
CONTENTS

COVER

ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT, IAN STEWART & JACK COHEN

TITLE PAGE

EPIGRAPH

CONCERNING ROUNDWORLD

1. ANY OTHER BUSINESS

2. PALEY’S WATCH

3. THEOLOGY OF SPECIES

4. PALEY ONTOLOGY

5. THE WRONG TROUSERS OF TIME

6. BORROWED TIME

7. THE FISH IS OFF

8. FORWARD TO THE PAST

9. AVOIDING MADEIRA

10. WATCH-22

11. WIZARDS ON THE WARPATH

12. THE WRONG BOOK

13. INFINITY IS A BIT TRICKY

14. ALEPH-UMPTYPLEX

15. AUDITORS OF REALITY

16. MANIFEST DESTINY

17. GALÁPAGOS ENCOUNTER

18. STEAM ENGINE TIME

19. LIES TO DARWIN

20. THE SECRETS OF LIFE

21. NOUGAT SURPRISE

22. FORGET THE FACTS

23. THE GOD OF EVOLUTION

24. A LACK OF SERGEANTS

25. THE ENTANGLED BANK

AFTERTHOUGHT

INDEX

COPYRIGHT

BY THE SAME AUTHORS:

TERRY PRATCHETT

THE CARPET PEOPLE • THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN • STRATA

TRUCKERS • DIGGERS • WINGS • ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD • JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

THE JOHNNY MAXWELL TRILOGY • JOHNNY AND THE DEAD (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

THE UNADULTERATED CAT (with Gray Jolliffe) • GOOD OMENS (with Neil Gaiman)

THE DISCWORLD ® SERIES:

THE COLOUR OF MAGIC • THE LIGHT FANTASTIC • EQUAL RITES

MORT • SOURCERY • WYRD SISTERS • PYRAMIDS • GUARDS! GUARDS!

ERIC (with Josh Kirby) • MOVING PICTURES • REAPER MAN • WITCHES ABROAD

SMALL GODS • LORDS AND LADIES • MEN AT ARMS • SOUL MUSIC

INTERESTING TIMES • MASKERADE • FEET OF CLAY • HOGFATHER • JINGO

THE LAST CONTINENT • CARPE JUGULUM • THE FIFTH ELEPHANT • THE TRUTH

THIEF OF TIME • NIGHT WATCH • MONSTROUS REGIMENT • GOING POSTAL

THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS

THE WEE FREE MEN • A HAT FULL OF SKY

THE COLOUR OF MAGIC (graphic novel) • THE LIGHT FANTASTIC (graphic novel)

MORT: A DISCWORLD BIG COMIC (illustrated by Graham Higgins)

GUARDS! GUARDS! A DISCWORLD BIG COMIC (adapted by Stephen Briggs, illustrated by Graham Higgins)

SOUL MUSIC: The illustrated screenplay • WYRD SISTERS: The illustrated screenplay

MORT – THE PLAY (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

WYRD SISTERS – THE PLAY (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

GUARDS! GUARDS! – THE PLAY (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

MEN AT ARMS – THE PLAY (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

MASKERADE (adapted for the stage by Stephen Briggs)

CARPE JUGULUM (adapted for the stage by Stephen Briggs)

LORDS AND LADIES (adapted for the stage by Irana Brown)

INTERESTING TIMES (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

THE FIFTH ELEPHANT (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK (with Stephen Briggs)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP (with Stephen Briggs)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE a Discworld Mapp (with Stephen Briggs and Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN (with Paul Kidby) • NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE DISCWORD COMPANION (with Stephen Briggs)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO (with Paul Kidby) • THE LAST HERO (with Paul Kidby)

IAN STEWART

CONCEPTS OF MODERN MATHEMATICS • GAME, SET, AND MATH

THE PROBLEMS OF MATHEMATICS • DOES GOD PLAY DICE?

ANOTHER FINE MATH YOU’VE GOT ME INTO • FEARFUL SYMMETRY

NATURE’S NUMBERS • FROM HERE TO INFINITY • THE MAGICAL MAZE

LIFE’S OTHER SECRET • FLATTERLAND • WHAT SHAPE IS A SNOWFLAKE?

THE ANNOTATED FLATLAND • MATH HYSTERIA

JACK COHEN

LIVING EMBRYOS • REPRODUCTION • PARENTS MAKING PARENTS

SPERMS, ANTIBODIES AND INFERTILITY • THE PRIVILEGED APE

STOP WORKING AND START THINKING (with Graham Medley)

IAN STEWART AND JACK COHEN

THE COLLAPSE OF CHAOS • FIGMENTS OF REALITY

EVOLVING THE ALIEN (alternative title: WHAT DOES A MARTIAN LOOK LIKE?)

WHEELERS (science fiction) • HEAVEN (science fiction)



[TITLE]


_In crossing a heath, suppose I … found a watch upon the ground … The
inference, we think, is inevitable; that the watch must have had a
maker_.

WILLIAM PALEY

_NATURAL THEOLOGY_

_Divine Design, the conscious process of creation, which Paley
discovered, and which we now know is the explanation for the existence
and purposeful form of all life, always has purpose in mind. If the
Deity can be said to play the role of Watchmaker in nature, He is an
all-seeing Watchmaker_.

THE REV. CHARLES DARWIN

_THEOLOGY OF SPECIES_

_There is grandeur in this view of life … and that, whilst this planet
has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so
simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have
been, and are being, evolved_.

THE REV. RICHARD DAWKINS

_THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES_

_There is grandeur in this view of life … and that, whilst this planet
has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so
simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have
been, and are being, evolved_.

CHARLES DARWIN

_THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES_

_Natural selection, the blind, unconscious automatic process which
Darwin discovered, and which we now know is the explanation for the
existence and apparently purposeful form of all life, has no purpose in
mind … If it can be said to play the role of watchmaker in nature, it is
the_ blind _watchmaker_.

RICHARD DAWKINS

_THE BLIND WATCHMAKER_

_In crossing a heath, suppose I found a watch upon the ground. The
inference, I think, is inevitable. Some careless chronometric surveyor
must have dropped it_.

PRESERVED J. NIGHTINGALE

_WATCHES ABROAD_


CONCERNING ROUNDWORLD

DISCWORLD IS REAL. It’s the way worlds should work. Admittedly, it is
flat and goes through space on the backs of four elephants which stand
on the shell of a giant turtle, but consider the alternatives.

Consider, for example, a globular world, a mere crust upon an inferno of
molten rock and iron. An accidental world, made of the wreckage of old
stars, the home of life which, nevertheless, in a most unhomely fashion,
is regularly scythed from its surface by ice, gas, inundation or falling
rocks travelling at 20,000 miles an hour.

Such an improbable world, and the entire cosmos that surrounds it, was
in fact accidentally created by the wizards of Unseen University.¹ It
was the Dean of Unseen University who in fact destabilised the raw
firmament by fiddling with it, possibly leading to the belief, if folk
memory extends to sub-sub-sub-sub-atomic particle level, that it was
indeed all done by somebody with a beard.

Infinite in size on the inside, but about a foot across on the outside,
the universe of Roundworld is now kept in a glass globe in UU, where it
has been the source of much interest and concern.

Mostly, it’s the source of concern. Alarmingly, it contains no
narrativium.

Narrativium is not an element in the accepted sense. It is an attribute
of every other element, thus turning them into, in an occult sense,
molecules. Iron contains not just iron, but also the story of iron, the
history of iron, the part of iron that ensures that it will continue to
be iron and has an iron-like job to do and is not, for example, cheese.
Without narrativium, the cosmos has no story, no purpose, no
_destination_.

Nevertheless, under the ancient magical rule of As Above, So Below, the
crippled universe of Roundworld strives at some level to create its own
narrativium. Iron seeks out other iron. Things spin. In the absence of
any gods to do the creating of life, life has managed, against the odds,
to create itself. Yet the humans who have evolved on the planet believe
in their hearts that there are such things as gods, magic, cosmic
purpose and million-to-one chances that crop up nine times out of ten.
They seek stories in the world which the world, regrettably, is not
equipped to tell.

The wizards, feeling somewhat guilty about this, have intervened several
times in the history of Roundworld when it seemed to them to be on the
wrong track. They encouraged fish (or fish-like creatures) to leave the
seas, they visited the proto-civilisations of dinosaur-descendants and
crabs, they despaired at the way ice and falling comets wiped out higher
life forms so often – and they found some monkeys who were obsessed with
sex and were quick learners, especially if sex was involved or could, by
considerable ingenuity, be made to be involved.

Again the wizards intervened, teaching them that fire was not for having
sex with and in general encouraging them to get off the planet before
the next big extinction.

In this they have all been guided by Hex, UU’s magical thinking engine,
which is immensely powerful in any case, and with Roundworld, which from
Hex’s point of view is a mere sub-routine of Discworld and is
practically godlike, although more patient.

The wizards think they have sorted it all out. The monkeys have learned
about their permanently threatened world via a type of technomancy
called Science and may yet escape frozen doom.

And yet …

The thing about best laid plans is that they _don’t_ often go wrong.
They _sometimes_ go wrong, but not often, because of having been, as
aforesaid, the best laid. The kind of plans laid by wizards, who barge
in, shout a lot, try to sort it all out by lunchtime and hope for the
best, on the other hand … well, they go wrong almost instantly.

There _is_ a kind of narrativium on Roundworld, if you really look.

On Discworld, the narrativium of a fish tells it that it is a fish, was
a fish, and will continue to be a fish. On Roundworld, something inside
a fish tells it that it is a fish, was a fish … and might eventually be
something else …

… perhaps.

¹ The greatest school of magic on the Discworld. But surely you know
this?

ONE

ANY OTHER BUSINESS

[image] IT WAS RAINING. THIS WOULD, of course, be good for the worms.

Through the trickles that coursed down the window Charles Darwin stared
at the garden.

Worms, thousands of them, out there under the soft rain, turning the
detritus of winter into loam, building the soil. How … convenient.

The ploughs of God, he thought, and winced. It was the harrows of God
that plagued him now.

Strange how the rustle of the rain sounds very much like people
whispering …

At which point, he became aware of the beetle. It was climbing up the
inside of the window, a green and blue tropical jewel.

There was another one, higher up, banging fruitlessly against the pane.

One landed on his head.

The air filled up with the rattle and slither of wings. Entranced,
Darwin turned to look at the glowing cloud in the corner of the room. It
was forming a shape …

It is always useful for a university to have a Very Big Thing. It
occupies the younger members, to the relief of their elders (especially
if the VBT is based at some distance from the seat of learning itself)
and it uses up a lot of money which would otherwise only lie around
causing trouble or be spent by the sociology department or, probably,
both. It also helps in pushing back boundaries, and it doesn’t much
matter what boundaries these are, since as any researcher will tell you
it’s the pushing that matters, not the boundary.

It’s a good idea, too, if it’s a bigger VBT than anyone else’s and, in
particular, since this was Unseen University, the greatest magical
university in the world, if it’s a bigger one than the one those
bastards are building at Braseneck College.

‘In fact,’ said Ponder Stibbons, Head of Inadvisably Applied Magic,
‘theirs is really only a QBT, or Quite Big Thing. Actually, they’ve had
so many problems with it, it’s probably only a BT!’

The senior wizards nodded happily.

‘And ours is certainly bigger, is it?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Stibbons. ‘Based on what I can determine from chatting
to the people at Braseneck, ours will be capable of pushing boundaries
twice as big up to three times as far.’

‘I hope you haven’t told them that,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.
‘We don’t want them building a … a … an EBT!’

‘A what, sir?’ said Ponder politely, his tone saying, ‘I know about this
sort of special thing and I’d rather you did not pretend that you do
too.’

‘Um … an Even Bigger Thing?’ said Runes, aware that he was edging into
unknown territory.

‘No, sir,’ said Ponder, kindly. ‘The next one up would be a Great Big
Thing, sir. It’s been postulated that if we could ever build a GBT, we
would know the mind of the Creator.’

The wizards fell silent. For a moment, a fly buzzed against the high,
stone-mullioned window, with its stained-glass image of Archchancellor
Sloman Discovering the Special Theory of Slood, and then, after
depositing a small flyspeck on Archchancellor Sloman’s nose, exited with
precision though a tiny hole in one pane which had been caused two
centuries ago when a stone had been thrown up by a passing cart.
Originally the hole had stayed there because no one could be bothered to
have it fixed, but now it stayed there because it was traditional.

The fly had been born in Unseen University and because of the high,
permanent magical field, was far more intelligent that the average fly.
Strangely, the field never had this effect on wizards, perhaps because
most of them were more intelligent than flies in any case.

‘I don’t think we want to do that, do we?’ said Ridcully.

‘It might be considered impolite,’ agreed the Chair of Indefinite
Studies.

‘Exactly how big would a Great Big Thing be?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘The same size as the universe, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘Every particle of
the universe would be modelled within it, in fact.’

‘Quite big, then …’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘And quite hard to find room for, I should imagine.’

‘Undoubtedly, sir,’ said Ponder, who had long ago given up trying to
explain Big Magic to the rest of the senior faculty.

‘Very well, then,’ said Archchancellor Ridcully. ‘Thank you for your
report, Mister Stibbons.’ He sniffed. ‘Sounds fascinatin’. And the next
item: Any Other Business.’ He glared around the table. ‘And since there
is _no_ other busi—’

‘Er …’

This was a bad word at this point. Ridcully did not like committee
business. He certainly did not like any other business.

‘Well, Rincewind?’ he said, glaring down the length of the table.

‘Um …’ said Rincewind. ‘I think that’s Professor Rincewind, sir?’

‘Very well, _professor_,’ said Ridcully. ‘Come on, it’s past time for
Early Tea.’

‘The world’s gone wrong, Archchancellor.’

As one wizard, everyone looked out at what could be seen of the world
through Archchancellor Sloman Discovering the Special Theory of Slood.

‘Don’t be a fool, man,’ said Ridcully. ‘The sun’s shining! It’s a nice
day!’

‘Not this world, sir,’ said Rincewind. ‘The other one.’

‘What other one?’ said the Archchancellor, and then his expression
changed.

‘Not—’ he began.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Rincewind. ‘That one. It’s gone wrong. Again.’

Every organisation needs someone to do those jobs it doesn’t want to do
or secretly thinks don’t need doing. Rincewind had nineteen of them now,
including Health and Safety Officer.¹

It was as Egregious Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography that he was
responsible for the Globe. These days, it was on his desk out in the
gloomy cellar passage where he worked, work largely consisting of
waiting until people gave him some cruel _and_ unusual geography to
profess.

‘First question,’ said Ridcully, as the faculty swept along the dank
flagstones. ‘Why are you working out here? What’s wrong with your
office?’

‘It’s too hot in my office, sir,’ said Rincewind.

‘You used to complain it was too cold!’

‘Yes, sir. In the winter it is. Ice freezes on the walls, sir.’

‘We give you plenty of coal, don’t we?’

‘Ample, sir. One bucket per day per post held, as per tradition. That’s
the trouble, really. I can’t get the porters to understand. They won’t
give me _less_ coal, only no coal at all. So the only way to be sure of
staying warm in the winter is to keep the fire going all summer, which
means it’s so hot in there that I can’t work in – don’t open the door,
sir!’

Ridcully, who’d just opened the office door, slammed it again, and wiped
his face with a handkerchief.

‘Snug,’ he said, blinking the sweat out of his eyes. Then he turned to
the little globe on the desk behind him.

It was about a foot across, at least on the outside. Inside, it was
infinite; most wizards have no problem with facts of this sort. It
contained everything there was, for a given value of ‘contained
everything there was’, but in its default state it focused on one tiny
part of everything there was, a small planet which was, currently,
covered in ice.

Ponder Stibbons swivelled the omniscope that was attached to the base of
the glass dome, and stared down at the little frozen world. ‘Just debris
at the equator,’ he reported. ‘They never built the big skyhook thing
that allowed them to leave.² There must have been something we missed.’

‘No, we sorted it all out,’ said Ridcully. ‘Remember? All the people
_did_ get away before the planet froze.’

‘Yes, Archchancellor,’ said Stibbons. ‘And, then again, no.’

‘If I ask you to explain that, would you tell me in words I can
understand?’ said Ridcully.

Ponder stared at the wall for a moment. His lips moved as he tried out
sentences. ‘Yes,’ he said at last. ‘We changed the history of the world,
sending it towards a future where the people could escape before it
froze. It appears that something has happened to change it back since
then.’

‘Again? Elves did it last time!’³

‘I doubt if _they’ve_ tried again, sir.’

‘But we _know_ the people left before the ice,’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes. He looked from face to face, and added uncertainly, ‘Don’t
we?’

‘We thought we knew before,’ said the Dean, gloomily.

‘In a way, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘But the Roundworld universe is somewhat …
soft and mutable. Even though _we_ can see a future happen, the past can
change so that from the point of view of Roundworlders it doesn’t. It’s
like … taking out the last page of a book and putting a new one in. You
can still read the old page, but from the point of view of the
characters, the ending has changed, or … possibly not.’

Ridcully slapped him on the back. ‘Well done, Mr Stibbons! You didn’t
mention quantum even once!’ he said.

‘Nevertheless, I suspect it may be involved,’ sighed Ponder.

¹ The N’tuitiv tribe of Howondaland created the post of Health and
Safety Officer even before the post of Witch Doctor, and certainly
before taming fire or inventing the spear. They hunt by waiting for
animals to drop dead, and eat them raw.

² See _The Science of Discworld_ (Ebury Press, 1999, revd 2000).

³ See _The Science of Discworld II_ (Ebury Press, 2002).

TWO

PALEY’S WATCH

[image] THE SCENE: A RADIO CHAT-SHOW in the Bible Belt of the United
States, a few years ago. The host is running a phone-in about evolution,
a concept that is anathema to every God-fearing southern fundamentalist.
The conversation runs something like this:

[table]

Such a conversation did occur, and the host was not being ironic. But
Jerry’s point is not quite the knock-down argument he thought it was.
Charles Robert Darwin died in 1882. The first Nobel Prize was awarded in
1901.

Of course, well-meaning people are often ignorant about fine points of
historical detail, and it is unfair to hold that against them. But it is
perfectly fair to hold something else against them: the host and his
guest didn’t have their brains in gear. After all, why were they having
that discussion? Because, as every God-fearing southern fundamentalist
knows, virtually every scientist views Darwin as one of the all-time
greats. It was this assertion, in fact, that Jerry was attempting to
shoot down. Now, it should be pretty obvious that winners of Nobel
prizes (for science) are selected by a process that relies heavily on
advice from scientists. And those, we already know, are overwhelmingly
of the opinion that Darwin was somewhere near the top of the scientific
tree. So if Darwin didn’t get a Nobel, it couldn’t have been (as
listeners were intended to infer) because the committee didn’t think
much of his work. There had to be another reason. As it happens, the
main reason was that Darwin was dead.

As this story shows, evolution is still a hot issue in the Bible Belt,
where it is sometimes known as ‘evilution’ and generally viewed as the
work of the Devil. More sophisticated religious believers – especially
European ones, among them the Pope – worked out long ago that evolution
poses no threat to religion: it is simply how God gets things done, in
this case, the manufacture of living creatures. But the Bible-Belters,
in their unsophisticated fundamentalist manner, recognise a threat, and
they’re right. The sophisticated reconciliation of evolution with God is
a wishy-washy compromise, a cop-out. Why? Because evolution knocks an
enormous hole in what otherwise might be the best argument yet devised
for convincing people of the existence of God, and that is the ‘argument
from design’.¹

The universe is awesome in its size, astonishing in its intricacy. Every
part of it fits neatly with every other part. Consider an ant, an
anteater, an antirrhinum. Each is perfectly suited to its role (or
‘purpose’). The ant exists to be eaten by anteaters, the anteater exists
to eat ants, and the antirrhinum … well, bees like it, and that’s a good
thing. Each organism shows clear evidence of ‘design’, as if it had been
made specifically to carry out some purpose. Ants are just the right
size for anteaters’ tongues to lick up, anteaters have long tongues to
get into ants’ nests. Antirrhinums are exactly the shape to be
pollinated by visiting bees. And if we observe design, then surely a
designer can’t be far away.

Many people find this argument compelling, especially when it is
developed at length and in detail, and ‘designer’ is given a capital
‘D’. But Darwin’s ‘dangerous idea’, as Daniel Dennett characterised it
in his book with that title, puts a very big spoke into the wheel of
cosmic design. It provides an alternative, very plausible, and
apparently simple process, in which there is no role for design and no
need for a designer. Darwin called that process ‘natural selection’;
nowadays we call it ‘evolution’.

There are many aspects of evolution that scientists don’t yet
understand. The details behind Darwin’s theory are still up for grabs,
and every year brings new shifts of opinion as scientists try to improve
their understanding. Bible-Belters understand even less about evolution,
and they typically distort it into a caricature: ‘blind chance’. They
have no interest whatsoever in improving their understanding. But they
do understand, far better than effete Europeans, that the theory of
evolution constitutes a very dangerous attack on the psychology of
religious belief. Not on its substance (because anything that science
discovers can be attributed to the Deity and viewed as His mechanism for
bringing the associated events about) but on its attitude. Once God is
removed from the day-to-day running of the planet, and installed
somewhere behind DNA biochemistry and the Second Law of Thermodynamics,
it is no longer so obvious that He must be fundamental to people’s daily
lives. In particular, there is no special reason to believe that He
affects those lives in any way, or would wish to, so the fundamentalist
preachers could well be out of a job. Which is how Darwin’s lack of a
Nobel can become a debating point on American local radio. It is also
the general line along which Darwin’s own thinking evolved – he began
his adult life as a theology student and ended it as a somewhat
tormented agnostic.

*

Seen from outside, and even more so from within, the process of
scientific research is disorderly and confusing. It is tempting to
deduce that scientists themselves are disorderly and confused. In a way,
they are – that’s what research involves. If you knew what you. were
doing it wouldn’t be research. But that’s just an apology, and there are
better reasons for expecting, indeed, for valuing, that kind of
confusion. The best reason is that it’s an extremely effective way of
understanding the world, and having a fair degree of confidence in that
understanding.

In her book _Defending Science – Reason_ the philosopher Susan Haack
illuminates the messiness of science with a simple metaphor, the
crossword puzzle. Enthusiasts know that solving a crossword puzzle is a
messy business. You don’t solve the clues in numerical order and write
them in their proper place, converging in an orderly manner to a correct
solution, unless, perhaps, it’s a quick crossword and you’re an expert.
Instead, you attack the clues rather randomly, guided only by a vague
feeling of which ones look easiest to solve (some people find anagrams
easy, others hate them). You cross-check proposed answers against
others, to make sure everything fits. You detect mistakes, rub them out,
write in corrections.

It may not sound like a _rational_ process, but the end result is
entirely rational, and the checks and balances – do the answers fit the
clues, do the letters all fit together? – are stringent. A few mistakes
may still survive, where alternative words fit both the clue and the
words that intersect them, but such errors are rare (and arguably aren’t
really errors, just ambiguity on the part of the compiler).

The process of scientific research, says Haack, is rather like solving a
crossword puzzle. Solutions to nature’s riddles arrive erratically and
piecemeal. When they are cross-checked against other solutions to other
riddles, sometimes the answers don’t fit, and then something has to be
changed. Theories that were once thought to be correct turn out to be
nonsense and are thrown out. A few years ago, the best explanation of
the origin of stars had one small flaw: it implied that the stars were
older than the universe that contained them. At any given time, some of
science’s answers appear to be very solid, some less so, some are
dubious … and some are missing entirely.

Again, it doesn’t sound like a rational process, but it leads to a
rational _result_. Indeed, all that cross-checking, backtracking, and
revision increases our confidence in the result. Remembering, always,
that nothing is proved to the hilt, nothing is _final_.

Critics often use this confused and confusing process of discovery as a
reason to discredit science. Those stupid scientists can’t even agree
among themselves, they keep changing their minds, everything they say is
provisional – why should anyone else believe such a muddle? They thereby
misrepresent one of science’s greatest strengths by portraying it as a
weakness. A rational thinker must always be prepared to change his or
her mind if the evidence requires it. In science, there is no place for
dogma. Of course, many individual scientists fall short of this ideal;
they are only human. Entire schools of scientific thought can get
trapped in an intellectual blind alley and go into denial. On the whole,
though, the errors are eventually exposed – by other scientists.

Science is not the only area of human thought to develop in this
flexible way. The humanities do similar things, in their own manner. But
science imposes this kind of discipline upon itself more strongly, more
systematically, and more effectively, than virtually any other style of
thinking. And it uses experiments as a reality check.

Religions, cults, and pseudoscientific movements do not behave like
that. It is extremely rare for religious leaders to change their minds
about anything that is already in their Holy Book. If your beliefs are
held to be revealed truth, direct from the mouth of God, it’s tricky to
admit to errors. All the more credit to the Catholics, then, for
admitting that in Galileo’s day they got it wrong about the Earth being
the centre of the universe, and until recently they got it wrong about
evolution.

Religions, cults and pseudoscientific movements have a different agenda
from science. Science, at its best, keeps lines of enquiry open. It is
always seeking new ways to test old theories, even when they seem well
established. It doesn’t just look at the geology of the Grand Canyon and
settle on the belief that the Earth is hundreds of millions of years
old, or older. It cross-checks by taking new discoveries into account.
After radioactivity was discovered, it became possible to obtain more
accurate dates for geological events, and to compare those with the
apparent record of sedimentation in the rocks. Many dates were then
revised. When continental drift came in from left field, entirely new
ways to find those dates arrived, and were quickly used. More dates were
revised.

Scientists – collectively – _want_ to find their mistakes, so that they
can get rid of them.

Religions, cults, and pseudoscientific movements want to close down
lines of enquiry. They want their followers to _stop_ asking questions
and accept the belief system. The difference is glaring. Suppose, for
instance, that scientists became convinced that there was something
worth taking seriously in the theories of Erich von Däniken, that
ancient ruins and structures must have been the work of visiting aliens.
They would then start asking questions. Where did the aliens come from?
What sort of spaceships did they have? Why did they come here? Do
ancient inscriptions suggest one kind of alien or many? What is the
pattern to the visitations? Whereas believers in von Däniken’s theories
are satisfied with generic aliens, and ask no more. Aliens explain the
ruins and structures – that’s cracked it, problem solved.

Similarly, to early proponents of divine design and their modern
reincarnations creationism and ‘intelligent design’, the latest
quasi-religious fad, once we know that living creatures were created
(either by God, an alien, or an unspecified intelligent designer) then
the problem is solved and we need look no further. We are not encouraged
to look for evidence that might disprove our beliefs. Just things that
confirm them. _Accept what we tell you, don’t ask questions_.

Ah, yes, but science discourages questions too, say the cults and
religions. You don’t take _our_ views seriously, you don’t allow that
sort of question. You try to stop us putting our ideas into school
science lessons as alternatives to your world view.

To some extent, that’s true – especially the bit about science lessons.
But they are _science_ lessons, so they should be teaching science.
Whereas the claims of the cults and the creationists, and the closet
theists who espouse intelligent design, are not science. Creationism is
simply a theistic belief system and offers no credible scientific
evidence whatsoever for its beliefs. Evidence for alien visitations is
weak, incoherent, and most of it is readily explained by entirely
ordinary aspects of ancient human culture. Intelligent design _claims_
evidence for its views, but those claims fall apart under even casual
scientific scrutiny, as documented in the 2004 books _Why Intelligent
Design Fails_, edited by Matt Young and Taner Edis, and _Debating
Design_, edited by William Dembski and Michael Ruse. And when people
(none of the above, we hasten to point out) claim that the Grand Canyon
is evidence for Noah’s flood – a notorious recent incident – it’s not
terribly hard to prove them wrong.

The principle of free speech implies that these views should not be
suppressed, but it does not imply that they should be imported into
science lessons, any more than scientific alternatives to God should be
imported into the vicar’s Sunday sermon. If you want to get your world
view into the science lesson, you’ve got to establish its scientific
credentials. But because cults, religions and alternative belief systems
stop people asking awkward questions, there’s no way they can ever get
that kind of evidence. It’s not only chance that is blind.

The scientific vision of the planet that is currently our only home, and
of the creatures with which we share it and the universe around it, has
attained its present form over thousands of years. The development of
science is mostly an incremental process, a lake of understanding filled
by the constant accumulation of innumerable tiny raindrops. Like the
water in a lake, the pool of understanding can also evaporate again –
for what we think we understand today can be exposed as nonsense
tomorrow, just as what we thought we understood yesterday is exposed as
nonsense today. We use the word ‘understanding’ rather than, ‘knowledge’
because science is both more than, and less than a collection of
immutable facts. It is more, in that it encompasses organising
principles that explain what we like to think of as facts: the strange
paths of the planets in the sky make perfect sense once you understand
that planets are moved by gravitational forces, and that these forces
obey mathematical rules. It is less, because what may look like a fact
today may turn out tomorrow to have been a misinterpretation of
something else. On Discworld, where obvious things tend to be true, a
tiny and insignificant Sun does indeed revolve round the grand,
important world of people. We used to think our world was like that too:
for centuries, it was a ‘fact’, and an obvious one, that the Sun
revolved round the Earth.

The big organising principles of science are _theories_, coherent
systems of thought that explain huge numbers of otherwise isolated
facts, which have survived strenuous testing deliberately designed to
break them if they do not accord with reality. They have not been merely
accepted as some act of scientific faith: instead, people have tried to
_falsify_ them – to prove them wrong – but have so far failed. These
failures do not prove that the theory is _true_, because there are
always new sources of potential discord. Isaac Newton’s theory of
gravitation, in conjunction with his laws of motion, was – and still is
– good enough to explain the movements of the planets, asteroids and
other bodies of the solar system in intricate detail, with high
accuracy. But in some contexts, such as black holes, it has now been
replaced by Albert Einstein’s theory of general relativity.

Wait a few decades, and something else will surely replace that. There
are plenty of signs that all is not well at the frontiers of physics.
When cosmologists have to postulate bizarre ‘dark matter’ to explain why
galaxies don’t obey the known laws of gravity, and then throw in even
weirder ‘dark energy’ to explain why galaxies are moving apart at an
increasing rate, and when the independent evidence for these two powers
of darkness is pretty much non-existent, you can _smell_ the coming
paradigm shift.

Most science is incremental, but some is more radical. Newton’s theory
was one of the great breakthroughs of science – not a shower of rain
disturbing the surface of the lake, but an intellectual storm that
unleashed a raging torrent. _Darwin’s Watch_ is about another
intellectual storm: the theory of evolution. Darwin did for biology what
Newton had done for physics, but in a very different way. Newton
developed mathematical equations that let physicists calculate numbers
and test them to many decimal places; it was a quantitative theory.
Darwin’s idea is expressed in words, not equations, and it describes a
qualitative process, not numbers. Despite that, its influence has been
at least as great as Newton’s, possibly even greater. Darwin’s torrent
still rages today.

Evolution, then, is a theory, one of the most influential, far-reaching
and important theories ever devised. In this context, it’s worth
pointing out that the word ‘theory’ is often used in a quite different
sense, to mean an idea that is proposed in order to be tested. Strictly
speaking, the word that should be used here is ‘hypothesis’, but that’s
such a fussy, pedantic-sounding word that people tend to avoid it. Even
scientists, who should know better. ‘I have a theory,’ they say. No, you
have a hypothesis. It will take years, possibly centuries, of stringent
tests, to turn it into a theory.

The theory of evolution was once a hypothesis. Now it is a theory.
Detractors seize on the word and forget its dual use. ‘_Only_ a theory,’
they say dismissively. But a true theory cannot be so easily dismissed,
because it has survived so much rigorous testing. In this respect there
is far more reason to take the theory of evolution seriously than any
explanation of life that depends on, say, religious faith, because
falsification is not high on the religious agenda. Theories, in that
sense, are the best established, most credible parts of science. They
are, by and large, considerably more credible than most other products
of the human mind. So what these people are thinking of when they chant
their dismissive slogan should actually be ‘only a hypothesis’.

That was a defensible position in the early days of the theory of
evolution, but today it is merely ignorant. If anything _can_ be a fact,
evolution is. It may have to be inferred from clues deposited in the
rocks, and more recently by comparing the DNA codes of different
creatures, rather than being seen directly with the naked eye in real
time, but you don’t need an eyewitness account to make logical
deductions from evidence. The evidence, from several independent sources
(such as fossils and DNA), is overwhelming. Evolution has been
established so firmly that our planet makes no sense at all without it.
Living creatures can, and do, change over time. The fossil record shows
that they have changed substantially over long periods of time, to the
extent that entirely new species have arisen. Smaller changes can be
observed today, over periods as short as a year, or mere days in
bacteria.

Evolution _happens_.

What remains open to dispute, especially among scientists, is _how_
evolution happens. Scientific theories themselves evolve, adapting to
fit new observations, new discoveries, and new interpretations of old
discoveries. Theories are not carved in tablets of stone. The greatest
strength of science is that when faced with sufficient evidence,
scientists change their minds. Not all of them, for scientists are human
and have the same failings as the rest of us, but enough of them to
allow science to improve.

Even today there are diehards – not a majority, despite the noise they
make, but a significant minority – who deny that evolution has ever
occurred. Most of them are American, because a quirk of history (coupled
with some idiosyncratic tax laws) has made evolution into a major
educational issue in the United States. There, the battle between
Darwin’s followers and his opponents is not just about the intellectual
high ground. It is about dollars and cents, and it is about who
influences the hearts and minds of the next generation. The struggle
masquerades as a religious and scientific one, but its essence is
political. In the 1920s four American states (Arkansas, Mississippi,
Oklahoma, and Tennessee) made it illegal to teach children about
evolution in public schools. This law remained in place for nearly half
a century: it was finally banned by the Supreme Court in 1968. This has
not stopped advocates of ‘creation science’ from trying to find ways
round that decision, or even to get it reversed. Largely, however, they
have failed, and one reason is that creation ‘science’ is not science;
it lacks intellectual rigour, it fails objective tests, and at times it
is plain nutty.

It is possible to maintain that God created the Earth, and no one can
prove you wrong. In that sense, it is a defensible thing to believe.
Scientists may feel that this ‘explanation’ doesn’t greatly help us
understand anything, but that’s their problem; for all anyone can prove,
it could have happened that way. But it is not sensible to follow the
Anglo-Irish prelate James Ussher’s biblical chronology and maintain that
the act of creation happened in 4004 BC, because there is overwhelming
evidence that our planet is far older than that – 4.5 billion years
rather than 6000. Either God is deliberately trying to mislead us (which
is conceivable, but does not fit well with the usual religious messages,
and may well be heretical) or we are standing on a very old lump of
rock. Allegedly, 50 per cent of Americans believe that the Earth was
created less than 10,000 years ago, which if true says something rather
sad about the most expensive education system in the world.

America is fighting, all over again, a battle that was fought to a
finish in Europe a century ago. The European outcome was a compromise:
Pope Pius XII did accept the truth of evolution in an encyclical of
1950, but that wasn’t a total victory for science.² In 1981 a successor,
John Paul II, gently pointed out that ‘The Bible … does not wish to
teach how the heavens were made, but how one goes to heaven.’ Science
was vindicated, in that the theory of evolution was generally accepted,
but religious people were free to interpret that process as God’s way of
making living creatures. And it’s a very good way, as Darwin realised,
so everyone can be happy and stop arguing. Creationists, in contrast,
seem not to have appreciated that if they pin their religious beliefs to
a 6000-year-old planet, they are doing themselves no favours and leaving
themselves no real way out.

_Darwin’s Watch_ is about a Victorian society that never happened –
well, once the wizards interfered, it stopped having happened. It is not
the society that creationists are still attempting to arrange, which
would be far more ‘fundamentalist’, full of self-righteous people
telling everyone else what to do and stifling any true creativity. The
real Victorian era was a paradox: a society with a very strong but
rather flexible religious base, where it was taken for granted that God
existed, but which gave birth to a whole series of major intellectual
revolutions that led, fairly directly, to today’s secular Western
society. Let us not forget that even in the USA there is a
constitutional separation of the state from the Church. (Strangely, the
United Kingdom, which in practice is one of the most secular countries
in the world – hardly anyone attends church, except for christenings,
weddings, and funerals – has its own state religion, and a monarch who
claims to be appointed by God. Unlike Discworld, Roundworld doesn’t have
to make sense.) At any rate, the real Victorians were a God-fearing
race, but their society encouraged mavericks like Darwin to think
outside the loop, with far-reaching consequences.

*

The thread of clocks and watches runs right across the metaphorical
landscape of science. Newton’s vision of a solar system running
according to precise mathematical ‘laws’ is often referred to as a
‘clockwork universe’. It’s not a bad image, and the orrery – a model
solar system, whose cogwheels make the tiny planets revolve in some
semblance of reality – does look rather like a piece of clockwork.
Clocks were among the most complicated machines of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, and they were probably the most reliable. Even
today, we say that something functions ‘like clockwork’; we have yet to
amend this to ‘atomic accuracy’.

By the Victorian age, the epitome of reliable gadgetry had become the
pocket-watch. Darwin’s ideas are intimately bound up with a watch, which
again plays the metaphorical role of intricate mechanical perfection.
The watch in question was introduced by the clergyman William Paley, who
died three years after Darwin was born. It features in the opening
paragraph of Paley’s great work _Natural Theology_, first published in
1802.³ The best way to gain a feeling for his line of thinking is to use
his own words:

In crossing a heath, suppose I pitched my foot against a stone, and were
asked how the stone came to be there; I might possibly answer, that for
anything I knew to the contrary, it had lain there forever: nor would it
perhaps be very easy to show the absurdity of this answer. But suppose I
had found a watch upon the ground, and it should be inquired how the
watch happened to be in that place; I should hardly think of the answer
which I had before given, that, for anything I knew, the watch might
have always been there. Yet why should not this answer serve for the
watch as well as for the stone? Why is it not as admissible in the
second case, as in the first? For this reason, and for no other, viz.
that, when we come to inspect the watch, we perceive (what we could not
discover in the stone) that its several parts are framed and put
together for a purpose, e.g. that they are so formed and adjusted as to
produce motion, and that motion so regulated as to point to the hour of
the day; that if the different parts had been differently shaped from
what they are, of a different size from what they are, or placed after
any other manner, or in any other order, than that in which they are
placed, either no motion at all could have been carried on in the
machine, or none which would have answered the use that is now served by
it.

Paley goes on to elaborate the components of a watch, leading to the
crux of his argument:

This mechanism being observed … the inference, we think, is inevitable;
that the watch must have had a maker; that there must have existed, at
sometime, and at some place or other, an artificer or artificers, who
formed it for the purpose which we find it actually to answer; who
comprehended its construction, and designed its use.

There then follows a long series of numbered paragraphs, in which Paley
qualifies his argument more carefully, extends it to cases where, for
instance, some parts of the watch are missing, and dismisses several
objections to his reasoning. The second chapter takes up the story by
describing a hypothetical ‘watch’ that can produce copies of itself – a
remarkable anticipation of the twentieth-century concept of a Von
Neumann machine. There would still be good reason, Paley states, to
infer the existence of a ‘contriver’; in fact, if anything, the effect
would be to enhance one’s admiration for the contriver’s skill.
Moreover, the intelligent observer

would reflect, that though the watch before him were, in some sense, the
maker of the watch which was fabricated in the course of its movements,
yet it was in a very different sense from that in which a carpenter, for
instance, is the maker of a chair.

He continues to develop this thought, and disposes of one possible
suggestion: that, just as a stone might always have existed, for all he
knew, so a watch might have always existed. That is, there might have
been a chain of watches, each made by its predecessor, going back
infinitely far into the past, so that there never was any first watch.
However, he tells us, a watch is very different from a stone: it is
contrived. Perhaps stones could always have existed: who knows? But not
watches. Otherwise we would have ‘contrivance, but no contriver; proofs
of design, but no designer’. Rejecting this suggestion on various
metaphysical grounds, Paley states:

The conclusion which the first examination of the watch, of its works,
construction, and movement, suggested, was, that it must have had, for
the cause and author of that construction, an artificer, who understood
its mechanism, and designed its use. This conclusion is invincible. A
second examination presents us with a new discovery. The watch is found,
in the course of its movement, to produce another watch, similar to
itself: and not only so, but we perceive in it a system or organisation,
separately calculated for that purpose. What effect would this discovery
have, or ought it to have, upon our former inference? What, as hath
already been said, but to increase, beyond measure, our admiration of
the skill which had been employed in the formation of such a machine!

Well, we can all see where the good reverend is leading, and he homes in
on his target in his third chapter. Instead of a watch, consider an eye.
Not lying on a heath, but in an animal, which perhaps does lie on a
heath. What he does say is: compare the eye to a telescope. There are so
many similarities that we are forced to deduce that the eye was ‘made
for vision’, just as the telescope was. Some thirty pages of anatomical
description reinforce the contention that the eye must have been
designed for the purpose of seeing. And the eye is just one example:
consider a bird, a fish, a silkworm, or a spider. Now, finally, Paley
states explicitly what all his readers knew was coming from page one:

Were there no example in the world of contrivance except that of the
eye, it would be alone sufficient to support the conclusion which we
draw from it, as to the necessity of an intelligent Creator.

There we have it, in a nutshell. Living creatures are so intricate, and
function so effectively, and fit together so perfectly, that they can
have arisen only by design. But design implies a designer. Ergo: God
exists, and it was He who created Earth’s magnificent panoply of life.
What more is there to say? The proof is complete.

¹ So called because it starts from the phenomenon of design and deduces
the existence of a cosmic designer.

² According to Isaac Asimov, the most practical and dramatic victory of
science over religion occurred in the seventeenth century, when churches
began to put up lightning conductors.

³ It is old enough to use the elongated s’s parodied in Diſcworld as ſs.
We have reſiſted temptation except in this footnote. Though
‘manifeſtation of deſign’ does have a bit of a cachet.

THREE

THEOLOGY OF SPECIES

[image] IT WAS THREE HOURS LATER …

The senior wizards trod carefully in the High Energy Magic Building,
partly because it wasn’t their natural habitat, but also because most of
the students who frequented it used the floor as a filing cabinet and,
distressingly, as a larder. Pizza is quite hard to remove from a sole,
especially the cheese.

In the background – always in the background in the High Energy Magic
Building – was Hex, the university’s thinking engine.

Occasionally, bits of it, or possibly ‘him’, moved. Ponder Stibbons had
long ago given up trying to understand how Hex worked. Possibly Hex was
the only entity in the university who understood how Hex worked.

Somewhere inside Hex magic happened. Spells were reduced, not to their
component candles and wands and chants, but to _what they meant_. It
happened too fast to see, and perhaps too fast to understand. All that
Ponder was certain about was that life was intimately involved. When Hex
was thinking deeply there was a noticeable hum from the beehives along
the back wall, where slots gave them access to the outside world, and
everything completely ceased to work if the ant colony was removed from
its big glass maze in the heart of the machine.

Ponder had set up his magic lantern for a presentation. He liked making
presentations. For a brief moment in the chaos of the universe, a
presentation made everything sound as if it was organised.

‘Hex has run the history of Roundworld against the last copy,’ he
announced, as the last wizard sat down. ‘He has found significant
changes beginning in what was known as the nineteenth century. Slide,
please, Rincewind.’ There was some muffled grumbling behind the magic
lantern and a picture of a plump and elderly lady appeared on the
screen. ‘This lady is Queen Victoria, ruler of the Empire of the
British.’

‘Why is she upside down?’ said the Dean.

‘It could be because with a globe there is technically no right way up,’
said Ponder. ‘But I’m hazarding that it got put in wrong. Next slide,
please. With care.’ Grumble, click. ‘Ah, yes, this is a steam engine.
The reign of Victoria was notable for great developments in science and
engineering. It was a very exciting time. Except … next slide, please.’
Grumble, click.

‘Wrong slide, that man!’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s just blank.’

‘Aha, no, sir,’ said Ponder, gleefully. ‘That is a dynamic way of
showing you that the period I just described turns out not, in fact, to
have happened. It should have, but it didn’t. On _this_ version of the
Globe, the Empire of the British did not become as big, and the other
developments were all rather muted. The great wave of discovery
flattened out. The world settled down to a period of stability and
peace.’

‘Sounds good to me,’ said Ridcully, and got a chorus of ‘hear, hears’
from the other wizards.

‘Yes, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. ‘And, then again, _no_. Getting off
the planet, remember? The big freeze in five hundred years’ time? No
land life form surviving that was bigger than a cockroach?’

‘No one bothered about that?’ said Ridcully.

‘Not until it was too late, sir. In that world as _we_ left it, the
first humans walked on the Moon less than seventy years after they flew
at all.’

Ponder looked at their blank faces.

‘Which was quite an achievement,’ he said.

‘Why? We’ve done _that_,’ said the Dean.

Ponder sighed. ‘Things are different on a globe, sir. There are no
broomsticks, no magic carpets, and going to the Moon is not just a case
of pushing off over the edge and trying to avoid the Turtle on the way
down.’

‘How did they do it, then?’ said the Dean.

‘Using rockets, sir.’

‘The things that go up and explode with lots of coloured lights?’

‘Initially, sir, but fortunately they found out how to stop them doing
that. Next slide, please …’ A picture that might have been a pair of
old-fashioned pantaloons appeared on the screen. ‘Ah, this is our old
friend, the Trousers of Time. We all know this. It’s what you get when
history goes two ways. What we have to do now is find out why they
split. That means I shall have to—’

‘Are we near the point where you mention quantum?’ said Ridcully,
quickly.

‘I’m afraid it is looming, sir, yes.’

Ridcully stood up, gathering his robes about him. ‘Ah. I think I heard
the gong for dinner, gentlemen. Just as well, really.’

The moon rose. At midnight, Ponder Stibbons read what Hex had written,
wandered across the dewy lawn to the Library, woke the Librarian, and
asked for a copy of a book called _The Origin of Species_.

Two hours later he went back, woke the Librarian again, and asked for
_Theology of Species_. As he left with it, he heard the door being
locked behind him.

Later still, he fell asleep with his face in a cold pizza and both books
open on his desk, dripping with bookmarks and stray pieces of anchovy.

Beside him, Hex’s writing table whirred. Twenty quill pens flashed back
and forth and gyrated on spring-loaded arms, making the table look like
several giant spiders on their backs. And, every minute, a page dropped
onto the pile that was forming on the floor …

Ponder dreamed fitfully of dinosaurs trying to fly. They always splashed
when they reached the bottom of the cliff.

He woke up at half past eight, read the accumulated papers, and voided a
small scream.

All right, all right, he thought. There is no actual _hurry_, as such.
We can change it back any time we like. That’s what time travel _means_.

But although the brain can think that, the panic gland never believes
it. He snatched up the books and as many notes as he could carry and
hurried out.

We have heard the chimes of midnight, the saying goes. The wizards had
not only heard them but also the ones at one, two and three a.m. They
certainly weren’t interested in hearing anything at half past eight,
however. The only occupant of the tables in the Great Hall was
Archchancellor Ridcully, who liked an unhealthy breakfast after his
early morning run. He was alone at the trestle tables in the big hall.

‘I’ve found it!’ Ponder announced, with a certain nervous triumph, and
dropped the two books in front of the astonished wizard.

‘Found what?’ said Ridcully. ‘And mind where you’re putting stuff, man!
You nearly had the bacon dish over!’

‘I have put my finger,’ Ponder declared, ‘on the precise split in the
Trousers of Time!’

‘Good man!’ said Ridcully, reaching for the flagon of brown sauce. ‘Tell
me about it after breakfast, will you?’

‘It’s a book, sir! Two books in fact! He wrote the wrong one! Look!’

Ridcully sighed. Against the enthusiasm of wizards there was no defence.
He narrowed his eyes and read the title of the book Ponder Stibbons was
holding:

‘_Theology of Species_. And?’

‘Archchancellor, it was written by a Charles Darwin, and caused rather a
row when it was published, since it purported to explain the mechanism
of evolution in a manner which upset some widely held beliefs. Vested
interests railed against it, but it prevailed and had a significant
effect on history. Er … the wrong one.’

‘Why? What is it about?’ said Ridcully, carefully taking the top off a
boiled egg.

‘I’ve only glanced at it, Archchancellor, but it appears to describe the
process of evolution as one of permanent involvement by an omnipotent
deity.’

‘And?’ Ridcully selected a piece of toast and began to cut it into
soldiers.

‘That’s not how it works on Roundworld, sir,’ said Ponder, patiently.

‘That’s how it does here, more or less. There’s a god who sees to it.’

‘Yes, sir. But, as I am sure you will remember,’ said Ponder, using the
words in the sense of ‘as I know you have forgotten’, ‘we have not found
any traces of Deitium on Roundworld.’

‘Well, all right,’ the Archchancellor conceded. ‘But I don’t see why the
man shouldn’t have written it, even so. Good solid book, by the look of
it. Took some thinkin’ about, I’ll be bound.’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘But the book he _should_ have written …’ he
thumped another volume onto the breakfast table, ‘… was this.’

Ridcully picked it up. It had a much more colourful cover than
‘Theology’, and the title:

_Darwin Revisited_

_THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES_

_by The Rev. Richard Dawkins_

‘Sir, I think I can prove that because Darwin wrote the wrong book the
world took a different leg of the Trousers of Time, and humanity didn’t
leave the planet before the big freeze,’ said Ponder, standing back.

‘Why did he do that, then?’ said Ridcully, mystified.

‘I don’t know, sir. All I know is that, until a few days ago, this
Charles Darwin wrote a book that said that evolution all worked
naturally, without a god. Now it turns out that he didn’t. Instead, he
wrote a book that said it worked _because_ a god was involved at every
stage.’

‘And this other fella, Dawkins?’

‘He said Darwin had pretty much got it right except the god part. You
didn’t need one, he said.’

‘Didn’t need a god? But it says here he’s a priest of some sort!’

‘Er … sort of, sir. In the … history where Charles Darwin wrote
_Theology of Species_, it had become more or less compulsory to take
holy orders in order to attend university. Dawkins said evolution
happened all by itself.’

He shut his eyes. Ridcully alone was a much better audience than the
senior faculty, who’d taken cross-purposes to the status of a fine art,
but his Archchancellor was a practical, sensible man and therefore found
Roundworld difficult. It wasn’t a sensible place.

‘You’ve foxed me there. _How_ can it _just_ happen?’ said Ridcully. ‘It
makes no sense if there isn’t _someone_ who knows what’s going on.
There’s got to be a _reason_.’

‘Quite so, sir. But this is Roundworld,’ said Ponder. ‘Remember?’

‘But surely this other feller, Dawkins, made it all right again?’
Ridcully floundered. ‘You did say it was the right book.’

‘But at the wrong time. It was too late, sir. He didn’t write _his_ book
until more than a hundred years later. It caused a huge row—’

‘An ungodly one, I suspect?’ said Ridcully cheerfully, dipping the toast
in the egg.

‘Haha, sir, yes. But it was still too late. Humanity was well on the
road to extinction.’

Ridcully picked up _Theology_ and turned it over in his hands, getting
butter on it.

‘Seems innocent enough,’ he said. ‘Gods making it all happen … well,
that’s common sense.’ He held up a hand. ‘I know, I know! This is
Roundworld, I know. But where there’s something as complicated as a
watch, you know there must be a watchmaker.’

‘That’s what the Darwin who wrote the _Theology_ book said, sir, except
that he stated that the watchmaker remained part of the watch,’ said
Ponder.

‘Oilin’ it, and so forth?’ said Ridcully, cheerfully.

‘Sort of, sir. Metaphorically.’

‘Hah!’ said Ridcully. ‘No wonder there was a row. Priests don’t like
that sort of thing. They always squirm when things get mystical.’

‘Oh, the _priests?_ They loved it,’ said Ponder.

‘What? I thought you said vested interests were against it!’

‘Yes, sir. I meant the philosophers and scientists,’ said Ponder
Stibbons. ‘The technomancers. But _they lost_.’

FOUR

PALEY ONTOLOGY

[image] PALEY’S METAPHOR OF THE WATCH, alluded to by Ridcully, still
remains powerful; powerful enough for Richard Dawkins to title his
neo-Darwinian riposte of 1986 _The Blind Watchmaker_. Dawkins¹ made it
clear that in his view, and those of most evolutionary biologists over
the past fifty years, there was no watchmaker for living organisms, in
Paley’s sense: ‘Paley’s argument is made with passionate sincerity and
is informed by the best biological scholarship of his day, but it is
wrong, gloriously and utterly wrong.’ But, says Dawkins, if we must give
the watchmaker a role, then that role must be the process of natural
selection that Darwin expounded. If so, the watchmaker has no sense of
purpose: it is blind. It’s a neat title but easily misunderstood, and it
opens the way to replies, such as the recent book by William Dembski,
_How Blind Is the Watchmaker_? Dembski is an advocate of ‘intelligent
design’, a modern reincarnation of Paley with updated biology which
repeats the old mistakes in new contexts.²

If you did find a watch on a heath, your first thought would probably
not be that there must have been a watchmaker, but a watch-_owner_. You
would either wish to get the owner’s property back to them, or look
guiltily around to make sure they weren’t anywhere nearby before you
snaffled it. Paley tells us that if we find, say, a spider on the path,
then we are compelled to infer the existence of a spider-maker. But he
finds no such compulsion to infer the existence of a spider-owner. Why
is one human social role emphasised, but the other suppressed?

Moreover, we _know_ what a watch is for, and this colours our thinking.
Suppose, instead, that our nineteenth-century heath-walker chanced upon
a mobile phone, left there by some careless time traveller from the
future. He would probably still infer ‘design’ from its intricate form …
but purpose? What conceivable purpose would a mobile phone have in the
nineteenth century, with no supporting network of transmission towers?
There is no way to look at a mobile phone and infer some evident
purpose. If its battery has run down, it doesn’t do _anything_. And if
what was found on the path was a computer chip – say, the engine manager
of a car – then even the element of design would be undetectable, and
the chip might well be dismissed as some obscure crystalline rock.
Chemical analysis would confirm the diagnosis by showing that it was
mostly silicon. Of course, _we_ know that these things do have a
designer; but in the absence of any clear purpose, Paley’s heath-walker
would not be entitled to make any such inference.

In short, Paley’s logic is heavily biased by what a human being would
know about a watch and its maker. And his analogy breaks down when we
consider other features of watches. If it doesn’t even work for watches,
which we do understand, there’s no reason for it to apply to organisms,
which we don’t.

He is also rather unfair to stones.

Some of the oldest rocks in the world are found in Greenland, in a
25-mile-long band known as the Isua supracrustal belt. They are the
oldest known rocks among those that have been laid down on the surface
of the Earth, instead of rising from the mantle below. They are 3.8
billion years old, unless we cannot reliably make inferences from
observations, in which case the evidence for cosmic design has to be
thrown out along with the evidence of the rocks. We know their age
because they contain tiny crystals of zircon. We mention them here
because they show that Paley’s lack of interest in ‘stones’, and his
casual acceptance that they might have ‘lain there forever’, are
unjustified. The structure of a stone is nowhere near as simple as Paley
assumed. In fact, it can be just as intricate as an organism, though not
as obviously ‘organised’. Every stone has a story to tell.

Zircons are a case in point.

Zirconium is the 40th element in the periodic table, and zircon is
zirconium sulphate. It occurs in many rocks, but usually in such tiny
amounts that its presence is ignored. It is extremely hard – not as hard
as diamond, but harder than the hardest steel. Jewellers sometimes use
it as a diamond substitute.

Zircons, then, are found in most rocks, but in this instance the
important rock is granite. Granite is an igneous rock, which wells up
from the molten layers beneath the Earth’s crust, forcing a path through
the overlying sedimentary rock that has been deposited by wind or water.
Zircons form in granite that solidifies about 12 miles (20 km) down
inside the Earth. The crystals are truly tiny: one 10,000th of an inch
(2 microns) is typical.

Over the last few decades we have learned that our apparently stable
planet is highly dynamic, with continents that wander around over the
surface, carried by gigantic ‘tectonic plates’ which are 60 miles (100
km) thick and float on the liquid mantle. Sometimes they even crash into
each other. They move less than an inch (about 2 cm) per year, on
average, and on a geological timescale that’s _fast_. The north-west of
Scotland was once part of North America, when the North American plate
collided with the Eurasian plate; when the plates later split apart, a
piece of America was left behind, forming the Moine thrust. When plates
collide, they slide over each other, often creating mountains. The
highest mountains on Earth today, the Himalayas, formed when India
collided with the Asian mainland. They are still rising today by more
than half an inch (1.3 cm) a year, though are often weathered away
faster, and India is still moving northwards.

At any rate, granite deep within the Earth may be uplifted by the
collision of continental plates, to appear at the surface as part of a
mountain range. Being a hard rock, it survives when the softer
sedimentary rocks that surround it weather away. But eventually, even
granite weathers, so the mountain erodes. The zircon crystals are even
harder, so they survive weathering; they separate out from the granite,
to be washed down to the coast by streams and rivers, deposited on the
sandy shore, and incorporated into the next layer of sedimentary rock.

As well as being very hard, zircon is chemically very stable, and it
resists most chemical changes. So, as the sediment builds up, and the
zircon crystal is buried under accumulating quantities of incipient
rock, the crystal is relatively immune to the increasing heat and
pressure. Even when the rock is cooked by deep heat, becoming
metamorphic – changing its chemical structure – the crystal of zircon
survives. Its one concession to the extreme environment around it is
that eventually it builds a new layer, like a skin, on its surface. This
‘rim’, as it is called, is roughly the same age as the surrounding rock;
the inner core is far older.

Now the process may repeat. The core of zircon, with its new rim, may be
pushed up with the surrounding rocks to make a new mountain range. When
those mountains weather, the zircon may return to the depths, to acquire
a second rim. Then a third, a fourth … Just as tree rings indicate the
growth of a tree, so ‘zircon rims’ reflect a sequence of
mountain-building and erosion. The main difference is that each ring on
a tree corresponds to a period of one year, whereas the rims on the tiny
zircon crystal correspond to geological cycles that typically last
hundreds of millions of years. But, just as the widths of tree rings
tell us something about the climate in the years that are represented,
so the zircon rims tell us something about the conditions that occurred
during a given geological cycle.

By one of those neat coincidences that Paley would interpret as the Hand
of God but nowadays we recognise as an inevitable consequence of the
sheer richness of the universe (yes, we do see that those statements
_might_ be the same), the zirconium atom has the same electric charge,
and is much the same size, as an atom of uranium. So uranium impurities
can easily sneak into that zircon crystal. This is good for science,
because uranium is radioactive. Over time, it decays into lead. If we
measure the ratio of uranium to lead then we can estimate the time that
has elapsed since any given part of the zircon crystal was laid down.
Now we have a powerful observational tool, a geological stopwatch. And
we also have a simple prediction that gives us confidence in the
hypothesis that the zircon crystal forms in successive stages. Namely,
the core should be the oldest part of the crystal, and successive rims
should become consistently younger, in separate stages.

A typical crystal might have, say, four layers. The core might date to
3.7 billion years ago, the next to 3.6 billion years, the third to 2.6
billion years, and the last one to 2.3 billion years. So here, in a
simple ‘stone’, we have evidence for geological cycles that last between
100 million and one billion years. The order of the ages agrees with the
order in which the crystal must have been deposited. If the general
scenario envisaged by geologists were wrong, then it would take only a
single grain of sand to disprove it. Of course that doesn’t confirm the
huge geological cycles: those are deduced from other evidence. Science
is a crossword puzzle.

Zircons can teach us more. It is thought that the ratio of two isotopes
of carbon, carbon-12 and carbon-13, may distinguish organic sources of
carbon from inorganic ones. There is carbon in the Isua formation, and
the ratio there suggests that life may have existed 3.8 billion years
ago, surprisingly soon after the Earth’s surface solidified. But this
conclusion is controversial, and many scientists are not convinced that
other explanations can be excluded.

At any rate, for the Isua zircons we know that it is not an option for
them to have ‘lain there for ever’. Stones are far more interesting than
they might seem, and anyone who knows how to read the rocks can deduce
many things about their history. Paley believed that he could deduce the
existence of God from the complexity of an eye. We can’t get God from a
zircon, but we can get vast geological cycles of mountain-building and
erosion … and just possibly, evidence for exceedingly ancient life.

Never underestimate the humble stone. It may be a watch in disguise.

Paley’s position is that what you see is what you get. The appearance is
the reality. His title _Natural Theology_ says as much, and his subtitle
could scarcely be plainer. Organisms look designed because they _are_
designed, by God; they appear to have a purpose because they _do_ have a
purpose: God’s. Everywhere Paley looked, he saw traces of God’s
handiwork; everything around him was evidence for the Creator.

That kind of ‘evidence’ exists in such abundance that there is no
difficulty in accumulating examples. Paley’s central example was the
eye. He noted its similarity to a telescope, and deduced that since a
telescope is designed, so must an eye be. The camera did not exist in
his day,³ but if it had existed, he would have found even closer
similarities. The eye, like a telescope or a camera, has a lens to bring
incoming light to a sharp focus, forming an image. The eye has a retina
to receive that image, just as a telescope has an observer, or a screen
on to which the image is projected.

The lens of the eye is useless without the retina; the retina is useless
without the lens. You can’t put an eye together piecemeal – you need all
of it, at once, or it can’t work. Later supporters of theist
explanations of life turned Paley’s subtle arguments into a simplistic
slogan: ‘What use is half an eye?’

One reason to doubt Paley’s explanation of ‘design’ is that in science,
you very seldom get what you see. Nature is far from obvious. The waves
on the ocean may seem to be travelling, but the water is mainly going
round and round in tiny circles. (If it wasn’t, the land would quickly
be swamped.) The Sun may appear to orbit the Earth, but actually it’s
the other way round. Mountains, apparently solid and stable, rise and
fall over geological timescales. Continents move. Stars explode. So the
explanation ‘it appears designed because it _is_ designed’ is a bit too
trite, a bit too obvious, a bit too shallow. That doesn’t prove it’s
wrong, but it gives us pause.

Darwin was one of a select group of people who realised that there might
be an alternative. Instead of some cosmic designer creating the
impressive organisation of organisms, that organisation might come into
being of its own accord. Or, more accurately, as an inevitable
consequence of the physical nature of life, and its interactions with
its environment. Living creatures, Darwin suggested, are not the product
of design, but of what we now call ‘evolution’ – a process of slow,
incremental change, almost imperceptible from one generation to the
next, but capable of accumulating over extensive periods of time.
Evolution is a consequence of three things. One is the ability of living
creatures to pass on some of their attributes to their offspring. The
second is the slightly hit-and-miss nature of that ability: what they
pass on is seldom a precise copy, though it usually comes close. The
third is ‘natural selection’ – creatures that are better at survival are
the ones that manage to breed, and pass on their survival attributes.

Natural selection is slow.

As an accomplished student of geology – Victorian-style field geology,
where you traipse about the landscape trying to work out what rocks lie
under your feet, or halfway up the next mountain, and how they got there
– Darwin was well aware of the sheer abyssal depth of geological time.
The record of the rocks offered compelling evidence that the Earth must
be very, very old indeed: tens or hundreds of millions of years, maybe
more. Today’s figure of 4.5 billion years is even longer than the
Victorian geologists dared imagine, but probably would not have
surprised them.

Even a few million years is a very long time. Small changes can turn
into huge ones over such a period of time. Imagine a species of worm
four inches (10 cm) long, whose length increases by one thousandth of a
per cent every year, so that even very accurate measurements would not
detect any change on a yearly basis. In a hundred million years, the
descendants of that worm would be 30 feet (10 m) long. From annelid to
anaconda. The longest worm alive today sometimes reaches lengths of 150
feet (50m), but it is a marine worm: _Lineus longissimus_, which lives
in the North Sea and can be found under boulders at low tide. Earthworms
are a lot shorter, but the _Megascolecid_ worms of Australia can grow to
a length of 10 feet (3m), which is still impressive.

We’re not suggesting that evolution happens with quite that degree of
simplicity or regularity, but there’s no question that geological time
allows huge changes to occur by imperceptible steps. In fact, most
evolutionary changes are a lot faster. Observations of ‘Darwin’s
finches’, 13 species of bird that inhabit the Galápagos Islands, reveal
measurable changes from one year to the next – for example, in the
average sizes of the birds’ beaks.

If we want to explain the rich panoply of life on Earth, it is not
enough to observe that living creatures can change as the generations
pass. There must also be something that _drives_ those changes in a
‘creative’ direction. The only driving force that Paley could imagine
was God, making conscious, intelligent choices and designing them in
from the beginning. Darwin was more acutely aware that organisms can and
do change from each generation to the next. Both the fossil record and
his experience with the breeding of new varieties of plants and domestic
animals made that fact plain. But breeding is also a choice imposed from
outside, by the breeder, so if anything, domestic animals look like
evidence in favour of Paley.

On the other hand, no human agency ever bred dinosaurs. Does that imply
that the agency was God – or did the dinosaurs somehow breed
_themselves_ into new forms? Darwin realised that there is another kind
of ‘choice’, imposed not by intelligent will but by circumstance and
context. This is ‘natural selection’. In the vast, ongoing competition
for food, living space, and the opportunity to breed, nature will
automatically favour winners over losers. Competition introduces a kind
of ratchet, which mostly moves in one direction: towards whatever works
better. So we should not be surprised that tiny incremental changes from
one generation to the next should possess some sort of overall
‘direction’, or dynamic, with changes accumulating coherently across the
aeons to produce something entirely different.

This kind of description is easily misunderstood as a kind of inbuilt
tendency towards ‘progress’ – ever onwards, ever upwards. Ever more
complex. Many Victorians took the message that the purpose of evolution
was to bring humanity into being. We are the highest form of creation,
we are at the top of the evolutionary tree. With us, evolution has
arrived; it will now stop, having achieved its ultimate goal.

Rubbish. ‘Works better’ is not an absolute statement. It applies in a
context that is itself changing. What works better today might not do so
in a million years’ time – or even tomorrow. Maybe for a time, a bird’s
beak will ‘work better’ if it is bigger and stronger. If so, that’s how
it will change. Not because the birds _know_ what kind of beak will work
better: because the kind of beak that works better is the kind that
survives more effectively and is therefore more likely to be inherited
by succeeding generations. But the results of the competition may change
the rules of the game, so that later on, big beaks may become a
disadvantage; for instance, suitable food may disappear. So now smaller
beaks will win.

In short, the dynamic of evolution is not prescribed in advance: it is
‘emergent’. It creates its own context, and reacts to that context, as
it proceeds. So at any given time we expect to find some sensible
directionality to evolutionary change, consistent over many generations,
but often the universe itself only finds out what that direction is by
exploring what’s possible and discovering what works. Over a longer
timescale, the direction itself can change. It’s like a river that flows
through an eroding landscape: at any given time there is a clear
direction to the flow, but in the long run the passage of the river can
slowly change its own course.

It is also important to appreciate that individual organisms do not
compete in isolation, or against a fixed background. Billions of
competitions go on all the time, and their outcome may be affected by
the results of other competitions. It’s not like the Olympics, where the
javelin-throwers politely wait for the marathon-runners to stream past.
It’s more like a version of the Olympics where the javelin-throwers try
to spear as many marathon-runners as they can, while the steeplechasers
are trying to steal their javelins to turn each hurdle into a miniature
pole vault, and the marathon-runners’ main aim in life is to drink the
water-jump before the steeplechasers get to it and drink it first. This
is the Evolympics, where everything happens at once.

The evolutionary competitions, and their outcomes, also depend on
context. Climate, in particular, plays a big role. In the Galápagos,
selection for beak size in Darwin’s finches depends on how many birds
have what size of beak, and on what kinds of food – seeds, insects,
cactus – are available and in what quantities. The amount and type of
food depend on which plants and insects are competing best in the
struggle to survive – not least from being eaten by finches – and breed.
And all of this is played out against a background of climatic
variations: wet or dry summers, wet or dry winters. Observations
published in 2002 by Peter and Rosemary Grant show that the main
unpredictable feature of finch evolution in the Galápagos is climate. If
we could forecast the climate accurately, we could predict how the
finches would evolve. But we can’t predict the climate well enough, and
there are reasons to think that this may never be possible.

That doesn’t prevent evolution from being ‘predictive’, hence a science,
any more than it prevents meteorology from being a science. But the
evolutionary predictions are contingent upon the behaviour of the
climate. They predict what will happen in what circumstances, not when
it will happen.

Darwin almost certainly read Paley’s masterwork as a young man, and in
later life he may well have used it as a touchstone for his own, more
radical and far more indirect, views. Paley succinctly expressed many of
the most effective objections to Darwin’s ideas, long before Darwin
arrived at them. Intellectual honesty demanded that Darwin should find
convincing answers to Paley. Such answers are scattered throughout
Darwin’s epic treatise _The Origin of Species_, though Paley’s name does
not appear.

In particular, Darwin found it necessary to tackle the thorny question
of the eye. His answer was that although the human eye appears to be a
perfected mechanism, with many interdependent parts, there are plenty of
different ‘eyes’ in the animal kingdom, and a lot of those are
relatively rudimentary. They can even be arranged in a rough progression
from simple light-sensing patches to pinhole cameras to complex lenses
(though this arrangement should not be interpreted as an actual
evolutionary sequence). Instead of half an eye, we find an eye that is
half as effective at detecting light. And this is far, far better than
no eye at all.

Darwin’s approach to the eye is complemented by some computer
experiments published by Daniel Nilsson and Suzanne Pelger⁴ in 1994.
They studied a simple model of the evolution of a light-sensing patch of
cells, whose geometry could change slightly at every ‘generation’, and
which was equipped with the capacity to develop accessories such as a
lens. In their simulations, a mere 100,000 generations were enough to
transform a light-sensing patch into something approaching the human
eye, including a lens whose refractive index varied from place to place,
to improve its focus. The human eye possesses just such a lens.
Moreover, and crucially, at every one of those 100,000 steps, the eye’s
ability to sense light got better.

This simulation was recently criticised on the grounds that it gets out
what it puts in. It doesn’t explain how those light-sensing cells can
appear to begin with, or how the eye’s geometry can change. And it uses
a rather simplistic measure of the eye’s performance. These would be
important criticisms if the model were being used as some kind of proof
that eyes must evolve, and as an accurate description of how they did
it. However, that was never the purpose of the simulation. It had two
main aims. One was to show that in the simplified context of the model,
evolution constrained by natural selection could make incremental
improvements and get to something resembling a real eye. It wouldn’t get
stuck along the way with some dead-end version of the eye that could be
improved only by scrapping it and starting afresh. The second aim was to
estimate the time required for such a process to take place (look at the
title of the paper), on the assumption that the necessary ingredients
were available.

Some of the model’s assumptions are easily justified, as it happens.
Light carries energy and energy affects chemical bonds, so it is not
surprising that many chemicals respond to light. Evolution has an
immense range of molecules to draw on – proteins specified by DNA
sequences in genes. The combinatorial possibilities here are truly vast:
the universe is not big enough, and has not lasted long enough, to make
one molecule of each possible protein as complex as, say, haemoglobin,
the oxygen-carrier in blood. It would be utterly astonishing if
evolution could _not_ come up with at least one light-sensing pigment,
and incorporate it into a cell.

There are even some ideas of how this may have happened. In _Debating
Design_, Bruce Weber and David Depew point out that light-sensitive
enzyme systems can be found in bacteria, and these systems are probably
very ancient. The bacteria don’t use them for vision, but as part of
their metabolic (energy-gaining) processes. Proteins in the human lens
are very similar to metabolic enzymes found in the liver. So the
proteins that make the eye did not start out as components of a system
whose purpose was vision. They arose elsewhere and had quite different
‘functions’. Their form and function were then selectively modified when
their rudimentary light-sensing powers turned out to offer an
evolutionary advantage.

Although we now know quite a lot about the genetics of the human eye, no
biologist claims to know _exactly_ how it evolved. The fossil record is
poor, and humanoid eyes don’t fossilise (though trilobite eyes do). But
biologists can offer simple reasons why and how the eye could have
evolved, and these alone are sufficient to demolish claims that its
evolution is impossible _in principle_ because the eye’s components are
interdependent and removing any one of them causes the eye to
malfunction. The eye did not evolve one component at a time. Its
structure evolved in parallel.

The instigators of more recent revivals of Paley’s doctrine, albeit in
less overtly theist tones, have taken on board the message of the eye as
a specific case … but its more generic aspects seem to have eluded them.
Darwin’s discussion of the eye, and the Nilsson-Pelger computer
experiment, are not limited to eyes. Here is the deeper message. When
confronted with a complex living ‘mechanism’, do not assume that the
only way it can evolve is component by component, piece by piece. When
you see a watch, do not think of hooking up springs and adding cogwheels
from some standard box of spare parts. Think more of a Salvador Dali
‘soft watch’ that can flow and distort, deform, split apart, and rejoin.
Think of a watch whose cogwheels can change shape, grow new teeth, and
whose axles and supports evolve along with the cogs so that at every
stage the whole thing fits together. Think of a watch that may have
started out as a paper clip, and along the way became a pogo-stick.
Think not of a watch that does and always did have a single purpose,
which was to tell the time. Think of a watch that once held sheets of
paper together and could also be straightened out to form a toothpick,
and which later turned out to be great for bouncing, and started to be
used for measuring time only when someone noticed that its rhythmic
movements could chart the passing seconds.

Yes, proponents of intelligent design understand the eye … but only as
one example, not as the basis of a general principle. ‘Oh, yes, we know
all about the eye,’ they say (we paraphrase). ‘We’re not going to ask
what use half an eye is. That’s simple-minded nonsense.’ So instead,
they ask what use half a bacterial flagellum is, and thereby repeat the
identical error in a different context.

We owe this example to Michael Behe, a biochemist who was baffled by the
complexity of bacterial flagella. These are the ‘tails’ that bacteria
use to move around, tiny ‘screws’ like a ship’s propeller, driven by a
rotary molecular motor. Some forty proteins are involved in making such
a motor, and if you miss any of them out, it won’t work. In his 1996
_Darwin’s Black Box_, Behe claimed that the only possible way to make a
flagellum was to encode the whole structure, in advance, in bacterial
DNA. This code could not have evolved from anything simpler, because the
flagellum is ‘irreducibly complex’. An organ or biochemical system is
said to be irreducibly complex if removing any of its parts causes it to
fail. Behe deduced that no irreducibly complex system can evolve. The
example of the bacterial flagellum quickly became a cornerstone of the
intelligent design movement, and Behe’s principle of irreducible
complexity was promoted as an unavoidable barrier to the evolution of
complex structures and functions.

There are several excellent books that debate intelligent design: we’ve
mentioned two earlier in a footnote. It’s fair to say that the antis are
winning the debate hands down – even in books edited by the pros, such
as _Debating Design_. Perhaps the biggest problem for the pros is that
Behe’s fundamental concept of ‘irreducible complexity’ has fatal flaws.
With his definition, the deduction that an irreducibly complex system
cannot evolve is valid _only_ if evolution always consists of adding new
parts. If that were the case, then the logic is clear. Suppose we have
an irreducibly complex system, and suppose that there is an evolutionary
route leading to it. Focus on the final step, where the last part is
added. Then whatever came before must have been a failure, so it
couldn’t have existed. This is absurd: end of story.

However, evolution need not merely add identifiable components, like a
factory-worker assembling a machine. It can also remove them – like a
builder using scaffolding and then taking it down once it’s done its
job. Or the entire structure can evolve in parallel. Either possibility
allows an irreducibly complex system to evolve, because the next to last
step no longer has to start from a system that lacks that final, vital
piece. Instead, it can start from a system with an extra piece, and
remove it. Or add two vital pieces simultaneously. Nothing in Behe’s
definition of irreducible complexity prohibits either of these.

Moreover, ‘fail’ is a slippery concept: a watch that lacks hands is a
failure at telling the time, but you can still use it to detonate a
time-bomb, or hang it on a string to make a plumb-line. Organs and
biochemical systems often change their functions as they evolve, as
we’ve just seen in the context of the eye. No satisfactory definition of
‘irreducible complexity’ – one that really does constitute a barrier to
evolution – has yet been suggested.

According to Kenneth Miller in _Debating Design_: ‘the great irony of
the flagellum’s increasing acceptance as an icon of the
anti-evolutionist movement is the fact that research had demolished its
status as an example of irreducible complexity almost at the very moment
it was first proclaimed’. Removing parts from the flagellum do _not_
cause it to ‘fail’. The base of the bacterial motor is remarkably
similar to a system that bacteria use to attack other bacteria, the
‘type III secretory system’. So here we have the basis of an entirely
sensible and plausible evolutionary route to the flagellum, in which
protein components _do_ get added on. When you remove them again, you
don’t get a working flagellum – but you do get a working secretory
system. The bacterial method of propulsion may well have evolved from an
attack mechanism.

To their credit, proponents of intelligent design are encouraging this
kind of debate, but they have not yet conceded defeat, even though their
entire programme rests on shaky foundations and is collapsing in ruins.
Creationists, desperate to snatch at any straw of scientific
respectability for their political programme to lever religion into the
American state school system,⁵ have not yet noticed that what they are
currently taking as their scientific support is falling apart at the
seams. The theory of intelligent design itself is not overtly theist –
indeed its proponents try very hard not to draw religious conclusions.
They want the scientific arguments to be considered as science. Of
course that’s not going to happen, because the theist implications are a
little too obvious – even to atheists.

There are some things that evolution does not explain – which will
gladden the heart of anyone who feels that, Darwin notwithstanding,
there are some issues that science cannot address.

It is perfectly possible to agree with Darwin and his successors that
the Earth is 4.5 billion years old, and that life has evolved, by purely
physical and chemical processes, from inorganic beginnings – yet still
find a place for a deity. Yes, in a rich and complex universe, all these
things can happen without divine intervention. But … how did that rich
and complex universe come into being?

Here, today’s cosmology offers descriptions of how (Big Bang, various
recent alternatives) and when (about 13 billion years ago), but not why.
String theory, a recent innovation at the frontiers of physics, makes an
interesting attempt at ‘why?’ However, it leaves an even bigger ‘why?’
unanswered: _why string theory?_ Science develops the consequences of
physical rules (‘laws’), but it doesn’t explain why those rules apply,
or how such a set-up came to exist.

These are deep mysteries. At the moment, and probably for ever, they are
not accessible to the scientific method. Here religions come into their
own, offering answers to riddles about which science chooses to remain
mute.

If you want answers, they are available.

Rather a lot of different ones, in fact. Choose whichever one makes you
feel most comfortable.

Feeling comfortable, however, is not a criterion recognised by science.
It may make us feel warm and fuzzy, but the historical development of
scientific understanding shows that, time and again, warm and fuzzy is
just a polite way of saying ‘wrong’.

Belief systems rely on faith, not evidence. They provide answers – but
they don’t provide any rational process to assess those answers. So
although there are questions beyond the capacity of science to answer,
that’s mostly because science sets itself high standards for evidence,
and holds its tongue when there isn’t any. The alleged superiority of
belief systems compared to science, when it comes to these deep
mysteries, stems not from a failure of science, but from the willingness
of belief systems to accept authority without question.

So the religious person can take comfort that his or her beliefs provide
answers to deep questions of human existence that are beyond the powers
of science, and the atheist can take comfort that there is absolutely no
reason to expect those answers to be right. But also no way to prove
them wrong, so why don’t we just coexist peacefully, stay off each
other’s turf, and each get on with our own thing? Which is easy to say
but harder to do, especially when some people refuse to stick to their
own turf, and use political means, or violence, to promote their views,
when rational debate long ago demolished them.

Some aspects of some belief systems are testable, of course – the Grand
Canyon is not evidence for Noah’s flood, unless God is having a quiet
joke at our expense, which admittedly would be a very Discworld thing to
do. And if He is, then all bets are off, because His revealed word in
[insert your preferred Holy Book] may well be a joke too. Other aspects
are not testable: the deeper issues stray into intellectual territory
where, in the end, you have to settle for whatever explanation your type
of mind finds convincing, or just stop asking that kind of question.

But remember: what’s most interesting about your beliefs, to anyone who
does not share them, is not whether you’re right – it’s that what you
believe is a window into the workings of your mind. ‘Ah, so you think
like _that_, do you?’

This is where the great mystery of human existence leads, and where all
explanations are true – for a given value of ‘true’.

¹ That is to say, the Richard Dawkins of _our_ leg of the famous
Trousers of Time, who is, in a very definite way, not in holy orders.

² For detailed and thoughtful rebuttals of the main contentions of the
intelligent designers, plus some responses, see Matt Young and Taner
Edis, _Why Intelligent Design Fails_ (Rutgers University Press, 2004),
and William Dembski and Michael Ruse, _Debating Design_ (Cambridge
University Press, 2004). And it’s only a matter of time before someone
writes _How Intelligent Is the Designer?_

³ Only the camera obscura, a room with a pinhole in the wall. Paley
first wrote about the eye in 1802, whereas genuine photography dates
from 1826.

⁴ ‘A pessimistic estimate of the time required for an eye to evolve’,
_Proceedings of the Royal Society of London_ B, volume 256 (1994), pp.
53–8.

⁵ They themselves refer to this programme as the ‘wedge strategy’.

FIVE

THE WRONG TROUSERS OF TIME

[image] THE GLASS GLOBE OF ROUNDWORLD had been installed on a pedestal
in front of Hex by the time most of the senior faculty were up and
milling around. They were always at a bit of a loose end when Second
Breakfast had finished and it wasn’t yet time for Elevenses, and this
looked like entertainment.

‘One asks oneself whether it really is worth saving,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies. ‘It’s had huge ice ages before, hasn’t it? If the
humans are too stupid to leave in time, then there’s bound to be another
interesting species around in half a million years or so.’

‘But extinction is so … sort of … _final_,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes.

‘Yes, and we created their world and helped them become intelligent,’
said the Dean. ‘We can’t just let them freeze to death. It’d be like
going on holiday and not feeding the hamster.’

A watchmaker as part of the watch, thought Ponder, adjusting the
university’s biggest omniscope; not just making the world, but tweaking
it all the time …

Wizards did not believe in gods. They didn’t deny their existence, of
course. They just didn’t believe. It was nothing personal; they weren’t
actually _rude_ about it. Gods were a visible part of the narrativium
that made things work, that gave the world its purpose. It was just that
they were best avoided close up.

Roundworld had no gods that the wizards had been able to find. But one
that was _built in_ … that was a new idea. A god inside every flower and
stone … not just a god who was everywhere, but a god who _was_
everywhere.

The last chapter of _Theology of Species_ had been very impressive …

He stood back. Hex had been busy all morning. So had the Librarian.
Right now he was carefully dusting books and feeding them into Hex’s
hopper. Hex had mastered the secret of osmotic reading, normally only
ever attempted by students.

And the Librarian had located a copy of the right _Origin of Species_,
the book Darwin ought to have written. It had a picture of Darwin as a
frontispiece. With a pointy hat he would have passed for a wizard
anywhere. If it came to that, he could have passed for the
Archchancellor.

Ponder waited until the wizards had settled down and opened their
popcorn.

‘Gentlemen,’ he said, ‘I do hope you’ve all read my analysis …?’

The wizards stared at him.

‘I worked very hard on it all morning,’ said Ponder. ‘And it was
delivered to all your offices … .’

There was more staring.

‘It had a green cover … .’ Ponder prompted.

The staring was quite intense now. Ponder gave in.

‘Perhaps I should remind you of the important points?’ he said.

The faces lit up.

‘Just jog our memories,’ said the Dean, cheerfully.

‘I discussed alternate timelines in phase space,’¹ said Ponder. That was
a mistake, he could see. His fellow wizards weren’t stupid, but you had
to be careful to shape ideas to fit the holes in their heads.

‘Two different legs in the Trousers of Time,’ said Ponder. ‘In the year
1859, by the counting system commonly in use in that part of Roundworld,
a book changed the way a lot of people thought about the world. It just
happened to be the wrong book—’

‘Prove it,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Pardon, sir?’

‘Well, correct me if I’m wrong, but supposing _Theology of Species_ was
the _right_ book?’ said the Chair.

‘It muted scientific – that is, technomantic – progress for almost a
hundred years, sir,’ said Ponder, wearily. ‘It slowed down humanity’s
understanding of its place in the universe.’

‘You mean that it was built by wizards and left on a shelf in a
corridor?’ said the Chair.

‘That’s only true on the outside, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘My point is,
something happened to Mr Darwin at some time in his life that caused him
to write the wrong book. And it _was_ wrong. Yes, it would have been the
right book here on Discworld, sir. We _know_ there is a God of
Evolution.’

‘That’s right. Skinny old chap, lives on an island,’ said Ridcully.
‘Decent sort, in his way. Remember? He was redesigning the elephant when
we were there. With wheels, very clever. Very keen on beetles, too, as I
recall.’

‘So why’d Darwin write this theology book instead?’ the Chair of
Indefinite Studies persisted.

‘I don’t know, sir, but as I wrote on page 4, I’m sure you recall, it
was the wrong book at exactly the right time. Nevertheless, it made
sense. There was something in it for everyone. All the technomancers had
to do was leave a place in their science for the local god, and all the
priests had to give up were a few beliefs that none of the sensible ones
believed anyway—’

‘Such as what?’ said the Dean.

‘Well, that the world was created in a week and isn’t very old,’ said
Ponder.

‘But that’s true!’

‘Once again, only on the outside, Dean,’ said Ponder smoothly. ‘As far
as we can tell, _Theology of Species_ polarised intellectual opinion in
a curious way. In fact, haha, it _equatorialised_ it, you might say.’

‘I don’t think we would,’ said Ridcully. ‘What does the word mean?’

‘Ah … er, on a globe, the equator is an imaginary line around the
middle,’ said Ponder. ‘What happened was that the bulk of the
technomancers and the priests got behind the ideas expressed in Darwin’s
book, because they gave everyone pretty much what they wanted. Quite of
few of the technomancers had a strong belief in the god, and most of the
brighter priests could see big flaws in the dogma. Together, they were a
very large and influential force. The hard-line religionists and the
unbending technomancers were marginalised. Out in the cold. Polarised,
in fact.’ This rather neat pun, although he said it himself, failed to
get even a groan of acknowledgement, so he went on: ‘They didn’t agree
with the united group and they _certainly_ didn’t agree with one
another. And, thus, happy compromise ruled. For well over sixty years.’

‘That’s nice,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Er … yes, sir, and then again, no,’ said Ponder. ‘Technomancy doesn’t
work well in those circumstances. It can’t make real progress by
consensus. Hah, being led by a bunch of self-satisfied old men who are
more interesting in big dinners than asking questions is a recipe for
stagnation, anyone can see that.’

The wizards nodded sagely.

‘Very true,’ said Archchancellor Ridcully, narrowing his eyes. ‘That was
an important point which needed to be made.’

‘Thank you, Archchancellor.’

‘And now it needs to be apologised for.’

‘Sorry, Archchancellor.’

‘Good. So, Mr Stibbons, what do—’

There was a rattle from Hex’s writing engine. The spidery arms wove
across the paper and wrote:

+++ The Chair of Indefinite Studies is correct +++

The wizards clustered round.

‘Right about what?’ said Ponder.

+++ Charles Darwin of _Theology of Species_ was for much of his life a
Rector in the Church of England, a sub-set of the British nation +++ the
computer scrawled. +++ The chief function of the priests of that
religion at the time was to further the arts of archaeology, local
history, lepidoptery, botany, palaeontology, geology and the making of
fireworks +++

‘Priests did that?’ said the Dean. ‘What about the praying and so on?’

+++ Some of them did that too, yes, although it was considered to be
showing off. The God of the English did not require much in the way of
sacrifice, only that people acted decently and kept the noise down.
Being a priest in that church was a natural job for a young man of good
breeding and education but no very specific talent. In the rural areas
they had much free time. My calculations suggest that _Theology of
Species_ was the book that he was destined to write. In all the
histories of third-level phase space, there is only one in which he
writes _The Origin of Species_ +++

‘Why is that?’ said Ponder.

+++ The explanation is complex +++

‘Well, out with it,’ said Ridcully. ‘We’re all sensible men here.’

Another piece of paper slid off Hex’s tray. It read: +++ Yes. That is
the problem. You understand that every possibility of choice gives birth
to a new universe in which that choice is manifest? +++

‘This is the Trousers of Time again, isn’t if said Ridcully.

+++ Yes. Except that every leg of the Trousers of Time branches into
many other legs, and so do those legs and every following leg, until
everywhere is full of legs, which often pass through one another or join
up again +++

‘I think I’m losin’ track,’ said Ridcully.

+++ Yes. Language is not good at this. Even mathematics gets lost. But a
little story might work. I will tell you the story. It will be not
completely inaccurate +++

‘Go ahead,’ said Ridcully.

+++ Imagine an unimaginably large number +++

‘Right. No problem there,’ said Ridcully, after the wizards had
consulted among themselves.

+++ Very well +++ Hex wrote. +++ From the moment that the Roundworld
universe was made, it began to split into almost identical copies of
itself, billions of times a second. That unimaginably large number
represents all possible Roundworld universes that there are +++

‘Do all these universes really exist?’ said the Dean.

+++ Impossible to prove. Assume that they do. In all those universes
there are hardly any in which a man called Charles Darwin exists, takes
a momentous ocean voyage, and writes a hugely influential book about the
evolution of life on the planet. Nevertheless, that number is still
unimaginably large +++

‘But imagined by a smaller imagination?’ said Ridcully. ‘I mean, is it
half as many as the other unimaginable number?’

+++ No. It is unimaginably large. But compared to the first number, it
is unimaginably small +++

The wizards debated this in whispers.

‘Very well,’ said Ridcully, at last. ‘Keep goin’ and we’ll kind of join
in when we can.’

+++ Even so, it is not so unimaginable as the number of universes in
which the book was _The Origin of Species_. That number is quite strange
and can only be imagined at all in very unusual circumstances +++

‘It’s unimaginably larger?’ said Ridcully.

+++ Just unimaginably unique. The number ONE. Gentlemen. All by itself.
One is one and all alone. One. Yes. In third-level phase space there is
only one history where he gets on the boat, completes the voyage,
considers the findings and writes that book. All the other alternative
Darwins either did not exist, did not stay on the boat, did not
_survive_ the journey, did not write any book at all or wrote, in a
large number of cases, _Theology of Species_ and entered the Church +++

‘Boat?’ said Ponder. ‘What boat? What’ve boats got to do with it?’

+++ I explained, in the successful timeline which led to humanity
leaving the planet, Mr Darwin makes a significant voyage. It is one of
nineteen pivotal events in the history of the species. It is almost as
important as Joshua Goddelson leaving his house by the back door in 1734
+++

‘Who was he?’ said Ponder. ‘I don’t recall the name.’

+++ A shoemaker living in Hamburg, Germany +++ wrote Hex. +++ Had he
left his house by the front door that day, commercial nuclear fusion
would not have been perfected 283 years later +++

‘That was important, was it?’ said Ridcully.

+++ Vastly. Major technomancy +++

‘Did it need much in the way of shoes, then?’ said Ridcully, mystified.

+++ No. But the chain of causality, though complex, is clear +++

‘How hard is it to get on this boat?’ said the Dean.

+++ In the case of Charles Darwin, very hard +++

‘Where did it go?’

+++ It sailed from England to England. But there were crucial stops
along the way. Even in those histories where he did embark on the boat,
he did not complete the voyage _and_ complete _The Origin of Species_ in
every case but one +++

‘Just one version of history, you say,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘Do you
know why?’

+++ Yes. It is the one where you intervene +++

‘But we haven’t intervened,’ said Ridcully.

+++ In a primitive subjective sense this is the case. However, you are
going to will have already soon +++ Hex wrote.

‘What? And I am not a primitive subject, Mr Hex!’

+++ I am sorry. It is hard to convey five-dimensional ideas in a
language evolved to scream defiance at the monkeys in the next tree +++

The wizards looked at one another.

‘Getting a man on a ship can’t be hard, surely?’ said the Dean.

‘Is it _dangerous_ in Darwin’s time?’ said Rincewind.

+++ Inevitably. The centre of the Globe is an inferno, humanity is
protected from being fried alive by nothing more than a skin of air and
magnetic forces, and the chance of an asteroid strike is ever present
+++

‘I think Rincewind was referring to more immediate concerns,’ said
Ridcully.

+++ Understood. The major city you must visit has many squalid areas and
open sewers. The river bisecting it is noxious. Your destination could
be considered a high-crime drainage ditch in a dangerous and dirty world
+++

‘Pretty much like here, you mean?’

+++ The similarity is noticeable, yes +++

The writing arms stopped moving. Bits of Hex rattled and shook. The ants
ceased their purposeful scurrying and began to mill about aimlessly in
their glass tubing. Hex appeared to have something on his mind.

Then one writing arm dipped its pen into the ink and wrote, slowly:

+++ There is an additional problem. It is not clear to me why Darwin did
not write _Origin_ somewhere in the multiple universes without your
forthcoming assistance +++

‘We haven’t decided that we will—’ Ridcully began.

+++ But you are going to have done +++

‘Well, probably—’

+++ Across the entire phase space of this world Charles Darwin did many
things. He became an expert watchmaker. He ran a pottery factory. In
many worlds he was a country priest. In others, he was a geologist. In
yet others, he did make the important voyage and, as a result wrote
_Theology of Species_. In some he began to write _The Origin of Species_
only to give up. Only in one timeline was _Origin_ published. This
should not be possible. I detect … +++

+++ I detect … +++

The wizards waited politely.

‘Yes?’ said Ponder.

The single pen moved across the paper.

+++ MALIGNITY +++

¹ Phase space, in a given context, is the space of everything that might
have happened, not just what did. See _The Science of Discworld_.

SIX

BORROWED TIME

[image] THE EVER-BRANCHING LEGS OF the Trousers of Time are a metaphor
(unless you are a quantum physicist, in which case they represent a
certain mathematical view of reality) for the many paths that history
might have taken if events had been slightly different. Later, we’ll
think about all those legs, but for now, we restrict attention to one
trouser. One timeline. What exactly is time?

We know what it is on Discworld. ‘Time’, states _The New Discworld
Companion_, ‘is one of the Discworld’s most secretive anthropomorphic
personifications. It is hazarded that time is female (she waits for no
man) but she has never been seen in the mundane worlds, having always
gone somewhere else just a moment before. In her chronophonic castle,
made up of endless glass rooms, she does at, er, times, materialise into
a tall woman with dark hair, wearing a long red-and-black dress.’

_Tick_.

Even Discworld has trouble with time. In Roundworld it’s worse. There
was a time (there we go) when space and time were considered to be
totally different things. Space had, or was, extension – it sort of
spread itself around, and you could move through it at will. Within
reason, maybe 20 miles (30km) a day on a good horse if the tracks
weren’t too muddy and the highwaymen weren’t too obtrusive.

_Tick_.

Time, in contrast, moved of its own volition and took you along with it.
Time just _passed_, at a fixed speed of one hour per hour, always in the
direction of the future. The past had already happened, the present was
happening _right now_ – oops, gone already – and the future had yet to
happen, but by jingo, it would, you mark my words, when it was good and
ready.

_Tick_.

You could choose where you went in space, but you couldn’t choose when
you went in time. You couldn’t visit the past to find out what had
really happened, or visit the future to find out what fate had in store
for you; you just had to wait and find out. So time was completely
different from space. Space was three-dimensional, with three
independent directions: left/right, back/forward, up/down. Time just
_was_.

_Tick_.

Then along came Einstein, and time started to get mixed up with space.
Time-like directions were still different from space-like ones, in some
ways, but you could mix them up a bit. You could borrow time _here_ and
pay it back somewhere else. Even so, you couldn’t head off into the
future and find yourself back in your own past. That would be time
travel, which played no part in physics.

_Ti_—

What science abhors, the arts crave. Time travel may be a physical
impossibility, but it is a wonderful narrative device for writers,
because it allows the story to move to past, present, or future, at
will. Of course you don’t need a time machine to do that – the flashback
is a standard literary device. But it’s fun (and respectful to
narrativium) to have some kind of rationale that fits into the story
itself. Victorian writers liked to use dreams; a good example is Charles
Dickens’s _A Christmas Carol_ of 1843, with its ghosts of Christmas
past, present, and yet-to-come. There is even a literary subgenre of
‘timeslip romances’, some of them really quite steamy. The French ones.

Time travel causes problems if you treat it as more than just a literary
device. When allied to free will, it leads to paradoxes. The ultimate
cliché here is the ‘grandfather paradox’, which goes back to René
Barjavel’s story _Le Voyageur Imprudent_. You go back in time and kill
your grandfather, but because your father is then not born, neither are
you, so you _can’t_ go back to kill him … Quite why it’s always your
grandfather isn’t clear (except as a sign that it’s a cliché, a low-bred
form of narrativium). Killing your father or mother would have the same
paradoxical consequences. And so might the slaughter of a Cretaceous
butterfly, as in Ray Bradbury’s 1952 short story ‘A Sound of Thunder’,
in which a butterfly’s accidental demise at the hands¹ of an unwitting
time traveller changes present-day politics for the worse.

Another celebrated time paradox is the cumulative audience paradox.
Certain events, the standard one being the Crucifixion, are so endowed
with narrativium that any self-respecting time tourist will insist on
seeing them. The inevitable consequence is that anyone who visits the
Crucifixion will find Christ surrounded by thousands, if not millions,
of time travellers. A third is the perpetual investment paradox. Put
your money in a bank account in 1955, take it out in 2005, with
accumulated interest, then take it back to 1955 and put it in again … Be
careful to use something like gold, not notes – notes from 2005 won’t be
valid in 1955. Robert Silverberg’s _Up the Line_ is about the Time
Service, a force of time police whose job is to prevent such paradoxes
from getting out of hand. A similar theme occurs in Isaac Asimov’s _The
End of Eternity_.

An entire class of paradoxes arises from time loops, closed loops of
causality in which events only get started because someone comes from
the future to initiate them. For example, the easiest way for today’s
humanity to get hold of a time machine is if someone is presented with
one by a time traveller from the far future, when such machines have
already been invented. He or she then reverse engineers the machine to
find out how it works, and these principles later form the basis for the
future invention of the machine. Two classic stories of this type are
Robert Heinlein’s ‘By His Bootstraps’ and ‘All you Zombies’, the second
being noteworthy for a protagonist who becomes his own father and his
own mother (via a sex change). David Gerrold took this idea to extremes
in _The Man Who Folded Himself_.

Science-fiction authors are divided on whether time paradoxes always
neatly unwrap themselves to produce consistent results, or whether it is
genuinely possible, in their fictional setting, to change the past or
the present. (No one worries much about changing the future, mind you,
presumably because ‘free will’ amounts to precisely that. We all change
the future, from what it might have been to what it actually becomes,
thousands of times every day. Or so we fondly imagine.) So some authors
write of attempts to kill your grandfather that, by some neat twist,
bring you into existence anyway. For example, your true father was not
his son at all, but a man he killed. By mistakenly eliminating the wrong
grandfather, you ensure that your true father survives to sire _you_.
Others, like Asimov and Silverberg, set up entire organisations
dedicated to making sure that the past, hence the present, remains
intact. Which may or may not work.

The paradoxes associated with time travel are part of the subject’s
fascination, but they do rather point towards the conclusion that time
travel is a logical impossibility, let alone a physical one. So we are
happy to allow the wizards of Unseen University, whose world runs on
magic, the facility to wander at will up and down the Roundworld
timeline, switching history from one parallel universe to another,
trying to get Charles Darwin – or _somebody_ – to write That Book. The
wizards live in Discworld, they operate outside Roundworld constraints.
But we don’t really imagine that Roundworld people could do the same,
without external assistance, using only Roundworld science.

Strangely, many scientists at the frontiers of today’s physics don’t
agree. To them, time travel has become an entirely respectable² research
topic, paradoxes notwithstanding. It seems that there is nothing in the
‘laws’ of physics, as we currently understand them, that forbids time
travel. The paradoxes are apparent rather than real; they can be
‘resolved’ without violating physical law, as we will see in Chapter 8.
That may be a flaw in today’s physics, as Stephen Hawking maintains; his
‘chronology protection conjecture’ states that as yet unknown physical
laws conspire to shut down any time machine just before it gets
assembled – a built-in cosmological time cop.

On the other hand, the possibility of time travel may be a profound
statement about the universe. We probably won’t know for sure until we
get to tackle the issue using _tomorrow’s_ physics. And it’s worth
remarking that we don’t really understand _time_, let alone how to
travel through it.

Although (apparently) the laws of physics do not forbid time travel, it
turns out that they do make it very difficult. One theoretical scheme
for achieving that goal, which involves towing black holes around very
fast, requires rather more energy than is contained in the entire
universe. This is a bit of a bummer, and it does seem to rule out the
typical science fiction time machine, about the size of a car.³

The most extensive descriptions of Discworld time are found in _Thief of
Time_. The ingredients for this novel include a member of the Guild of
Clockmakers, Jeremy Clockson, who is determined to make a completely
accurate clock. However, he is up against a theoretical barrier, the
paradoxes of the Ephebian philosopher Xeno, which are first mentioned in
_Pyramids_. A Roundworld philosopher with an oddly similar name, Zeno of
Elea, born around 490 BC, stated four paradoxes about the relation
between space, time and motion. He is Xeno’s Roundworld counterpart, and
his paradoxes bear a curious resemblance to the Ephebian philosopher’s.
Xeno proved by logic alone that an arrow cannot hit a running man,⁴ and
that the tortoise is the fastest animal on the Disc.⁵ He combined both
in one experiment, by shooting an arrow at a tortoise that was racing
against a hare. The arrow hit the hare by mistake, and the tortoise won,
which proved that he was right. In _Pyramids_, Xeno describes the
thinking behind this experiment.

‘’s quite simple,’ said Xeno. ‘Look, let’s say this olive stone is an
arrow and this, and this –’ he cast around aimlessly – ‘and this stunned
seagull is the tortoise, right? Now, when you fire the arrow it goes
from here to the seag— the tortoise, am I right?’

‘I suppose so, but—’

‘But, by this time, the seagu— the tortoise has moved on a bit, hasn’t
he? Am I right?’

‘I suppose so,’ said Teppic, helplessly. Xeno gave him a look of
triumph.

‘So the arrow has to go a bit further, doesn’t it, to where the tortoise
is now. Meanwhile the tortoise has flow— moved on, not much, I’ll grant
you, but it doesn’t have to be much. Am I right? So the arrow has a bit
further to go, but the point is that by the time it gets to where the
tortoise is now the tortoise isn’t there. So if the tortoise keeps
moving, the arrow will never hit it. It’ll keep getting closer and
closer, but it’ll never hit it. QED.’

Zeno has a similar set-up, though he garbles it into two paradoxes. The
first, called the Dichotomy, states that motion is impossible, because
before you can get anywhere, you have to get halfway, and before you can
get there, you have to get halfway to that, and so on for ever … so you
have to co infinitely many things to get started, which is silly. The
second, Achilles and the Tortoise, is pretty much the paradox enunciated
by Xeno, but with the hare replaced by the Greek hero Achilles. Achilles
runs faster than the tortoise – face it, anyone can run faster than a
tortoise – but he starts a bit behind, and can never catch up because
whenever he reaches the place where the tortoise was, it’s moved on a
bit. Like the ambiguous puzuma, by the time you get to it, it’s not
there. The third paradox says that a moving arrow isn’t moving. Time
must be divided into successive instants, and at each instant the arrow
occupies a definite position, so it must be at rest. If it’s always at
rest, it can’t move. The fourth of Zeno’s paradoxes, the Moving Rows (or
Stadium), is more technical to describe, but it boils down to this.
Suppose three bodies are level with each other, and in the smallest
instant of time one moves the smallest possible distance to the right,
while the other moves the smallest possible distance to the left. Then
those two bodies have moved apart by twice the smallest distance, taking
the smallest instant of time to do that. So when they were just the
smallest distance apart, halfway to their final destinations, time must
have changed by half the smallest possible instant of time. Which would
be smaller, which is crazy.

There is a serious intent to Zeno’s paradoxes, and a reason why there
are four of them. The Greek philosophers of Roundworld antiquity were
arguing whether space and time were discrete, made up of indivisible
tiny units, or continuous – infinitely divisible. Zeno’s four paradoxes
neatly dispose of all four combinations of continuous/discrete for space
with continuous/discrete for time, neatly stuffing everyone else’s
theories, which is how you make your mark in philosophical circles. For
instance, the Moving Rows paradox shows that having both space and time
discrete is contradictory.

Zeno’s paradoxes still show up today in some areas of theoretical
physics and mathematics, although Achilles and the Tortoise can be dealt
with by agreeing that if space and time are both continuous, then
infinitely many things can (indeed must) happen in a finite time. The
Arrow paradox can be resolved by noting that in the general mathematical
treatment of classical mechanics, known as Hamiltonian mechanics after
the great (and drunken) Irish mathematician Sir William Rowan Hamilton,
the state of a body is given by two quantities, not one. As well as
position it also has momentum, a disguised version of velocity. The two
are related by the body’s motion, but they are conceptually distinct.
All you _see_ is position; momentum is observable only through its
effect on the subsequent positions. A body in a given position with zero
momentum is not moving at that instant, and so will not _go_ anywhere,
whereas one in the same position with non-zero momentum – which appears
identical – _is_ moving, even though instantaneously it stays in the
same place.

Got that?

Anyway, we were talking about _Thief of Time_, and thanks to Xeno we’ve
not yet got past see here. The main point is that Discworld time is
malleable, so the laws of narrative imperative sometimes need a little
help to make sure that the narrative does what the imperative says it
should.

_Tick_.

Lady Myria LeJean is an Auditor of reality, who has temporarily assumed
human form. Discworld is relentlessly animistic; virtually everything is
conscious on some level, including basic physics. The Auditors police
the laws of nature; they would very likely fine you for exceeding the
speed of light. They normally take the form of small grey robes with a
cowl – and nothing inside. They are the ultimate bureaucrats. LeJean
points out to Jeremy that the perfect clock must be able to measure
Xeno’s smallest unit of time. ‘It must exist, mustn’t it? Consider the
present. It must have a length, because one end of it is connected to
the past and the other is connected to the future, and if it didn’t have
a length then the present couldn’t exist at all. There would be no
_time_ for it to be the present in.’

Her views correspond rather closely to current theories of the
psychology of the perception of time. Our brains perceive an ‘instant’
as an extended, though brief, period of time. This is analogous to the
way discrete rods and cones in the retina _seem_ to perceive individual
points, but actually sample a small region of space. The brain accepts
coarse-grained inputs and smooths them out.

LeJean is explaining Xeno to Jeremy because she has a hidden agenda: if
Jeremy succeeds in making the perfect clock, then time will stop. This
will make the Auditors’ task as clerks of the universe much simpler,
because humans are always moving things around, which makes it difficult
to keep track of their locations in time and space.

_Tick_.

Near the Discworld Hub, in a high, green valley, lies the monastery of
Oi Dong, where live the fighting monks of the order of Wen, otherwise
known as History Monks. They have taken upon themselves the task of
ensuring that the right history happens in the right order. The monks
know what is right because they guard the History Books, which are not
records of what did happen, but instructions for what should.

A youngster named Ludd, a foundling brought up by the Thieves’ Guild,
where he was an exceptionally talented student, has been recruited to
the ranks of the History Monks and given the name Lobsang. The monks’
main technological aids are procrastinators, huge spinning machines that
store and move time. With a procrastinator, you can borrow time and pay
it back later. Lobsang wouldn’t _dream_ of living on borrowed time,
though – but if it wasn’t nailed down, he would almost certainly steal
it. He can steal anything, and usually does. And, thanks to the
procrastinators, time is _not_ nailed down.

If you haven’t got the joke by now, take another look at the title.

LeJean’s plan works; Jeremy builds his clock.

_Ti_—

Time stops, which is what the Auditors wanted. Not only on Discworld:
temporal stasis expands across the universe at the speed of light. Soon,
_everything_ will stop. The History Monks are powerless, for they, too,
have stopped. Only Susan Sto Helit, Death’s granddaughter, can get time
started again. And Ronnie Soak, who used to be Kaos, the Fifth Horseman
of the Apocralypse, but left because of artistic disputes before they
became famous … Fortunately, the Auditors like obeying rules, and DO NOT
FEED THE ELEPHANT really perplexes them when there is no elephant to
feed. Fatally, they also have a love–hate relationship with chocolate.
They are living on stolen time.

A procrastinator is a sort of time machine, but it moves time itself,
instead of moving people through time. Moreover, it’s fact, not fiction,
as is all of Discworld to those who live there. On Roundworld, the first
fictional time machine, as opposed to dreams or narrative timeslip,
seems to have been invented by Edward Mitchell, an editor for the _New
York Sun_ newspaper. In 1881 he published an anonymous story, ‘The Clock
That Went Backward’, in his paper. The most celebrated time-travel
gadget appears in Herbert George Wells’s novel _The Time Machine_ of
1895, and this set a standard for all that followed. The novel tells of
a Victorian inventor who builds a time machine and travels into the far
future. There he finds that humanity has speciated into two distinct
types – the nasty Morlocks, who live deep inside caverns, and the
ethereal Eloi, who are preyed on by the Morlocks and are too indolent to
do anything about it. Several movies, all fairly ghastly, have been
based on the book.

The novel had inauspicious beginnings. Wells studied biology,
mathematics, physics, geology, drawing, and astrophysics at the Normal
School of Science, which became the Royal College of Science and
eventually merged with Imperial College of Science and Technology. While
a student there, he began the work that led up to _The Time Machine_.
His first time-travel story ‘The Chronic Argonauts’ appeared in 1888 in
the _Science Schools Journal_, which Wells helped to found. The
protagonist voyages into the past and commits a murder. The story offers
no rationale for time travel and is more of a mad-scientist tale in the
tradition of Mary Shelley’s _Frankenstein_, but nowhere near as well
written. Wells later destroyed every copy of it he could locate, because
it embarrassed him so much. It lacked even the paradoxical element of
the 1891 _Tourmalin’s Time Cheques_ by Thomas Anstey Guthrie, which
introduced many of the standard time-travel paradoxes.

Over the following three years, Wells produced two more versions of his
time-travel story, now lost, but along the way the storyline mutated
into a far-future vision of the human race. The next version appeared in
1894 in the _National Observer_ magazine, as three connected tales with
the title ‘The Time Machine’. This version has many features in common
with the final novel, but before publication was complete, the editor of
the magazine moved to the _New Review_. There he commissioned the same
series again, but this time Wells made substantial changes. The
manuscripts include many scenes that were never printed: the hero
journeys into the past, running into a prehistoric hippopotamus⁶ and
meeting the Puritans in 1645. The published magazine version is very
similar to the one that appeared in book form in 1895. In this version
the Time Traveller moves only into the future, where he finds out what
will happen to the human race, which splits into the languid Eloi and
the horrid Morlocks – both equally distasteful.

Where did Wells get the idea? The standard SF writer’s reply to this
question is that ‘you make it up’, but we have some fairly specific
information in this case. In a foreword to the 1932 edition, Wells says
that he was motivated by ‘student discussions in the laboratories and
debating society of the Royal College of Science in the eighties’.
According to Wells’s son, the idea came from a paper on the fourth
dimension read by another student. In the introduction to the novel, the
Time Traveller (he is never named, but in the early version he is Dr
Nebo-gipfel, so perhaps it’s just as well) invokes the fourth dimension
to explain why such a machine is possible:

‘But wait a moment. Can an instantaneous cube exist?’

‘Don’t follow you,’ said Filby.

‘Can a cube that does not last for any time at all, have a real
existence?’

Filby became pensive.

‘Clearly,’ the Time Traveller proceeded, ‘any real body must have
extension in four directions: it must have Length, Breadth, Thickness,
and – Duration …

‘… There are really four dimensions, three which we call the three
planes of Space, and a fourth, Time. There is, however, a tendency to
draw an unreal distinction between the former three dimensions and the
latter, because it happens that our consciousness moves intermittently
in one direction along the latter from the beginning to the end of our
lives …

‘… But some philosophical people have been asking why three dimensions
particularly – why not another direction at right angles to the three? –
and have even tried to construct a Four-Dimensional geometry. Professor
Simon Newcomb was expounding this to the New York Mathematical Society
only a month or so ago.’

The notion of time as a fourth dimension was becoming common scientific
currency in the late Victorian era. The mathematicians had started it,
by wondering what a dimension was, and deciding that it need not be a
direction in real space. A dimension was just a quantity that could be
varied, and the number of dimensions was the largest number of such
quantities that could all be varied independently. Thus the Discworld
thaum, the basic particle of magic, is actually composed of resons,
which come in at least five flavours: up, down, sideways, sex appeal,
and peppermint. The thaum is therefore at least five-dimensional,
assuming that up and down are independent, which is likely because it’s
quantum.

In the 1700s the foundling mathematician Jean le Rond D’Alembert (his
middle name is that of the church where he was abandoned as a baby)
suggested thinking of time as a fourth dimension in an article in the
_Reasoned Encyclopaedia or Dictionary of Sciences, Arts, and Crafts_.
Another mathematician, Joseph-Louis Lagrange, used time as a fourth
dimension in his _Analytical Mechanics_ of 1788, and his _Theory of
Analytic Functions_ of 1797 explicitly states: ‘We may regard mechanics
as a geometry of four dimensions.’

It took a while for the idea to sink in, but by Victorian times
mathematicians were routinely combining space and time into a single
entity. They didn’t (yet) call it spacetime, but they could see that it
had four dimensions: three of space plus one of time. Journalists and
the lay public soon began to refer to time as _the_ fourth dimension,
because they couldn’t think of another one, and to talk as if scientists
had been looking for it for ages and had just found it. Newcomb wrote
about the science of four-dimensional space from 1877, and spoke about
it to the New York Mathematical Society in 1893.

Wells’s mention of Newcomb suggests a link to one of the more colourful
members of Victorian society, the writer Charles Howard Hinton. Hinton’s
primary claim to fame is his enthusiastic promotion of ‘the’ fourth
dimension. He was a talented mathematician with a genuine flair for
four-dimensional geometry, and in 1880 he published ‘What is the Fourth
Dimension?’ in the _Dublin University Magazine_, which was reprinted in
the _Cheltenham Ladies’ Gazette_ a year later. In 1884 it reappeared as
a pamphlet with the subtitle ‘Ghosts Explained’. Hinton, something of a
mystic, related the fourth dimension to pseudoscientific topics ranging
from ghosts to the afterlife. A ghost can easily appear from, and
disappear along, a fourth dimension, for instance, just as a coin can
appear on, and disappear from, a tabletop, by moving along ‘the’ third
dimension.

Charles Hinton was influenced by the unorthodox views of his surgeon
father James, a collaborator of Havelock Ellis, who outraged Victorian
society with his studies of human sexual behaviour. Hinton the elder
advocated free love and polygamy, and eventually headed a cult. Hinton
the younger also had an eventful private life: in 1886 he fled to Japan,
having been convicted of bigamy at the Old Bailey. In 1893 he left Japan
to become a mathematics instructor at Princeton University, where he
invented a baseball-pitching machine that used gunpowder to propel the
balls, like a cannon. After several accidents the device was abandoned
and Hinton lost his job, but his continuing efforts to promote the
fourth dimension were more successful. He wrote about it in popular
magazines like _Harper’s Weekly, McClure’s_, and _Science_. He died
suddenly of a cerebral haemorrhage in 1907, at the annual dinner of the
Society of Philanthropic Enquiry, having just completed a toast to
female philosophers.

It was probably Hinton who put Wells on to the narrative possibilities
of time as the fourth dimension. The evidence is indirect but
compelling. Newcomb definitely knew Hinton: he once got Hinton a job. We
don’t know whether Wells ever met Hinton, but there is circumstantial
evidence of a close connection. For example, the term ‘scientific
romance’ was coined by Hinton in titles of his collected speculative
essays in 1884 and 1886, and Wells later used the same phrase to
describe his own stories. Moreover, Wells was a regular reader of
_Nature_, which reviewed Hinton’s first series of _Scientific Romances_
(favourably) in 1885 and summarised some of his ideas on the fourth
dimension.

In all likelihood, Hinton was also partially responsible for another
Victorian transdimensional saga, Edwin A. Abbott’s _Flatland_ of 1884.
The tale is about A. Square, who lives in the Euclidean plane, a
two-dimensional society of triangles, hexagons and circles, and doesn’t
believe in the third dimension until a passing sphere drops him in it.
By analogy, Victorians who didn’t believe in the fourth dimension were
equally blinkered. A subtext is a satire on Victorian treatment of women
and the poor. Many of Abbott’s ingredients closely resemble elements
found in Hinton’s stories.⁷

Most of the physics of time travel is general relativity, with a dash of
quantum mechanics. As far as the wizards of Unseen University are
concerned, all this stuff is ‘quantum’ – a universal intellectual
get-out-of-jail card – so you can use it to explain virtually anything,
however bizarre. Indeed, the more bizarre, the better. You’re about to
get a solid dose of quantum in Chapter 8. Here we’ll set things up by
providing a quick primer on Einstein’s theories of relativity: special
and general.

As we explained in _The Science of Discworld_, ‘relativity’ is a silly
name. It should have been ‘absolutivity’. The whole point of special
relativity is _not_ that ‘everything is relative’, but that one thing –
the speed of light – is unexpectedly _absolute_. Shine a torch from a
moving car, says Einstein: the extra speed of the car will have no
effect on the speed of the light. This contrasts dramatically with
old-fashioned Newtonian physics, where the light from a moving torch
would go faster, acquiring the speed of the car in addition to its own
inherent speed. If you throw a ball from a moving car, that’s what
happens. If you throw light, it should do the same, but it doesn’t.
Despite the shock to human intuition, experiments show that Roundworld
really does behave relativistically. We don’t notice because the
difference between Newtonian and Einsteinian physics becomes noticeable
only when speeds get close to that of light.

Special relativity was inevitable; scientists were bound to think of it.
Its seeds were already sown in 1873 when James Clerk Maxwell wrote down
his equations for electromagnetism. Those equations make sense in a
‘moving frame’ – when observations are made by a moving observer – only
if the speed of light is _absolute_. Several mathematicians, among them
Henri Poincaré and Hermann Minkowski, realised this and anticipated
Einstein on a mathematical level, but it was Einstein who first took the
ideas seriously as physics. As he pointed out in 1905, the physical
consequences are bizarre. Objects shrink as they approach the speed of
light, time slows to a crawl, and mass becomes infinite. Nothing (well,
no _thing_) can travel faster than light, and mass can turn into energy.

In 1908 Minkowski found a simple way to visualise relativistic physics,
now called Minkowski spacetime. In Newtonian physics, space has three
fixed coordinates – left/right, front/back, up/down. Space and time were
thought to be independent. But in the relativistic setting, Minkowski
treated time as an extra coordinate in its own right. A fourth
coordinate, a fourth independent direction … a fourth _dimension_.
Three-dimensional space became four-dimensional spacetime. But
Minkowski’s treatment of time added a new twist to the old idea of
D’Alembert and Lagrange. Time could, to some extent, be swapped with
space. Time, like space, became geometrical.

We can see this in the relativistic treatment of a moving particle. In
Newtonian physics, the particle sits in space, and as time passes, it
moves around. Newtonian physics views a moving particle the way we view
a movie. Relativity, though, views a moving particle as the sequence of
still frames that make up that movie. This lends relativity an explicit
air of determinism. The movie frames already exist before you run the
movie. Past, present and future are already _there_. As time flows, and
the movie runs, we discover what fate has in store for us – but fate is
really _destiny_, inevitable, inescapable. Yes – the movie frames could
perhaps come into existence one by one, with the newest one being the
present, but it’s not possible to do this consistently for every
observer.

Relativistic spacetime = geometric narrativium.

Geometrically, a moving point traces out a _curve_. Think of the
particle as the point of a pencil, and spacetime as a sheet of paper,
with space running horizontally and time vertically. As the pencil
moves, it leaves a line behind on the paper. So, as a particle moves, it
traces out a curve in spacetime called its world-line. If the particle
moves at a constant speed, the world-line is straight. Particles that
move very slowly cover a small amount of space in a lot of time, so
their world-lines are close to the vertical; particles that move very
fast cover a lot of space in very little time, so their world-lines are
nearly horizontal. In between, running diagonally, are the world-lines
of particles that cover a given amount of space in the same amount of
time – measured in the right units. Those units are chosen to correspond
via the speed of light – say years for time and light-years for space.
What covers one light-year of space in one year of time? Light, of
course. So diagonal world-lines correspond to particles of light –
_photons_ – or anything else that can move at the same speed.

Relativity forbids bodies that move faster than light. The world-lines
that correspond to such bodies are called timelike curves, and the
timelike curves passing through a given event form a cone, called its
‘light cone’. Actually, this is like two cones stuck together at their
sharp tips, one pointing forward, the other backward. The
forward-pointing cone contains the future of the event, all the points
in spacetime that it could possibly influence. The backward-pointing
cone contains its past, the events that could possibly influence _it_.
Everything else is forbidden territory, elsewheres and elsewhens that
have no possible causal connections to the chosen event.

Minkowski spacetime is said to be ‘flat’ – it represents the motion of
particles when no forces are acting on them. Forces change the motion,
and the most important force is gravity. Einstein invented general
relativity in order to incorporate gravity into special relativity. In
Newtonian physics, gravity is a force: it pulls particles away from the
straight lines that they would naturally follow if no force were acting.
In general relativity, gravity is a geometric feature of the universe –
a form of spacetime curvature.

In Minkowski spacetime, points represent events, which have a location
in both space and time. The ‘distance’ between two events must capture
how far apart they are in space, _and_ how far apart they are in time.
It turns out that the way to do this is, roughly speaking, to take the
distance between them in space and _subtract_ the distance between them
in time. This quantity is called the _interval_ between the two events.
If, instead, you did what seems obvious and _added_ the time-distance to
the space-distance, then space and time would be on exactly the same
physical footing. However, there are clear differences: free motion in
space is easy, but free motion in time is not. Subtracting the
time-difference reflects this distinction; mathematically it amounts to
considering time as _imaginary_ space – space multiplied by the square
root of minus one. And it has a remarkable effect: if a particle travels
with the speed of light, then the interval between any two events along
its world-line is zero.

Think of a photon, a particle of light. It travels, of course, at the
speed of light. As one year of time passes, it travels one light-year.
The sum of 1 and 1 is 2, but that’s not how you get the interval. The
interval is the difference 1 – 1, which is 0. So the interval is related
to the apparent rate of passage of time for a moving observer. The
faster an object moves, the slower time on it appears to pass. This
effect is called _time dilation_. As you travel closer and closer to the
speed of light, the passage of time, as you experience it, slows down.
If you could travel _at_ the speed of light, time would be frozen. No
time passes on a photon.

In Newtonian physics, particles that move when no forces are acting
follow straight lines. Straight lines minimise the distance between
points. In relativistic physics, freely moving particles minimise the
interval, and follow _geodesics_. Finally, gravity is incorporated, not
as an extra force, but as a distortion of the structure of spacetime,
which changes the size of the interval and alters the shapes of
geodesics. This variable interval between nearby events is called the
_metric_ of spacetime.

The usual image is to say that spacetime becomes ‘curved’, though this
term is easily misinterpreted. In particular, it doesn’t have to be
curved _round_ anything else. The curvature is interpreted physically as
the force of gravity, and it causes light cones to deform.

One result is ‘gravitational lensing’, the bending of light by massive
objects, which Einstein discovered in 1911 and published in 1915. He
predicted that gravity should bend light by twice the amount that
Newton’s Laws imply. In 1919 this prediction was confirmed, when Sir
Arthur Stanley Eddington led an expedition to observe a total eclipse of
the Sun in West Africa. Andrew Crommelin of Greenwich Observatory led a
second expedition to Brazil. The expeditions observed stars near the
edge of the Sun during the eclipse, when their light would not be
swamped by the Sun’s much brighter light. They found slight
displacements of the stars’ apparent positions, consistent with
Einstein’s predictions. Overjoyed, Einstein sent his mum a postcard:
‘Dear Mother, joyous news today … the English expeditions have actually
demonstrated the deflection of light from the Sun.’ the _Times_ ran the
headline: REVOLUTION IN SCIENCE. NEW THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE. NEWTONIAN
IDEAS OVERTHROWN. Halfway down the second column was a subheading: SPACE
‘WARPED’. Einstein became an overnight celebrity.

It would be churlish to mention that to modern eyes the observational
data are decidedly dodgy – there might be some bending, and then again,
there might not. So we won’t. Anyway, later, better experiments
confirmed Einstein’s prediction. Some distant quasars produce multiple
images when an intervening galaxy acts like a lens and bends their
light, to create a cosmic mirage.

The metric of spacetime is not flat.

Instead, near a star, spacetime takes the form of a curved surface that
bends to create a circular ‘valley’ in which the star sits. Light
follows geodesies across the surface, and is ‘pulled down’ into the
hole, because that path provides a short cut. Particles moving in
spacetime at sublight speeds behave in the same way; they no longer
follow straight lines, but are deflected towards the star, whence the
Newtonian picture of a gravitational force.

Far from the star, this spacetime is very close indeed to Minkowski
spacetime; that is, the gravitational effect falls off rapidly and soon
becomes negligible. Spacetimes that look like Minkowski spacetime at
large distances are said to be ‘asymptotically flat’. Remember that
term: it’s important for making time machines. Most of our own universe
is asymptotically flat, because massive bodies such as stars are
scattered very thinly.

When setting up a spacetime, you can’t just bend things any way you
like. The metric must obey the Einstein equations, which relate the
motion of freely moving particles to the degree of distortion away from
flat spacetime.

We’ve said a lot about how space and time behave, but what are they? To
be honest, we haven’t a clue. The one thing we’re sure of is that
appearances can be deceptive.

_Tick_.

Some physicists take that principle to extremes. Julian Barbour, in _The
End of Time_, argues that from a quantum-mechanical point of view, time
does not exist.

_Ti_ —

In 1999, writing in _New Scientist_, he explained the idea roughly this
way. At any instant, the state of every particle in the entire universe
can be represented by a single point in a gigantic phase space, which he
calls Platonia. Barbour and his colleague Bruno Bertotti found out how
to make conventional physics work in Platonia. As time passes, the
configuration of all particles in the universe is represented in
Platonia as a moving point, so it traces out a path, just like a
relativistic world-line. A Platonian deity could bring the points of
that path into existence sequentially, and the particles would move, and
time would seem to flow.

Quantum Platonia, however, is a much stranger place. Here, ‘quantum
mechanics kills time’, as Barbour puts it. A quantum particle is not a
point, but a fuzzy probability cloud. A quantum state of the universe is
a fuzzy cloud in Platonia. The ‘size’ of that cloud, relative to that of
Platonia itself, represents the probability that the universe is in one
of the states that comprise the cloud. So we have to endow Platonia with
a ‘probability mist’, whose density in any given region determines how
probable it is for a cloud to occupy that region.

But, says Barbour, ‘there cannot be probabilities at different times,
because Platonia itself is timeless. There can only be once-and-for-all
probabilities for each possible configuration.’ There is only one
probability mist, and it is always the same. In this set-up, time is an
illusion. The future is not determined by the present – not because of
the role of chance, but because there is no such thing as future or
present.

By analogy, think of the childhood game of snakes and ladders. At each
roll of the dice, players move their counters from square to square on a
board; traditionally there are a hundred squares. Some are linked by
ladders, and if you land at the bottom you immediately rise to the top;
others are linked by snakes, and if you land at the top you immediately
fall to the bottom. Whoever reaches the final square first wins.

To simplify the description, imagine someone playing solo snakes and
ladders, so that there is only one counter on the board. Then at any
instant, the ‘state’ of the game is determined by a single square:
whichever one is currently occupied by the counter. In this analogy, the
board itself becomes the phase space, our analogue of Platonia. The
counter represents the entire universe. As the counter hops around,
according to the rules of the game, the state of the ‘universe’ changes.
The path that the counter follows – the list of squares that it
successively occupies – is analogous to the world-line of the universe.
In this interpretation, time does exist, because each successive move of
the counter corresponds to one tick of the cosmic clock.

Quantum snakes and ladders is very different. The board is the same, but
now all that matters is the probability with which the counter occupies
any given square – not just at one stage of the game, but overall. For
instance, the probability of being on the first square, at some stage in
the game, is 1, because you always start there. The probability of being
on the second square is 1/6, because the only way to get there is to
throw a 1 with the dice on your first throw. And so on. Once we have
calculated all these probabilities, we can forget about the rules of the
game and the concept of a ‘move’. Now only the probabilities remain.
This is the quantum version of the game, and it has no explicit moves,
only probabilities. Since there are no moves, there is no notion of the
‘next’ move, and no sensible concept of time.

Our universe, Barbour tells us, is a quantum one, so it is like quantum
snakes and ladders, and ‘time’ is a meaningless concept. So why do we
naive humans imagine that time flows; that the universe (at least, the
bit near us) passes through a linear sequence of changes?

To Barbour, the apparent flow of time is an illusion. He suggests that
Platonian configurations which have high probability must contain within
them ‘an appearance of history’. They will look _as though_ they had a
past. It’s a bit like the philosophers’ old chestnut: maybe the universe
is being created anew every instant (as in _Thief of Time_), but at each
moment, it is created along with apparent records of a lengthy past
history. Such apparently historical clouds in Platonia are called time
capsules. Now, among those high-probability configurations we find the
arrangement of neurons in a conscious brain. In other words, the
universe itself is timeless, but our brains are time capsules,
high-probability configurations, and these automatically come along with
the _illusion_ that they have had a past history.

It’s a neat idea, if you like that sort of thing. But it hinges on
Barbour’s claim that Platonia must be timeless because ‘there can only
be once-and-for-all probabilities for each possible configuration’. This
statement is remarkably reminiscent of one of Xeno’s – sorry, Zeno’s –
paradoxes: the Arrow. Which, you recall, says that at each instant an
arrow has a specific location, so it can’t be moving. Analogously,
Barbour tells us that at each instant (if such a thing could exist)
Platonia must have a specific probability mist, and deduces that this
mist can’t change (so it doesn’t).

What we have in mind as an alternative to Barbour’s timeless probability
mist is not a mist that changes as time passes, however. That would fall
foul of the non-Newtonian relation between space and time; different
parts of the mist would correspond to different times depending on who
observed them. No, we’re thinking of the mathematical resolution of the
Arrow paradox, via Hamiltonian mechanics. Here, the state of a body is
given by _two_ quantities, position and momentum, instead of just
position. Momentum is a ‘hidden variable’, observable only through its
effect on subsequent positions, whereas position is something we can
observe directly. We said: ‘a body in a given position with zero
momentum is not moving at that instant, whereas one in the same position
with non-zero momentum _is_ moving, even though instantaneously it stays
in the same place’. Momentum encodes the next change of position, and it
encodes it _now_. Its value now is not observable now, but it is (will
be) observable. You just have to wait to find out what it was. Momentum
is a ‘hidden variable’ that encodes _transitions_ from one position to
another.

Can we find an analogue of momentum in quantum snakes and ladders? Yes,
we can. It is the overall probability of going from any given square to
any other. These ‘transition probabilities’ depend only on the squares
concerned, not on the time at which the move is made, so in Barbour’s
sense they are ‘timeless’. But when you are on some given square, the
transition probabilities tell you where your _next_ move can lead, so
you can reconstruct the possible sequences of moves, thereby putting
time back into the physics.

For exactly the same reason, a single fixed probability mist is _not_
the only statistical structure with which Platonia can be endowed.
Platonia can also be equipped with transition probabilities between
_pairs_ of states. The result is to convert Platonia into what
statisticians call a ‘Markov chain’, which is just like the list of
transition probabilities for snakes and ladders, but more general. If
Platonia is made into a Markov chain, each _sequence_ of configurations
gets its own probability. The most probable sequences are those that
contain large numbers of highly probable states – these look oddly like
Barbour’s time capsules. So instead of single-state Platonia we get
sequential-state Markovia, where the universe makes transitions through
whole sequences of configurations, and the most likely transitions are
the ones that provide a coherent history – narrativium.

This Markovian approach offers the prospect of bringing time back into
existence in a Platonian universe. In fact, it’s very similar to how
Susan Sto Helit and Ronnie Soak managed to operate in the cracks between
the instants, in _Thief of Time_.

_Tick_.

¹ Actually, foot.

² Well, let’s not exaggerate. You can publish papers on it without
risking losing your job. It’s certainly better than publishing nothing,
which definitely _will_ lose you your job.

³ Indeed, in the _Back to the Future_ movie sequence, it was a car. A
Delorean. Though it did need the assistance of a railway locomotive at
one point.

⁴ Provided it is fired by someone who has been in the pub since
lunchtime.

⁵ Actually this is the ambiguous puzuma, which travels at
near-lightspeed (which on the Disc is about the speed of sound). If you
see a puzuma, it’s not there. If you hear it, it’s not there either.

⁶ As one does. Palaeontologists have just announced that they have found
remarkably well-preserved fossils in an East Anglian quarry, showing
that giant hippos weighing six or seven tons – roughly twice the weight
of modern hippos – wallowed in the rivers of Norfolk 600,000 years ago.
It was a warm period sandwiched between two ice ages, probably a few
degrees warmer than the present day (you can tell that from insect
fossils) and hyenas prowled the banks in search of carrion.

⁷ See _The Annotated Flatland by_ Edwin A. Abbott and Ian Stewart (Basic
Books, 2002).

SEVEN

THE FISH IS OFF

[image] TWO HOURS LATER A SINGLE sheet of paper slid off Hex’s writing
table. Ponder picked it up.

‘There are about ten points where we must intervene to ensure that _The
Origin_ is written,’ he said. ‘Well, that doesn’t seem too bad,’ said
Ridcully. ‘We got Shakespeare born, didn’t we?¹ We just have to tinker.’

‘These look a little more complicated,’ said Ponder, doubtfully.

‘But Hex can move us around,’ said Ridcully. ‘It could be fun,
especially if something or someone is playing _les buggeurs risibles_.
It could be educational, Mr Stibbons.’

‘And they do really good beer,’ said the Dean. ‘And the food was
excellent. Remember that goose we had last time? I’ve seldom eaten
better.’

‘We will be setting out to save the world,’ said Ridcully, severely. ‘We
will have other things on our minds!’

‘But there will be mealtimes, yes?’ said the Dean

Second Lunch and Mid-afternoon Snack went past almost unnoticed. Perhaps
the wizards were already leaving space for goose …

*

It was turning out to be a long day. Easels had been set up around Hex.
Paper was strewn across every table. The Librarian had practically built
up a branch library in one corner, and was still fetching books from the
distant reaches of L-Space.

And the wizards had changed their clothes, ready for hands-on
intervention. There had barely been a discussion about it, not after the
Dean had mentioned the goose. Hex had a great deal of control over the
Globe, but when it came to the fine detail you needed to be hands-on,
especially hands on cutlery. Hex had no hands. Besides, he’d explained
at length, there was no such thing as absolute control, not in a fully
functioning universe. There was just a variable amount of lack of
control. In fact, Ponder thought, Hex was a Great Big Thing as far as
Roundworld was concerned. Almost … godlike. But he still couldn’t
control _everything_. Even if you knew where every tiny spinning
particle of stuff was, you couldn’t know what it’d do next.

The wizards would have to go in. They could do that. They’d done it
before. No trouble is too much if it saves some excellent chefs from
extinction.

Clothing, at least, would not be a problem. Give or take the odd pointy
hat and staff, the wizards would be able to walk the Roundworld streets
without attracting a second glance.

‘How do we look?’ said the Archchancellor, as they reassembled.

‘Very … Victorian,’ said Ponder. ‘Although technically, at the moment,
very Georgian. Very … tweedy, anyway. Are you totally happy with the
bishop look, Dean?’

‘Isn’t that appropriate for the time?’ said the Dean, looking worried.
‘We looked through the book on costumes and I thought …’ His voice
trailed off. ‘It’s the mitre, isn’t it …’

‘And the crozier,’ said Ponder.

‘I wanted to fit in, you see.’

‘In a cathedral, yes. I’m afraid it’s plain black suit with gaiters for
street wear. However, you can do anything you like with your beard and
you can wear hats a small child could stand up inside. But on the
streets, bishops are quite dull.’

‘Where’s the fun in that?’ said the Dean, sulkily.

Ponder turned to Rincewind.

‘As for you, Rincewind, can I ask why you are wearing nothing but a
loincloth and a pointy hat?’

‘Ah, well, you see, if you don’t know what you’re getting into, naked
always works,’ said Rincewind. ‘It’s the all-purpose suit. At home in
every culture. Admittedly you sometimes get—’

‘In tweed, that man!’ barked Ridcully. ‘And no pointy hat!’ Against a
background of grumbling he turned then to the Librarian. ‘And as for
you, sir … a suit too. And a stovepipe hat. You need the height!’

‘Ook!’ said the Librarian.

‘I _am_ the Archchancellor, sir! I insist! And a false beard, I think.
False eyebrows, too. Let Mr Darwin be your model here! These Victorians
were very civilised people! Hair everywhere! Keep the knuckling to a
minimum and they’ll make you Prime Minister! Very well, gentlemen. Back
here in half an hour!

The wizards assembled. A circle of white light appeared on the floor.
They stepped inside, there was a change in the sounds made by Hex, and
they vanished.

They landed knee-deep in the mire of a peat bog, causing bubbles of foul
air to burst around them.

‘Mr Stibbons!’ Ridcully bellowed.

‘Sorry, sir, sorry,’ said Ponder quickly. ‘Hex, raise us by two feet,
please.’

‘Yes, but we’re still soaked,’ grumbled the Dean, as they floated up in
the air. ‘You seem to have, ah, “mucked up", Mr Stibbons!’

‘No, sir, I wanted to show you a Charles Darwin in the wild,’ said
Ponder. ‘Here he comes now …’

A large and energetic young man bounded out of the weeds and went to
clear a black pool with a vaulting pole. The pole immediately sank
one-third of its length into the sucking ground and its athletic owner
sailed off into the mud. He came up holding a small water plant.
Oblivious of the noisome bubbling around him, he waved the plant
triumphantly at some distant companions, pulled his pole out of the peat
with some effort, and splashed away.

‘Did he see us?’ said Rincewind.

‘No, not yet. That’s _young_ Darwin,’ said Ponder. ‘Very keen on
collecting all sorts of wildlife. Collecting was enormous popular among
the English of this century. Bones, shells, butterflies, birds, other
people’s countries … all sorts of things.’

‘Man after my own heart!’ said Ridcully, cheerfully. ‘I had the best
pressed lizard collection ever when I was that age!’

‘Can’t see a beagle anywhere, though,’ said Rincewind, gloomily. He got
edgy in the absence of his hat, and tried to stand under things.

The Chair of Indefinite Studies looked up from the thaumometer in his
hand.

‘No magic disturbance, no nothing,’ he said, looking around at the
marshes. ‘Is Hex _sure?_ The only strange thing here is us.’

‘Let’s get started, shall we?’ said Ridcully. ‘Where to next?’

‘Hex, move us to London, will you?’ said Ponder. ‘Location 7.’

The wizards didn’t apparently move, but the landscape around them
wavered and changed.

It became an alleyway. There were a lot of street noises nearby.

‘I’m sure you all read the briefing I prepared this morning.’ said
Ponder, brightly.

‘Are you also sure we’ve not back in Ankh-Morpork?’ said Ridcully
loudly. ‘I’d swear I can smell the river!’

‘Ah, then perhaps I’d better just remind you of the _important_ points,’
said Ponder wearily. ‘The list of major things that might impede
Darwin’s progress—’

‘I remember about the giant squid,’ Rincewind volunteered.

‘Hex can handle the giant squid,’ said Ponder.

‘Oh, shame. I was looking forward to that,’ said Ridcully.

‘No, sir,’ said Ponder, as patiently as possible. ‘_We_ have to deal
with people. Remember? We agreed last time it’s not ethical to leave
that to Hex. Remember the rain of fat women?’²

‘That never actually _happened_,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes,
wistfully.

‘Quite so,’ said Ridcully, firmly. ‘And just as well. Lead on, Mr
Stibbons.’

‘So much to do, so much to do,’ muttered Ponder, leafing through the
paperwork. ‘I suppose we’d better do things in order … so first, we must
see that Mr Habbakuk Souser’s cook throws away the fish.’

It was a scullery boy who opened the back door, in a street of quite
prosperous-looking houses. Ponder Stibbons raised his very tall hat.

‘We wish to see –’ he consulted the clipboard ‘– Mrs Boddy,’ he said.
‘She is the cook here, I believe? Tell here we are the Committee for
Public Sanitation, and the matter is urgent, so look sharp about it!’

‘I hope you know what you’re doing, Stibbons,’ hissed Ridcully as the
boy scurrièd away.

‘Totally, Archchancellor. Hex says the line of causality is – ah, Mrs
Boddy?’

This was to a skinny, worried woman who was advancing on them from the
dim interior, wiping her hands on her apron.

‘I am, sir,’ said the cook. ‘The boy said you gentlemen was Hygienic?’

‘Mrs Boddy, you had some fish delivered this morning?’ said Ponder,
sternly.

‘Yes sir. Nice piece o’ hake.’ Sudden uncertainty seized her features.
‘Er … that was all right, wasn’t it?’

‘Alas it was not, Mrs Boddy!’ said Ponder. ‘We have just come from the
fishmonger. All his hake is completely off. We have had many complaints.
Some of them were from next of kin, Mrs Boddy!’

‘Oh, what shall we do to be saved!’ the cook burst out. ‘I’ve got it
cookin’! It smelled all right, sir!’

‘Thankfully, then, there is no harm done,’ said Ponder.

‘Shall I give it to the cat?’

‘Do you _like_ the cat’ said Ponder. ‘No, wrap it in some paper and
bring it out to us right now! I’m sure Mr Souser will understand when
you give him some of the cold ham from yesterday.’

‘Yessir!’ The cook scurried away, and returned shortly with a parcel of
very hot, very damp fish. Ponder grabbed it from her and thrust it into
Rincewind’s arms.

‘Scour the pan thoroughly, Mrs Boddy!’ said Ponder, as Rincewind tried
to juggle hake. ‘Gentlemen, we must hurry!’

He started to walk very fast towards the end of the street, the wizards
jogging along behind him, and turned sharply into an alleyway just ahead
of a shout of ‘Sir? Sir? How did you know about the cold ham?’

‘Location 9, Hex,’ said Ponder. ‘And remove the fish, please!’

‘Was all that about?’ said Ridcully. ‘Why did we take that poor woman’s
fish?’

Rincewind said ‘ow!’ as the fish disappeared.

‘Mr Souser will travel, er, tomorrow to meet some businessmen,’ said
Ponder, as a circle formed on the ground around the wizards. ‘One of
them will be a man called Josiah Wedgwood, a famous industrialist. Mr
Souser will tell him about his son James, who is currently working with
the Navy. It has made a man of him, Mr Souser will say. Mr Wedgwood will
listen with interest, and form the opinion that the adventure of a long
sea voyage in respectable company may well be of benefit to a young man
on the verge of adult life. At least, he will now. If Mr Souser had
eaten that fish, he would have been too ill to travel tomorrow.’

‘Well, that’s good news for Mr Souser, but what’s it got to do with us?’
said the Dean.

‘Mr Wedgwood is Charles Darwin’s uncle,’ said Ponder, as the air
wavered. ‘He will have an influence on his nephew’s career. And now for
our next call …’

‘Good morning! Mrs Nightingale?’

‘Yes?’ said the woman, as if she was now doubting it. She took in the
group of people in front of her, her eye resting on the very bearded one
whose knuckles touched the ground. Beside her, the housemaid who’d
opened the door looked on nervously.

‘My name is Mr Stibbons, Mrs Nightingale. I am the secretary of The
Mission to Deep Sea Voyagers, a charitable organisation. I believe Mr
Nightingale is shortly to embark on a perilous mission to the
storm-tossed, current-mazed, ship-eating giant-squid infested waters of
the South Americas?’

The woman’s gaze tore itself away from the Librarian and her eyes
narrowed.

‘He never said anything to _me_ about giant squid,’ she said.

‘Indeed? I’m very sorry to hear that, Mrs Nightingale. Brother
Bookmeister here,’ Ponder patted the Librarian on the shoulder, ‘would
tell you about them himself were it not that the dire experience quite
robbed him of the power of speech.’

‘Ook!’ said Brother Bookmeister plaintively.

‘Really?’ said the woman, setting her jaw firmly. ‘Would you gentlemen
care to step into the parlour?’

‘Well, the biscuits were nice,’ said the Dean, as the wizards strolled
out into the street half an hour later. ‘And now, Stibbons, would you
care to tell us what all that was about?’

‘Gladly, Dean, and may I say your story about the sea snake was very
useful?’ said Ponder. ‘But Rincewind, that tale about the killer flying
fish was rather over the top, I thought.’

‘I didn’t make it up!’ Rincewind said. ‘They had teeth on them like—’

‘Well, anyway … Darwin was the second choice for the post on the
_Beagle_,’ said Ponder. ‘Mr Nightingale was the captain’s initial
choice. History will record that after his wife’s pleading he declined
the offer. This he will do within about five minutes of when he gets
home tonight.’

‘Another fine ruse?’ said Ridcully.

‘I’m rather pleased with it, as a matter of fact,’ said Ponder.

‘Hmm,’ said Ridcully. Cunning in younger wizards is not automatically
applauded in their elders. ‘Very clever, Stibbons. You are a wizard to
watch.’

‘Thank you, sir. My next question is: does anyone here know anything
about shipbuilding? Well, perhaps that won’t be necessary. Hex, take us
to Portsmouth, please. The _Beagle_ is being refitted. You will need to
be naval inspectors which, ahaha, I’m sure you’ll be good at. In fact
you will be the most observant inspectors there have ever been. Location
3, please, Hex.’

¹ Yes, they did – in _The Science of Discworld II_.

² A rare meteorological phenomenon discussed briefly in _The Science of
Discworld II_.

EIGHT

FORWARD TO THE PAST

[image] WELL, THE WIZARDS HAVE MADE a good start. And with the might of
Hex behind them, the wizards can travel at will along the Roundworld
timeline. We’re happy for them to do that, in a fictional context – but
could we do the same thing, in a factual one?

To answer that, we must decide what a time machine looks like within the
framework of general relativity. Then we can talk about building one.

Travel into the future is easy: wait. It’s getting back that’s hard. A
time machine lets a particle or object return to its own past, so its
world-line, a timelike curve, must close into a loop. So a time machine
is just a _closed timelike curve_, abbreviated to CTC. Instead of
asking, ‘Is time travel possible?’ we ask, ‘Can CTCs exist?’

In flat Minkowski spacetime, they can’t. Forward and backward light
cones – the future and past of an event – never intersect (except at the
point itself, which we discount). If you head off across a flat plane,
never deviating more than 45° from due north, you can never sneak up on
yourself from the south.

But forward and backward light cones can intersect in other types of
spacetime. The first person to notice this was Kurt Gödel, better known
for his fundamental work in mathematical logic. In 1949 he worked out
the relativistic mathematics of a rotating universe, and discovered that
the past and future of every point intersect. Start wherever and
whenever you like, travel into your future, and you’ll end up in your
own past. However, observations indicate that the universe is not
rotating, and spinning up a stationary universe (especially from inside)
doesn’t look like a plausible way to make a time machine. Though, if the
wizards were to give Roundworld a twirl …

The simplest example of future meeting past arises if you take Minkowski
spacetime and roll it up along the ‘vertical’ time direction to form a
cylinder. Then the time coordinate becomes cyclic, as in Hindu
mythology, where Brahma recreates the universe every _kalpa_, a period
of 4.32 billion years. Although a cylinder looks curved, the
corresponding spacetime is _not_ actually curved – not in the
gravitational sense. When you roll up a sheet of paper into a cylinder,
it doesn’t _distort_. You can flatten it out again and the paper is not
folded or wrinkled. An ant that is confined purely to the surface won’t
notice that spacetime has been bent, because distances _on_ the surface
haven’t changed. In short the local metric doesn’t change. What changes
is the global geometry of spacetime, its overall _topology_.

Rolling up Minkowski spacetime is an example of a powerful mathematical
trick for building new spacetimes out of old ones: cut-and-paste. If you
can cut pieces out of known spacetimes, and glue them together without
distorting their metrics, then the result is also a possible spacetime.
We say ‘distorting the metric’ rather than ‘bending’, for exactly the
reason that we say that rolled-up Minkowski spacetime is _not_ curved.
We’re talking about intrinsic curvature, as experienced by a creature
that lives in the spacetime, not about apparent curvature as seen by
some external viewer.

The rolled-up version of Minkowski spacetime is a very simple way to
prove that spacetimes that obey the Einstein equations _can_ possess
CTCs – and thus that time travel is not inconsistent with currently
known physics. But that doesn’t imply that time travel is _possible_.
There is a very important distinction between what is mathematically
possible and what is physically feasible.

A spacetime is mathematically possible if it obeys the Einstein
equations. It is physically feasible if it can exist, or could be
created, as part of our own universe or an add-on. There’s no very good
reason to suppose that rolled-up Minkowski spacetime is physically
feasible: certainly it would be hard to refashion the universe in that
form if it wasn’t already endowed with cyclic time, and right now very
few people (other than Hindus) think that it is. The search for
spacetimes that possess CTCs _and_ have plausible physics is a search
for more plausible topologies. There are many mathematically possible
topologies, but, as with the Irishman giving directions, you can’t get
to all of them from here.

However, you can get to some remarkably interesting ones. All you need
is black hole engineering. Oh, and white holes, too. And negative
energy. And –

One step at a time. Black holes first. They were first predicted in
classical Newtonian mechanics, where there is no limit to the speed of a
moving object. Particles can escape from an attracting mass, however
strong its gravitational field, by moving faster than the appropriate
‘escape velocity’. For the Earth, this is 7 miles per second (11 kps),
and for the Sun, it is 26 miles per second (41 kps). In an article
presented to the Royal Society in 1783, John Michell observed that the
concept of escape velocity, combined with a finite speed of light,
implies that sufficiently massive objects cannot emit light at all –
because the speed of light will be lower than the escape velocity. In
1796 Pierre Simon de Laplace repeated these observations in his
_Exposition of the System of the World_. Both of them imagined that the
universe might be littered with huge bodies, bigger than stars, but
totally dark.

They were a century ahead of their time.

In 1915 Karl Schwarzschild took the first step towards answering the
relativistic version of the same question, when he solved the Einstein
equations for the gravitational field around a massive sphere in a
vacuum. His solution behaved very strangely at a critical distance from
the centre of the sphere, now called the Schwarzschild radius. It is
equal to the mass of the star, multiplied by the square of the speed of
light, multiplied by twice the gravitational constant, if you must know.

The Schwarzschild radius for the Sun is 1.2 miles (2 km), and for the
Earth 0.4 inches (1 cm) – both buried inaccessibly deep where they can’t
cause trouble. So it wasn’t entirely clear how significant the strange
mathematical behaviour was … or even what it meant.

What would happen to a star that is so dense that it lies inside its own
Schwarzschild radius?

In 1939 Robert Oppenheimer and Hartland Snyder showed that it would
collapse under its own gravitational attraction. Indeed a whole portion
of spacetime would collapse to form a region from which no matter, not
even light, could escape. This was the birth of an exciting new physical
concept. In 1967 John Archibald Wheeler coined the term _black hole_,
and the new concept was christened.

How does a black hole develop as time passes? An initial clump of matter
shrinks to the Schwarzschild radius, and then continues to shrink until,
after a finite time, all the mass has collapsed to a single point,
called a singularity. From outside, though, we can’t observe the
singularity: it lies beyond the ‘event horizon’ at the Schwarzschild
radius, which separates the observable region, from which light can
escape, and the unobservable region where the light is trapped.

If you were to watch a black hole collapse from outside, you would see
the star shrinking towards the Schwarzschild radius, but you’d never see
it get there. As it shrinks, its speed of collapse as seen from outside
approaches that of light, and relativistic time-dilation implies that
the entire collapse takes infinitely long when seen by an outside
observer. The light from the star would shift deeper and deeper into the
red end of the spectrum. The name should be ‘red hole’.

Black holes are ideal for spacetime engineering. You can cut-and-paste a
black hole into any universe that has asymptotically flat regions, such
as our own.¹ This makes black hole topology physically plausible in our
universe. Indeed, the scenario of gravitational collapse makes it even
more plausible: you just have to start with a big enough concentration
of matter, such as a neutron star or the centre of a galaxy. A
technologically advanced society could _build_ black holes.

A black hole doesn’t possess CTCs, though, so we haven’t achieved time
travel. Yet. However, we’re getting close. The next step uses the
time-reversibility of Einstein’s equations: to every solution there
corresponds another that is just the same, except that time runs
backwards. The time reversal of a black hole is called a white hole. A
black hole’s event horizon is a barrier from which no particle can
escape; a white hole’s event horizon is one into which no particle can
fall, but from which particles may emerge at any moment. So, seen from
the outside, a white hole would appear as the sudden explosion of a
star’s worth of matter, coming from a time-reversed event horizon.

White holes may seem rather strange. It makes sense for an initial
concentration of matter to collapse, if it is dense enough, and thus to
form a black hole; but why should the singularity inside a white hole
suddenly decide to spew forth a star, having remained unchanged since
the dawn of time? Perhaps because time runs backwards inside a white
hole, so causality runs from future to past? Let’s just agree that white
holes are a mathematical possibility, and notice that they too are
asymptotically flat. So if you knew how to make one, you could glue it
neatly into your own universe, too.

Not only that: you can glue a black hole and a white hole together. Cut
them along their event horizons, and paste along these two horizons. The
result is a sort of tube. Matter can pass through the tube in one
direction only: into the black hole and out of the white. It’s a kind of
matter-valve. The passage through the valve follows a timelike curve,
because material particles can indeed traverse it.

Both ends of the tube can be glued into any asymptotically flat region
of any spacetime. You could glue one end into our universe, and the
other end into somebody else’s; or you could glue both ends into ours –
anywhere you like except near a concentration of matter. Now you’ve got
a wormhole. The distance through the wormhole is very short, whereas
that between the two openings, across normal spacetime, can be as big as
you like.

A wormhole is a short cut through the universe.

But that’s matter-transmission, not time travel.

Never mind: we’re nearly there.

The key to wormhole time travel is the notorious twin paradox, pointed
out by the physicist Paul Langevin in 1911. Recall that in relativity,
time passes more slowly the faster you go, and stops altogether at the
speed of light. This effect is known as time dilation. We quote from
_The Science of Discworld_:

Suppose that Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are born on Earth on the same
day. Rosencrantz stays there all his life, while Guildenstern travels
away at nearly lightspeed, and then turns round and comes home again.
Because of time dilation, only one year (say) has passed for
Guildenstern, whereas 40 years have gone by for Rosencrantz. So
Guildenstern is now 39 years younger than his twin brother.

It’s called a paradox because there seems to be a puzzle: from
Guildenstern’s frame of reference, it is Rosencrantz who has whizzed off
at near-lightspeed. Surely, by the same token, Rosencrantz should be 39
years younger, not Guildenstern? But the apparent symmetry is
fallacious. Guildenstern’s frame of reference is subject to acceleration
and deceleration, especially when he turns round to head for home;
Rosencrantz’s isn’t. In relativity, accelerations make a big difference.

In 1988 Michael Morris, Kip Thorne, and Ulvi Yurtsever realised that
combining a wormhole with the twin paradox yields a CTC. The idea is to
leave the white end of the wormhole fixed, and to zigzag the black one
back and forth at just below the speed of light. As the black end
zigzags, time dilation comes into play, and time passes more slowly for
an observer moving with that end. Think about world-lines that join the
two wormholes through normal space, so that the time experienced by
observers at each end are the same. At first those lines are almost
horizontal, so they are not timelike, and it is not possible for
material particles to proceed along them. But as time passes, the line
gets closer to the vertical, and eventually it becomes timelike. Once
this ‘time barrier’ is crossed, you can travel from the white end of the
wormhole to the black through normal space – following a timelike carve.
Because the wormhole is a short cut, you can do so in a very short
period of time, effectively travelling instantly from the black end to
the corresponding white one. This is the same place as your starting
point, but in the past.

You’ve travelled in time.

By waiting, you can close the path into a CTC and end up at the same
place and time that you started from. Not back to the future, but
forward to the past. The further into the future your starting point is,
the further back in time you can travel from that point. But there’s one
disadvantage of this method: you can never travel back past the time
barrier, and that occurs some time after you build the wormholes. No
hope of going back to hunt dinosaurs. Or to tread on Cretaceous
butterflies.

Could we really make one of these devices? Could we really get through
the wormhole?

In 1966 Robert Geroch discovered a theoretical way to warp spacetime,
smoothly, without tearing it, to create a wormhole. There’s a snag,
though: at one stage in the construction, time becomes so twisted that
the wormhole turns into a temporary time machine, and equipment from
late in the construction gets carried back to the beginning. The
builders’ tools might vanish into the past, just as they thought they
had finished. Still, with the right work schedule, that might not
matter. Perhaps a technologically advanced civilisation could build
black and white holes, and move them around, by creating intense
gravitational fields.

But building a wormhole is not the only obstacle. Keeping it open is
another. The main trouble is the ‘catflap effect’: when you move a mass
through a wormhole, the hole tends to shut on your tail. It turns out
that in order to get through without getting your tail trapped, you have
to travel faster than light, so that’s no good. Any timelike path that
starts at the wormhole entrance must run into the future singularity.
There’s no way to get across to the exit without exceeding the speed of
light.

The traditional way round this difficulty is to thread the wormhole with
‘exotic’ matter, which exerts enormous negative pressure like a
stretched spring. It is a form of negative energy, and is thus different
from antimatter, which has positive energy. In quantum mechanics, a
vacuum is not empty – it is a turbulent sea of particles, coming into
being and disappearing again. Zero energy includes all these
fluctuations, so you can get negative energy if you can calm the waves.
One way to do this is the ‘Casimir effect’, discovered in 1948: if two
metal plates are held very close together, then in between you find a
negative energy state. This effect has been observed in experiments, but
it’s very weak. To get enough negative energy, you need galaxy-sized
plates. Rigid ones, to maintain the gap.

Another possibility is a magnetic wormhole. In 1907 the geometer Tullio
Levi-Civita proved that in general relativity a magnetic field can warp
space. Magnetism has energy, energy is equivalent to mass, and mass is
spatial curvature. Moreover, he found an exact mathematical solution to
Einstein’s field equations which he called ‘magnetic gravity’. The
trouble was, this effect could only be observed using a magnetic field
one quintillion times as large as anything that could be obtained in a
laboratory. The idea languished until 1995, when Claudio Maccone
realised that Levi-Civita had actually come up with a magnetic wormhole.
The stronger the magnetic field, the more tightly curved the wormhole
mouth is. A wormhole whose magnetic field was the strength you can get
in a laboratory would be enormous – about 150 light-years across. And
you’d need laboratories everywhere along it. It’s making a _small_
wormhole that needs a gigantic magnetic field. Maccone suggested that
the surface of a neutron star, where very strong magnetic fields can
occur, might be a good place to look for magnetic wormholes. Why bother?
Because a magnetic wormhole can stay open without any need for exotic
matter.

A better solution, though, might be to employ a rotating black hole,
which has a ring singularity, not a point one. Passers-by can go through
the ring and miss the singularity. The mathematics of Einstein’s
equations tells us that a rotating black hole connects to infinitely
many different regions of spacetime. One must be in our universe
(assuming that we built the rotating black hole in our universe), but
the others need not be. Beyond the ring singularity lie antigravity
universes in which distances are negative and matter repels other
matter. There are legal (slower-than-light) paths through the wormhole
to any of its alternative exits. So, if we use a rotating black hole
instead of a wormhole, and if we can find a way to tow its entrances and
exits around at nearly lightspeed, we’ll get a much more practical time
machine – one that we can get through without running into the
singularity.

*

There are other time machines based on the twin paradox, but all of them
are limited by the speed of light. They would work better, and perhaps
be easier to build and operate, if you could follow _Star Trek_ and
engage your warp drive, travelling faster than light.

But relativity forbids that, right?

Wrong.

Special relativity forbids that. General relativity, it turns out,
permits it. The amazing thing is that the way it permits it turns out to
be standard SF gobbledegook, invoked by innumerable writers who knew
about relativistic limitations but still wanted their starships to
travel faster than light. ‘Relativity forbids _matter_ travelling faster
than light,’ they would incant, ‘but it doesn’t forbid _space_
travelling faster than light.’ Put your starship in a region of space,
and leave it stationary relative to that region. No violation of
Einstein there. Now move the entire region of space, starship inside,
with superluminal (faster-than-light) speed. Bingo!

Ha-ha, most amusing. Except …

In the context of general relativity, that’s exactly what Miguel
Alcubierre Moya came up with in 1994. He proved that there exist
solutions of Einstein’s field equations involving a local ‘warping’ of
spacetime to form a mobile bubble. Space contracts ahead of the bubble
and expands behind it. Put a starship inside the bubble, and it can
‘surf’ a gravitational wave, cocooned inside a static shell of local
spacetime. The speed of the starship relative to the bubble is zero.
Only the bubble’s boundary moves, and that’s just empty space.

The SF writers were right. There is no relativistic limit to the speed
with which _space_ can move.

Warp drives have the same drawback as wormholes. You need exotic matter
to create the gravitational repulsion needed to distort spacetime in
this unusual way. Other schemes for warp drives have been proposed,
which allegedly overcome this obstacle, but they have their own
drawbacks. Sergei Krasnikov noticed one awkward feature of Alcubierre’s
warp drive: the inside of the bubble becomes causally disconnected from
the front edge. The starship’s captain, inside the bubble, can’t steer
it, and she can’t even turn it on or off. He proposed a different
method, a ‘superluminal highway’. On the outward trip, the starship
travels below lightspeed and leaves a tube of distorted spacetime behind
it. On the way back, it travels faster than light along the tube. The
superluminal highway also needs negative energy; in fact, Ken Olum and
others have proved that any type of warp drive does.

There are limits to the lifetime of any given amount of negative energy.
For wormholes and warp drives these limits imply that such structures
must either be very small, or else the region of negative energy must be
extremely thin. For example, a wormhole whose mouth is three feet (lm)
across must confine its negative energy to a band whose thickness is one
millionth of the diameter of a proton. The total negative energy
required would be equivalent to the total output (in positive energy) of
10 billion stars for one year. If the mouth were one light year across,
then the thickness of the negative energy band would still be smaller
than a proton, and now the negative energy requirement would be that of
10 quadrillion stars.

Warp drives, if anything, are worse. To travel at 10 times lightspeed (a
mere _Star Trek_ Warp Factor 2) the thickness of the bubble’s wall must
be 10-32 metres. If the starship is 200 yards (200m) long, the energy
required to make the bubble has to be 10 billion times the mass of the
known universe.

Engage.

Roundworld narrativium can sometimes be documented. When Ronald Mallett
was ten years old his 33-year-old father died of heart failure, brought
on by drinking and smoking. ‘It completely devastated me,’ he is
reported to have said.² Soon after, he read Wells’s _The Time Machine_.
And he reasoned that ‘If I could build a time machine, I might be able
to warn him about what was going to happen.’

The childish idea faded, but the interest in time travel did not. As an
adult, Mallett invented an entirely new type of time machine, one that
uses bent light.

Morris and Thorne bent space to make a wormhole using matter. Mass _is_
curved space. Levi-Civita bent space using magnetism. Magnetism has
energy, energy _is_ (so Einstein tells us) mass. Mallett prefers to bend
space using light. Light, too, has energy. So it can act like mass. In
2000, he published a paper on the deformation of space by a circular
beam of light. Then it hit him. If you can deform space, you ought to be
able to deform time too. And his calculations showed that a ring of
light could create a ring of time – a CTC.

With a Mallett bent-light time machine, you can walk into your past. A
time traveller makes his or her way into the closed loop of light,
space, and time. Walking round the loop has the same effect as moving
backwards in time. The more times he walks round the loop, the further
back he goes, tracing out a helical world-line. When he has gone
sufficiently far into his past, he exits the loop. Easy.

Yes, but … we’ve been here before. It takes huge amounts of energy to
make a circular beam of light.

That’s true … unless you can slow the light down. A ring of really
_slow_ light, Discworld-speed, like that of sound on Roundworld, is much
easier to make. The reason is that as light slows down, it _gains_
inertia. This gives it more energy, and the warping effect is far
greater for less effort on the part of the builder.

Relativity tells us that the speed of light is constant – _in a vacuum_.
In other media, light slows down; this is why glass refracts light, for
example. In the right medium, light can be slowed to walking pace, or
even stopped altogether. Experiments by Lene Hau demonstrated this
effect in 2001, using a medium known as a Bose-Einstein condensate. This
is a curious, degenerate form of matter, occurring at temperatures near
absolute zero; it consist of lots of atoms in exactly the same quantum
state, forming a ‘superfluid’ with zero viscosity.

So maybe Wells’s time traveller could have included some refrigeration
equipment and a laser in his machine. But a Mallett bent-light time
machine suffers from the same limitation as a wormhole one. You can’t
travel back to any time before the machine was constructed.

Wells was probably right to eliminate that encounter with a giant
hippopotamus.

These are purely relativistic time machines, but the universe has
quantum features too, and these should be taken into account. The search
for a unification of relativity and quantum theory – respectably known
as ‘quantum gravity’ and often derided as a Theory of Everything – has
turned up a beautiful mathematical proposal, string theory. In this
theory, instead of fundamental particles being points, they are
vibrating multidimensional loops. The best-known version uses
six-dimensional loops, so its model of spacetime is really
ten-dimensional. Why has no one noticed? Perhaps because the extra six
dimensions are curled up so tightly that no one has observed them – very
possibly, _can_ observe them. Or perhaps – the Irishman again – we can’t
go that way from here.

Many physicists hope that string theory, as well as unifying relativity
and quantum mechanics, will also supply a proof of Hawking’s chronology
protection conjecture – that the universe conspires to keep events
happening in the same temporal order. In this connection, there is a
five-dimensional string-theoretic rotating black hole called a BMPV³
black hole. If this rotates fast enough, it has CTCs _outside_ the black
hole region. Theoretically, you can build one from gravitational waves
and esoteric string-theoretic gadgets called ‘D-branes’.

And here we see a hint of Hawking’s cosmological time cops. Lisa Dyson
took a careful look at just what happens when you put the gravitational
waves and D-branes together. Just as the black hole is within a gnat’s
whisker of turning into a time machine, the components stop collecting
together in the same place. Instead, they form a shell of gravitons
(hypothetical particles of gravity, analogous to photons for light). The
D-branes are trapped inside the shell. The gravitons can’t be persuaded
to come any closer, and the BMPV can’t be made to spin rapidly enough to
create an accessible CTC.

The laws of physics won’t let you put this kind of time machine
together, unless some clever kind of scaffolding can be invented.

Quantum mechanics adds a new spin to the whole time-travel game. For a
start, it may open up a way to create a wormhole. On the very tiny
length scale of the quantum world, known as the Planck length (around
10-35 metres), spacetime is thought to be a quantum foam – a perpetually
changing mass of tiny wormholes. Quantum foam is a kind of time machine.
Time is slopping around inside the foam like spindrift bobbing on the
ocean waves. You just have to harness it. An advanced civilisation might
be able to use gravitational manipulators to grab a quantum wormhole and
enlarge it to macroscopic size.

Quantum mechanics also sheds light, or possibly dark, on the paradoxes
of time travel. Quantum mechanics is indeterminate – many events, such
as the decay of a radioactive atom, are random. One way to make this
indeterminacy mathematically respectable is the ‘many worlds’
interpretation of Hugh Everett III. This view of the universe is very
familiar to readers of SF: our world is just one of an infinite family
of ‘parallel worlds’ in which every combination of possibilities occurs.
This is a dramatic way to describe quantum superposition of states, in
which an electron spin can be both up and down at the same time, and
(allegedly) a cat can be both alive and dead.⁴

In 1991 David Deutsch argued that, thanks to the many worlds
interpretation, quantum mechanical time travel poses no obstacles to
free will. The grandfather paradox ceases to be paradoxical, because
grandad will be (or will have been) killed in a parallel world, not in
the original one.

We find this a bit of a cheat. Yes, it resolves the paradox, but only by
showing that it wasn’t really time travel at all. It was travel to a
parallel world. Fun, but not the same. We also agree with a number of
physicists, among them Roger Penrose, who accept that the ‘many worlds’
interpretation of quantum theory is an effective mathematical
description, but deny that the parallel worlds involved are in any sense
_real_. Here’s an analogy. Using a mathematical technique called Fourier
analysis you can resolve any periodic sound, such as the note played by
a clarinet, into a superposition of ‘pure’ sounds that involve only one
vibrational frequency. In a sense, the pure sounds form a serious of
‘parallel notes’, which together create the real note. But you don’t
find anyone asserting that there must therefore exist a corresponding
set of parallel clarinets, each producing one of the pure notes. The
mathematical decomposition need not have a literal physical analogue.

What about paradoxes of genuine time travel, no faffing about with
parallel worlds? In the relativistic setting, which is where such
questions most naturally arise, there is an interesting resolution. If
you set up a situation with paradoxical possibilities, it automatically
leads to consistent behaviour.

A typical thought-experiment here is to send a billiard ball through a
wormhole, so that it emerges in its own past. With care, you can send it
in so that when it comes (came) out it bashes into its earlier
incarnation, deflecting it so that it never enters the wormhole in the
first place. This is the grandfather paradox in less violent form. The
question for a physicist is: can you actually set such paradoxical
states up? You have to do so before the time machine is built, then
build it, and see what physical behaviour actually occurs.

It turns out that, at least in the simplest mathematical formulation of
this question, the usual physical laws select a unique, logically
consistent behaviour. You can’t suddenly plonk a billiard ball down
inside a pre-existing system – that act involves human intervention,
‘free will’, and its relation to the laws of physics is moot. If you
leave it up to the billiard ball, it follows a path that does not
introduce logical inconsistencies. It is not yet known whether similar
results hold in more general circumstances, but they may well do.

This is all very well, but it does beg the ‘free will’ question. It’s a
deterministic explanation, valid for idealised physical systems like
billiard balls. Now, it is possible that the human mind is actually a
deterministic system (ignoring quantum effects to keep the discussion
within bounds). What we like to think of as making a free choice may
actually be what it _feels like_ when a deterministic brain works its
way towards the only decision that it can actually reach. Free will may
be the ‘quale’ of decision-making – the vivid _feeling_ we get, like the
vivid sense of colour we get when we look at a red flower.⁵ Physics does
not yet explain how these feelings arise. So it is usual to dismiss
effects of free will when discussing possible temporal paradoxes.

This sounds reasonable, but there’s a catch. The whole discussion of
time machines, in physics terms, is about the possibility of people
constructing the various warped spacetimes that are involved. ‘Get a
black hole, join it to a white one …’ Specifically, it is about people
_choosing_ or _deciding_ to construct such a device. In a deterministic
world, either they are bound to construct it from the beginning, in
which case ‘construct’ isn’t a very appropriate word, or the thing just
puts itself together, and you find out what sort of universe you are in.
It’s just like Gödel’s rotating universe: either you’re in it, or you’re
not, and you don’t get to _change_ anything. You can’t bring a time
machine into being unless it was already implicit in the unfolding of
that universe anyway.

The standard physics viewpoint really only makes sense in a world where
people have free will and can choose to build, or not to build, as they
see fit. So physics, not for the first time, has adopted inconsistent
viewpoints for different aspects of the same question, and has got its
philosophical knickers in a twist as a result.

For all the clever theorising, the dreadful truth is that we do not yet
have the foggiest idea how to make a practical time machine. The clumsy
and energy-wasteful devices of real physics are a pale shadow of the
elegant machine of Wells’s Time Traveller, whose prototype was described
as ‘a glittering metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small clock,
very delicately made. There was ivory in it, and some transparent
crystalline substance.’

There’s still some R&D needed.

Probably this is a Good Thing.

¹ This is a mathematician’s way of saying that you can put a black hole
anywhere you want. (Or, like a gorilla in a Mini, it can go anywhere
_it_ wants.)

² Michael Brooks, ‘Time Twister’, _New Scientist_, 19 May 2001, 27–9.

³ Jason Breckenridge, Rob Myers, Amanda Peet, and Cumrun Vafa.

⁴ It’s OK for electrons and probably nonsense for cats. See Greebo’s
cameo appearance in _The Science of Discworld_.

⁵ See Ian Stewart, Jack Cohen, _Figments of Reality: the origins of the
curious mind_ (Cambridge University Press, 1997).

NINE

AVOIDING MADEIRA

[image] THE JOINER WAS AMAZED, AS he told his mates in the pub after
work

‘– so I was just finishing, and this feller comes down the ladder and
says beggin’ your pardon, sir, but I’d just like to check that bulkhead,
please. Nothing wrong with it, says I, it’s as sound as a bell. Then he
says, right, right, of course, but I’ve just got to check something. He
pulls this piece of paper out of his pocket and reads it careful, and
says he’s got to check that the new timber hasn’t got a rare tropical
worm that’ll leave it looking like good wood but weaken it so much that
the ship will take in too much water and will have to put in to Madeira
for repairs, or something, possibly. I’ll soon see about that, says I
and whacks it with my hammer and, blow me, it cracks in half. I’d have
sworn it was prime timber, too. Little worms everywhere!’

‘Funny you should say that,’ said the man opposite. ‘One of ’em came up
when I was working and asked if he could look at the copper nails I was
usin’. Well, he takes out a knife, scrapes away at one, it’s a bit of
rubbish iron under a skin ’o copper! Had to do half a day’s work again!
Beats me how he knew. Tom said the chandler swore they were all copper
when he supplied ’em.’

‘Hah,’ said a third man, ‘one came up to me and said what would I do if
a giant squid pulled the ship under. I told him I’d do nothing, being as
I live in Portsmouth.’ He drained his mug. ‘Damned thorough, these
inspectors.’

‘Yeah,’ said the first man, reflectively. ‘They think of everything …’

‘A goose is an inconvenient bird, I’ve always thought,’ said Mustrum
Ridcully, carving it. ‘Just a bit too much for one but not quite enough
for two.’ He extended a fork. ‘Anyone else want some? Rincewind, just
get the man to send up some more oysters, will you? What do you say,
gentlemen? Another six dozen? Let’s push the boat out, eh? Hahah …’

The wizards had taken rooms at an inn, and the owner, watching the
bustling staff down in his kitchen, was already thinking happily of an
early retirement.

Money had not been a problem. Hex had merely teleported some from a
distant bank. The wizards had debated the moral implications of this for
some time, with their mouths full, but had come down in favour of the
idea. They were, after all, Doing The Right Thing.

Only Ponder wasn’t eating much. He nibbled a biscuit and updated his
notes, before announcing: ‘We have covered everything, Archchancellor.
The nails, the leaking water barrels, the defective compass, the bad
meat … there were nine reasons why the _Beagle_ would have called in at
the island of Madeira. Hex believes the giant squid may be a red
herring. As for the nine … yes, I think we have assured that they will
no longer occur.’

‘Remind me why that’s important, will you?’ said the Dean. ‘And pass the
wine, Mustrum.’

‘Without this intervention it’s more than likely that Darwin will leave
the ship at Madeira, should the _Beagle_ call there,’ said Ponder. ‘He
will be terribly seasick on the voyage.’

‘Madeira being –?’ said the Dean.

‘One of a group of islands on the way, Dean. After that it’s a long haul
down to the South Atlantic, round the bottom of South America with a few
stops, and straight up to the Galapagos Islands.’

‘Down, bottom, up,’ muttered the Dean. ‘How can anyone get the hang of
globular navigation?’

‘The phenomenon we call The Love Of Iron, sir,’ said Ponder, smoothly.
‘We only find it in rare metals that drop from the sky, but it’s very
common here. Iron here tries to point north.’

Silence fell around the table.

‘North? Is that the bit at the top?’ said Ridcully.

‘Conventionally, sir, yes,’ said Ponder, and rather foolishly added,
‘but on a globe it doesn’t really matter, of course.’

‘Ye gods,’ muttered the Dean, putting his hand over his eyes.

‘How does the iron _know_ which way to point?’ Ridcully persisted.
‘Metal can’t think.’

‘It’s a bit like … like peas turning to follow the Sun, sir,’ hazarded
Ponder, not sure if they actually did; perhaps it was pea farmers.

‘Yes, but peas are living things,’ said Ridcully. ‘They … know about the
Sun, right?’

‘Peas aren’t exactly renowned for their brains, Archchancellor,’ said
the Chair of Indefinite Studies, ‘hence the term pea-brained.’

‘But a pea must be a bloody genius compared to a lump of iron, yes?’
said Ridcully.

Ponder knew he had to put a stop to this. The wizards were still
determined to apply common sense to Roundworld, and that would get them
nowhere.

‘It’s a force that can occur on globe-shaped worlds,’ he said. ‘It’s
caused by the molten iron core spinning, and helps prevent life on the
surface being fried by the Sun.’

‘Sounds like Deitium in disguise, doesn’t it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Planet
gets this big magical umbrella so that life can survive? Shows
forethought’

‘It doesn’t work quite like that, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. ‘Life
evolved because conditions allowed it to do so.’

‘Ah, but if conditions hadn’t been right, there wouldn’t have been any
life,’ said Ridcully. ‘Therefore the whole exercise would have been
pointless.’

‘Not really, sir. There wouldn’t have been anyone to point out the
pointlessness of it,’ said Ponder. ‘I was about to add that some birds,
like pigeons, use The Love Of Iron to help them navigate long distances.
They have tiny things called “magnets” in their head, says Hex. They’re
… little bits of iron that know where the North Pole is …’

‘Ah, I know that bit,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘The North and
South Poles are those bits on a globe where the spindle comes out. But
they’re invisible, of course,’ he added.

‘Um,’ said Ponder.

‘Just a minute, can we get back to these birds?’ said Ridcully. ‘Birds
with magnet heads?’

‘Yes?’ said Ponder, knowing that this was going to be loaded.

‘How?’ said Ridcully, flourishing a goose leg. ‘On this globe, birds
grew out of great big monstrous lizard beasts, isn’t that so?’

‘Er … _small_ great monstrous beasts, sir,’ said Ponder, wishing not for
the first time that his Archchancellor did not have a knack for
remembering inconvenient details.

‘Did _they_ have to fly long distances through fog and bad weather?’
said the Archchancellor.

‘I doubt it, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘So did they already have these magnets in their heads from day one, or
did they turn up by some godly hand? What does Mr Darwin of _The Origin_
say about that?’

‘Not very much, sir,’ said Ponder. It had been a long day.

‘But it suggests, does it not, that _The Ology_ haha, is right and _The
Origin_ is wrong. Perhaps the magnets were added when needed?’

‘Could be, sir,’ said Ponder. Just don’t let him start on the eyeball,
he thought.

‘I’ve got a question,’ said Rincewind, from the end of the table.

‘Yes?’ said Ponder, quickly.

‘There’s going to be monster creatures on these island we’re heading
for, yes?’

‘How did you know that?’ said Ponder.

‘It just came to me,’ said Rincewind gloomily. ‘So there _are_
monsters?’

‘Oh, yes. Giants of their kind.’

‘With big teeth?’

‘No, not really. They’re tortoises.’

‘How big?’

‘About the size of an easy chair, I think.’

Rincewind looked suspicious.

‘How fast?’

‘I don’t know. Not very fast.’

‘And that’s _it_?’

‘From a Darwinian perspective, the islands are famous for their many
species of finches.’

‘Any of them carnivorous?’

‘They eat seeds.’

‘So … there’s _nothing_ dangerous where we’re going?’

‘No. Anyway, we don’t have to go there. All we have to do now is find
the point where he decides to write _The Ology_ instead of _The
Origin_.’

Rincewind pulled the dish of potatoes towards him.

‘Sez you,’ he said.

+++ I need to communicate grave news +++

The words came out of the air. In Roundworld, Hex had a voice.

‘We’re having a bit of a celebration here,’ said Ridcully. ‘I’m sure
your news can wait, Mr Hex!’

+++ Yes. It can +++

‘Good. In that case, Dean would you pass me—’

+++ I would not wish to spoil your appetite +++ Hex went on.

‘Glad to hear it.’

+++ The destruction of the human race can wait until after the pudding
+++.

Ridcully’s fork hovered between his plate and his mouth. Then he said:
‘Would you care to explain this, please, Mr Stibbons?’

‘I can’t, sir. What is happening, Hex? We completed all those tasks
properly, didn’t we?’

+++ Yes. But, pause for significance, have you heard of a mythical
creature called a, pause again, hydra? +++

‘The monster with many heads?’ said Ponder. ‘You don’t need to tell us
when you pause, by the way.’

+++ Thank you. Yes. Cut off one head and a dozen grow in its place. This
history is a hydra +++

Rincewind nodded at Ponder. ‘Told you,’ he said, with his mouth full.

+++ I am unable to explain why this is the case, but there are now 1457
reasons why Darwin did not write _The Origin of Species_. The book has
never been written in this history. The voyage has never taken place +++

‘Don’t be silly! We know it did!’ said the Dean.

+++ Yes. It did. But now, it hasn’t. Charles Darwin the scientist has
been removed from this history while you ate. He was, and now he was
not. He became a little-remembered priest who caught butterflies. He
wrote no book. The human race dies in five hundred years +++

‘But yesterday—’ Ridcully began.

+++ Consider time not as a continuous process but as a succession of
discrete events. Darwin’s scientific career has been excised. You
remember him, but that is because you are not part of this universe. To
deny this is simply to scream at the monkeys in the next tree +++

‘Who did it?’ said Rincewind.

‘What sort of question is that?’ said Ponder. ‘No one _did_ it. There
isn’t anyone to _do_ things. This is some kind of strange phenomenon.’

+++ No. The act shows intelligence +++ said Hex. +++ Remember, I
detected malignity. I surmise that your interference in this history has
led to some counter-measure +++

‘Elves again?’ said Ridcully.

+++ No. They are not clever enough. I can detect nothing except natural
forces +++

‘Natural forces aren’t animate,’ said Ponder. ‘They can’t think!’

+++ pause for dramatic effect … Perhaps the ones here have learned to
+++ said Hex.

TEN

WATCH-22

[image] IN THE STANDARD VERSION OF Roundworld history, Charles Darwin’s
presence on the _Beagle_ came about only because of a highly improbable
series of coincidences – so improbable that it is tempting to view them
as wizardly intervention. What Darwin expected to become was not a
globetrotting naturalist who revolutionised humanity’s view of living
creatures, but a country vicar.

And it was all Paley’s fault.

_Natural Theology_’s seductive and beautifully argued line of reasoning
found considerable favour with the devout people of Georgian (III and
IV) England, and after them, the equally devout subjects of William IV
and Victoria. By the time Victoria ascended to the throne, in 1837, it
was indeed almost compulsory for country vicars to become experts in
some local moth, or bird, or flower, and the Church actively encouraged
such activities because they were continuing revelations of the glory of
God. The Suffolk rector William Kirby was co-author, with the
businessman William Spence, of a lavish four-volume treatise _An
Introduction to Entomology_, for example. It was fine for a clergyman to
interest himself in beetles. Or geology, a relatively new branch of
science that had grabbed the young Charles Darwin’s attention.

The big breakthrough in geology, which turned it into a fully fledged
science, was Charles Lyell’s discovery of Deep Time – the idea that the
Earth is enormously older than Ussher’s 6000 years. Lyell argued that
the rocks that we find at the Earth’s surface are the product of an
ongoing sequence of physical, chemical, and biological processes. By
measuring the thickness of the rock layers, and estimating the rate at
which those layers can form, he deduced that the Earth must be
extraordinarily ancient.

Darwin had a passion for geology, and absorbed Lyell’s ideas like a
sponge. However, Charles was basically rather lazy, and his father knew
it. He also knew, to quote Adrian Desmond and James Moore’s biography
_Darwin_, that:

The Anglican Church, fat, complacent, and corrupt, lived luxuriously on
tithes and endowments, as it had for a century. Desirable parishes were
routinely auctioned to the highest bidder. A fine rural ‘living’ with a
commodious rectory, a few acres to rent or farm, and perhaps a tithe
barn to hold the local levy worth hundreds of pounds a year, could
easily be bought as an investment by a gentleman of Dr. Darwin’s means
and held for his son.

That, at least, was the plan.

And at first, the plan seemed to be working. In 1828 Charles was
admitted to the University of Cambridge, taking his oath of
matriculation one cold January morning, swearing to uphold the
university’s ancient statutes and customs, ‘so help me God and his holy
Gospels’. He was enrolled at Christ’s College for a degree in theology,
alongside his cousin William Darwin Fox who had started the previous
year. (Charles had previously attempted medicine in Edinburgh, following
in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, but he became
disillusioned and left without a degree.) After getting his Batchelor of
Arts degree, he might spend a further year reading theology, ready to be
ordained in the Anglican Church. He could become a curate, marry, and
take up a rural position near Shrewsbury.

It was all arranged.

Shortly after starting at Christ’s, Charles was bitten by the beetle
bug, as it were. _An Introduction to Entomology_ sparked off an intense
interest in beetles, when seemingly half the nation was out searching
the woods and hedgerows to find new species. Since there were more
species of beetle in the world than anything else, this was a serious
prospect. Charles and his cousin scoured the byways of rural
Cambridgeshire, pinning their catches in neat rows on large sheets of
cardboard. He didn’t find a new species of beetle, but he found a rare
German one, seen only twice before in the whole of England.

Towards the end of his second year at university, exams loomed. Darwin
had been too intent on beetles and a young lady named Fanny Owen and had
neglected his academic studies. Now he had a mere two months left to do
the work of two years. In particular, there would be ten questions on
the book _Evidences of Christianity_, by one William Paley. Darwin had
already read the book, but now he read it again with new attention – and
loved it. He found the logic fascinating. Moreover, Paley’s political
leanings were distinctly left-wing, which appealed to Charles’s innate
sense of social justice. Bolstered by his studies of Paley, Darwin
scraped through.

Next in line were the final exams. Another of Paley’s books was on the
syllabus: _Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy_. The book was
outdated, and sailed close to the wind of (political) heresy and well
into the shallows of unorthodoxy; that was _why_ it was on the syllabus.
You had to be able to argue the case against it, where applicable. It
said, for example, that an established Church formed no part of
Christianity. Darwin, then a very conventional Christian, wasn’t sure
what to think. He needed to broaden his reading, and in so doing he
selected yet another book by his idol Paley: _Natural Theology_. He knew
that many intellectuals derided Paley’s stance on design as naive. He
knew that his own grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, had held a radically
different view, speculating about spontaneous changes in organisms in
his own book _Zoonomia_. Darwin’s sympathies were with Paley, but he
started wondering how scientific laws were established, and what kind of
evidence was acceptable, a quest that led him to a book by Sir John
Herschel with the mind-numbing tide _Preliminary Discourse on the Study
of Natural Philosophy_. He also picked up a copy of Alexander von
Humboldt’s _Personal Narrative_, a 3754-page blockbuster about the
intrepid explorer’s trip to South America.

Darwin was entranced. Herschel stimulated his interest in science, and
Humboldt showed him how exciting scientific discoveries could be. He
determined, then and there, to visit the volcanoes of the Canary Islands
and see for himself the Great Dragon Tree. His friend Marmaduke Ramsay
agreed to accompany him. They would leave for the tropics once Darwin
had signed the 39 Articles of the Anglican Church at his degree
ceremony. To prepare for the journey, Charles went to Wales to carry out
geological fieldwork. He discovered that there was no Old Red Sandstone
in the Vale of Clwyd, contrary to the current national geological map.
He had won his geologists’ spurs.

Then a message arrived. Ramsay had died. The Canary scheme shuddered to
a halt. The tropics seemed further away than ever. Could Charles go it
alone? He was still trying to decide when a bulky package arrived from
London. Inside was a letter, offering him the opportunity to join a
voyage round the world. The ship would sail in a month.

The British Navy was planning to explore and map the coast of South
America. It was to be a chronometric survey, meaning that all navigation
would be done using the relatively new and not fully trusted technique
of finding longitude with the aid of a very accurate watch or
chronometer. A 26-year-old sea captain, Robert FitzRoy, would head the
expedition; his ship would be the _Beagle_.

FitzRoy was worried that the solitude of his command might drive him to
suicide. The risk was not far-fetched: the _Beagle_’s former captain
Pringle Stokes had shot himself while mapping a particularly convoluted
bit of the coast of South America. Further, one of FitzRoy’s uncles had
slit his own throat in a fit of depression.¹ So he had decided that he
needed someone to talk to, to keep him sane. It was this position that
was now being offered to Darwin. The job would be especially suitable
for someone with an interest in natural history, and the ship had the
necessary scientific equipment. Technically, Darwin would not be ‘ship’s
naturalist’, as later he sometimes claimed, and that presumption would
eventually lead to an almighty row with the _Beagle_’s surgeon Robert
McCormick, because by tradition the surgeon did the job of naturalist in
his spare time. Darwin was being hired as a ‘gentleman companion’ for
the captain.

Charles decided to accept the offer, but his father, forewarned by
Charles’s sisters, refused permission. Darwin could have gone against
his father’s wishes, but the thought made him feel very uncomfortable,
so he wrote to the Navy and turned the job down. Then,
uncharacteristically, his father opened a loophole – our first example
of what looks suspiciously like wizardly interference. Charles might yet
be allowed to go, he said, provided ‘some person of good standing’
recommended it. Both Charles and his father knew who was meant: Uncle
Jos (Wedgwood, grandson of the founder of the pottery company). Jos was
an industrialist, and Dr Darwin trusted his judgement. So Charles and
his uncle sat up very late, composing a suitable letter. Jos told Dr.
Darwin that such a voyage would be the making of the young man. And,
slyly, he added that it would improve his knowledge of natural history,
which would be very useful for a subsequent career in the clergy.

Darwin Senior relented (score one to the wizards). Excited beyond
measure, Charles hurriedly wrote another letter to the Navy, this time
accepting. But then he heard from FitzRoy, who told him that the post
was no longer vacant. The captain had given it to a friend. However,
Darwin was top of the list if his friend changed his mind.

Darwin went to London, to make contingency plans in case he got lucky,
and to keep an appointment with FitzRoy. He arrived to be told that the
captain’s friend had changed his mind, not five minutes earlier.
(Wizards again?) His wife had objected to the length of the voyage, then
planned to be three years. Did Darwin still want the job?

Lost for words, Charles nodded.

Darwin’s heart sank when he saw the ship. The _Beagle_ was a rotting,
eleven-year-old brig, with ten guns. It was being rebuilt, partly at
FitzRoy’s own expense, so it would be seaworthy enough. But the ship was
cramped, a mere 90 feet (30m) long by 24 feet (8m) wide. Could his
companionship with the captain survive such a lengthy voyage in such
close contact? Fortunately, he was allocated one of the larger cabins.

The _Beagle_’s assignment was to survey the southern end of South
America, in particular the complicated islands around Tierra del Fuego.
The Admiralty had provided 11 chronometers for navigation, because the
trip would be the first attempt to circumnavigate the Globe using marine
chronometers to find longitude. FitzRoy borrowed five more, then bought
six himself. So the _Beagle_ sailed with a massive 22 chronometers on
board.

The voyage started badly. Darwin was sick as a dog, crossing the Bay of
Biscay, and had to endure the sound of sailors being flogged as he lay
nauseated in his hammock. FitzRoy was hot on discipline, especially at
the beginning of a voyage. Privately, the captain expected his
‘companion’ to jump ship the moment it touched land, and hotfoot it back
to England. The ship was supposed to put in at Madeira to take on fresh
food, which would be the perfect opportunity. But the Madeira landing
was cancelled because the sea was too heavy and there was no pressing
need (score 3 to the wizards?). Instead, the _Beagle_ headed for
Tenerife in the Canaries. If Charles jumped ship there, he could see the
volcanoes and the Great Dragon Tree. But the consul in Santa Cruz was
scared that visitors from England might introduce cholera to his
islands, and he refused the _Beagle_ permission to put into port without
undergoing quarantine (score 4? We’ll see). Unwilling to wait off land
for the required two weeks, FitzRoy ordered the _Beagle_ south, to the
Cape Verde Islands.

It may not have been the wizards at work, but _something_ was determined
that Charles should stay on the _Beagle_. And now, a fifth coincidence,
involving his great love, geology, made it impossible for him to do
anything else. As the _Beagle_ sailed westward, the ocean grew calm, the
air warm. Darwin could trawl for plankton and jellyfish with home-made
gauze nets. Things were looking up. And when they finally touched land,
the island of St Jago in the Cape Verde Islands, Darwin found it hard to
believe his luck. St Jago was a rugged volcanic outcrop, with conical
volcanoes and lush valleys. Charles could do geology. And natural
history.

He collected everything. He noticed that an octopus can change colour,
and mistakenly thought this was a new discovery. After two days, he had
worked out the geological history of the island, using the principles he
had learned from Lyell. Lava had flowed over the seabed, trapping shells
and other debris, and had later been raised to the surface. All of this
must have happened relatively recently, because the shells were just
like the fresh ones lying on the beach. This was not the conventional
theory of the day, which held that volcanic structures were incredibly
old.

The young man was coming into his own.

In the end, the voyage lasted five years, and in the whole of that time,
poor Darwin never found his sea-legs. Even on the final run home, he was
still seasick. But he contrived to spend most of the voyage on land, and
only 18 months at sea. And while on land, he made discovery after
discovery. He found fifteen new species of flat-worm in Brazil. He
studied rheas, giant flightless birds related to the ostrich, in
Argentina. There, too, he found fossils, including the head of a giant
armadillo-like glyptodont. In Tierra del Fuego he turned anthropologist,
and studied the people. ‘I shall never forget how savage & wild one
group was,’ he wrote, on encountering ‘naked savages’. He found more
fossils, among them bones of the ground-sloth _Megatherium_ and the
llama-like _Macrauchenia_. In Chile, he studied the geology of the Andes
and decided that they, and the plains beyond, had been thrust skyward in
some gigantic geological upheaval.

From the South American mainland, the _Beagle_ went north-west to the
Galápagos, a tight group of a dozen or so islands, far out into the
Pacific ocean. The islands had fascinating geology, mainly volcanic, and
a great variety of animals that were not found anywhere else. There were
the spectacular giant tortoises that had given the islands their name.
Darwin measured the circumference of one as seven feet (2m). There were
iguanas, and birds – boobies, warblers, finches. The finches had beaks
of different shapes and sizes, depending on the food they ate, and
Darwin divided them up into a series of subfamilies. He did not notice
that different types of animals occurred on different islands, until
Nicholas Lawson pointed this out. (The wizards again? Oh yes, this will
have happened soon …) But he did notice that the mockingbirds of Charles
and Chatham islands (now Santa Maria and San Cristobál) were different
species, and when, now alerted, he looked on James Island (San
Salvador), he found yet a third species. But Darwin was not greatly
interested in small variations in species, or how those variations
corresponded to the local geography. He was vaguely aware of some
theorising about species change, or ‘transmutation’, if only from his
grandfather Erasmus, but the topic didn’t interest him and he saw no
reason to collect evidence for or against it.

And so the _Beagle_ continued to Tahiti, New Zealand, and Australia.
Darwin had seen wonders that would shortly revolutionise the world. But
he did not yet understand what he had seen.

In Tahiti, though, he glimpsed his first coral reef. Before leaving
Australia, he was determined to find out how coral islands came into
being. Lyell had suggested that because the coral animals live only in
shallow waters, with ample sunlight, the reefs must be built on top of
submerged volcanoes. This also explained their ringed shape. Darwin
didn’t believe Lyell’s theory. ‘The idea of a lagoon island, 30 miles in
diameter being based on a submarine crater of equal dimensions, has
always appeared to me to be a monstrous hypothesis.’ Instead, he had his
own theory. He already knew that land could rise, he’d seen that in the
Andes. He reasoned that if some land went up, then other land ought to
go down, to maintain the balance of the Earth’s crust. Suppose that when
the reef started to form, the water was shallow, but then the ocean
floor started descending slowly, while the coral polyps at the surface
continued building the reef. Then eventually you would get a huge
mountain of coral rising from what was now the ocean depths – all built
by tiny creatures, always in shallow water while the building was going
on. The shape? That was the result of an island with a fringing reef
collapsing. The island would sink, leaving a hole in the middle, but the
reef would continue to grow.

Five years and three days after the _Beagle_ set sail from Plymouth,
Darwin walked into the family home. His father glanced up from his
breakfast. ‘Why,’ he said, ‘the shape of his head is quite altered.’

Darwin did not come up with the concept of evolution during his _Beagle_
voyage. He was too busy amassing specimens, mapping geology, taking
notes, and being seasick, to have time to organise his observations into
a coherent theory. But when the voyage was over, he was promptly elected
to the Royal Geological Society. In January 1837 he presented his
inaugural paper, on the geology of Chile’s coast. He suggested that the
Andes mountains had originally been the ocean floor, but had later been
uplifted. His diary records amazement at ‘the wonderful force which has
upheaved these mountains, & even more so the countless ages [needed] to
have broken through, removed & levelled whole masses of them’. Much
later, the Chilean coast became part of the evidence for ‘continental
drift’: we now think that these mountains result from subduction, as the
Nazca tectonic plate slides underneath the South American plate.

Darwin could certainly spot them.

His interest in geology had other, less obvious, implications. He was
starting to wonder about the finches of the Galápagos. They seemed to
contradict Lyell’s view that local geological conditions determined what
species were created. It was a puzzle.

In fact, it was more of a puzzle than Darwin thought, because he had
misunderstood the finches completely. He thought they all fed on the
same food, in big flocks. He had not noticed important differences among
their beaks, and he even had trouble identifying different species.
Some, he believed, were not finches at all, but wrens and blackbirds. He
was so baffled by the birds, and so indifferent to the specimens he had
collected, that he donated the lot to the Zoological Society. Within ten
days the Society’s bird expert John Gould had worked out that they were
all finches, all very closely related, forming a tightly knit grouping
that nonetheless contained twelve² distinct species. This number was
surprisingly large for such a small group of tiny islands. What had
caused such diversity? Gould wanted to know, but Darwin didn’t care.

By 1837, Paley’s logic was no longer in vogue. The scientifically
literate theist now believed that God had set up the laws of nature at
the time of Creation, and that those laws included not just the
‘background’ laws of physics, to which Paley subscribed, but also the
development of living creatures, which Paley had denied. The laws of the
universe were fixed for all eternity. They had to be, otherwise God’s
creation was flawed. Paley’s analogies were used against him. What kind
of artificer made such bad machinery that He had to keep tinkering with
it all the time to keep it working?

Science and theology were ripping asunder. The political corruption of
the Church was becoming undeniable; now its intellectual claims were
also corning under fire. And some radical thinkers, often medics who had
studied comparative anatomy and noticed remarkable similarities between
the bones of entirely different animals, were engaged in speculation
that changed the view of creation itself. According to the Bible, God
had created each type of animal as a one-off item – whales and winged
fowl on the fifth day, cattle and creeping things and humans on the
sixth. But these medical types were starting to think that species could
change, ‘transmute’. Species were not fixed for all time. They realised
that there was a rather big gap between, say, a banana and a fish. You
couldn’t cross that gap in one step. But given enough time, and enough
steps …

Darwin slowly became caught up in the flow. His Red Notebook, where he
recorded anything that he saw or that came to mind, began to hint at the
‘mutability of species’. The hints were incomplete and ill-assorted.
Deformed babies resembled new species. The beaks of Galápagos finches
were of different shapes and sizes. Rheas were a puzzle, though: two
distinct species of the giant birds had overlapping ranges in Patagonia.
Why didn’t they merge into a single species?

By July, he had secretly started a new notebook, his B Notebook.

It was on the transmutation of species.

By 1839 Darwin was building up a complete picture, and he wrote a
35-page summary of his thinking. A crucial influence was Thomas Malthus,
whose 1826 _Essay on the Principle of Population_ pointed out that the
unchecked growth of organisms is exponential (or ‘geometric’, in the
old-fashioned phrase of the time), whereas that of resources is linear
(‘arithmetic’). Exponential growth occurs when each step multiplies the
size by some fixed amount, for example 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, where each
number is twice the previous one. Linear growth adds some fixed amount
at each step, for instance 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, where each number exceeds the
previous one by 2. However small the multiplier is in exponential
growth, provided it is bigger than 1, and however large the number added
in linear growth may be, it turns out that in the long run exponential
growth _always_ beats linear. Though it does take some time if the
multiplier is close to 1 and the number being added is huge.

Darwin had taken on board Malthus’s argument, and he had realised that
in practice what keeps populations down is competition for resources,
such as food and a place to live. This competition, he wrote, leads to
‘natural selection’, in which those creatures that are victorious in the
‘war of nature’ are the ones that produce the next generation.
Individual creatures within a species are not exactly identical; those
differences make it possible for the force of natural selection to
produce slow, gradual changes. How far might such changes go? In
Darwin’s view, very far indeed. Far enough to lead to entirely new
species, given enough time. And thanks to geology, scientists now knew
that the Earth was very, very old.

Darwin, following family tradition, was a Unitarian. This particular
branch of Christianity has been aptly described as ‘people who believe
in at most one God’. As a sound Unitarian, he believed that the Deity
must work on the grandest of scales. So he finished his summary with a
powerful appeal to the Unitarian view of the Deity:

It is derogatory that the Creator of countless systems of worlds should
have created each of the myriads of creeping parasites and slimy worms
which have swarmed each day of life on land and water on this one globe.
We cease being astonished, however much we may deplore, that a group of
animals should have been directly created to lay their eggs in bowels
and flesh of others – that some organisms should delight in cruelty …
From death, famine, rapine, and the concealed war of nature we can see
that the highest good, which we can conceive, the creation of the higher
animals has directly come.

God surely has better taste than to create nasty parasites _directly_.
They exist only because they are a necessary step along the path that
leads to cats, dogs, and us.

Darwin had his hypothesis.

Now he began to agonise about how to bring it to the waiting world.

¹ In 1865 FitzRoy did exactly the same, having been turned down for a
promotion. Narrativium at work?

² Now considered to be thirteen, plus a fourteenth on the Cocos Islands.
(Look, people write and _complain_ if we don’t point this kind of thing
out.)

ELEVEN

WIZARDS ON THE WARPATH

[image] IN THE GLOOM OF THE High Energy Magic building, Hex wrote. Every
minute another page slid off the writing table.

‘“Boat sunk by collision with Spanish fishing vessel”,’ Ponder Stibbons
read out, a tremor in his voice. ‘“Boat shipwrecked on uncharted reef
near Madeira. Boat found drifting minus all crew, with the table laid
for a meal. Boat catches fire, all lost. Boat struck by meteorite.
Darwin accidentally shot by ship’s surgeon and naturalist during a
collecting expedition on the island of St Jago. Darwin accidentally shot
by ship’s captain. Darwin accidentally shot by himself. Darwin loses
place on boat. Darwin leaves boat because of seasickness. Darwin loses
notebooks. Darwin stung to death by wasps! Darwin bangs head on
underside of table and loses memory …”’ He put down the paper. ‘And
these are the more sensible causes.’

‘The stone dropping out of the sky was sensible?’ said Ridcully.

‘Compared to the attack of the giant squid, Archchancellor, I would say
so,’ said Ponder. ‘And the enormous waterspout. And the shipwreck off
the coast of Norway.’

‘Well, ships do get wrecked,’ said the Dean.

‘Yes, sir. But the country known as Norway is in the wrong direction.
The _Beagle_ would only get there by sailing backwards. Hex is right,
sir. This is insane. The moment that we decided to change one simple
little history, the whole of the universe is trying to stop the voyage
happening! And mathematically speaking, this is illegal!’

Ponder thumped the table, his face red. The senior wizards shied. This
was as unnerving as hearing a sheep roar.

‘My word!’ said Ridcully. ‘Is it?’

‘Yes! There _must_ be room in phase space for the possibility that
_Origin_ gets written! It’s not against the physical laws of this
universe!’

‘That a young inexperienced man takes a voyage around this world and has
an insight that changes mankind’s view of itself?’ said the Dean. ‘You
must admit it looks a bit unlikely – sorry, sorry, sorry!’ He backed
away as Ponder advanced.

‘One of the biggest religions on Roundworld was founded by a carpenter’s
son!’ Ponder snarled. ‘For _years_, the most powerful person on the
planet was an actor! There’s got to be room for Darwin!’

He stamped back to the table and picked up a handful of papers. ‘Look at
this stuff! “Darwin bitten by poisonous spider … Darwin savaged by
kangaroo … stung by jellyfish … eaten by shark … _Beagle_ found
floating, table laid for a meal, this time in a different ocean, still
no one on board … Darwin struck by lightning … killed by volcanic
activity … _Beagle_ sunk by freak wave” … _does anyone expect us to
believe this for one minute_?’

There was a ringing silence.

‘I can see this is worrying you, Mr Stibbons,’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, yes, I mean, _yes_, it’s so … wrong! The multiverse is not
supposed to change the rules. Anything that’s possible to happen has a
universe for it to happen in! I mean, _here_, yes, the rules can be bent
in all kinds of ways, but in Roundworld there’s no one to bend them!’

‘I’ve got an idea,’ said Rincewind. The other wizards turned, amazed at
this revelation.

‘Yes?’ said Ponder.

‘Why not just take it for _granted_ that someone is out to get you?’
said Rincewind. ‘That’s what I do. Don’t bother to work out the fine
detail. Look, when you first started to tinker, it was all going to be
plain sailing, right? Make a few little adjustments, pinch a fish, and
it’d all be OK? But now there are nearly fifteen hundred new reasons—’

With a rattle, Hex’s writing desk started up. The pens wrote:

+++ 3563 reasons now +++

‘They’re breeding!’ said Ridcully.

‘There you are, then,’ said Rincewind, almost cheerfully. ‘Something
down there is frightened. It’s so frightened that it’s not even going to
let him get on the boat. I mean, he has to take the voyage _whatever_
book he writes, isn’t that right!’

‘Yes, of course,’ said Ponder. _Theology of Species_ gets taken
seriously because it’s written by a renowned and respected scientist
whose research was meticulous. So was _The Origin_. Either way, he needs
to be on that boat. But the moment we take an interest, the voyage
doesn’t happen!’

‘Then if it was me, I’d say that something’s got really worried,’ said
Rincewind. ‘They don’t mind if _The Ology_ doesn’t get written in just
one universe, but they hate the idea of _The Origin_ being written at
_all_.’

‘Oh, _really_?’ said Ridcully. ‘The nerve! I am the master of this
college, and that –’ he pointed to the little globe ‘– is university
property! Now I’m getting angry. We’re going to fight back, Mr
Stibbons!’

‘I don’t think you can fight a whole universe, sir!’

‘It’s the prerogative of every life form, Mr Stibbons!’

Gales roared for three weeks. Roundworld time was mutable for the
wizards; it only affected them if they wanted it to.

Something or someone didn’t want the _Beagle_ to sail, and they could
influence the weather. They could influence anything. But of them, there
was still no sign.

The Dean watched the storm in the big omniscope in the HEM.

‘That’s what happened when Darwin gets on board in this universe,’ said
Ponder, adjusting the omniscope. ‘If he hadn’t gone, his place is taken
by an artist, who produced a famous portfolio as a result. His name was
Preserved J. Nightingale. You met his wife.’

‘Preserved?’ said the Dean, watching the dismal gale.

‘Short for Preserved-by-God,’ said Ponder. ‘He was found as a child in
the wreckage of a ship. His adopted parents were very religious. And …
ah yes … _this_ is the weather they get when _he_ is on board.’

The omniscope flickered.

‘No gale?’ said the Dean, looking at the blue sky.

‘Brisk winds from the north-east. They’re ball-world directions, sir.
For the purposes of the voyage, they are ideal. I see you have your
“Born to Rune” jacket on, sir.’

‘We’ve got a fight on our hands, Stibbons,’ said the Dean, severely.
‘It’s a long time since I’ve seen the Archchancellor so angry at anyone
but me! Have you finished?’

‘Just finishing, sir,’ said Ponder.

The HEM had a deserted look. That was because it had been, by and large,
deserted. Thick tubes led out from Hex, across the floor and out over
the lawn towards UU’s Great Hall.

The wizards were going to war. It took a lot to make that happen, but
you couldn’t let any old universe push you around. Gods, demons and
Death were one thing, but mindless matter shouldn’t be allowed to get
ideas.

‘Couldn’t we just find a way to bring Darwin back here?’ said the Dean,
watching Ponder prod buttons on Hex’s keyboard.

‘Quite probably, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Well, then, why don’t we just bring him here, explain the situation,
and drop him off on his island? We could even give him a copy of his
book.’

Ponder shuddered.

‘There are quite a lot of reasons why that course of action might not,
with ease, be rescued in any coherent way from the category of the
insanely unwise, Dean,’ he said, having worked out that the senior
wizards lost interest in any sentence that went on past twenty words.
‘For one thing, he’d know.’

‘We could bop him on the head,’ said the Dean. ‘Or put a ’fluence on
him. Yes, that’d be a good idea,’ he said, because it was his. ‘We could
sit him in a comfy chair and read out the right book to him. He’d wake
up back home and think he’s made it all up.’

‘But he wouldn’t have been there,’ said Ponder. He waved a hand. In the
air overhead, a little ball of multicoloured light appeared. It looked
like a tangle of glowing strings, or the mating of rainbows.

‘Oh, we could sort that out,’ said the Dean airily. ‘Stick some sand in
his boots, a few finch feathers in his pocket … we are wizards, after
all.’

‘That would be unethical, Dean,’ said Ridcully.

‘Why? We’re the Good Guys, aren’t we?’

‘Yes, but that rather hinges on doing certain things and not doing
others, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘Playing around with people’s heads against
their will is almost certainly one of the nots. You should get ready to
move quickly, sir.’

‘What are _you_ doing, Stibbons?’

‘I’ve got Hex to cast a thaumatic glyph in conditional Darwin space,’
said Ponder. ‘But to resolve it properly Hex will have to run the
thaumic reactor a little higher than usual.’

‘How much higher?’ said the Dean suspiciously.

‘About 200 per cent, sir.’

‘Is that safe?’

‘Absolutely not, sir. Hex, glyphic resolution in twenty seconds. Dean,
run! Run, sir!’

From the direction of the Old Squash Court came a sound that had been
there all the time, unheeded, and was now growing louder. It was the
_whum whum_ of dying thaums, each one yielding up its intrinsic magic …

Wizards have a wonderful turn of speed.

Ponder and the Dean reached the Great Hall in twelve seconds, the Dean
slightly in the lead. The ball of rainbows had got there before them,
though, and hung high over the black and white flagstones of the floor.

The hall was packed with wizards. Teams had been sent out to the
furthest corners of the university, which were pretty far. Space and
time had long ago been warped by the ancient magical stones, and there
were wizards at UU who had happily occupied nooks and corners for
decades or longer, regarding the Great Hall and surrounding buildings as
the colonists on some faraway continent might regard the ancient mother
country. Distant studies had been broken into and their occupants
dragged out or, in some unfortunate cases, swept up. Wizards that Ponder
had never seen before were in the throng, blinking in the light of
common day.

Panting slightly, Ponder hurried over to Ridcully.

‘You said you wanted a map, sir,’ he said.

‘Yes, Stibbons. Can’t plan a campaign without a map!’

‘Then look up now, sir! Here it comes!’

The air wavered for a moment, and then the mated rainbows gave birth.
Frozen streamers of light looped through the hazy air of the hall. They
twisted and tangled and curved in ways that suggested more than the
everyday four dimensions were involved.

‘Looks very pretty,’ said the Archchancellor, blinking. ‘Er …’

‘I thought it would help us sort out further nodalities,’ said Ponder.

‘Ah yes, good idea,’ said Ridcully. ‘No one wants unsorted nodalities.’
The other senior wizards nodded sagely.

‘_By which I mean_,’ Ponder added, ‘it will show us those points where
our intervention will have been going to be was essential, if I can put
it that way.’

‘Oh,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Er … what does the coloured line mean,
exactly?’

‘Which one, sir?’

‘All of them, man!’

‘Well, the points of intervention that require a human show up as red
circles. Those that can be left to Hex are white. The blue lines
represent the author of, ahem, _The Ology_, the yellow lines is the
optimum path for the author of _The Origin_, and the green line
represent slippage between futures. Known thaumic occlusions are purple,
but I expect you worked that out already.’

‘What’s that one?’ said the Dean, pointing to a red circle with his
staff.

‘We must make certain he doesn’t get off the boat at an island called
Tenerife,’ said Ponder. ‘Seasickness again, you see. Quite a few Darwins
got off there.’

The tip of the staff moved. ‘And that one?’

‘He _must_ get off the boat at the island of St Jago. He has valuable
insights there.’

‘Sees things evolvin’, that kind of thing?’ said Ridcully.

‘No, sir. You can’t see things evolving, even when they’re doing it.’

‘We saw them on Mono Island,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘You
could practically _hear_ them!’

‘Yes, sir. But we have a _god_ of evolution. Gods aren’t patient. On
Roundworld, evolution takes time. Lots of time. Darwin was raised in the
belief that the Roundworld universe was created in six days –’

‘Which is correct, as I have pointed out,’ said the Dean proudly.

‘Yes,’ said Ponder, ‘but I have also pointed out that on the inside it
took billions of years. It is vital that Darwin realises that evolution
has got lots of time to work in.’

Before the Dean could protest, Ponder turned back to the shining,
twisting tangle of light.

‘_There_ is where the mast falls on his head in the port of Buenos
Aires,’ he said, pointing. ‘The _Beagle_ was shot at. It was meant to be
a blank, fired from a cannon, but for some reason it had been loaded.
The British were very upset about it, and issued a stern diplomatic
protest by sending a warship to bombard the port to rubble. This one is
where Darwin bludgeons himself into unconsciousness with his own bolas
in Argentina. This one is where he’s severely injured putting down an
insurrection—’

‘He got about a bit for a man who collected flowers and things,’ said
Ridcully, with a touch of admiration.

‘Look, I’ve been thinking about all this,’ said the Dean. ‘This
“science” is all about the search for truth, yes? Why don’t we just tell
them the truth?’

‘You mean tell them that their universe was accidentally started by you,
Dean, sticking your hand into some raw firmament created to use up spare
power from the thaumic reactor?’ said Ridcully.

‘Put like that it seems a bit unlikely, I admit, but—’

‘No direct contact, Dean, we agreed about that,’ said Ridcully. ‘We just
clear his way. What’s _that_ nodality, Stibbons? It’s flashing.’

Ponder looked at where the Archchancellor’s staff was pointing.

‘That’s a tricky one, sir. We will have to ensure that Edward Lawson, a
British official in the Galápagos Islands, isn’t struck by a meteorite.
It’s a new malignity, Hex says. In a number of histories, it happens a
few days before he meets Darwin. Remember, sir? I mentioned it in my
yellow folder that was delivered to your office this morning.’ Ponder
sighed. ‘He draws Darwin’s attention to some interesting facts.’

‘Ah, I read that one,’ said Ridcully, his happy tone indicating that
this was a lucky coincidence. ‘Darwin seemed to be too busy runnin’
around like a monkey in a banana plantation to spot the clues, eh?’

‘It would be true to say that his full theory of natural selection was
evolved on mature reflection some time after his voyage, yes,’ said
Ponder, carefully answering a slightly different question.

‘And this chap Lawson was important?’

‘Hex believes so, sir. In a way, everyone Darwin met was important. And
everything he saw.’

‘And then whoosh, this chap was hit by a rock? I call that suspicious.’

‘Hex does too, sir.’

‘I’ll be jolly glad when we’ve got this Darwin to the damn islands,
then,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘We’ll need a holiday after this. Oh
well, I’ll address the wizards now. I hope we’ll have enough for—’

‘Er, we haven’t just got to get him to the islands. We’ve got to get him
all the way home, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘He’ll be away from home for nearly
five years.’

‘Five years?’ said the Dean. ‘I thought visiting the wretched islands
was what it was all about!’

‘Yes and then again, in a very real sense, no, Dean,’ said Ponder. ‘It
would be more correct to say they later _became_ what it was all about.
He was actually there for a little more than a month. It was a very long
voyage, sir. They went all around the world. I’m sorry, I hadn’t made
that clear. Hex, show the _entire_ timelines, please.’

The display began to recede, drawing from nowhere more and more tangles
and loops, as if half a dozen cosmic kittens had been given stars to
play with instead of balls of wool. There was a gasp from the throng of
wizards.

The tangles were still streaming away overhead when the Dean said:
“There’s _millions_ of the wretched things!’

‘No, Dean,’ said Ponder. ‘It looks like that, but there are only 21,309
important nodalities at this point. Hex can deal with almost all of
them. They involve quite minute changes at the quantum level.’

The wizards continued to stare upwards as the whorls and loops flashed
by and dwindled.

‘Someone really doesn’t want that book,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes, his face illuminated by the multi coloured glow.

‘In theory there isn’t a someone in charge,’ said Ponder.

‘But the odds against Darwin writing _Origin_ are getting bigger by the
minute!’

‘The odds against anything actually happening are huge, when you come to
think about it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Take poker, for example. The odds
against four aces are huge, but the odds of having any four cards at all
are _really_ big.’

‘Well put, Archchancellor!’ said Ponder. ‘But this is a crooked game.’

Ridcully strode out into the centre of the Great Hall, his face
illuminated by the glowing map.

‘Gentlemen!’ he bellowed. ‘Some of you already know what this is about,
eh? We’re going to _force_ a history on Roundworld! It’s one that should
be there already! Something is trying to _kill_ it, gentlemen. So if
someone wants to stop it happening, we want to make it happen all the
more! You will be sent into Roundworld with a series of tasks to do!
Most of them have been made very simple so that wizards can understand
them! Shortly our missions for tomorrow, should you chose to accept
them, will be given to you by Mr Stibbons. If you do _not_ choose to
accept them, you are free to choose dismissal! We’re starting at dawn!
Dinner, Second Dinner, Midnight Snack, Somnambulistic Nibbles and Early
Breakfast will be served in the Old Refectory! There will be _no_ Second
Breakfast!’

Over a chorus of protest he went on: ‘We are taking this _seriously_,
gentlemen!’

TWELVE

THE WRONG BOOK

[image] OUR FICTIONAL DARWIN HAS A lot more in common with the ‘real’
one – the Darwin of the particular timeline that you inhabit, the one
who wrote _The Origin_ and not _The Ology_ – than might at first be
apparent. Or plausible. The irresistible force of narrativium induces us
to imagine Charles Darwin as an old man with a beard, a stick, and a
faint but definite hint of gorilla. And so he was, in his old age. But
as a young man he was vigorous, athletic, and engaged in the kind of
exuberant and not always politically correct activities that we expect
of young men.

We’ve already learned of the real Darwin’s amazing fortune in getting on
board the _Beagle_ and remaining there, culminating in his boundless
delight at the geology of the coral island of St Jago. But there are
other crucial nodalities, points of intervention, and thaumic occlusions
in that version of Roundworld’s historical record, and the wizards are
exercising extreme care and attention in the hope of steering history
through, past, and around these causal singularities.

For example, the _Beagle_ really did come under fire from a cannon. When
the ship tried to enter the harbour at Buenos Aires in 1832, one of the
local guard ships fired at it. Darwin was convinced that he heard a
cannonball whistle over his head, but it turned out that the shot was a
blank, intended as a warning. FitzRoy, muttering angrily about insults
to the British flag, sailed on, but was stopped by a quarantine boat:
the harbour authorities were worried about cholera. Incensed, FitzRoy
loaded all of the cannons on one side of his ship. As he sailed back out
of the harbour he aimed them all at the guard ship, informing its crew
that if they ever fired at the _Beagle_ again, he would send their
‘rotten hulk’ to the seabed.

Darwin really did learn to throw a bolas, too, on the pampas of
Patagonia. He enjoyed hunting rheas, and watching the gauchos bring them
down by entangling a bolas in their legs. But when he tried to do the
same, all he managed was to trip up his own horse. _The Origin_ might
have vanished from history’s timeline then and there, but Darwin
survived, with only his pride hurt. The gauchos found the whole thing
hugely amusing.

Charles even took part in suppressing an insurrection. When the _Beagle_
reached Montevideo, shortly after the cannonball incident, FitzRoy
complained to the local representative of Her Majesty’s Royal Navy, who
promptly set sail for Buenos Aires in his frigate HMS _Druid_ to secure
an apology. No sooner had the warship disappeared from view than there
was a rebellion, with black soldiers taking over the town’s central
fort. The chief of police asked FitzRoy for help, and he dispatched a
squad of fifty sailors, armed to the teeth … with Darwin happily
bringing up the rear. The mutineers immediately surrendered, and Darwin
expressed disappointment that not a shot had been fired.

No expense, then, has been spared to bring you historical truth,
inasmuch as so weighty a characteristic as truth can be attributed to
something as ethereal as history. Except for the giant squid, of course.
That happened in a different timeline, when the malign forces were
getting extremely desperate and strayed into _Twenty Thousand Leagues
Under the Sea_ through some obscure warp in L-space.

The most important similarity between the two Darwins is less exciting,
but essential to our tale. The real Charles Darwin, like his fictional
counterpart, began by writing _the wrong book_. In fact, he wrote eight
wrong books. They were very _nice_ books, very worthy … of great
scientific value … and they did his reputation no harm at all … but they
weren’t about natural selection, his term for what later scientists
would call ‘evolution’. Still, that book was brewing merrily away in the
back of his mind, and until he was ready to bring it off the back
burner, he had plenty of other things to write about.

It had been FitzRoy who had put the idea of authorship into his head.
The _Beagle_’s captain had signed himself up to write the story of his
round-the-world voyage, based on the ship’s log. He had also agreed to
edit an accompanying book about a previous survey by the same vessel –
the one where Stokes had shot himself. As the _Beagle_ headed north-west
from Cape town, stopped briefly at Bahía in Brazil, and turned
north-east across the Atlantic towards its final destination in
Falmouth, FitzRoy suggested to Darwin that the latter’s diary might form
the basis of a third volume on the natural history of the voyage,
completing the trilogy.

Darwin was nervous but excited at the prospect of becoming an author. He
had another book in mind, too, on geology. He’d been thinking about it
ever since his revelation on the island of St Jago.

As soon as the ship had returned to England, FitzRoy got married and
went on honeymoon, but he also made an impressive start to his book.
Darwin began to worry that his own slow writing would delay the whole
project, but FitzRoy’s early enthusiasm soon ground to a halt. Between
January and September 1837 Charles worked flat out, overtook the
captain, and towards the year’s end he sent his finished manuscript to
the printer’s. It took FitzRoy more than a year to catch up, so Darwin’s
contribution was held back, finally seeing the light of day in 1839 as
volume 3 of the _Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of H.M.S. Adventure
and Beagle, Between the Years 1826 and 1836_, with the subtitle _Volume
3: Journal and Remarks, 1832–1836_. After a few months the publishers
reissued it on its own as _Journal of Researches into the Geology and
Natural History of the Various Countries Visited by H.M.S. Beagle_. It
may have been the wrong book, but writing it had one very useful effect
on Darwin’s thinking. It forced him to try to make sense of all the
things he had seen. Was there some overarching principle that could
explain it all?

Next came his geology book, which eventually turned into three: one on
coral reefs, one on volcanic islands, and one on the geology of South
America. These established his scientific credentials and led to him
winning a major Royal Society prize. Darwin was now recognised as one of
the leading scientists in the land.

He was also making ever more extensive notes on the transmutation of
species, but he still was in no hurry to publish. Quite the contrary.
Elsewhere, political forces were at work aiming to destroy the influence
of the Church, and one of their key points was that living creatures
could easily have arisen without the intervention of a creator. Darwin,
being (at that point in his life) a good Christian, was totally averse
to anything that might seem to ally him with such people. He could not
publicly espouse transmutation without risking serious damage to the
Anglican Church, and nothing in the world would induce him to
contemplate that. But his deep insight about natural selection wouldn’t
go away, so he continued developing it as a kind of hobby.

He did mention the insight to various scientific friends and
acquaintances, among them Lyell, and also Joseph Dalton Hooker, who
didn’t dismiss the idea out of hand. But he did tell Darwin, ‘I shall be
delighted to hear how you think this change may have taken place, as no
presently conceived opinions satisfy me on this subject.’ And he later
said, rather acerbically, that ‘No one has hardly a right to examine the
question of species who has not minutely examined many.’ Darwin took
this advice to heart and cast around for new species to become an expert
on. In 1846 he sent the final proofs of his geology books back to the
printer and celebrated by collecting the last bottle of preserved
specimens from the _Beagle_ voyage. At the top of the bottle he noticed
a crustacean from the Chonos Archipelago – a barnacle.

That would do. It was as good as anything else.

Hooker helped Darwin set up his microscope and make some preliminary
anatomical observations. Darwin asked Hooker to name the new beast, and
together they decided on _Arthrobalanus_.¹ ‘Mr Arthrobalanus’, as they
privately called it, turned out to be somewhat unusual. ‘I believe
_Arthrobalanus_ has no ovisac at all!’ Charles wrote. ‘The appearance of
one is entirely owing to the splitting & tucking up of the posterior
penis.’ To resolve the mystery he took other barnacles from the bottle
and looked at them, too. Now he was doing comparative anatomy of
barnacles, and enjoying the hands-on experience immensely. This was
better than writing.

By Christmas he had decided to study every barnacle known to humanity –
the entire order of _Cirripedia_. Which turned out to be rather a lot,
so he settled for the British ones. Even these were rather a lot, and in
the end the task took eight years.

He might have finished earlier, but in 1848 he got interested in
barnacle sex, and that was very peculiar indeed. Most barnacles were
hermaphrodites, able to assume either sex. But some species had good
old-fashioned males and females. Except that the males spent much of
their lives _embedded in the females_.

Not only that: some supposedly hermaphrodite species also had tiny males
that somehow assisted in the reproductive process.

Now Darwin became very excited, because he had convinced himself that
what he was observing was a relic of evolution, as a hermaphrodite
ancestor gradually developed separate sexes. A ‘missing link’ for
barnacle sex. He could reconstruct the barnacles’ family tree, and what
he thought he saw reinforced his views on natural selection. So even
when he tried to do respectable science, and become a taxonomist,
transmutation insisted in getting in on the act. In fact, if anything
convinced Darwin he was right about transmutation, it was barnacles.

He became ill, but continued working on barnacles. In 1851 he published
two books about them – one on fossil barnacles for the
Palaeontographical Society, the other on the living ones for the Royal
Society. By 1854 he had produced a sequel to each of them.

These were Darwin’s eight wrong books:

[table]

Not a hint of transmutation of species, the struggle for life, or
natural selection.

Yet, in a strange way, all of his books – even the geological ones –
were crucial steps towards the work that was now putting itself together
inside his head. Darwin’s ninth book would be pure dynamite. He wanted
desperately to write it, but he had already decided that it would be far
too dangerous to be published.

It is a common dilemma in science: whether to publish and be damned, or
not to publish and be pre-empted. You can have the credit for a truly
revolutionary idea, or a quiet life, but not both. Darwin was wary of
publicity, and he was scared that putting his views into print might
damage the Church. But there is nothing that more effectively galvanises
a scientist than the fear that somebody else will pip them to the
winning post. In this case, that somebody was Alfred Russel Wallace.

Wallace was another Victorian explorer, equally keen on natural history.
Mostly because he could sell it. Unlike Darwin, he was not ‘gentry’, and
had no independent income. He was the son of an impecunious lawyer² and
had been taken on at age fourteen as a builder’s apprentice. He spent
his evenings drinking free coffee in the Hall of Science off Tottenham
Court Road in London. This was a socialist organisation, dedicated to
the overthrow of private property and the downfall of the Church.
Wallace’s experiences as a youth reinforced a left-wing view of
politics. He financed his own travels, and made a living by selling the
specimens he collected – butterflies, beetles (a thousand labelled
specimens per box, the dealers demanded³), even bird skins. He went on a
collecting expedition to the Amazon in 1848, and again to the Malay
Archipelago in 1854. There, in Borneo, he sought orang-utans. The idea
that humans were somehow related to the great apes was simmering away in
the collective subconscious, and Wallace wanted to investigate a
potential human ancestor.⁴

One miserable Borneo day, when a tropical monsoon raged outside and
Wallace was stuck indoors, he put together a little scientific paper
outlining some modest ideas that had just popped into his head. It
eventually appeared in the _Annals and Magazine of Natural History_, a
rather ordinary publication, and it was about the ‘introduction’ of
species. Lyell, aware of Darwin’s secret interest in such matters,
pointed the paper out to him, and Charles began to read it. Then another
of Charles’s regular correspondents, Edward Blyth, wrote from Calcutta
with the same recommendation. ‘What do you think of Wallace’s paper in
the Ann M.N.H.? Good! Upon the whole!’ Darwin had met Wallace shortly
before one of the latter’s expeditions – he couldn’t remember which –
and he could see that the Ann M.N.H. paper had useful things to say
about relationships between similar species. Especially the role of
geography. But apart from that, he felt that the paper contained nothing
new, and made an entry to that effect in one of his notebooks. Anyway,
it seemed to Darwin that Wallace was talking about creation, not
evolution. Nevertheless, he wrote to Wallace, encouraging him to
continue developing his theory.

This was a Really Bad Idea.

Encouraged by Lyell and others, who were now warning him that if he
delayed too long, others might snatch the prize, Darwin was putting
together ever more elaborate essays on natural selection, but he
continued to dither about publication. All that changed in an instant in
June 1858, when the postman dropped a bombshell through Charles’s
letterbox. It was a package from Wallace, containing a twenty-page
letter, sent from the Moluccas. Wallace had taken Darwin’s advice to
heart. And he had come up with a very similar theory. Very similar
indeed.

_Calamity_. Darwin declared that his life’s work was ‘smashed’. ‘Your
words have come true with a vengeance,’ he wrote to Lyell. The more he
read Wallace’s notes, the closer the ideas seemed to his own. ‘If
Wallace had my MS [manuscript] sketch written out in 1842, he could not
have made a better short abstract!’ Darwin moaned in a letter to Lyell.

Staid Victorians would soon consider both Wallace and Darwin to be out
of their minds, and Wallace certainly came close, for he was suffering
from malaria when he composed his letter to Darwin. As a good socialist,
Wallace had been taught not to trust the reasoning of Malthus, who had
argued that the world’s ability to feed itself grew linearly, while the
population grew exponentially – implying that eventually the population
would win and there would be too little food to go round. Socialists
believed that human ingenuity could postpone such an event indefinitely.
But by the 1850s even socialists were beginning to view Malthus in a
more favourable light; after all, the threat of overpopulation was a
very good reason to promote contraception, which made excellent sense to
every good socialist. Half-delirious with fever, Wallace thought about
the rich variety of species he had encountered, wondered how that fitted
in with Malthus, put two and two together, and realised that you could
have selective breeding without the need for a breeder.

As it turned out, he didn’t have _quite_ the same view as Darwin.
Wallace thought that the main selective pressure came from the struggle
to survive in a hostile environment – drought, storm, flood, whatever.
It was this struggle that removed unfit creatures from the breeding
pool. Darwin had a rather blunter view of the selection mechanism:
competition among the organisms themselves. It wasn’t quite ‘Nature red
in tooth and claw’ as Tennyson had written in his _In Memoriam_ of 1850,
but the claws were unsheathed and there was a certain pinkness to the
teeth. To Darwin, the environment set a background of limited resources,
but it was the creatures themselves that selected each other for the
chop when they _competed_ for those resources. Wallace’s political
leanings made him detect a purpose in natural selection: to ‘realise the
ideal of a perfect man’. Darwin refused even to contemplate this kind of
utopian hogwash.

Wallace hadn’t mentioned publishing his theory, but Darwin now felt
obliged to recommend it to him. At that point it looked as if Charles
had compounded his Really Bad Idea, but for once the universe was kind.
Lyell, searching for a compromise, suggested that the two men might
agree to publish their discoveries simultaneously. Darwin was concerned
that this might make it look as if he’d pinched Wallace’s theory,
worried himself to distraction, and finally handed the negotiating over
to Lyell and Hooker and washed his hands of it.

Fortunately, Wallace was a true gentleman (the accident of breeding
notwithstanding) and he agreed that it would be unfair to Darwin to do
anything else. He hadn’t realised that Darwin had been working on
exactly the same theory for many years, and he had no wish to steal such
an eminent scientist’s thunder, perish the very thought. Darwin quickly
put together a short version of his own work, and Hooker and Lyell got
the two papers inserted into the schedule of the Linnaean Society, a
relatively new association for natural history. The Society was about to
shut up shop for the summer, but the council fitted in an extra meeting
at the last minute, and the two papers were duly read to an audience of
about thirty fellows.

What did the fellows make of them? The President reported later that
1858 had been a rather dull year, not ‘marked by any of those striking
discoveries which at once revolutionise, so to speak, our department of
science’.

No matter. Darwin’s fear of controversy was now irrelevant, because the
cat was out of the bag, and there was no chance whatsoever that the
beast could be stuffed back in. Yet, as it happened, the anticipated
controversy didn’t quite materialise. The meeting of the Linnaean
Society had been rushed, and the fellows had departed muttering vaguely
under their breaths, feeling that they _ought_ to be outraged by such
blasphemous ideas … yet puzzled because the enormously respected (and
respectable) Hooker and Lyell clearly felt that both papers had some
merit.

And the ideas struck home with some. In particular, the Vice-President
promptly removed all mention of the fixity of species from a paper he
was working on.

Now that Darwin had been forced to put his head above the parapet, he
would lose nothing by publishing the book that he had previously decided
not to write, but had constantly been thinking about anyway. He had
intended it to be a vast, multi-volume treatise with extensive
references to scientific literature, examining every aspect of his
theory. It was going to be called _Natural Selection_ (a conscious or
subconscious reference to Paley’s _Natural Theology_?). But time was
pressing. He polished up his existing essay, changing the title to _On
the Origin of Species and Varieties by Means of Natural Selection_.
Then, on the insistent advice of his publisher John Murray, he cut out
the ‘and Varieties’. The first print run of 1250 copies went on sale in
November 1859. Darwin sent Wallace a complimentary copy, with a note:
‘God knows what the public will think.’

In the event, the book sold out before publication. Over 1500 advance
orders came in for those 1250 copies, and Darwin promptly started
working on revisions for a second edition. Charles Kingsley, author of
_The Water-Babies_, country rector, and Christian socialist, loved it,
and wrote a lavish letter: ‘[It is] just as noble a conception of Deity,
to believe that He created primal forms capable of self-development … as
to believe that He required a fresh act of intervention to supply the
_lacunas_⁵ which He himself had made.’ Kingsley was something of a
maverick, because of his socialist views, so praise from this source was
something of a poisoned chalice.

The reviews, steadfast in their Christian orthodoxy, were distinctly
less favourable. Even though _Origin_ hardly mentions humanity, all the
usual complaints about men and monkeys, and insults to God and His
Church, were trotted out. What particularly galled the reviewers was
that _ordinary people_ were buying the thing. It was all right for the
upper classes to toy with radical views, it had an attractive frisson of
naughtiness and was perfectly harmless among gentlemen of breeding,
though not ladies of course; but those same views might put ideas into
the common folk’s heads, if they were exposed to them, and upset the
established order. For Heaven’s sake, the book was even selling to
commuters outside Waterloo railway station! It must be suppressed!

Too late. Murray geared up to print 3000 copies of the second edition,
whose likely sales were not going to suffer from public controversy. And
the people who mattered most to Darwin – Lyell, Hooker, and the
anti-religious ‘evangelist’ Thomas Henry Huxley – were impressed, and
pretty much convinced. While Charles stayed out of the public debate,
Huxley set to with a will. He was determined to advance the cause of
atheism, and _Origin_ gave him a point of leverage. The radical atheists
loved the book, of course: its overall message and scientific
weightiness were enough for them, and they weren’t too concerned about
fine points. Hewett Watson declared Darwin to be ‘the greatest
revolutionist in natural history of this century’.

In the introduction to _Origin_, Darwin begins by telling his readers
the background to his discovery:

When on board H.M.S. _Beagle_, as naturalist, I was much struck with
certain facts, in the distribution of the inhabitants of South America,
and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants
of that continent. These facts seemed to me to throw some light on the
origin of species – that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by
one of our greatest philosophers. On my return home, it occurred to me,
in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out of this question by
patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could
possibly have any bearing on it.

Apologising profusely for lack of space, and time, to write something
more comprehensive than his 150,000-word tome, Darwin then moves towards
a short summary of his main idea. Writers on science generally
appreciate that it is seldom enough to discuss the _answer_ to a
question: it is also necessary to explain the question. And that, of
course, should be done first. Otherwise your readers will not appreciate
the context into which the answer fits. Darwin was clearly aware of this
principle, so he begins by pointing out that:

It is quite conceivable that a naturalist, reflecting on the mutual
affinities of organic beings, on their embryological relations, their
geographical distribution, geological succession, and other such facts,
might come to the conclusion that each species had not been
independently created, but had descended, like varieties, from other
species. Nevertheless such a conclusion, even if well founded, would be
unsatisfactory, until it could be shown how innumerable species
inhabiting this world have been modified, so as to acquire those
perfections of structure and coadaptation which most justly excites our
admiration.

Already we see a gesture towards Paley – ‘perfections of structure’ is a
clear reference to the watch/watchmaker argument, and ‘had not been
independently created’ shows that Darwin doesn’t buy Paley’s conclusion.
But we also see something that characterises the whole of _Origin_:
Darwin’s willingness to acknowledge difficulties in his theory. Time and
again he raises possible objections – not as straw men, to be knocked
flat again, but as serious points to be considered. More than once he
concludes that there is more to be learned, before the objection can be
resolved. Paley, to his credit, did something similar, though he didn’t
go as far as admitting ignorance: he knew that he was right. Darwin, a
real scientist, not only had his doubts – he shared them with his
readers. He would not have arrived at his theory to begin with if he had
failed to seek the weaknesses of the hypotheses upon which it was based.

He also, of course, makes it clear what his own work is adding to the
speculations of earlier ‘transmutationists’. Namely: he has come up with
a _mechanism_ for species change. There are advantages in being honest
about your own limitations: you gain the right to talk about the
limitations of others. And now he tells us what that mechanism is.
Species, we know, are variable – the domestication of wild species like
chickens, cows, and dogs is clear evidence of that. Although that is
deliberate selection by humans, it opens the door to selection by nature
without human aid:

I will then pass on to the variability of species in a state of nature …
We shall, however, be enabled to discuss what circumstances are most
favourable to variation. In the next chapter the Struggle for Existence
amongst all organic beings throughout the world, which inevitably
follows from their high geometrical powers of increase, will be treated
of … The fundamental subject of Natural Selection will be treated at
some length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see how Natural
Selection almost inevitably causes much Extinction of the less improved
forms of life, and induces what I have called Divergence of Character.

He then promises four chapters on ‘the most apparent and gravest
difficulties of the theory’, prominent among these being to understand
how a simple organism or organ can change into a highly complex one –
another nod to Paley. The introduction ends with a flourish:

I can entertain no doubt … that the view which most naturalists
entertain, and which I formerly entertained – namely, that each species
has been independently created – is erroneous. I am fully convinced that
species are not immutable; but that those belonging to what are called
the same genera are lineal descendent of some other and generally
extinct species … Furthermore, I am convinced that Natural Selection has
been the main but not exclusive means of modification.

In essence, Darwin’s theory of natural selection, which soon became
known as evolution,⁶ is straightforward. Most people think they
understand it, but its simplicity is deceptive, and its subtleties are
easily underestimated. Many of the standard criticisms of evolutionary
theory stem from common misunderstandings, not from what the theory
actually proposes. The ongoing scientific debate about details is often
misrepresented as disagreement with the general outline, which is an
error based on too simple-minded a view of how science develops and what
‘knowledge’ is.

Briefly, Darwin’s theory goes like this.

1.  Organisms, even those in the same species, are variable. Some are
    bigger than others, or bolder than others, or prettier than others.
2.  This variability is to some extent hereditary, passed on to
    offspring.
3.  Unchecked population growth would quickly exhaust the capacity of
    the planet, so something checks it: competition for limited
    resources.
4.  Therefore as time passes, the organisms that _do_ survive long
    enough to breed will be modified in ways that _improve_ their chance
    of surviving to breed, a process called natural selection.
5.  Ongoing slow changes can lead, in the long run, to big differences.
6.  The long run has been very long indeed – hundreds of millions of
    years, maybe more. So by now those differences can have become huge.

It’s relatively simple to put these six ingredients together and deduce
that new species can arise without divine intervention – provided we can
justify each ingredient.

Even though different species seem to stay pretty much the same – think
lions, tigers, elephants, hippos, whatever – it is actually rather
obvious that, in general, species are not fixed for all time. The
changes are relatively slow, which is why we don’t notice them. But they
do happen. We’ve already seen that in Darwin’s finches, evolutionary
changes can be and have been observed on a timescale of years, and in
bacteria they occur on a timescale of days.

The most obvious evidence for the variability of species, in Darwin’s
day and ours, was the domestication of animals – sheep, cows, pigs,
chickens, dogs, cats …

… and pigeons. Darwin was rather knowledgeable about pigeons, he
belonged to two London pigeon clubs. Every pigeon-fancier knows that by
selectively breeding particular combinations of male and female pigeons,
it is possible to produce ‘varieties’ of pigeons with particular
characteristics. ‘The diversity of the breeds is something astonishing,’
says Darwin in the first chapter of _Origin_. The English carrier pigeon
has a wide mouth, large nostrils, elongated eyelids, a long beak. The
short-faced tumbler has a short stubby beak like a finch. The common
tumbler flies high up in a tightly knit flock, and has an odd habit of
falling about in the sky, whence its name. The runt (despite its name)
is huge, with a long beak and large feet. The barb is like the carrier
but with a short, broad beak. The pouter has an inflatable crop and can
puff out its chest. The turbit has a short beak and a line of reversed
feathers on its chest. The Jacobin has so many reversed feathers on its
neck that they form a hood. Then there are the trumpeter, laugher,
fantail … These are not separate species: they can interbreed, to
produce viable ‘hybrids’ – cross-breeds.

The enormous variety of dogs is so well known that we don’t even need to
mention examples. It’s not that the dog species is exceptionally
malleable, just that dog-breeders have been unusually active and
imaginative. There is a dog for every purpose that a dog can carry out.
Again, they’re all _dogs_, not new (albeit related) species. They can
_mostly_ (barring really big size differences) interbreed, and
artificial insemination can take care of mere size. Dog sperm plus dog
egg makes fertile dog zygote, and, eventually, dog – independently of
breed. That’s why pedigree pooches need a pedigree, to guarantee that
their parentage is pure. If the different varieties of dog were
different species, that wouldn’t be necessary.

In modern times, it has become clear that cats are just as malleable,
but the cat-breeders have only just got going on exotic cats. The same
goes for cows, pigs, goats, sheep … and what about flowers? The number
of varieties of garden flowers is immense.

By avoiding the creation of hybrids, the breeder can maintain the
individual varieties over many generations. Pouter pigeons breed with
pouters to produce (a substantial proportion of) pouters. Carriers mated
with carriers produce (mostly) carriers. The underlying genetics, about
which Darwin and his contemporaries knew nothing, is complicated enough
that apparent hybrids can sometimes arise from what seems to be pure
stock, just as two brown-eyed parents can nonetheless have a blue-eyed
child. So pigeon-breeders have to eliminate the hybrids.

The existence of these cross-bred varieties does not, of itself, explain
how new species can arise of their own accord. Varieties are not
species; moreover, the guiding hand of the breeder is evident. But
varieties do make it clear that there must be plenty of variability
within a species. In fact, the variability is so great that one can
readily imagine selective breeding leading to entirely new species,
given enough time. And the avoidance of hybrids can maintain varieties
from one generation to the next, so their _characters_ (biologese for
the features that distinguish them) are _heritable_ (biologese for ‘able
to be passed from one generation to the next’). So Darwin has his first
ingredient: heritable variability.

The next ingredient was easier (though still controversial in some
quarters). It was time. Oodles and oodles of time, the Deep Time of
geologists. Not a few thousand years, but millions, tens of millions …
billions, in fact, though that was further than the Victorians were
willing to go. Deep Time, as we’ve previously observed, is contrary to
the biblical chronology of Bishop Ussher, which is why the idea remains
controversial among certain Christian fundamentalists, who have
bizarrely chosen to fight their corner on the weakest of grounds,
completely needlessly. Deep Time is supported by so much evidence that a
truly committed fundamentalist has to believe that his God is
deliberately trying to fool him. Worse, if we can’t trust the evidence
of our own eyes, then we can’t trust the apparent element of ‘design’ in
living creatures either. We can’t trust anything.

Lyell realised that the age of the Earth must be many millions of years,
when he looked at sedimentary rocks. These are rocks like limestone or
sandstone which form in layers, and have been deposited either
underwater, as muddy sediments, or in deserts, as accumulating sand.
(Independent evidence for these processes comes from the fossils found
in such rocks.) By studying the rate at which modern sediments
accumulate, and comparing that with the thickness of known beds of
sedimentary rock, Lyell could estimate the time it had taken for the
layers of rock to be deposited. Something in the range 1000–10,000 years
would produce a layer about a metre thick. But the chalk cliffs of the
south coast, around Dover, are hundreds of metres thick. So that’s
several hundred thousand years of deposition, and we’ve only dealt with
one of the numerous layers of rock that make up the geological column –
the historical sequence of different rocks.

We now have many other kinds of evidence for the great age of our
planet. The rate of decay of radioactive elements, which we can measure
today and extrapolate backwards, is in general agreement with the
evidence of the rock layers. The rate of movement of the continents,
when combined with the distances they have moved, is again consistent
with other estimates. We’ve seen that India was once attached to Africa,
but about 200 million years ago it broke off, and by 40 million years
ago it had moved all the way to its current position, butting up against
Asia and pushing up the Himalayas.

When continents move apart – as Africa and South America, or Europe and
North America, are doing now – new material forms on the ocean floor,
flowing out from the mantle beneath to form huge mid-ocean ridges. The
rocks in the ridges contain a record of the changes in the Earth’s
magnetic field, ‘frozen in’ as the rock cooled. They show a long series
of repeated reversals of the field polarity. Sometimes the ‘north’
magnetic pole is at the northern end of the Earth, as now, but every so
often the polarity flips, so that the magnetic pole near the northern
end is the ‘south’ one. Mathematical models of the Earth’s magnetic
field predict that such reversals occur roughly once every five million
years. Count the number of reversals in the ocean-ridge rocks, multiply
by five million … again, the numbers fit reasonably well, and careful
comparisons and a lot of disputation by experts lead to revised numbers
that fit even better.

The Grand Canyon is a deep gash through layers of rock one mile (1.6km)
thick. You have a choice. You can understand what the record of the
rocks is telling you here: it took a very long time to lay down those
rocks, and quite a long time – though less – for flash-flooding in the
Colorado river to erode them again. Or you can follow one book that
until recently was displayed in the ‘science’ section of the Grand
Canyon bookstore, until a lot of scientists complained, and assert that
the Grand Canyon is evidence for Noah’s flood. The first choice fits
huge amounts of evidence and geological understanding. The second is an
excellent test of faith, because it fits absolutely nothing. A flood
that lasted only 40 days could never have produced that kind of
geological formation. A miracle? In that case, the Sahara desert could
equally well be hailed as evidence for Noah’s flood, miraculously _not_
forming a deep canyon. Once you admit miracles, you can’t pursue a
logical thread.

Anyway, that’s the second ingredient – Deep Time. It takes huge amounts
of time to change organisms into entirely new species, if all you can do
– as Darwin believed – is make very gradual changes. But even Deep Time,
when combined with heritable variation, is not enough to lead to the
kind of organised, coherent changes that are needed to create new
species. There has to be a _reason_ for such changes to occur, as well
as opportunity and time. Darwin, as we’ve seen, found his reason in
Malthus’s contention that the unchecked growth of organisms is
exponential, whereas that of resources is linear. In the long run,
exponential growth always wins.

The first assertion is pretty much correct, the second highly debatable.
The qualifier ‘unchecked’ is crucial, and real populations only grow
exponentially if there are plenty of resources available. Typically, the
growth starts exponentially with a small population and then levels off
as the population size increases. But in most species, two parents
(let’s think sexual species here) produce some larger number of
offspring. A breeding female starling lays about 16 eggs in her life,
and with ‘unchecked’ growth, the starling population would multiply by 8
every lifetime. It would not be long before the planet was knee-deep in
starlings. So, of necessity, 14 of those 16 offspring (on average) fail
to breed – usually because something eats them. Just two become parents
in their turn. A female frog may lay 10,000 eggs in her life, and nearly
all die in various grotesque ways to achieve each two parents; a female
cod contributes forty million or thereabouts of her offspring to
planktonic food chains, for each two that breed. Here the multiplier,
with ‘unchecked’ growth, would be 20 million per cod-lifetime. Unchecked
growth simply doesn’t bear thinking about as a realistic prospect.

We suspect that Malthus plumped for linear growth of resources for a
slightly silly reason. Victorian school-textbook mathematics
distinguished two main types of sequence: geometric (exponential) and
arithmetic (linear). There were plenty of other possibilities, but they
didn’t get into the textbooks. Having already assigned geometric growth
to organisms, Malthus was left with arithmetic growth for resources. His
main point doesn’t depend on the actual growth rate, in any case, as
long as it is less than exponential. As the starling example shows, most
offspring die before breeding, and that’s the main point here.

Given that most young starlings cannot possibly become parents, the
question arises: which ones will? Darwin felt that the ones that
survived to breed would be the ones best suited for survival, which
makes sense. If one starling is better at finding food, or hanging on to
it, than another one, then it’s clear which one is more likely to do
best if food supplies become limited. The better one _might_ be unlucky
and get eaten by a hawk; but across the population, starlings that are
better equipped to survive are generally the ones that _do_ survive.

This process of ‘natural selection’ in effect plays the role of an
external breeder. It _chooses_ certain organisms and eliminates the
rest. The choice is not conscious – there is no consciousness to do the
choosing, and no preconceived _purpose_ – but the end result is very
similar. The main difference is that natural selection makes sensible
choices, whereas human selection can make ridiculous ones (like dogs
with faces so flattened they can hardly breathe). Sensible choices lead
to sensible animals and plants, ones that are beautifully adapted for
survival in whatever environment they happened to be in when natural
selection was moulding them.

It is just like breeding new varieties of pigeon, but without a human
breeder. Natural selection exploits the same variability of organisms
that pigeon-breeding does. It makes choices based on survival value (in
some environment) rather than whim. It is typically much slower than
human intervention, but the timescale is so vast that this slowness
doesn’t matter much. Heritable variation plus natural selection
inevitably lead, over Deep Time, to the origination of species.

Nature does it all on her own. There is no need for a series of acts of
special creation. That doesn’t imply that special creation has not
occurred. It just removes any logical imperative for it.

Paley was wrong.

The watches don’t need a watchmaker.

They can make themselves.

¹ Literally, ‘jointed acorn’

² Yes, we _know_ it sounds unlikely, but apparently there are such
things.

³ It was a good job that God had such a fondness for beetles.

⁴ Its potential for Librarianship was not widely recognised at that
time.

⁵ No, not long-haired South American beasts of burden, but Latin for
‘gaps’.

⁶ The term was around in Victorian times, as a phenomenon but not a
specific mechanism. Darwin didn’t use it in _Origin_, nor in the later
_The Descent of Man_. However, the final word in _Origin_ is ‘evolved’.

THIRTEEN

INFINITY IS A BIT TRICKY

[image] IT WAS JUST GONE HALF five in the morning, too late for Nibbles
and yet not time for Early Breakfast. Jogging through the grey mist,
Archchancellor Ridcully saw the lights on in the Great Hall. Steeling
himself in case Ponder had students in there, he pushed open the door.

There were a few students around. One of them was asleep under the
coffee spigot.

Ponder Stibbons was still on the stepladder, waving his hands through
the timelines.

‘Getting anywhere, Stibbons?’ said Ridcully, running on the spot.

Ponder managed to steady himself just in time.

‘Er … general progress, sir,’ he said, and climbed down.

‘Bit of a big job, eh?’ said Ridcully.

‘Rather taxing, sir, yes. We’ve done the instructions, though. We’re
nearly ready.’

‘Hit ’em hard, that’s the style,’ said Ridcully, punching the air.

‘Quite probably, sir,’ said Ponder, yawning.

‘I was thinking while I was running, Stibbons, as is my wont,’ said
Ridcully.

It’s going to be about the eyeball, isn’t it, Ponder thought. I’m pretty
good on the eyeball now, but then he’ll ask about the parasitic wasp and
that’s a puzzler, and then he’ll ask how _exactly_ is evolution passed
on and there’s a god-space right there. And then he’ll ask _how_ do you
get from a blob in the ocean to people by adding nothing but sunlight
and time? And he’ll probably say: people know they’re people, did blobs
know they were blobs? What bit of a blob knows that? Where did
consciousness come from, then? Did the big lizards have it? What’s it
for? What about imagination? And even if I can think up some kind of
answers to all those, he’ll say: look, Stibbons, what you’ve got there
is a lot of clockwork answers, and if I ask you how you can get from a
big bang to turtles and spoons and Darwin, all you’ll be able to come up
with is more clockwork. _How_ did all this happen? Who wound it up? How
can nothing explode? _Theology of Species_ makes so much sense when—

‘Are you all right, Stibbons?’ He was aware of the Archchancellor
looking at him with uncharacteristic concern.

‘Yes, sir, Just a bit tired.’

‘Only, your lips were moving.’

Ponder sighed. ‘What was it you were thinking about, sir?’

‘Lots of Darwins get through this voyage, right?’

‘Yes. An infinite number.’

‘Well, in that case—’ the Archchancellor began.

‘But Hex did say it’s a much smaller infinite number that the number
that don’t,’ said Ponder. ‘And that’s an even smaller number than the
very large infinity when he never goes on the voyage. And the number of
infinities where he’s never even born is—’

‘Infinite?’ Ridcully asked.

‘At least,’ said Ponder. ‘However, there is a positive side to this.’

‘Do tell, Stibbons.’

‘Well, sir, once _Origin_ is published, the number of universes in which
it is published will also become infinite in an infinitely small space
of time. So even though the book may only be written once, it will, by
human standards, immediately have been written in untold billions of
adjacent universes.’

‘An infinite number, I suspect?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir. Sorry about that. Infinity is a bit tricky.’

‘You can’t imagine half of it, for one thing.’

‘That’s true. It’s not really a number at all. You can’t get to it
starting from one. And that’s the problem, sir. Hex is right, the oddest
number in the multiverse isn’t infinity, it’s one. Just one Charles
Darwin writing _The Origin of Species_ … it’s impossible.’

Ridcully sat down. ‘I’ll be damn glad when he finishes the book,’ he
said. ‘We’ll get all those nody things sorted and get him back and I
personally will hand him the pen.’

‘Er … that doesn’t happen immediately, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘He didn’t
write it until he was back home.’

‘Fair enough,’ said Ridcully. ‘Probably a bit tricky, writin’ on a
boat.’

‘He thought about it a lot first, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘I did mention
that.’

‘How long?’ said Ridcully.

‘About twenty-five years, sir.’

‘What?’

‘He wanted to be sure, sir. He researched and wrote letters, lots of
letters. He wanted to know everything about, well, everything – silk
worms, sheep, jaguars … He wanted to be sure he was right.’ Ponder
thumbed through the papers on his clipboard. ‘This interested me. It was
from a letter he wrote in 1857, and he says “_what a jump it is from a
well-marked variety, produced by a natural cause, to a species produced
by the separate act of the Hand of God_”.

‘That’s the author of _The Origin_? Sounds more like the author of _The
Ology_.’

‘It was a big thing he was going to do, sir. It worried him.’

‘I’ve read _The Ology_,’ said Ridcully. ‘Well, some of it. Makes a lot
of sense.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘I mean, if we hadn’t watched the world all happen from Day One, we’d
have thought—’

‘I know what you mean, sir. I think that’s why _The Ology_ was so
popular.’

‘Darwin – I mean _our_ Darwin – thought that no god would make so many
kinds of barnacle. It’s so wasteful. A perfect being wouldn’t do it, he
thought. But the other Darwins, the religious ones, said that was the
whole point. They said that just as mankind had to strive for
perfection, so must the whole animal kingdom. Plants, too. Survival of
the Worthiest, they called it. Things weren’t made perfect, but had an
inbuilt, er, striving to achieve perfection, as if part of the Plan was
inside them. They could evolve. In fact, that was a good thing. It meant
they were getting better.’

‘Seems logical,’ said Ridcully. ‘By god logic, at least.’

‘And there’s the whole thing about the Garden of Eden and the end of the
world,’ said Ponder.

‘I must’ve missed that chapter,’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, sir, it’s your basic myth of a golden age at the start of the
world and terrible destruction at the end of it, but codified in some
very interesting language. Darwin suggested that the early chroniclers
had got things mixed up. Like trolls, you know? They think the past is
ahead of them because they can see it? The terrible destruction was in
fact the _birth_ of the world—’

‘Oh, you mean the red hot rocks, planets smacking together, that sort of
thing?’

‘Exactly. And the _end_ of the world, well, as experienced, would be the
assembly of perfect creatures and plants in a perfect garden, belonging
to the god.’

‘To get congratulated, and so on? Prizes handed out, marks awarded?’

‘Could be, sir.’

‘Like an everlasting picnic?’

‘He didn’t put it like that, but I suppose so.’

‘What about the perfect wasps?’ said Ridcully. ‘You always get them, you
know. And ants.’

Ponder had been ready for this.

‘There was a lot of debate about that sort of thing,’ he said.

‘And it concluded how?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘It was decided that it was the kind of subject on which there could be
a lot of debate, and that earthly considerations would not apply.’

‘Hah! And Darwin got all this past the priests?’

‘Oh, yes. Most of them, anyway,’ said Ponder.

‘But he was turning their whole world upside down!’

‘Um, that was happening anyway, sir. But _this_ way, the god didn’t drop
out of the bottom. People were poking around and proving that the world
really was very old, that seabeds had become mountain tops, that all
kinds of strange animals had lived a long, long time ago. Lots of people
already accepted the idea of evolution. The idea of natural selection,
as Darwin called it, of life just evolving itself, was hovering in the
air. It was a big threat. But _Theology of Species_ said there was a
Plan. A huge, divine Plan, unfolding across millions of years! It even
included the planet itself! All that turmoil and volcanoes and drowning
lands, that was a world evolving, you see? A world that would end up
with topsoil, and the right kind of atmosphere, and minerals that were
easily accessible, and seas full of fish—’

‘A world for humans, in other words.’

‘Got it in one, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘Humans. The top of the tree. A
creature that knew what it was, that gave things names, that had a
concept of epiphany. That Darwin later wrote another book, called _The
Ascent of Man_. Oddly enough, _our_ Darwin is going to write a similar
book called _The Descent of Man_—’

‘Ah, I can see a bad choice of words right there,’ said Ridcully.

‘Quite,’ said Ponder. ‘The _Ology_ Darwin was considered daring but …
acceptable. And there was so much evidence that this _was_ a planet made
for humans. The religion changed quite a lot, but so did the
technomancy. The god was still in charge.’

‘All very neat,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘So … what about the
dinosaurs?’

‘Sorry, sir?’

‘Mr Stibbons, you _know_ what I’m talking about. We saw them, remember?
Not the big ones, the little ones who painted their bodies and herded
animals? And the octopuses building cities under the sea? Not to mention
the crabs! Oh, yes, the crabs. They were really doing well, the crabs.
They were building rafts with sails and enslaving other crab nations.
That’s practically civilisation! But they all got wiped out. Was _that_
part of a divine plan?’

Ponder hesitated.

‘They did worship a crab-shaped god,’ he said, as a holding statement
until actual thought happened.

‘Well, they would, wouldn’t they?’ said Ridcully. ‘They were _crabs_.’

‘Um. Perhaps they just weren’t … satisfactory?’ said Ponder. ‘In some
way?’

‘They were pretty clever,’ said Ridcully.

Ponder squirmed. ‘Darwin didn’t know about them,’ he said. ‘They didn’t
build anything that lasted. I suppose the Darwin who wrote _The Ology_
would have taken the view that they simply failed, or were wicked in
some way. One of the major religious texts does mention a divine flood
that drowned everything in the world except one family and a boatload of
animals.’

‘Why?’

‘Because they were all wicked, I believe.’

‘How can animals be wicked? How can a crab be wicked, for that matter?’

‘I don’t know, Archchancellor!’ Ponder burst out. ‘Maybe if they eat
forbidden seaweed? Dig a burrow on the wrong day? I’m not a theologian!’

They sat in despondent silence.

‘It’s a bit of mess, isn’t it?,’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir.’

‘We’ve really got to see to it that _The Origin_ gets written.’

‘We have indeed, sir.’

‘But you’d like to think there’s someone in charge, yes?’ said Ridcully,
gently. ‘Of everything, I mean.’

‘Yes! Yes, I would, sir! Not a big beard in the sky, but … something!
Some kind of frame, some sense that good and bad have real meanings! I
can see why _The Ology_ was so popular. It wrapped everything up! But
how does evolution get passed on? Where does order come from? If you
start with a lot of exploding firmament, _how_ do you end up with
butterflies? Were butterflies built in from the start? How? What bit of
burning hydrogen carried the plans for people? Even the Darwin who wrote
_The Origin_ called on a god to _start_ life. It’s be nice to know that
underneath it all is some kind of … sense.’

‘You didn’t used to talk like this, Mr Stibbons.’

Ponder sagged. ‘Sorry, sir. It’s all getting me down, I think.’

‘Well, I can see why,’ said Ridcully. ‘Surely there _must_ be some
Deitium here. Some things can’t just happen. Now, the eyeball –’

Ponder gave a little yelp.

‘– is easy,’ said Ridcully. ‘Are you all right, Stibbons?’

‘Er, fine, fine, sir. I’m fine. Easy, is it?’

‘Seeing keeps you alive,’ said Ridcully. ‘Any kind of seeing is better
than nothing. I can see, ha, what the _Origin_ Darwin is getting at
there. You don’t have to have a god. But there’s a kind of wasp that’s
parasitical on a spider … unless I’m thinking about a kind of spider
that is parasitical on a wasp … anyway, what it does is, it waits
until—’

‘Ah,’ said Ponder brightly, ‘wasn’t that the gong for Early Breakfast?’

‘_I_ didn’t hear anything,’ said Ridcully.

‘I’m positive,’ said Ponder, edging towards the door. ‘I’ll tell you
what, sir, I’ll just go and check.’

FOURTEEN

ALEPH-UMPTYPLEX

[image] THE WIZARDS ARE NOT ONLY grappling with the apparent absurdities
of ‘quantum’, their catch-all phrase for advanced physics and cosmology,
but with the explosive philosophical/mathematical concept of infinity.
In their own way, they have rediscovered one of the great insights of
nineteenth-century mathematics: that there can be many infinities, some
of them bigger than others.

If this sounds ridiculous, it is. Nonetheless, there is an entirely
natural sense in which it turns out to be true.

There are two important things to understand about infinity. Although
the infinite is often compared with numbers like 1, 2, 3, infinity is
not itself a number in any conventional sense. As Ponder Stibbons says,
you can’t get there from 1. The other is that, even within mathematics,
there are many distinct notions that all bear the same label ‘infinity’.
If you mix up their meanings, all you’ll get is nonsense.

And then – sorry, _three_ important things – you have to appreciate that
infinity is often a process, not a thing.

But – oh, _four_ important things – mathematics has a habit of turning
processes into things.

Oh, and – all right, _five_ important things – one kind of infinity _is_
a number, though a slightly unconventional one.

As well as the mathematics of infinity, the wizards are also contending
with its physics. Is the Roundworld universe finite or infinite? Is it
true that in any infinite universe, not only _can_ anything happen, but
everything must? Could there be an infinite universe consisting entirely
of chairs … immobile, unchanging, wildly unexciting? The world of the
infinite is paradoxical, or so it seems at first, but we shouldn’t let
the apparent paradoxes put us off. If we keep a clear head, we can steer
our way through the paradoxes, and turn the infinite into a reliable
thinking aid.

Philosophers generally distinguish two different ‘flavours’ of infinity,
which they call ‘actual’ and ‘potential’. Actual infinity is a _thing_
that is infinitely big, and that’s such a mouthful to swallow that until
recently it was rather disreputable. The more respectable flavour is
potential infinity, which arises whenever some process gives us the
distinct impression that it could be continued for as long as we like.
The most basic process of this kind is counting: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 … Do we
ever reach ‘the biggest possible number’ and then stop? Children often
ask that question, and at first they think that the biggest number whose
name they _know_ must be the biggest number there is. So for a while
they think that the biggest number is six, then they think it’s a
hundred, then they think it’s a thousand. Shortly after, they realise
that if you can count to a thousand, then a thousand and one is only a
single step further.

In their 1949 book _Mathematics and the Imagination_, Edward Kasner and
James Newman introduced the world to the googol – the digit 1 followed
by a hundred zeros. Bear in mind that a billion has a mere nine zeros:
1000000000. A googol is

100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

and it’s so big we had to split it in two to fit the page. The name was
invented by Kasner’s nine-year-old nephew, and is the inspiration for
the internet search engine Google™.

Even though a googol is very big, it is definitely not infinite. It is
easy to write down a bigger number:

100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001

Just add 1. A more spectacular way to find a bigger number than a googol
is to form a googolplex (name also courtesy of the nephew), which is 1
followed by a googol of zeros. Do not attempt to write this number down:
the universe is too small unless you use subatomic-sized digits, and its
lifetime is too short, let alone yours.

Even though a googolplex is extraordinarily big, it is a precisely
defined number. There is nothing vague about it. And it is definitely
not infinite (just add 1). It is, however, big enough for most purposes,
including most numbers that turn up in astronomy. Kasner and Newman
observe that ‘as soon as people talk about large numbers, they run
amuck. They seem to be under the impression that since zero equals
nothing, they can add as many zeros to a number as they please with
practically no serious consequences,’ a sentence the Mustrum Ridcully
himself might have uttered. As an example, they report that in the late
1940s a distinguished scientific publication announced that the number
of snow crystals needed to start an ice age is a billion to the
billionth power. ‘This,’ they tell us, ‘is very startling and also very
silly.’ A billion to the billionth power is 1 followed by nine billion
zeros. A sensible figure is around 1 followed by 30 zeros, which is
fantastically smaller, though still bigger than Bill Gates’s bank
balance.

Whatever infinity may be, it’s not a conventional ‘counting’ number. If
the biggest number possible were, say, umpty-ump gazillion, then by the
same token umpty-ump gazillion _and one_ would be bigger still. And even
if it were more complicated, so that (say) the biggest number possible
were umpty-ump gazillion, two million, nine hundred and sixty-four
thousand, seven hundred and fifty-eight … then what about umpty-ump
gazillion, two million, nine hundred and sixty-four thousand, seven
hundred and fifty-_nine_?

Given any number, you can always add one, and then you get a number that
is (slightly, but distinguishably) _bigger_.

The counting process only stops if you run out of breath; it does not
stop because you’ve run out of _numbers_. Though a near-immortal might
perhaps run out of universe in which to write the numbers down, or time
in which to utter them.

In short: there exist infinitely many numbers.

The wonderful thing about that statement is that it does not imply that
there is some number called ‘infinity’, which is bigger than any of the
others. Quite the reverse: the whole point is that there _isn’t_ a
number that is bigger than any of the others. So although the process of
counting can in principle go on for ever, the number you have reached at
any particular stage is finite. ‘Finite’ means that you can count up to
that number and then stop.

As the philosophers would say: counting is an instance of potential
infinity. It is a process that can go on for ever (or at least, so it
seems to our naive pattern-recognising brains) but never _gets to_ ‘for
ever’.

The development of new mathematical ideas tends to follow a pattern. If
mathematicians were building a house, they would start with the
downstairs walls, hovering unsupported a foot or so above the damp-proof
course … or where the damp-proof course ought to be. There would be no
doors or windows, just holes of the right shape. By the time the second
floor was added, the quality of the brickwork would have improved
dramatically, the interior walls would be plastered, the doors and
windows would all be in place, and the floor would be strong enough to
walk on. The third floor would be vast, elaborate, fully carpeted, with
pictures on the walls, huge quantities of furniture of impressive but
inconsistent design, six types of wallpaper in every room … The attic,
in contrast, would be sparse but elegant – minimalist design, nothing
out of place, everything there for a reason. Then, and only then, would
they go back to ground level, dig the foundations, fill them with
concrete, stick in a damp-proof course, and extend the walls downwards
until they met the foundations.

At the end of it all you’d have a house that would stand up. Along the
way, it would have spent a lot of its existence looking wildly
improbable. But the builders, in their excitement to push the walls
skywards and fill the rooms with interior decor, would have been too
busy to notice until the building inspectors rubbed their noses in the
structural faults.

When new mathematical ideas first arise, no one understands them
terribly well, which is only natural because they’re _new_. And no one
is going to make a great deal of effort to sort out all the logical
refinements and make sense of those ideas unless they’re convinced it’s
all going to be worthwhile. So the main thrust of research goes into
developing those ideas and seeing if they lead anywhere interesting.
‘Interesting’, to a mathematician, mostly means ‘can I see ways to push
this stuff further?’, but the acid test is ‘what problems does it
solve?’ Only after getting a satisfactory answer to these questions do a
few hardy and pedantic souls descend into the basement and sort out
decent foundations.

So mathematicians were _using_ infinity long before they had a clue what
it was or how to handle it safely. In 500 BC Archimedes, the greatest of
the Greek mathematicians and a serious contender for a place in the
all-time top three, worked out the volume of a sphere by (conceptually)
slicing it into infinitely many infinitely thin discs, like an
ultra-thin sliced loaf, and hanging all the slices from a balance, to
compare their total volume with that of a suitable shape whose volume he
already knew. Once he’d worked out the answer by this astonishing
method, he started again and found a logically acceptable way to prove
he was right. But without all that faffing around with infinity, he
wouldn’t have known where to start and his logical proof wouldn’t have
got off the ground.

By the time of Leonhard Euler, an author so prolific that we might
consider him to be the Terry Pratchett of eighteenth-century
mathematics, many of the leading mathematicians were dabbling in
‘infinite series’ – the school child’s nightmare of _a sum that never
ends_. Here’s one:

1 + 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + 1/16 + 1/32 + …

where the ‘…’ means ‘keep going’. Mathematicians have concluded that if
this infinite sum adds up to anything sensible, then what it adds up to
must be exactly two.¹ If you stop at any finite stage, though, what you
reach is slightly less than two. But the amount by which it is less than
two keeps shrinking. The sum sort of sneaks up on the correct answer,
without actually getting there; but the amount by which it fails to get
there can be made as small as you please, by adding up enough terms.

Remind you of anything? It looks suspiciously similar to one of
Zeno/Xeno’s paradoxes. This is how the arrow sneaks up on its victim,
how Achilles sneaks up on the tortoise. It is how you can do infinitely
many things in a finite time. Do the first thing; do the second thing
one minute later; do the third thing half a minute after that; then the
fourth thing a quarter of a minute after _that_ … and so on. After two
minutes, you’ve done infinitely many things.

The realisation that infinite sums _can_ have a sensible meaning is only
the start. It doesn’t dispel all of the paradoxes. Mostly, it just
sharpens them. Mathematicians worked out that some infinities are
harmless, others are not.

The only problem left after that brilliant insight was: how do you tell?
The answer is that if your concept of infinity does not lead to logical
contradictions, then it’s safe to use, but if it does, then it isn’t.
Your task is to _give_ a sensible meaning to whatever ‘infinity’
intrigues you. You can’t just assume that it automatically makes sense.

Throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, mathematics
developed many notions of ‘infinity’, all of them potential. In
projective geometry, the ‘point at infinity’ was where two parallel
lines met: the trick was to draw them in perspective, like railway lines
heading off towards the horizon, in which case they appear to meet _on_
the horizon. But if the trains are running on a plane, the horizon is
infinitely far away and it isn’t actually part of the plane at all –
it’s an optical illusion. So the point ‘at’ infinity is determined by
the _process_ of travelling along the train tracks indefinitely. The
train never actually gets there. In algebraic geometry a circle ended up
being _defined_ as ‘a conic section that passes through the two
imaginary circular points at infinity’, which sure puts a pair of
compasses in their place.

There was an overall consensus among mathematicians, and it boiled down
to this. Whenever you use the term ‘infinity’ you are really thinking
about a process. If that process generates some well-determined
_result_, by however convoluted an interpretation you wish, then that
result gives meaning to your use of the word ‘infinity’, in that
particular context.

Infinity is a context-dependent process. It is potential.

It couldn’t stay that way.

David Hilbert was one of the top two mathematicians in the world at the
end of the nineteenth century, and he was one of the great enthusiasts
for a new approach to the infinite, in which – contrary to what we’ve
just told you – infinity is treated as a thing, not as a process. The
new approach was the brainchild of Georg Cantor, a German mathematician
whose work led him into territory that was fraught with logical snares.
The whole area was a confused mess for about a century (nothing new
there, then). Eventually he decided to sort it out for good and all by
burrowing downwards rather than building ever upwards, and putting in
those previously non-existent foundations. He wasn’t the only person
doing this, but he was among the more radical ones. He succeeded in
sorting out the area that drove him to these lengths, but only at the
expense of causing considerable trouble elsewhere.

Many mathematicians detested Cantor’s ideas, but Hilbert loved them, and
defended them vigorously. ‘No one,’ he declaimed, ‘shall expel us from
the paradise that Cantor has created.’ It is, to be sure, as much
paradox as paradise. Hilbert explained some of the paradoxical
properties of infinity à la Cantor in terms of a fictitious hotel, now
known as Hilbert’s Hotel.

Hilbert’s Hotel has infinitely many rooms. They are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4
and so on indefinitely. It is an instance of actual infinity – every
room exists _now_, they’re not still building room umpty-ump gazillion
and one. And when you arrive there, on Sunday morning, every room is
occupied.

In a finite hotel, even with umpty-ump gazillion and one rooms, you’re
in trouble. No amount of moving people around can create an extra room.
(To keep it simple, assume no sharing: each room has exactly one
occupant, and health and safety regulations forbid more than that.)

In Hilbert’s Hotel, however, there is always room for an extra guest.
Not in room infinity, though, for there is no such room. In room one.

But what about the poor unfortunate in room one? He gets moved to room
two. The person in room two is moved to room three. And so on. The
person in room umpty-ump gazillion is moved to room umpty-ump gazillion
and one. The person in room umpty-ump gazillion and one is moved to room
umpty-ump gazillion and two.

The person in room _n_ is moved to room _n_+1, for every number _n_.

In a finite hotel with umpty-ump gazillion and one rooms, this procedure
hits a snag. There is no room umpty-ump gazillion and two into which to
move its inhabitant. In Hilbert’s Hotel, there is no end to the rooms,
and everyone can move one place up. Once this move is completed, the
hotel is once again full.

That’s not all. On Monday, a coachload of 50 people arrives at the
completely full Hilbert Hotel. No worries: the manager moves everybody
up 50 places – room 1 to 51, room 2 to 52, and so on – which leaves
rooms 1–50 vacant for the people off the coach.

On Tuesday, an Infinity Tours coach arrives containing infinitely many
people, helpfully numbered Al, A2, A3, …. Surely there won’t be room
now? But there is. The existing guests are moved into the even-numbered
rooms: room 1 moves to room 2, room 2 to room 4, room 3 to room 6, and
so on. Then the odd-numbered rooms are free, and person A1 goes into
room 1, A2 into room 3, A3 into room 5 … Nothing to it.

By Wednesday, the manager is really tearing his hair out, because
_infinitely many_ Infinity Tours coaches turn up. The coaches are
labelled A, B, C, … from an infinitely long alphabet, and the people in
them are A1, A2, A3, …, B1, B2, B3, … C1, C2, C3, … and so on. But the
manager has a brainwave. In an infinitely large corner of the infinitely
large hotel parking lot, he arranges all the new guests into an
infinitely large square:

A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 …

B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 …

C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 …

D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 …

E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 …

…

Then he rearranges them into a single infinitely long line, in the order

A1 - A2 B1 - A3 B2 C1 - A4 B3 C2 D1 - A5 B4 C3 D2 E1 …

(To see the pattern, look along successive diagonals running from top
right to lower left. We’ve inserted hyphens to separate these.) What
most people would now do is move all the existing guests into the
even-numbered rooms, and then fill up the odd rooms with new guests, in
the order of the infinitely long line. That works, but there is a more
elegant method, and the manager, being a mathematician, spots it
immediately. He loads everybody back into a single Infinity Tours coach,
filling the seats in the order of the infinitely long line. This reduces
the problem to one that has already been solved.²

Hilbert’s Hotel tells us to be careful when making assumptions about
infinity. It may not behave like a traditional finite number. If you add
one to infinity, it doesn’t get bigger. If you multiply infinity by
infinity, it _still_ doesn’t get bigger. Infinity is like that. In fact,
it’s easy to conclude that _any_ sum involving infinity works out as
infinity, because you can’t get anything bigger than infinity.

That’s what everybody thought, which is fair enough if the only
infinities you’ve ever encountered are potential ones, approached as a
sequence of finite steps, but in principle going on for as long as you
wish. But in the 1880s Cantor was thinking about actual infinities, and
he opened up a veritable Pandora’s box of ever-larger infinities. He
called them _transfinite numbers_, and he stumbled across them when he
was working in a hallowed, traditional area of analysis. It was really
hard, technical stuff, and it led him into previously uncharted byways.
Musing deeply on the nature of these things, Cantor became diverted from
his work in his entirely respectable area of analysis, and started
thinking about something much more difficult.

Counting.

The usual way that we introduce numbers is by teaching children to
count. They learn that numbers are ‘things you use for counting’. For
instance, ‘seven’ is where you get to if you start counting with ‘one’
for Sunday and stop on Saturday. So the number of days in the week is
seven. But what manner of beast is seven? A word? No, because you could
use the symbol 7 instead. A symbol? But then, there’s the word … anyway,
in Japanese, the symbol for 7 is different. So what _is_ seven? It’s
easy to say what seven days, or seven sheep, or seven colours of the
spectrum are … but what about the _number_ itself? You never encounter a
naked ‘seven’, it always seems to be attached to some collection of
things.

Cantor decided to make a virtue of necessity, and declared that a number
was something associated with a set, or collection, of things. You can
put together a set from any collection of things whatsoever.
Intuitively, the number you get by counting tells you how many things
belong to that set. The set of days of the week determines the number
‘seven’. The wonderful feature of Cantor’s approach is this: you can
decide whether any other set has seven members _without_ counting
anything. To do this, you just have to try to match the members of the
sets, so that each member of one set is matched to precisely one of the
other. If, for instance, the second set is the set of colours of the
spectrum, then you might match the sets like this:

  ----------- ----------
  Sunday      Red
  Monday      Orange
  Tuesday     Yellow
  Wednesday   Green
  Thursday    Blue
  Friday      Violet³
  Saturday    Octarine
  ----------- ----------

The order in which the items are listed does not matter. But you’re not
allowed to match Tuesday with both Violet and Green, or Green with both
Tuesday and Sunday, in the same matching. Or to miss any members of the
sets out.

In contrast, if you try to match the days of the week with the elephants
that support the Disc, you run into trouble:

  ----------- --------------
  Sunday      Berilia
  Monday      Tubul
  Tuesday     Great T’Phon
  Wednesday   Jerakeen
  Thursday    ?
  ----------- --------------

More precisely, you run out of elephants. Even the legendary fifth
elephant fails to take you past Thursday.

Why the difference? Well, there are seven days in the week, and seven
colours of the spectrum, so you can match those sets. But there are only
four (perhaps once five) elephants, and you can’t match four or five
with seven.

The deep philosophical point here is that you don’t need to know about
the _numbers_ four, five or seven, to discover that there’s no way to
match the sets up. Talking about the numbers amounts to being wise after
the event. Matching is logically primary to counting.⁴ But now, all sets
that match each other can be assigned a common symbol, or ‘cardinal’,
which effectively is the corresponding number. The cardinal of the set
of days of the week is the symbol 7, for instance, and the same symbol
applies to any set that matches the days of the week. So we can base our
concept of number on the simpler one of matching.

So far, then, nothing new. But ‘matching’ makes sense for infinite sets,
not just finite ones. You can match the even numbers with all numbers:

  ---- ---
  2    1
  4    2
  6    3
  8    4
  10   5
  …     
  ---- ---

and so on. Matchings like this explain the goings-on in Hilbert’s Hotel.
That’s where Hilbert got the idea (roof before foundations, remember).

What is the cardinal of the set of all whole numbers (and hence of any
set that can be matched to it)? The traditional name is ‘infinity’.
Cantor, being cautious, preferred something with fewer mental
associations, and in 1883 he named it ‘aleph’, the first letter of the
Hebrew alphabet. And he put a small zero underneath it, for reasons that
will shortly transpire: aleph-zero.

He knew what he was starting: ‘I am well aware that by adopting such a
procedure I am putting myself in opposition to widespread views
regarding infinity in mathematics and to current opinions on the nature
of number.’ He got what he expected: a lot of hostility, especially from
Leopold Kronecker. ‘God created the integers: all else is the work of
Man,’ Kronecker declared.

Nowadays, most of us think that Man created the integers too.

Why introduce a new symbol (and Hebrew at that?). If there had been only
one infinity in Cantor’s sense, he might as well have named it
‘infinity’ like everyone else, and used the traditional symbol of a
figure 8 lying on its side. But he quickly saw that from his point of
view, there might well be other infinities, and he was reserving the
right to name those aleph-one, aleph-two, aleph-three, and so on.

How can there be _other_ infinities? This was the big unexpected
consequence of that simple, childish idea of matching. To describe how
it comes about, we need some way to talk about really big numbers.
Finite ones and infinite ones. To lull you into the belief that
everything is warm and friendly, we’ll introduce a simple convention.

If ‘umpty’ is any number, of whatever size, then ‘umptyplex’ will mean
10umpty, which is 1 followed by umpty zeros. So 2plex is 100, a hundred;
6plex is 1000000, a million; 9plex is a billion. When umpty = 100 we get
a googol, so googol = 100plex. A googolplex is therefore also
describable as 100plexplex.

In Cantorian mode, we idly start to muse about infinityplex. But let’s
be precise: what about aleph-zeroplex? What is 10aleph-zero?

Remarkably, it has an entirely sensible meaning. It is the cardinal of
the set of all real numbers – all numbers that can be represented as an
infinitely long decimal. Recall the Ephebian philosopher Pthagonal, who
is recorded as saying, ‘The diameter divides into the circumference … It
ought to be three times. But does it? No. Three point one four and lots
of other figures. There’s no end to the buggers.’ This, of course, is a
reference to the most famous real number, one that really does need
infinitely many decimal places to capture it exactly: π (‘pi’). To one
decimal place, π is 3.1. To two places, it is 3.14. To three places, it
is 3.141. And so on, ad infinitum.

There are plenty of real numbers other than π. How big is the phase
space of all real numbers?

Think about the bit after the decimal point. If we work to one decimal
place, there are 10 possibilities: any of the digits 0, 1, 2, …, 9. If
we work to two decimal places, there are 100 possibilities: 00 up to 99.
If we work to three decimal places, there are 1000 possibilities: 000 up
to 999.

The pattern is clear. If we work to umpty decimal places, there are
10umpty possibilities. That is, umptyplex.

If the decimal places go on ‘for ever’, we first must ask ‘what kind of
for ever?’ And the answer is ‘Cantor’s aleph-zero’, because there is a
first decimal place, a second, a third … the places match the whole
numbers. So if we set ‘umpty’ equal to ‘aleph-zero’, we find that the
cardinal of the set of all real numbers (ignoring anything before the
decimal point) is aleph-zeroplex. The same is true, for slightly more
complicated reasons, if we _include_ the bit before the decimal point.⁵

All very well, but presumably aleph-zeroplex is going to turn out to be
aleph-zero in heavy disguise, since all infinities surely must be equal?
No. They’re not. Cantor proved that you can’t match the real numbers
with the whole numbers. So aleph-zeroplex is a bigger infinity than
aleph-zero.

He went further. Much further. He proved⁶ that if umpty is any infinite
cardinal, the umptyplex is a bigger one. So aleph-zeroplexplex is bigger
still, and aleph-zeroplexplexplex is bigger than that, and …

There is no end to the list of Cantorian infinities. There is no
‘hyperinfinity’ that is bigger than all other infinities.

The idea of infinity as ‘the biggest possible number’ is taking some
hard knocks here. And this is the _sensible_ way to set up infinite
arithmetic.

If you start with any infinite cardinal aleph-umpty, then
aleph-umptyplex is bigger. It is natural to suppose that what you get
must be aleph-(umpty+1), a statement dubbed the Generalised Continuum
Hypothesis. In 1963 Paul Cohen (no known relation either to Jack or the
Barbarian) proved that … well, it depends. In some versions of set
theory it’s true, in others it’s false.

The foundations of mathematics are like that, which is why it’s best to
construct the house first and put the foundations in later. That way, if
you don’t like them, you can take them out again and put something else
in instead. Without disturbing the house.

This, then, is Cantor’s Paradise: an entirely new number system of
alephs, of infinities beyond measure, never-ending – in a very strong
sense of ‘never’. It arises entirely naturally from one simple
principle: that the technique of ‘matching’ is all you need to set up
the logical foundations of arithmetic. Most working mathematicians now
agree with Hilbert, and Cantor’s initially astonishing ideas have been
woven into the very fabric of mathematics.

The wizards don’t just have the mathematics of infinity to contend with.
They are also getting tangled up in the physics. Here, entirely new
questions about the infinite arise. Is the universe finite or infinite?
What _kind_ of finite or infinite? And what about all those parallel
universes that the cosmologists and quantum theorists are always talking
about? Even if each universe is finite, could there be infinitely many
parallel ones?

According to current cosmology, what we normally think of as the
universe is finite. It started as a single point in the Big Bang, and
then expanded at a finite rate for about 13 billion years, so it has to
be finite. Of course, it could be infinitely finely divisible, with no
lower limit to the sizes of things, just like the mathematician’s line
or plane – but quantum-mechanically speaking there is a definite
graininess down at the Planck length, so the universe has a very large
but finite number of possible quantum states.

The ‘many worlds’ version of quantum theory was invented by the
physicist Hugh Everett as a way to link the quantum view of the world to
our everyday ‘sensible’ view. It contends that whenever a choice can be
made – for example, whether an electron spin is up or down, or a cat is
alive or dead – the universe does not simply make a choice and abandon
all the alternatives. That’s what it looks like to us, but really the
universe makes _all possible_ choices. Innumerable ‘alternative’ or
‘parallel’ worlds branch off from the one that we perceive. In those
worlds, things happen that did not happen here. In one of them, Adolf
Hitler won the Second World War. In another, you ate one extra olive at
dinner last night.

Narratively speaking, the many worlds description of the quantum realm
is a delight. No author in search of impressive scientific gobbledegook
that can justify hurling characters into alternative storylines – we
plead guilty – can possibly resist.

The trouble is that, as science, the many-worlds interpretation is
rather overrated. Certainly, the usual way that it is described is
misleading. In fact, rather too much of the physics of multiple
universes is usually explained in a misleading way. This is a pity,
because it trivialises a profound and beautiful set of ideas. The
suggestion that there exists a real universe, somehow adjacent to ours,
in which Hitler defeated the Allies, is a big turn-off for a lot of
people. It sounds too absurd even to be worth considering. ‘If that’s
what modern physics is about, I’d prefer my tax dollars to go towards
something useful, like reflexology.’

The science of ‘the’ multiverse – there are numerous alternatives, which
is only appropriate – is fascinating. Some of it is even useful. And
some – not necessarily the useful bit – might even be true. Though not,
we will try to convince you, the bit about Hitler.

It all started with the discovery that quantum behaviour can be
represented mathematically as a Big Sum. What actually happens is the
sum of all of the things that might have happened. Richard Feynman
explained this with his usual extreme clarity in his book _QED_ (Quantum
Electro Dynamics, not Euclid). Imagine a photon, a particle of light,
bouncing off a mirror. You can work out the path that the photon follows
by ‘adding up’ all possible paths that it might have taken. What you
really add is the levels of brightness, the light intensities, not the
paths. A path is a concentrated strip of brightness, and here that strip
hits the mirror and bounces back at the same angle.

This ‘sum-over-histories’ technique is a direct mathematical consequence
of the rules of quantum mechanics, and there’s nothing objectionable or
even terribly surprising about it. It works because all of the ‘wrong’
paths interfere with each other, and between them they contribute
virtually nothing to the overall sum. All that survives, as the totals
come in, is the ‘right’ path. You can take this unobjectionable
mathematical fact and dress it up with a physical interpretation.
Namely: light _really_ takes all possible paths, but what we observe is
the sum, so we just see the one path in which the light ‘ray’ hits the
mirror and bounces off again at the same angle.

That interpretation is also not terribly objectionable, philosophically
speaking, but it verges into territory that is. Physicists have a habit
of taking mathematical descriptions literally – not just the
conclusions, but the steps employed to get them. They call this
‘thinking physically’, but actually it’s the reverse: it amounts to
projecting mathematical features on to the real world – ‘reifying’
abstractions, endowing them with reality.

We’re not saying it doesn’t _work_ – often it does. But reification
tends to make physicists bad philosophers, because they forget they’re
doing it.

One problem with ‘thinking physically’ is that there are sometimes
several mathematically equivalent ways to describe something – different
ways to say exactly the same thing in mathematical language. If one of
them is true, they all are. But, their natural physical interpretations
can be inconsistent.

A good example arises in classical (non-quantum) mechanics. A moving
particle can be described using (one of) Newton’s laws of motion: the
particle’s acceleration is proportional to the forces that act on it.
Alternatively, the motion can be described in terms of a ‘variational
principle’: associated with each possible particle path there is a
quantity called the ‘action’. The actual path that the particle follows
is the one that makes the action as small as possible.

The logical equivalence of Newton’s laws and the principle of least
action is a mathematical theorem. You cannot accept one without
accepting the other, on a mathematical level. Don’t worry what ‘action’
is. It doesn’t matter here. What matters is the difference between the
natural interpretations of these two logically identical descriptions.

Newton’s laws of motion are local rules. What the particle does next,
here and now, is entirely determined by the forces that act on it, here
and now. No foresight or intelligence is needed; just keep on obeying
the local rules.

The principle of least action has a different style: it is global. It
tells us that in order to move from A to B, the particle must somehow
contemplate the totality of all possible paths between those points. It
must work out the action associated with each path, and find whichever
one of them has the smallest action. This ‘computation’ is non-local,
because it involves the entire path(s), and in some sense it has to be
carried out _before the particle knows where to go_. So in this natural
interpretation of the mathematics, the particle appears to be endowed
with miraculous foresight and the ability to choose, a rudimentary kind
of intelligence.

So which is it? A mindless lump of matter which obeys the local rules as
it goes along? Or a quasi-intelligent entity with vast computational
powers, which has the foresight to choose, among all the possible paths
that it could have taken, precisely the unique one that minimises the
action?

We know which interpretation we’d choose.

Interestingly, the principle of least action is a mechanical analogue of
Feynman’s sum-over-histories method in optics. The two really are
extremely close. Yes, you can formulate the mathematics of quantum
mechanics in a way that seems to imply that light follows all possible
paths and adds them up. But you are not obliged to buy that description
as the real physics of the real world, even if the mathematics works.

The many-worlds enthusiasts do buy that description: in fact, they take
it much further. Not the history of a single photon bouncing off a
mirror, but the history of the entire universe. That, too, is a sum of
all possibilities – using the universe’s quantum wave function in place
of the light intensity due to the photon – so by the same token, we can
interpret the mathematics in a similarly dramatic way. Namely: the
universe really does do all possible things. What we observe is what
happens when you add all those possibilities up.

Of course there’s also a less dramatic interpretation: the universe
trundles along obeying the local laws of quantum mechanics, and does
exactly _one_ thing … which just happens, for purely mathematical
reasons, to equal the sum of all the things that it might have done.

Which interpretation do you buy?

Mathematically, if one is ‘right’ then so is the other. Physically,
though, they carry very different implications about how the world
works. Our point is that, as for the classical particle, their
mathematical equivalence does not require you to accept their physical
truth as descriptions of reality. Any more than the equivalence of
Newton’s laws with the principle of least action obliges you to believe
in intelligent particles that can predict the future.

The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, then, is resting on
dodgy ground even though its mathematical foundations are impeccable.
But the usual presentation of that interpretation goes further, by
adding a hefty dose of narrativium. This is precisely what appeals to SF
authors, but it’s a pity that it stretches the interpretation well past
breaking-point.

What we are usually told is this. At every instant of time, whenever a
choice has to be made, the universe splits into a series of ‘parallel
worlds’ in which each of the choices happens. Yes, in this world you got
up, had cornflakes for breakfast, and walked to work. But somewhere ‘out
there’ in the vastness of the multiverse, there is another universe in
which you had kippers for breakfast, which made you leave the house a
minute later, so that when you walked across the road you had an
argument with a bus, and lost, fatally.

What’s wrong here is not, strangely enough, the contention that this
world is ‘really’ a sum of many others. Perhaps it is, on a quantum
level of description. Why not? But it is wrong to describe those
alternative worlds in human terms, as scenarios where everything follows
a narrative that makes sense to the human mind. As worlds where ‘bus’ or
‘kipper’ have any meaning at all. And it is even less justifiable to
pretend that every single one of those parallel worlds is a minor
variation on this one, in which some human-level choice happens
differently.

If those parallel worlds exist at all, they are described by changing
various components of a quantum wave function whose complexity is beyond
human comprehension. The results need not resemble humanly
comprehensible scenarios. Just as the sound of a clarinet can be
decomposed into pure tones, but most combinations of those tones do not
correspond to any clarinet.

The natural components of the human world are buses and kippers. The
natural components of the quantum wave function of the world are not the
quantum wave functions of buses and kippers. They are altogether
different, and they carve up reality in a different way. They flip
electron spins, rotate polarisations, shift quantum phases.

They do not turn cornflakes into kippers.

It’s like taking a story and making random changes to the letters,
shifting words around, probably changing the instructions that the
printer uses to make the letters, so that they correspond to no alphabet
known to humanity. Instead of starting with the Ankh-Morpork national
anthem and getting the Hedgehog Song, you just get a meaningless jumble.
Which is perhaps as well.

According to Max Tegmark, writing in the May 2003 issue of _Scientific
American_, physicists currently recognise four distinct levels of
parallel universes. At the first level, some distant region of the
universe replicates, almost exactly, what is going on in our own region.
The second level involves more or less isolated ‘bubbles’, baby
universes, in which various attributes of the physical laws, such as the
speed of light, are different, though the basic laws are the same. The
third level is Everett’s many-worlds quantum parallelism. The fourth
includes universes with radically different physical laws – not mere
variations on the theme of our own universe, but totally distinct
systems described by every conceivable mathematical structure.

Tegmark makes a heroic attempt to convince us that all of these levels
really do exist – that they make testable predictions, are
scientifically falsifiable if wrong, and so on. He even manages to
reinterpret Occam’s razor, the philosophical principle that explanations
should be kept as simple as possible, to support his view.

All of this, speculative as it may seem, is good frontier cosmology and
physics. It’s exactly the kind of theorising that a _Science of
Discworld_ book ought to discuss: imaginative, mind-boggling,
cutting-edge. We’ve come to the reluctant conclusion, though, that the
arguments have serious flaws. This is a pity, because the concept of
parallel worlds is dripping with enough narrativium to make any SF
author out-salivate Pavlov’s dogs.

We’ll summarise Tegmark’s main points, describe some of the evidence
that he cites in their favour, offer a few criticisms, and leave you to
form your own opinions.

Level 1 parallel worlds arise if – because – space is infinite. Not so
far back we told you it is finite, because the Big Bang happened a
finite time ago so it’s not had time to expand to an infinite extent.⁷
Apparently, though, data on the cosmic microwave background do not
support a finite universe. Even though a very large finite one would
generate the same data.

‘Is there a copy of you reading this article?’ Tegmark asks. Assuming
the universe is infinite, he tells us that ‘even the most unlikely
events must take place somewhere’. A copy of you is likelier than many,
so it must happen. Where? A straightforward calculation indicates that
‘you have a twin in a galaxy about 10 to the power 10²⁸ metres from
here’. Not 10²⁸ metres, which is already 25 times the size of the
currently observable universe, but 1 followed by 10²⁸ zeros. Not only
that: a complete copy of (the observable part of) our universe should
exist about 10 to the power 10¹¹⁸ metres away. And beyond that …

We need a good way to talk about very big numbers. Symbols like 10¹¹⁸
are too formal. Writing out all the zeros is pointless, and usually
impossible. The universe is big, and the multiverse is substantially
bigger. Putting numbers to _how_ big is not entirely straightforward,
and finding something that can also be typeset is even harder.

Fortunately, we’ve already solved that problem with our earlier
convention: if ‘umpty’ is any number, then ‘umptyplex’ will mean
10umpty, which is 1 followed by umpty zeros.

When umpty = 118 we get 118plex, which is roughly the number of protons
in the universe. When umpty is 118plex we get 118plexplex, which is the
number that Tegmark is asking us to think about, 10 to the power 10 to
the power 118. Those numbers arise because a ‘Hubble volume’ of space –
one the size of the observable universe – has a large but finite number
of possible quantum states.

The quantum world is grainy, with a lower limit to how far space and
time can be divided. So a sufficiently large region of space will
contain such a vast number of Hubble volumes that every one of those
quantum states can be accommodated. Specifically, a Hubble volume
contains 118plex protons. Each has two possible quantum states. That
means there are 2 to the power 118plex possible configurations of
quantum states of protons. One of the useful rules in this type of
mega-arithmetic is that the ‘lowest’ number in the plexified stack –
here 2 – can be changed to something more convenient, such as 10,
without greatly affecting the top number. So, in round numbers, a region
118plexplex metres across can contain one copy of each Hubble volume.

Level 2 worlds arise on the assumption that spacetime is a kind of foam,
in which each bubble constitutes a universe. The main reason for
believing this is ‘inflation’, a theory that explains why our universe
is relativistically flat. In a period of inflation, space rapidly
stretches, and it can stretch so far that the two ends of the stretched
bit become independent of each other because light can’t get from one to
the other fast enough to connect them causally. So spacetime ends up as
a foam, and each bubble probably has its own variant of the laws of
physics – with the same basic mathematical form, but different
constants.

Level 3 parallel worlds are those that appear in the many-worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics, which we’ve already tackled.

Everything described so far pales into insignificance when we come to
level 4. Here, the various universes involved can have radically
different laws of physics from each other. All conceivable mathematical
structures, Tegmark tells us, exist here:

How about a universe that obeys the laws of classical physics, with no
quantum effects? How about time that comes in discrete steps, as for
computers, instead of being continuous? How about a universe that is
simply an empty dodecahedron? In the level IV multiverse, all these
alternative realities actually exist.

But do they?

In science, you get evidence from observations or from experiments.

Direct observational tests of Tegmark’s hypothesis are completely out of
the question, at least until some remarkable spacefaring technology
comes into being. The observable universe extends no more than 27plex
metres from the Earth. An object (even the size of our visible universe)
that is 118plexplex metres away cannot be observed now, and no
conceivable improvement on technology can get round that. It would be
easier for a bacterium to observe the entire known universe than for a
human to observe an object 118plexplex metre away.

We are sympathetic to the argument that the impossibility of direct
experimental tests does not make the theory unscientific. There is no
_direct_ way to test the previous existence of dinosaurs, or the timing
(or occurrence) of the Big Bang. We infer these things from indirect
evidence. So what indirect evidence is there for infinite space and
distant copies of our own world?

Space is infinite, Tegmark says, because the cosmic microwave background
tells us so. If space were finite, then traces of that finitude would
show up in the statistical properties of the cosmic background and the
various frequencies of radiation that make it up.

This is a curious argument. Only a year or so ago, some mathematicians
used certain statistical features of the cosmic microwave background to
deduce that not only is the universe finite, but that it is shaped a bit
like a football.⁸ There is a paucity of very long-wavelength radiation,
and the best reason for not finding it is that the universe is too small
to accommodate such wavelengths. Just as a guitar string a metre long
cannot support a vibration with a wavelength of 100 metres – there isn’t
room to fit the wave into the available space.

The main other item of evidence is of a very different nature – not an
observation as such, but an observation about how we interpret
observations. Cosmologists who analyse the microwave background to work
out the shape and size of the universe habitually report their findings
in the form ‘there is a probability of one in a thousand that such and
such a shape and size could be consistent with the data’. Meaning that
with 99.9 per cent probability we rule out that size and shape. Tegmark
tells us that one way to interpret this is that at most one Hubble
volume in a thousand, of that size and shape, would exhibit the observed
data. ‘The lesson is that the multiverse theory can be tested and
falsified even when we cannot see the other universes. The key is to
predict what the ensemble of parallel universes is and to specify a
probability distribution over that ensemble.’

This is a remarkable argument. Fatally, it confuses actual Hubble
volumes with potential ones. For example, if the size and shape under
consideration is ‘a football about 27plex metres across’ – a fair guess
for our own Hubble volume – then the ‘one in a thousand’ probability is
a calculation based on a potential array of one thousand footballs of
that size. These are not part of a single infinite universe: they are
distinct conceptual ‘points’ in a phase space of big footballs. If you
lived in such a football and made such observations, then you’d expect
to get the observed data on about one occasion in a thousand.

There is nothing in this statement that compels us to infer the actual
existence of those thousand footballs – let alone to embed the lot in a
single, bigger space, which is what we are being asked to do. in effect,
Tegmark is asking us to accept a general principle: that whenever you
have a phase space (statisticians would say a sample space) with a
well-defined probability distribution, then everything in that phase
space must be real.

This is plain wrong.

A simple example shows why. Suppose that you toss a coin a hundred
times. You get a series of tosses something like HHTTTHH … TTHH. The
phase space of all possible such tosses contains precisely 2¹⁰⁰ such
sequences. Assuming the coin is fair, there is a sensible way to assign
a probability to each such sequence – namely the chance of getting it is
one in 2¹⁰⁰. And you can test that ‘distribution’ of probabilities in
various indirect ways. For instance, you can carry out a million
experiments, each yielding a series of 100 tosses, and count what
proportion has 50 heads and 50 tails, or 49 heads and 51 tails,
whatever. Such an experiment is entirely feasible.

If Tegmark’s principle is right, it now tells us that the entire phase
space of coin-tossing sequences _really does exist_. Not as a
mathematical concept, but as physical reality.

However, coins do not toss themselves. Someone has to toss them.

If you could toss 100 coins every second, it would take about 24plex
years to generate 2¹⁰⁰ experiments. That is roughly 100 trillion times
the age of the universe. Coins have been in existence for only a few
thousand years. The phase space of all sequences of 100 coin tosses is
_not_ real. It exists only as potential.

Since Tegmark’s principle doesn’t work for coins, it makes no sense to
suppose that it works for universes.

The evidence advanced in favour of level 4 parallel worlds is even
thinner. It amounts to a mystical appeal to Eugene Wigner’s famous
remark about ‘the unusual effectiveness of mathematics’ as a description
of physical reality. In effect, Tegmark tells us that if we can imagine
something, then it has to exist.

We can imagine a purple hippopotamus riding a bicycle along the edge of
the Milky Way while singing Monteverdi. It would be lovely if that meant
it had to exist, but at some point a reality check is in order.

We don’t want to leave you with the impression that we enjoy pouring
cold water over every imaginative attempt to convey a feeling for some
of the remarkable concepts of modern cosmology and physics. So we’ll end
with a very recent addition to the stable of parallel worlds, which has
quite a few things going for it. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the main thing
_not_ currently going for it is a shred of experimental evidence.

The new theory on the block is string theory. It provides a
philosophically sensible answer to the age-old question: why are we
here? And it does so by invoking gigantic numbers of parallel universes.

It is just much more careful how it handles them.

Our source is an article, ‘The String Theory Landscape’ by Raphael
Bousso and Joseph Polchinski, in the September 2004 issue of _Scientific
American_ – a special issue on the theme of Albert Einstein.

If there is a single problem that occupies the core of modern physics,
it is that of unifying quantum mechanics with relativity. This search
for a ‘theory of everything’ is needed because although both of those
theories are extraordinarily successful in helping us to understand and
predict various aspects of the natural world, they are not totally
consistent with each other. Finding a consistent, unified theory is
hard, and we don’t yet have one. But there’s one mathematically
attractive attempt, string theory, which is conceptually appealing even
though there’s no observational evidence for it.

String theory holds that what we usually consider to be individual
points of spacetime, dimensionless dots with no interesting structure of
their own, are actually very, very tiny multidimensional surfaces with
complicated shapes. The standard analogy is a garden hose. Seen from
some way off, a hose looks like a line, which is a one-dimensional space
– the dimension being distance along the hose. Look more closely,
though, and you see that the hose has two extra dimensions, at right
angles to that line, and that its shape in those directions is a
circular band.

Maybe our own universe is a bit like that hosepipe. Unless we look very
closely, all we see is three dimensions of space plus one of time –
relativity. An awful lot of physics is observed in those dimensions
alone, so phenomena of that type have a nice four-dimensional
description – relativity again. But other things might happen along
extra ‘hidden’ dimensions, like the thickness of the hose. For instance,
suppose that at each point of the apparent four-dimensional spacetime,
what seems to be a point is actually a tiny circle, sticking out at
right angles to spacetime itself. That circle could vibrate. If so, then
it would resemble the quantum description of a particle. Particles have
various ‘quantum numbers’ such as spin. These numbers occur as whole
number multiples of some basic amount. So do vibrations of a circle:
either one wave fits into the circle, or two, or three … but not two and
a quarter, say.

This is why it’s called ‘string theory’. Each point of spacetime is
replaced by a tiny loop of string.

In order to reconstruct something that agrees with quantum theory,
however, we can’t actually use a circular string. There are too many
distinct quantum numbers, and plenty of other problems that have to be
overcome. The suggestion is that instead of a circle, we have to use a
more complicated, higher-dimensional shape, known as a ‘brane’.⁹ Think
of this as a surface, only more so. There are many distinct topological
types of surface: a sphere, a doughnut, two doughnuts joined together,
three doughnuts … and in more dimensions than two, there are more exotic
possibilities.

Particles correspond to tiny closed strings that loop around the brane.
There are lots of different ways to loop a string round a doughnut –
once through the hole, twice, three times … The physical laws depend on
the shape of the brane and the paths followed by these loops.

The current favourite brane has six dimensions, making ten in all. The
extra dimensions are thought to be curled up very tightly, smaller than
the Planck length, which is the size at which the universe becomes
grainy. It is virtually impossible to observe anything that small,
because the graininess blurs everything and the fine detail cannot be
seen. So there’s no hope of observing any extra dimensions directly.
However, there are several ways to infer their presence indirectly. In
fact, the recently discovered acceleration in the rate of expansion of
the universe can be explained in that manner. Of course, this
explanation may not be correct: we need more evidence.

The ideas here change almost by the day, so we don’t have to commit
ourselves to the currently favoured six-dimensional set-up. We can
contemplate any number of different branes and differently arranged
loops. Each choice – call it a loopy brane – has a particular energy,
related to the shape of the brane, how tightly it is curled up, and how
tightly the loops wind round it. This energy is the ‘vacuum energy’ of
the associated physical theory. In quantum mechanics, a vacuum is a
seething mass of particles and anti-particles coming into existence for
a brief instant before they collide and annihilate each other again. The
vacuum energy measures how violently they seethe. We can use the vacuum
energy to infer which loopy brane corresponds to our own universe, whose
vacuum energy is extraordinarily small. Until recently it was thought to
be zero, but it’s now thought to be about l/120plex units, where a unit
is one Planck mass per cubic Planck length, which is a googol grammes
per cubic metre.

We now encounter a cosmic ‘three bears’ story. Macho Daddy Bear prefers
a vacuum energy larger than +l/118plex units, but such a spacetime would
be subject to local expansions far more energetic than a supernova.
Wimpy Mummy Bear prefers a vacuum energy smaller than −l/120plex units
(note the minus sign), but then spacetime contracts in a cosmic crunch
and disappears. Baby Bear and Goldilocks like their vacuum energy to be
‘just right’: somewhere in the incredibly tiny range between +1/118plex
and − 1/120plex units. That is the Goldilocks zone in which life as we
know it might possibly exist.

It is no coincidence that we inhabit a universe whose vacuum energy lies
in the Goldilocks zone, because we _are_ life as we know it. If we lived
in any other kind of universe, we would be life as we don’t know it. Not
impossible, but not us.

This is our old friend the anthropic principle, employed in an entirely
sensible way to relate the way we function to the kind of universe that
we need to function in. The deep question here is not ‘why do we live in
a universe like that?’, but ‘why does there _exist_ a universe like
that, for us to live in?’ This is the vexed issue of cosmological
fine-tuning, and the improbability of a random universe hitting just the
right numbers is often used to prove that something – they always say
‘We don’t know, could be an alien,’ but what they’re all thinking is:
‘God’ – must have set our universe up to be just right for us.

The string theorists are made of sterner stuff, and they have a more
sensible answer.

In 2000 Bousso and Polchinski combined string theory with an earlier
idea of Steven Weinberg to explain why we shouldn’t be surprised that a
universe with the right level of vacuum energy exists. Their basic idea
is that the phase space of possible universes is absolutely gigantic. It
is bigger than, say, 500plex. Those 500plex universes distribute their
vacuum energies densely in the range -1 to +1 units. The resulting
numbers are much more closely packed than the l/118plex units that
determine the scale of the ‘acceptable’ range of vacuum energies for
life as we know it. Although only a very tiny proportion of those
500plex universes fall inside that range, there are so many of them that
that a tiny proportion is still absolutely gigantic – here, around
382plex. So a whacking great 382plex universes, from a phase space of
500plex loopy branes, are capable of supporting our kind of life.

However, that’s still a very small proportion. If you pick a loopy brane
at random, the odds are overwhelmingly great that it won’t fall inside
the Goldilocks range.

Not a problem. The string theorists have an answer to that. If you wait
long enough, such a universe will necessarily come into being. In fact,
_all_ universes in the phase space of loopy branes will eventually
become the ‘real’ universe. And when the real universe’s loopy brane
gets into the Goldilocks range, the inhabitants of that universe will
not know about all that waiting. Their sense of time will start from the
instant when that particular loopy brane first occurred.

String theory not only tells us that we’re here because we’re here – it
explains why a suitable ‘here’ must exist.

The reason why all of those 500plex or so universes can legitimately be
considered ‘real’ in string theory stems from two features of that
theory. The first is a systematic way to describe all the possible loopy
branes that _might_ occur. The second invokes a bit of quantum to
explain why, in the long run, they _will_ occur. Briefly: the phase
space of loopy branes can be represented as an ‘energy landscape’, which
we’ll name the _branescape_. Each position in the landscape corresponds
to one possible choice of loopy brane; the height at that point
corresponds to the associated vacuum energy.

Peaks of the branescape represent loopy branes with high vacuum energy,
valleys represent loopy branes with low vacuum energy. Stable loopy
branes lie in the valleys. Universes whose hidden dimensions look like
those particular loopy branes are themselves stable … so these are the
ones that _can_ exist, physically, for more than a split second.

In hilly districts of the branescape, the landscape is rugged, meaning
that it has a lot of peaks and valleys. They get closer together than
elsewhere, but they are still generally isolated from each other. The
branescape is very rugged indeed, and it has a huge number of valleys.
But all of the valleys’ vacuum energies have to fit inside the range
from -1 units to +1 units. With so many numbers to pack in, they get
squashed very close together.

In order for a universe to support life as we know it, the vacuum energy
has to lie in the Goldilocks zone where everything is just right. And
there are so many loopy branes that a huge number of them must have
vacuum energies that fall inside it:

Vastly more will fall outside that range, but never mind.

The theory has one major advantage: it explains why our universe has
such a small vacuum energy, without requiring it to be zero – which, we
now know, it isn’t.

The upshot of all the maths, then, is that every stable universe sits in
some valley of the branescape, and an awful lot of them (though a tiny
proportion of the whole) lie in the Goldilocks range. But all of those
universes are potential, not actual. There is only one real universe. So
if we merely pick a loopy brane at random, the chance of hitting the
Goldilocks zone is pretty much zero. You wouldn’t bet on a horse at
those odds, let alone a universe.

Fortunately, good old quantum gallops to our rescue. Quantum systems
can, and do, ‘tunnel’ from one energy valley to another. The uncertainty
principle lets them borrow enough energy to do that, and then pay it
back so quickly that the corresponding uncertainty about timing prevents
anyone noticing. So, if you wait long enough – umptyplexplexplex years,
perhaps, or umptyplexplexplexplex if that’s too short – then a single
quantum universe will explore every valley in the entire branescape.
Along the way, at some stage it finds itself in a Goldilocks valley.
Life like ours then arises, and wonders why it’s there.

It’s not aware of the umptyplexplexplexplex years that have already
passed in the multiverse: just of the few billion that have passed since
the wandering universe tunnelled its way into the Goldilocks range. Now,
and only now, do its human-like inhabitants start to ask why it’s
possible for them to exist, given such ridiculous odds to the contrary.
Eventually, if they’re bright enough, they work out that thanks to the
branescape and quantum, the true odds are a dead certainty.

It’s a beautiful story, even if it turns out to be wrong.

¹ To see why, double it: the result now is 2 + 1 + ½ + ¼ + ⅛ + [entity]
+ … which is 2 more than the original sum. What number increases by 2
when you double it? There’s only one such number, and it’s 2.

² If you’ve never encountered the mathematical joke, here it is. Problem
1: a kettle is hanging on a peg. Describe the sequence of events needed
to make a pot of tea. Answer: take the kettle off the peg, put it in the
sink, turn on the tap, wait till the kettle fills with water, turn the
tap off … and so on. Problem 2: a kettle is sitting in the sink.
Describe the sequence of events needed to make a pot of tea. Answer:
_not_ ‘turn on the tap, wait till the kettle fills with water, turn the
tap off … and so on’. Instead: take the kettle out of the sink and _hang
it on the peg_; then proceed as before. This reduces the problem to one
that has already been solved. (Of course the first step puts it back in
the sink – that’s why it’s a joke.)

³ Yes, traditionally ‘Indigo’ goes here, but that’s silly – Indigo is
just another shade of blue. You could equally well insert ‘Turquoise’
between Green and Blue. Indigo was just included because seven is more
mystical than six. Rewriting history, we find that we have left a place
for Octarine, the Discworld’s eighth colour. Well, seventh, actually.
Septarine, anyone?

⁴ This is why, even today when the lustre of ‘the new mathematics’ has
all but worn to dust, small children in mathematics classes spend hours
drawing squiggly lines between circles containing pictures of cats to
circles containing pictures of flowers, busily ‘matching’ the two sets.
Neither the children nor their teachers have the foggiest idea _why_
they are doing this. In fact they’re doing it because, decades ago, a
bunch of demented educators couldn’t understand that just because
something is _logically_ prior to another, it may not be sensible to
teach them in that order. Real mathematicians, who knew that you always
put the roof on the house _before_ you dug the foundation trench, looked
on in bemused horror.

⁵ Briefly: since the bit before the decimal point is a whole number,
taking that into account multiplies the answer by aleph-zero. Now
aleph-zero X aleph-zeroplex is less than or equal to aleph-zeroplex X
aleph-zeroplex, which is (2 X aleph-zero)plex, which is aleph-zeroplex.
OK?

⁶ The proof isn’t hard, but it’s sophisticated. If you want to see it,
consult a textbook on the foundations of mathematics.

⁷ Curiously, it could expand to infinity in a finite time if it
accelerated sufficiently rapidly. Expand by one light-year after one
minute, by another light-year after half a minute, by another after a
quarter of a minute … do a Zeno, and after two minutes, you have an
infinite universe. But it’s not expanding that fast, and no one thinks
it did so in the past, either.

⁸ Actually a more sophisticated gadget called the Poincaré dodecahedral
space, a slightly weird shape invented more than a century ago to show
that topology is not as simple as we’d like it to be. But people
understand ‘football’.

⁹ Derived from a pun: _m_-brane for ‘membrane’. Opening up jokes about
no-branes and _p_-branes. Oh well.

FIFTEEN

AUDITORS OF REALITY

[image]IT WAS ONE HOUR LATER. Wizards were ranged in rows across the
width of the Great Hall in a variety of costumes, but mostly in what
might be called Early Trouser; despite Rincewind’s view on nudity, a
grubby shirt and pants would pass without comment in many ages and
countries and lead to fewer arrests.

‘Right, then,’ said Ridcully, striding along the ranks ‘We’ve kept all
this _very_ simple so that even _professors_ can understand! Ponder
Stibbons has given all of you your tasks!’ He stopped in front of a
middle-aged wizard. ‘You, sir, who are you?’

‘Don’t you know, sir?’ said the wizard, taken aback.

‘Slipped m’ mind, man!’ said Ridcully. ‘Big university, can’t be
expected to recognise _everyone_!’

‘It’s Pennysmart, sir. Professor of Extreme Horticulture.’

‘Any good at it?’

‘Yes, sir!’

‘Any students?’

‘No, sir!’ said Pennysmart, looking offended.

‘That’s what I like to hear! And what will you be doin’ today?’

‘First, it appears, I shall be dropped waist-deep in a lagoon in the,
the –’ he stopped, and fumbled a piece of paper out of his pocket ‘–
Keeling Islands, where I shall attack the sand bottom round me with this
rake,’ he held up the implement, ‘and then return here as soon as I see
any humans.’

‘And how will you do that?’

‘Say aloud, “Return Me, Hex”,’ said Pennysmart, smartly.

‘Well done, good man,’ said the Archchancellor. He raised his voice.
‘Remember that, everyone! Exactly those words! Write them down if you
can’t remember them. Hex will bring you back on the lawn _outside_ the
building. There will be hundreds of you and many of you have several
tasks, so we don’t want any collisions! Now, if—’

‘Excuse me,’ said Pennysmart, raising a hand.

‘Yes?’

‘_Why_ will I be standing in a lagoon flailing around with a rake,
please?’

‘Because if you don’t do that, Darwin will tread on the dorsal spine of
an extremely poisonous fish,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘Now—’

‘Excuse me again, please,’ Pennysmart said.

‘Yes?’

‘Why won’t _I_ tread on this fish?’

‘Because _you_ will be lookin’ where you are treadin’, Mr Pennysmart,’
roared Ridcully.

But a forest of other hands had gone up. About the only wizard without a
hand aloft was Rincewind, who was staring gloomily at his feet.

‘What’s all this about?’ said the Archchancellor, irritably.

‘_Why have I got to move a chair six inches?_’

‘_Why have I got to fill up a hole in the middle of a prairie?_’

‘_Why have I got to hide a pair of trousers?_’

‘_Why have I got to stuff a letter box full of starved snails?_’

Ponder waved his clipboard wildly to silence the clamour.

‘Because otherwise Darwin would have fallen off a chair or been thrown
from a horse or would have been struck by a stone hurled by a rioter or
an unwise letter would have reached its destination,’ he said. ‘But
there are more than two thousand tasks, so I can’t explain _every_ one.
Some of them are the start of a quite astonishing causal chain.’

‘We are supposed to develop questioning minds, you know,’ someone
muttered.

‘Yes, but not regarding university policy!’ said Ridcully. ‘You all have
very simple jobs to do! Gentlemen, Mr Stibbons will call out your names,
and you will step smartly into the circle! Over to you, Mr Stibbons!’

Ponder Stibbons picked up a different clipboard. He was beginning to
collect clipboards. They proclaimed order in an increasingly
hard-to-understand world. That’s all I’ve ever really wanted, he
thought. I just want to feel that things are being ticked off properly.

‘Now, chaps,’ he said. ‘This should not be hard, as the Archchancellor
has said. If at all possible don’t talk to anyone and don’t touch
anything. In and out, that’s the ticket. I want this done fast. I have a
… theory about that. So don’t waste time, wherever you go. Are we all
ready? Very well … Aardvarker, Professor A …’

One by one, with confidence or trepidation or a mixture of both, wizards
stepped into Hex’s circle of light and vanished. As they did so, little
pointy-hatted wizard symbols appeared at points in the tangle of lights
above.

Rincewind watched gloomily, and didn’t join in the ragged cheer as, one
by one, red circles began to wink out.

Ponder had taken him aside earlier and had explained that, since
Rincewind was so experienced at this sort of thing, he was going to be
given four of the most, er, interesting tasks. That was how he had put
it: ‘er, interesting’. Rincewind knew all about ‘er, interesting’. There
was a giant squid out there with his name on it, that’s what it meant.

A movement at the end on the hall made him look around. It was a chest,
a metal-bound box of the kind favoured by people who bury treasure, and
it walked on hundreds of little pink legs. He groaned. He’d left it
asleep on the wardrobe in his bedroom, with its feet in the air.

‘Hmm?’ he said.

‘Rincewind! Off you go, best of luck!’ Ponder repeated. ‘Hurry up!’

There was nothing for it. Rincewind walked into the circle, and fell
over as the ship moved gently under him.

It was dawn, and a clammy sea mist was drifting across the deck. Rigging
creaked, the water lapped far below. There was no other sound. The air
smelled warm and exotic.

There was a small cannon only a few feet away. Rincewind knew about
them. He was the only wizard to have seen one, over in the Agatean
Empire, where they were known as ‘Barking Dogs’. He was sure that one of
the rules associated with them was ‘do not stand in front’.

Slowly, he reached inside his shirt and pulled out his pointy hat. It
was red, or rather, it was the colour that red becomes after being
washed, eaten, retrieved, scorched, buried, crushed, engulfed, washed
again and wrung out far, far too often.

No wearing of pointy hats? Were they mad? He pulled at it a bit to get
it back to its comfortable shapeless shape, and put it on. That felt
much better. A pointy hat meant you weren’t just _anyone_.

He unrolled his instructions.

_1. Remove ball from ‘cannon’_

There was no one around. There _was_ a stack of metal balls by the
cannon. Rincewind pulled the barrel around with some effort, felt down
the hole, and grunted as his fingers touched the top of another ball at
the far end.

How could he get it out? The way to get a ball out of a Barking Dog was
to set a match to its tail, but Ponder had said this wasn’t an option.
He cast around, and saw a bundle of tools by the stack; one was a rod
with an end like a super-corkscrew.

Carefully, he pushed it down the cannon, wincing at every _clink_. Twice
he felt the curved springy bits engage with the ball, and twice it came
away and rolled back with a thud.

At the third attempt he was able to get the tapped ball almost out of
the mouth of the barrel, and slid his fingers under it.

Well, that wasn’t too hard, was it? He dropped it over the side, where
the sea swallowed it with a ‘plomp!’

This caused no stir anywhere. Job done, and nothing horrible had
happened at all! He pulled a scrap of paper out of his pocket. It was
important to get the words right.

‘Return—’ he began, and stopped. With a little metallic grinding noise,
another ball rolled gently off the pile, across the deck, and leapt into
the cannon’s mouth.

‘O-kay,’ said Rincewind slowly. Of course. Obviously. Why had he thought
otherwise for even one second?

Sighing, he picked up the ball grasper, rammed it down the barrel,
caught the ball, and jerked it out so hard that it would have made a
giveaway noise hitting the deck. Fortunately, it landed on Rincewind’s
foot.

A little metallic sound disturbed him while he was lying across the
barrel making the traditional ‘gheeee’ noise of those who are screaming
through clenched teeth.

It was the noise of another cannon ball rolling across the deck. He
jumped on it, picked it up, and felt a slight resistance trying to tug
it out of his hands. He wrenched against the invisible force, spun
around and the ball flew out of his hands and over the rail.

This time the ‘plomp!’ caused an interrogatory mumble from below decks.

The last remaining ball started to roll towards the cannon.

‘Oh no you don’t!’ snarled Rincewind, and grabbed it. Again the force
tried to pull the ball away from him, but he clung on tightly.

There was the sound of footsteps climbing stairs. Somewhere close, in
the fog, someone sounded angry.

Then in the billows in front of Rincewind there was … something. He
couldn’t make out the shape, but it disturbed the fog, making an outline
of sorts. It looked like—

It let go as someone hurried closer. Rincewind growled in triumph,
staggered backwards, tipped over the rail and, still clutching the
cannon ball, went ‘plomp!’

‘Look at the red circles, sir!’ shouted Ponder.

Erratically, in the drifting tangle of lights, the red circles were
winking out. The yellow line was extending.

‘That’s the style, Mr Stibbons!’ the Archchancellor roared. ‘Keep
pounding away!’

Wizards were scuttling through the hall, getting fresh instructions,
catching their breath and disappearing in the circle again.

Ridcully nodded at the stretcher containing the screaming Pennysmart, as
it was hurried away to the Infirmary.

‘Never seen _that_ shade of purple on a leg,’ he said. ‘I _told_ him to
look where he was going. You heard me, didn’t you?’

‘He says he was dropped right on top of the fish,’ said Ponder. ‘I’m
afraid Hex is running at the very limit of his power, sir. We’re bending
an entire timeline. You’ve got to expect some accidents. A few of the
returning wizards are reappearing in the fountain. We just have to
accept that it’s better than them reappearing inside walls.’

Ridcully surveyed the throng, and said: ‘Here comes one from the
fountain, by the look of it …’

Rincewind limped in, his face like thunder, water still streaming off
him, with something grasped in his hands. Halfway across the hall a fish
fell out of his robe, in obedience to the unbreakable laws of humour.

He reached Ponder, and dropped the cannon ball on the floor.

‘Do you know how hard it is to shout underwater?’ he demanded.

‘But I see you were successful, Rincewind,’ said Ridcully.

Rincewind looked up. All over the streaming lines, little pointy wizard
symbols were appearing and disappearing.

‘No one told me it would fight back! It fought back! The cannon tried to
load itself!’

‘Aha!’ said Ridcully. ‘The enemy is revealed! We’re nearly there! If
they are breaking the—’

‘It was an Auditor,’ said Rincewind, flatly. ‘It was trying to be
invisible but I saw it outlined in the fog.’

Ridcully sagged a little. A certain exuberance faded from his face. He
said, ‘Oh, darn,’ because an amusing misunderstanding in his youth had
led him to believe that this was the worst possible word you could say.

‘We’ve found no evidence of them,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘Here? Did we look? We wouldn’t find any anyway, would we?’ said
Ridcully. ‘They’d show up as natural forces.’

‘But how could they exist here? All those things work by themselves
here!’

‘Same way we did?’ said Rincewind. ‘And they’ll meddle with anything.
You know them. And they really, really hate people …’

Auditors: personifications of things that have no personality that can
be imagined. Wind and rain are animate, and thus have gods. But the
personification of gravity, for example, is an Auditor or, rather
Auditors. In universes that run on narrativium rather than automatic,
they are the means by which the most basic things happen.

Auditors are not only unimaginative, they find it impossible to imagine
what imagination is.

They are never found in groups of less than three, at least for long. In
ones and twos they quickly develop personality traits that make them
_different_, which to them is fatal. For an Auditor to have an opinion
that differs from that of its colleagues is certain … cessation. But
while individual Auditors cannot hold an opinion (because that would
make them individual), Auditors as a whole certainly can, and with grim
certainty they hold that the multiverse would be a lot better off with
no life in it. Life gets in the way, tends to be messy, acts
unpredictably and reverses entropy.

Life, they believe, is an unwanted by-product. The multiverse would be
more reliable if there wasn’t any. Unfortunately, there are rules.
Gravity is not allowed to increase a millionfold and laminate all local
life forms to the bedrock, highly desirable though that would appear to
be. Simply mugging life forms merely walking, flying, swimming or oozing
past would attract attention from higher authority, which Auditors
dread.

They are weak, not very clever and always afraid. But they can be
subtle. And the wonderful thing about intelligent life, they have
discovered, is that with some care it can be persuaded to destroy
_itself_.

SIXTEEN

MANIFEST DESTINY

[image] THE WIZARDS ARE DISCOVERING THAT changing history is not so
easy, even when you’ve got a time machine. The Auditors aren’t helping,
but history has its own metaphorical Auditor, often called ‘historical
inertia’. Inertia is the innate tendency of moving objects to continue
moving along much the same track, even if you try to divert them; it is
a consequence of Newton’s laws of motion. Historical inertia has a
similar effect but a different cause: changing a single historical
event, however important it may appear, may have no significant effect
on the social context that directs the path of history.

Imagine we’ve _got_ a time machine, and go back to the past. Not too
far, just to the assassination of Abraham Lincoln. In _our_ history, the
President lived till the following morning, so a tiny deflection of the
assassin’s bullet could make all the difference. So we arrange a small
deflection, and he is hit but recovers, with no noticeable brain damage.
He cuts a couple of appointments while he recuperates, and then he goes
on to do … what?

We don’t know _anything_ about that new version of history.

Or do we? Of course we do. He doesn’t turn into a hippopotamus, for a
start, or a Ford Model T. Or disappear. He goes on being President
Abraham Lincoln, hedged in by all the political expediencies and
impossibilities that existed in our version of history _and still exist
in his_.

The counterfactual¹ scenario of a live Lincoln raises many questions.
How much do you think being the American President is like driving a
car, going where you want to? Or sitting in a train, observing the
terrain that others drive you through?

Somewhere in between, no doubt.

Ordinarily, we don’t have to think much about counterfactuals, precisely
because they are contrary to fact. But mathematicians think about them
all the time – ‘if what I think happens is wrong, what can I deduce that
might _prove_ it wrong?’ Any consideration of phase spaces automatically
gets tangled up in worlds of if. You don’t really understand history
unless you can take a stab at what might have happened if some major
historical event had not occurred. That’s a good way to appreciate the
significance of that event, for a start.

In that spirit, let’s think about that altered ‘now’: the beginning of
the West’s third millennium of history, but without Lincoln having been
assassinated in its past. What would your morning newspaper be called?
Would it be different? Would you still be having much the same breakfast
ritual, bacon and eggs and a sausage perhaps? What about the World Wars?
Hiroshima?

A very large number of stories have been written with this kind of
theme: Wilson Tucker’s _The Lincoln Hunters_ is set in such an
‘alternat(iv)e universe’ and tackles the Lincoln question.

Curious things happen in our minds when they are presented with _any_
fictional world. Consider for a moment the London of the late nineteenth
century. It did have Jack the Ripper, and we can wonder about the
real-world puzzle of who he was. It had Darwin, Huxley and Wallace, too.
But it did _not_ have Sherlock Holmes, Dracula, Nicholas Nickleby, or Mr
Polly. Nevertheless, some of the best portrayals of the Victorian world
are centred around those characters. Sometimes the fictional portrayals
are intended to paint a humorous gloss on the society of the period. The
Flintstones put just such a gloss on human prehistory, so much so that
in order to think rationally about our evolution we must excise all
those images, which is probably an impossible task.

Sherlock Holmes and Mr Polly were Victorians in just the same sense that
the tyrannosaur and triceratops in _Jurassic Park_ were dinosaurs. When
we envisage _Triceratops_, we cannot avoid the memory of that warty
purple-spotted _Jurassic Park_ skin, as the beast lies on its side,
breathing stertorously. And _Tyrannosaur_, in our mind’s eye, is running
after the jeep, bobbing its head like a bird. When we envisage late
nineteenth-century Baker Street it’s very difficult not to see Holmes
and Watson (probably in one of their filmic versions) hailing a
four-wheeler, off to solve another crime. Our pictures of the past are a
mixture of real historical figures and scenarios peopled by fictional
entities, and it’s difficult to keep them apart, especially as films and
TV series acquire better technologies to latch into those spurious
pictures in our heads.

The 1930s philosopher George Herbert Mead made much of the rather
obvious point that the present, in a causal world, does not only
determine (‘constrain’ if you prefer) the future, it also affects the
past, in just this sense: if I discover a new fact about the present,
then the (conceptual) past that led up to the new present must also have
been different. Mead thereby enabled a rather cute way of seeing how
good the portrayals of Sherlock Holmes, or of the _Jurassic Park_
tyrannosaur, are. If my picture of the present isn’t altered at all by
the presence or absence of Sherlock Holmes in the 1880s, or if my
construction of the present by evolutionary processes isn’t altered at
all by seeing _Jurassic Park_, then these are _consistent_ inventions.

Dracula and the Flintstones are _inconsistent_ inventions: if they
really existed in our past, then the present isn’t what we think it is.
Much of the fun of ‘worlds of if’ stories, and of many consistent
fictions like _The Three Musketeers_, is that they show closed-loop
causalities in our apparent past. Whether or not D’Artagnan had
aggregated the Musketeers and thereby brought into being much of the
causal history of seventeenth-century France, children of later
centuries would learn the same history in the textbooks. Ultimately,
consistent historical fictions make no difference.

In _The Science of Discworld II_ we played with this idea in several
ways: the presence of the Elves was, surprisingly, consistent with our
history; stopping them led to stagnation of humans and had to be
reversed. In this book the meddling of the Unseen University wizards, in
Victorian history this time, is trying to create an apparently
internally caused history in which Darwin wrote _The Origin of Species_
and not _Theology of Species_. We are going to use this trick to
illuminate the causalities of human history.

In order to do this convincingly, we must make the Discworld intrusions
consistent, but even then we must address the convergence/divergence
problem, which is this. Would such a meddled-with world _converge_ on to
ours, demonstrating that history is stable, or would any tiny difference
start a _divergence_ that became wider and wider, proving history to be
unstable?

Most people think the latter. Indeed, even the wildly imaginative
physicists who believe that a new world history is created by each and
every decision in this universe, spawning new universes in which the
_other_ choices were implemented, don’t imagine that the histories
converge. No, each universe goes its own way, spitting out new and
divergent universes as it goes. The Trousers of Time are a tree: their
legs can branch but never merge.

The _Worlds of If_ stories were divided on this issue. Some had each
tiny change in the past getting amplified, resulting in vast changes
now: we’ve mentioned Bradbury’s story where you trod on a butterfly in
the far past, on a dinosaur hunt, and came back to find a fascist
regime. Or the changes you made were all wiped out, because there was a
gigantic all-powerful inertia-of-events Kismet that you couldn’t change.
However you tried to avoid your fate, that only made it more certain to
happen. And some stories took a middle way; some things converged and
others didn’t.

This, we think, is the rational way to think about time travel and
altering the past.

After all, we don’t change the _rules_ by which the past works. Gravity
still operates, sodium chloride crystals are still cubical, people fall
in and out of love, misers hoard and spendthrifts squander. What we
change is what physicists call the ‘initial conditions’. We change the
positions of a few of the pieces on the Great Chessboard of Life, The
Universe and Everything, but we still keep to the rules of chess. That’s
how the wizards operated in _The Science of Discworld II_. They went
back in time to remove the Elves from the game board; then they went
back _again_ to stop themselves making that mistake.

We are now ready to think about our question above: would the names of
newspapers have changed if Abraham Lincoln had lived to a ripe old age?

Perhaps some of them would, because some cultures would have become
rather different. Perhaps Quebec wouldn’t have been French; perhaps New
York would have been Dutch. But names like _Daily Mail, Daily News_ and
_New York Times_ are so obvious, so appropriate, that even if the Roman
Empire were still running things, the Latin equivalents would seem
fitting. Someone would have invented flush toilets, and there would have
been a steam engine time, when several people invented steam power. Some
things in Western culture seem so _likely_, from toilet paper on up to
(as soon as paper is invented) daily newspapers to plastics to
artificial wood … Technology seems to have a set of rules for its
advancement, so that it seems rational to expect gramophones of some
kind if people make music with musical instruments, then tape players
when people get used to electricity and its possibilities for
amplification. Then from analogue to digital, to computers … some things
seem inevitable.

Perhaps this feeling is misleading, but it’s silly to insist that
absolutely _everything_ in a slightly divergent future has to end up
different.

Organic evolution has lessons for us here, and these lessons can
instruct us about how likely various advances in animal organisation
were. Innovations like insect wings, vertebrate jaws, photosynthesis,
life coming out from the seas on to the land … if we ran evolution on
Earth again, would the same things happen? If we went back to the
beginning of life on this planet, and killed it, would another system
evolve and give us a whole different range of creatures, or would Earth
remain lifeless? Or would we be unable to decide whether we’d done
anything, because everything would be just the same the second time
around?

If history ‘healed up’, we wouldn’t be able to tell if it was the
second, or the hundredth, or the millionth time around – each time
sooner or later producing a version of us, whose time machine goes back
to _The Origin_. There would be a consistent time loop, as happened with
the Elves in _The Science of Discworld II_. If life is ‘easy’ to
originate (and the evidence does look that way) then this isn’t an
exercise in going back and killing your grandfather, or if it is, your
grandfather is a vampire and doesn’t _remain_ killed. If life is easy to
invent, then preventing it happening once, or a million times, will make
no difference in the long run. The same process that generated it will
happen again.

Looking at the panorama of life on this planet, in time as well as
space, we can see that there are two kinds of evolutionary innovation.
Photosynthesis, flight, fur, sex, and jointed limbs have all arisen
independently in several different lineages. Surely, like toilet paper,
we would expect to see them again each time we ran life on Earth. And,
presumably, we’ll see them on other aqueous planets when we explore our
local region of the galaxy. Such evolutionary attractors, are called
‘universals’, in contrast to ‘parochials’: unlikely innovations that
have happened only once in Earth’s history.

The classic parochial is the curious suite of characters possessed by
land vertebrates, because a particular species of Devonian fish
succeeded in invading the land in our, _real_, history. Those fishes’
descendants were amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals – including
us. Jointed limbs are a universal innovation. The limbs of spiders,
hydraulically operated, differ in detail from the limbs of mammals, and
were presumably acquired via a different ancestor, perhaps an earlier
arthropod proto-spider. The mammalian internal skeleton, with one bone
at the body end, then two, then a wrist or ankle, then five lines of
bones for fingers or toes, was an independent evolution of the same
universal trick.

This highly unlikely combination now occurs in all land vertebrates
(except most of the legless ones), because they are all descended from
those fishes that came out of the water to colonise the land. Other
parochials are feathers and teeth (of the kind that evolved from scales,
which are what we have). And, especially, each of the special body-plans
that characterise Earth’s animals and plants: mammal, insect, rotifer,
trilobite, squid, conifer, orchid … _None_ of these would appear again
after a rerun of Earth’s evolutionary history, nor would we find exact
replicas on other aqueous planets.

We would expect much the same _processes_ to occur, though, in a repeat
run of Earth or on another similar world: an atmosphere far from
chemical equilibrium as life forms pump up their chemistry using light;
planktonic layers of the seas colonised by the larvae of sedentary
animals; flying creatures of many kinds. Such ecosystems would also
probably have ‘layers’, a hierarchical structure, fundamentally similar
to the ecosystems that have emerged in so many different circumstances
on Earth. So there would be ‘plantlike’ creatures, a productive majority
of the biomass (like Earth’s grass or marine algae). These would be
browsed by tiny animals (mites, grasshoppers) and by larger animals
(rabbits, antelopes), with a few very large creatures (elephants,
whales). Comparable evolutionary histories would lead to the same
dramatic scenarios, but performed by different actors.

The central lesson is that although natural selection has a very varied
base to work with (recombinations of ancient mutations, differently
assorted in all those ‘waste’ progeny), clear large-scale themes emerge.
Marine predators, such as sharks, dolphins, and ichthyosaurs all have
much the same shape as barracuda, because hydrodynamic efficiency
dictates that streamlining will catch you more prey, more cheaply. Very
different lineages of planktonic larvae all have long spines or other
extensions of the body to restrain the tendency to fall or rise because
their density differs from that of seawater, and most of them pump ions
in or out to adjust their densities too. As soon as creatures acquire
blood systems, other creatures – leeches, fleas, mosquitoes – develop
puncture tools to exploit them, and tiny parasites exploit both the
blood as food and the bloodsuckers as postal systems. Examples are
malaria, sleeping-sickness, and leishmaniasis in humans, and lots of
other parasitic diseases in reptiles, fishes, and octopuses.

Large-scale themes may be the obvious lesson, but the last examples
reveal a more important one: organisms mostly form their own
environments, and nearly all of the important context for organisms is
other organisms.

Human social history is like evolutionary history. We like to organise
it into stories, but that’s not how it really works. History, too, can
be convergent or divergent. It seems quite sensible to believe that
small changes mostly get smeared out, or lost in the noise, so that big
changes are needed to divert the course of history. But anyone familiar
with chaos theory will also expect some tiny differences to set off
divergent histories, drifting progressively further away from what might
have happened otherwise.

Changing history is a theme of time-travel stories, and the two issues
come together in those stories called ‘worlds of if’.

We have the strongest feeling that what we do, even what we decide, does
change history. If I decide, now, not to go and meet Auntie Janie at the
train station even though she’s expecting me because I told her I would
… the universe will take a different path from the one it would have
taken if I had done the expected. But we’ve just seen that even saving
Abraham Lincoln from the assassin would have the tiniest, most local, of
effects. Neighbours such as the gas-bag aliens on Jupiter wouldn’t
notice Lincoln’s survival at all, or at least not for a very long time.
After all, we haven’t yet noticed _them_.²

In fact, how _will_ they, or we, notice? How will we be able to say,
‘Just a minute, this newspaper shouldn’t be called the _Daily Echo_ …
There must have been a time traveller interfering, so that we’re now in
the wrong leg of the Trousers of Time’?

Auntie Janie making her own way from the station won’t topple empires –
unless you believe, with Francis Thompson’s _The Mistress of Vision_,
that

_All things by immortal power_

_Near or far_

_Hiddenly_

_To each other linkéd are_

_That thou canst not stir a flower_

_Without troubling of a star_.

That is, all contingent chaos butterflies are responsible in some sense
for all important events like hurricanes and typhoons – and newspaper
titles. When a typhoon, or a newspaper tycoon, topples an empire, that
event is caused by everything, all those butterflies, that preceded it.
Because change in any one – or perhaps just in one of a very large
number – can derail the important event.

So everything must be caused by _everything_ before it, not just by a
thin string of causality.

_We_ think about causality as a thin string, a linear chain of events,
link following link following link … probably because that’s the only
way we can hold any kind of causal sequence in our minds. As we’ll see,
that’s how we deal with our own memories and intentions, but none of
this means that the universe can isolate such a causal string antecedent
to any event at all, important or not. And surely ‘important’ or
‘trivial’ is usually human judgement, unless the universe really does
‘smear out’ most small changes (whatever that means), and major events
are those whose singular influence can be distinguished at later times.

Because they _are_ stories, committed to the way our minds work and not
to the way the universe works its own causality, most time-travel
stories assume that a big (localised) change is needed to have a big
effect – kill Napoleon, invade China … or save Lincoln. And time travel
stories have another convention, another ‘conceit’, because they are
stories, nearer fee-fi-fo-fum than physics. This is the remembered
timeline of the traveller. Usually the plot depends on it being unique
to him. When he comes back to his present _he_ remembers stepping on the
butterfly, or killing his grandfather, or telling Leonardo about
submarines … but no one else is conscious of anything other than their
‘altered’ present.

Let’s move from large events, large or small causes, to how we influence
the apparent causality in our own lives. We have invented a very strange
oxymoron to describe this: ‘free will’. These words appear prominently
on the label of the can of worms called ‘determinism’. In _Figments of
Reality_ we titled the free will chapter: ‘We wanted to have a chapter
on free will, but we decided not to, so here it is’ in order to expose
the paradoxical nature of the whole idea. Dennett’s recent book _Freedom
Evolves_ is a very powerful treatment of the same topic. He shows that
in regard to ‘free will’ it doesn’t _matter_ whether the universe,
including humans, is deterministic. Even if we can do only what we must,
there are ways to make the inevitable evitable. Even if it is all
butterflies, if tiny differences chaotically determine large historical
trends, nevertheless creatures as evolved as us can have ‘the only free
will worth having’, according to Dennett. He writes of dodging a
baseball coming for his face, and this being perhaps a culmination of a
causal chain going right back to the Big Bang – yet if it will help his
team, he _might_ let it hit his face.

But then, what decides it is: will it help his team? That’s not a free
choice.

Inevitable, evitable.

Dennett’s best example is more ancient: Odysseus’s ship approaching the
Sirens. Inevitably, if his men hear the Sirens’ song, they will steer
the ship on to the rocks. But the steersman must be able to hear the
surf, so there seems no way to avoid their lure. Odysseus has himself
lashed to the mast, while all his sailors plug their ears with wax so
they cannot hear the Sirens. The vital issue for Dennett is that humans,
and on this planet probably only humans, have evolved several stages
beyond the observing-and-reacting that even quite advanced animals do.
We observed ourselves and others observing, so got more context to embed
our behaviour in – including our prospective behaviour. Then we
developed a tactic of labelling good and bad imaginary outcomes, just as
we labelled our memories with emotional tags. We, and some other apes –
perhaps also dolphins, perhaps even some parrots – developed a ‘theory
of mind’, a way to imagine ourselves or others in invented scenarios and
to anticipate the associated feelings and responses. Then we learned to
run more than one scenario: ‘But on the other hand, if we did so-and-so,
the lion couldn’t get us anyway …’, and that trick soon became a major
part of our survival strategy. So with Odysseus … and fiction … and
particularly that dissection of hypothetical alternatives that we call a
time-travel story.

In our minds, we can hold many possible histories, just as Mead showed
that every discovery about today implies a different past leading up to
it. But whether there is any sense in which the universe has several
possible pasts (or futures) is a much more difficult question. We’ve
argued that popularisations of quantum indeterminacy, particularly the
many-worlds model, have got confused about this. They tell us that the
_universe_ branches at every decision point, whereas we think that
people have to invent a different _mental_ causal path, a different
explanatory history, for each possible present or future.

Antonio Damasio has written three books: _Looking for Spinoza,
Descartes’ Error_, and _The Feeling of What Happens_. These are popular
accounts of what we know about the important attributes of our minds. He
has documented our discoveries, now that we can use various experimental
techniques to ‘watch the brain thinking’ and see how the different parts
of the brain are involved in what we feel about the things we think. We
tend to forget that our brains are continually interacting with our
bodies, which supply the brain with stance-determining hormones for
longer-term behaviour, and mood-changing emotion-provoking chemicals for
short-term modulation of our intentions and feelings, directing our
thoughts.

According to these books, the result of having lived with a brain which
we think we direct using a kind of tiller, but which actually is
continually affected by cross-winds, occasional storms, rain and warm
sun that provokes us into lazy days, is that we have evolved a series of
memories with different flavours. Or, the result of having lived with a
brain that we think we direct using a kind of automobile steering wheel
and foot controls, but whose route is actually continually affected by
long-term goals that change (‘Let’s go to a hotel, not to Auntie Janie’s
_again_’), short-term road signs and other traffic, is that we have
evolved a series of memories with different flavours. Or, each of us has
a personal history which we explain internally by feelings attached to
emotional memories, so we have evolved a series of memories with
different flavours.

Damasio has imported emotional biasing into how we think about our own
intentions, choices, other people, memories, and prospective plans. He
claims that this is what emotion is ‘for’, and most psychologists now
agree that emotionally labelled memories are the effect of having a
brain whose interaction with its body paints emotions on to memories and
intentions.

We habitually assume that real physical history, and particularly social
history, works the same way as our own personal histories, with events
labelled ‘good’ or ‘bad’… but it doesn’t. It’s misleading to think of
the Big Bang, for example, as an explosion like a bomb or a firework,
_seen from outside_. The whole point of the Big Bang metaphor is that at
the moment the universe was born, there _was_ no outside. More subtly,
perhaps, we tend to think of the birth of the universe in the same way
that we think of our own birth, or even our conception.

Real history, _post_ whatever the Big Bang ‘really’ was, relies on the
accumulation of countless tiny sequences of cause-and-effect. As soon as
we begin to think about what any of these sequences looks like, taking
it out of the context that drives it, we lose its causality. This
seething sea of processes and appearances and disappearances, where no
causality can be isolated, is sometimes called ‘Ant Country’. The name
reflects three features: the seething, apparently purposeless activity
of ants, which, in aggregate, makes ant colonies work; the metaphorical
Aunt Hillary in Douglas Hofstadter’s _Gödel, Escher, Bach_, who was a
sentient anthill and recognised the approach of her friend the anteater
because some of her constituent ants panicked; and Langton’s Ant, a
simple cellular automaton, which shows that even if we know all the
rules that govern a system, its behaviour cannot be predicted except by
running the rules and seeing what happens. Which in most people’s book
is not ‘prediction’ at all.

For similar reasons, it is impossible to forecast the weather
accurately, even a few weeks ahead. Yet, despite this apparent absence
of causality at the micro-levels of weather, the impossibility of
isolating causality in the swirling butterflies … despite the chaotic
nature of meteorology in both the large and the small, weather _makes
sense_. So does a stone tumbling downhill. So does a lot of physics,
engineering, and aeronautics: we can build a Boeing 747 that flies
reliably. Nevertheless, all of our physical models are rooted in brains
that get most of their perceptions wrong.

Shouting at the monkeys in the next tree. That’s what brains evolved to
do. Not mathematics and physics.

We get ecology and evolution mostly right, but often wrong, for the same
reasons. The scenarios we build don’t work, they’re as false to fact as
‘weather’. But we can’t help building them, and they’re useful
sufficiently often to be ‘good enough for government work’.

To underline this point, here’s an important evolutionary example. Think
of the first land vertebrate, that fish that came out of the water. We
have the strongest feeling that if we took a time machine back to the
Devonian, when that first important fish was emerging from the sea,
there ought to be a moment that we could isolate: ‘Look, by wriggling
out on to the mud _that_ female has escaped that predator, so she’s
lived to lay her eggs, and some of them will become our ancestors … If
she hadn’t got those leggy fins, she wouldn’t quite have made if, and we
wouldn’t be here.’

Grandfather paradox again? Not quite, but we can illuminate the
grandfather paradox neatly with this example. Ask yourself what would
happen if you killed _that_ fish. Would humanity never have happened?
Not at all. By isolating a single event, we have tried mentally to make
history follow a thin thread of causality. But we made the Adam-and-Eve
mistake: ancestors don’t get _fewer_ as you go back, they multiply. You
have two parents, four grandparents, maybe only seven great-grand
parents, because cousin marriages were commoner then. By the time you’ve
gone back a couple of dozen generations, a significant proportion of all
the breeders of that period were your ancestors. That’s why everyone
finds some famous ancestors when they look – and the fact that famous
people were rich and powerful and sexually successful helps too, so that
they are reproductively better represented in that generation’s
descendants.

Note that we said ‘breeders’ and ‘many’. Nearly all sexually produced
creatures don’t breed, including humans of most previous generations.
Not only are most of the people alive at that previous generation young
children who won’t survive to breed; many of the apparently successful
breeders contribute to lineages that die out before they get to the
present day, because they are excluded from the limited ecosystem by
more successful lineages as the generations pass.

So when we look at those Devonian fishes, there simply isn’t just _one_
that was our ancestor. _All_ of the breeders, a very unsystematic small
proportion of the fish population, contributed to the recombining and
mutating mix of genes that passed down from those fishes that left the
water, through generations of amphibians and mammal-like reptiles, into
the early mammals, were newly selected to characterise the early
primates, and eventually ended up in us. There wasn’t a single
grandfather fish, or one grandfather primate, no thin line of descent,
just as there isn’t a thin line of causality leading from a butterfly’s
wing flap to a hurricane. Nearly any fish you went back and killed would
make virtually no difference to history. We’d still be here, but history
would have taken a slightly different route to get to us.

But that doesn’t mean that history has no important accomplishments.

Some physicists, especially, have argued from this indeterminacy and
chaotic influences at all the micro-levels that there is no pattern to
history, that Heisenberg uncertainty rules. Wrong. Just because we
cannot predict the weather more than about a week ahead, with the best
and biggest computers, doesn’t mean that there isn’t such a thing as
weather. Our thin-causal-thread evolutionary scenarios for the emergence
of those fishes on to the land don’t work, but that doesn’t mean we must
throw away all ideas of causality in evolution. Any event, when looked
at in detail, seems not to have a clear cause, but that just means that
our Damasio-minds are not suited to that way of analysing history.

We are much better at totally disregarding all the micro stuff, and
making big guesses: I guess it’ll be sunny again tomorrow; or I guess
that among all those fishes eating each other on the Devonian mudflats,
some will escape on to the land. We’re confirmed in that guess by
finding climbing perch, mudskippers and lots of other separate fish
lineages doing exactly that on mudflats today.

The great evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould got this point wrong
in _Wonderful Life_: if evolution ran again, he stated, we would not get
people, because of all the tiny chaotic butterflies that determined
evolutionary outcomes, so there were no thin causal threads. We
disagree: we might not, almost surely would not, get the same primate
coming down from the trees, but equivalent major innovations would occur
in the new and different lineages. People are good at finding high-level
groupings, making analogies and metaphors, arguing from what Aunt Janie
does today to what she’ll do tomorrow, or did twenty years ago. But we
oversimplify when we try to disentangle the maze of tiny causalities
that lies behind any historical event, because we can’t handle that kind
of complexity.

So, even though all of the causality happens at the micro-level, and we
can’t analyse it except in terms of tens of particles interacting when
it’s really billions, this isn’t what it’s about. It’s like the early
twentieth-century physicists telling us that the dining-room table
wasn’t really there, it was nearly all empty space, and that concepts
like ‘hard’ and ‘brown’ had no place in the physicist’s view of the
world. So much the worse for the physicist. Did he really not eat his
dinner off just such a hard, brown table? And was not his brain designed
to do really clever things with abstractions useful in his daily life,
like hard and brown, rather than the very peculiarly unuseful concepts
of atoms, nuclei, and so on?

On the contrary, our brains are excellent at all the higher-level
judgements they’re called on to make, especially in a world that is full
of hard, brown tables, doors, houses, trees to make them out of, and
other people to help us or compete with us. But nearly all human brains
are poor when it comes to the physics of atoms and the micro-world.

Back to history. We ‘make sense’ of large movements like the
Enlightenment, democracy in ancient Athens, the Tudors; but we know that
if we were to look at all the small-scale interactions, they would make
little sense against the comprehensible backdrop. That is precisely why
historical novels can be so fascinating, and why _The Three Musketeers_
didn’t really affect Cardinal Richelieu and all the important people in
seventeenth-century France. Nevertheless, we greatly enjoy the fiction
that makes sense of the great movements by tying them down to the
motives and nobility of a few people like D’Artagnan, with whom we can
identify. The sequels _Ten Years After_ and _Twenty Years Later_
intrigued some of us, as Dumas found that he was on to a good thing and
turned out more of the same. Some of us, at least, then found that
Athos’s nobility rang increasingly false, and Porthos’s good humour was
boring, while Aramis’s religiosity wore very thin as the years rushed
by. The initial idea wedged into the history we knew, it was consistent
and provided colourful incident. But the later money-spinners were
increasingly at odds with how we knew history worked.

There is an excellent example of the converse of this, which makes that
point even better than Dumas. Wells’s _The Time Machine_, as we’ve said,
was the absolute classic time travelogue, showing us the large picture
from prehistory to the social consequences of the capitalism that the
socialist Wells wanted to criticise. Then the cooling Sun, the great
crabs on a post-diluvian beach … lovely. But Stephen Baxter’s modern
sequel _The Time Ships_ shows us how clever the Morlocks will be, how
the Traveller is really a little bit prurient about the little Eloi girl
from the future – a resonance with Lewis Carrol’s Alice – who is
innocent and a bit stupid.

It’s like a historical novel that puts all the little sexy and
despicable bits into the great tapestry of history. Such literary
exercises add colour and flavour to history, just as Damasio has shown
that we do with our own personal memories. The pleasure this exercise
gives us shows how our human minds read history: in the large without
flavour, in the small with the kind of colour that we paint on to our
own small reminiscences. So historical romance is just that: romantic
painting of the little, interesting items, whose causality might affect
the big picture, but doesn’t.

What does it mean, then, to ask whether time knits up any changes, or
whether mischievous butterflies are ultimately responsible for the fall
of empires?

Here fictional conventions cease to fit the real world. From the point
of view of the wizards, Roundworld time is a one-dimensional sequence
that they can access two-dimensionally like a book. For narrative
reasons, we have to depict it like this because of all those
thin-thread-of-causality historical stories that our minds find so
congenial. In a fictional context, we have little choice. However, here
we want to think about the nature of causality and free will in the
‘real’ universe, which – as we’ve made clear throughout the _Science of
Discworld_ series – does not have any narrativium. In that context, we
have to understand that this simple image of Roundworld history is a
fraud. The Trousers of Time also work well as a story, but as genuine
physics they are a fraud: you can’t be pushed from one leg to the other
by an event. Worse, you can’t tell that there has been such an event. As
far as you are concerned, this is the world. It doesn’t have ‘ifs’ in
its past.

None of this stops us using ‘what ifs’ (which by nature are fictions,
not facts) to think about history. We can still ask, in our minds, what
would have happened if, say, Lincoln had survived … but in the real
world he didn’t, and we can’t run a mock-up of ‘if he did’ in the real
world: only in our heads.

Science runs into precisely this difficulty. For instance, the main
problem in testing medical treatments is that we can’t both _give_ Mrs
Jones the treatment and _not_ give Mrs Jones the treatment,
simultaneously, and compare the results. We can do it sequentially, but
then the second treatment (whether it is placebo or real treatment) is
of a different Mrs Jones, one who’s had the first treatment. So what the
testers do is to have quite a large panel, do treatment first on some,
placebo first on others – and they should perhaps do two placebos on a
few, and two treatments on a few others.

What time-travel stories do, in our minds, is the same kind of test:
‘What would happen if Leonardo had really seen a submarine working?’ or
equivalently ‘Did Leonardo see a submarine working?’ In _The Science of
Discworld_, and more explicitly in _The Science of Discworld II_, we
asked whether the interesting stories that we make up have some kind of
coherent explanation, something like ‘evil’ – which we personified in
the second book as Elves. To what extent do such concepts relate to the
real rules of the real world? Now we argue that we _cannot know_ if any
answer we get is useful; we can’t even know whether we’ve got an answer
at all. And that this is precisely why Dennett’s kind of free will is
the only one worth having. It’s prospective, giving each of us the
chance to make little items of an otherwise inevitable future evitable.

When we look back on something we’ve changed by that kind of an act of
free will, it’s just as causal as everything else – and if the universe
is in any sense determinate, then it is determinate in that sense. Think
of Odysseus looking back at what happened as his ship failed to be
caught by the Sirens. His men didn’t hear them, and he, who could hear
them, couldn’t act to steer the ship. So he and his crew came through in
that most unlikely of passages. There is a sense, of course, in which
every sea passage is equally unique, just as every deal of cards is
unique; but Odysseus’s journey, like a one-suit-per-player deal of
cards, is totally remarkable too. Looking back into history, can we find
journeys, events, and processes so remarkable that they seem to be the
results of previous acts of free will?

What, then, is causality? For Damasio-like reasons, we tend to think
that what gives history its dynamic is the big events, the ‘pivot
points’. The fallacy is that we think big causes are needed to produce
big effects. This is false (butterfly) but there is a problem: choosing
the right tiny change (which butterfly?). And there are always billions
of new butterflies, dragging new changes out from previously invisible
differences ‘in the 13th decimal place’, unobservable until their
effects show up.

Real history is like this; causes are often distributed, with huge
numbers of tiny events all coming together. It is just this problem that
leads Ridcully to employ such a huge number of wizards, doing such a
bizarre set of trivial things, merely to get _The Origin_ written.

We only justify this sort of causality in retrospect: history didn’t
know ‘where it was going’. So changing the past creates a _context_ for
the future, not a causal chain, and this is how the wizards must
operate, which is why we have thousands of them making endless trivial
changes to Victorian history, instead of, say, assassinating Queen
Victoria. Any Victorian, perhaps particularly the well-trained
nursemaid, will tell you just that about your personal history: your
heart must be pure (context) rather than your plans being subtle.

¹ Counterfactual: a more acceptable word for what has for a long time
been a very common feature of science fiction, the ‘alternate world’ or
‘worlds of if’ story (there was a pulp SF magazine in the 1950s called
_Worlds of If_, in fact). ‘Counterfactual’ is now used when said stories
are written by real writers and historians, to save them the indignity
of sharing a genre with all those strange sci-fi people.

² Well, there _might_ be …

SEVENTEEN

GALÁPAGOS ENCOUNTER

[image] CHARLES DARWIN WAS SITTING ON a grassy bank. Three types of bee
buzzed among the flowers, and overhead examples of _Hirundo rustica_
swooped after miscellaneous _Ephemeroptera_.

His thoughts were complex, as human thoughts tend to be when the mind is
idling, but included: this is an interesting bank of astonishing
complexity; there might be fish for lunch; he had a sore throat; he
hoped never to receive another letter about barnacles; the rash seemed
to be getting worse; there was a strange buzzing sound; had he really
experienced that apparition?; homeopathy transcended all common sense;
he really should find out where the ovaria were situated in
_Phyllosoma;_ it really was a _very_ loud buzzing …

Something like a yellow-brown smoke was issuing from a hole in the bank
a few yards away, and resolved itself into a cloud of angry _Vespula
vulgaris_. It bore down on the horrified Darwin –

‘Over here, waspies!’

Darwin stared.

This mission had created a difficult decision for Rincewind, when he’d
been presented with the task of preventing Charles Darwin being stung to
death by wasps. Right from the start it was obvious that Darwin would
see him, and if Rincewind was invisible the wasps wouldn’t see _him_.
He’d therefore undertaken the mission carrying two buckets of warm jam
and wearing a pink tutu, an acid-green wig and a red nose, reasoning
that (a) Darwin wouldn’t believe that he had seen him and in any case
(b) wouldn’t dare tell anyone …

Darwin watched the apparition skip away over the fields. It was quite
astonishing. He’d never seen wasps swarm in such a manner.

A piece of paper fluttered to the ground. The curious clown must have
dropped it.

Darwin picked it up and read, aloud, ‘“Return me, Hex”. What does—?’

The afternoon dozed on. The grassy bank went back to its buzzing,
humming, flowering busyness.

On the forlorn shore, a man appeared, hid two buckets behind a rock, and
removed his false nose.

Rincewind scanned the landscape while extracting his hat from inside his
shirt.

_This_ was one of the most famous islands in the history of technomancy?
It looked, frankly, rather dull.

He’d been expecting forests and streams and a riot of creatures. You
couldn’t move for vibrant, striving life on Mono Island, home of the God
of Evolution. Everything wanted to leave. But this place had a skinflint
look. You’d need to be tough to survive here. You’d have to fit in.

He couldn’t see any giant tortoises, but there were a couple of large,
empty shells.

Rincewind picked up a length of driftwood, baked by the sun into
something like stone, and hurried up a narrow path.

Hex was good. The man Rincewind was after was striding ahead of him
along the track.

‘Mr Lawson, sir!’

The man turned.

‘Yes? Are you from the _Beagle_?’

‘Yessir. Heave ho, sir,’ said Rincewind. Lawson stared at him.

‘Why do you wear that hat with “Wizzard” written on it?’

Rincewind thought fast. Thank goodness Roundworld had some strange
customs.

‘Crossing the Line ceremony, sir,’ he said. ‘Took a fancy to it!’

‘Oh, King Neptune and so forth,’ said Lawson, backing away a little.
‘Jolly good. How can I help you?’

‘Just wanted to shake you by the hand and say how glad we all are that
you’re doing such a wonderful job out here, sir,’ said Rincewind,
pumping the man’s unresisting arm vigorously.

‘We … that’s is very kind of you, Mr – what was that noise?’

‘Sorry? Shiver my timber, by the way.’

‘That … whistling noise …’ said Lawson, uncertainly.

‘Probably one of the tortoises?’ said Rincewind, helpfully.

‘They hiss or – wasn’t that a thump?’ said Lawson. Behind him, a small
cloud of dust rose above the bushes.

‘Didn’t hear one, yo ho,’ said Rincewind, still shaking the hand. ‘Well,
don’t let me keep you, sir.’

Lawson gave him the look of a man who feels has inadvertently fallen
into dribbling company. The hat was clearly preying on his mind.

‘Thank you, my man,’ he said, pulling his hand away. ‘Indeed, I must
go.’

He headed away at some speed, which increased when he noticed Rincewind
following him, and completely failed to notice what was, after all, just
another small, rubble-filled hole among many. Rincewind spotted it,
though, and after some effort pulled out a small, warm lump.

Something hissed, behind him.

Rincewind had ascertained that the only way a giant tortoise could go as
fast as him was by falling over a cliff, and also that they were highly
unlikely to savage a man to death. Still, he was ready.

He turned, stick upraised.

Something, a greyish something, something just transparent enough to
show the landscape behind it in a dreary light, was hovering a few feet
away. It looked like a monk’s robe for a very small monk, and minus the
monk. The empty hood was more worrying than almost anything that could
have filled it. There were no eyes, there was no face, but there _was_
nevertheless a stare, as malignant as razor-blade pants.

Other robe-shadows appeared around the shape and began drifting towards
it. When they reached it they vanished, and the central shape became
darker and, somehow, more present.

Rincewind didn’t turn and run. There was no point in trying to run from
Auditors; they were certainly faster than anything with legs. But that
wasn’t the reason. If it was time to run, he’d considered, no other
calculations applied. He wouldn’t even worry that his escape route was
blocked by solid lava; most things could be overcome if you ran at them
hard enough. There was, however, another reason. It had pink toes.

‘Why meddle?’ said the Auditor. The voice sounded windy and uncertain,
as if the speaker was having to assemble the words by hand. ‘Entropy
will always triumph.’

‘Is it true that you die if you have an emotion?’ said Rincewind. The
Auditor was quite dark now, which meant that it has assembled enough
mass to move something quite heavy, like a human head.

‘We do not have emotion,’ said the Auditor. ‘It is a human aberration.
In you we detect the physical manifestation recognisable to us as fear.’

‘You can’t just kill people, you know,’ said Rincewind. ‘That’s against
the rules.’

‘We believe there may be no rules here,’ said the Auditor, moving
forward.

‘Wait, wait, wait!’ said Rincewind, trying to back away into solid rock.
‘You’re saying you don’t _know_ what fear is, right?’

‘We have no requirement to do so,’ said the Auditor. ‘Prepare to cease
coherent function.’

‘Turn around,’ said Rincewind.

And a weakness of the Auditors is that they find a direct command hard
to disobey, at least for a second or two. It turned, or, rather, flowed
through itself to face the other way.

The lid of the Luggage closed with a ‘clop’ like the sound of a trout
taking an unwary mayfly.

I wonder if it found out what fear really is, Rincewind thought.

But more grey shapes were distilling out of the air.

_Now_ it was time to run.

EIGHTEEN

STEAM ENGINE TIME

[image]THERE WAS DARWIN, SITTING ON a bank, watching the bees, the
wasps, the flowers … In the last paragraph of _The Origin_ we find a
beautiful and important passage that hints at afternoons of that kind:

It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many
plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various
insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth,
and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different
from each other, and dependent on each other in so complex a manner,
have all been produced by laws acting around us.

_Go ahead Paley, make my day_.

All that wizardly effort to get him to write _The Origin_, not _The
Ology_. It mattered to Darwin, of course, and it matters to those who
chart the course of history. But, just as we can ask whether Lincoln’s
assassination really had much effect on subsequent events, so we can ask
the same about Darwin’s life’s work. Would it really have mattered if
the wizards had failed?

Metaphorical wizards, you appreciate. Yes, those happy coincidences that
got Charles on board the _Beagle_ and kept him there do look a tad
suspicious, but _wizards_?

Let’s ask the question in a more respectable way. How radical was
Darwin’s theory of natural selection, really? Did he have insights that
no one before him had considered? Or did he just happen to be the person
who caught the public eye, with an idea that had been floating around
for some time? How much credit should he be given?

The same can be – and has been – asked of many ‘revolutionary’
scientific concepts. Robert Hooke got the idea of inverse square-law
gravity before Newton did. Minkowski, Poincaré, and others worked out
much of special relativity before Einstein did. Fractals were around, in
some form, for at least a century before Benoît Mandelbrot energetically
promoted them and they developed into a major branch of applied
mathematics. The earliest sniff of chaos theory can be found in
Poincaré’s prize-winning memoir on the stability of the solar system in
1890, probably 75 years before the subject was perceived as ‘taking
off’.

How do scientific revolutions get started, and what decides who gets the
credit? Is it talent? A flair for publicity? A lottery?

Part of the answer to these questions can be found in Robert Thurston’s
1878 study of another important Victorian innovation, which Ponder
Stibbons unerringly homed in on in Chapter 3. The book is _A History of
the Growth of the Steam Engine_. The second paragraph says:

History illustrates the very important truth: inventions are never, as
great discoveries are seldom, the work of any one mind. Every great
invention is really either an aggregation of minor inventions, or the
final step in a progression. It is not a creation, but a growth as truly
so as is that of the trees in the forest. The same invention is
frequently brought out in several countries, and by several individuals,
simultaneously.

Thurston’s topic reminds us of a common metaphor for this kind of
apparently simultaneous invention: _steam engine time_. When it’s steam
engine time, suddenly everyone is making steam engines. When it’s
evolution time, everyone is inventing a theory of evolution. When it’s
VCR time, everyone is making video cassette recorders. When it’s Dotcom
time, everyone is setting up Internet trading systems. And when it’s
Dotcom-going-bust time, all the Dotcoms are going bust.

There are times when human affairs really do seem to run on
pre-constructed tracks. Some development becomes inevitable, and
suddenly it’s everywhere. Yet, just before that propitious moment, it
wasn’t inevitable at all, otherwise it would have happened already.
‘Steam engine time’ is a convenient metaphor for this curious process.
The invention of the steam engine wasn’t the first example, and it
certainly wasn’t the last, but it is one of the best known, and it’s
quite well documented.

Thurston distinguishes invention from discovery. He says that inventions
are _never_ the creation of a single individual, whereas great
discoveries _seldom_ are. However, the distinction isn’t always
clear-cut. Did ancient humans discover fire as a phenomenon of nature,
or did they invent fire as a technology to keep predators away, light
the cave, and cook food? The natural phenomenon surely came first, in
the form of brush- or forest fires triggered by lightning, or possibly a
droplet of water accidentally acting as a lens to concentrate the Sun’s
rays on to a piece of dry grass.¹

However, that kind of ‘discovery’ doesn’t _go_ anywhere until someone
finds a use for it. It was the idea of controlling fire that made the
difference, and that seems more of an invention than a discovery. Except
… you find out how to control fire by discovering that fires don’t
spread (so easily) across bare soil, that they can be spread very easily
indeed by picking up a burning stick and dropping it into dry brushwood,
or taking it home to the cave …

The inventive step, if there is such a thing, consists of putting
together several independent discoveries so that what emerges has
genuine novelty.

So inventions are often preceded by a series of discoveries. Similarly,
discoveries are often preceded by inventions. The discovery of sunspots
rested on the invention of the telescope, the discovery of amoebas and
Parameciums in pond water rested on the invention of the microscope. In
short, invention and discovery are intimately entwined, and it’s
probably pointless to try to separate them. Moreover, the significant
instances of both are much easier to spot in retrospect than they were
at the time they first happened. Hindsight is a wondrous thing, but it
does have the virtue of providing an explicit context for working out
what did, or did not, matter. Hindsight lets us organise the remarkably
messy process of invention/discovery, and tell convincing stories about
it.

The problem is, most of those stories aren’t true.

As children, many of us learned how the steam engine was invented. The
young James Watt, aged about six, was watching a kettle boil, and he
noticed that the pressure of the steam could lift the lid. In a classic
‘eureka’ moment, it dawned on him that a really big kettle could lift
really heavy bits of metal, and the steam engine was born.

The original teller of this story was the French mathematician François
Arago, author of one of the first biographies of Watt. For all we know,
the story may be true, though it is more likely a ‘lie-to-children’, or
educational aid,² like Newton’s apple. Even if the young Watt was indeed
suddenly inspired by a boiling kettle, he was by no means the first
person to make the connection between steam and motive power. He wasn’t
even the first person to build a working steam engine. His claim to fame
rests on something more complex, yet more significant. In Watt’s hands,
the steam engine became an effective and reliable tool. He didn’t
‘perfect’ it – many smaller improvements were made after Watt – but he
brought it into pretty much its final form.

Watt wrote in 1774: ‘The fire engine [= steam engine] that I have
invented is now going, and answers much better than any other that has
yet been made.’ In conjunction with his business partner Matthew
Boulton, Watt made himself the household name of the steam engine. And
it has done his reputation no harm that, in the words of Thurston: ‘Of
the personal history of the earlier inventors and improvers of the
steam-engine, very little is ascertained; but that of Watt has become
well known.’

Was Darwin just another Watt? Did he get credit for evolution because he
brought it into a polished, effective form? Is he famous because we
happen to know so much about his personal history? Darwin was an
obsessive record-keeper, he hardly threw away a single scrap of paper.
Biographers were able to document his life in exceptional detail. It
certainly did his reputation no harm that such a wealth of historical
material was available.

In order to make comparisons, let’s review the history of the steam
engine, avoiding lies-to-children as much as we can. Then we’ll look at
Darwin’s intellectual predecessors, and see whether a common pattern
emerges. How does steam engine time work? What factors lead to a
cultural explosion, as an apparently radical idea ‘takes off’ and the
world changes for ever? Does the idea change the world, or does a
changing world generate the idea?

Watt completed his first significant steam engine in 1768, and patented
it in 1769. It was preceded by various prototypes. But the first
recorded reference to steam as a source of motive power occurs in the
civilisation of ancient Egypt, during the Late Kingdom when that country
was under Roman rule. Around 150 BC (the date is very approximate) Hero
of Alexandria wrote a manuscript _Spiritalia seu Pneumatica_. Only
partial copies have survived to the present day, but from them we learn
that the manuscript referred to dozens of steam-driven machines. We even
know that several of them predated Hero, because he tells us so; some
were the previous work of the inventor Cestesibus, celebrated for the
great number and variety of his ingenious pneumatic machines. So we can
see the beginnings of steam engine time long ago, but initial progress
was so quiet and slow that steam engine time itself was still far in the
future.

One of Hero’s devices was a hollow airtight altar, with the figure of a
god or goddess on top, and a tube running through the figure. Unknown to
the punters, the altar contains water. When a worshipper lights a fire
on top of the altar, the water heats up and produces steam. The pressure
of the steam drives some of the remaining liquid water up the pipe, and
the god offers a libation. (As miracles go this one is quite effective,
and distinctly more convincing than a statue of a cow that oozes milk or
one of a saint that weeps.) Similar devices were commonplace from the
1960s to make tea at the bedside and pour it out automatically. They
still exist today, but are harder to find.

Another of Hero’s machines used the same principle to open a temple door
when someone lit a fire on an altar. The device is quite complicated,
and we describe it to show that these ancient machines went far beyond
being mere toys. The altar and door are above ground, the machinery is
concealed beneath. The altar is hollow, filled with air. A pipe runs
vertically down from the altar into a metal sphere full of water, and a
second inverted U-shaped pipe acts like a siphon, with one end inside
the sphere and the other inside a bucket. The bucket hangs over a
pulley, and ropes from the bucket wind round two vertical cylinders, in
line with the hinges of the door and attached to the door’s edge. They
then run over a second pulley and terminate in a heavy weight which acts
as a counterbalance. When a priest lights the fire, the air inside the
altar expands, and the pressure drives water out of the sphere, through
the siphon, and into the bucket. As the bucket descends under the weight
of water, the ropes cause the cylinders to turn, opening the doors.

Then there’s a fountain that operates when the sun’s rays fall on it,
and a steam boiler that makes a mechanical blackbird sing or blows a
horn. Yet another device, often referred to as the world’s first steam
engine, boils water in a cauldron and uses the steam to turn a metal
globe about a horizontal axis. The steam emerges from a series of bent
pipes around the sphere’s ‘equator’, at right angles to the axis.

In design, these machines weren’t toys, but as far as their applications
went, they might as well have been. Only the door-opener comes close to
doing anything we would consider practical, although the priests
probably found the ability to produce miracles on demand to be quite
profitable, and that’s practical enough for most businessmen today.

Looking back from the twenty-first century, it seems astonishing that it
took steam engine time so long to gain proper momentum, with all these
examples of steam power on public display all over the ancient world.
Especially since there was plenty of demand for mechanical power, for
the same reasons that finally gave birth to steam engine technology in
the eighteenth century – pumping water, lifting heavy weights, mining,
and transport. So we learn that it takes more than the mere ability to
_make_ steam engines, even in conjunction with a clear need for
something of that kind, to kick-start steam engine time.

And so the steam engine bumbled along, never disappearing entirely, but
never making any kind of breakthrough. In 1120 the church at Rheims had
what looks suspiciously like a steam-powered organ. In 1571 Matthesius
described a steam engine in a sermon. In 1519 the French academic Jacob
Besson wrote about the production of steam and its mechanical uses. In
1543 the Spaniard Balso de Garay is reputed to have suggested the use of
steam to power a ship. Leonardo da Vinci described a steam-gun that
could throw a heavy metal ball. In 1606 Florence Rivault, gentleman of
the bedchamber to Henry IV, discovered that a metal bombshell would
explode if it was filled with water and heated. In 1615, Salomon de
Caius, an engineer under Louis XIII, wrote about a machine that used
steam to raise water. In 1629 … but you get the idea. It went on like
that, with person after person reinventing the steam engine, until 1663.

In that year Edward Somerset, Marquis of Worcester, not only invented a
steam-powered machine for raising water: he got it built, and installed,
two years later, at Vauxhall – now part of London, but then just outside
it. This was probably the first genuine application of steam power to a
serious practical problem. No drawing of the machine exists, but its
general form has been inferred from grooves, still surviving, in the
walls of Raglan Castle, where it was installed. Worcester planned to
form a company to exploit his machine, but failed to raise the cash. His
widow in her turn made the same attempt, with the same lack of success.
So that’s another necessary ingredient for steam engine time: money.

In some ways, Worcester was the true creator of the steam engine, but he
gets little credit, because he was just a tiny bit ahead of the wave. He
does mark a moment at which the whole game changed, however: from this
point on, people didn’t just invent steam engines – they used them. By
1683, Sir Samuel Morland was building steam-powered pumps for Louis XIV,
and his book of that year reveals a deep familiarity with the properties
of steam and the associated mechanisms. The idea of the steam engine had
now arrived, along with a few of the things themselves, earning their
living by performing useful tasks. But it still wasn’t steam engine
time.

Now, however, the momentum began to grow rapidly, and what gave it a
really big push was mining. Mines, for coal or minerals, had been around
for millennia, but by the start of the eighteenth century they were
becoming so big, and so deep, that they ran into what quickly became the
miner’s greatest enemy: water.

The deeper you try to dig mines, the more likely they are to become
flooded, because they are more likely to run into underlying reservoirs
of water, or cracks that lead to such reservoirs, or just cracks down
which water from above can flow. Traditional methods of removing water
were no longer successful, and something radically different was needed.
The steam engine filled the gap neatly. Two people, above all, made it
possible to build suitable machinery: Dennis Papin and Thomas Savery.

Papin trained in mathematics under the Jesuits at Blois, and in medicine
in Paris, where he settled in 1672. He joined the laboratory of Robert
Boyle, who would nowadays be called an experimental physicist. Boyle was
working on pneumatics, the behaviour of gases – ‘Boyle’s law’, relating
the pressure and volume of a gas at constant temperature, continues to
be taught to this day. Papin invented the double air pump and the air
gun, and then he invented the Digester. This is best described as a
pressure-cooker, which is a saucepan with thick walls and a thick lid,
held on securely so that water inside boils to form high-pressure steam.
Food contained in the pan cooks very quickly.

The cookery aspect doesn’t affect our story, but one bit of technology
does. To avoid explosions, Papin added a safety valve, a feature
replicated in the sixties domestic version, and an important invention
because early involvement with steam engines was dangerous at the best
of times. The idea probably originated earlier, but Papin gets the
credit for using it to control steam pressure. In 1687 he moved to the
University of Marburg, where he invented the first mechanical steam
engine and the first piston engine. Throughout his career, he carried
out innumerable experiments with steam-related apparatus, and introduced
many significant pieces of gadgetry.

Steam engine time was hotting up. Savery, who also trained in
mathematics, brought it to the boil. In 1698 he patented the first
steam-powered pump that was actually used to clear mines of unwanted
water – in this case, the deep mines of Cornwall. He sent a working
model to the Royal Society, and later showed a model ‘fire engine’, as
the machines were then confusingly called, to William III. The King
granted him a patent:

A grant to Thomas Savery of the sole exercise of a new invention by him
invented, for raising of water, and occasioning motion to all sorts of
mill works, by the important force of fire, which will be of great use
in draining mines, serving towns with water, and for the working of all
sorts of mills, when they have not the benefit of water nor constant
winds; to hold for 14 years; with usual clauses.

Steam engine time was close at hand. What clinched it was that Savery
was a born businessman. He didn’t wait for the world to beat a path to
his door: he _advertised_. He gave lectures at the Royal Society, some
of which were published in its journals. He circulated a prospectus
among mine-owners and managers. And the selling point, naturally, was
profit. If you can open up deeper levels of your mine, you can extract
more minerals and make more money out of the same mine and the same bit
of land.

Two more major steps were needed before what Thurston calls the ‘modern’
steam engine – that of 125 years ago – became firmly established. The
first was to move from specialised, single-purpose machines, to
multi-purpose ones. The second was to improve the engine’s efficiency.

The move to multi-purpose steam engines was made by Thomas Newcomen, a
blacksmith by trade, who introduced a radical new kind of engine, the
‘atmospheric steam engine’. Previous engines had effectively combined a
steam-driven piston and a pump in the same apparatus. Newcomen separated
the components, and threw in a separate boiler and a condenser to boot.
The piston moves up and down like a ‘nodding donkey’, driving a rod,
which can be attached to … anything you like. Another engineer who must
be mentioned here was John Smeaton, who scaled Newcomen’s design up to
much larger size.

Now, finally, we come to James Watt. Whatever credit he deserves, it is
clear that he stood on the shoulders of a number of giants. Even if he
had been capable of inventing the steam engine on his own, the plain
fact is that he didn’t. His grandfather was a mathematician – there seem
to be a lot of mathematicians in the history of the steam engine – and
Watt inherited his abilities. He carried out lots of experiments, and he
made quantitative measurements, a relatively new idea. He worked out how
heat travelled through the materials of the engine, and how much coal it
took to boil a given amount of water. And he realised that the key to an
efficient steam engine was to control unnecessary heat loss. The worst
loss occurred in the cylinder that powered the piston, which kept
changing temperature. Watt realised that the cylinder should always be
kept at the same temperature as the steam that entered it – but how
could that be done? The answer, when he finally chanced upon it, was
simple and elegant:

I had gone to take a walk on a fine Sabbath afternoon. I had entered the
Green by the gate at the foot of Charlotte Street, and had passed the
old washing-house. I was thinking upon the engine at the time, and had
gone as far as the herd’s house, when the idea came into my mind that,
as steam was an elastic body, it would rush into a vacuum, and, if a
communication were made between the cylinder and an exhausted vessel, it
would rush into it, and might be condensed there without cooling the
cylinder … I had not walked farther than the Golf-house, when the whole
thing was arranged in my mind.

Such an easy thing to come up with – don’t cool the steam in the
cylinder, cool it _somewhere else_. Yet it improved the machine’s
efficiency so much that within a few years the only steam engines that
anyone even thought of installing were those of Watt and his financial
partner Boulton. Boulton-and-Watt engines cornered the market. No really
significant improvements were subsequently made to their design. Or, to
be more accurate, later ‘improvements’ supplanted the steam engine with
engines of a very different design, driven by coal and oil. The steam
engine had evolved to the pinnacle of its existence, and what displaced
it was, in effect, a new species of engine altogether.

In retrospect, steam engine time arrived around the period of Savery,
when the ability to make practical machines coincided with a genuine
need for them in an industry that could afford to pay for them and would
make more profits as a result. Add to that a sound business mind, to
notice the situation and exploit it, and a sense for publicity to raise
money from investors and get the idea off the ground, and the steam
engine went like a … train.

Ironically, before most people realised that steam engine time had
arrived, it had gone, again, and in the end there was only one winner.
The rest of the competition fell by the wayside. And that is why Watt
gets so much credit, and why, ultimately, he deserves it. But he also
deserves credit for his systematic quantitative experiments, his focus
on the theory behind the steam engine, and his development of the
concept – not as its inventor.

Certainly not for watching a kettle as a kid.

The history of the introduction of the Boulton-and-Watt steam engine is
essentially an evolutionary one: the fittest design survived, the less
fit were superseded and vanished from the historical record. Which
brings us to Darwin, and natural selection. The Victorian era was ‘steam
engine time’ for evolution; Darwin was just one of many people who
recognised the mutability of species. Does he deserve the credit he
gets? Was he, like Watt, the person who brought the theory to its
culmination? Or did he play a more innovative role?

In the introduction to _Origin_, Darwin mentions several of his
predecessors. So he certainly wasn’t trying to take credit for the ideas
of others. Unless you subscribe to the rather Machiavellian school of
thought that giving credit to others is just a sneaky way of damning
them with faint praise. One predecessor that he does _not_ mention is
perhaps the most interesting of all – his own grandfather, Erasmus
Darwin. Perhaps Charles felt that Erasmus was a bit too nutty to
mention, especially being a relative.

Erasmus knew James Watt, and may have helped him to promote his steam
engine. They were both members of the Lunar Society, an organisation of
Birmingham technocrats. Another was Josiah Wedgwood, Darwin’s uncle
Jos’s grandfather and founder of the famous ceramics company. The
‘Lunaticks’ met once a month at the time of the full moon – not for
pagan or mystic reasons, or because they were all werewolves, but
because that way they could see their way easily as they rode home after
a few drinks and a good meal.

Erasmus, a physician, could also turn a nifty hand to machinery, and he
invented a new steering mechanism for carriages, a horizontal windmill
to grind Josiah’s pigments, and a machine that could speak the Lord’s
Prayer and the Ten Commandments. When the 1791 riots against
‘philosophers’ (scientists) and for ‘Church and King’ put paid to the
Lunar Society, Erasmus was just putting the finishing touches to a book.
Its tide was _Zoonomia_, and it was about evolution.

Not, however, by Charles’s mechanism of natural selection. Erasmus
didn’t really describe a mechanism. He just said that organisms could
change. All plant and animal life, Erasmus thought, derived from living
‘filaments’. They _had_ to be able to change, otherwise they’d still be
filaments. Aware of Lyell’s Deep Time, Erasmus argued that:

In the great length of time, since the earth began to exist, perhaps
millions of ages before the commencement of the history of mankind,
would it be too bold to imagine, that all warm-blooded animals have
arisen from one living filament, which the first great cause endowed
with animality, with the power of acquiring new parts, attended by new
propensities, directed by irritations, sensations, volitions, and
associations; and thus possessing the faculty of continuing to improve
by its own inherent activity, and of delivering down those improvements
by generation to its posterity, world without end!

If this sounds Lamarckian, that’s because it was. Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
believed that creatures could inherit characteristics acquired by their
ancestors – that if, say, a blacksmith acquired huge muscular arms by
virtue of working for years at his forge, then his children would
inherit similar arms, _without_ having to do all that hard work. Insofar
as Erasmus envisaged a mechanism for heredity, it was much like
Lamarck’s. That did not prevent him having some important insights, not
all of them original. In particular, he saw humans as superior
descendants of animals, not as a separate form of creation. His grandson
felt the same, which is why he called his later book on human evolution
_The Descent of Man_. All very proper and scientific. But Ridcully is
right. ‘Ascent’ would have been better public relations.

Charles certainly read _Zoonomia_, during the holidays after his first
year at Edinburgh University. He even wrote the word on the opening page
of his ‘B Notebook’, the origin of _Origin_. So his grandfather’s views
must have influenced him, but probably only by affirming the possibility
of species change.³ The big difference was that from the very beginning,
Charles was looking for a mechanism. He didn’t want to point out _that_
species could change – he wanted to know _how_ they changed. And it is
this that distinguishes him from nearly all of the competition.

The most serious competitor we have mentioned already: Wallace. Darwin
acknowledges their joint discovery in the second paragraph of the
introduction to _Origin_. But Darwin wrote an influential and
controversial book, whereas Wallace wrote one short paper in a technical
journal. Darwin took the theory much further, assembled much more
evidence, and paid more attention to possible objections.

He prefaced _Origin_ with ‘An Historical Sketch’ of views of the origin
of species, and in particular their mutability. A footnote mentions a
remarkable statement in Aristode, who asked why the various parts of the
body fit together, so that, for example, the upper and lower teeth meet
tidily, instead of grinding against each other. The ancient Greek
philosopher anticipated natural selection:

Wheresoever, therefore, all things together (that is all the parts of
one whole) happened like as if they were made for the sake of something,
these were preserved, having been appropriately constituted by an
internal spontaneity; and whatsoever things were not thus constituted,
perished, and still perish.

In other words: if by chance, or some unspecified process the components
carried out some useful function, they would appear in later
generations, but if they didn’t, the creature that possessed them would
not survive.

Aristotle would have made short shrift of Paley.

Next, Darwin tackles Lamarck, whose views date from 1801. Lamarck
contended that species could descend from other species, mostly because
close study shows endless tiny graduations and varieties within a
species, so the boundaries between distinct species is much fuzzier than
we usually think. But Darwin notes two flaws. One is the belief that
acquired characteristics can be inherited – Darwin cites the giraffe’s
long neck as an example. The other is that Lamarck believed in
‘progress’ – a one-way ascent to higher and higher forms of
organisation.

A long series of minor figures follows. Among them is one noteworthy but
obscure fellow, Patrick Matthew. In 1831, he published a book about
naval timber, in which the principle of natural selection was stated in
an appendix. Naturalists failed to read the book, until Matthew drew
attention to his anticipation of Darwin’s central idea in the
_Gardener’s Chronicle_ in 1860.

Now Darwin introduces a better-known forerunner, the _Vestiges of the
Natural History of Creation_. This book was published anonymously in
1844 by Robert Chambers; it is clear that he was also its author. The
medical schools of Edinburgh were awash with the realisation that
entirely different animals have remarkably similar anatomies, suggesting
a common origin and therefore the mutability of species. For example,
the same basic arrangement of bones occurs in the human hand, the paw of
a dog, the wing of a bird, and the fin of a whale. If each were a
separate creation, God must have been running out of ideas.

Chambers was a socialite – he played golf – and he decided to make the
scientific vision of life on Earth available to the common man. A born
journalist, Chambers outlined not just the history of life, but that of
the entire cosmos. And he filled the book with sly digs at ‘those dogs
of the clergy’. The book was an overnight sensation, and each successive
edition slowly removed various blunders that had made the first edition
easy to attack on scientific grounds. The vilified clergy thanked their
God that the author had not begun with one of the later editions.

Darwin, who respected the Church, had to refer to _Vestiges_, but he
also had to distance himself from it. In any case, he found it woefully
incomplete. In his ‘Historical Sketch’, Darwin quoted from the tenth
‘and much improved’ edition, objecting that the anonymous author of
_Vestiges_ cannot account for the way organisms are adapted to their
environments or lifestyles. He takes up the same point in his
introduction, suggesting that the anonymous author would presumably say
that:

After a certain number of unknown generations, some bird had given birth
to a woodpecker, and some plant to the misseltoe [sic], and that these
had been produced perfect as we now see them; but this assumption seems
to me to be no explanation, for it leaves the case of the coadaptations
of organic beings to each other and to their physical conditions of
life, untouched and unexplained.

More heavyweights follow, interspersed with lesser figures. The first
heavyweight is Richard Owen, who was convinced that species could
change, adding that to a zoologist the word ‘creation’ means ‘a process
he knows not what’. The next is Wallace. Darwin reviews his interactions
with both, at some length. He also mentions Herbert Spencer, who
considered the breeding of domesticated varieties of animals as evidence
that species could change in the wild, without human intervention.
Spencer later became a major populariser of Darwin’s theories. He
introduced the memorable phrase ‘survival of the fittest’, which
unfortunately has caused more harm than good to the Darwinian cause, by
promoting a rather simple-minded version of the theory.

An unexpected name is that of the Reverend Baden Powell, whose 1855
‘Essays on the Unity of Worlds’ states that the introduction of new
species is a natural process, not a miracle. Credit for mutability of
species is also given to Karl Ernst von Baer, Huxley, and Hooker.

Darwin was determined not to miss out anyone with a legitimate claim,
and in all he lists more than twenty people who in various ways
anticipated parts of this theory. He is absolutely explicit that he is
not claiming credit for the idea that species can change, which was
common currency in scientific circles – and, as Baden Powell shows,
beyond. What Darwin is laying claim to is not the idea of evolution, but
that of natural selection as an evolutionary mechanism.

So … we come full circle. Does an innovative idea change the world, or
does a changing world generate the idea?

Yes.

It’s complicity. Both of these things happen – not once, but over and
over again, each progressively altering the other. Innovations redirect
the course of human civilisation. New social directions encourage
further innovation. The world of human ideas, and the world of things,
recursively modify each other.

That is what happens to a planet when a species evolves that is not
merely intelligent, but what we like to call _extelligent_. One that can
store its cultural capital outside individual minds. Which lets that
capital grow virtually without limit, and be accessible to almost
anybody in any succeeding generation.

Extelligent species take new ideas and run with them. Before the ink was
dry on _Origin_, biologists and laymen were already trying to test its
ideas, shoot them down, push them further. If Darwin had written
_Ology_, and if nobody else had written something like _Origin_, then
Victorian extelligence would have been enfeebled, and perhaps the modern
world would have taken longer to arrive.

But it was evolution time. _Somebody_ would have written such a book,
and soon. And in that alternat(iv)e world of if, he or she would have
got the credit instead.

So it’s only fair to give Darwin the credit in this world. Steam engine
time notwithstanding.

¹ Dry grass and drops of water are not commonly associated, but perhaps
a damp elephant had just emerged from a river crossing on to dry
savannah … Oh, invent your own explanation.

² See _The Science of Discworld_.

³ What would have happened if _Darwin_ had gone back in time and killed
his own grandfather?

NINETEEN

LIES TO DARWIN

[image] ARCHCHANCELLOR RIDCULLY’S MOUTH DROPPED OPEN.

‘You mean killed?’ he said.

+++ No +++, Hex wrote, +++ I mean vanished. Darwin disappears from
Roundworld in 1850. This is a new development. That is to say, it has
always happened, but has always happened only for the last two minutes
+++

‘I really hate time travel,’ sighed the Dean.

‘Kidnapped?’ said Ponder, hurrying across the hall.

+++ Unknown. Phase space currently contains proto-histories in which he
reappears after a fraction of one second and others where he never
reappears at all. Clarity must be restored to this new node +++

‘And you only tell us this now?’ said the Dean.

+++ It has only just happened +++

‘But,’ the Dean attempted, ‘when you looked at this … history before,
this wasn’t happening!’

+++ Correct. But that was then then, this is then now. Something has
been changed. I surmise that this is as a result of our activities. And,
having happened, it has always happened, from the point of view of an
observer in Roundworld +++

‘It’s like a play, Dean,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘The characters just see
the act they’re in. They don’t see the scenery being shifted because
that’s not part of the play.’

+++ Despite being wrong in every important respect, that is a very, good
analogy +++ Hex wrote.

‘Have you any idea where he is?’ said Ridcully.

+++ No +++

‘Well, don’t just sit there, man, find him!’

Rincewind reappeared above the lawn, and rolled expertly when he hit the
ground. Other wizards, nothing like so experienced at dealing with the
vicissitudes of the world, lay about groaning or staggered around
uncertainly.

‘It wears off,’ he said, as he stepped over them. ‘You might throw up a
bit at first. Other symptoms of rapid cross-dimensional travel are
short-term memory loss, ringing in the ears, constipation, diarrhoea,
hot flushes, confusion, bewilderment, a morbid dread of feet,
disorientation, nose bleeds, ear twinges, grumbling of the spleen,
widgeons, and short-term memory loss.’

‘I think I’d like to … thing … end of your life thing …’ murmured a
young wizard, crawling across the damp grass. Nearby, another wizard had
pulled off his boots and was screaming at his toes.

Rincewind sighed and made a grab at an elderly wizard, who was staring
around like a lost lamb. He was also soaking wet, having apparently also
landed in the fountain.

He looked familiar. It was impossible to know all the wizards in UU, of
course, but this one he had definitely seen before.

‘Are you the Chair of Oblique Frogs?’ he said.

The man blinked at him. ‘I … don’t know,’ he said. ‘Am I?’

‘Or the Professor of Revolvings?’ said Rincewind. ‘I used to write down
my name on a piece of paper before this sort of thing. That’s always a
help. You _look_ a bit like the Professor of Revolvings.’

‘Do I?’ said the man.

This looked like a very bad case. ‘Let’s find you your pointy hat and
some cocoa, shall we? You’ll soon feel—’

The Luggage landed with a thump, raised itself on its legs, and trotted
away. The possible Professor of Revolvings stared at it.

‘That? Oh, it’s just the Luggage,’ said Rincewind. The man didn’t move.
‘Sapient pearwood, you know?’ Rincewind carried on, watching him
anxiously. ‘It’s very clever wood. You can’t get the very clever wood
any more, not around here.’

‘It moves about?’ said the possible professor.

‘Oh, yes. Everywhere,’ said Rincewind.

‘I know of no plant life that moves about!’

‘Really? I wish I didn’t,’ said Rincewind, fervently, gripping the man a
little tighter. ‘Come on, after a nice warm drink you’ll—’

I must examine it closely! I am aware, of course of the so-called Venus
Fly—’

‘Please don’t!’ Rincewind pleaded, pulling the man back. ‘You cannot
botanise the Luggage!’

The bewildered man looked around with a desperation that was shading
into anger.

‘Who are you, sir? Where is this place? Why are all these people wearing
pointy hats? Is this Oxford? _What has happened to me!_’

A chilly feeling was creeping over Rincewind. Quite probably, he alone
of all the wizards had read Ponder’s briefings as they arrived by surly
porter; it paid to know what you might have to run away from. One had
included a picture of a man who looked as if he was evolving all by
himself, an effect caused by the riot of facial hair. This man was not
that man. Not yet. But Rincewind could see that he would be.

‘Um,’ he said, ‘I think you should come and meet people.’

It seemed to the wizards that Mr Darwin took it all very well, after the
initial and quite understandable screaming.

It helped that they told him quite a lot of lies. No one would like to
be told that they came from a universe created quite by accident and,
moreover, by the Dean. It could only cause bad feeling. If you were told
you were meeting your maker, you’d want something better.

It was Ponder and Hex who solved that. Roundworld’s history offered a
lot of opportunities, after all.

‘I didn’t _feel_ any lightning strike,’ Darwin said, looking around the
Uncommon Room.

‘Ah, you wouldn’t have done,’ said Ponder. ‘The whole force of it threw
you here.’

‘Another world …’ said Darwin. He looked at the wizards. ‘And you are …
magical practitioners …’

‘Do have a little more sherry,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.
The sherry glass in Darwin’s hand filled up again.

‘You _create_ sherry?’ he said, aghast.

‘Oh no, that’s done by grapes and sunshine and so on,’ said Ridcully.
‘My colleague just moved it from the decanter over there. It’s a simple
trick.’

‘We’re all very good at it,’ said the Dean cheerfully.

‘Magic is basically just movin’ stuff around,’ said Ridcully, but Darwin
was looking past him. The Librarian had just knuckled into the room,
wearing the old green robe he wore for important occasions or when he’d
had a bath. He climbed into a chair and held up a glass; it filled
instantly, and a banana dropped into it.

‘That is _Pongo pongo!_’ said Darwin, pointing a shaking finger. ‘An
ape!’

‘Well done that man!’ said Ridcully. ‘You’d be amazed at how many people
get that wrong! He’s our Librarian. Very good at it, too. Now, Mr
Darwin, there’s a delicate matter we—’

‘It’s another vision, isn’t it?’ said Darwin. ‘It’s my health, I know
it. I have been working too hard.’ He tapped the chair. ‘But this wood
feels solid. This sherry is quite passable. But magic, I must tell you,
does not exist!’ Beside him, with a little gurgle, his glass refilled.

‘Just one moment, sir, please,’ said Ponder. ‘Did you say _another_
vision?’

Darwin put his head in his hands. ‘I though it was an epiphany,’ he
groaned. ‘I thought that God himself appeared unto me and explained His
design. It made so much sense. I had relegated Him to the status of
Prime Mover, but now I see that He is immanent in His creation,
constantly imparting direction and meaning to it all … or,’ he looked
up, blinking, ‘so I thought …’

The wizards stood frozen. Then, very carefully, Ridcully said: ‘Divine
visitation, eh? And when was this, exactly?’

‘It would have been after breakfast,’ moaned Darwin. ‘It was raining,
and then I saw this strange beetle on the window. The room filled up
with beetles—’

He stopped, mouth open; a thin blue haze surrounded him.

Ridcully lowered his hand.

‘Well, well,’ he said. ‘What about _that_, Mr Stibbons?’

Ponder was scrabbling desperately at the paper on his clipboard.

‘I’ve no idea!’ he said. ‘Hex hasn’t mentioned it!’

The Archchancellor grinned the grim little grin of someone sensing that
the game, at last, was afoot.

‘Mono Island, remember?’ said Ridcully, while Darwin stared blankly at
nothing. ‘A god with a thing about beetles?’

‘I’d rather forget,’ Ponder shuddered. ‘But, but … no, it couldn’t be
_him_. How could the God of Evolution get into Roundworld?’

‘Same way the Auditors did?’ said Ridcully. ‘All the spacetime
continuumuum stuff we’re doing, who’s to say we aren’t leaving a few
doors ajar? Well, we can’t let the barmy old boy run around there! You
and Rincewind, meet me in the Great Hall in one hour!’

Ponder remembered the God of Evolution, who had been so proud of
developing a creature even better fitted to survive than mankind. It had
been a cockroach.

‘We should go right away,’ he said; firmly.

‘Why? We can move in time!’ said Ridcully. ‘The hour, Mr Stibbons, is
for you to come up with some way to kill Auditors!’

‘They’re indestructible, sir!’

‘All right – ninety minutes!’

TWENTY

THE SECRETS OF LIFE

[image] THE DISCWORLD VERSION OF DARWIN’S vision may not be _quite_ what
Roundworld’s historians of science like to tell us, but the two will
have been done converged on to the same timeline if the wizards manage
to have will defeated the Auditors, so we can concentrate on the
after-effects of that convergence. In any case some features are common
to both versions of Darwinian history, including apes, beetles, and
parasitic wasps. By contemplating these organisms, and many others –
especially those confounded barnacles, of course – Darwin was led to his
grand synthesis.

Today, no area of biology remains unaffected by the discovery of
evolution. The evidence that today’s species evolved from different
ones, and that this process still continues, is overwhelming. Very
little modern biology would make sense without the over-arching
framework of evolution. If Darwin were reincarnated today, he would
recognise many of his ideas, perhaps slightly reformulated, in the
conventional scientific wisdom. The big principle of natural selection
would be one of them. But he would also observe debate, perhaps even
controversy, about this fundamental pillar of his thinking. Not whether
natural selection happens, not whether it drives much of evolution; but
whether it is the _only_ driving force.

He would also find many new layers of detail filling some of the gaps in
his theories. The most important and far-reaching of these is DNA, the
magic molecule that carries genetic ‘information’, the physical form of
heredity. Darwin was sure that organisms could pass on their
characteristics to their offspring, but he had no idea how this process
was implemented, and what physical form it took. Today we are so
familiar with the role of genes, and their chemical structure, that any
discussion of evolution is likely to focus mainly on DNA chemistry. The
role of natural selection, indeed the role of organisms, has been
downgraded: the molecule has triumphed.

We want to convince you that it won’t stay that way.

Evolution by natural selection, the great advance that Darwin and
Wallace brought to public attention, is nowadays considered to be
‘obvious’ by scientists of most persuasions and by most non-specialists
outside the US Bible Belt. This consensus has arisen partly because of a
general perception that biology is ‘easy’, it isn’t a real,
hard-to-understand science like chemistry or physics, and most people
think that they know enough about it by a kind of osmosis from the
general folk information. This assumption showed up amusingly at the
Cheltenham Science Festival in 2001, when the Astronomer Royal Sir
Martin Rees and two other eminent astronomers gave talks on ‘Life Out
There’.

The talks were sensible and interesting, but they made no contact with
real modern biology. They were based on the kind of biology that is
currently taught in schools, most of which is about thirty years out of
date. Like almost everything in school science, because it takes at
least that long for ideas to ‘trickle down’ from the research frontiers
to the classroom. Most ‘modern mathematics’ is at least 150 years old,
so thirty-year-old biology is pretty good. But it’s not what you should
base your thinking on when discussing cutting-edge science.

Jack, in the audience, asked: ‘What would you think of three biologists
discussing the physics of the black hole at the centre of the galaxy?’
The audience applauded, seeing the point, but it took a couple of
minutes for the scientists on the platform to understand the symmetry.
They were then as contrite as they could be without losing their
dignity.

This kind of thing happens a lot, because we are all so familiar with
evolution that we think we understand it. We devote the rest of this
section to a reasonable account of what the average person thinks about
evolution. It goes like this.

Once upon a time there was a little warm pond full of chemicals, and
they messed about a bit and came up with an amoeba. The amoeba’s progeny
multiplied (because it was a good amoeba) and some of them had more
babies (something funny here …) and some had fewer, and some of them
invented sex and had a much better time after that. Because biological
copying wasn’t very good in those days, all of their progeny were
different from each other, carrying various copying mistakes called
_mutations_.

Nearly all mutations were bad, on the principle that putting a bullet
randomly through a piece of complex machinery is unlikely to improve its
performance, but a few were good. Animals with good mutations had many
more babies, and those had the good mutation too, so they thrived and
bred. Their progeny carried the good mutation into the future. However,
many more bad mutations accumulated, so natural selection killed those
off. Luckily, another new mutation appeared, which made a new character
for a new species (better eyes, or swimming fins, or scales), which was
altogether better and took over.

These later species were fishes, and one of them came out on land,
growing legs and lungs to do so. From these first amphibians arose the
reptiles, especially the dinosaurs (while the unadventurous fishes were
presumably just messing about in the sea for millions of years, waiting
to be fish and chips). There were some small, obscure mammals, who
survived by coming out at night and eating dinosaur eggs. When the
dinosaurs died, the mammals took over the planet, and some evolved into
monkeys, then apes, then Stone Age people.

Then evolution stopped, with amoebas in ponds content to remain amoebas
and not wanting to be fishes, fishes not wanting to be dinosaurs but
just living their little fishy lives, the dinosaurs wiped out by a
meteorite. The monkeys and apes, having seen what it was like to be at
the peak of evolution, are now just slowly dying out – except in zoos,
where they are kept to show us what our progenitors used to be like.
Humans now occupy the top branch of the tree of life: since we are
perfect, there’s nowhere for evolution to go any more, which is _why_ it
has stopped.

If pressed for more detail, we dredge up various things we’ve learned,
mostly from newspapers, about things called _genes_. Genes are made from
a molecule called DNA, which takes the form of a double helix and
contains a kind of code. The code specifies how to make that kind of
organism, so human DNA contains the information needed to make a human,
whereas cat DNA contains the information for a cat, and so on. Because
the DNA helix is double, it can be split apart, and the separate parts
can easily be copied, which is how living creatures reproduce. DNA is
the molecule of life, and without it, life would not exist. Mutations
are mistakes in the DNA copying process – typos in the messages of life.

Your genes specify everything about you – whether you’ll be homosexual
or heterosexual, what kinds of diseases you will be susceptible to, how
long you will live … even what make of car you will prefer. Now that
science has sequenced the human genome, the DNA sequence for a person,
we know all of the information required to make a human, so we know
everything there is to know about how human beings work.

Some of us will be able to add that most DNA isn’t in the form of genes,
but is just ‘junk’ left over from some distant part of our evolutionary
history. The junk gets a free ride on the reproductive roller-coaster,
and it survives because it is ‘selfish’ and doesn’t care what happens to
anything except itself.

Here ends the folk view of evolution. We’ve parodied it a little, but
not by as much as you might hope. The first part is a lie-to-children
about natural selection; the second part is uncomfortably close to
‘neo-Darwinism’, which for most of the past 50 years has been the
accepted intellectual heir to _The Origin_. Darwin told us _what_
happens in evolution; neo-Darwinism tells us _how_ it happens, and how
it happens is DNA.

There’s no question that DNA is central to life on Earth. But virtually
every month, new discoveries are being made that profoundly change our
view of evolution, genetics, and the growth and diversification of
living creatures. This is a vast topic, and the best we can do here is
to show you a few significant discoveries and explain why they are
significant.

Just as physics replaced Newton by Einstein, there has been a major
revolution in the basic tenets of biology, so we now have a different,
more universal view of what drives evolution. The ‘folk’ evolutionary
viewpoint: ‘I’ve got this new mutation. I have become a new kind of
creature. Is it going to do me any good?’ is not the way modern
biologists think.

There are many things wrong with our folk-evolution story. In fact we’ve
deliberately constructed it so that every single detail is wrong.
However, it’s not very different from many accounts in popular science
books and television programmes. It assumes that primitive animals alive
today are our ancestors, when they are our cousins. It assumes that we
‘came from’ apes, when of course the ape-like ancestor of man is the
same creature as the man-like ancestor of modern apes. More seriously,
it assumes that mutations in the genetic material, the changes that
natural selection has to work on – indeed, to select among – are checked
out as soon as they appear, and labelled ‘bad’ (the organism dies, or at
least fails to breed) or ‘good’ (the animal contributes its progeny to
the future).

Until the early 1960s, that was what most biologists thought too.
Indeed, two very famous biologists, J.B.S. Haldane and Sir Ronald
Fisher, produced important papers in the mid-1950s espousing just that
view. In a population of about 1000 organisms, they believed, only about
a third of the breeding population could be ‘lost’ to bad gene variants,
or could be ousted by organisms carrying better versions, without the
population moving towards extinction. They calculated that only about
ten genes could have variants (known as ‘alleles’) that were increasing
or decreasing as proportions of the population. Perhaps twenty genes
might be changing in this way if they were not very different in
‘fitness’ from the regular alleles. This picture of the population
implied that almost all organisms in a given species must have pretty
much the same genetic make-up, except for a few which carried the good
alleles coming in, and winning, or the bad alleles on the way out.¹
These exceptions were mutants, famously and stupidly portrayed in many
SF films.

However, in the early 1960s Richard Lewontin’s group exploited a new way
to investigate the genetics of wild (or indeed any) organisms. They
looked at how many versions of common proteins they could find in the
blood, or in cell extracts. If there was just one version, the organism
had received the same allele from both of its parents: the technical
term here is ‘homozygous’. If there were two versions, it had received
different ones from each parent, and so was ‘heterozygous’.

What they found was totally incompatible with the Fisher-Haldane
picture.

They found, and this has been amply confirmed in thousands of wild
populations since, that in most organisms, about _ten per cent_ of genes
are heterozygous. We now know, thanks to the Human Genome Project, that
human beings have about 34,000 genes. So about 3400 are heterozygous, in
any individual, instead of the ten or so predicted by Haldane and
Fisher.

Furthermore, if many different organisms are sampled, it turns out that
about one-third of all genes have variant alleles. Some are rare, but
many of them occur in more than one per cent of the population.

There is no way that this real-world picture of the genetic structure of
populations can be reconciled with the classical view of population
genetics. Nearly all current natural selection must be discriminating
between different combinations of _ancient_ mutations. It’s not a matter
of a new mutation arriving and the result being immediately subjected to
selection: instead, that mutation must typically hang around, for
millions of years, until eventually it ends up playing a role that makes
enough of a difference for natural selection to notice, and react.

With hindsight, it is now obvious that all currently existing breeds of
dog must have been ‘available’ – in the sense that the necessary alleles
already existed, somewhere in the population – in the original
domesticated wolves. There simply hasn’t been _time_ to accumulate the
necessary mutations purely in modern dogs. Darwin knew about the amount
of cryptic and overt variation in pigeons, too. But his successors, hot
on the trail of the molecular basis of life, forgot about wolves and
pigeons. They pretty much forgot about cells. DNA was complicated
enough: cell biology was impossible, and as for understanding an
_organism_ …

Lewontin’s discovery was a significant turning point in our
understanding of heredity and evolution. It was at least as radical as
the much better publicised revolution that replaced Newton’s physics
with Einstein’s, and it was arguably more important. We will see that in
the last year or so there has been another, even more radical, revision
of our thinking about the control of cell biology and development by the
genes. The whole dogma about DNA, messenger RNA, and proteins has been
given a reality check, and science’s internal ‘auditors’ have rendered
it as archaic as Fisher’s population genetics.

It is commonly assumed – not only by the average television producer of
pop science half-hours, but also by most popular science book authors –
that now we know about DNA, the ‘secret of life’, evolution and its
mechanisms are an open book. Soon after the discovery of DNA’s structure
and mechanism of replication by James Watson and Francis Crick, in the
late 1950s, the media – and biology textbooks at all levels – were
beginning to refer to it as the ‘Blueprint for Life’. Many books,
culminating with Dawkins’s _The Selfish Gene_ in the 1970s, promoted the
view that by knowing about the mechanism of heredity, we had found the
key to all of the important puzzles of biology and medicine, especially
evolution.

There was soon to be a major tragedy, resulting from a medical
application of that mistaken view. The sedative thalidomide was
increasingly being prescribed, and bought over the counter, to treat
nausea and other minor discomforts of the early weeks of pregnancy. Only
later was it discovered that in a small proportion of cases, thalidomide
could cause a type of birth defect known as phocomelia, in which arms
and legs are replaced by partially developed versions that resemble a
seal’s flippers.

It took a while for anyone to notice, partly because few general
practitioners had experience of phocomelia before 1957. In fart, very
few of them had ever seen a case at all, but after 1957 they began to
see two or three in a year. A second reason was that it was very
difficult to tie this defect to a particular potion or treatment:
pregnant women famously take a great variety of dietary additives, and
often they don’t remember precisely what they’ve taken. Nevertheless, by
196l some medical detective work had tied the spate of phocomelia down
to thalidomide.

American doctors congratulated themselves on having missed out on the
pathology, because Frances Kelsey, a medical worker for the Food and
Drug Administration, had expressed misgivings about the original animal
testing of the drug. Her misgivings eventually turned out to have been
unfounded, but they did save much suffering in the USA. She noticed that
the drug had not been tested on pregnant animals, because at that time
such tests were not required. Everyone knew that the embryo has its own
blueprint for development, quite separate from that of the mother.
However, embryologists trained in biology departments, as distinct from
medical embryologists, knew about the work of Cecil Stockard, Edward
Conklin, and other embryologists of the 1920s. They had shown that many
common chemicals could caused monstrous developmental defects. For
instance, lithium salts easily induced cyclopia, a single central eye,
in fish embryos. These alternative developmental paths, induced by
chemical changes, have taught us a lot about the biological development
of organisms, and how it is controlled.

They have also taught us that an organism’s development is _not_ rigidly
determined by the DNA of its cells. Environmental insults can push the
course of development along pathological paths. In addition, the
genetics of organisms, particularly wild organisms, are usually
organised so that ‘normal’ development happens _despite_ a variety of
environmental insults, and even despite changes in some of the genes.
This so-called ‘canalised’ development is very important for
evolutionary processes, because there are always temperature variations,
chemical imbalances and assaults, parasitic bacteria and viruses; the
growing organism must be ‘buffered’ against these variations. It must
have versatile developmental paths to ensure that the ‘same’
well-adapted creature is produced, whatever the environment is doing.
Within reasonable limits, at any rate.

There are many developmental tactics and strategies that help to
accomplish this. They range from simple tricks like the HSP90 protein to
the very clever mammalian trade-off.

HSP stands for ‘heat shock protein’. There are about 30 of these
proteins, and they are produced in most cells in response to a sudden,
not very severe, change of temperature. A different array of proteins is
produced in response to other shocks; this one is called HSP90 because
of where it sits in a much longer list of cell proteins. HSP90, like
most HSPs, is a chaperonin: its job is to hug other proteins during
their construction, so that when the long line of amino acids folds up
it achieves the ‘right’ shape. HSP90 is very good at making the ‘right’
shape – even if the gene that specifies the chaperoned protein has
accumulated a lot of mutations. So the resulting organism doesn’t
‘notice’ the mutations; the protein is ‘normal’ and the organism looks
and behaves just like its ancestral form.

However, if there’s a heat shock or other emergency during development,
HSP90 is diverted from its role as chaperonin, and other less powerful
chaperonins permit the mutational differences to be expressed in most of
the progeny. The effect this has on evolution is to keep the organisms
much the same until there’s an environmental stress, when suddenly, in
one generation, lots of previously hidden, but hereditable, variation
appears.

Most books that describe evolution seem to assume that every time
there’s a mutation, the environment promptly gets to judge it good or
bad … but one little trick, HSP90, which is present in most animals and
many bacteria, makes nonsense of that assertion. And from Lewontin’s
discovery that a third of genes have common variants in wild
populations, and that all organisms carry lots of them, it is clear that
ancient mutations are continually being tested in different modern
combinations, while the potential effects of more recent mutations are
being cloaked by HSP90 and its ilk.

The trick employed by mammals is much more complex and far-reaching.
They reorganised their genes, and got rid of a lot of genetic
complication that their amphibian ancestors relied on, by adopting a new
and more controlled developmental strategy.

Most frogs and fishes, whose eggs usually encounter great differences
and changes of temperature during each embryology, ensure that the
‘same’ larva, and then adult, results. Think of frog spawn in a frozen
English pond, warming up to 35°C during the day while the delicate early
development proceeds; then the little hatchling tadpoles have to endure
these temperature changes. Now think of the frogs that so few of the
tadpoles become.

Most chemical reactions, including many biochemical ones, happen at
different rates if the temperature is different. You only get a frog if
all the different developmental processes fit together effectively, and
timing is crucial. So how does frog development work at all, given that
the environment is changing so quickly and repeatedly?

The answer is that the frog genome ‘contains’ many different contingency
plans, for many different environmental scenarios. There are many
different versions of each of the enzymes and other proteins that frog
development requires. All of them are put into the egg while it is in
mother frog’s ovary. There are perhaps as many as ten versions of each,
appropriate to different temperatures (fast enzymes for low
temperatures, sluggish ones for higher temperatures, to keep the
duration of development much the same²), and they have ‘labels’ on the
packages that make them, so the embryo can choose which one to use
according to its temperature. Animals whose development must be buffered
in this way use a lot of their genetic programme to set up contingency
plans for many other variables, in addition to temperature.

The mammals cleverly avoided all of this faffing around, by making their
females thermostatically controlled – ‘warm-blooded’. What counts is not
the warmth of the blood, but the system that maintains it at a constant
temperature. The beautifully controlled uterus keeps all kinds of other
variables away from the embryos, too, from poisons to predators. It
probably ‘costs’ much less in DNA programming to adopt this strategy,
too.

This trick, evolved by the mammals, carries an important message. To ask
how much information passes across the generations in the DNA blueprint,
as textbooks and sophisticated research manuals often do, is to miss the
point. How the genes and proteins are _used_ is far more important, and
far more interesting, than how many genes or proteins there are in a
given creature. Lungfishes and some salamanders, even some amoebas, have
more than fifty times as much DNA as we mammals do. What does this say
about how complex these creatures are, compared to us?

Absolutely nothing.

Tricks like HSP90, and strategies like warm-bloodedness and keeping
development inside the mother, mean that bean-counting of DNA
‘information’ is beside the point. What counts is what the DNA means,
not how big it is. And meaning depends on context, as well as content:
you can’t regulate the temperature of a uterus unless your context (that
is, mother) provides one.

The simple-minded ‘mutation’ viewpoint, allied to trendy interpretations
of DNA function in terms of ‘information theory’, is often allied with
ignorance of biology in other areas. One example is radiation biology
and simple ecology as seen by ‘conservation activists’. Some of these
volunteers found five-legged frogs and other ‘monsters’ downwind of the
Chernobyl site, years after the nuclear accident but while radiation
levels were still noticeably high. They claimed that the monsters were
mutants, caused by the radiation. Other workers, however, then found
just as many supposed mutants upwind of the reactor site.

It turned out that the best explanation had nothing to do with mutant
frogs. It was the _absence_ of their usual predators, owls and hawks and
snakes, because there were so many humans trudging about. _Rana
palustris_ tadpoles from Chernobyl produced no more of these pathologies
than did other frogspawn samples from ponds some tens of kilometres away
that had not been subjected to radiation, when a high percentage of both
was allowed to survive. Usually, in British _Rana temporaria_ frogs, it
is very difficult to achieve ten per cent normal adults, or even ones
that are viable in the laboratory, but they don’t produce extra limbs as
_palustris_ does. It is normally the case, of course, that a female
frog’s lifetime production of some 10,000 eggs results in a few highly
selected, and therefore ‘normal’, survivors, and on average just two
breeders. But conservationists don’t like thinking about this
reproductive arithmetic, with all those deaths.

Here is another issue, again chosen from the thalidomide literature,
that demonstrates how talk of Lamarckism, or of ‘mutations’, misses the
point.

Some of the children affected by thalidomide have married each other,
and several of these pairings have produced phocomelic children. The
obvious deduction, from the folk-DNA point of view, is that the DNA of
the first generation must have been altered, so that it produced the
same effect in the next generation. In fact, this effect looks, at first
glance, like Lamarckism: the inheritance of acquired characters. Indeed,
it seems a classic demonstration of such inheritance, as convincing as
if cutting off terriers’ tails resulted in puppies being born with short
tails. However, it is actually a lesson in not attempting to explain
things ‘at first glance’, like the conservationists did with the
abnormal frogs.

It is very tempting to do just that, when the idea of heredity in your
mind is that one gene leads to one character, so if you’ve got the
character you’ve got the gene, and vice versa. Figures from the
epidemiological literature suggest that in the space of a few years
either side of 1960, about 4 million women took thalidomide at the
critical time during gestation. Of those, about 15,000–18,000 fetuses
were damaged; 12,000 came to birth with defects, and about 8,000
survived their first year. That is to say, the natural course of
development _selected_ just 1 in 500 who showed adverse effects. The
proportion of children born with no detectable defect was much, much
higher. And that fact changes our view of the likely reason for the
children of two thalidomide parents to suffer from phocomelia, for the
following reason.

Conrad Waddington demonstrated a phenomenon called ‘genetic
assimilation’. He started with a genetically diverse population of wild
fruit flies, and found that about one in 15,000 of their pupae, when
warmed, produced a fly with no cross-vein in its wing. These
‘cross-veinless’ flies looked just like some very rare mutant flies that
turned up occasionally in the wild, just as occasional genetically
phocomelic children turned up before thalidomide. By breeding from the
flies that responded to the treatment, Waddington selected for a lower
and lower threshold of response. In a few tens of generations, he had
selected flies that bred true for the cross-veinless trait, exhibiting
it regularly _without_ anyone warming the pupae. This may look like
Lamarckian inheritance, but it’s not. It’s genetic assimilation. The
experiments were selecting flies that had no cross-vein at lower and
lower temperature thresholds. Eventually, they selected flies that had
no cross-vein at ‘normal’ temperatures.

Similarly, genetic assimilation provides a much better explanation than
Lamarckism for the phocomelic children of thalidomide-modified parents.
We have _selected_, from some 4 million foetuses, those that respond to
thalidomide with phocomelia. It is not surprising that when they marry
each other, they produce a few progeny whose threshold is very low –
below zero in fact. They are so liable to produce phocomelia that they
do it without thalidomide, just as Waddington’s flies came to produce
cross-veinlessness without warming the pupae.

*

One of the things that really worried Darwin was the existence of
parasitic wasps – a fact that has influenced our Discworld tale, but has
gone unremarked until now in the scientific commentaries. Parasitic
wasps lay their eggs in other insects’ larvae, so that as the wasp eggs
grow into wasp larvae, they eat their hosts. Darwin could see how this
might have happened on evolutionary grounds, but it seemed to him to be
rather immoral. He was aware that wasps don’t have a sense of morality,
but he saw it as some kind of flaw on the part of the wasps’ creator. If
God designed each species on Earth, for a special purpose – which is
what most people believed at the time – then God had deliberately
designed parasitic wasps, whose purpose was to eat other species of
insect, also designed by God. To be so eaten, presumably.

Darwin was fascinated by such wasps, ever since he first encountered
them in Botafogo Bay, Brazil. He eventually satisfied himself – though
not his successors – that God had found it necessary to permit the
existence and evolution of parasitic wasps _in order to get to humans_.
This is what the quote at the end of Chapter 10 alludes to. That
particular explanation has fallen out of favour among biologists, along
with all theist interpretations. Parasitic wasps exist because there is
something for them to parasitise – so why not? Indeed, parasitic wasps
play a major role in controlling many other insect populations: nearly
one-third of all of the insect populations that humans like to label
‘pests’ are kept at bay in this manner. Maybe they _were_ created in
order for humans to be possible … At any rate, the wasps that so puzzled
Darwin still have much to tell us, and the latest discovery about them
threatens to overturn several cherished beliefs.

Strictly, the discovery is not so much about the wasps, as about some
viruses that infect them … or are symbiotic with them. They are called
polydnaviruses.

When mother wasp injects her eggs into some unsuspecting larva, such as
a caterpillar, she also injects a solid dose of viruses, among them said
polydnaviruses. The caterpillar not only gets a parasite, it gets an
infection. The virus’s genes produce proteins that interfere with the
caterpillar’s own immune system, stopping it reacting to the parasite
and, perhaps, rejecting it. So the wasp larvae munch merrily away on the
caterpillar, and in the fullness of time they develop into adult wasps.

Now, any self-respecting adult parasitic wasp obviously needs its own
complement of polydnaviruses. Where does it get them? From the
caterpillar that it fed on. And it gets them (just as mother did) not as
a separate infective ‘organism’, but as what is called a provirus: a DNA
sequence that has been integrated into the wasp’s own genome.

Many genomes, probably most if not all, include various bits of viruses
in this way. Our own certainly does. Transport of DNA by viruses seems
to have been an important feature of evolution.

In 2004 a team headed by Eric Espagne worked out the DNA sequence of a
polydnavirus – as one does – and what they found was dramatically
different from what anyone had expected. Typical virus genomes are very
different from those of ‘eukaryotes’ – organisms whose cells have a
nucleus, which includes most multi-cellular creatures and many
single-celled ones, but not bacteria. The DNA sequences of most
eukaryote genes consist of ‘exons’, short sequences that collectively
code for proteins, separated by other sequences called introns, which
get snipped out when the code is turned into the appropriate protein.
Viral genes are relatively simple, and typically they do not contain
introns. They consist of connected code sequences that specify proteins.
This particular polydnavirus genome, in contrast, does contain introns,
quite a lot of them. The genome is complex, and looks much more like a
eukaryote genome than a virus genome. The authors conclude that
polydnavirus genomes constitute ‘biological weapons directed by the
wasps against their hosts’. So they look more like the enemy’s genome
than that of an ordinary virus.

*

Numerous examples, old and new, disprove every aspect of the folk
version of evolution and DNA. We end with one that looks especially
important, discovered very recently, and whose significance is just
becoming seriously apparent to the biological community. It is probably
the most severe shock that cell biology has received since the discovery
of DNA and the wonderful ‘central dogma’: DNA specifies messenger-RNA
which specifies proteins. The discovery was not made through some big,
highly publicised research programme like the human genome project. It
was made by someone who wondered why his petunias had gone stripy. When
all the world is chasing ‘the’ human genome, it’s not easy to get
research grants to work on stripy petunias. But what the petunias
revealed is probably going to be far more important for medicine than
the entire human genome project.

Because proteins _are_ the structure of living creatures, and because as
enzymes they control the processes of life, it has seemed obvious that
DNA controls life, that we can ‘map’ DNA code on to all the important
living functions. We could assign a function to each protein, so we
could assume that the DNA that coded for that protein was ultimately or
fundamentally responsible for the corresponding function. Dawkins’s
early books reinforced the idea of one gene, one protein, one function
(although he carefully warned his readers that he didn’t want to give
that impression), and this encouraged such media exaggerations as
calling the human genome the Book of Life. And the ‘selfish gene’ image
made it entirely credible that huge stretches of the genome were present
for solely selfish reasons – that is, for no reason related to the
organism concerned.

Biologists employed – as so many now are – in the biotechnology
industries serving agriculture, pharmacy, medicine, even some
engineering projects (we don’t mean just ‘genetic engineering’ but
making better motor oils), all subscribe to the central dogma, with a
few minor modifications and exceptions. All of them have been informed
that nearly all of the DNA in the human genome is ‘junk’, not coding for
proteins, and that although some of it may be important for
developmental processes or for controlling some of the ‘real’ genes,
they really don’t need to worry about it.

Admittedly, quite a lot of junk DNA seems to be transcribed into RNA,
but these are just short lengths that sit about briefly in the cell
fluids and don’t need to be considered when you’re doing important
protein-making things with the real genes. Recall that the DNA sequences
of real genes consist of a mosaic of ‘exons’ which code for proteins,
separated by other sequences called introns. The introns have to be cut
out of the RNA copies to get the ‘real’ protein-coding sequences, called
messenger-RNAs, which lace into ribosomes like tapes into a tape player.
Messenger-RNAs determine what proteins get made, and they have sequences
on their ends that label them for making many copies of a protein or for
destruction after only a couple of protein molecules.

Nobody worried much about those snipped-out introns, just bits of RNA
drifting aimlessly around in the cell till they got broken up by
enzymes. Now, they do worry. Writing in the October 2004 _Scientific
American_, John Mattick reports that

The central dogma is woefully incomplete for describing the molecular
biology of eukaryotes. Proteins do play a role in the regulation of
eukaryotic gene expression, yet a hidden, parallel regulatory system
consisting of RNA that acts directly on DNA, RNAs and proteins is also
at work. This overlooked RNA signalling network may be what allows
humans, for example, to achieve structural complexity far beyond
anything seen in the unicellular world.

Petunias made that clear. In 1990 Richard Jorgensen and colleagues were
trying to breed new varieties of petunias, with more interesting,
brighter colours. An obvious approach was to engineer into the petunia
genome some extra copies of the gene that coded for an enzyme involved
in the production of pigment. More enzyme, more pigment, right?

Wrong.

_Less_ pigment?

No, not exactly. What previously was a uniformly coloured petal became
stripy. In some places the pigment was being produced, elsewhere it
wasn’t. This effect was so surprising that plant biologists tried to
find out exactly why it was happening. And what they found was ‘RNA
interference’. Certain RNA sequences can shut down a gene, prevent it
making protein. It happens in many other organisms, too. In fact, it is
extremely widespread. And it suggests something extraordinarily
important.

The big question in this area, asked many times and largely ignored, has
always been: if introns (which occupy all but one-twentieth of a typical
protein-coding gene) have no biological function, why are they there? It
is easy to dismiss them as relics of some dim evolutionary past, no
longer useful, lying around because natural selection can’t get rid of
things that are harmless. Even so, we can still wonder whether introns
are present because they do have some useful function, one that we
haven’t yet worked out. And it’s starting to look as if that may be the
case.

For a start, introns are not that ancient. It now seems that they became
incorporated into the human genome relatively recently. They are
probably related to mobile genetic elements known as group II introns,
which are a ‘parasitic’ form of DNA that can invade host genomes and
then remove themselves when the DNA is expressed as RNA. Moreover, they
now seem to have a role as ‘signals’ in the regulation of genetic
processes. An intron may be relatively short, compared to the long
protein-coding sequences that arise when the introns are snipped out,
but a short signal has advantages and can do quite a lot. In effect, the
introns may be genetic ‘txt msgs’ in the mobile phone of life. Short,
cheap, and very effective. An RNA-based ‘code’, running parallel to the
DNA double helix, can affect the activity of the cell very directly. An
RNA sequence can act as a very specific, well-defined signal, directing
RNA molecules to their targets in RNA or DNA.

The evidence for the existence of such a signalling system is
reasonable, but not yet undeniable. If such a system does exist, it
clearly has the potential to resolve many biological mysteries. A big
puzzle about the human genome is that its 34,000 genes manage to encode
over 100,000 proteins. Clearly ‘one gene one protein’ doesn’t work. A
hidden RNA signalling system could make one gene produce several
proteins, depending on what the accompanying RNA signal specified.
Another puzzle is the complexity of eukaryotes, especially the Cambrian
explosion of 525 million years ago, when the range of terrestrial
body-plans suddenly diversified out of all recognition; indeed, was more
diverse than it is now. Perhaps the hypothetical RNA signalling system
started to take off at that time. And it’s widely known that the human
and chimpanzee genomes are surprisingly similar (though the degree of
similarity seems not to be 98 per cent as widely quoted even a few years
ago). If our RNA signals are significantly different, that would be one
way to explain why humans don’t greatly resemble chimps.

At any rate, it very much looks as if all that ‘junk’ DNA in your genome
is not junk at all. On the contrary, it may be a crucial part of what
makes you human.

This lesson is driven home by those business associates of parasitic
wasps, the symbiotic polydnaviruses, sneakily buried inside the wasps’
own DNA. There is a message there about human evolution, and it’s a very
strange one.

Genome-sequencing may have been oversold as _the_ answer to human
diseases, but it’s very good basic science. The activities of the
sequencers have revealed that wasps are not the only organisms to have
bits of viral DNA hanging around in their genomes. In fact, most
creatures do, humans included. The human genome even contains one
_complete_ viral genome, and only one, called ERV-3 (Endogenous
RetroVirus). This may seem an evolutionary oddity, a bit of ‘junk DNA’
that really is junk … but, actually, without it none of us would be
here. It plays the absolutely crucial role of preventing rejection of
the fetus by the mother. Mother’s immune system ‘ought to’ recognise the
tissue of a developing baby as ‘foreign’, and trigger actions that will
get rid of it. By ‘ought to’ here we mean that this is what the immune
system normally does for tissue that is not the mother’s own.

Apparently, the ERV-3 protein closely resembles another one called p15E,
which is part of a widespread defence system used by viruses to stop
their hosts killing them off. The p15E protein stops lymphocytes, a key
type of cell in the immune system, from responding to antigens,
molecules that reveal the virus’s foreign nature. At some stage during
mammalian evolution, this defence system was stolen from the viruses and
used to stop the female placenta responding to antigens that reveal the
foreign nature of the fetus’s _father_. Perhaps on the principle of
being hung for a sheep as well as for a lamb, the human genome decided
to go the whole hog³ and steal the entire retroviral genome.

When evolution carried out the theft, however, it did not just dump its
booty into the human DNA sequence unchanged. It threw in a couple of
introns, too, splitting ERV-3 into several separate pieces. It’s
_complete_, but not connected. No matter: enzymes can easily snip out
the introns when that bit of DNA is turned into protein. But no one
knows why the introns are there. They might be an accidental intrusion.
Or – pursuing the RNA interference idea – they might be much more
significant. Those introns might be an important part of the genetic
regulatory system, ‘text messages’ that let the placenta use ERV-3
without running the risk of setting the corresponding virus loose.

At any rate, whatever the introns are for, warm-bloodedness is not the
only trick that mammalian evolution managed to find and exploit. It also
indulged in wholesale theft of a virus’s genome, to stop mother’s immune
system booting out baby because it ‘smelled’ of father. And we also get
another lesson that DNA isn’t _selfish_. ERV-3 is present in the human
genome, but not because it’s a bit of junk that gets copied along with
everything else and has remained because it does no harm. It’s there
because, in a very real sense, humans could not survive – could not even
_reproduce_ – without it.

¹ They made exceptions for manifestly ‘unimportant’ but very diverse
sets of alleles like blood groups, but in those cases it didn’t seem to
matter much which kind you had.

² That’s very important for a few species. Zebra-fish eggs in the wild
must hatch in just under 72 hours, because they’re laid just before dawn
and must hide before the third dawn when predators could see them.

³ Sorry about the proliferation of barnyard metaphors.

TWENTY-ONE

NOUGAT SURPRISE

[image] THE ACTIVITY IN THE GREAT HALL was slowing down now. All along
the rainbow lines of time, the nodes were closed. Or shut, or denoded,
Rincewind thought. Whatever you did with nodes, anyway. There was a
little cheer as the last glowing wizard symbol faded away, and a roar
from outside as three wizards and a lot of tentacles landed in the
fountain. Rincewind had been surprised about that, and then dismayed.
Since it did _not_ have his name on it, this meant that Ridcully had
something worse in mind.

‘Looks like I’m not needed now,’ he said hopefully, just in case.

‘Haha, professor, what a card you are and no mistake,’ said the lobster
next to him. ‘The Archchancellor was very definite that we was to keep
you here no matter what you said.’

‘But I wasn’t running away!’

‘No, you was only inspecting the wall with the loose bricks in it,’ said
the lobster.¹ We quite understand. Lucky for you we caught you before
you dropped over into the alley, eh? Could’ve done yerself a mischief.’

Rincewind sighed. The lobsters were always hard to outrun. They hunted
in packs, appeared to share a common brain, and many years of harrying
erring students had given them a malignant street cunning that verged on
the supernatural.

Some of the senior wizards swept in … There was an argument going on
between Ridcully and the Dean.

‘I don’t see why I shouldn’t.’

‘Because you get too excited in the presence of combat, Dean. You run
around making silly “hut, hut” noises,’ said Ridcully. ‘Remember why we
had to stop those paintball afternoons? You didn’t seem to be able to
get the hang of the term “people on my side”.’

‘Yes, but this is—’

‘It took us a week to get the Senior Wrangler looking halfway suitable
for polite company – Ah, Rincewind. Still with us, I see. Good man. Very
well, Mr Stibbons: report!’

Ponder coughed.

‘Hex confirms that, er, that our recent activities may have left
camiloops between our word and Roundworld, sir. That is to say, residual
connections that may be used deliberately or inadvertently from either
side. Magic doors, in fact, drifting without anchor. These will
evaporate within a matter of days. Um …’

‘I don’t want to hear “um”, Mr Stibbons. “Um” is not a word we entertain
here.’

‘Well, the fact is that since the camiloops are spread over centuries,
the Auditors may very well have been in Roundworld for some time. We
have no way of knowing for how long. Hex, um, sorry, does report some
circumstantial evidence that humans are dimly aware of their malign
meddling, albeit at a very mundane level as evidenced by the findings of
a researcher called Murphy. Roundworld would be difficult for them. They
would be bewildered. Things would not work the way they expect. They are
not flexible thinkers.’

‘They were able to mess around with Mr Darwin’s voyage!’

‘By doing lots of small and rather stupid things at great effort, sir.
They don’t react well to adversity. They get petulant. From what
Professor Rincewind tells us, many hundreds of them have to combine to
perform even a simple physical action.’

He stood back and indicated some items laid out on a dining table.

‘There is some evidence that Auditors, being embodiments of physical
laws, find it hard to deal with nonsensical or contradictory
instructions. Therefore, I have prepared these.’

He flourished something that looked like a table-tennis bat. On it were
printed the words: ‘Do Not Read This Sign.’

‘That works, does it?’ said the Dean, doubtfully.

‘It’s said to put their minds into a fugue state, Dean. They feel
confused and alone, and evaporate instantly. Being alone means having a
sense of self, and any Auditor that develops an individuality is said to
die instantly.’

‘And the catapult bows?’ What are _they_ for?’ said the Archchancellor,
slapping the Dean’s hand off one of them.

‘In addition, it is possible that a collective of Auditors with
sufficient presence in the material world may develop crude physical
senses, and so I have adapted some catapult bows to fire a mixture of
intense, er, stimuli. Old references suggest chilli, essence of Wahoonie
or Blissberry blossoms, but modern thinking inclines to Higgs & Meakins
Luxury Assortment.’

‘Chocolate?’ said Ridcully.

‘They don’t like it, sir.’

‘But those things can live in empty space and inside stars, man!’

‘Where chocolate is significantly absent, sir,’ said Ponder, patiently.
‘They keep away from it. Also, it comes handily packed. They
particularly don’t like the Strawberry Whirl.’

Ridcully picked up a bow, pointed it at a wizard, and fired. There was a
distant ‘ow!’

‘Hmm. Spreads nicely on impact,’ he said. ‘Well done, Mr Stibbons. I’m
impressed. You are in charge.’

The Dean bridled at this. ‘I protest! I am the Dean, when all is said
and done!’

‘Oh, all _right_, Dean, you can come! But, and I want to make myself
_absolutely_ clear, you are not to point anything at anything unless I
give you a clear instruction, understood?’

‘Yes, Mustrum,’ said the Dean meekly.

‘Furthermore, you will not, at any point, wave your weapon in the air
and shout “choc and load”. Is that clear? I say that because I can
practically see the silly words forming in your head!’

‘That’s a vile calumny!’ the Dean shouted.

‘I hope so. Stibbons, wait here with the proctors and see no harm comes
to Mr Darwin. Hex, you know where to send us. Invisibly, if you please!’

While Charles Darwin was sitting in a blue haze in Unseen University, a
slightly younger Charles Darwin was staring out at the rain, noting idly
that the rain sounded a little like whispering.

A drawback of invisibility is that no one can see you; it is in fact the
main drawback if there is a group of you –

‘– _that was my foot!_’

‘_Who is that?_’

‘_Look where you ’re going!_’

‘_And what help will that be?_’

‘_Keep it down, you fellows! He’ll hear you!_’

At which point, the wall in the corner dissolved and brilliant light
shone through. Beetles of all sizes and colours poured into the study in
a shimmering torrent.

A figure that the wizards recognised stepped though the hole and looked
around him with an air of amiable bewilderment. He had a slightly
lopsided circlet of leaves on his head, and glowed with the light of
deity.

‘Mr Darwin?’ he said, as the figure in the corner turned and stared. ‘I
understand you are studying evolution and are currently perplexed?’

‘Look behind him!’ Ridcully whispered.

The unseen wizards stared into the flickering hole. There was sand, and
sea in the distance, a suggestion of moving shadows …

‘After me,’ Ridcully hissed, as an astonished Darwin dropped to his
knees. ‘Let’s _get_ them …’

The wizards poured through the camiloop, while behind them an elderly
voice said: ‘Of course, selection is, ahaha, anything but natural. Take,
for example, a species of parasitic wasp …’

The sand boiled. Sometimes handfuls of it fountained into the air. One
invisible person can move with stealth and speed. Half a dozen invisible
people are an accident waiting to happen again and again.

‘This is not being our finest hour,’ said the voice of Ridcully. ‘Every
time I start to stand up someone else treads on me! Can’t Hex sort this
out?’

‘We’re back in the real world,’ said the invisible Dean. ‘Hex’s power
isn’t so strong here. It’ll take him some time to find us. Would you
mind getting off my leg. Thank you so very much.’

‘That’s not me, I’m over here. I don’t see _why_ it’s a problem. We were
in another world, after all!’

‘Roundworld is right inside the High Energy Magic Building,’ said the
Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘We’re thousands of miles way, I suspect.
Could I possibly suggest we all endeavour to crawl away in different
directions? If you, Dean, head for that little bush with the red
flowers, and Rincewind – where’s Rincewind?’

‘Here,’ said a muffled voice from under the sand.

‘Sorry … _you_ head for that rock _there_ …’

By degrees, with only the occasional curse, the wizards were able to get
to their unseen feet.

‘This is Mono Island, I recognise that mountain,’ said Ridcully. ‘Look
out for—’

‘Why didn’t we just bop him on the head?’ said the Dean. ‘Just a tap on
the noggin? Then we could have dragged him back here, end of problem.’

‘But it’s quantum,’ said Rincewind. ‘We have to deal with what’s
happened. If we stop it happening before it happens, the other things
we’ve …’ he hesitated. ‘Look, it’s quantum. Believe me, I’d prefer it
the other way.’

‘Anyway, you can’t just bop gods on the head,’ said Ridcully, now a
faint outline against the distant ocean. ‘It doesn’t usually work and it
causes talk. The other gods would be bound to hear about it, too.’

‘So? None of them like him. They exiled him here after he invented the
hermit elephant!’ said the Dean, who was also fading into view.

‘It’s the look of the thing,’ said Ridcully. ‘They don’t want to
encourage deicide. Besides, look up there …’

‘Oh dear,’ said Rincewind. ‘Auditors …’

A grey cloud was rolling down the mountain. As it neared, it contracted
upon itself, growing darker.

‘They’ve _learned_ things,’ said Ridcully. ‘They’ve never done _that_
before. Oh, well … Rincewind, first line of defence, if you please. And
hurry!’

Rincewind, who’d always operated on the assumption that if you carried a
weapon you were giving the enemy something extra to hit you with, held
up a placard. It read: GO AWAY.

‘Stibbons says it should work,’ said Ridcully, uncertainly.

The Auditors drew closer, merging until, now, only half a dozen were
left. They were dark, and full of menace.

‘Ah, they probably aren’t the reading sort, then,’ said Ridcully.
‘Gentlemen, it’s chocolate time …’

It had to be said that the most of the wizards were not natural aimers.
A spell went where you wanted it to go. You just had to wave in the
general direction. They’d never learned to be serious about pointing.

Some shots went home. When several hit an Auditor it let out a thin
scream and began to break up into its component robes, which then
evaporated. But one, slightly large than the others, zigged and zagged
through the tumbling chocolates. Auditors _did_ learn here … and the
wizards were running out of chocolate.

‘Hold it,’ said the Dean, pointing his bow.

The shape stopped.

‘Ah,’ said the Dean, happily. ‘Ha, I expect you are wondering, eh, I
expect you are wondering, indeed, if I have any chocolate left? And as a
matter of fact I’m no—’

‘No,’ said the Auditor, drifting forward.

‘What? Pardon?’

‘I am not wondering if you have any chocolate left,’ said the dark
apparition. ‘You have none left. The Higgs & Meakins Luxury Assortment
comprises two each of: Walnut Whips, Strawberry Whirls, Caramel Bars,
Violet Creams, Coffee Creams, Cherry Whips and Walnut Clusters and one
each of Almond Delight, Vanilla Cup, Peach Cream, Coffee Fondue and
Lemon Extravaganza.’

The Dean smiled the smile of a man whose Hogswatches had come all at
once. He raised the bow.

‘Then be so kind as to say good day to the Nougat Surprise!’

There was a twang. The sweet flew. For a moment the Auditor wavered, and
the wizards held their breath. Then, with the slightest of whimpers, it
faded into nothing.

‘Everyone forgets the Nougat Surprise,’ said the Dean, turning to the
other wizards. ‘I suppose it’s because it’s so irredeemably awful.’

There was nothing but the sound of the sea for a few seconds. Then:

‘Er … well done, Dean,’ said Ridcully.

‘Thank you, Archchancellor.’

‘A little too showy, nevertheless. I mean, you didn’t have to _chat_ to
the thing.’

‘I wasn’t in fact sure if I _had_ used the nougat,’ said the Dean, still
smiling. Quite an effort would be needed to wipe that smile away,
Ridcully knew, and so he gave up.

‘Good show, all the same,’ he mumbled, and then raised his voice. ‘If
you can hear me, Hex … back to the Great Hall, please.’

Nothing happened. An important part of transferring matter _across_ the
world is the moving of an equivalent mass the other way. This can take a
while.

Then an oak table, three chairs and two spoons crashed into the beach. A
moment later, the wizards vanished.

¹ The University’s proctors were known as lobsters because they went
very red when hot and had a grip that was extremely hard to shake off.
They were generally ex-army sergeants, had depths of cynicism
unplumbable by any line, and were fuelled by beer.

TWENTY-TWO

FORGET THE FACTS

[image] … IT’S THEORIES THAT MATTER.

Discworld does not have science as such. But it does have a variety of
systems of causality, ranging from human intentions (‘I’ll just go out
for a drink in the Mended Drum’) to magical spells to a generalised
narrativium that keeps local and general history close to the lines of
‘story’. Roundworld does have science, but it’s difficult to discover
the extent to which it determines, modifies, affects people’s actions –
technology does, of course, but does science? Science does _affect_ what
we do, what we think, but it doesn’t _change_ what we do and think
because so much of our basic knowledge is simply accepted scientific
‘fact’.

Well, actually not ‘fact’, but theory.

We search for theories because they organise facts. We do this,
according to _The Science of Discworld II_, because we are really _Pan
narrans_, the storytelling ape, not _Homo sapiens_, the wise man. We
invent our own stories to help ourselves to live. For this reason we are
not reliable when we collect ‘facts’ for scientific purposes. Even the
best scientists, and certainly the paid help and the student employees,
are so full of what they _want_ to find that there’s no way that what
they do find can relate to the real world more than to their own
prejudices, biases, and wishes. However, we were all told at school that
‘science’s facts are reliable’, but that its theories – and even more so
its working hypotheses – are and were constantly subject to criticism,
and therefore to change. It was explained to us that Newton had been
supplanted by Einstein, Lamarck by Darwin, Freud by Skinner … So we were
told that theories were constantly being supplanted, but that the
observations on which they were based were reliable.

This is the reverse of the truth.

No teacher pointed out that many, perhaps most, of the basic assumptions
of our intellectual world were scientific theories that had _survived_
criticism … from the place of Earth and Sol in the Milky Way galaxy to
the fertilisation theory of human conception to subatomic physics
producing atom bombs … to Ohm’s Law and the electrical energy grid, to
medical tricks like the germ theory of disease, all the way to X-rays
and MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), not to mention chemical theories
that reliably gave us nylon, polythene and detergents. These theories go
unnoticed because they have become defaults, so completely accepted as
‘true’ that we fail to paint them with emotional tags, and simply, build
them into our intellectual toolkit. Even though no teacher pointed out
that they were scientific successes, they constitute much of the
(regrettably but unavoidably) uninspiring parts of school science.

On these foundation beliefs we hang such glittering flesh as visits to
Mars, new fertility techniques like ICSI, fusion power, new bactericides
for kitchen surfaces – and for a minority of the more imaginative
children, the wide and wonderful worlds of science fiction.

The theories of science, then, particularly the totally accepted ones
like sperm-egg conception, polythene, and Earth-orbits-Sun, are good
reliable science. They are continually tested against the real world
when babies are conceived in fertility clinics, when people do the
washing-up, or when astronauts circle the Earth in sunlight and shadow.
An enormous mass of Roundworld science is built into our everyday world,
and it’s mostly reliable.

But there is also a whole mass of science that is incomprehensible to
nearly everybody, which pretends that it’s The Answer for all kinds of
technical or philosophical issues, and which supports experts. Quantum
theory is the classic case, relativity is a touch more accessible, but
subatomic physics and most of medicine, aeronautics and automobile
engineering, soil chemistry and biology, statistics, and the higher
reaches of economics, are all subjects that nearly everybody is content
to leave to the experts. Mathematics has a strange position, similar but
with its own peculiar stance akin to revealed religion – mostly because
it has been presented from school onwards as an arcane craft whose
practitioners are the only humans with access to Platonic truths.

Then there are the quasi¹-sciences like astrology, homeopathy,
reflexology, and iridology, which simply can’t work. They should be
sharply distinguished from odd, often ancient practices like
acupuncture, osteopathy and herbal treatments, which work sufficiently
often but have a theoretical base that is poorly worked out in
scientific terms. Many people are attracted by their homespun mix of
myth and mysticism (which are all the more impressive because the
treatment sometimes _works_), and feel that a modern scientific
investigation would somehow spoil them. It would certainly poke some
holes in the traditional rationalisations, but in all likelihood it
would make the treatments even better. Whereas the quasi-sciences would
be (indeed, already have been, not that everyone’s noticed) demolished.

To end that list, we add evolutionary biology, a very well-established
set of models founded in the fossil record, chromosomes, and DNA, which
explains similarities and differences among today’s living creatures
much more elegantly and effectively than its creationist or
intelligent-design rivals. Nevertheless, a very large proportion of
people – especially Christians in the American Mid-West, Muslims in
fanatically Islamic cultures, and fundamentalist believers in general –
deny that humans evolved. To them, their own brand of authority trumps
the scientific evidence, or their ‘common sense’ renders the whole
concept laughable. ‘I ain’t kin to no ape!’ was the explanation given by
a young schoolgirl at one of Jack’s _Life on Other Planets_ lectures,
when the teacher asked her why she didn’t believe in evolution.

There is a general human propensity, of which much use is made in the
Discworld books, to set up accepted, unexamined mental backgrounds.
Mostly these result from the Make-a-Human-Being kits that each human
culture inflicts on its members as they grow up through childhood and
adolescence. Each of us is the result of a learning process, only a tiny
fraction of which is overt ‘education’ by professional teachers. The kit
includes nursery rhymes, songs, stories, the personification of nursery
animals (sly foxes, wise owls, industrious litter-collecting Wombles)
and human roles from fabulous postman and princess up to crime-fighting
Batman and Superman. All these have their place in the unexamined basis
of our day-to-day thoughts and actions. A possible explanation for
Princess Diana’s undeniable popularity with the British public – indeed
the world – is that she, unlike ‘real’ royalty, had imbibed the
_popular_ impression of What Princesses Do as distinct from the
authentically royal version. So she did what _we_ had all learned that
real princesses do, she looked and behaved like an icon, not like
genuine royalty.

Sophisticated human beings, citizens like us – and indeed like tribesmen
and barbarians² in today’s world, nearly all of whom have heard of
Superman, Tarzan, Ronald MacDonald – all have this hotchpotch of images,
models, phobias, inspirations and villains. Our day-to-day experience
gives us a self whose memory-train is a succession of scenes, thoughts,
experiences, and passions, all painted à la Damasio with emotional tags
that say ‘Great!’, ‘Do This Again When I Can!’ or ‘Avoid At All Costs!’
when we recall them. But these sit upon a great mass of mostly
unexamined structural human material, that labels us as Western
Twentieth-Century Biologist or Ghetto Rabbi or Roman Centurion or
Seventeenth-Century French Courtesan, or, for most people most of the
time, Exploited Peasant.

Each of those roles has a different set of emotional labels for money,
for priests, for sex, for nakedness, for death, and for birth. Most
people, until quite recently, underpinned that unexamined set of beliefs
with a theist (personal, humanlike) God or gods, or a deist (Something
Up There with Extraordinary Powers) god-structure, so the emotional tags
on important memories have been strongly God-flavoured. When we remember
them they may be sins, atonements, redemptions or trials. They may be
mitzvahs (blessings) or revenges or charities. Religions, in bringing us
into our cultures _via_ their Make-a-Christian or Make-a-Maya kit, put
different-strength labels on, for example, human sacrifice, so that it
has a whole host of associations in adult life. Our adult prejudices,
and our scientific theories, go in on top of this crazy mishmash of
historical errors, badly understood schooling, mathematics and
statistics that barely make sense to us, God-stories of causality and
ethics, and educational lies-to-children that permit the teacher to
disengage his brain in response to children’s questions.

This mental mishmash is well illustrated by our changing attitudes to
Mars. Mars was known to the ancients as a ‘wandering star’, a planet;
its reddish colour had bloody associations, so the Romans associated it
with their god of war. It also acquired a connection with war in
astrology, where the visible stars and planets all had to _mean_
something. We’re going to look at a lot of different associations with
Mars,³ as myth and rationality engaged with the red planet, as stories
by the hundred employed Mars and Martians, and as the scientific picture
of Mars changed over the centuries.

We shouldn’t ask ‘which is the true Mars?’ We become larger humans by
considering all of these aspects; from that stance there really isn’t a
true, real, objective planet for our minds to engage with usefully. Our
simple, thin causal lines can’t comprehend a real astronomical object,
even a world which is actually out there so that we can see it. The ‘it’
we see can be the disc whose apparent lines Giovanni Schiaparelli called
‘canali’, which excited Percival Lowell (whose grasp of Italian seems to
have been slight, since the word means ‘channels’) to see them as
engineered canals. He wrote _Mars as the Abode of Life_, and this laid
the foundation for the folk Mars of the twentieth century.

Between the World Wars, everybody in the West, and many in the East,
looked into the night sky and saw inimical Martians, a mental residue of
that 1920s picture of a drying, dying Mars. The image was overlaid by
the _War of the Worlds_ picture of envious, grim, disgusting tripod
Martians invading Earth (or at least England). There was a more romantic
overlay for many of those out camping, or sleeping out under the stars:
_Barsoom_. Edgar Rice Burroughs, familiar because of his Tarzan stories,
invented a Mars whose dried-out seabeds were home to green Martian
warrior hordes, six-legged centaur-like creatures whose egg-incubators
were visited regularly. John Carter, an American ex-confederate army
officer, had wished himself on to Mars, been captured by the green
warriors but soon found himself married to a red Martian princess.⁴
Stanley Weinbaum’s _A Martian Odyssey_ added more dimensions: the
Martian called Tweel, who made long hops and landed on his nose, the
hypnotic predator that showed you your most desirable images, and
attempts at a gosh-wow desert ecology. Then there were stories of
Martians coming to Earth, pretending to be human … and humans attempting
to interact with a more or less mystical ancient Martian civilisation.

The best known, perhaps the best crafted of these romantic-mystical
portrayals of crude, lumbering Earthmen, insensitive to the ethereal
beauties of the Martian crystal cities, were Ray Bradbury’s. In the
1950s and 1960s his tales were read by many outside the fantasy/SF
world, and they appeared in widely read magazines like _Argosy_ as well
as in SF pulps in railway station bookstores. They laid the mystical
ancient Martian foundation for Robert Heinlein to build the most potent
of all these Martian tales, _Stranger in a Strange Land_. Michael
Valentine Smith had been a foundling on Mars, brought up and trained in
their culture by the ancient Martians. He came to Earth, founded a
commune of friends – ‘Water Brothers’ – and started a religion whose
‘grokking the fullness’ of everyday events, from sex to science to
swimming, spread to communities of readers. There was a tragic,
well-publicised association with the murderous Manson killers, who had
used this book as their mantra, but this didn’t harm sales, and the
ancient mystical Martians became the standard image.

Then we learned that Mars has no atmosphere to speak of, that it is
cold, dry, laden with frozen carbon dioxide, to the extent that the
‘icecaps’ were probably dry ice. Our machines visited Mars, looked for
‘life’, and found strange chemistry because we inevitably asked the
wrong questions. The ‘canals’ died in the public mind, replaced by
craters and gigantic volcanoes.

We have now visited again, and it seems that ancient, wet Mars may have
been a reality, there may be at least bacterial life forms under the
sand … Much is not yet clear, but what is clear is that our image of
Mars has changed yet again.

Each of us has a variety of associations with Mars. When we weave these
many different interpretations and imaginations together, we become a
different, wiser kind of creature. As for all of our different Marses …
well, those are toys of our imaginations, as we grok the red planet’s
fullness.

If Mars seems a bit of a digression, consider those twin icons of
evolution, the archaeopteryx and the dodo. In folk-evolutionary
thinking, the archaeopteryx is the ancestor of all the birds, and the
dodo is the bird that went extinct about 400 years ago. ‘As dead as a
dodo.’ Again, our thinking about these iconic creatures is heavily
daubed with unchallenged assumptions, myths, and fictional associations.

We mentioned archaeopteryx in Chapter 36 (‘Running from Dinosaurs’) of
_The Science of Discworld_, second edition. We think of it as the
ancestral bird because it is a dinosaur-like animal with birdlike
feathers … and _it was the first one to be found_. However, by the time
of archaeopteryx there were plenty of genuine birds around, among them
the diving bird _Ichthyornis_. Poor old archaeopteryx arrived on the
scene far too late to be ‘the’ bird ancestor.

The recent amazing ‘dinobird’ discoveries in China – transitional
creatures part way between dinosaurs and birds – have totally changed
scientists’ view of bird evolution. At some stage some dinosaurs started
to develop feathers, though they couldn’t then fly. The feathers had
some other function, probably keeping the animal warm. Later, they
turned out to be useful in wings. Some dinobirds effectively had four
wings – two at the front, two at the back. It took a while before the
standard ‘bird’ body-plan settled down.

As for the dodo – we all know what it looked like, right? Fat little
thing with a big hooked beak … Such a famously extinct creature must be
well documented in the scientific literature.

No, it’s not. What we have is about ten paintings and half a stuffed
specimen.⁵ We have more specimens of the archaeopteryx than we do of the
dodo. Why? The dodo went _extinct_, remember? And it did so before
science really got interested in it. So few people recorded it, or
studied it. It was _there_, not requiring special attention, and then it
wasn’t, and it was too late to start studying it. It isn’t even certain
what colour it was – many books say ‘grey’, but it was more likely
brown.

Yet, we all know exactly what it looked like. How come? Because we all
saw it illustrated by Sir John Tenniel in _Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland_.

Say no more.

The great strength of Discworld narrative is that it makes fun of just
those places where ‘education’ has left us feeling a bit vulnerable:
where we change the subject in the pub, or when our five-year-old asks
us those probing questions. A running joke throughout the _Science of
Discworld_ series is what grammarians call ‘privatives’. These are
concepts that our minds seem quite happy with, even though a moment’s
thought shows that they’re complete nonsense. Chapter 22 of _The Science
of Discworld_ discussed this notion, and we recap briefly.

It is entirely normal to speak of ‘cold coming in the window’ or
‘ignorance spreading among the masses’. The _opposites_ of these
concepts, heat and knowledge, are real, but we’ve dignified their
absence with words that do not correspond to actual things. In
Discworld, we find ‘knurd’, which is super-sober, as far from ordinary
sober as drunk is in the alcoholic direction. There are jokes about the
speed of dark, which must be faster than the speed of light because dark
has to get out of the way. On Discworld, Death exists as a (perhaps
_the_) major character, but on Roundworld that word refers only to the
absence of life.

People habitually label the absence of something with a word, instead of
(or as well as) its presence: such words are the aforementioned
privatives.

Sometimes this habit leads to mistakes. The classic case was the label
‘phlogiston’, the substance that appears to be emitted by burning
materials. You can _see_ it coming out as smoke, flame, foam … It took
many years to demonstrate that burning was an intake of oxygen, not the
emission of phlogiston. During the intervening period, many people had
demonstrated that when metals burned they got heavier, and had therefore
argued that phlogiston had negative weight. These were clever people;
they weren’t being stupid. The phlogiston idea really did work – until
oxygen supplanted its explanations, and alchemists suddenly found that
the paths into rational chemistry were easier.

Privatives are often very tempting. In _What is Life?_, a short book
published in 1944, the great physicist Erwin Schrödinger asked precisely
that question. At that time the Second Law of Thermodynamics –
everything runs down, disorder always increases – was thought to be a
fundamental principle about the universe. It implied that eventually
everything would become a grey, cool soup of maximum entropy, maximum
disorder: a ‘heat death’ in which nothing interesting could happen. So
in order to explain how, in such a universe, life could occur,
Schrödinger claimed that life could only put off its individual tiny
heat death by imbibing negative entropy, or ‘negentropy’. Many
physicists still believe this: that life is unnatural, selfishly causing
entropy to increase more in its vicinity than it would otherwise do, by
eating negentropy.

This tendency to deny what is happening before our very eyes is part of
what it is to be human. Discworld exploits it for humorous and serious
purposes. By building Discworld flat, Terry pokes fun at flat-Earthers;
rather, he recruits his readers into a ‘we all know the Earth is round,
don’t we?’ fellowship. The Omnians’ belief in a round Disc, in _Small
Gods_, adds a further twist.

We want to put what rational people are coming to believe into a general
human context, so let’s look at what everyone believes. In these days of
fundamentalist terrorists we would do well to understand why a few
people hold beliefs that are so different from the rational. These
unexamined beliefs may be vitally important, because the ignorant people
who espouse them think that they provide a good reason for killing us
and our loved ones, even though they have never considered alternatives.
People Who Know The Truth, by heredity or personal revelation or
authority, are not concerned with logic or the validity of premises.

Nearly everybody who has ever lived has been one of those.

There have been a few sparse times and places – and we are hoping that
the twenty-first century will host a few of them – in which onlookers
are more ready to believe a disputant who is unsure, than one who is
certain. But in today’s politics, changing your mind in response to new
evidence is seen as a weakness. When he was Vice-Chancellor at Warwick
University, the biologist Sir Brian Follett remarked: ‘I don’t like
scientists on my committees. You don’t know where they’ll stand on any
issue. Give them some more data, and they change their minds!’ He
understood the joke: most politicians wouldn’t even realise it _was_ a
joke.

In order to discuss the kinds of explanation and understanding that are
going to have future values, we need at least a simple geography of
where human beings pin their faiths now. What kinds of world picture are
most common? They include those of the authoritarian theist, the
more-or-less imaginative theist, the more critical deist, and various
kinds of atheists – from Buddhists and the followers of Spinoza to
those, including many scientists and historians, who simply believe that
the age of religion is behind us.

Most human beings of the last few millennia seem to have been
authoritarian theists, and we still have many of them in our world;
perhaps they are still a majority. Does this mean that we must give
intellectual ‘equal time’ to these views (plural, because they’re all
very different: Zeus, Odin, Jahweh …), or can we just dismiss them all
with ‘I have no need of that hypothesis’, as Laplace supposedly said to
Napoleon. Voltaire, aware that God making man in His image meant that
God’s nature might be deduced from man’s, thought it at least possible
that God has mischievously misinformed us about reward and punishment.
Perhaps sinners are rewarded by Heaven and saints are given a taste of
Hell. Our view is that all the various authoritarian theists are the
contemporary bearers of an extremely successful memeplex, a package of
beliefs designed and selected through the generations to ensure its own
propagation.

A typical memeplex is the Jewish _shema_: ‘And these words … you shall
teach them to your children, muse on them when you get up and when you
lie down … Write them upon the doorposts of your house and upon your
gates.’ Like e-mail chain letters that threaten you with punishment if
you fail to send them on to many friends, and with ‘luck’ if you do send
them on, the world’s great religions have all promised pleasures for
committed believers and transmitters, but pain for those who fail to
adhere to the faith. Heretics, and those who leave the faith, are often
killed by the faithful.

We can easily understand how such beliefs, bolstered as they are from
within, have been retained throughout the generations. The promise of an
afterlife, espoused by all the sensible people around you, makes many of
this life’s sorrows easier to bear. And, as we’ve seen in recent years,
belief in a Paradise for those who die fighting for the faith in a Holy
War makes you pretty well invincible.⁶ Such invincibility is a
side-effect of the memeplex’s belief tactics, not a certification of the
truth of the bomber’s faith. Especially given that nearly all of those
who share the bomber’s faith (Islam, Catholicism …) deny that their
beliefs justify killing unbelievers.

This plurality of theist beliefs, especially in today’s mixed-up world
with its different cultures and multicultures, encourages a more
critical belief in authority, and usually a willingness to admit
commonality with other theists. Such common ground encourages the
integration of different cultures. Many minorities are assimilated and
disappear, but others react by emphasising their individuality. Some of
the latter, like the Thuggee worshippers of the death goddess Kali in
nineteenth-century India, and the recent al-Qaeda terrorists, gain
temporary notoriety that seems to be a triumph of their faith. However,
this is usually self-defeating in the longer term. In any event, the
number of deaths is no comment, plus or minus, upon the truth of the
beliefs that these thugs hold. The faith of these militant minorities
sometimes gains sharpness and even subtlety, but it is usually
subordinated to the day-to-day exigencies of the violent lives they
lead.

Many great scientists, for example Galileo, were ridiculed when they
proposed new insights into the natural world. Scientific crackpots often
deduce that because their work is being ridiculed, they must be the new
Galileo, but that doesn’t follow. Similarly, men of violence often try
to validate their ‘martyrdom’ by comparing themselves to ancient
Christians or ghetto Jews, and again the logic is flawed. There is no
rational reason to accept any of their gods as part of the real
universe, however helpful that belief might be to some people as regards
day-to-day living. Despite that, many clever, honest people do feel that
a God is necessary to their understanding of how everything is
organised. Once a memeplex has caught you, it’s hard to escape.

We have a little more sympathy with deists, who mostly seem to believe
that the universe is extraordinarily complex, yet possesses an overall
simplicity, and that this points to some celestial guardian who looks
after the whole thing and gives it meaning. Ponder Stibbons and Mustrum
Ridcully, in their different ways, edge towards deism; they want to feel
that ‘someone’ is at the helm. If challenged, deists usually deny the
anthropomorphic character of this guardian, but they still retain a
belief in the ability of individual people – perhaps individual ‘souls’
– to relate directly with whoever or whatever is in charge. We
personally doubt that such apparent interactions, whether attained by
meditation or prayer, are more than self-delusion. But we are happy to
live on the same planet as people who believe that they are in direct
contact with ultimate causality, however unscientific we may feel that
belief to be.

There is a growing minority of thoughtful people who have given up on
the idea of a personal, anthropomorphic God altogether. Some,
particularly among Buddhists and Taoists, retain the
mystical/metaphysical stance that is characteristic of religion, and
consider the ‘scientific’ world to be subservient to a mystical true
picture more closely related to subjective experience. In contrast,
those of us who were persuaded by Spinoza’s rejection of an
anthropomorphic God, not least because neither the universe nor an
omnipotent deity can exist without being coextensive with everything
there is, see the scientific view as exposing both the nature of god, if
that is our belief, through the laws by which things work, and the
workings of the universe itself.

Many scientists, particularly those whose endeavours relate closely to
the real world, like geologists, astronomers, biologists, ecologists,
and polymer chemists, avoid the mystical approach and see their own
speciality as exemplifying a complex slice of the universe, with many
emergent properties that are not predictable from the detailed
substructure. Other scientists, particularly those devoted to
reductionist explanations, like physicists, astrophysicists, physical
chemists, molecular biologists, and geneticists, retain a version of the
mystical approach, but try to explain higher level behaviour in terms of
the substructure. Tellingly, many scientists who work at the ‘coal face’
of the subject generally have a respect for the unknown possibilities
that the universe might throw at them, whereas workers in more abstract
realms like quantum theory have a tendency to go all mystical about
their own understanding, or lack of it.

Most human attempts at an explanation try to find a thin causal chain of
logic and narrative, leading from things we accept to whatever it is we
are trying to explain. This type of story appeals to human minds, but it
is usually an oversimplification, and it leads to serious
misunderstandings. The typical television science programme, where a
single individual is held to be responsible for some big ‘breakthrough’,
paints a wildly inaccurate picture of the incremental process by which
most scientific advances are made. Unicausal explanations make nice
stories, but fail to capture the complexities of the real world. The
most effective explanations are often very varied, and it’s a good idea
to find a lot of different ones, if they’re available. Physicists
searching for a unification of relativity and quantum theory should
perhaps bear in mind the possibility that any unification may turn out
to be less effective than the two separate theories, each safely
confined to its own domain. Only if you can get several theories to
compete, in your mental territory, can you begin to distil
understanding.

¹ Pronounced ‘crazy’.

² This is a special usage devised by the anthropologist Lloyd Morgan in
the 1880s, picked up by John Campbell Jr in an _Analog_ editorial in the
1960s, then by Jack in _The Privileged Ape_: for tribal humans,
everything is traditional, mandatory or forbidden; for barbarians,
action is driven by honour, bravery, modesty, defiance of precedent; for
citizens, some roles are tribal, some barbarian, we choose.

³ Not quite including the confectionery, which was the surname of the
originator; he came to England from the USA, and invented M&Ms too. That
stands for ‘Mars and Mars’.

⁴ Also egg-laying. Jack, reading Burroughs when young, was disturbed by
the idea of their marriage bed …

⁵ Rajith Dissanayake, ‘What did the Dodo look like?’ _Biologist_ 51
(2004), 165–8.

⁶ Although it does seem a little strange that Palestinian terrorists
protect their genitals, for use in Paradise, when setting themselves up
as suicide bombers.

TWENTY-THREE

THE GOD OF EVOLUTION

[image] ‘DOING WELL BUT LOTS STILL TO BE DONE!’ barked Ridcully,
striding out of the magic circle into the Great Hall. ‘Everything all
right, Mr Stibbons?’

‘Yes, sir. You didn’t try to stop the God of Evolution talking to
Darwin, did you?’

‘No, you said we shouldn’t,’ said Ridcully briskly.

‘Good. It had to happen,’ said Ponder. ‘So all we need to do now is
persuade Mr Darwin—’

‘I’ve been thinking about that, Stibbons,’ Ridcully interrupted, ‘and I
have decided that you will now take Mr Darwin to meet our God of
Evolution on his island,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘It’s quite safe.’

Ponder went pale. ‘I’d really rather not go there, sir!’

‘However, you will, because I am Archchancellor and you are not’ said
Ridcully. ‘Let’s see what he thinks of the wheeled elephant, eh?’

Ponder glanced at Darwin, still in the blue glow of stasis. ‘That’s very
dangerous, sir. Think of what he’ll be seeing! And it would be quite
unethical to remove the memories that —’

‘I know I _am_ Archchancellor, it’s written on my door!’ said Ridcully.
‘Show him his god, Mr Stibbons, and leave the worrying to me. Quickly,
man. I want this all wrapped up by dinnertime!’

A moment after Ponder and Darwin left, a small boulder and quite a lot
of sand appeared and slid across the tiles of the Great Hall.

‘Well done, Mr Hex,’ said Ridcully.

+++ Thank you, Archchancellor +++ Hex wrote.

‘I was kind of hoping we’d get the chairs back, though.’

+++ I will see what I can do next time, Archchancellor +++

And on Mono Island, Charles Darwin picked himself up from the beach and
stared around.

‘Does this lend itself to any rational explanation, or is it more
madness?’ he said to Ponder. ‘I have cut my hand quite badly!’

At which point two little leaves pushed themselves out of the ground
near his foot and, with amazing speed, became a plant. It threw up more
leaves, then developed a single red flower which opened like an
explosion and died like a spark to produce one single seed, which was
white and fluffy.

‘Oh, a bandage plant,’ said Ponder, picking it. ‘Here you are, sir.’

‘How—’ Darwin began.

‘It just understood what you needed, sir,’ said Ponder, leading the way.
‘This is Mono Island, the home of the God of Evolution.’

‘A _god_ of evolution?’ said Darwin, stumbling after him. ‘But evolution
is a process inherent in—’

‘Ye – yes, I know what you’re thinking, sir. But things are different
here. There _is_ a god of evolution and he … _improves_ things. That’s
why we think everything here is desperate to get off the island, poor
creatures. Somehow they know what you want and evolve as fast as they
can in the hope you’ll pick them to take away.’

‘That is not possible! Evolution needs many thousands of years to—’

‘Pencil,’ said Ponder, calmly. A tree nearby shivered.

‘Actually, the pencil bush breeds true in the right soil,’ Ponder went
on, walking over to it. ‘We’ve got some of these at the University. And
the Chair of Indefinite Studies kept a cigarette tree going for months,
but they got very tarry. Once most of them get far enough away from Mono
Island they stop trying.’ He held one out. ‘Would you like a ripe
pencil? They’re quite useful.’

Darwin took the slim cylinder Ponder had plucked from the tree. It was
warm, and still slightly moist.

‘This is Mono Island, you see,’ said Ponder, and pointed to the small
mountain at the far end of the island. ‘Up there is where the god lives.
Not a bad old boy, as gods go, but he will keep _changing_ things all
the time. When we met him he—’

The bushes rustled, and Ponder dragged the bemused Darwin aside as
something rattled down the path.

‘That’s a giant tortoise!’ said Darwin, as it trundled past. ‘That at
least is something – oh!’

‘Yes.’

‘It’s on wheels!’

‘Oh, yes. He’s very keen on wheels. He thinks wheels should work.’

The tortoise turned quite professionally and rolled to a halt by a
cactus, which it proceeded to eat, daintily, until there was a hiss and
it sagged sideways.

‘Oh,’ said a voice from the air. ‘Bad luck. Tyre bladder punctured. It’s
the everlasting problem of the strength of the integument versus the
usage rate of the mucus.’

A skinny, rather preoccupied man, dressed in a grubby toga, appeared
between the two of them. Beetles orbited him like wonderful little
asteroids.

‘Deposition of metal may be our friend here,’ he said, and turning to
Ponder as if to another old friend he went on: ‘What do you think?’

‘Ah, um, er … do you really need all that shell?’ said Ponder,
hurriedly. Beetles, bright as tiny galaxies, landed on his robe.

‘I know what you mean,’ said the old man. ‘Too heavy, perhaps? Oh … you
seem familiar, young man. Have we met before?’

‘Ponder Stibbons, sir. I was here a few years ago. With some wizards,’
said Ponder, with care. He’d quite admired the God of Evolution, until
he’d found that the god considered the cockroach to be the peak of the
evolutionary pyramid.

‘Ah, yes. You had to leave in such a hurry, I recall,’ said the god,
sadly. ‘It was—’

‘You! … you appeared in my room!’ said Darwin, who’d been staring at the
god with his mouth open. ‘There were beetles everywhere!’ He stopped,
his mouth opening and shutting for a while. ‘But you certainly are not …
I thought you—’

Ponder was ready for this.

‘You know about Olympus, sir?’ he said quickly.

‘What? This is _Greece?_’ said Darwin.

‘No, sir, but we’ve got lots of gods here. This, er, gentleman isn’t, as
you might put it, _the_ god. He’s just _a_ god.’

‘Is there a problem?’ said the God of Evolution, giving them a worried
smile.

‘_A_ god?’ Darwin demanded.

‘One of the nice ones,’ said Ponder quickly.

‘I like to think so,’ said the god, beaming happily. ‘Look, I need to
check on how the whales are doing. Why don’t you come up the mountain
for tea? I love to have visitors.’

He vanished.

‘But the Greek gods were myths!’ Darwin burst out, staring at the
suddenly empty space.

‘I wouldn’t know about that, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘Ours aren’t. On this
world, gods are extremely real.’

‘He came through the wall!’ said Darwin, pointing angrily at the empty
air. ‘He told me that he was immanent in all things!’

‘He tinkers a lot, certainly,’ said Ponder. ‘But only here.’

‘_Tinkers!_’

‘Shall we take a little walk up Mount Impossible?’ said Ponder.

Most of Mount Impossible was hollow. You need a lot of space when you
are trying to devise a dirigible whale.

‘It really should work,’ said the God of Evolution, over tea. ‘Without
that heavy blubber and with an inflatable skeleton of which, I must say
I am rather proud, it should do well on the routes of migratory birds.
Larger maw, of course. Note the cloud-like camouflage, obviously
required. Lifting is produced via bacteria in the gut which produce
elevating gases. The dorsal sail and the flattened tail give a
reasonable degree of steerability. All in all, a good piece of work. My
main problem is devising a predator. The sea-air ballistic shark has
proved quite unsatisfactory. I don’t know if you might have any
suggestions, Mr Darwin?’

Ponder looked at Darwin. The poor man, his face grey, was staring up at
the two whales who were cruising gently near the roof of the cave.

‘I beg your pardon?’ he said.

‘The god would like to know what could attack this,’ Ponder prompted.

‘Yes, the grey people said you were very interested in evolution,’ said
the god.

‘The grey people?’ said Ponder.

‘Oh yes, _you_ know. You see them flying around sometimes. They said
someone really wanted to listen to my views. I was so pleased. Lots of
people just laugh.’

Darwin looked around the celestial workshop and said: ‘I cannot see
anything to laugh at in an elephant with sails, sir!’

‘Exactly! It was the big ears that gave me the clue there,’ said the god
cheerfully. ‘Making them bigger was simplicity itself. It can do
twenty-five miles an hour across the open veldt in a good wind!’

‘Until a wheel bursts,’ said Darwin, flatly.

‘I’m sure once they get the idea it will all work,’ said the god.

‘You don’t think it might be better to let things evolve by themselves?’
said Darwin.

‘My dear sir, it’s so _dull_,’ said the god. ‘Four legs, two eyes one
mouth … so few are prepared to _experiment_.’

Once again Darwin looked around the glowing interior of Mount
Impossible. Ponder watched him take in the details: the cage of
web-winged octo-monkeys that in theory could skim across the canopy for
hundreds of yards, the _Phaseolus coccineus giganticus_ that actually
bred true, if there was any possible use for a beanstalk that could grow
half a mile high … and everywhere the animals, often in stages of
assembly or disassembly but all quite contentedly alive in a little mist
of holiness.

‘Mr, er, Stibbons, I should like to go … home now, please,’ said Darwin,
who had gone pale. ‘This has all been most … instructive, but I should
like to go home.’

‘Oh dear, people are always rushing off,’ said the god, sadly. ‘But
still, I hope I have been of help, Mr Darwin?’

‘Indeed, I believe you have,’ said Darwin, grimly.

The god accompanied them to the mouth of the cave, beetles streaming
behind him in a cloud.

‘Do call again,’ he said, as they wandered off down the track. ‘I do
like to—’

He was interrupted by a noise like all the party balloons in the world
being let down at once. It was long and drawn out and full of
melancholy.

‘Oh no,’ said the God of Evolution, hurrying back inside, ‘not the
whales!’

Darwin was silent as they walked to the beach. He was even more silent
as they passed the wheeled tortoise, which was limping in circles. The
silence was deafening when Ponder summoned Hex. When they appeared in
the Great Hall his silence, apart from a brief scream during the actual
travelling, was a huge infectious silence that was contagious.

The assembled wizards shuffled their feet. Dark rage radiated off their
visitor.

‘How did it go, Stibbons?’ whispered Ridcully.

‘Er, the God of Evolution was his usual self, sir.’

‘Was he? Ah, good—’

‘I wish, very clearly, to awaken from this nightmare,’ said Darwin,
abruptly.

The wizards stared at the man, who was quivering with rage.

‘Very well, sir,’ Ridcully said quietly. ‘We can help you wake up.
Excuse us a moment.’

He waved a hand; once again the blue shimmer surrounded their visitor.
‘Gentlemen, if you please?’

He beckoned to the other senior wizards, who clustered around him.

‘We _can_ put him back without him having any memory of anything that
happened here, right?’ he said. ‘Mr Stibbons?’

‘Yes, sir. Hex could do it. But as I said, sir, it wouldn’t be very
ethical to mess around with his mind.’

‘Well, I wouldn’t like anyone to think we’re unethical,’ said Ridcully
firmly. He glared around. ‘Anyone object? Good. You see, I’ve been
taking to Hex. I’d like to give him something to remember. We owe him
that, at least.’

‘Really, sir?’ said Ponder. ‘Won’t it make things worse?’

‘I’d like him to know _why_ we did all this, even if it’s only for a
moment!’

‘Are you sure that’s a good idea, Mustrum?’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes.

The Archchancellor hesitated. ‘No,’ he said. ‘But it’s mine. And we’re
going to do it.’

TWENTY-FOUR

A LACK OF SERGEANTS

[image] WHAT WAS IT ABOUT VICTORIAN ENGLAND, and what led up to it, that
made it so progressive, inventive and innovative? Why was it so
different from Russia, China, and all the other nations that seem to
have stagnated during the nineteenth century – accumulating wealth, but
lacking a middle class full of engineers, sea captains, clerics, and
scientists? We would not expect there to be one simple answer, one trick
that Victorian England discovered but other nations did not. That would
satisfy the innate human wish for a single thin causal chain, but as
we’ve seen, history doesn’t work like that.

Equally, though, it’s unsatisfying just to list lots of possible
contributory causes – the East India Company … Harrison’s excellent
chronometer, which helped to make the British Empire so profitable and
made aristocratic families send their younger sons fairly safely out
into the Empire, from which they came back wiser and richer … Quakers
and other nonconformist sects, which were tolerated by the Anglican
Church … the Lunar Society’s progeny, including the Royal Society and
the Linnaean Society … the College of Apprentices … Parliament and the
pretence of democracy, so that a middle class could rise from the
merging of junior aristocrats who came back from the Empire to found
pickle factories in Manchester … artisans who were coming into towns
looking for satisfying jobs. We could make the list ten times longer,
though in most cases we wouldn’t be sure about genuine causal
connections. And even with ten times as many ‘causes’, we would still
have to say ‘all of the above’.

Are such factors a cause of historical differences, or a consequence?
That’s not a sensible question if you insist on a yes/no answer – very
probably the answer should be ‘both’. A modern analogue would be to ask
whether today’s space-oriented engineers and scientists are a cause of
the success of space films and nailed-down science-fiction stories – or
did the early scientifically oriented SF stories, with their sense of
wonder at the sheer vastness and mystery of outer space, fire those
engineers, when young, with the desire to turn fiction into fact? It
must have been both, of course.

The early Victorian apprentices in pottery, ironworking, brick firing,
and even bricklaying were respected by, and respected, their masters.
Together they laid down enduring monuments for future generations.
Similarly, early trains and canals connected all the major cities, and
connected factories to their suppliers and customers. This transport
system paved the way to the wonderful economic network that Edwardian
Britain inherited from the Victorians. These systems were not static, to
be admired for what they had achieved. They were dynamic, they changed,
they were processes as much as achievements. They changed the way
succeeding generations thought about where and how they lived. Even
today, our cities rely heavily on what the Victorians built, especially
when it comes to sewerage and water supplies.

The resulting changes in thinking fuelled further changes. The
combination of cause and consequence is an example of what we have
elsewhere called _complicity_.¹ This phenomenon arises when two
conceptually distinct systems interact recursively, each repeatedly
changing the other, so that they co-evolve. A typical outcome is that
together they work their way into territory that would have been
inaccessible to either alone. Complicity is not mere ‘interaction’,
where the systems join forces to achieve some joint outcome, but are not
themselves greatly affected as a result. It is far more drastic, and it
changes everything. It can even erase its own origins, so that neither
of the original separate systems remains.

The social innovations that were (arguably but not solely) triggered by
Victorian ingenuity and drive are just like that. Because there was
selection, and because the best growth often occurs in the best run and
best designed parts of growing systems, there was recursion. The next
generation was inspired by the previous generation’s successes, _and_
their noble mistakes, and built a better world. What we might call the
Channel Tunnel Syndrome occurs quite often in capitalist, democratic
societies, but not in totalitarian states or even in nations like, say,
today’s Arab states or twentieth-century India. And particularly not in
nineteenth-century Russia or China: both were rich, but they had no
respectable middle class.

The Victorian middle class was respected both by the workers whose lives
they exploited – and opened up – and by the aristocrats, whose
increasingly international outlook was progressively integrated with
trade. Russia and China had political systems without an economically
powerful, shareholding middle class, which could start or follow
fashions, and support romantic, visionary ventures. Today, the British
will still support a Channel Tunnel venture or a _Beagle-2_ Mars lander,
because such things are romantic and possibly heroic, even though they
are unlikely to be very profitable. A lengthy historical record shows
very clearly that the first attempt at any major tunnel usually
collapses financially – though after the tunnel is successfully built –
often after a long series of attempts to shore up a failing enterprise.
Then the ruins are bought for a song, occasionally nationalised or
considerably financed by government or some other major capital source,
and the resulting business can stand on the shoulders of the first. Only
some rather strained economics has so far kept the original companies
involved in the Channel Tunnel in business, at least on the British side
of the Channel where everything was done by private enterprise.

Some projects are so romantic, so attractive in concept but so very
difficult in execution, that three or four attempts are needed for them
to acquire momentum. It is recursive structure of the complicit kind
that keeps them afloat.² Telford’s bridges are famous, as are so many of
his other engineering works; his ability to capitalise on his successes
was the result, and the cause, of his fame, which was achieved by what
would now be called ‘networking’ among aristocrats, government
ministers, and pickle manufacturers. He was, as they said, famous for
being famous. In America similar enterprises were measured more by the
anticipated financial return, the ‘bottom line’. So John D. Rockefeller,
Andrew Carnegie, and their ilk were worth supporting because your
investment was guaranteed to multiply, rather than because the
enterprise was exciting ‘for Queen and Country’. Early twentieth-century
America had gigantic, monolithic Ford … while England had a variety of
small engineering concerns like Morris Garages (MG).

The other major reason why societies like Victorian England can pick
themselves up by their bootstraps and fly is one we’ve discussed
earlier. They lift themselves out of the old constraints, and into a new
set of rules. In _The Science of Discworld_ and _The Science of
Discworld II_ we explained why the space bolas, a kind of enormous
Ferris wheel in orbit, is capable of carrying people into space far
cheaper than rockets – in fact, requiring less energy than anyone would
calculate using Newton’s laws of motion and gravity. We took one further
step, and invoked the space elevator, a very strong cable hung from
geostationary orbit, which would be harder to build but would require
even less energy. The trick is that people and goods coming down can
help to lift other people and goods up. The energetics satisfy all the
standard mathematical rules, but the context supplies an unexpected
source of energy.

These gadgets work better than rockets, but not because these use
relativity or other clever new physics like quantum. Or because they
don’t obey Newton’s laws, because they do, to the extent that these are
still relevant. Instead, the bolas and the elevator have new invention
immortalised into them, so that a spaceman who gets into the cabin of a
bolas in thin upper atmosphere from a jet aircraft can shortly
afterwards get out of the cabin 400 miles up. Going at the right speed,
it so happens, to catch the passing cabin of a 400-mile space bolas,
which can deposit him, days later, in the right orbit to catch the
15,000-mile bolas, which deposits him in geostationary orbit, 22,000
miles up, after a couple of weeks. Such machines can be powered by using
them to drop valuable asteroid material down to Earth, or (in the case
of the bolas) by ‘pumping’ them like a garden swing, using motors in the
middle powered by sunlight and reeling in or letting out the cabin
tethers as the bolas rotates.

Once we’ve made the huge initial investment required to build such
machinery, rocket technology becomes largely obsolete, just as animal
traction was dispossessed by the internal combustion engine. Sure, you
can’t attach 500 horses to the front of a big canal-barge, because there
wouldn’t be room on the towpath – but a 500-horsepower marine engine is
another matter entirely. Sure, a rocket would use far too much fuel to
be a practical method for hoisting goods and people into orbit _en
masse_ – but that’s not the only way to get them there. Yes, Newton’s
laws still have to be obeyed, and you have to ‘pay’ to set everything
up, and it still costs just the same energy to get people into orbit.
But nobody pays once the machinery is there. If you don’t believe this,
go up in an elevator in a skyscraper, noting how the counterbalance
weights go down, and return to solid ground. _Then_, to ram the message
home, walk up the stairs.

The wordprocessor we’re using to type this book is a metaphorical space
elevator compared to a manual typewriter (remember those? Maybe not). A
modern automobile is a space elevator compared to a Ford model T or an
Austin-7, which were themselves bolases, while 1880s steam cars were
rockets. Think of the investment that went into the Victorian railway
system, the canals – then realise how this immense investment changed
the rules, so that later generations could do all kinds of things that
were impossible to their forebears.

Victoriana, then, was not a situation, it was a process. A recursive
process, which built itself new rules and new abilities, as previous
hard work and innovation led to new capital, new money, and new
investment. The new poor, downtrodden though they may have been, were
much better off than the rural poor had been. Which is why people poured
into the cities where their lives, even though Dickensian, were easier
and more interesting than they had been in the countryside. The urban
newcomers provided a new workforce to build new industries. They
provided a useful consumer base too. Those workmen’s cottages, still
found in the suburbs of many towns, were not only housing for an
exploited labour force; they were also a source of new wealth for that
young aristocrat back from the Gold Coast who’d opened a pickle factory
in Manchester. He had seen the sauces made in Madagascar or Goa, liked
the taste, and thought that he could sell them to workmen to put on
their sausages and bacon. Think of him for a moment, perhaps a chinless
wonder who employed thirty men to mix the tropical-fruit ingredients and
boil them in great cast-iron vats. The vats had been made in Sheffield
and carried by narrow-boat along canals, giving coin to perhaps fifty
workmen who supplied the original vats and buildings:³ His pickle
company supported a whole small industry for generations: supplying coke
for heating, imported and locally grown fruit and spices to be processed
into sauces, special water, glass bottles, printed labels …

There would have been half a dozen middle-aged matrons busy at different
tasks in his factory, too, even bossing some of the men. This was new –
outside the home, anyway. Women also got jobs with him as cleaners,
perhaps as secretaries to some of the senior staff, and women earning
their own money was a massive wedge driven into a male-dominated
society. In that society, it was rare even for courtesans to have
control of their own funds, to that extent Mimi in _La Bohème_ is more
realistic than Flora in _La Traviata_. The laws and customs then were
very different from what we accept as ‘normal’ now: young women and
older ones were exploited sexually, large numbers of workmen died from
industrial accidents and pollution.⁴ Only through their suffering – and
their triumphs – could the next generation be built.

Today’s Britons are an integral part of this onward and upward process,
and in order to see why the triumphs of our real Victorian history have
lessons for us now, we must understand what happened then.

There was one major difference, among millions of individual tiny
differences, between Victorian Britain and Russia (or China). The
British had several sources of social heterogeneity, dissidence, of
exposure to the public eye of things being done or understood in
different ways. From the Baptist chapel to the Quaker meeting house,
from the Catholic cathedral with its sweet music and incomprehensible
prayers to the Jewish synagogues with their strangely cloaked and hatted
congregants who turned into your lawyer or your accountant during the
week, religion was obviously diverse. In Poland and Russia, there were
pogroms (particularly during the late nineteenth century); in England,
there were only taxes. Even in English prisons, very different religious
practices were respected, perhaps as much in the breach as in the
practice, but the theory was well known and encouraged – if not enforced
– by the law. This freedom of thought, word and deed lasted. After the
Second World War, after the defeat of Nazism at immense cost, with
London still in ruins and food rationed, Sir Oswald Mosley was an avowed
fascist whose Blackshirts came down to the East End of London to promote
their racist views. Jack was involved in street fights with them about
once a month. Even then, he was pleased that their horrible speeches
were permitted by the law. In the USA or Russia, Mosley would either
have been in jail or elected president. There was a context of
heterogeneity, of difference being more than accepted, being valued with
a smile. And this was part of an unbroken tradition, going back to
Victorian times.

The big difference that made Victorian Britain successful, itself
fostered recursively by all the success stories within it – and by the
disparate nature of these successes, such as Quakers, railways, big
beautiful bridges, fewer starving children, control of some diseases –
was in the ambience, the context, which _promoted difference_. It has
been fashionable for a particularly naive kind of historian of science
to point to the social context of scientific theories, and to pretend
that science is therefore entirely socially driven. It is usually
claimed, by the same token, that this provenance denies science its
authority, so its truths merely follow social convention.

Victorian evolutionists provide a precise refutation of that view.
Wallace, for example, was born to poor parents, was apprenticed to a
watchmaker for a while (obviously one of our wizards had been instructed
to achieve this), then became a successful – though indigent – land
agent, then a more successful animal and plant collector. He never made
enough money to join the upper middle class, even after his star had
risen alongside Darwin’s.

Darwin was a junior aristocrat, his parents were well off, and it would
have been entirely proper for him to have become a curate – and, indeed
to have written _Theology of Species_. Other pro-evolutionists, as
various as Owen (mistaken by Darwin for an anti-evolutionist because of
his careful analysis of the anatomical implications of the
Darwin/Wallace natural-selection idea), Huxley, Spencer, Kingsley, were
all from different strata of society. We have seen that the first
printing of _Origin of Species_ was inadequate for the market, and all
copies were sold by the second morning after publication. Would that
have happened in nineteenth-century India? In Russia under the czars,
_or_ after the revolution? In the United States … possibly. And in the
German part of Prussia. Dickens’s stories, critical as they were of the
existing order, were anxiously awaited by all strata of society in
England – and by many in the eastern United States.

It would not have been quite so strange if this heterogeneous society
involved different groups that picked up on _different_ ideas, according
to their various philosophies and theologies. However, what really
happened, both to Dickens and to Darwin and later to Wells, was a very
general appreciation of their radical ideas, very widely, across all of
those diverse groups. The same alternative views were welcomed by many
different strata of society. More so, perhaps, than in any other society
since, heterodoxy was almost the rule. Working men’s clubs were hotbeds
of rational argument, thanks to the establishment of evening classes by
the Workers’ Educational Association. Education for the common man was
promoted by the new technical colleges and the British Association for
the Advancement of Science.

To some extent, the same went for all the embryo universities which, in
Victorian times, had been seeded by philanthropic discussion groups in
the big cities. These establishments, dark red-brick buildings found in
the centres of all English industrial cities, were very different
organisations from the ancient universities. The other half of the
building, or the building opposite on the same street, was often the
public library, an organisation not to be found in Russia or China at
that time. These organisations provided a way up from manual labour to
artisan, and there were a thousand such establishments all over
Victoriana.

The real universities, of Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh, St Andrew’s,
were promoting orthodoxy via classics and the literary and governmental
arts. The sciences were slowly coming in, mainly as theoretical physics
and astrophysics, which needed only brains and blackboards, like
mathematics. Practical sciences like geology and palaeontology,
chemistry, and zoology went on in dark and dirty laboratories with tall
glass and dark wood partitions; botany was backed up by aromatic
herbaria. Such work had a very low status compared to mathematics and
philosophy – it had associations with manual labour and dirt. However,
archaeology, because of its continuing association with the classical
world and its artefacts, had quite high status.

The burgeoning middle class didn’t, by and large, aspire to these arcane
practices. They wanted technical and scientific information, not to
potter about with theories, however important and romantic. They didn’t
want classical anything, certainly not the classics. The universities
proper were still requiring a classical education of all aspiring
students, and even in the 1970s they continued to require competence in
a foreign language from science entrants (as evidence, presumably, of
_some_ culture – they never required science or mathematics from arts or
classics entrants). The workmen and the artisans’ guilds cooperated to
produce the apprenticeship system, and this was in many ways the model
for their own educational organisations. These, notably the WEA,
provided exactly what was wanted, guided and monitored by the artisans’
guilds and by the elected council representatives who helped oversee
their relations with local industry, especially apprenticeship schemes.
‘City and Guilds’ examinations, granting certificates and diplomas, were
the educational currency of these self-organised educational systems,
and they continued until the 1960s. They were the labels that qualified
erstwhile labourers as artisans, worthy of respect by their peers.

This pulling yourself up by your bootstraps into respectable citizenship
contrasts with the attitude to elected local councilmen by the
universities that these organisations matured into. Like the ancient
universities, new ones like Birmingham and Manchester rewarded local
elected dignitaries, mayors, and councillors with honorary degrees.
These empty titles, contrasting both with the earned certificates of the
artisans and with the honorary degrees given to eminent scholars in
recognition and respect, ensured a political allegiance – and devalued
academia in general. Unfortunately, the profusion of such young
universities in late twentieth-century England has meant that
non-technical, even non-scientific subjects have again become
fashionable, to the exclusion of that artisan education which was so
healthy in late Victorian times. The devaluation of academic degrees of
all kinds has continued apace, but at the same time the alternative and
more worthy routes to self-advancement have atrophied.

Does this matter?

Indeed it does. Perhaps Owen Harry, who had himself risen from a poor
Welsh beginning near Cardiff’s Tiger Bay to become a very young chief
technician in Jack’s zoology dept at Birmingham University, and later
became a senior lecturer at Belfast University, put this best when he
described its main negative consequence as ‘a lack of sergeants’.

There is a story about officer training and examination in the British
Army in the 1950s. One of the most important questions was ‘How do you
dig a trench?’. The correct answer was ‘I say “Sergeant, dig me a
trench!”’ Sergeants are people who organise the _doing_. They are not
experts in what to do, or when: that’s the prerogative of officers, who
theoretically constitute the brains of the organisation. Officers decide
what has to be done, but don’t know how to do it. Sergeants don’t
actually _do_ things, either, except occasionally when they have to.
Their role is to organise squads of ignorant men, often incompetent, but
well trained to obey orders, so that they cooperate effectively.
Sergeants are the layer that _makes_ cooperation effective: they know
how to get things done. Privates know how to do what they’re told, and
are trained not to do anything else.

We didn’t say efficient; it’s a common mistake to see efficiency as
something to be striven for. Efficiency is a concept borrowed from
engineering and physics, a measure of how much you get out for how much
you put in. Sergeants are in some respects the least efficient way of
getting things done; they have a tendency towards repetition and
sarcasm, confident that a few of their recruits will graduate from basic
training with some degree of competence. But sergeants are _very_
effective, and the system they are part of is very robust.

Darwin and Wallace, Spencer and Wells, all came up through a system that
was very robust in this way. All of them, different as they were, knew
that writing books was a prime way of affecting the society around you.
There was no television, no films, and only a fraction of people went to
the theatre or the opera … mostly to music hall and pantomimes around
Christmas. Dickens, Kingsley, the Brontë sisters, and Thomas Hardy made
people – lots of people – think new thoughts and lead new lives. The
working men’s clubs and their links with the public libraries brought
reading skills to a higher level than ever before.

So this audience was ripe for persuasive texts that could take them out
of simple biblical knowledge into new theologies, even into atheism.
Huxley, ‘Darwin’s Bulldog’, promoted Darwinism as the antithesis of a
God-made world. From the aspiring middle class of Victoriana grew our
modern secular age, with God relegated to the plaything of a few of the
less modern clergy. Modern clergy don’t believe in a twelve-foot
Englishman up there in the sky, with Heaven as an eternal Buckingham
Palace garden party. Particularly from those French philosophers who
continued sophisticated theological criticism in lineages derived from
Voltaire, our clerics learned to do without that strong Victorian style
of Christianity. That form of Anglicanism, confident that God really was
looking after the English, didn’t need to embarrass itself with overt
prayers. The rituals would suffice (provided they weren’t noisy like the
Welsh, or showy like the Catholics).

We have lost strong simple religion, we have lost academic excellence,
we have gained a secular society that maintains the heterogeneity that
made it so robust in Victorian times and later. However, we are now
pursuing policies, particularly in education, that fail to provide
society with all those able people who built the Victorian and Edwardian
edifices, both material and theoretical.

There are routes away from this pessimism. In _The Science of Discworld
II_ we referred to humans as _Pan narrans_, the storytelling chimpanzee.
Our overall message was that humans need to make stories to motivate
themselves, to identify goals, and to distinguish good from evil.

Here we go a step further.

Technological and Civilised Man, we believe, must become _Polypan
multinarrans_,⁵ to extend the metaphor rather further. Human beings must
become ever more diverse, valuing and enjoying each other’s differences
rather than fearing them or suppressing them. And mere explanation is
not enough. To gain understanding, a useful working philosophy as
appropriate for action as for judgement and decision, an explanation is
only rarely good enough. People find simple explanations satisfying
because they enable thin causal chains of the kind we build for our own
personal memories and causalities. But the real world, even the world of
other people and their likes, dislikes, and prejudices – sometimes so
rigidly held that our own lives and those of our loved ones don’t matter
to them – doesn’t work like that.

We owe it to ourselves, and to those for whom we are responsible and
those who respect us, to develop multi-causal understanding. We can do
that, as suggested here, by simultaneously encompassing _several_
explanations of each puzzle, explanations that disagree productively
with each other. _Multinarrans_: many stories. So one person, even a
Newton or a Shakespeare or a Darwin, will not really be enough, despite
the story we have just told you. Our fictional Darwin is a symbol for an
endless stream of Darwins, challenging orthodoxy _and being right_, a
glorious network of innovative thinkers and radicals. People who try to
keep ancient cultures alive by blowing up the competition achieve
nothing, except widespread contempt for their objectives. They doom
their own enterprise by their methods, and they betray a terrible lack
of confidence that what matters to them can survive without coercion and
violence.

Back to sergeants, and the way things are really done: ‘Sergeant, dig a
trench.’ This is how _Polypan multinarrans_ gets things done. How many
people are needed to understand a jet airliner? To build one? Recursion
in technology really is like biological evolution, it really does expand
the phase space. It expands it so much that most of us have virtually no
understanding of how the world we live in works. In fact, it is
essential that we don’t, because there would be too much for anyone to
understand.

But we do need to understand that this is what the world is like.
Otherwise we don’t just lose the sergeants: we lose the ability to build
aircraft that fly, dishwashers that clean, cars that don’t pollute (as
much). We stop being able to cure (some of) the sick, to feed (most of)
the planet, and to house, clothe, and wash a burgeoning humanity.

Our world is changing, and it’s changing very fast, and we ourselves are
the inescapable agents of that change. If we stagnate, like our
fictional Victoriana, we die. Staying where we are is not an option.
Static resources cannot continue to support us.

We make our world work by introducing new, undreamt-of rules and
possibilities, by considering alternatives and making decisions, which
feel like ‘free will’, and work that way, even if they are ‘really’
deterministic. We build on the present to create a bigger future.
Science standing on technology, and technology standing on science,
provide a successful ladder that leads to extelligence.

Is it, perhaps, the _only_ one?

The past was another country, but the future is an alien world.

And yet …

The most remarkable thing about the universe, as Einstein once said, is
that it is comprehensible. Not in every aspect, but in enough to make us
feel at home in it. It _makes sense_ – almost as much as a Discworld
story. Which is amazing because facts don’t have to make sense: only
well-crafted fiction has to obey such rigid rules.

Part of this comprehensibility can be explained. We evolved in the
universe, and we evolved to survive in it. Being able to tell ourselves
‘what if’ stories about it – to understand it – has survival value. We
have been selected, by nature, to tell such stories.

What is less easy to explain is why the universe can be represented by
human stories at all. But then, if it wasn’t, we wouldn’t be telling
them, would we?

Which brings us back to Charles Darwin, architect of our own present,
which was his future, and would surely seem alien to any Victorian. In
Chapter 18 we left him sitting on an ‘entangled bank’, watching birds
and insects, and musing on the nature of life. The final paragraph of
_The Origin_, which began with gentle musings about entangled banks, now
works its way to its revolutionary conclusion:

From the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object
which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of the higher
animals, directly follows. There is grandeur in this view of life, with
its several powers, having been originally breathed into a few forms or
into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to
the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most
beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved.

¹ See Jack Cohen and Ian Stewart, _The Collapse of Chaos_ (Viking,
1994).

² In their 1980 book _Autopoiesis and Cognition_, Humberto Maturana and
Francisco Varela confused this kind of recursion with a life force, and
called it ‘autopoiesis’. Many self-consciously modern management experts
cite this concept, without having the foggiest idea what it is.

³ When Jack started at Birmingham University in the 1950s, the factory
behind the university made cooking pots for missionaries, just like the
ones that were popular in the cartoons in _Punch_ – with the
missionaries as ingredients, not cooks, you appreciate. No doubt the
same factory had once made the original sauce vats used in Madagascar
and Goa.

⁴ Details can be found in many personal diaries, such as those kept by
the foremen of the spinning and weaving mills in Lancashire as exercises
in writing for their evening classes. We learn that sexual engagement
with women employees was sometimes necessary for these men, in order to
retain the respect of their colleagues, to maintain obedience by the
workforce, even when they found it horrible themselves. In the armed
forces, of course, and in prisons, the social ‘rules’, the peer pressure
to sin grossly, were too powerful to resist, too awful for us to
contemplate now.

⁵ Sorry, it’s one of those horrible Graeco-Latin hybrids. But, like
‘television’, it’s comprehensible.

TWENTY-FIVE

THE ENTANGLED BANK

[image] IT WAS MIDNIGHT IN THE museum’s Central Hall when the wizards
appeared. There were a few lights on; just enough to see the skeletons.

‘Is this a temple of some kind?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies,
patting his pockets for his tobacco pouch and a packet of Wizlas. ‘One
of the weirder ones, perhaps?’

+++ Indeed +++ boomed the voice of Hex from the middle air. +++ In all
the universes of the _The Ology_, it was the Temple of the Ascent of
Man. Here, it is not +++

‘Very impressive,’ muttered the Dean. ‘But why don’t we just show him
the big snowball? He’d be pretty pleased to know it was because of him
humans got away.’

‘We’ve scared the poor chap enough, that’s why!’ snapped Ridcully.
‘He’ll understand _this_. Hex says they started building when Darwin was
alive. Stuffed animals, bones … it’s the kind of thing he knows. Now
stand back and give the chap some air, will you?’

They stepped away from the chair on which Charles Darwin had been
transported, wreathed in the blue light. Ridcully snapped his fingers.

Darwin opened his eyes, and groaned.

‘It never ends!’

‘No, we’re sending you back, sir,’ said Ridcully. ‘That is, you’ll soon
wake up. But we thought there is something you should see first.’

‘I’ve seen enough!’

‘Not quite enough. Lights, gentlemen, please,’ said Ridcully,
straightening up.

Light is the easiest magic to do. A glow rose in the hall.

‘The Museum of Natural History, Mr Darwin,’ said Ridcully, standing
back. ‘It opened after your death at a venerable age. It’s your future.
I believe there is a statue to you here somewhere. Place of honour, no
doubt. Please listen. I would like you to know that because of you,
humanity turned out to be fit enough to survive.’

Darwin stared around at the hall, and then looked askance at the
wizards.

‘The phrase “survival of the fittest” was not—’ he began.

‘Survival of the luckiest in this case, I fear,’ said Ridcully. ‘You are
familiar with the idea of natural catastrophes throughout history, Mr
Darwin?’

‘Indeed! One only has to examine—’

‘But you will not have known that they wiped intelligent life from the
face of the globe,’ said Ridcully, sombrely. ‘Sit down again, sir …’

They told him about the crab-like civilisation, and the octopus-like
civilisation and the lizard-like civilisation. They told him about the
snowball.¹

Darwin, Ponder thought, bore up well. He didn’t scream or try to run
away. What he did do was, in a way, worse: he asked questions, in a
slow, solemn voice, and then asked more questions.

Strangely, he kept away from ones like ‘how do you know this?’ and ‘how
can you be so sure?’. He looked like a man anxious to avoid certain
answers.

For his part, Mustrum Ridcully very nearly told the whole truth on
several occasions.

At last Darwin said, ‘I think I see,’ in a tone of finality.

‘I’m sorry we had to—’ Ridcully began, but Darwin held up a hand.

‘I do know the truth of all this,’ he said.

‘You _do?_’ said Ridcully. ‘Really?’

‘Indeed, a few years ago there was a rather popular novel published. _A
Christmas Carol_. Did you read it?’

Ponder looked down at the hitherto blank piece of paper on his
clipboard. Hex had been told to be quiet; Charles Darwin was probably
not in the right frame of mind for booming voices from the sky. But Hex
was resourceful.

‘By Charles Dickens?’ said Ponder, trying not to look as though he was
reading the writing that had suddenly filled the page. ‘The story of the
redemption of a misanthrope via ghostly intervention?’

‘Quite so,’ said Darwin, still speaking in the careful, wooden voice.
‘It is clear to me that something similar is happening to me. You are
not ghosts, of course, but aspects of my own mind. I was resting on a
bank near my home. I had been wrestling at length with some of the
perturbing implications of my work. It was a warm day. I fell asleep,
and you, and that … god … and all this, are a kind of … pantomime in the
theatre of my brain as my thinking resolves itself.’

The wizards looked at one another. The Dean shrugged.

Ridcully grinned. ‘Hold on to that thought, sir.’

‘And I feel sure that when I awake I _will_ have reached a resolve,’
said Darwin, a man firmly nailing his thoughts in order. ‘And, I
fervently trust I will have forgotten the means by which I did so. I
certainly would not wish to recall the wheeled elephant. Or the poor
crabs. And as for the dirigible whale …’

‘You _want_ to forget?’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh, yes!’

‘Since that is your clear request, I have no doubt it will be the case,’
said Ridcully, glancing questioningly at Ponder. Ponder glanced at the
clipboard and nodded. It was a direct request, after all. Ridcully was,
Ponder noted, quite clever under all that shouting.

Apparently relieved at this, Darwin looked around the hall again.

‘“I dreamt I dwelt in marble halls”, indeed,’ he said.

The words ‘Reference to a popular song written by Michael W. Balfe,
manager of the Lyceum Theatre, London, in 1841’ floated across Ponder’s
clipboard.

‘I don’t recognise some of these very impressive skeletons,’ Darwin went
on. ‘But that is Robert Owen’s _Diplodocus carnegii_, clearly …’

He turned sharply.

‘Humanity survives, you say?’ he said. ‘It rode out to the stars on
tamed comets?’

‘Something like that, Mr Darwin,’ said Ridcully.

‘And it flourishes?’

‘We don’t know. But it survives better that it would under a mile of
ice, I suspect.’

‘It has a _chance_ to survive,’ said Darwin.

‘Exactly.’

‘Even so … to trust your future to some frail craft speeding through the
unknown void, prey to unthinkable dangers …’

‘That was what the dinosaurs did,’ said Ridcully. ‘And the crabs. And
all the rest of them.’

‘I beg your pardon?’

‘I meant that this world is a pretty frail craft, if you take the long
view.’

‘Ha. Nevertheless, some vestige of life surely survives every
catastrophe,’ said Darwin, as if following a train of thought. ‘Deep
under the sea, perhaps. In seeds and spores …’

‘And is that how it should be?’ said Ridcully. ‘New thinkin’ creatures
arisin’ and being forever smashed down? If evolution didn’t stop at the
edge of the sea, why should it stop at the edge of the air? The beach
was once an unknown void. Surely the evidence that mankind has risen
thus far may give him hope for a still higher destiny in the distant
future?’

Ponder looked down at his clipboard. Hex had written: he is _quoting_
Darwin.

‘An interesting thought, sir,’ said Darwin, and managed a smile. ‘And
now, I think, I really should like to awaken.’

Ridcully snapped his fingers.

‘We _can_ get rid of those memories, can’t we?’ he said, as the blue
glow enveloped Darwin yet again.

‘Oh yes,’ said Ponder. ‘He’s asked us to, so it’s ethically correct.
Well done, sir. Hex can see to it.’

‘Well then,’ said Ridcully, rubbing his hands. ‘Send him back, Hex. With
perhaps just a tiny recollection. A souvenir, as it were.’

Darwin vanished. ‘Job done, gentlemen,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘All
that remains now is to get back for—’

‘We ought to make sure there are no more Auditors left on Roundworld,
sir,’ said Ponder.

‘On that subject—’ Rincewind began, but Ridcully waved him away. ‘That
at least can wait,’ he said. ‘We’ve established the timeline, it’s nice
and stable, and we can—’

‘Er, I don’t think they _want_ to wait, sir,’ said Rincewind, backing
away.

Shadows were pouring in to the Central Hall. Over the double staircase,
a cloud was forming. It looked like the grey robe of an Auditor, but
hugely bigger, and as the wizards watched the greyness darkened to
coal-mine black.

The bloated shape drifted forward, while hundreds more of the empty grey
robes continue to merge with it.

‘And I think they’re a bit angry,’ Rincewind added.

Trailing greyness after it, filling the hall from edge to edge, the
Auditor bore down on the wizards.

‘Hex—’ Ponder began.

‘Too late,’ boomed the Auditor. ‘_We_ have control now. No magic, no
science, no chocolate. We have to thank you for this place. Never was
there a species so determined to destroy itself. In this world, we can
win without trying! Do you know the wars you’ve unleashed upon this toy
world? The plagues, the famine, the whole _science_ of death? Are you
not ashamed?’

‘What’s he talking about, Stibbons?’ said Ridcully, not taking his eyes
off the cloud.

‘There are a number of wars in the next couple of hundred years, sir,’
said Ponder. ‘Big ones.’

‘Darwin’s fault?’

‘Er, sir.’

‘Just “er”, Stibbons?’

‘“Er” is a very precise term in this context, sir. It means we don’t
have time for a big debate. But certainly the wars are bigger and more
frequent than the ones that took place in the world of _The Ology_.’

‘Bad thing, then?’ said Ridcully, who liked his philosophy succinct.

‘Er again, sir, I’m afraid,’ said Ponder.

‘Care to expand?’

‘In short, sir, more people will die in wars, far fewer will die of
disease and medical problems of all kinds. And humanity survives the
snowball. The first humans left the planet in converted weapons of war,
sir.’

‘That’s monkeys for you, Stibbons,’ said Ridcully. He looked up at the
cloud of pure Auditor.

‘No, we’re not ashamed,’ he said. ‘Humans get a chance to go on.’

‘They won’t have earned it!’

‘Strange that this concerns you,’ said Ridcully.

‘Do you know the terrors that will confront them?’ the Auditor demanded.
‘And the terrors that they will bring _with_ them?’

‘No, but I doubt if they’re worse that the ones they’ve met already,’
said Ridcully. ‘Anyway, you don’t _care_ about them. You just want them
to die quietly. Don’t you?’

The Auditor shimmered. Ponder wondered how many Auditors had come
together to create it. It seemed, now, to be hesitant, unsure …

It said: ‘I want … I …’

… and exploded into fog which, itself, faded away.

‘Not learned quite enough, then,’ said Ridcully, and sniffed. ‘Well,
let’s send Darwin back and go home, shall we? I’m sure we’ve missed at
least one meal. Where’s Rincewind?’

+++ Hiding in the Minerals Gallery +++ said Hex.

‘Impressive. I didn’t even see him move. Oh well, I dare say you can
pick him up later. Let’s go.’

‘What did it mean by the terrors they bring with them?’ said the Dean.

‘Well, they’re still monkeys,’ said Ridcully. ‘Still screaming at one
another, trailing all that evolution behind them, wherever they go.’

‘Darwin said something like that, sir. In _The Descent of Man_,’ said
Ponder.

‘Good chap, Darwin,’ said Ridcully. ‘Would have made a good wizard.’

‘Did you know they put his statue in the canteen, sir?’ said Ponder, a
little shocked.

‘Did they? Good idea,’ said Ridcully brusquely. ‘That way, _every_
sensible person _sees_ it. Ready, Hex.’

And the Central Hall was empty again, apart from the fossils.

Charles Darwin awoke. For a moment so brief that a blink ended it, there
was a sense of complete disorientation. But then he sat up, feeling
unaccountably exhilarated, and looked around at the tangled, busy bank,
with its birds and flitting insects, and thought: Yes. That’s right.
That’s how it is.

¹ See _The Science of Discworld_ and _The Science of Discworld II_.


AFTERTHOUGHT

The Darwin family motto:

_cave et aude_.

Watch, and listen.


INDEX

The page references in this index correspond to the printed edition from which this ebook was created. To find a specific word or phrase from the index, please use the search feature of your ebook reader.

A

Abbott, Edwin A. 75

Achilles 67, 68

afterlife 300

al-Qaeda 301

aleph-zero 180–1, 182

aleph-zeroplex 182

algebraic geometry 174

aliens 16

_see also_ Martians

alleles 264–5

amphibians 269, 270–1

ancestors 224

Ancient Egypt 239–41

Anglican Church 118, 120, 143, 311, 323

Ant Country 222–3

_Anthrobalanus_ 144

anthropic principle 198

apes 146

apprenticeship system 320–1

Arago, François 238

archaeopteryx 296–7

Archimedes 172–3

Aristotle 248–9

Arrow paradox 67, 68, 83

Asimov, Isaac 63, 64

B

bacterial flagella 47–9

Barbour, Julian 80–4

Barjavel, René 63

barnacles 143–5

Baxter, Stephen 227

_Beagle_ (ship) 117, 120–5, 140–3, 151, 235

beetles 5, 119

Behe, Michael 47–8

beliefs 298–303

_see also_ faith

Bertotti, Bruno 80–1

Besson, Jacob 241

Bible Belt America 11–12, 13, 21, 49

Big Bang theory 183–4, 190, 222

biological weapons, evolutionary 274

biology 260–1, 263–80

birds 296–7

birth defects 266–7

black holes 18, 95–8, 99

BMPV 105–6

rotating 101

Blackshirts 318

_Blind Watchmaker, The_ (Dawkins)34

Blyth, Edward 146–7

body temperature control 269–70

Bose-Einstein condensate 104–5

Boulton, Matthew 239, 245, 246

Bousso, Raphael 195

Boyle, Robert 243

Boyle’s law 243

Bradbury, Ray 63, 213–14, 295

Brahma 94

brain 82–3, 221–3, 226

branes 105–6, 196–7, 199–201

Braseneck College 6

British Army 321–2

British Empire 311–12

Bront’ sisters 322

Buddhism 302

Burroughs, Edgar Rice 294

C

Caius, Salomon de 241–2

Cambrian explosion 278

canalised development 267

Cantor, Georg 175, 177–8, 180–3

Carrol, Lewis 227

Carter, John 294

Casimir effect 100

causality 212–13, 219–29, 311–12, 324

Cestesibus 240

Chambers, Robert 249–50

change 325

Channel Tunnel Syndrome 313–14

chaos theory 217–20, 229, 236

chaperonins 268

Chernobyl 270–1

Chile 124, 125–6

chimps 278

China 313, 317

Christianity 118, 119, 128–9, 150, 301, 318, 323

Anglican Church 118, 120, 143, 311, 323

fundamentalism 156–7, 291–2

Quakers 311, 318

Roman Catholicism 15

_see also_ Bible Belt America

chronology projection conjecture 65, 105–6

‘City and Guilds’ examinations 321

classics 320

closed timelike curves (CTCs) 93, 94–5, 97, 99, 104, 105–6, 213

Cohen, Paul 183

competition 128, 154

complicity 312–14

consistent fictions 212–13, 226–7

continental drift 36–7, 126, 157–8

convergence/divergence problem 213–14, 217–18

coral islands 125

cosmic microwaves 192–3

cosmology 18–19, 50, 183–4

counterfactuals 211

counting 171, 178

creationism 16–17, 22, 23–5, 49

Crucifixion 63

cults 15–17

cumulative audience paradox 63

D

D-branes 105–6

D’Alembert, Jean Le Rond 73, 76

Dali, Salvador 47

Damasio, Antonio 221–2, 225, 227, 229, 293

dark energy 19

dark matter 19

Darwin, Charles 11–13, 21–3, 40–2, 49–50, 117–28, 140–55, 158–60, 211,
213, 263, 273, 290

against the notion of a cosmic designer 40, 44–5, 47

B Notebook 127, 248

and the _Beagle_ voyage 117, 120–5, 140–3, 151, 235

destined for the clergy 118–19

discoveries 124

early books 141–3, 145

on the eye 44–5, 47

on geology 117–18, 123, 125–6

impact of 19

on the influence of books 322

influence of Paley on 119–20, 152, 153

initial interest in evolution 127–9, 143–51

modern additions to the work of 259–60

_Origin of Species_ 44, 145–55, 235, 246–52, 319, 325–6

originality 235–6, 239, 246–7, 248–52

Red Notebook 127

social class 319

summary of his theory of evolution 154

and Wallace 146–9, 150

and the wizards (fictional) 5, 31–3, 53–60, 64, 87–8, 91–2, 111–16,
130–8, 140–2, 162–7, 203, 230–1, 253–7, 282, 284–5, 304–10, 324, 327–33

Darwin, Erasmus 119, 124, 246–8

Darwin Fox, William 118, 119

Darwinism 322–3

Darwin’s finches 41, 43–4, 114, 126, 127, 155

Dawkins, Richard 31, 32, 34, 266, 275

decimal places 182

Deep Time 118, 156–7, 158, 160, 247

degrees, honorary 321

deists 301–2

Dembski, William 17, 34

Dennett, Daniel 13, 220, 228

deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 260, 262–3, 266–7, 270–1, 274–80

junk DNA 262–3, 275–6, 278–80

Depew, David 46

Desmond, Adrian 118

destiny 76

determinism 76, 108–9, 220–1, 229

_see also_ free will

Deutsch, David 107

Diana, Princess 292

Dichotomy 67

Dickens, Charles 62, 319, 322, 329

difference, social 317–19, 323–5

dinosaurs 261–2, 296

discovery 237–8

Discworld novels

_Pyramids_ 66

_Small Gods_ 298

_Thief of time_ 65–6, 68–70, 84

dodos 296–7

dogs 155–6, 265

domestication 155

double helix 262

Dumas, Alexandre (Dumas Père) 226–7

Dyson, Lisa 106

E

earth 36–9

age 50, 118, 157

escape velocity 95

magnetic field 158

Schwarszschild radius 96

East India Company 311

eclipses 79

Eddington, Sir Arthur Stanley 79

Edis, Taner 17

education 320–1, 323

Einstein, Albert 18, 62, 75–80, 94–7, 101–2, 195, 236, 263, 290, 325

Ellis, Havelock 74

emotions 221–2, 293

energy

dark 19

negative 100, 103

vacuum 197–200

entropy, negative 298

environment, effect on genetic potential 267

ERV-3 (Endogenous Retrovirus) 278–80

escape velocity 95

eukaryotes 274, 276, 278

Euler, Leonard 173

event horizon 96, 97

Everett, Hugh III 106, 184, 189

Everything, Theory of 105, 195

evolution 15, 19–22, 32–6, 39–49, 223–5

alternative evolutions 215–17, 225

of birds 296–7

common interpretations of 260–3

and competition 128, 154

consensus regarding 260

constantly changing nature of 42–4

Darwin’s early interest in 127–9, 143–51

driving force behind 41–2

and genetics 260–80

impact of the theory of 259

modification over time 259–60

_Origin of Species_ 44, 145–55, 235, 246–52, 319, 325–6

origins of the theory 127–9

as parallel process 46–7

purpose 42

and religion 11–13, 291–2

summary of Darwin’s thinking on 154

_see also_ natural selection

exons 274, 276

exotic matter 100, 101, 102

extelligence 252

eyes 39–40, 44–7

F

facts 289–90

faith 50–1

_see also_ beliefs

fascism 318

Feynman, Richard 185, 187

fictions, consistent 212–13, 226–7

finite 171, 173, 175–6, 183–4

fish 223–4, 225

Fisher, Sir Ronald 264–6

FitzRoy, Robert 120–2, 140–1, 142

flagella 47–9

flooding 242–4

Follett, Sir Brian 299

Fourier analysis 107

free will 107, 108–9, 219–21, 227–9

_see also_ determinism

Freud, Sigmund 290

frogs 269–71

fruit flies 272

fundamentalism 11–13, 156–7, 291–2, 299

future 93–4, 212, 229

_see also_ past; present; time travel

G

Galápagos islands 41, 43–4, 112, 114, 124, 126, 127

Galileo 15, 301

Garay, Balso de 241

Generalised Continuum Hypothesis 183

genes 260, 262, 264–8, 270, 274, 277–8

heterozygous 264–5

homozygous 264

selfish 275

genetic assimilation 272

genetics 260–80

alleles 264–5

deoxyribonucleic acid 260, 262–3, 266–7, 270–1, 274–80

environmental influences on 267

eukaryotes 274, 276, 278

genes 260, 262, 264–8, 270, 274–5, 277–8

genomes 262, 265, 274, 275–80

heterozygosity 264–5

homozygosity 264

hybrids 156

mutation 261, 263–5, 268, 270–2

variation 156, 160, 265, 268

genomes 262, 265, 274, 275–80

geodesics 79, 80

geology 36–9, 41,143, 156–8

age of the Earth 50, 118, 157

continental drift 36–7, 126, 157–8

Darwin on 117–18, 123, 125–6

Deep Time 118, 156–7, 158, 160, 247

zircon and 36, 37–9

geometry

algebraic 174

projective 174

Geroch, Robert 100

Gerrold, David 64

ghosts 74

God

and creation 12–13, 21–2, 26, 32–3, 39, 42, 126–9, 150, 250, 273, 300

necessity of 301

rejection of 302

relegation of 323

Goddelson, Joshua 58

Gödel, Kurt 93–4, 109

gods 52–3

googol 169–70

googolplex 170

Gould, John 126

Gould, Stephen Jay 225

Grand Canyon 158

‘grandfather paradox’ 63, 64, 107–8, 223–4

granite 36, 37

Grant, Peter 44

Grant, Rosemary 44

gravitational fields 95–7, 100

gravitational lensing 79–80

gravitons 106

gravity 18, 78, 79, 80, 314

magnetic 101

quantum 105

group II introns 277

Guthrie, Thomas Anstey 71

H

Haack, Susan 14

Haldane, J.B.S. 264–5

Hamilton, Sir William Rowan 68

Hamiltonian mechanics 68, 83

Hardy, Thomas 322

Harry, Owen 321

Hau, Lene 104–5

Hawking, Stephen 65, 105–6

heat shock proteins (HSPs) 267–8, 270

Heaven 300

Heinlein, Robert 64, 295

Hell 300

heretics 300

heritable variability 156, 160, 265, 268

hermaphrodites 144

Hero of Alexandria 239–40

Herschel, Sir John 120

heterozygous genes 264–5

Hilbert, David 174–7, 180, 183

Hilbert’s Hotel 175–7, 180

Hinduism 94

Hinton, Charles Howard 73–5

Hinton, James 74

historical inertia 210, 214

historical romances 227

history 82–4, 217–18, 226–9, 311–12

Hofstadter, Douglas 222–3

Homes, Sherlock 211–12

homozygous genes 264

Hooke, Robert 236

Hooker, Joseph Dalton 143–4, 148–9, 151, 251

Hubble volumes 191, 193

human genome 262, 265, 275–80

Humboldt, Alexander von 120

Huxley, Thomas Henry 151, 211, 251, 319, 322–3

hybrids 156

hypotheses 19–20, 290

I

immune system, maternal 279–80

infinity 168–83, 190–5

actual 169

alternatives 181

Cantorian 178–83

context-dependent nature 174

Hilbert on 175–7, 180, 183

potential 169

of the universe 169, 183, 190–5

inflation 191

‘intelligent design’ theory 12–13, 16, 17, 34–6, 39–40, 47–9, 126–7, 160

intervals 78–9

introns 274, 276, 277, 279

invention 236–8

‘irreducible complexity’ 47–9

Islam 291–2

J

Jack the Ripper 211

John Paul II, Pope 12, 22

Jorgensen, Richard 276–7

Judaism/Jews 300, 301, 318

_Jurassic Park_ (film) 212

K

Kali 301

Kasner, Edward 169–70

Kingsley, Charles 150, 319, 322

Kirby, William 117

Krasnikov, Sergei 102–3

Kronecker, Leopold 181

L

Lagrange, Joseph-Louis 73, 76

Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste 248, 249, 290

Lamarckism 271–2

Langevin, Paul 98

Laplace, Pierre Simon de 95, 299–300

Lawson, Nicholas 124

lens 39–40, 45

Leonardo da Vinci 241

Levi-Civita, Tullio 100–1, 104

Lewontin, Richard 264–5, 268

life on earth

ancient 39

_see also_ evolution

light

faster-than-light speeds 100, 102–3

gravitational lensing 79–80

photons 77, 78

slow 104–5

speed of 75–8, 95–6, 98, 102

light cones 77, 79

light-years 77, 78

limbs 216

Lincoln, Abraham 210–11, 214, 218, 219, 235

Linnaean Society 149

Lunar Society 247, 311

Lyell, Charles 118, 123, 125–6, 143, 146–9, 151, 157, 247

M

Maccone, Claudio 101

McCormick, Robert 121

magnetic fields 100–1, 104, 158

magnetic gravity 101

Mallett, Ronald 103–4, 105

Malthus, Thomas 127–8, 147–8, 159

mammals 261–2, 268–70, 279–80

Manson killers 295

many worlds interpretation 107, 184–5, 187–9, 191, 221

Markov chain 84

Mars 293–6

Martians 294–5

martyrdom 301

matching 178–80, 181

maternal immune system 279–80

mathematics 72–4, 76, 185–8, 195–200, 291

of infinity 168–83

sets 178–80, 181, 183

matter

dark 19

exotic 100, 101, 102

Maxwell, James Clerk 76

Mead, George Herbert 212, 221

mechanics

classical 186

Hamiltonian 68, 83

_see also_ quantum mechanics

memeplexes 300–1

messenger RNA 275–6

Michell, John 95

microwaves, cosmic background 192–3

middle classes 311, 313, 320

Miller, Kenneth 49

mind, theory of 220

mines, flooding of 242–4

Minkowski, Hermann 76, 236

Minkowski spacetime 76, 77–8, 80, 93–5

Mitchell, Edward 70

momentum 68, 83

Montevideo 141

Moore, James 118

Morland, Sir Samuel 242

Morris, Michael 99, 104

Mosley, Sir Oswald 318

motion 66–8, 77–80

Newton’s law of 18, 186, 188, 210, 314–15

Moving Rows paradox 67

Moya, Miguel Alcubierre 102–3

multiculturalism 300–1

Murray, John 150, 151

mutation 261, 263–5, 268, 270–2

mysticism 302

N

Napoleon 300

narrativium 1–3, 52, 63, 77, 84, 103–4, 140

natural selection 13, 34, 40–2, 45, 142, 144, 147, 160, 217

common interpretations of 260, 263

and competition 128, 154

fundamental nature of 259

and mutation 265

originality of 235–6, 246–7, 248–52

summary of the theory of 153–4

_see also_ evolution

Nazism 318

negative energy 100, 103

negentropy 298

neo-Darwinism 263

_New Scientist_ 80–1

Newcomb, Simon 73, 74

Newcomen, Thomas 244

Newman, James 169–70

Newton, Isaac 18, 19, 23, 186, 188, 210, 236, 263

Newtonian physics 75–6, 78–80, 95

Newton’s law of motion 18, 186, 188, 210, 314–15

Nilsson, Daniel 45, 46

Noah 158

Nobel Prize 11–12

numbers

definition 178

quantum 196

transfinite 178

O

Occam’s razor 189

Odysseus 220, 221, 229

officer-training 321–2

Olum, Ken 103

Oppenheimer, Robert 96

_Origin of Species_ (Darwin) 44, 145–55, 235, 319

conclusion 325–6

originality 246–7, 248–52

origins 145–51

structure 151–2

Owen, Fanny 119

P

Paley, William 23–6, 38–40, 41–2, 44, 46, 117, 235, 249

argument from design 34–6, 39–40, 126–7, 160

influence on Darwin 119–20, 152, 153

_Pans narrans_ 323

Papin, Dennis 243

paradoxes

Arrow 67, 68, 83

cumulative audience 63

‘grandfather’ 63, 64, 107–8, 223–4

Moving Rows 67

twin 98–9, 102

parallel worlds (multiverse) 56–60, 106–7, 184–5, 187–95

four levels of 189–95

parasites 217, 273–4

parochials 216

particles 76–81

past 77, 93–4, 104, 212, 214, 229

_see also_ future; history; present; time travel

Pelger, Suzanne 45, 46

Penrose, Roger 107

petunias 275, 276–7

phlogiston 298

phocomelia 266–7, 271–2

photons 77, 78

physics 183–8, 192

Newtonian 75–6, 78–80, 95

quantum 75, 81–4, 100, 105–7, 184–9, 191, 195–201, 303

pi 182

pigeons 155, 156

Pius XII, Pope 22

Planck length 106, 184, 197–8

plankton 217

Platonia 80–4

pogroms 318

Poincaré, Henri 76, 236

point singularities 96, 97, 100

Poland 318

Polchinski, Joseph 195

politics 299

polydnaviruses 273–4

_Polypan multinarrans_ 323–4

population growth, exponential 127–8, 147–8, 159

position 83

present 77, 81, 212

_see also_ future; past; time travel

pressure cookers 243

principle of least action 186–7

privatives 297–8

probability 82–4, 194

probability mists 81, 83

projective geometry 174

proteins 275–9

heat shock 267–8, 270

proviruses 274

pseudoscientific movements 15–16

Q

Quakers 311, 318

qualitative theories 19

quantitative theories 19

quantum foam 106, 191

quantum gravity 105

quantum mechanics 75, 81–4, 100, 105–7, 184–9, 191

parallel worlds 106–7, 184–5, 187–95

superimposition of states 106

time travel 105–7

unification with relativity theory 105, 195–201, 303

quantum numbers 196

Quantum Platonia 81–2

quasars 79

quasi-sciences 291

R

radiation 270–1

radiuses, Schwarszschild 96

Ramsay, Marmaduke 120

reification 184–5

relativity theory 75–81

general 18, 75–6, 78, 93–6, 98–102, 104

special 75–6, 236

unification with quantum mechanics 105, 195–201, 303

religion 15–17, 22, 49, 291–2, 293, 299–302

beliefs 298–303

Buddhism 302

and evolution 11–13, 291–2

faith 50–1

fundamentalism 11–13, 156–7, 291–2, 299

heterogeneous societies 318

Hinduism 94

Islam 291–2

_see also_ Christianity

resources, linear growth 127–8, 147–8, 159

retina 40

retroviruses 278–80

revolutions, scientific 236–8, 251–2

ribonucleic acid (RNA) 276–9

ring singularities 101

Rivault, Florence 241

RNA interference 277, 279

rocket technology 314–16

Roman Catholicism 15

Royal Geological Society 125

Royal Society 243–4, 311

Ruse, Michael 17

Russia 313, 317, 318, 319

S

St Jago island, Cape Verde Islands 123, 140, 142

Savery, Thomas 243–4, 246

Schrödinger, Erwin 298

Schwarszschild, Karl 95–6

Schwarszschild radius 96

science 14–23, 228

beliefs of 302, 302–3

facts 289–90

research 14–16

theories 18–20, 289–92

unanswerable questions of 50–1

university study of 320

_Science of Discworld, The_ 228, 296, 297, 314–15

_Science of Discworld II, The_ 213, 214, 215, 228, 289, 314–15, 323

science fiction 294–5

scientific revolutions 236–8, 251–2

secularism 22, 323

_Selfish Gene, The_ (Dawkins) 266, 275

sergeants 321–2, 324

sets 178–80, 181, 183

sex 144

Shelley, Mary 71

_shema_ 300

Silverberg, Robert 63, 64

singularities

point 96, 97, 100

ring 101

Sirens 220, 229

Skinner, B.F. 290

Snyder, Hartland 96

social class 319

middle classes 311, 313, 320

working classes 316–17

social heterogeneity 317–19, 323–5

Somerset, Edward (Marquis of Worcester) 242

space

Newtonian 76

and time 62, 66–7, 72–3, 83

_see also_ spacetime

space elevator 314–16

space travel 314–16

space-bolas 314–16

spacetime 76–80

asymptotically flat 80, 93–5, 97–8

and black holes 97

metric of 79–80, 94

Minkowski’s 76, 77–8, 80, 93–5

and quantum foam 191

as ten dimensional 105

species

changeability of 152–6, 158–60, 247–51

extelligent 252

transmutation 124, 127, 144, 145, 152, 247–8

Spence, William 117

Spencer, Herbert 251, 319, 322

sphere, volume of 172–3

Spinoza, Baruch 302

stars

gravitational lensing 79–80

origins of 14–15

_see also_ black holes

steam engine time 236–7, 243–4, 246

steam technology 238–47

Stokes, Pringle 120–1, 142

_Stranger in a Strange Land_ (Heinlein) 295

string theory 50, 105, 195–201

sum, never-ending 173

sum-over-histories technique 185, 187

Sun

eclipses 79

escape velocity 95

Schwarszschild radius 96

superimposition of states 106

superluminal highways 103

Supreme Being (deist) 301–2

survival of the fittest 251

T

Taoism 302

technomancy 55

tectonic plates 36–7, 126

Tegmark, Max 189, 190–5

Telford, Thomas 314

Tenniel, Sir John 297

Tennyson, Alfred 148

terrorism 299, 300, 301

thalidomide 266–7, 271–2

theists 299–301

authoritarian 299–300

theories 18–20, 289–92

Theory of Everything 105, 195

theory of mind 220

Thermodynamics, Second Law of 298

Thompson, Francis 218

Thorne, Kip 99, 104

_Three Musketeers, The_ (Dumas) 213, 226–7

Thuggee worshippers 301

Thurston, Robert 236–7, 239

time 61–84

Deep Time 118, 156–7, 158, 160, 247

as fourth dimension 72–5, 76

as illusion 80–3

paradoxes of 63–8, 83, 98–9, 102, 106–8, 173, 223–4

and relativity theory 75–9

and space 62, 66–7, 72–3, 83

_see also_ spacetime

time capsules 82–3, 84

time dilation 78, 96, 98

time loops 63–4, 215

_Time Machine, The_ (Wells) 70–2, 103–4, 109, 227

time travel 62–5, 70–2, 75, 80, 93–109, 210–11, 214–19, 221, 227–9

quantum theory of 105–7

using bent light 104–5

using wormholes 98, 99–100, 103–4, 107–8

timelike curves 77, 93, 99

closed (CTCs) 93, 94–5, 97, 99, 104, 105–6, 213

tortoises, giant 124

transfinite numbers 178

Tucker, Wilson 211

twin paradox 98–9, 102

U

Unitarians 128–9

United States, Bible Belt 11–12, 13, 21, 49

universals 216

universe

argument from design 12–13, 16–17, 34–6, 39–40, 47–9, 126–7, 160

Big Bang theory 183–4, 190, 222

clockwork 23

as finite 183–4, 190, 193

infinity of 169, 183, 190–5

multiple 56–60

our ability to understand 325

quantum explanations 81–2

universities

‘ancient’ 320

red-brick 320, 321

uranium 38

Ussher, James 21, 118, 156–7

V

vacuum energy 197–200

variation 156, 160, 265, 268

Victoria, Queen 28

Victorian achievements 311–13, 316–21

viruses 273–4, 278–80

Voltaire 300, 323

von Däniken, Erich 16

W

Wallace, Alfred Russel 146–9, 150, 211, 248–9, 251, 260, 318–19, 322

warp drives 102–3

wasps, parasitic 273–4

watch analogy 23–5, 34–5, 47, 152, 160

Watson, Hewett 151

Watt, James 238–9, 244–7

Weber, Bruce 46

Wedgwood, Josiah 90–1, 121, 247

Weinbaum, Stanley 294–5

Wells, Herbert George 70–2, 73, 74, 105, 109, 163–4, 227, 319, 322

Wheeler, John Archibald 96

white holes 97–8, 99

catflap effect 100

magnetic 100–1

Wigner, Eugene 195

women in society 317

working classes 316–17

world views 299, 324–5

world-lines 77, 78, 81, 82, 93

‘worlds of if’ 212–13, 218

wormholes 98, 99–100, 103–4, 107–8

worms 5, 41

Y

Young, Matt 17

Yurtsever, Ulvi 99

Z

Zeno of Elea 66, 67–8, 83, 173

zircon 36, 37–9

Zoological Society 126

This eBook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Version 1.0

Epub ISBN 9781407022697

www.randomhouse.co.uk

This edition published in 2006 by Ebury Press
First published in 2005 by Ebury Press

10

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett, Joat Enterprises, Jack Cohen 2005
Line drawings Copyright © Paul and Sandra Kidby 2005

Terry Pratchett, Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen have asserted their right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 to be identified as the authors of this work.

_All rights reserved_. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission from the publisher.

First published in Great Britain in 2005

EBURY PRESS
Random House, 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 2SA

Addresses for companies within The Random House Group can be found at www.randomhouse.co.uk

The Random House Group Limited Reg. No. 954009

www.randomhouse.co.uk

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

ISBN:9780091898243
