THE TRUTH

TERRY PRATCHETT'S

THE TRUTH

_adapted by_

STEPHEN BRIGGS

METHUEN DRAMA

Methuen

1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

Published in Great Britain in 2002 by

Methuen Publishing Limited

215 Vauxhall Bridge Road,

London SW1V1EJ

Novel copyright © 2000 Terry Pratchett

Adaptation copyright © 2002 Stephen Briggs

The authors have asserted their moral rights

Methuen Publishing Limited Reg. No. 3543167

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available

from the British Library

eISBN: 978-1-40811-789-7

Typeset by SX Composing DTP, Rayleigh, Essex

Printed and bound in Great Britain by Cox & Wyman Ltd

CAUTION

All rights in these plays are strictly reserved and application for

performances etc. should be made to Colin Smythe Limited, PO Box 6,
Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire, SL9 8XA. No performance may be given
unless a licence has been obtained.

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition, including this condition, being imposed
on the subsequent purchaser.

Contents

Introduction

Act One

Act Two

INTRODUCTION

ALL THE DISCWORLD'S A STAGE

The first people _ever_ to dramatise the Discworld, in any form, were
the Studio Theatre Club in Abingdon, Oxon. That was in 1991, with _Wyrd
Sisters._

We had already staged our own adaptations of other works: Monty Python's
_Life of Brian_ and _Holy Grail_ _—_ and Tom Sharpe's _Porterhouse Blue_
and _Blott on the Landscape._ We were looking for something new when
someone said, 'Try Terry Pratchett - you'll like him.' So I ventured
into the previously uncharted territory of the 'Fantasy' section of the
local bookstore ('Here be dragons'). I read a Terry Pratchett book; I
liked it. I read all of them. I wrote to Terry and asked if we could
stage _Wyrd Sisters._ He said 'Yes'.

_Wyrd Sisters_ sold out.

So did _Mort_ the year after.

So did _Guards! Guards!, Men at Arms, Maskerade, Jingo, Carpe_ _Jugulum_
and _The Fifth Elephant_ in the years after that. In fact, 'sold out' is
too modest an expression. 'Oversold very quickly so that by the time the
local newspaper mentioned it was on we'd had to close the booking
office' is nearer the mark.

My casts were all happy enough to read whichever book we were staging,
and to read others in the canon, too. The books stand on their own, but
some knowledge of the wider Discworld ethos is essential when adapting
the stories, and can also help directors to find out where it's all
coming from, and the actors with their characterisations.

The Discworld novels have been getting longer (and darker) as the years
pass and it is a problem trying to put over the plot while still meeting
the over-riding target for amdram - getting into the pub before closing.
The important thing was to decide what the basic plot was: anything
which didn't contribute to that was liable to be dropped in order to
keep the play flowing. Favourite scenes, even favourite characters, have
on occasion had to be dumped. These are hard decisions but the book has
to work as a _play._ You can't get four hundred pages of novel into two
and a half hours on stage without sacrifices.

Each play also offers a challenge to directors in working out who can
double for whom when working with a smaller cast. You'll see from the
cast list, which follows this introduction, how _we_ covered all the
roles.

Although the majority of our audiences are 'fans', I've tried to
remember when writing the plays that not _all_ the audience will be
steeped in Discworld lore. Some of them may just be normal theatre-goers
who've never read a fantasy novel in their whole lives; humorous fantasy
may not be their 'thing', but I wouldn't want them to feel they were
watching something which had been typed on an Enigma machine.

The books are episodic and have a sort of 'cinematic' construction; this
can be a difficult concept to incorporate into a play. Set changes slow
down the action. Any scene change that takes more than twenty to thirty
seconds means you've lost the audience. Even ten-second changes, if
repeated often enough, will lead to loss of interest. I've been to see
many productions of the plays and the best have been those that have
used bare stages or composite sets - leaving the majority of the
'scene-changing' to the lighting technician. The golden rule is: if you
_can_ do it without scene-shifting, _do_ it without scene-shifting. It's
a concept that has served radio drama very well (everyone _knows_ that
radio has the best scenery). And Shakespeare managed very well without
it, too.

The plays do, however, call for some unusual props. Over the years, many
of these have been made by my casts and crew: large hourglasses for
Death's house, shadow puppets, archaic rifles, dragon-scorched books
and, of course, Mr Pin's one-shot crossbow pistol for _The Truth._
Other, more specialised props were put 'out to contract': Death's sword
and scythe, an orangutan, Detritus's head and hands, a Death of Rats, a
Greebo, Scraps the dog and two swamp dragons (one an elaborate hand
puppet and one with a fire-proof compartment in its bottom for a flight
scene).

Since the Studio Theatre Club started the trend in 1991, Terry and I
have had many enquiries about staging the books - from as far afield as
Finland, South Africa, Indonesia, Australia, Bermuda and the Czech
Republic (as well as Sheffield, Aberdeen, Exeter and the Isle of Man).
Royalties from the five plays administered by _me_ have raised over
£35,000 so far for the Orangutan Foundation.

So how did our productions actually go? We enjoyed them. Our audiences
seemed to enjoy them (after all, some of them were prepared, year after
year, to travel down to Abingdon in Oxfordshire from Taunton,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Ipswich, Basingstoke and . . . well, Oxford). Terry
seems to enjoy them, too. He says that many of our members look as
though they have been recruited straight off the streets of
Ankh-Morpork. He says that several of them were born to play the 'rude
mechanicals' in Vitoller's troupe in _Wyrd Sisters,_ and that in his
mind's eye the famous Ankh-Morpork City Watch _are_ the players of the
Studio Theatre Club.

I'm sure these were meant to be compliments.

THE TRUTH

By the time we staged _The Truth_ in 2000, we knew that the Discworld
plays were a winner . . . though we'd learned that the flourishing trade
in other groups staging the plays meant that we couldn't afford to take
full houses for granted. They're still full, but we do have to work a
bit now to achieve that.

As with all the adaptations, there were difficult choices about which
scenes should be sacrificed to try and keep the play down to a
reasonable running time. We had also realised that Abingdon's medieval
Unicorn Theatre was a part of the package; it has its shortcomings, but
its ambience contributed much to the original success of the shows.

This dramatisation was written with the Unicorn Theatre's restrictions,
and the number of players I expected to have available, in mind. Really
complicated scenic effects were virtually impossible. Basically, we had
a bare stage with an on-stage balcony at the back with a small curtained
area beneath it. Anyone thinking of staging a Discworld play can be as
imaginative as they like - call upon the might of Industrial Light &
Magic, if it's within their budget. But _The_ _Truth can_ be staged with
only a relatively modest outlay on special effects and the notes that
accompany the text are intended to be a guide for those, like us, with
limited budgets. Bigger groups, with teams of experts on hand, can let
their imaginations run wild!

In short, though, our experience and that of other groups is that it
pays to work hard on getting the costumes and lighting right, and to
keep the scenery to little more than, perhaps, a few changes of level
enhanced by lighting effects and carefully chosen background music.
There's room for all sorts of ideas here. The Discworld, as it says in
the books, is your mollusc.

Characterisation: Within the constraints of what is known and vital
about each character, there is still room for flexibility of
interpretation. With the main roles, though, you have to recognise that
your audiences will expect them to look as much like the book
descriptions as possible. Most drama clubs don't have a vast range from
which to choose, though, and it's the acting that's more important than
the look of the player when it comes down to it! _The Discworld
Companion_ gives some background information about the City Watch and
Lord Vetinari but most of the characters in this play are new.

Costumes: We played most of the Ankh-Morpork characters in a form of
Victorian dress, with the dwarfs in leather armour, boots, helmets, etc.
Otto was dressed as the classic, Bela Lugosi, vampire. Pin and Tulip
were in black suits with black sunglasses - a sort of cross between
Agent Smith in _Matrix_ and the MIB agents in _Men in Black._

Scenery: Virtually none. Our major set-piece was the printing press,
which we hired in London. Apart from that, there were just the odd bits
of furniture.

Oh, and a word on pronunciation . . . Having seen many of the plays
staged, pronunciation of the names seems sometimes to be a stumbling
block. Here are some pointers:

[1114115267]

[1114115268]

Thinking of staging it? Although Methuen control the amateur rights for
_The Truth,_ Terry and I are keen to know which of our plays are being
staged where, so do feel free to write to me or email me with your
production dates, just in case one of us can get to see your show. I
also have some stocks of a snazzy Uberwald League of Temperance badge .
. . I can be contacted either via Methuen, or via email at
sbriggs@cix.co.uk

Stephen Briggs

February 2002

THE TRUTH

_The Truth,_ dramatised by Stephen Briggs, was first presented by the
Studio Theatre Club at the Unicorn Theatre, Abingdon, on Tuesday 21
November 2000. The cast was as follows:

[1114115286]

*This actor, originally playing Coffin Henry, had to take over these two
parts at the last minute, meaning that his old lines had to be spread
out among the other beggars

_Director_ Stephen Briggs

_Lighting/Effects_ Colin James

_Sound_ Phil Evans

_Stage Manager_ Catherine Long

_ACT ONE_

SCENE ONE

_A bare stage._ GASPODE _is discovered onstage._

GASPODE Wotcha. I'm Gaspode. Yes, I know dogs aren't meant to be able to
talk, but this is Discworld, where magic has a way of bending the normal
rules of science. Our story takes place in the Disc's principle city,
Ankh-Morpork. A city so lawless that even the thieves go around in twos.
Our story starts with a rumour. It spread around this great city like
wildfire - in fact wildfire _itself has_ spread through Ankh-Morpork
quite a few times since its citizens learned about fire insurance, but I
digress . . .

_He looks conspiratorially to left and right._

It even reached the ears of the city's Night Watch.

_He looks up at_ NOBBY _and_ COLON, _who have entered into a raised_
_part of the stage._

The dwarfs can turn lead into gold.

CPL NOBBS _and_ SGT COLON _are leaning on the rail as if on the_
_dockside. Water lapping. Water effect._

CORPORAL NOBBS You can't turn sumfin' into sumfin' else. Alchemists have
bin tryin' it for years.

SERGEANT COLON They can usually manage to turn an house into an 'ole in
the ground.

CORPORAL NOBBS That's what I mean. Can't be done. It's all to do wiv
elephants, see. Everything's made of elephants, see? Earth, air . . .

SERGEANT COLON _Elements,_ Nobby. Elements, not elephants.

CORPORAL NOBBS Yeah right. Anyway, everything's made of them: earth,
air, fire, water and . . . sunnink. Well-known fact.

SERGEANT COLON If it was possible to turn lead into gold, we'd all be
doin' it.

_We hear a splash of oars, off._

CORPORAL NOBBS Wizards could do it.

SERGEANT COLON _(dismissively)_ Oh, well, _magic._

CORPORAL NOBBS Hang on, there's someone down there.

SERGEANT COLON In the river? _(He listens.)_ Oi! You!

MR PIN _(off)_ Yes?

SERGEANT COLON Are you invadin' the city, or what?

MR PIN _(off, after a short pause)_ What?

SERGEANT COLON _What_ what?

MR PIN _(off)_ What were the other options?

SERGEANT COLON Don't mess me about . . . are _you,_ down there in that
boat, _invading_ this city?

MR PIN _(off)_ No.

SERGEANT COLON Fair enough. Get a move on, then.

_The boat noise moves off._

CORPORAL NOBBS You reckon that was enough, just askin' them?

SERGEANT COLON Well, they ought to know.

CORPORAL NOBBS Yeah, but . . .

SERGEANT COLON It was a tiny little rowing boat, Nobby. Of course, if
you want to go all the way down them icy steps to the jetty . . . .

CORPORAL NOBBS No, sarge.

SERGEANT COLON Well, let's get back to the Watch House, then.

_They exit. The lapping water effect continues, on a bare stage. We
hear_ _the voices, off, of_ CHARLIE, MR PIN _and_ MR TULIP. CHARLIE _is_
_played by the same actor who plays_ LORD VETINARI - _unless you're_
_blessed with suitable identical twins!_

CHARLIE _(off)_ My nose itches.

MR PIN _(off)_ You'll just have to wait 'til we get there.

CHARLIE _(off)_ You could take the mask off again. It really itches.

MR TULIP _(off)_ Shall I hit him alongside the ___ ___ing head with the
___ing oar again, Mr Pin?

MR PIN _(off)_ Good idea, Mr Tulip.

_There is a dull thump._

CHARLIE _(off)_ Ow!

_'River lights' cross-fade to_ GASPODE,, _who has temporarily been_
_joined by_ FOUL OLD RON.

GASPODE Well, well, well. There's a fing. Man all bundled up and masked.
Interesting, eh?

FOUL OLD RON Scraplit. Thatch and trouser. I told 'im. I told 'im.
Millennium Hand and Shrimp. Buggrit.

GASPODE Looks like a dirty deed to me, too. _(To the_ _audience.)_ Oh,
sorry - this is Foul Old Ron. One of the city's best-known and most
pungent beggars. He is a _Mutterer_ you know . . . he walks behind
people muttering until they give him money not to. He's usually
accompanied by his Smell, which has become so powerful over the years
that it has developed a life of its own.

RON _sidles off, muttering._ 'I _told_ 'em, I _told_ 'em. Millennium
Hand and Shrimp. I said, I said, I said. But they only run out . . .'

GASPODE And that's about it for the intro. Ooh, no, sorry, nearly forgot
our main character, Mr William de Worde.

_The lights come up on_ WILLIAM, _writing._

_He_ heard the rumour, too . . . and he duly wrote it down. 'Cos that's
what he does, see? He writes down rumours and other news in a letter,
then sends it to rulers and nobs in other cities and countries so they
can keep up-to-date with what's goin' on here in Ankh-Morpork.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(reading)_ '. . . and finally, on a lighter note, it
is being said that the dwarfs can turn lead into gold, though no-one
knows where this rumour has started. And anyone under five foot tall is
liable to be accosted by newcomers to the city, shouting 'Ho there,
short stuff, let's see you make some gold then'. _Only_ newcomers do
this, of course, because everyone else knows what you call people who
call dwarfs 'short stuff. 'The deceased.' Yr obedient servant, William
de Worde'. Right, well let's get this block off to Mr Cripslock.

_He exits._

GASPODE 'Cos he sends so _many_ letters, he only actually writes _one,_
which he then transfers onto a wooden block and then has it cut into a
printing block by Mr Cripslock, the engraver. Then he prints off a wadge
of copies, fills in the 'Dear Lady Margolotta' s and so on, and everyone
thinks he's offerin' a personal service. Clever, eh? And it pays quite
well, too.

_As_ WILLIAM _enters at stage level, two dwarfs enter carrying a large_
_piece of equipment which hopefully looks like a chunk of an ancient_
_printing press. One of them is_ GUNILLA GOODMOUNTAIN. _Another_ _is_
BODDONY, _who is walking backwards. They collide and_ WILLIAM _drops the
cloth/woodblock._ GUNILLA GOODMOUNTAIN _picks up the wrapped plate and
opens it to reveal_ _that it is now broken into two pieces._

GUNILLA Sorry. Yours, I think. What was it meant to be?

WILLIAM DE WORDE A block prepared for a woodcut. You know? Engraving?
_(Explaining, as if to a child)_ A sort of magical way of getting lots
of copies of writing? I shall have to go and make another one, now.

GUNILLA _keeps looking at the broken pieces._

You see, the engraver cuts away bits of the wood . . .

GUNILLA You still got the original?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Pardon?

GUNILLA The original. (WILLIAM _produces the original letter_ _from a
pocket.)_ Can I borrow it for a moment? (WILLIAM _passes_ _it over.)_
Hmm. We'll need ten point across three. _(To_ WILLIAM.) Just you step
this way, will you? My card. _(He_ _hands over a card to_ WILLIAM.)

WILLIAM DE WORDE 'Gunilla Goodmountain & Co. Respectfully Solicit Work
for Their New Word Smithy' . . . This is very good - you've got the
letters very even and neat - you must have a very steady hand.

GUNILLA No, not really.

_They move across into the print room. One of the dwarfs removes the_
_cloth over the press._

Lead moveable type, see?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh dear. This is _printing,_ isn't it?

_Blackout._

SCENE TWO

_The Patrician's Palace._ LORD VETINARI _is on-stage. Nearby_ WUFFLES,
_a wheezy old terrier, is asleep in his basket._ DRUMKNOTT _enters,
followed by_ HUGHNON RIDCULLY.

DRUMKNOTT Archbishop Ridcully to see you, my lord.

_He exits._

HUGHNON RIDCULLY My Lord . . .

LORD VETINARI Ah, Hughnon. You wish to complain about the dwarfs' new
printing press?

HUGHNON RIDCULLY _(slightly taken aback)_ Well . . . yes. You must put a
stop to this, Havelock. You know the . . . understanding.

LORD VETINARI _'Must',_ your reverence?

HUGHNON RIDCULLY You _know_ why we're against this moveable type
nonsense.

LORD VETINARI Remind me again.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY _(with a sigh)_ Words are too important to be left to
mere machinery. We have nothing against engraving, you know that. We've
nothing against words being nailed down properly. But words that can be
taken apart and then used to make other words - well, that's positively
dangerous. I thought that was your view, too.

LORD VETINARI Broadly, yes. But many years of ruling this city has
taught me that you cannot apply brakes to a volcano. Sometimes it is
best just to let things run their course.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY You haven't always been this relaxed, Havelock.

LORD VETINARI Flexibility and understanding have always been my
watchwords.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY My God, have they?

LORD VETINARI Indeed. And of course, it is increasingly hard to ignore
this new _type,_ aha, of printing when vast printeries already exist in
Omnia. The Omnians, as you know, import vast quantities of holy books
and pamphlets.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY Evangelical nonsense. You should have banned them years
ago.

LORD VETINARI _Ban_ a _religion,_ your reverence?

HUGHNON RIDCULLY Well, when I say _ban,_ I mean . . .

LORD VETINARI > I'm sure no-one could call me a despot, your reverence.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY Not twice at any rate, ahaha.

LORD VETINARI I'm sorry?

HUGHNON RIDCULLY I said . . . 'Not twice, at any rate, ahaha.'

LORD VETINARI I do apologise . . . you seem to have lost me there.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY It was, uh, a minor witticism, Havelo . . ., er, my
lord.

LORD VETINARI Oh. Yes. Ahah. _(Pause.)_ The Guild of Engravers has put
its rates up three times in the past year, you know.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY AH. I see.

LORD VETINARI Civilisation runs on words, your reverence. Which should
not be too expensive. Look out of the window. Tell me what you see.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY _(pause)_ Fog.

LORD VETINARI _(slightly testily) If it was afineday_ you would see the
big semaphore tower across the river. Words fly back and forth from
every corner of the continent. A year ago it would have taken a month to
exchange letters with my ambassador in Borogravia. Now I can have a
reply tomorrow. If we don't grab events by the collar they will have us
by the throat.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY Is it me, or is there a terrible smell in here?

_He sniffs about, then realises to his embarrassment that the smell is_
_emanatingfrom_ LORD VETINARI'S _dog,_ WUFFLES.

Ah. Yes, Wuffles. Of course. Ahaha. Hrm. He's doing very well, er, for a
dog of his age. Um, how old is he now?

LORD VETINARI Sixteen. That's over a hundred in dog years.

HUGHNON RIDCULLY Excellent. Yes. Hrm. He must be a great companion and I
expect you get used to the smell.

LORD VETINARI What smell?

WUFFLES _shuffles across to_ RIDCULLY _and leans against him._

HUGHNON RIDCULLY Ah. Yes. Indeed.

LORD VETINARI _(after a chilly pause)_ However, I _will_ pay a visit to
these dwarf printers.

DRUMKNOTT _enters._

DRUMKNOTT Yes, my lord?

LORD VETINARI Have my coach made ready, will you?

DRUMKNOTT Yes, my lord.

DRUMKNOTT _exits._ RIDCULLY _pats_ WUFFLES _embarrassedly, as_ _the
lights black out._

SCENE THREE

_A cellar somewhere. As the lights come up,_ MR PIN, MR TULIP _and_ MR
SLANT _enter._ MR TULIP _is sniffing at a white powder on his_ _hand._

MR SLANT That _is_ him. It's a trick, isn't it?

MR PIN I assure you that it is not him. If it were, we'd all be damned
for sure.

MR SLANT But he is the very spitting image . . . I must reiterate; I am
a mere facilitator in this matter.

MR TULIP Just like us.

MR SLANT Quite . . . so. My clients wished me to find some experts. I
found you. I gave you some sealed instructions and you have made some .
. . arrangements. I do not know what those arrangements are. I will
continue not to know, do you understand? You and I see each other when
absolutely necessary.

MR TULIP I hate ___ing zombies.

MR SLANT I am sure the feeling is mutual.

MR PIN You're sayin' if this goes bad, you've never seen us in your life
. . .

MR SLANT _coughs._

. . . Your _after_life. OK. What about the money? In gems, remember, not
cash.

MR SLANT Of course. My clients could hardly write you a cheque. It will
be delivered tonight. Oh, perhaps you should see this.

_He hands a document to_ M r PIN, _who reads_

You may show it to your monkey.

TULIP _makes to grab for_ SLANT, _but_ PIN _stops him._

MR PIN He's got the story of our lives, Mr Tulip.

MR TULIP So? I can still rip his ___ing stitched-on head right off!

MR SLANT I fear not. Mr Pin?

MR PIN Because he'll have placed copies of this all over the city, I
guess. He knows stuff we wouldn't want leaking out.

MR TULIP What? Even about the puppies and that kid?

MR PIN He does _now._ He knows where the bodies are buried, see.

MR SLANT I've even talked to one or two of them. So . . . if anything
happens to me . . . that document would go straight to . . . well,
straight to people you wouldn't want to know. I hope that you have a
crime-free stay in our city. The City Watch are very dogged in some
respects.

MR PIN We hold the police in very high regard.

MR TULIP We ___ing love policemen.

MR PIN If there was a policemen's ball, we'd be the first to buy a
ticket.

MR TULIP Specially if it was mounted on a plinth, or something.

MR SLANT I just wanted to make sure we understood one another. _(He
coughs)_ I believe my clients wish to see the . . . merchandise, as it
were, /will, of course, not be involved in this element . . .

MR PIN Of course.

MR SLANT If you would wait here a moment. I will let them know it is
safe to enter.

_He exits._

MR PIN Time to meet the bosses, eh? Nice place this, eh?

MR TULIP Nah. I fort that at the start but it's just a late eighteenth
century copy of the ___ing Baroque style. They got the dimensions all
wrong. Didja see them pillars in the hall? ___ing sixth century Ephebian
with second Empire Djelibeybian finials! It was all I could do not to
___ing laugh.

MR PIN You are a very unexpected man, Mr Tulip.

MR TULIP _walks over to look at a painting on the fourth wall'._

MR TULIP Well me, it's a ___ing da Quirm. 'Woman Holding Ferret'. He did
it just after he moved from Genua and was influenced by Caravati. Look
at that___ing brushwork, will ya? Look at his use of___ing light and the
way the ferret's nose follows you round the room. That's___ing genius,
that is . . .

_The hooded and robed city bosses have entered. One of them, as we_
_shall later discover, is_ LORD DE WORDE. _The others include_ LORD
RUST, LADY SELACHII, LADY VENTURI.

LORD DE WORDE Perhaps your colleague would like it as a present?

MR PIN Mr Tulip does not collect art, he merely _appreciates_ it. Our
payment will be in gems, as agreed.

LORD RUST Where is your . . . protege?

MR PIN _gestures to_ MR TULIP _to fetch_ CHARLIE. TULIP _exits._

When will you be ready?

MR PIN We think Tuesday would be a good time. By then he'll be as good
as he's going to get.

LORD DE WORDE And there will be no deaths involved? This is important.

MR PIN Mr Tulip will be as gentle as a lamb.

LORD DE WORDE Er . . .yes. His Lordship is not to be harmed any more
than is strictly necessary. Vetinari dead would be more dangerous than
Vetinari alive.

MR TULIP _enters, with a hooded and masked_ CHARLIE,, _who_ _remains
with his back to the audience. He removes his mask._

LORD RUST My gods! It's _not_ him - is it?

MR PIN No.

LORD RUST But why can't we just replace him?

MR PIN Our man is of rather low intelligence.

LORD DE WORDE Astonishing. This has to work. Lord Vetinari may be
prepared to see humans become a minority group in their own city but
even so his death by assassination would cause turmoil.

LORD RUST And turmoil is difficult to control.

LADY SELACHII Too many people have an interest in taking over. This
doppelganger will provide us with an opportunity to slide gently from
one condition to another.

MR PIN _draws_ LORD DE WORDE _to one side._

MR PIN It makes no odds to my colleague or me but what would happen to
our, friend, once you have slid gently from one condition to another?

LORD DE WORDE I'm sure there are ways to dispose of a man whose face no
longer fits, eh? _(He laughs.)_ But there must be no trouble with the
Watch. Commander Vimes is running a very efficient force.

MR PIN Yes, Mr Slant told us . . .

LADY SELACHII And it employs a werewolf.

MR TULIP A___ing _werewolf?_ Are you___ing _crazy?_

LORD RUST Why does your colleague keep saying '___ing', Mr Pin?

MR TULIP You must be out of your___ing minds!

MR PIN Speech impediment. A werewolf? Thank you for telling us. They're
worse than vampires when they're on the trail. You do know that, do you?

LORD DE WORDE Mr Slant will discuss this with you.

MR TULIP They got a sense of smell you wouldn't believe.

MR PIN Any more surprises? What kind of a city are you running here?

LADY SELACHII We are _not_ running the city. Yet.

LORD DE WORDE We look forward to seeing you again, gentlemen. Tomorrow
night. When, I trust, you will announce your readiness. Good night.

_The robed figuresexit._

MR PIN So, Charlie, how about it?

CHARLIE It's not illegal, is it?

MR PIN What's legality, Charlie? Just words on paper. But you won't be
doing anything _wrong._

CHARLIE But ten thousand dollars doesn't sound like the sort of money
you get for doing something _right._ Not for saying a few words.

MR PIN Well, you are a special man, Charlie. And afterwards you will
have to stay out of sight for a very long time.

MR TULIP Yeah.

CHARLIE But why did you have to kidnap me? And keep me padlocked in a
mask? One minute I was running my nice little clothes shop in
Pseudopolis, next thing, I'm . . .

MR PIN There's no point in dwelling on the past, my friend. This is a
business. All we want is a few days of your time, and then you end up
with a fortune and - and I believe this is _important,_ Charlie - a
_lifetime_ in which to spend it.

CHARLIE But how do you know I won't tell anyone?

MR PIN We trust you, Charlie. Now, you go and wait outside for us. Mr
Tulip and I will join you shortly. Mask.

CHARLIE _puts on the mask and exits._

MR TULIP Do we?

MR PIN Do we what?

MR TULIP Do we___ing _trust_ him?

MR PIN Of course we don't. What do you think? Do you know, he actually
thinks he can outsmart me. He might _look_ like Lord Vetinari, but he
can't _think_ like him. He's smart enough to run a small clothes shop,
but that's it. Got to admire him, though. Almost.

MR TULIP Too___ing right.

MR TULIP _takes another sniff of his white powder._

MR PIN _(sees the bag)_ What have you got now? _(He puts his_ _finger in
and then licks the end)_ That's table salt. Shall I try again? Listen
carefully - drugs equal chemicals but chemicals don't always equal
drugs. Remember all that trouble with the calcium carbonate? You shoved
so much up your nose we could've cut your head off and written on a
blackboard with your neck.

MR TULIP It made me feel good.

MR PIN You've got to stop buying anything you're offered in the street
in little bags. You've had flour, baking powder, chalk, salt - oh, and
pickled beef sandwiches.

_Blackout._

SCENE FOUR

_The print room. A couple of dwarfs are working at the press._ WILLIAM
_and_ GUNILLA _are discussing a proofsheet._ LORD VETINARI _enters._

LORD VETINARI Why, Lord de Worde, I hadn't realised you were involved in
this.

WILLIAM DE WORDE It's _Mister_ de Worde, my lord.

LORD VETINARI Of course. But how _is_ your father?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I . . . don't see much of him, my lord.

LORD VETINARI A pity. Are you in charge here?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mr Goodmountain does most of the talking, sir.

GOODMOUNTAIN _crosses to them._

LORD VETINARI I want to be certain this project is not doomed to
failure. Is Mr CMOT Dibbler involved in any way?

WILLIAM DE WORDE What?

LORD VETINARI Shifty fellow, sells sausages . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, no, just the dwarfs.

LORD VETINARI I see. And is this building built on a crack in the
space-time continuum?

GUNILLA What?

LORD VETINARI When one has been ruler of this city as long as I have,
one gets to know with a sad certainty that whenever some well-meaning
soul begins a novel enterprise they always manage to site it at a point
where it will do maximum harm to the fabric of reality.

WILLIAM DE WORDE We haven't noticed any cracks.

LORD VETINARI Ah, but possibly on this very site a strange cult engaged
in eldritch rites, the very essence of which permeated the neighbourhood
just waiting for the right events to trigger them to once again rise and
walk around eating people?

GUNILLA I don't have to take that kind of talk, mister. Who do you think
you are?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(stepping in quickly)_ I wonder if I might just
explain one or two things to Mr Goodmountain?

LORD VETINARI I'm sure he'll thank you for it later.

WILLIAM _and_ GUNILLA _withdraw slightly, and they have a silent_ _but
heated conversation. They return._

GUNILLA I speak as I find, me. Always have done, always . . .

LORD VETINARI And what is it that you call a spade?

GUNILLA Never use 'em. Farmers use spades. But I call a shovel a shovel.

LORD VETINARI Yes, I thought you would.

GUNILLA Young William here says you're a ruthless despot who doesn't
like printing. But I say you're a fair-minded man who won't stand in the
way of an honest dwarf making a bit of a living, right?

LORD VETINARI _puts his arm companionably around_ WILLIAM'S _shoulder
and leads him to one side._

LORD VETINARI Mr de Worde, a moment, please.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I only said that _some_ people call you . . .

LORD VETINARI Now, sir. I think I might be persuaded, against all
experience, that your little endeavour can proceed without filling my
streets with inconvenient occult rubbish. So I am minded to allow your
friends to proceed with their folly. _Of course,_ should there be any
occult occurrences, I would hold you personally responsible.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Me? But I, er . . .

LORD VETINARI Ah. You think I am being unfair? Ruthlessly despotic,
perhaps? You really ought to write to your father more often, you know.
I always think it is sad when families fall out. Well, carry on, then. I
may even have the occasional job for you myself.

WILLIAM _waves at_ GUNILLA _behind_ _LORD_ VETINARI'S _back._

GUNILLA Special rates for government jobs.

LORD VETINARI I wouldn't dream of paying less than other customers.

GUNILLA I wasn't going to charge you less than . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well it's been a pleasure to see you, your lordship.

LORD VETINARI _walks out of the print shop. Lights cross-fade to_
_raised area where_ TULIP _and_ PIN _watch him leave._

MR TULIP And _he's_ the man who runs the city?

MR PIN Yeah.

MR TULIP So, where's his___ing bodyguards?

MR PIN If we wanted to scrag him, here and now, how much use would four
bodyguards be?

MR TULIP As a___ing chocolate kettle, Mr Pin.

MR PIN There you are then. But the man at the top has a lot of friends
when things are going well. People tell me this dump is thriving. We
wouldn't reach the end of the street.

MR TULIP From what I hear he doesn't do a___ing thing!

MR PIN Yeah. One of the hardest things to do properly, in politics.

MR TULIP _taking a secretive sniff out of a paper bag._

MR TULIP It'd be simpler to ___ing kill him.

MR PIN Oh, for a ___ing simple world.

_He turns and sees the bag. He takes it and samples it._

You do _know_ this is only washing soda?

MR TULIP Sorry.

MR PIN _(with a sigh)_ Come on, let's feed the geek.

_Cross-fade back to print room._ WILLIAM _has been writing in his_
_notebook._ GUNILLA _has been working at the press and crosses to_
WILLIAM _with a printed sheet._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(readingfrom the paper)_ 'Lord Vetinari appeared to
have enjoyed his visit. He said . . .' _(He looks_ _down the page)_ 'A
fight broke out in the Mended Drum tavern last night. A ruckus commenced
and five or six people were hurt. Brezock the Barbarian . . .' You know,

Gunilla, once it's been set out, all neat and regular, it looks somehow
more _real._

GUNILLA And what do we call this news sheet? What do you usually put at
the top of your news letter thingies?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Generally just 'To My Lord the . . .'

GUNILLA Need something snappier than that.

WILLIAM DE-WORDE How about 'Ankh-Morpork Items'?

GUNILLA _(over his shoulder)_ Boddony - set that would you?

_In the background,_ BODDONY _sets the banner._

Still looks a bit grey though. All the type bunched up. How about if we
put a little title on each piece? Like this?

_He hands_ WILLIAM _a little slip of paper._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(reading)_ 'Five/six Hurt in Tavern Brawl'. Yes, OK.

BODDONY _passes the title sheet to_ GUNILLA.

GUNILLA No. 'Items', I said. You've set the T and the 't' the wrong way
round. It says 'times'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, that's better. Just use a big 'T' and a small 'i'.
'Ankh-Morpork Times'.

BODDONY How many copies do you want then?

GASPODE,, RON, _the_ DUCK MAN, ALTOGETHER ANDREWS _and_ COFFIN HENRY
_enter._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . twenty? Thirty?

GUNILLA How about a couple of hundred? Hardly worth going to press for
less.

WILLIAM DE WORDE There can't be two hundred people prepared to pay five
dollars!

GUNILLA Charge 'em half a dollar, then. That'll be fifty dollars for us
and the same for you.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Really? But how will we sell them? We haven't got a
shop . . . what _is_ that smell?

_He sees the crowd of beggars._

What do they want?

GUNILLA Well, people usually give Foul Old Ron money just to go away.

FOUL OLD RON _(nodding)_ S'right, Mr Push. Don't try the blarney gobble
on me, juggins. Dang.

GASPODE Woof. Growl.

GUNILLA One thing you notice about Ankh-Morpork is that people will buy
almost anything off a man on a street corner . . .

_He picks up some of the news sheets and crosses to_ RON.

Can you understand me, mister?

FOUL OLD RON Bugrit.

GUNILLA _looks at_ WILLIAM.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Probably 'Yes'.

GUNILLA OK. Well, see here now, if you sell these things at, oh, twenty
pence each, you can keep . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE You can't sell it that cheap! At that price, _anyone_
will be able to read it!

GUNILLA Good. 'Cos there's more poor folk than rich folk, so if we sell
it cheaper we'll sell more copies. _(To_ RON.) Might your, er, friends
be interested in a little money?

FOUL OLD RON Told 'em. I told 'em. Buggrit.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . 'Yes' again, I think.

GUNILLA Well, then if they sell these to people for twenty pence, they
can keep one shiny penny per copy.

GASPODE Yeah - and you can stick your penny where the sun don't shine.

GUNILLA _and_ WILLIAM _react as though_ RON _had spoken._

GUNILLA Oh, so you - sorry, what was that?

FOUL OLD RON Buggrit.

WILLIAM DE WORDE You want more than a penny?

GASPODE Got to be worth five pence a time.

WILLIAM _looks from_ RON _to_ GASPODE.

Woof?

WILLIAM _looks back up to_ RON.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Are you all right, Ron?

GASPODE Gottle o'geer, Gottle o'geer.

GUNILLA All right. Two pence.

GASPODE Four. But let's not muck about. How about one dollar per thirty?

GUNILLA It's a deal. William, give me a hand, will you?

_They cross to the press as_ RON _and_ GASPODE _turn to the other_
_tramps._

GASPODE Right, then. For every thirty of these paper things you sell,
you get a dollar, OK?

COFFIN HENRY How much is that in old boots?

GASPODE No, you can use the money to buy as many old . . .

ANDREWS This isn't. . . _work,_ is it?

GASPODE No, no, no. Hardly work, is it? Just standing at a street corner
taking money? Doesn't sound like _work_ to me.

COFFIN HENRY I ain't workin'!

ANDREWS We do _not_ work. We is gentlemen and ladies of les-u-are, are
we not, Duck Man?

DUCK MAN It's a nasty winter, though, Andrews. Extra money would come in
handy. We could live like kings on a dollar a day.

ANDREWS What? You mean someone would cut our heads off?

DUCK MAN NO, I . . .

COFFIN HENRY Someone would climb up inside the privy with a red-hot
poker and . . .

DUCK MAN No! I meant . . .

ANDREWS Someone'd drown us in a butt of wine?

DUCK MAN No, that's _dyin'_ like kings, Andrews.

GASPODE _(muttering_ Shouldn't think there's a butt of wine big enough
that you couldn't drink your way out of. _(Aloud)_ So - what shall we,
er, what shall _Ron_ tell them, then? Are we on for it?

_They nod and mutter their agreement._ GASPODE _turns to_ WILLIAM _and_
GUNILLA.

OK, you have a deal.

GUNILLA Could I just ask . . . why has he got a duck on his head?

GASPODE Ssh. We never mention the 'd' word. He thinks he's perfectly
normal, see, and compared with the rest of them, er, _us_ - he _is!_

_The tramps are issued with bundles of the news sheets and exit, with_
GASPODE. _A moment's pause, and then_ SACHARISSA _storms in._ _She
crosses to_ WILLIAM _and slaps him hard around the face._

SACHARISSA That twenty dollars a month was nearly all we had!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sorry? What?

SACHARISSA He may not have been very fast, but my father was one of the
best engravers in the business!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Ah. Er . . . I see. Um, you're Sacharissa Cripslock,
aren't you?

SACHARISSA And you took it away, just like that!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Your grandfather . . .

SACHARISSA Used to cut the woodblocks for your news letters, yes! But
now you've dropped us and moved in with these dwarfs!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Look, I'm sort of stuck with it now. Lord Vetinari's
made me responsible for it all . . .

SACHARISSA The Guild of Engravers is going to be livid about this!

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(taking out his notebook)_ You wouldn't care to make
that official, would you? For the paper? 'We are livid' says spokes . .
. _woman_ for the Guild of . . .

SACHARISSA Why?

WILLIAM DE WORDE We need things to go in our next edition. Perhaps you
could help? I could give you, oh, twenty pence an item, and I could use
at least five a day.

SACHARISSA _(about to launch into another tirade) A_ dollar a day?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(wildly)_ More, if they're nice and long.

SACHARISSA For that news letter thing you do?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes.

SACHARISSA A dollar.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes.

SACHARISSA How can you afford that? You told grandfather that you only
get thirty dollars yourself.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Things have moved on a bit.

SACHARISSA Well, I _do_ hear things, I suppose. I suppose it's a
suitable job for a lady. Practically cultural.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er, close, I suppose.

SACHARISSA I wouldn't like to do anything improper.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm sure it's proper.

SACHARISSA Well - all right then.

WILLIAM _and she shake hands -_ WILLIAM _gives her a notepad and_
_pencil._

I'll start right away.

_She exits. Blackout. In the dark, we hear_ FOUL OLD RON _shouting:_
_'Hoinarylup!' and_ _eSquidaped-oyt!' in the manner of a London news_
_vendor._

SCENE FIVE

_The balcony of the Palace._ LORD VETINARI _is leaning out, looking_
_down at the street._ FOUL OLD RON _repeats his calls._ DRUMKNOTT
_enters carrying a newspaper._

DRUMKNOTT It's the beggar Foul Old Ron, sir. Selling this . . . paper
full of things.

_He hands the paper to_ LORD VETINARI, _who reads it._

LORD VETINARI Well, well. 'The Ankh-Morpork Times'. Was anyone else
buying this?

DRUMKNOTT A number of people, my lord. All sorts of people.

LORD VETINARI I see no mention of Hoinarylup or Squidaped-oyt.

DRUMKNOTT No, my lord.

LORD VETINARI How very strange. I'm seeing the Guild of Town criers at
nine and the Guild of Engravers at ten past.

DRUMKNOTT I didn't know they had appointments, my lord.

LORD VETINARI They will have, when they see this.

FOUL OLD RON _(off)_ Sheearna-pip!

LORD VETINARI _(with a glance in_ RON'S _direction)_ Oh and let that
nice Mr de Worde know that I'll see _him_ at nine thirty.

_Cross-fade to street exterior. As_ WILLIAM _crosses the stage,_ MRS
ARCANUM _and_ MRS MACKLEDUFF _enter and stop him._

MRS ARCANUM Ah, Mr de Worde. I'd just popped out to do a spot of
shopping with Mrs Mackelduff, who runs the lodging house next to ours
and we bought one of these.

_She holds up the paper._

Is this all true?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, yes, of course.

MRS ARCANUM _(to_ MRS MACKLEDUFF) Well - it says here _thai fifty-six_
people were hurt in that brawl last night at the Drum. My hubby told
_me_ it was only a few.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh. That should've read 'five _or_ six'. Sorry.

MRS MACKLEDUFF It says fifty-six here. In black and white.

MRS ARCANUM It must be right. Otherwise they couldn't

put it in. It's all written by special people, innit?

MRS MACKLEDUFF _(exiting with_ MRS ARCANUM) They wouldn't allow just
anyone to write what they like. Stands to reason.

MRS ARCANUM _(as they both exit)_ Fifty-six hurt, eh? Goodness me. Oh,
and supper is at seven thirty prompt, Mr de Worde. Puctuality is the
politeness of princes, you know.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, Mrs Arcanum.

_Lights change from the street to the print room, and_ WILLIAM _enters._

_There is a bag of cash on a corner of the press._

GUNILLA Oh, there's a spot of cash for you there.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(picking it up)_ This can't be right.

GUNILLA Mr Ron and his friends kept coming back for more copies. I
reckon we can sell three times as many tomorrow if we halve the price.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _Halve_ the price? But there wasn't even that much in
it!

GUNILLA People like to be in the know.

_He nods towards_ SACHARISSA _and clears his throat._

SACHARISSA _(coming down to_ WILLIAM) I've already got two good items
for you.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . yes?

SACHARISSA My grandfather says this is the longest, coldest winter he
can remember.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes?

SACHARISSA Well, he's eighty. That's a long time.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OH.

SACHARISSA And the meeting of the Dolly Sisters Baking and Flower Circle
Annual Competition had to be cancelled last night because a cake table
got knocked over.

_She hands him a page from her notebook._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Is that really _interesting,_ do you think? _(He
reads)_ 'The Dolly Sisters blah di blah was held in the Reading Room in
Lobbin Clout Street. Mrs H Rivers was President. She welcomed all
members and commented on the sumptuous offerings. Prizes were awarded as
follows . . .' _(He skims down, turning a page) . . ._ 'Specimen in
Jar'??

SACHARISSA Yes, it was a dahlia.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Perhaps we'll say 'Specimen _Dahlia_ in Jar' then -
less ambiguous. 'A Fine Display of Loose Stool Covers' . . . ? ' . . .
everyone's spirits were dampened when a naked man, hotly pursued by
members of the Watch, burst through the window and ran around the room,
causing much disarray of the Tarts before being apprehended by the
trifles. The meeting closed at nine pm. Mrs Rivers thanked all members.'

SACHARISSA What do you think?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Perhaps you could drop in at the Watch House to ask
about the naked man.

SACHARISSA I will do no such thing! Respectable women don't have
anything to do with the Watch.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I meant, ask why he was being chased.

_She looks uncomprehendingly at him._

People will want to know. Oh, and who's the oldest person in the city?

SACHARISSA One of the wizards, I suppose.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well go along to the University and see if _he_ can
remember a colder winter.

MR WINTLER _enters. He carries a lidded cardboard box._

MR WINTLER Is this where you put things in the paper?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes?

MR WINTLER Only I grew this carrot and I reckon it's a very interesting
shape.

_He takes the lid off the box and_ WILLIAM _and_ SACHARISSA _look at_
_the contents._

Eh? What d'you think, eh? The blokes down the pub said I should put it
in your paper!

SACHARISSA That's a _very_ strange carrot. What do you think, Mr de
Worde?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . you go along to the University, will you? I'll
deal with this . . . gentleman.

_She exits._

MR WINTLER My wife couldn't stop laughin'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE What a lucky man you are, sir. What a pity we can't put
pictures in the paper - but I think I'm already in quite enough trouble.
Well, thank you for bringing it in. _(He ushers the man out.)_

GUNILLA _crosses to him._ WILLIAM _hands her/him_ SACHARISSA'_S_
_notes._

Can you think of a good reason why I should put _this_ in the paper?
It's a bit . . . dull.

GUNILLA _reads._

GUNILLA I can see seventy-three reasons. That's 'cos there's
seventy-three names. I think people will like to see their names in the
paper.

_Unseen by_ WILLIAM,, SGT DETRITUS _has entered behind him._

WILLIAM DE WORDE What about the naked man?

GUNILLA Yeah, pity she didn't get his name.

DETRITUS Der Patrician will see you now.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I don't have an appointment with . . .

DETRITUS You'd be amazed how many people has appointments wiv der
Patrician an' they don't know it. So you'd better hurry.

_They exit as the lights black out._

SCENE SIX

_The Palace._ LORD VETINARI _is on, reading_ The Times. _A_ _moment,
then_ DRUMKNOTT _enters._

DRUMKNOTT Mr William de Worde, my lord.

WILLIAM _enters, out of breath._

LORD VETINARI Thank you, Drumknott.

DRUMKNOTT _exits._ LORD VETINARI _holds up the newspaper._

What a very . . . interesting document. But I have to ask why?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . people like to know things, my lord.

LORD VETINARI Which people?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, everyone, really.

LORD VETINARI And did they tell you this?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, you know I've been writing my news letters for
some time now, sir . . .

LORD VETINARI Sent to various foreign dignitaries. People who _need_ to
know. But you are selling this to anyone in the street, is that correct?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I suppose so, sir.

LORD VETINARI You wouldn't entertain the idea, would you, that a state
is like, say, one of those rowing galleys? You know, banks of oarsmen
down below? Helmsman up above? I put it to you that it is not
necessarily a good thing for the rowers to know of every collision
fended off, every reef avoided . . . it would only serve to worry them -
to put them off their stroke. What rowers _need to know_ is how to
_row,_ hmmm?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(without thinking_ And that the helmsman is a good
one, sir.

LORD VETINARI _(with a thin smile)_ To be sure. This is the age of
words, after all. _(He looks at the paper.)_ 'Fifty-six hurt in tavern
brawl', eh? Astounding. What further news do you have for us, sir?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, er . . . it's been very cold, sir.

LORD VETINARI Has it? Has it indeed? My word!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, sir, and there was a bit of a fracas at a cookery
meeting last night . . .

LORD VETINARI A fracas?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, more of a rumpus, really. And someone's grown a
funny-shaped vegetable.

LORD VETINARI That's the stuff. Could I give you a piece of advice, Mr
de Worde?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Please do, sir.

LORD VETINARI Be careful. People like to be told what they already know.
They get uncomfortable when you tell them _new_ things. They want
reassurance. They think they want news, but what they really want is
_olds._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, sir.

LORD VETINARI Indeed. Good day, Mr de Worde. And do take care. Tread
carefully. I'm sure you wouldn't want to become news . . . would you?

_Lights cross-fade to the street._ MR PIN _and_ MR TULIP, _eating_
_sausages in buns._ MR TULIP _sniffs his._

MR PIN In your mouth, Mr Tulip, not up your nose. Do you know what they
call a sausage-in-a-bun in Quirm?

MR TULIP No.

MR PIN They call it le sausage-in-a-bun.

MR TULIP What, in a foreign language? You're ___ing kidding!

MR PIN I'm not a ___ing kidder, Mr Tulip.

MR TULIP They ought to call it a . . . sausage dans le derriere.

MR PIN In a _bun,_ Mr Tulip.

MR TULIP I know what I meant. This is a ___ing awful sausage.

MR PIN _(looking up)_ Hello. What's happening up there?

_Above them,_ ARTHUR CRANK _has stepped out onto the edge of a_
_balcony. A crowd gathers - quickly!_

FIRST PERSON IN CROWD Much better to try the Thieves' Guild, mate! Six
floors and then you're on solid cobbles! Crack your skull first go!

SECOND PERSON IN CROWD _(to_ FIRST PERSON) There's proper flagstones
round the Palace.

THIRD PERSON IN CROWD Certainly, but the Patrician'11 kill him if he
tries to jump from there, am I right?

FOURTH PERSON IN CROWD Tower of Art's good. Nearly nine hundred feet.
And you get a good view.

FIRST PERSON IN CROWD Granted, but you also get time to think while
you're falling. Not a good time for introspection in my view.

WILLIAM _appears up on the balcony and scrambles out with_ MR CRANK.

SECOND PERSON IN CROWD He _is_ thinking about it. It's a big step, after
all.

_Lights now fade out on the crowd. Wind noise._

ARTHUR CRANK Morning. Come to try to talk me out of it, have you?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(beginning to regret his bravado)_ I . . . I . . . I
wouldn't dream of it.

ARTHUR CRANK I'm always open to being talked out of it.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, er . . . well, would you care to give me your name
and address?

ARTHUR CRANK Why?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Because, from this height onto solid ground it's often
hard to find out that sort of thing afterwards. If this is going in the
paper, it's best if we can say who you were.

ARTHUR CRANK What paper? (WILLIAM _hands him a copy)_ Oh, right. Sort of
like a town crier, but written down?

WILLIAM DE WORDE That's right. So, what was your name?

ARTHUR CRANK What do you mean, _was?_

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, you know, obviously . . .

ARTHUR CRANK Arthur Crank, thirty-five.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And where did you live, Arthur?

MRS CRANK _enters, below, with_ CPL NOBBS.

ARTHUR CRANK Prattle Alley.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And what was your job?

ARTHUR CRANK There you go with the 'was' again. The Watch usually give
me a cup of tea.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Hold on . . . you jump a lot, then do you?

ARTHUR CRANK Well, not the actual _jumping,_ obviously. That's not a
skilled job. I'm more into the 'cry for help' aspect.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And the help you want is?

ARTHUR CRANK Could you make it twenty dollars?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Or you jump?

ARTHUR CRANK Well, not exactly _jump_ obviously. But I shall continue to
threaten.

MRS CRANK Arthur Crank, you come down here this instant!

ARTHUR CRANK Oh gawds, they've gone and fetched the wife. Well, gotta
go.

WILLIAM DE WORDE What?

ARTHUR CRANK Three happy married years. The other thirty-two haven't
been too bad, either. But she can't cook cabbage worth a damn. See ya
next time.

_Blackout on balcony._ ARTHUR _and_ WILLIAM _exit. Crowd disperses,_
_leaving_ TULIP _and_ PIN.

MR TULIP ing funny city, this. So what do we do now?

MR PIN Well, I've got us a little insurance.

_He pulls out the_ DISORGANISER.

I don't like no lawyer having all that muck on us.

MR TULIP Is it magic?

MR PIN Not as such.

_He opens the_ DISORGANISER. _A light comes on. (In previous_
_productions, the_ DISORGANISER _appeared in a tight spotlight,_
_separate from the action)_

DISORGANISER _(in a spot)_ Bingly, bingly, beep! You have wisely
purchased the Dis-Organiser Mk II. This device is provided without
warranty of any kind as to the reliability, accuracy, existence or
otherwise or fitness for any particular purpose and Bioalchemical
Products specifically does not warrant, guarantee, imply or make any—

MR TULIP _thrusts a dagger at the_ DISORGANISER _box. It stops_
_speaking._

MR TULIP What the ___ing heck is this?

MR PIN It's a listening device.

MR TULIP Seems to be doin' a lot of ___ing _talkin',_ to me.

MR PIN It does both. It's that little demon there. It can repeat
everything it hears, word for word.

MR TULIP And it doesn't make stuff up?

MR PIN Oh no. And people will know what it's saying is really what it
heard said to it. I reckon this will be very useful. No lawyer puts one
over on me, Mr Tulip.

MR TULIP NO, MR Pin.

_As they start to exit, the scene changes to the print room._ SACHARISSA
_and a couple ofdwafs are on, working. There is now a spike on the_
_press._ WILLIAM _enters._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(seeing the spike)_ What's that?

SACHARISSA It's a spike. It's a sort of filing system. Wre can put
things on it for Gunilla and Boddony to set up when there's spare time,
that sort of thing. Grandfather uses one.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Fair enough. If it's good enough for your . . . _(A new
thought occurs to him)_ yes . . . Sacharissa — your grandfather's an
engraver, isn't he?

SACHARISSA You know perfectly well . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE If we gave him iconograph pictures, could he engrave
them on to metal plates so we could have pictures in the paper?

SACHARISSA I don't see why not.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Do you know any good iconographers?

SACHARISSA I'll ask around. We had lots of excitement at the office.
We've taken on Mr Bendy the zombie to write obituaries - this is his
first.

_She pulls out some yellow crinkly sheets of paper._

It's his own.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh good.

SACHARISSA And a man complained about your piece about that brawl in the
Mended Drum. You said he hit someone with a table and he said that was a
cissy weapon. We offered him an apology and he's gone away happy.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh good.

SACHARISSA And a man gave us sixpence to put in an advert for his lost
watch.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh good.

SACHARISSA And I thought of this.

_She produces a sample page of the newspaper._

To go under 'Ankh-Morpork Times'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(reading_ 'The Truth Shall Make Ye Free'. Yes.
Impressive. Is it a quote?

SACHARISSA ER . . . yes . . . ?

SCENE SEVEN

_A cellar._ TULIP, PIN _and_ CHARLIE _are onstage._ CHARLIE _is_
_dressed as_ LORD VETINARI.

MR PIN Now look, it seems to me that we have here a failure to
communicate. I mean, it's not like we're asking you memorise a book or
anything. You just got to _look_ at Mr Tulip here. Is that hard? Lots of
people do it without any kind of special training.

CHARLIE I just, sort of . . . lose my bottle.

MR PIN Mr Tulip is not a scary man. I mean, does he _look_ scary? _(He
does)_ Remember, you are Lord Vetinari. Understand? You're not going to
take _anything_ from some guard. If he talks back to you, just _look_ at
him.

MR TULIP Like _this._

_He leers evilly._

MR PIN Not quite like that, perhaps. Just look haughty and raise an
eyebrow. That's what he does.

CHARLIE Don't want to _do_ this any more!

MR PIN Ten thousand dollars, Charlie. That's a lot of money.

CHARLIE I've heard of this Vetinari. If this goes wrong he'll have me
thrown in the scorpion pit!

MR PIN Well the scorpion pit's not as bad as it's cracked up to be,
y'know?

MR TULIP It's a ___ing picnic compared to me.

CHARLIE Ten thousand dollars isn't enough. After all, you _need me . .
._

MR PIN _(mildly)_ We had a deal, Charlie.

CHARLIE Yeah, well I reckon there's more money in this now.

MR PIN _(looking at_ MR TULIP) Well, maybe we could go to fifteen
thousand - but that's coming out of _our_ share, you realise?

CHARLIE Yeah, well.

MR PIN But we want to see extra effort, right? Starting right now. All
you have to do is to say . . . what do you have to say?

CHARLIE You are relieved of your post, my man. Go away.

MR PIN Except we don't say it like that, do we? It's an _order._ You are
his _boss._ Look - how can I put it? You're a shopkeeper. Imagine he's
asked for credit.

CHARLIE _straightens up and raises an eyebrow. He speaks, for the_
_time, like_ LORD VETINARI.

CHARLIE You are relieved of your post. Go away.

MR TULIP By George, I think he's ___ing got it!

PIN _and_ TULIP _shake hands as the lights black out._

SCENE EIGHT

MRS ARCANUM !y _boarding house._ MRS ARCANUM,, MRS MACKLEDUFF _and_ MR
CARTWRIGHT _are onstage, reading the_ _latest issue of The_ Times.
WILLIAM _enters._

MRS MACKLEDUFF Ooh, Mr de Worde, it says here in your news paper that a
man in Martlebury Street has grown a vegetable that's a funny shape.

MRS ARCANUM I should very much like to see that.

MR CARTWRIGHT Good soil over that way.

MRS MACKLEDUFF Someone held a shopkeeper up at knifepoint.

MR CARTWRIGHT I don't think this is the coldest winter for more than a
hundred years, though. I'm sure that one we had ten years ago was worse.

MRS MACKLEDUFF It's in the paper, though.

MRS ARCANUM Strange obituary, though. I'm sure it's not usual to write
about things people've done _since_ they've died.

MR CARTWRIGHT At least zombies are human, though.

MRS ARCANUM I suppose we have to move with the times. _(Shortpause.)_ I
hope that other poor man finds his watch.

_Cross-fade to print room._ WILLIAM, SACHARISSA _and_ GUNILLA _onstage.
The_ LOST WATCH MAN _enters, excitedly, crosses to_ WILLIAM _and shakes
his hand enthusiastically._

LOST WATCH MAN Amazing, sir, amazing! How _did yon_ do it? You put that
notice in your paper and when I got home, blow me down if the watch
wasn't in my other jacket! Gods bless your paper, say I!

_He exits._

GUNILLA We've sold eight hundred copies so far today. At five pence
each, that makes your share sixteen dollars.

WILLIAM DE WORDE This is insane. All we did was to write things down.

GUNILLA Are you going to want to do another one for tomorrow?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Gods, I hope not.

GUNILLA Well, I've got a story for you. The Guild of Engravers are
already setting up their own press. They could put us out of business.
So if you could keep your paper going . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE But I don't _want_ all this money money causes
problems!

GUNILLA We could sell _The Times_ cheaper . . . ?

WILLIAM DE WORDE We'd only make more money!

SACHARISSA We could . . . we could pay the street vendors more.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm not even sure if there _is_ enough news to fill a .
. . it isn't supposed to work like this, surely . . . But if it's in the
paper, it _is_ news. If it's news it goes in the paper, if it's in the
paper it's news. _And_ it was the truth.

_Unseen by the others,_ OTTO _enters and sets up his tripod._

SACHARISSA We could employ more people to collect the news. How about
news from other places? We could use the semaphore towers to get the
news quicker!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Are you mad? That's really expensive!

SACHARISSA Well, you were complaining we had too much money.

_Shrouded in the old-fashioned photographer's black cloth,_ OTTO
_discharges the flash._

OTTO Nice vun. You vanted an iconographer? My name is Otto Chriek.

SACHARISSA Are you any good? We could start you at a dollar a day . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sacharissa! He's a vampire!

OTTO I object most stronkly. It iss such an easy assumption to believe
that everyvun with an Uberwald accent is a vampire, is it not? There are
many thousands of people from uberwald who are _not_ vampires!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sorry.

OTTO I _am_ a vampire, as it happens. But if I had said 'Hello my cheeky
cock sparrow mate old boy by crikey' vhat vould have happened _zen,_ eh?

WILLIAM DE WORDE We'd have been completely taken in.

OTTO Anyvay, your notice did say 'vanted'. Alzo, I have zis.

_He indicates his temperance badge._

SACHARISSA Oh - you're a member of the uberwald League of Temperance?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(reading the badge)_ 'Living not in Vein'? You've
signed the pledge?

OTTO At ze meeting rooms in Abattoirs Lane, vhere I attend every veek
for our big sing-song and tea and a bun and wholesome conversation on
themes of positive reinforcement and keeping offze subject of bodily
fluids. I am no longer a stupid sucker.

SACHARISSA _(to_ WILLIAM) A vampire signs up and forswears human blood .
. .

OTTO Ve prefer zer 'b'vord.

SACHARISSA The 'b'word. _(To_ WILLIAM.) Um. There is one tiny problem,
though, William. Grandfather says no-one in the Guild would engrave the
pictures for us . . .

OTTO Zere is alvays a vay. All you are printing is black and vhite, yes?
Ze paper is vhite so all you are printing is ze _black._ Veil, you know
how engravers engrave metal viz acid?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes?

OTTO All ve haf to do is to get ze imps in ze camera to paint viz acid
instead of paint.

WILLIAM DE WORDE You can do it?

OTTO OH yes.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, OK then. You're hired!

OTTO You vill not be sorry.

MR WINTLER _enters, with another box._

MR WINTLER Here, what do you think of _this?_

_He starts to unlid the box._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mr Wintler, I really don't think . . . .

MR WINTLER _(to_ WILLIAM) I dug up this parsnip . . . my wife couldn't
keep a straight face. _(To_ SACHARISSA.) This young lady looks like she
enjoys a good laugh. _(He opens the_ _box._ SACHARISSA _looks in.)_

SACHARISSA Golly! It's amazingly lifelike!

WILLIAM _looks in the box._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh — it's a _nose._ A parsnip with a sort of knobbly
face and a big nose!

OTTO This is news? I should take a picture?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes.

MR WINTLER _poses with the box._ OTTO _sets off the flash. He_ (OTTO)
_screams in reaction to the light and staggers around the room._ _They
all stare._

OTTO _(recovering_ Vhat? Vhat? It's a perfectly normal reaction, for a
vampire. Strong light hurts us. I'm vorking on it. I'm vorking on a new
machine to take pictures viz _dark_ light.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Dark light?

OTTO Viz _true_ darkness, as a matter of fact. Not just absence of light
— the light on ze ozzer side of darkness. Ve can't see it, but the imps
that paint ze pictures _can._ It's emitted by eels zat live deep
underground in caves in uberwald. Let me show you . . .

_He pulls ajar of eels out of his satchel and holds them up. He looks
at_ _them._

Boo!

_Dark light effect. Lights black out totally for a second, then come up_
_again. During the effect_ LORD DE WORDE _walks up behind_ WILLIAM _and
then exits again._

WILLIAM DE WORDE That was very weird. It was like something very cold
walking through me.

OTTO Very strange. I could have sworn I saw somezing . . .

BODDONY _bursts on._

BODDONY Quick! Quick! The Palace!

_He hands_ WILLIAM _a note._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Otto! Get your gear together Vetinari's killed someone
. . . allegedly. And it can't possibly be true!

_They exit as the lights black out._

SCENE NINE

_The Patrician's Palace._ DETRITUS _and_ CPL LITTLEBOTTOM _are_
_onstage. She is holding a knife which she drops into a cloth bag held_
_by_ DETRITUS. _He exits._ WILLIAM _and_ OTTO _enter a different way_
_and_ VIMES _enters from yet another direction._

VIMES What is it you're wanting?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I want to know what's happened here, please.

VIMES Why?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Because people will want to know.

VIMES You're Lord de Worde's boy, aren't you? You run that news sheet
thing?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, your grace.

VIMES This has not been a nice day - and it's going to get a lot worse.
Why would I want to talk to you?

WILLIAM DE WORDE So that I can write it down accurately. And you know
who I am so if I get it wrong you know where to find me.

VIMES So - if/do what you want, _you'll_ do what _you_ want, is that it?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm saying, sir, that a rumour can run round the world
before the truth has got its boots on, sir.

VIMES Did you make that up?

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, sir, it's something my father told me. But you know
it's true.

VIMES _(after a moment's thought)_ All right, then. Lord Vetinari was
seen by three cleaning maids after they were alerted by the barking of
his lordship's dog at around seven this morning. He said: (VIMES
_consults his notebook)_ 'I've killed him. I've killed him. I'm sorry.'
They saw what looked very much like a body on the floor. Lord Vetinari
was holding a knife. They ran downstairs to fetch someone. On their
return, they found his lordship missing. The body was that of one Rufus
Drumknott, the Patrician's personal secretary. He had been stabbed and
is seriously ill. A search of the buildings found Lord Vetinari in the
stables. He was unconscious on the floor. A horse was saddled. The
saddlebags contained . . . seventy thousand dollars . . . Cheery, this
is damn stupid!

CHEERY LITTLEBOTTOM I know, sir. But they are the facts.

VIMES But they're stupid facts.

CHEERY LITTLEBOTTOM I know, sir - I can't imagine his lordship trying to
kill anyone.

VIMES Are you mad? _I_ can't imagine him saying 'sorry'!!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Why was his lordship unconscious, sir?

VIMES _(with a shrug_ It looks as though he was trying to get on the
horse. He has a gammy leg. Maybe he slipped . . . I can't believe I'm
saying all this . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Could I get an iconograph picture, sir? To reassure our
readers that you're on this case personally. Otto?

VIMES What - a damn vampire?

WILLIAM DE WORDE He _is_ a black ribboner, sir.

OTTO _(who has set up his camera)_ Good mornink. Do not movink, please.
Looking this vay . . .

_The flash goes off._ OTTO _writhes in agony._

Oh, shee-yut!

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(to_ VIMES) He's getting used to the flash, sir.

VIMES So I see. Right, I think you've seen and heard about as much as
you need. _(To_ CHEERY.) Come on, Cheery.

_They exit._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(to_ OTTO) You OK? (OTTO _nods.)_ Right, now we'd
better see if we can get into the scene of the crime.

NOBBY _enters from the crime scene._

Ah, just the man I was looking for!

CORPORAL NOBBS AM I?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, I've been talking to Commander Vimes and now I
would like to see the room where the crime was committed.

CORPORAL NOBBS 'Ere, are you from that news paper?

WILLIAM DE WORDE That's right, and I thought people would like to see
how our brave Watch swings into action at a time like this.

CORPORAL NOBBS Corporal Nobby Nobbs, sir. Prob'ly thirty-four. Bin in
uniform since prob'ly ten years old, man and boy.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Man and boy and . . . ?

CORPORAL NOBBS Just man and boy, sir. Just man and boy.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And were you first on the scene, Corporal?

CORPORAL NOBBS Last on the scene, sir.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Can I have a look?

WILLIAM _pokes his head around the_ _edoor'._

Ah yes . . . chalk outline on floor. _Coloured_ chalk, I see . . .

CORPORAL NOBBS I done the flowers and clouds.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Strong smell _of peppermint._ Hmm. Chair and basket
knocked over. Short metal arrow stuck in the floor . . .

CHEERY _bursts back on._

CHEERY LITTLEBOTTOM Hey, hey! What're you doing? Come out of there!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Otto?

OTTO _(speaking to his jar of eels)_ Boo!

_Dark light effect._

CHEERY LITTLEBOTTOM What the . . . ? That was dark light, wasn't it?

OTTO Ah - you, too, are from uberwald?

CHEERY LITTLEBOTTOM Yes - and I did not expect to see that in
Ankh-Morpork. Now get out!

_Lights out._ SACHARISSA, GUNILLA, BODDONY _and_ MR WINTLER _enter into
the press room. As the lights come up again,_ WILLIAM _and_ OTTO _cross
to the press._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Is there something you should tell me about dark light,
Otto. The corporal seemed very angry when you used it just now?

OTTO Veil, it's a little hard to explain . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Is it harmful?

OTTO Oh no, zere are no physical effects whatsoever . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE What then? Mental effects, you mean?

OTTO Perhaps ziz is not ze time.

MR WINTLER What do you think of this funny marrow, Mr de Worde?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I suggest you stuff it, Mr Wintler.

MR WINTLER Just what my wife said.

_He exits._

SACHARISSA What's going on? Who's been killed?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . no-one, I think.

SACHARISSA Well, that's a mercy. We've had five other people in with
amusing vegetables.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OH.

SACHARISSA They weren't all that funny, to tell the truth.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OH.

SACHARISSA No. They mainly looked like . . . you know.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh. What?

SACHARISSA _You_ know. A man's . . . um, you know.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _Oh__._

SACHARISSA Not even very much like . . . um, you know. I mean, you had
to _want_ to see a . . . you know, there, if you know what I mean.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OH.

SACHARISSA But I took their names and addresses, just in case. It's been
very busy while you've been away. Lost dogs, things people want to sell
. . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(a bit distracted)_ That's advertising. If they want
it in the paper, they have to pay.

SACHARISSA We've been 'asked' to attend a ball at Lady Selachi's. I
haven't anything suitable to wear, though . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(responding on autopilot)_ Not a problem - you're
about my sister's size - she's got lots of dresses stored away in our
town house. I'll get you the key . . ._(Coming to)_ But not right now.
Look, something is _happening!._ And I have to write it down as soon as
possible. Mr Goodmountain?

GUNILLA Yes?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Can you put stuff in type while I dictate?

GUNILLA Yes.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(dictating_ All right - at the top: 'AMAZING SCENES IN
ANKH-MORPORK'... got it? Then, smaller: 'PATRICIAN ATTACKS CLERK WITH
KNIFE'. Smaller again: 'MYSTERIOUS EVENTS IN STABLES'. Then, smaller
again: 'WATCH BAFFLED'. OK, now we can start the story . . .

GUNILLA Start it? Aren't we nearly finished?

WILLIAM DE WORDE 'Suspicious circumstances surround the attack' . . .
make that alleged attack. _(To_ SACHARISSA.) If Lord Vetinari wanted to
kill someone they'd be dead . . . check _Twerp's Peerage,_ would you?
I'm sure he was educated in the Assassins' Guild. _(Back to_ GUNILLA.)
Er . . . alleged, no, _apparent,_ attack by Lord Vetinari on Rufus
Drumknott, his clerk, in the Palace today. Palace staff heard . . .
heard his lordship . . .'

SACHARISSA _(referring to_ Twerp's Peerage) '. . . who graduated from
the Guild of Assassins in 1968 . . .'

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(to_ GUNILLA) Put that in. And then go on, 'heard him
say, "I killed him, I killed him. I'm sorry".' Vimes is right, he'd have
to be mad to talk like this . . .

MR SLANT _enters with_ MR CARNEY.

MR SLANT Mr de Worde? I am Mr Slant of the Guild of Lawyers. This is Mr
Carney of the Guild of Engravers and Printers . . .

GUNILLA Engravers _and_ Printers?

CARNEY Yes. We expanded our charter. Guild membership two hundred
dollars a year . . .

MR SLANT _However,_ in this instance, there will also be a one-off
payment of, say, two thousand dollars.

WILLIAM DE WORDE We can't afford that.

MR SLANT In that case, accepted law and practice allows me to . . .

SACHARISSA I want to see your charter!

SLANT _hands it over._

Oh. It seems to be in order . . . _(Pointedly.)_ Except for the
Patrician's signature.

MR SLANT That is a mere formality, my dear.

SACHARISSA I'm not your dear and it's not on there, formal or not. So
this isn't legal, is it?

MR SLANT _Clearly_ we cannot get a signature off a man in prison on a
murder charge, can we?

WILLIAM DE WORDE When people say _clearly,_ that means there's a huge
gap in their argument and that things are _not_ clear at all. So - who
is running the city?

MR SLANT Er . . . I don't know. That isn't my concern . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mr Goodmountain? Bold type, please: 'Who is governing
the city while Vetinari is imprisoned? Asked today, a leading legal
figure said he didn't know and that it was none of his concern . . .'

MR SLANT You can't put that in your news paper!

WILLIAM DE WORDE '. . . said Mr Slant of the Guild of Lawyers . . .'

CARNEY You'll find it hard to print that with no damn press!

WILLIAM DE WORDE '. . . was the view of Mr Carney of the Guild of
Engravers and Printers, who earlier today tried to put _The Times_ out
of business with an illegal document. Asked for his opinion on this
flagrant breach of the city's laws, Mr Slant said . . .'

MR SLANT _(shouting_ Stop taking down everything we say!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Otto?

OTTO _holds up theflash gun._

OTTO Chentlemen? _(He takes their photo)_ Ooh, ohh, aargh, argh!

MR SLANT What are you going to do with that picture?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I don't have to tell you. This is our workshop. We
didn't ask you to come here.

MR SLANT But I was here on legal business.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Then it can't be wrong to take your picture, can it?
Anything to say?

_He holds his pad and pencil ready._

CARNEY Well, I think . . .

MR SLANT _(interrupting_ My _considered_ opinion. Is that we go. Right
now. In _silence._

CARNEY But . . . ?

MR SLANT In _silence,_ I suggest.

_They exit._

GUNILLA Should I set this for real?

SACHARISSA We could get in terrible trouble!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, but how much trouble are we in already? On a scale
of one to ten?

SACHARISSA About eight. But when the next edition hits the streets . . .
about two thousand three hundred and seventeen!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Then we'll put it in. _(To_ GUNILLA.) But this is my
choice. I'll set it - you guys can go home.

GUNILLA You can't operate the press alone. And we want to protect our
investment.

SACHARISSA And / need that dollar.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Two dollars. It's time for a rise. Otto?

OTTO Vhat sort of danger are ve talking about? Garlic?

WILLIAM DE WORDE NO.

OTTO Zat's OK zen.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sacharissa? _Please_ go and find Ron and friends. I
want to get another issue out _now._ Not tomorrow. Now. Please?

SACHARISSA Right.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Let's go to press!

_Blackout. Pause. They set to work in the dark._

SCENE TEN

_Later that day. The paper has hit the streets. All are in the press
room_ _as we saw them before._ VIMES, ANGUA _and_ DETRITUS _enter._

VIMES _is carrying the new issue of_ 'The Times.

VIMES 'Baffled', am I?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, if you are telling me that you are not,
Commander, I would be glad to print . . .

VIMES You're not going to do to me what you did to Slant! Are you going
to print _everything_ you hear? You stand there clutching your integrity
like some wretched teddy bear and you haven't the faintest idea, have
you, how hard you can make my job?

WILLIAM DE WORDE It's not against the law to . . .

VIMES Isn't it? Looks like Behaviour Likely to Cause a Breach of the
Peace to me.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I haven't printed that you have a werewolf in the
Watch.

ANGUA _(quietly)_ Where did you hear that?

VIMES This is Sergeant Angua. You can speak freely in front of her.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I've heard . . . rumours.

ANGUA And?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Look, I can see this is worrying you. I can assure you,
though, that Corporal Nobbs' secret is safe with me.

VIMES _(carefully)_ Yes, we don't often talk about Corporal Nobbs'
species. I would deem it a small favour if you could adopt the same
approach.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, sir. So could I ask why you're having me watched?

ANGUA We're not watching _you._ We're watching to see what _happens_ to
you.

VIMES _(holding up the newspaper)_ Because of this.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But I'm not doing anything wrong.

VIMES You may not be doing anything _illegal._ Though it comes damn
close. Other people may not have my kind and understanding disposition,
though. All I ask is that you try not to bleed all over my streets.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'll try.

VIMES And don't write that down.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Fine.

VIMES And don't write down that J said not to write that down.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OK. Can I write that you said I shouldn't write down
that I shouldn't . . . only joking.

VIMES Ha ha. And no tapping my officers for information.

ANGUA And no giving dog biscuits to Corporal Nobbs.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OK. But what's in it for me?

VIMES I'm Commander of the Watch and I'm asking you politely. I _could_
ask you zmpolitely. Look, a crime has been committed. I've got Vetinari
and Drumknott in the cells . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE But wasn't Drumknott the victim?

VIMES One of my men is tending him.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Have you found Lord Vetinari's dog?

VIMES _{giving nothing away)_ Dog?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Wuffles, I think he was called. And why was there a
crossbow bolt sticking into the floor? Sounds like there was someone
else in the room. And it had stuck in quite a long way. Not a rebound.
It'd been fired at something floor level. A small dog, perhaps?

_No reaction from_ VIMES.

And then there's the smell of peppermint. Why peppermint? Perhaps to
cover a scent - maybe _they'd_ heard about your werewolf, too?

VIMES _(after a pause)_ I don't trust you Mr de Worde. Not because
you're trouble - I'm _paid_ to deal with trouble. Because you're not
answerable to anyone. I have to answer for what I do, but it seems to me
you can do what the hell you like.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I suppose I'm answerable to the truth, sir.

VIMES Oh, right. So, if you tell lies, does the truth come and smack you
in the face? _(Pause.)_ Supposing, just supposing, you came into
possession of a line drawing of a dog. Could you print it in your paper?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm sure we could.

VIMES We would be interested in knowing why he barked just before . . .
the event.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And if you could find him, Corporal Nobbs could talk to
him in dog language, yes?

VIMES _(no reaction)_ I could get a drawing to you in an hour.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Thank you. I'd like to see Lord Vetinari.

VIMES No. One, he's still unconscious. Two, he's my prisoner.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Drumknott, then?

VIMES Very well. Can't have people saying he's dead. Sergeant Angua will
escort you to the Watch House. Good day.

VIMES _and_ DETRITUS _exit._ WILLIAM _and_ ANGUA _walk out of_ _the
print room scene and around to the cell._

ANGUA Come on.

WILLIAM DE WORDE How did I do?

ANGUA I've seen worse.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sorry to mention Corporal Nobbs, but . . .

ANGUA Don't worry about it. Your powers of observation will be the talk
of the station. Look, Mr Vimes is being kind to you because he hasn't
sussed you out yet, OK? Just be careful, that's all. _(Pause)_ I hear
you have a vampire working _foryou._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Otto? Yes, we're not prejudiced about that sort of
thing. And he is a black ribboner.

_They arrive at the cell. Lights up on the cell._ DRUMKNOTT _is inside._

ANGUA _(to_ WILLIAM) Here we are. _(To_ DRUMKNOTT.) Mr de Worde here
would like a word with you. I'll be outside.

_She moves outside the cell and waits._

DRUMKNOTT You're Lord de Worde's son, aren't you? You write that news
sheet.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes. I seem destined always to be recognised as 'Lord
de Worde's son'. Anyway, um, they say Lord Vetinari stabbed you.

DRUMKNOTT So they say. I knocked on the door to take him his copy of the
paper as he'd requested. His lordship opened it, I walked into the room.
Next thing I know I was waking up here in the Watch House. I have every
confidence that there has been a mistake.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Has his lordship been preoccupied lately?

DRUMKNOTT His lordship is always preoccupied. It's his job.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Do you know that three people heard him say that he'd
killed you?

DRUMKNOTT I cannot explain that. They must have been mistaken.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Why do you think . . . ?

DRUMKNOTT I don't think I _have_ to talk to you, do I?

WILLIAM DE WORDE NO, but . . .

DRUMKNOTT Sergeant!

ANGUA Yes?

DRUMKNOTT I have finished talking to this gentleman.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(wearily, putting away his notepad)_ Thank you. You've
been very helpful.

_He walks out of the prison scene with_ ANGUA. _To her._

He doesn't want to believe his lordship attacked him.

ANGUA Really.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Looks like he had quite a bang on the head.

ANGUA Does it?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Look, even I can see this smells funny.

ANGUA Can you?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I _see._ You went to the Mister Vimes School of
Communication, yes?

ANGUA Did I?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Loyalty is a wonderful thing . . .

ANGUA Is it? This is the way out, Mr de Worde.

WILLIAM _exits as_ VIMES _enters US._

I wouldn't underestimate him, sir. He notices things. He was dead right
about the peppermint bomb. And how many officers would have noticed how
deeply the arrow had gone into the floor?

VIMES True. What are the odds?

ANGUA On Mr de Worde? You're right, sir, someone _is_ running a book on
his chances. Apparently, six will get you ten that he'll be dead by next
Monday, sir.

VIMES You might just spread the word around that I don't like that sort
of thing, will you? Oh, and find out who's running this book and when
you've found out it's Nobby, take it off him.

ANGUA Yes, sir.

_Blackout. In the blackout, we hear the news vendor's cry -_
'Eyinng-GUT!' _When the lights come up the news vendor is onstage,
carrying_ _a bundle_ _of_ Inquirers. WILLIAM _enters, on his way to the
print_ _room. He stops and takes paper from the vendor._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(reading the paper)_ 'Ankh-Morpork Inquirer'? 'LANCRE
WOMAN GIVES BIRTH TO COBRA'? - what's all this?

VENDOR All this what?

WILLIAM DE WORDE All this to!

VENDOR Don't ask me, guv. I just gets a penny for every one I sells.
That's all /know.

WILLIAM DE WORDE 'Rain of Soup in Genua'? 'Hen Lays Egg Three Times in
Hurricane'? Where'd this come _from?_

VENDOR Look, guv, if I was a reading man I wouldn't be floggin' papers,
right?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Someone else has started a paper!

_He sees the small print at the bottom of the page._

In _Gleam_ Street! Right opposite our offices! _(He reads)_ But this is
rubbish! Tuppence? If they're paying you a penny, how can they hope to
make a profi . . . Oh, of course, they're not doing it to make a profit,
they're doing it to put _The Times_ out of business!

_He gives the vendor twopence and storms off into the print room.
Lights_ _change._ VENDOR _exits. In the print room are_ GUNILLA,
BODDONY, SACHARISSA. WILLIAM _waves the paper at them._

GUNILLA We know. They've got three presses - got that out in half an
hour.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But it's only one sheet - and it's made-up stuff.

SACHARISSA Shall I give you the headlines?

WILLIAM DE WORDE You'd better.

SACHARISSA 'Engravers Offer Dwarfs One Thousand Dollars for Press'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OH no.

SACHARISSA 'Vampire Iconographer and Hard-Working Lady Writer Tempted by
Five Hundred Dollar Salaries'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh, really . . .

SACHARISSA 'Dwarfs Buggered for Paper'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _What?_

SACHARISSA That's a direct quote from Mr Goodmountain. We only have
enough for one more edition.

GUNILLA And if we want any more, it's five times the old price. The
Engravers are buying it up. Supply and demand, Mr King says.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Harry King?

GUNILLA Yeah, Harry King. King of the Golden River . . .

GUNILLA We could just about pay the new prices but this new paper's
undercutting us, too - we can't cover costs at that price!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sacharissa?

SACHARISSA I'm staying. I didn't trust them. They're too sneaky. But
what will we do?

GUNILLA We could cut back a bit.

SACHARISSA But then people wouldn't buy the paper. And they ought to buy
ours, because it has _real_ news in it!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Apart from the truth, what have we got that _The
Inquirer_ hasn't got? Can we print faster?

GUNILLA They have three presses to our one! But we can set type faster!
So we can probably beat them to getting the first paper onto the street!

WILLIAM DE WORDE OK, that might help. We'll need more writers . . .

SACHARISSA There's lots of people looking for work. I'll get some.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Tomorrow we'll go to four pages. I have more stuff
about Vetinari. That gives us twelve hours to get more paper.

GUNILLA But Harry won't let us have any at a reasonable price . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE There's a story right there, then! Oh, and send a
clacks to Verence, King of Lancre. I met him once. Let's see if we can
disprove some of _The Inquirer's_ stories. Otto!

OTTO _appears from the cellar._

OTTO Vot can I do for you?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Any ideas how we can sell more papers?

OTTO Veil, I _have_ been working on some ideas for _colour_ pictures for
ze paper . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Excellent! That could help to give us an edge. But now
- we'd better arrange to see Harry King . . . the _King of the Golden
Riverl_

SACHARISSA _(speaking as they exit)_ Why is he called that? There's no
river of gold around here, is there?

_Blackout. They all exit._ GASPODE _sidles on into a spot._

GASPODE Woof. Sorry to muck you about, but I ought to explain about
'Arry King. King of the Golden River. His title, you see, recognises his
wealth and achievements and, er, _and_ the source of his success, which
was not quite the _classical_ Golden River, if you gets my drift. Let's
put it this way, his _old_ nickname was Piss Harry. See, Ankh-Morpork
don't really have a sewerage system. Not as such. _Harry_ started out
supplying large buckets to hotels, pubs and guesthouses and then taking
them away when they was full. He sold the contents on to, well, people
who needed large quantities of ammonia, saltpetre and so on. A lot of it
went to the tanning industry. Anyway, it all snowballed from there and
Harry expanded into the old rags and waste paper business and now,
amongst other things, he also controls the city's paper mills. There ya
go. Back to the plot.

GASPODE _exits._

SCENE ELEVEN

_An empty house. A moment, then_ MR PIN _and_ MR TULIP _enter._ MR TULIP
_has a paper bag._ MR PIN _holds out his hand and_ MR TULIP _hands him
the bag, sheepishly._ PIN _pulls out a mint imperial._ TULIP _looks
surprised, takes back the bag and looks into it._ PIN _slaps_ _him round
the back of the head._ SLANT _enters._

SLANT Gentlemen. Where have you been? I _told_ you to maintain a low
profile.

MR PIN Mr Tulip isn't good at low profiles. He got hungry. What did you
want?

SLANT What did you do with the dog?

MR TULIP No-one said anything about the dog. It bit our ___ing legs and
ran off.

SLANT _(with a sigh)_ I _did_ tell you that the Watch has a werewolf on
its staff? A werewolf would have no difficulty talking to a dog.

MR PIN What? You're telling us that people will listen to a _dog?_

SLANT Unfortunately, yes. If Vimes finds the dog, things will start to
unravel.

MR PIN Slip him a few dollars. That always works with Watchmen.

SLANT The last person who tried that with Vimes has yet to regain full
use of their fingers.

MR TULIP _(shouting_ We did everything you ___ing told us!

SLANT We understood we were employing _professionals._ Is your _other_
assistant still safe?

MR PIN _(indicating the trapdoor)_ He's down in the cellar. Drunk as a
skunk. I don't see why we don't just scrag him now. He nearly turned and
ran when he saw Vetinari. Who'd notice one more corpse in a city like
this?

SLANT The Watch would. We don't want anything that would give them a
clue, do we?

MR TULIP How could they talk to a ___ing dead man?

SLANT Why not? _You_ are. Anyway, it is always possible that we may have
further use for him. He is too valuable to _retire_ just now.

MR PIN Yeah, OK. But we want extra for the dog.

SLANT It's just a _dog._ Even Mr Tulip could outthink a dog, I would
hope. I can add another five thousand dollars to your fee. And don't
insult me by asking for ten. The task is not hard.

MR PIN I want to know who's giving us these orders.

SLANT ME.

MR PIN I mean your clients. This is going to get political. I need to
know how far away we're going to have to run when people find out what
happened.

SLANT My clients have long memories and deep pockets. Other killers can
be hired. Do you understand me? Even if they did not wish to terminate
you, your reputations are equally easy to destroy. As my clients say - a
lie can be halfway round the world before the truth has got its boots
on. Good day to you.

SLANT _exits._

MR PIN _(with a sigh)_ Right, let's find this damn dog.

MR TULIP How we gonna do that?

MR PIN Intelligently.

MR TULIP I hate that ___ing way.

_Blackout._

SCENE TWELVE

_The press room. The cellar is open._ OTTO _is crawling around the
floor,_ _with ajar in one hand as_ SACHARISSA _enters._

OTTO _(getting up)_ Miss Sacharissa? How did it go viz ze King of ze
Golden River?

SACHARISSA OK. We got some paper. But we owe him eighty dollars and we
have to print colour pictures of his daughter's wedding. He was very
keen on that. How's the colour thing coming along?

OTTO I'm qvite confident. It vill vork.

_He starts to look around on theflooragain._

SACHARISSA Good — the bridesmaids will be wearing eau-de- nil - 1 hope
you can do eau-de-nil? What are you looking for?

OTTO Vun of my dark light eels escaped from its jar.

SACHARISSA _sees it under the press._

SACHARISSA There it is.

_She starts to reach for it._

OTTO Ah gut. No - don't touch it! Here, use ze jar.

SACHARISSA It's OK, I'm not squeamish.

_She grabs it. Dark light effect, during which the flame and rain
effects_ _are also visible._ SACHARISSA _yelps and faints._ OTTO
_crosses to her_ _and helps her into a sitting position. He starts to
notice her neck and_ _decolletage._

It's OK, I'm fine. What happened?

_She sees the look on hisface._

What's the matter? Are you all right?

OTTO Cheese! Get me some cheese! Or a big apple! Somesing to _bite!
Pleeease!!_ Keep avay. And stop _breathing_ like zat!

SACHARISSA Like what?

OTTO Viz ze bosoms going in and out and up and down like zat! I am a
_vampirel_ But I vill be _stronkl_ I vill not let everyvun down! _(He
sings)_ Oh vill you come to ze mission, vill you come, come, come.
Zere's a nice cup of tea and a bun, bun, bun . . .

GUNILLA _and_ BODDONY _enter._

BODDONY Are you all right, miss? Has he tried anything?

SACHARISSA NO, no, he's. . .

OTTO _(singing_ Zer drink zat's in zer livink vein is not zer drink for
me . . .

SACHARISSA That's right, you can fight it _(To the dwarfs)_ Have either
of you any meat on you?

GUNILLA _(taking a rat in a paper bag out of his pocket)_ I've got a rat
for me tea.

SACHARISSA _{passing it to_ OTTO) Here! Here! (OTTO _rears_ _away from
it)_ No, no - it's rat! Rat's OK!

OTTO _takes it and bites it._

OTTO Oh vot shame! Vot must you sink of me?

SACHARISSA No, we're all very impressed. _(To the dwarfs)_ _Aren't we?_

_The dwarfs mutter agreement as they exit into the back of the shop._

OTTO But for a second zere I nearly . . .

SACHARISSA But you _didn't._ Well done. _(Pause)_ What happened when I
grabbed that eel?

OTTO A. Zis may not be zer time . . .

SACHARISSA Otto, I _saw_ things. Flames. People. Noise. Molten metal.
Silver rain underground. What _happened?_

OTTO Veil, zer eel absorbs _dark_ light. Not darkness, but zer darkness
vithin light. It is a light vizout _time._ Vot you see may not be now.
Dark light is seen by ze dark eyes of zer mind.

SACHARISSA So it's a magical light that takes uncanny pictures.

OTTO Er, yes. Look at zis picture I took in Lord Vetinari's study.

SACHARISSA There's _two_ Lord Vetinaris. I suppose that's because it's
his office and he's in it all the time?

OTTO Maybe. And look at zis vun of Villiam. You see - his father, Lord
de Vorde, is stood behind him. He vozn't zere ven I took zer picture.
But, as you vill have observed, in a vay Villiam's father is alvays
standing behind him.

SACHARISSA That's creepy. I wouldn't mention this to anyone else. We've
got enough to deal with.

_Blackout._

SCENE THIRTEEN

_Onstage are a group of the robed figures._ SLANT _enters._

LORD DE WORDE Well?

SLANT They didn't get the dog. In other respects, I have to say, they
have done a masterly job.

LORD DE WORDE If things go wrong, who do these men know?

SLANT Only me. I would not worry unduly. Vimes plays by the rules. In
any cast the Guilds will meet tomorrow to choose the new Patrician.

LORD RUST Who will they choose?

SLANT That will be a matter for careful discussion and . . .

LORD RUST Mr Slant? It _is_ going to be Scrope, isn't it?

SLANT He is certainly well thought of by many of the city's leading
figures.

LADY SELACHII Of course, a lot of powerful men owe their positions to
Lord Vetinari.

LORD RUST But to people who seek power, gratitude has very poor keeping
qualities.

LADY VENTURII Will no-one speak up for Vetinari?

LORD DE WORDE Oh, everyone. They'll say things like 'Poor fellow, it was
the strain of office'. They'll say 'It's the quiet ones that crack'. Mr
Scrope is a man of fine qualities.

LORD RUST Good family man.

LADY VENTURI Listens to the common people.

LADY SELACHII Not_just_ to the common people, I trust?

LORD DE WORDE Oh no. He's very open to advice. From informed . . . focus
groups.

SLANT Is that all, gentlemen?

LORD DE WORDE What about _The Ankh-Morpork Times?_ Bit of a problem
building up there?

SLANT People find it amusing. Nobody takes it seriously. _The Inquirer_
already outsells it two to one. And it has some cashflow problems.

LADY VENTURI Good tale in _The Inquirer_ about that woman giving birth
to a snake.

SLANT Was there?

LORD DE WORDE I'd feel happier if a few likely lads smashed up the
press.

LADY SELACHII That would attract attention. _The Times_ _wants_
attention. The writer craves to be noticed.

LORD DE WORDE Very well. But _The Times_ will collapse. The young man is
an idealist. He has yet to find out that what is in the public interest
is not what the public is interested in.

LADY SELACHII Say again?

LORD DE WORDE I mean, (ladies and) gentlemen, that most people think
he's doing a good job, but what they are _buying_ is _The Inquirer._ A
good rumour will go around the world before the truth can get its boots
on. Keep an eye on our . . . workmen, Mr Slant.

_They all drift off as the lights fade to blackout._

SCENE FOURTEEN

_The vestry of a church. Organ music, off. Stained glass gobo. Table_
_with a brocade cloth and a large candlestick on it. To one side are a_
_couple of hymn books on the floor._MR TULIP _stands, looking up at_
_the_ _cwindow'._ MR PIN _enters, carrying a cassock which he holds up_
_against_ MR TULIP. _It is far too small._

MR PIN I can't find anything in your size.

_He looks at_ MR TULIP'S _nose._

Have you been sniffing incense? It's for burning during the services not
for getting high on, for gods' sakes . . .

_He exits again. The_ OLD PRIEST _enters and crosses to_ MR TULIP.

And lay off that oven cleaner, too. I want you focussed, understand? The
only thing they've got that fits you is . . .

OLD PRIEST Hello? Are you here for the, mm, midnight service?

_He moves out to pick up thefallen hymn books._ MR PIN _has entered_
_behind him, carrying some black robes. He drops them, picks up the_
_candlestick and is about to clock him with it._ MR TULIP _grabs his_
_arm._

MR TULIP _(sotto voce)_ Are you mad? What kind of person are you?

MR PIN What? We can't let him . . .

MR TULIP _(taking the candlestick from_ MR PIN) I mean, _look_ at the
___ing thing, will you? That's a genuine Sellini, that is. Look at the
craftsmanship.

OLD PRIEST _(turning to them)_ Actually, it's a, mm, Futtock.

MR TULIP What, the pupil? _(He looks closer)_ Hey, that's right. There's
the Sellini mark but it's stamped with a little 'F', too. Futtock was a
much better silversmith. Pity about the ___ing stupid name. _(To the_
PRIEST.) Do you know what this'd sell for, reverend?

OLD PRIEST _(hopefully)_ We thought about seventy dollars. It came in a
very nice box.

MR TILIP You still got that?

OLD PRIEST No, I'm afraid not.

MR TULIP ing shame.

OLD PRIEST Is it still worth anything? I think we've got another
somewhere.

MR TULIP Four thousand dollars, to the right collector. Twelve thousand
if you've got the ___ing pair. Futtock is very collectable at the
moment.

OLD PRIEST Twelve thousand!

MR TULIP Could be more. It's a delightful piece. _(To_ MR PIN.) And you
were just going to use it as a blunt instrument.

_He brings his first down hard on the_ PRIEST'S _head; the_ PRIEST
_collapses._

And they just had it stuck away in a vestry. Honestly, I could ___ing
spit!

MR PIN _(picking up the robes)_ You want to take it with you?

MR TULIP _(replacing it on the table)_ Nah. Fences round here would just
melt it down for the silver. I couldn't have something like that on my
___ing conscience.

MR PIN _(handing a robe to_ MR TULIP) Well, let's get in disguise and
find this dog, shall we?

MR TULIP Right you are, _Brother_ Pin.

_Blackout as they exit._

_ACT TWO_

SCENE ONE

_The print room._ BODDONY _is on, working at some typeface._ WILLIAM
_enters, carrying a set of scales._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Quick, get Mr Goodmountain up.

We've got to get out another edition! And can I have ten dollars,
please?

GOODMOUNTAIN _enters, in nightshirt, but still with his helmet on._

GUNILLA What is it, William? I think there's a bag of small change on
the press.

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, I need ten dollar coins. I want to check how much
seventy thousand dollars weighs.

_BODDONY_ _picks up the bag of money from the press.)_

BODDONY Oh, there's definitely not seventy thousand dollars in here.

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, no. _One_ dollar would do. Ten would just be a bit
more accurate. I reckon seventy thousand dollars will weigh close on a
third of a _ton. A_ really good horse might just be able to carry that
_and_ a rider but Lord Vetinari - well he walks with a stick since he
was shot. He'd take forever to load up the horse and even then they
couldn't travel fast. I think Vimes has already worked all this out - he
said the facts were stupid facts. Can you set some type, Gunilla?

GUNILLA _nods._

Right. Make the heading: 'Who Framed Lord Vetinari?' And then the story
starts, er, 'Ankh-Morpork City Watch now believe that at least one other
person was involved in the . . .'

GUNILLA Fracas?

WILLIAM DE WORDE No.

BODDONY Rumpus?

WILLIAM DE WORDE '. . . in the _attack_ at the Palace on Monday night.
Evidence suggests that far from attacking his clerk as had been
believed, Lord Vetinari may have discovered a crime in progress.'

GUNILLA Are you _sure_ about that?

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, but it's as good a theory as any other. The horse
hadn't been loaded to escape, it had been loaded to be _discovered._
Someone had a plan and it went wrong. Right, new paragraph: 'A horse in
the stables had been loaded with a third of a ton of coins . . . ' I'll
check that in a moment . . . 'but in his current state of health, the
Patrician was in no condition either to load the horse or to make a
quick getaway.' Er . . . what else can we put in _with_ this story?

GUNILLA This message came from Verence, King of Lancre: 'WOMEN OF LANCRE
NOT REPEAT NOT IN HABIT OF BEARING SNAKES STOP. CHILDREN BORN THIS MONTH
WILLIAM WEAVER, CONSTANCE THATCHER, CATASTROPHE CARTER ALL PLUS ARMS AND
LEGS MINUS SCALES AND FANGS STOP.'

WILLIAM DE WORDE Hah! We have them! I'll put together a story on that,
too. We'll soon see if the sword of truth can't beat the dragon of lies.

BODDONY Didn't you say a lie can run round the world before the truth
has got its boots on?

WILLIAM DE WORDE It's my father's saying, not mine. But this _is the_
truth!

BODDONY So where's its boots then?

GUNILLA You nip off to bed, Boddony. I'll pull it all together.

BODDONY _exits._

What are you doing this for, Mr de Worde?

WILLIAM DE WORDE What do you mean?

GUNILLA I'm not saying we don't appreciate it, mind. It keeps the money
rolling in. That's why we started this. Money. But what are JWM doing it
for?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Me? Because . . . I don't know. I suppose because I'm
no good at anything else. Now I can't imagine _doing_ anything else.

GUNILLA But your family's got pots of money.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, but I'm useless. I was educated to be useless. The
de Wordes are just supposed to hang around until there's a war and then
do something stupidly brave and get killed.

GUNILLA You don't get on with your family, then?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Look, my father is not a nice man. He doesn't like me.
I don't like him. In fact, he doesn't like anyone very much. Especially
dwarfs and trolls.

GUNILLA No law against not liking us.

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, but there ought to be a law against not liking them
the way _he_ does. He won't even live in the city any more. Says it's
polluted.

GUNILLA I've met humans like him.

WILLIAM DE WORDE You said it was all about money? Is that true?

GUNILLA Pretty much. We need gold to get married. You know, to buy
ourselves from our parents.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _Buy?_ How can you buy people?

GUNILLA Cultural misunderstanding there, lad. Costs a lot of money to
raise a young dwarf to marriageable age. It needs repaying. It's
_traditional._ 'Course, if you've been working for your parents that
gets taken into account, too.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But we don't do it like that. We . . .

GUNILLA Oh? So what do _you_ use, then?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, _gratitude,_ I suppose.

GUNILLA And doesn't that cause problems?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sometimes.

GUNILLA We know about gratitude, too. But our way a dwarf enters
marriage in a state of . . . g'daraka . . . er, free, unencumbered.
_Then_ their parents might give them a huge wedding present. But it is
between dwarf and dwarf. Out of love and respect, not between debtor and
creditor like your gratitude. It works for us. Don't worry too much
about your father, lad. People change. My grandmother used to think all
humans were just hairless bears. She doesn't think that any more,
though.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Why? What changed her mind?

GUNILLA I think it was the dying that did it.

GUNILLA _pats_ WILLIAM _on the shoulder._

Come on, lad, let's get the paper finished.

_Blackout._

SCENE TWO

MRS ARCANUM X ARCANUM, MACKLEDUFF, CARTWRIGHT _on-stage, reading_ The
Inquirer. WILLIAM _joins them as soon as he_ _can._

CARTWRIGHT I'm frankly amazed. It beats me how they find this stuff out.

MRS MACKLEDUFF A woman in Kicklebury Street says her husband has been
kidnapped by elves. _(She reads)_ 'ELVES STOLE MY HUSBAND'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE That's just made up!

MRS MACKLEDUFF Can't be. It's in the paper. Gives her name and address.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(looking)_ I _know_ this lady! _She_ was the one who
said her husband had been carried off by a big silver dish that came out
of the sky. And you, Mr Cartwright, said everyone _knew_ her husband had
carried _himself off_ with a lady called Flo who used to be a waitress
at Harga's House of Ribs!

MRS ARCANUM I'm not partial to that kind of talk at the table. _And_
you're too late for breakfast, you know.

CARTWRIGHT Well then, it's obvious - he must have come back.

WILLIAM DE WORDE From the silver dish or from Flo?

MRS ARCANUM Mr de Worde!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Is there anything in the . . . other paper?

MRS MACKLEDUFF Oh, they're still trying to say that Vetinari didn't do
it.

CARTWRIGHT The Guild leaders are meeting to choose a new Patrician. They
need to choose someone a bit more responsive to the views of ordinary
people. The city's getting too big. Too many . . . outsiders, in my
humble opinion. Anyway, Vetinari must've done _something,_ otherwise why
would he be helping the Watch with their inquiries?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(hotly)_ I believe there's plenty of evidence that
throws doubt on his guilt.

_He exits._

CARTWRIGHT Well!

MRS MACKLEDUFF _(reading)_ Oh, _The Times_ has the King of Lancre saying
women in Lancre don't give birth to snakes.

MRS ARCANUM Well, he would say that, wouldn't he?

_Blackout._

SCENE THREE

_A dark alley._ WILLIAM _enters, crossly and leans against a wall,
under_ _a spotlight._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(to himself)_ They're impossible. They'll believe any
old lies but tell them the truth and they just won't have it.

GASPODE _enters to a dimly-lit comer near_ WILLIAM.

GASPODE 'Scuse me, friend.

WILLIAM _jumps, alarmed._

Don't panic, I'm not a thief. Do you know what's good for you?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Healthy exercise, regular meals, good night's sleep. I
think, though, that what you _meant_ to ask was 'Do I know what's bad
for me' in the general context of blunt instruments and sharp metal, am
I right?

GASPODE Broadly, yes. Don't move, mister. You stand where I can see you,
and no harm will come to you.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, but if I stand where you _can't_ see me, I don't
see how any harm could come to me there, either.

GASPODE Look, meet me halfway, will you?

WILLIAM _makes as if to move into the alley._

No! Don't move!

WILLIAM DE WORDE But you just said . . .

GASPODE _(exasperated)_ Look just shut up and listen, will you? I am
hearing that there's a certain _dog_ people are looking for.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes. The Watch want him and . . . _(He sniffs)_ Ron?

GASPODE Do I _sound_ like Ron?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Not exactly 'sound', no. So who _am_ I talking to?

GASPODE You can call me . . . Deep Bone.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _Deep Bone?_

GASPODE Something wrong with that?

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, I suppose not. What can I do for you, Mr Bone?

GASPODE Just supposin' someone knew where the doggie was but didn't want
to get involved with the Watch?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Why not?

GASPODE They have their reasons. I hear there's a reward. Only it was
printed wrong in the paper 'cos it said twenty-five dollars and I reckon
that should've been a hundred dollars, see?

WILLIAM DE WORDE That's a lot of money for a dog.

GASPODE Yeah, but this one has a _story_ to tell. About things that
happened in the Palace a few mornings ago. To them as can understand dog
talk, of course.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Werewolves, you mean?

GASPODE Could be, could be, yes.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But the only werewolf I know is in the Watch. So give
you a hundred dollars to hand Wuffles straight over to the Watch?

GASPODE All right, the dog and an interpreter - one hundred and fifty
dollars.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I want to see who I'm talking to.

GASPODE Can't do that.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh well, that's reassuring. I'll just go and get a
hundred and fifty dollars, shall I, bring it back here and hand it over
to you just like that?

GASPODE Good idea.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Not a chance.

GASPODE Well, s'pose I give you a little snippet of information. As a
taster.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Go on.

GASPODE It wasn't Vetinari who stabbed the other man. It was another
man.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Is there a description?

GASPODE He has a dog bite on his ankle.

WILLIAM DE WORDE So I'm supposed to go around Ankh-Morpork, lifting
people's trouser legs?

GASPODE That's kosher info, that is. That'd worry some people, if you
put it in your paper.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'll need a better description than that!

GASPODE Well, it dun't work that way with dogs, see? We . . . er, _they_
look _up_ at people, see. They, er, _we_ just look like a wall with
nostrils. What he _smells_ like, mind, that's a different matter.

WILLIAM DE WORDE So, what does he _smell_ like?

GASPODE Do I see a pile of cash in front of me? I don't think so. You
know, it'd save a lot of time and trouble if you just gave me the money
and I told you everything.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _You_ tell me everything, _then_ I'll pay you.

GASPODE Pull one of the others, it's got bells on.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Looks like we can't do business then.

_He makes as if to go._

GASPODE Wait! All right. You ask Vimes what Vetinari did just before the
murder.

WILLIAM DE WORDE What did he do?

GASPODE See if you can find out.

WILLIAM DE WORDE That's not a lot to go on. _(Pause)_ I said that's not
a lot . . . hello?

_He peers further into the alley._ GASPODE _has gone. He starts to exit_
_and then stops._

'Pull _one_ of the others' . . . ?

_He looks quickly around him and then exits as the lights black out._

SCENE FOUR

_The print room._ GUNILLA _and_ BODDONY _are at work._ SACHARISSA _is
pushing out a person holding an animal box._

SACHARISSA _(exasperated)_ No - it _isn't_ Wuffles! How do I know?
Because it's a _cat,_ that's how!

_She pushes the person right off-stage. As the door opens, we hear a_
_variety of animal noises. We hear her speak to another person._

No, sir, and that is not Wuffles either. Putting a collar on a parrot
and teaching it to say 'woof is _not_ enough. Thank you.

WILLIAM _enters from the back door as_ SACHARISSA _re-enters from_
_thefront._

Well now — who's been a clever boy? There's hundreds of them out there -
dogs of all sizes, cats, budgies . . . I've even been offered a couple
of goldfish!

WILLIAM DE WORDE What?

SACHARISSA Some complete _muffin_ offered a reward! In _Ankh-Morpork._
They were queuing three deep when I got here. I mean, one man had a cow.
A _cowl_

WILLIAM DE WORDE Sorry.

MR PIN _and_ MR TULIP _enter._ MR PIN _is dressed as a priest of_ _Om._
MR TULIP _is dressed very unconvincingly as a nun._

MR PIN I wonder, ah, if we can be of any assistance? Mm, I am Brother
Upon-Which-the-Angels-Dance Pin. And this is Sister Jennifer, who is
_(Pointedly to_ MR TULIP.) under a vow of _silence. (To the others.)_
That means she does not, mm, talk. _At all._ Under _any_ circumstances.

SACHARISSA Oh dear.

MR PIN Yes, mm, and we happened to be in Ankh Morpork as part of the
Bishop Horn Ministry to Animals and heard that you were looking for a
little doggie who is in trouble. We saw you were overwhelmed and perhaps
we could help?

_He nods at_ MR TULIP, _who exits._

SACHARISSA The dog's a little terrier, but you'd be amazed what people
are bringing in. We do have a picture of Wuffles.

WILLIAM DE WORDE It would help if we could print in colour.

MR PIN Probably. It was a kind of greyish-brown.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _senses this is a dangerous question._

WILLIAM DE WORDE You _know_ what colour you're looking for?

MR PIN _draws_ WILLIAM _to one side and half draws his gonne._

MR PIN You just sort out the words, writer boy. This isn't anything to
do with you, OK? Shout out, and someone gets killed. Make a sudden move
and someone gets killed. In fact we might as well kill someone _anyway_
and save some time, eh? You know that stuff about the pen being mightier
than the sword?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes.

MR PIN Want to try?

WILLIAM DE WORDE NO. _(TO_ GUNILLA.) If you could just set that type, Mr
Goodmountain.

_He gives a meaningful look to_ GUNILLA _and_ BODDONY. BODDONY _opens
the trap and descends into the cellar._

MR PIN Where's that dwarf going?

WILLIAM DE WORDE To the cellar to get some ink.

MR TULIP _re-enters, carrying a big sack._

MR PIN How are we doing Sister Jennifer?

MR TULIP _(normal voice)_ Got the ___ing terriers.

PIN _shakes his head violently._ TULIP _changes to a higher register._

Got the ___ing terriers! And there's ___ing Watchmen at the end of the
street!

OTTO _enters from the cellar, carrying the camera and jar of eels._

MR PIN Who's that? He's a vampire! What's he holding?

OTTO Boo.

_Dark light effect. Everyone is badly affected by it but_ M r PIN
_screams_ _out in fear and exits, screaming, followed by a bemused_ MR
TULIP.

Everyvun OK?

GUNILLA We didn't know you used dark light!

OTTO Oh, _excuse_ me. Mr Boddony said it vas urgent and the eels vere
all I had to hand.

SACHARISSA Who _were_ they?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm not sure. But they certainly wanted Lord Vetinari's
dog.

SACHARISSA I'm sure she wasn't a proper virgin, you know. _(The others
all look at her)_ What?

GUNILLA _(to_ OTTO) You _know_ that dark light is dangerous!

WILLIAM DE WORDE It certainly frightened those two off.

VIMES _enters._

VIMES Ah, Mr de Worde. There's animals rampaging all over the city.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Uh, we had a bit of a problem.

VIMES Never? Really? Anything you need to tell me?

WILLIAM DE WORDE What was it Lord Vetinari did just before the . . .
accident?

VIMES _pulls_ WILLIAM _to one side._

VIMES All right, Mr de Worde, we'll do it your way. What do you know?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I don't know. But I _think_ Lord Vetinari did something
remarkable not long before the crime.

VIMES _(referring to his notebook)_ 'He entered the Palace by the
stables sometime before seven o'clock and dismissed the guard.'

WILLIAM DE WORDE He'd been up all night? Is that unusual? Not part of
the routine?

VIMES Well, nor is stabbing your clerk and trying to run off with a
heavy sack of cash. We _did_ notice that, you know. We only _look_
stupid. Oh . . . and the guard said he smelled spirits on his lordship's
breath.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Does he drink?

VIMES No. Now look - they're electing a new Patrician today . . .

SACHARISSA That'll be Mr Scrope, of the Shoemakers and Leatherworkers.

VIMES And I hear that the first thing Mr Scrope will do is to pardon
Lord Vetinari. Clean sheet. Fresh start. Poor chap. Overwork. Bound to
crack.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But you _know_ Lord Vetinari didn't . . .

VIMES Do I?

_He exits._ WILLIAM _sees a picture on the floor next to the camera._

Hello? What have we here?

OTTO Ah, zat vill be ze picture I took ven zose men vere here.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Look! What are all those people behind the so-called
priest?

OTTO Oh dear. He is not a good man. Zis is not good for him. All zose
faces in zer shadows.

WILLIAM DE WORDE What happened?

OTTO Veil, under stronk dark light ze picture _really_ does not lie. It
reveals zer truth in zer dark corners of zer mind.

GUNILLA This is unholy stuff. No more meddling with it, understand?

_He takes the photo off_ WILLIAM.

I'm _telling_ you. I don't want any more of these . . . these prints of
darkness!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, no more of this stuff, Otto. Let's get back to
normal.

BODDONY and GUNILLA OK then.

_They exit._

WILLIAM DE WORDE What's it all for, though? The paper comes out - it
doesn't seem to matter.

SACHARISSA What did you expect? Look, this paper is some sort of hobby
to you, isn't it? If it all goes pear-shaped, you'll still have money,
/won't.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I don't have money!

SACHARISSA Yes, but you were able to choose.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But - someone has to care about the . . . big truth.

SACHARISSA We're not getting enough advertising. _The_ _Inquirer_ gets
huge ads from the big Guilds. That's what keeps them going, not stories
about how much gold weighs.

WILLIAM DE WORDE What am I supposed to do?

SACHARISSA Find a way of getting more ads! Look, I know this means a lot
to you but it's the Watch's job, not ours.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Tomorrow we'll get more ads.

_He pulls a key out of his pocket and turns to_ SACHARISSA.

Here, the key to our town house. It's deserted now that father's moved
outside the city. He stays in his club now if he has to stop overnight
within the city walls. Take Boddony with you, though -just in case.

SACHARISSA It's a bit late.

WILLIAM DE WORDE You'll need a posh frock for that ball at Lady
Selachii's. My father's had most of the furniture moved to his new
house, but my sister left lots of dresses in the huge wardrobes in her
room. Top of the main staircase - fifth door on your right. Leave the
others to get on with the paper and go and have a look. I expect we can
find someone to do your hair properly, too.

SACHARISSA It's true — you really _do_ have an amazing way with words!

WILLIAM DE WORDE And I don't think those men will be back. I've a
feeling there isn't a shed anywhere in Ankh-Morpork that's guarded as
well as this place right at the moment.

SACHARISSA So what are you going to do?

WILLIAM DE WORDE First I'm going to the nearest apothecary for a quality
stink bomb. I need to put a werewolf off the scent, as it were. Then -
I'm going to see a man about a dog.

_Lights change to the dockside. There is a sort of splash and_ PIN _and_
TULIP _enter._ MR PIN _is very jumpy and keeps looking behind him._

MR PIN Come on!

MR TULIP That ___ing sack was heavy! I fought you wanted to keep the
dog? Why'd we throw them all in the river? I told you ___ing clever
plans don't work. What did that vampire do to us?

MR PIN He took some kind of picture.

_A couple of dark figures_(MR PIN'S _victims) enter. Only_ Mr PIN _can_
_see them._

Who's that?

MR TULIP _(looking)_ Where? I can't see no-one. Look, we done the ___ing
job. I say we scrag the geek, take the money and scram.

MR PIN You mean quit on a contract? Someone would recognise Charlie,
though. It's hard for the dead to stay dead round here. This place is
getting to me. Vampires, werewolves . . . I think we should go and
explain things to our lawyer friend.

MR TULIP Right, and then I'll rip his head off.

MR PIN That doesn't kill zombies.

MR TULIP Good, 'cos then he'll be able to _see_ where I'm gonna ___ing
shove it!

MR PIN And then we'll pay another visit to that news paper. Very
inflammable stuff, paper.

TULIP _exits, followed by_ PIN _and the shadowy figures._

But first we'll . . . who's that behind me?

MR TULIP No-one.

MR PIN _pulls out his gonne._

MR PIN It's time Mr Slant said hello to my little friend.

_Blackout._

SCENE FIVE

_Dark streets._ WILLIAM _sneaks on, he is followed by_ ANGUA _in_ _were
wolf form. He turns and throws a stink bomb at her. She yelps,_ _swats
at her muzzle and exits, yelping._ WILLIAM _moves over to the_ _wall by
the alley._ GASPODE _is off-stage._

GASPODE Don't turn around, Mr Writer man. You sure you weren't followed?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Corporal Nobbs was on my trail. But I shook him off. I
knew Vimes would have me tracked.

GASPODE By Nobby Nobbs?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes. Well - obviously in his werewolf shape . . .

GASPODE _(flatly)_ Werewolf shape.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes. I'd be grateful if you wouldn't

tell anyone else.

GASPODE _(flatly)_ Corporal Nobbs? A werewolf?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, look Vimes told me not to . . .

GASPODE _Vimes_ told you Nobby Nobbs was a werewolf?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, not _exactly._

GASPODE Corporal Nobbs is _not_ a werewolf, mister. Not in any way.
Whether he's human or not is another matter.

WILLIAM DE WORDE So who did I drop that stink bomb in front of, then?

GASPODE A stink bomb? In front of a werewolf? Mr Vimes is going to go
round the twist. He's going to go totally librarian-poo.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Then I'd better get hold of Vetinari's dog as soon as
possible. All I can afford is fifty dollars. Right now, Mr Bone, there's
a couple of very nasty men indeed hunting down every terrier in the city
. . .

GASPODE Terriers? _All_ terriers?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, and I . . .

GASPODE Like . . . pedigree terriers, or just people who happen to look
a bit terrier-like?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I don't think they're checking for kennel club
certificates.

GASPODE All right, fifty dollars. Tonight. The Misbegot Bridge. I won't
be there. I'll send . . . a messenger.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Right.

_He goes. A moment, then_ GASPODE _enters, with_ FOUL OLD RON _and the_
DUCK MAN.

DUCK MAN Those men are hunting terriers?

GASPODE Yeah - but I've got to be out and about! I'm a figure in this
town! I can't lie low - 1 need a disguise!

FOUL OLD RON Blewitt.

DUCK MAN A disguise? Yes, a dog is not just a dog. Come on.

_They exit as the lights cross-fade to_ VIMES _and_ ANGUA. ANGUA _has a
hanky to her nose._

ANGUA Sorry about this, sir, he gave me the slip.

VIMES His feet won't touch the ground. He's assaulted an officer.

ANGUA Well, that's where it gets tricky, sir, isn't it?

VIMES You're an officer, Sergeant, whatever shape you happen to be.

ANGUA Yes, but up to now it's been better for the . . . werewolf thing .
. . to be kept a rumour. It's my own fault, anyway, sir, for
underestimating him. And I'll be fine in a couple of hours.

VIMES He's a quick learner, our Mr de Worde. He's got a pen and a
printing press and suddenly everyone's acting like he's a major player.
Well, he's going to have to learn a bit more. He doesn't want us
watching? Well, we won't any more. He can reap what he sows for a while.

ANGUA But, sir . . .

VIMES That sign on my desk says _'Commander_ Vimes'. That means the buck
starts here. It was a command you just got.

ANGUA Sir.

SCENE SIX

_Back at the alley._ WILLIAM _is on-stage, waiting._ GASPODE _is in_
_the wings._

GASPODE Hello, mister.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Deep Bone?

GASPODE I'm sending a . . . a guide for you to follow. Name of, name of
. . . Trixiebell. Just you follow him and everything will be OK, yeah?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes.

GASPODE _enters. He is disguised as a pink poodle._

GASPODE Yip.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Hello, little . . . dog?

GASPODE Yip, yipyip. Sheesh. Yip. Whine?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Right. Lead on.

_Lights down for a second. Lights come up to reveal the beggars under_
_the Misbegot Bridge. Water effect. As_ WILLIAM _walks into the scene,_
GASPODE _sidles off._

Oh . . . good evening, gentlemen.

GASPODE Let's see yer money, then.

WILLIAM _holds out the bill._ DUCK MAN _takes it._

DUCK MAN Seems to be in order.

WILLIAM DE WORDE So - can I see the dog?

GASPODE Show 'im, Ron.

RON _opens his coat._ WUFFLES _is in there._

WILLIAM DE WORDE You've been carrying him around? That's all there was
to it?

GASPODE Who's going to search Foul Old Ron, eh?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Good point. Or smell him out.

GASPODE Now you got to remember Wuffles is a bit old, and he wasn't
exactly Mr Brain to start with. Don't expect a philosophical treatise,
is what I'm sayin'.

DUCK MAN Would you care for a cup of tea?

_He holds up a blackened teapot and a very grimy looking_

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . why not. _(Hurriedly)_ But no milk, though.

DUCK MAN _(pouring the tea)_ Ah - I _said you_ were a gentleman. Milk in
tea is an abomination.

_He hands the tea to_ WILLIAM _as_ COFFIN HENRY _holds out a_ _grubby
saucer with lemon slices on it and a small pair of tongs._ DUCK MAN
_picks up a slice of lemon and holds it over_ WILLIAM'S _mug._

Slice of lemon?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Lemon? You have lemon?

DUCK MAN Oh, even Mr Ron here would rather wash under his arms than have
anything but lemon in his tea.

_He plops the lemon into_ WILLIAM_'S_ _tea._

We're very fortunate when it comes to slices of lemon . . .

WILLIAM _takes a big swig from his tea._

Why it is indeed a bad day when we can't find two or three slices
floating down the river.

WILLIAM _'sface is a picture - spit or swallow?_

Is something wrong, Mr William?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mmf.

DUCK MAN Is it too hot?

WILLIAM _gratefully sprays his tea back into the cup._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes! Too hot! Lovely tea, but - too hot! I'll just put
it down here to cool, yes?

_He does so, then turns to_ WUFFLES.

So, Wuffles, _which_ man was it you bit on the leg?

WUFFLES _barks._

GASPODE He bit all of them.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Would you know them if you bit them again?

WUFFLES _barks._

GASPODE Yes. He tasted of . . . hot water, soap . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE A bath?

WUFFLES _and_ GASPODE _yelp._

GASPODE That's it - the 'b'word. The other smelled of cheap hair oil and
the one that looked like Lord Vetinari smelled of wine.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'd like to get a picture of Wuffles. Can I bring my
iconographer down here?

DUCK MAN This is a select neighbourhood. We don't allow just _anyone_
down here, you know.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But there's a path running under the bridge! Anyone
could walk right past!

COFFIN HENRY Werl, yes. They _could. (He coughs expertly)_ But they
_don't._

FOUL OLD RON Buggrit. Choking a tinker? Garn!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Then you'd better come back to the office with me.

GASPODE Too dangerous now.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Would it be less dangerous for another fifty dollars?

ANDREWS _Another_ fifty dollars? That'd make _it fifteen_ dollars!

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(wearily)_ A hundred dollars.

GASPODE All right, then.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Good. Come _on._

SCENE SEVEN

SLANT'_s_ _office._ MR SLANT _walks in, carrying some papers._ PIN _and_
TULIP _burst on and confront him._

SLANT Gentlemen?

MR TULIP Don't try a ___ing thing!

MR PIN There's something you should know . . .

_Hepulb out the_ DISORGANISER _and presses its rewind button._

DISORGANISER Nyip . . . nyapnyip . . . nyapdit. . .wheedlewheedle . . .

SLANT And what is that thing?

MR PIN It's a Disorganiser. I'm just rewinding its memory . . .

DISORGANISER (SLANTS _voice)_ 'My clients have long memories and deep
pockets. Other killers can be hired. Do you understand me?'

_Disorganiser's voice, as_ PIN _switches it off._

Ouch!

SLANT Would you like a drink, Mr Pin? A banana for your monkey, perhaps?

MR TULIP I told you - I'm goin' to ___ing kill him!

SLANT Too late, alas. Very well, Mr Pin. This is about money, yes?

MR PIN All we're owed, plus another fifty thousand.

SLANT But you haven't found the dog.

MR PIN Nor have the Watch, and _they've_ got a werewolf!

Forget the dog - it's this box which is important.

SLANT That is very little in the way of evidence.

MR PIN Really? You asking us about the dog? Talking about killers? I
reckon Vimes would niggle away at stuff like that. OK, you've got stuff
on _us,_ and some of it might be considered criminal...

MR TULIP All them ___ing murders for a start.

MR PIN _But,_ since we _are_ criminals, that could be called typical
behaviour, whereas a respectable citizen such as _you_ . . . well people
talk.

SLANT Very well, to save any . . . misunderstandings, I will give you .
. .

MR PIN _(interrupting)_ Jewels.

MR TULIP We _like_ jewels.

SLANT I wonder if I can trust you?

MR PIN _(patiently)_ Well, you see, it's like this . . . If news got
round that we'd shopped a client, that wouldn't be good. But if the
people we deal with heard we'd scragged a client because the client had
not played fair, they would say 'These people are businesslike. They are
businessmen. They do business.'

_A couple of Pin's 'shadows' can be seen in the corner of the room._ M
PIN _notices them._

SLANT And?

MR PIN _(blinking and shaking his head)_ And . . . and . . . the hell
with this. Give us the jewels or Mr Tulip will be doing the asking!
We're getting out of here! I've had enough of your damn city with its
dwarfs and vampires and dead men walking! So give us the jewels, right
now!

SLANT Very well. And that box . . . ?

MR PIN Goes with us. We get caught, it gets caught. We die mysteriously
. . . some people find out about things. If we get safely away, well
you'll have to trust us because you're in no position to argue and I am
_not_ having a good day!

SLANT _gets a couple of bags of jewels._

Check 'em, Mr Tulip.

MR TULIP _checks the contents of one of the bags._

MR TULIP You think I'm some kind of ___ing idiot?

MR PIN Don't even think of arguing.

SLANT Perhaps the jewellers made a mistake?

MR PIN Yeah?

_He reaches into his coat and draws out his gonne. The bolt has a wad_
_of cotton wool tied to it._ PIN _speaks in an almost trance-like way._

This is a bad thing I am about to do. But I done so many bad things,
this one'll hardly count. It's like . . . _a_ killing is a big thing,
right? But _another_ killing, that's kind of half the size, you know?
So, when you done, say, twenty killings, they barely notice, on average.

_He lights a match or lighter and waves it near the end of the_

But, but . . . it's a nice day today, the birds is singing, there's
stuff like . . . kittens and stuff, and the sun is shining off the snow,
bringin' the promise of spring to come with flowers and fresh grass and
more kittens on hot summer days and the gentle kiss of the rain and
wonderful clean things _which_ _you won't ever see ifyou don't give us
the real jewels 'cos you'll burn_ _like a torch you double-dealing
twisty dried-up cheating son of a bitch!!_

SLANT _quickly produces more bags of jewels which he hurriedly passes_
_to_ TULIP.

MR TULIP Rubies. ___ing good ones.

SLANT Now go away from here. Right away. Never come back. I've never
heard of you. I've never seen you.

PIN _is still transfixed by the shadowy figures._

MR PIN Right. _(He blows out the flame)_ Right. _(He focuses on_ SLANT.)
I think I shall let you live today. Tomorrow . . . who knows?

SLANT _spins on his heel and exits._ PIN _starts to stare again at_
_shadowy figures._

MR TULIP So - we'll be heading off now, eh? _(No answer.)_ No point in
hangin' around here, eh? _(Mo answer.)_ How come you didn't kill that
___ing zombie?

MR PIN What do you think happens when we die, Tulip?

MR TULIP You know that. Remember when we had to leave that guy in that
___ing barn and it was a week before we got to bury him. Remember how
his . . .

MR PIN I don't mean _bodiesl_

MR TULIP Ah, religion stuff, eh?

MR PIN Yes.

MR TULIP I never worry about that ___ing stuff! I've got my potato.

MR PIN Potato?

MR TULIP Oh yeah.

MR TULIP Oh yeah.

_He draws out a dried-up spud on a string around his neck._

See?

MR PIN And that's religious?

MR PIN And that's religious?

MR TULIP Well, yeah. When you die, if you've got your potato,
everything'll be OK. You're allowed to come back and have another life.

MR PIN Even if . . . you've done things which some people might think
were bad?

MR TULIP What? Like choppin' people up and shovin' them off cliffs?

MR PIN Yeah, that kind of thing.

MR TULIP We-e-ell, it's OK so long as you're _really_ ing sorry about
it.

MR PIN _(looking twitchily around him)_ It _works?_

MR TULIP Yep.

MR PIN And you come back alive?

MR TULIP Sure. No point in coming back dead - who'd notice the ___ing
difference?

_One of the shadowy figures touches_ PIN _on the shoulder. He starts._

What's up?

MR PIN Someone's got their hand on my shoulder!

MR TULIP You OK?

MR PIN Can't you see them?

MR TULIP Nope.

MR PIN _tries to bring his mind back to reality._

MR PIN OK. OK, what we'll do . . . we'll go back to the house, OK, and .
. . we'll get the rest of the jewels, and we'll scrag Charlie and, and .
. . and we'll find a vegetable shop . . . any special kind of potato?

MR TULIP Nope.

MR PIN But first . . .

_He looks round at the shadows._

All this is down to what that damned vampire did. And hey - killing a
vampire? That's practically _good)._ Yeah, I think those news paper
people are due another visit.

MR TULIP Yeah, but who cares?

MR PIN /do!

_They exit. Blackout._

SCENE EIGHT

_The deserted house. Darkness. We hear footsteps on a wooden staircase,_
_along a landing. A door creaks open and_ SACHARISSA _enters,_ _folbwed
by_ BODDONY _who is carrying a lighted lantern. The room_ _now lit in an
eerie glow._

SACHARISSA Ah, this is the one - there're the wardrobes.

_She crosses the room and exits to rummage for clothes._

BODDONY Did you see the footprints, miss? In the dust?

SACHARISSA _(off)_ Yes. Probably the cleaner.

BODDONY There's lots of them. What does she do - kick the dust to death?

SACHARISSA _(off)_ Perhaps there's caretakers and such? Gosh, these
dresses really stink of mothballs.

_She enters, carrying a flashy evening gown._

Do you think a dress like this would be too forward?

BODDONY You're quite a lot forward already.

SACHARISSA I _meant_ make me look like a fast woman?

BODDONY Nah. No-one could run fast in a dress like that.

CHARLIE _can be heard singing, off._

What's that?

SACHARISSA _(a little nervous)_ Caretaker, I expect - we'd better just,
you know, mention that we've been here . . . ?

BODDONY _(moving towards a doorway)_ It seems to be coming from in here.

SACHARISSA _crosses to the entrance and peers off._

SACHARISSA Hello? Erm, William, that is Mr de Worde said it'd be all
right?

CHARLIE _(off)_ Hello! How are you? I'm fine!

SACHARISSA Er . . . are _you_ all right?

CHARLIE _appears in the doorway. He is squiffy and has a chain_ _around
his ankle which prevents him coming much further in than just_ _into the
doorway._

CHARLIE _(sniffing)_ Poo, Mr Mothball Nose! Whoops! Can't get . . . haha
. . . it's all . . . chains.

SACHARISSA Are you ill?

CHARLIE No'm fine. I've just had a few too many . . .

SACHARISSA A few too many what?

CHARLIE Wazza . . . things you put drink in . . . barrels?

SACHARISSA You're drunk?

CHARLIE Tha's right. Drunk as a thing. Smelly thing. Heehee.

SACHARISSA _(seeing the chain)_ Are you a _prisoner?_

MR PIN _and_ MR TULIP _enter._

CHARLIE Woo! The gang's all here!

MR TULIP Who the ___ing hell are you?

BODDONY _crosses to_ TULIP, _who thumps him on top of the head._

BODDONY _collapses._

SACHARISSA Don't you dare swear at me! How dare you swear in the
presence of a lady!

MR TULIP _(nonplussed)_ I didn't ___ing swear!

SACHARISSA Hold on - you're that nun - I _knew_ you weren't a proper
virgin.

MR PIN'S _shadowy figures enter after him._

MR PIN _pulls out his gonne and points it at_ SACHARISSA.

MR PIN Just what _are_ you doing here, young lady?

SACHARISSA And you were Brother Pin! You haven't any right here! _I've_
got a key!

MR PIN A key? So have I? _(He holds it up)_ Who'd give _you_ a key?
_You_ are coming with us and don't say you'll scream because we're all
alone here and I've . . . heard . . . lots of . . .

_Thegonne wavers in his hand, he looks as though he might fall to_
_knees._

MR TULIP Let's just scrag 'em now.

MR PIN Chain them up and leave them.

MR TULIP But we _always . . ._

MR PIN Leave them!

MR TULIP You sure you're all right?

MR PIN No. Just leave them, OK? We haven't got time.

MR TULIP We've got lots of . . .

MR PIN _I_ haven't! _(He crosses to_ SACHARISSA.) Who gave you that key?

SACHARISSA _(triumphantly)_ This house belongs to Lord de Worde and his
son gave me the key. There! He was the one at the news paper. So - now
you know what you've got yourself into, eh?

MR PIN No, but I'm going to find out. Don't try anything.

_Really_ don't scream. Walk normally and . . . I was going to say
everything will be all right. _(He leans in to her)_ But that would be
silly, wouldn't it?

_Blackout._

SCENE NINE

_The print room._ WILLIAM _is on with_ GUNILLA, FOUL OLD RON, WUFFLES
_and_ TRIXIEBELL. PIN _enters, with_ SACHARISSA _in_ _front of him,
followed by_ TULIP _and_ BODDONY.

MR PIN Ah, our writer man. And you've brought me the little doggie.

WUFFLES _growls._

WILLIAM DE WORDE The Watch will be here soon.

MR PIN Doesn't worry me now. Not with what I know. Not with _who_ I
know. Mr Tulip? Lock the front door, will you? That'll slow them down a
bit if they do turn up.

(TULIP _does so) Where's the damn vampire?_

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(crossly)_ I don't know! He's not always with us!

MR _YIN_ _puts the muzzle of the gonne into_ WILLIAM _'sface and picks_
_up a lantern from the press._

MR PIN Really? Then let me retort . . . if it, he doesn't arrive within
two minutes I will personally torch your establishment, first having
locked all you lot inside . . .

WUFFLES _lunges forward and bites_ PIN _on the ankle. He yelps, drops_
_the lantern and hobbles around holding his shin. There is an explosion_
_and aflame effect - the press is on fire!_ SACHARISSA _knees_ TULIP
_in_ _the parsnips; he folds up double._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Quick! Get out! Now!

_Everyone, except_ PIN _and_ TULIP, _starts to exit._

GUNILLA _(as they exit)_ But the press?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Better the press than us - come _on!_

TULIP _starts to follow the others off. Another explosion, in front of_
_him._

MR TULIP The doorway's blocked!

MR PIN Quick - down here!

_They exit down into the cellar. Blackout. Lights up again in the
gloomy_ _cellar. We can hear the fire roaring above them. Some smoke
drifts_

MR TULIP We're ___ing trapped down here!

MR PIN No - this is stone. Stone walls, stone floor, stone ceiling.
Stone doesn't burn, OK? We're just nice and calm down here and wait it
out.

TULIP _picks up the eel jar from the floor._

MR TULIP Hey - here's some of that vampire's equipment. What's these
worm things in this ___ing jar?

_He brings them over._

Why does it say 'Handle Viz Care' on it?

_The jar slips in his hand_ _—_ _he catches it, but there is a flash of
dark_ _light. The shadowy figures reappear._ MR PIN _screams and puts
his_ _hands to his head._

You all right?

MR PIN They're right behind me!

MR TULIP Nah, there's just you and me down here, old friend. Calm down.
Remember some good times, take your mind off all this. Hey, remember
when Gerhardt the Boot and his lads had us cornered in that ___ing
cellar in Quirm? Remember what we did to him afterwards?

MR PIN Yes. I _remember._

MR TULIP And that time that old man was in that house and we didn't
know? And we nailed up the door and set fire . . .

MR PIN Shut up! Shut up! We shouldn't have killed all those people.

_Rain effect starts._

MR TULIP Oh, hello - this'11 put the fire out - it's raining.

MR PIN That's not water! That's melting lead! Hot lead they print the
paper with it! We'll fry!

MR TULIP No, we're all right in here. Can't touch us.

MR PIN Are you mad? We'll be inches deep in molten metal in a few
minutes! It'll burn our feet off- and there's

nothing to stand on!

MR TULIP _(pointing out front)_ That bench!

MR PIN You can't get across there! The dripping lead would kill you
before you got to it. We need _something_ to stand on for a few minutes
until it sets.

MR TULIP But there's nothing under here but us! We're ___ing trapped!

MR PIN I . . . have a plan.

MR TULIP Good.

MR PIN My plans are pretty good, right?

MR TULIP Yeah, you come up with some ___ing wonders.

MR PIN I'm always thinking about the good of the firm, right?

MR TULIP Yeah, sure, right.

MR PIN So this plan . . . it's not, like, _perfect_ but . . . oh, the
hell with it. Give me your potato.

MR TULIP What?

MR PIN _whips out the gonne and thrusts it into_ _TULIP'S FACE._

MR PIN No time to argue! Gimme the damn potato right now! This is no
time for you to _think!_

_Uncertainly,_ TULIP _hands over the potato._

Right. The way I see it . . . the way I see it, I'm a small man, Mr
Tulip. You couldn't stand on me. I wouldn't do. You're a big man, Mr
Tulip. I wouldn't want to see you suffer.

TULIP _realises. Tableau. Blackout. Moise of gonne._

SCENE TEN

_The print room. Mext day. Smouldering remains of the press. Smoke._

WILLIAM, SACHARISSA, BODDONY _and_ GUNILLA _enter._

WILLIAM _is carrying the scorched spike, still with some charred bits_
_paper on it._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(to_ GUNILLA) Look, I'm sorry.

GUNILLA Not your fault.

SACHARISSA Can it be rebuilt?

GUNILLA No, it's scrap. And we've no type, no ink, no paper!

WILLIAM DE WORDE The spike seems to have survived. Bit scorched, though.

SACHARISSA _(ignoring that)_ Right, so we need to get another press . .
.

GUNILLA Look, even an old scrap one would cost over a thousand dollars.
It's over.

SACHARISSA I've got some savings. Perhaps we could make do with a hand
press to start off with.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I could probably go further into debt for another
couple of hundred dollars.

SACHARISSA We could put a tarpaulin over the roof.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, a few days' work should get this place in shape.

GUNILLA Hel-loo! This is sanity calling! _We have no moneyl_

SACHARISSA Not much room to expand, though. You know, magazines and so
on. To make use of the dead time on the press.

GUNILLA Dead time on the press? The _press_ is dead!

WILLIAM DE WORDE What sort of magazines?

SACHARISSA Oh, fashion, knitting, that sort of thing.

GUNILLA Hello? Hello? My mouth is opening and shutting - is any sound
getting out?

SACHARISSA And one about cats. 'Completely Cats', we could call it.

GUNILLA 'Completely Cats'? Completely _batsl_

WILLIAM DE WORDE There's a problem.

SACHARISSA Yes?

WILLIAM DE WORDE We don't have enough money for a new press. We're out
of business. It's all over. Do you understand?

SACHARISSA Yes. I just hoped you didn't.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And we were so close. So close. I'll just have to hand
it all over to Vimes . . .

BODDONY Where's the lead?

WILLIAM DE WORDE What?

BODDONY There's no sign of it.

GUNILLA In my experience, twenty tons of lead does not just get up and
walk away.

BODDONY It must've melted.

GUNILLA The cellar. _(He crosses to the hatch.)_ The hatch is a bit
stiff. Give me a hand here, will you?

WILLIAM _comes round and they tug at the trapdoor. It bursts open_ _and,
swathed in smoke,_ MR PIN _rises like a demon king, waving a_ _flick
knife. He crosses to_ WILLIAM. _There is a tussle and_ M r PIN _impales
himself on the spike, which_ WILLIAM _is still carrying. He_ _stands and
looks down at the metal._

MR PIN Ah. S'all right, see? Got my potato . . . _(He has it_ _round his
neck)_ Not . . . not a very funny one, though. _(He_ _dies)_

OTTO _enters._

OTTO Vot _has_ been happening here? I leave zer place for five minutes
and you burn it to zer ground.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I wish I'd had the chance to ask him a few questions.

BODDONY You mean like, 'Is this the first time you've strangled anyone?'
or 'How old are you, Mr Killer?'.

_There is a small cough - it is the_ DISORGANISER _in Yin's pocket._

WILLIAM DE WORDE What's that noise?

_He searches_ PIN _and pulls out the_ DISORGANISER.

A personal Disorganiser? A killer with a personal Disorganiser?

BODDONY The Things To Do Today section should be interesting, then.

WILLIAM _opens the box._

DISORGANISER Hello Insert Name Here. Erase Memory Yes/No?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . NO! What is it you're

remembering?

DISORGANISER You have to press the replay button first.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Wait.

_He closes the box._ BODDONY _has gone over to the trap and looked_
WILLIAM _goes through Yin's pockets._

BODDONY There's a man down there, lying in lead. He's a bit on the
cooked side. There's an arrow through his head.

WILLIAM _pulls out the bags of jewels and hands them to_ GUNILLA.

WILLIAM DE WORDE How much are these worth?

GUNILLA Tens of thousands. Could be a hundred thousand. He must've
stolen them.

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, a theft that big we'd have heard about. There's a
story here. _(To_ SACHARISSA.) What else is in his pockets?

SACHARISSA This wallet - it says 'Not a Very Nice Person At All' on the
front. What kind of person would put that on a wallet?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Someone who isn't a very nice person. What's in it?

SACHARISSA An address. Oh dear. I didn't have time to tell you this
earlier, William . . .

GUNILLA If these aren't stolen, they could be worth top dollar . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE What's the address?

SACHARISSA It's your family's house. That's where these men caught me.
They had a key and everything. And there was a drunken man all chained
up and he looked just like Lord Vetinari and . . . .

WILLIAM _hits the replay button on the Disorganiser._

DISORGANISER Ow. Nyipnyip . . . mapnyap . . . wheedlewheedlewhee . . .
(MR _YIN'S_ _voice)_ Testing, testing . . . say something Mr Tulip. (MR
TULIP'S _voice)_ I'm not speaking into no ___ing box!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Forward a bit.

DISORGANISER Wheedlewheedlewheedle . . . (SLANTS _voice)_ I can add
another five thousand dollars to your fee . . .

BODDONY That's Slant! That lawyer!

GUNILLA What shall we do with these jewels, then?

DISORGANISER (SLANTS _voice)_ My clients have long memories and deep
pockets.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Slant was paying them, but he was working for clients.
And one of the men who attacked Vetinari and Drumknott had a key to
_our_ house!

DISORGANISER Wheedlewheedlewheedle . . . a lie can run round the world
before the truth has got its boots on.

SACHARISSA Right. Obviously, we . . .

WILLIAM _presses replay again._

DISORGANISER Wheedlewheedlewheedle . . . can run round the world before
the truth has got its boots on. Wheedlewheedlewheedle . . . round the
world before the truth has got its boots on. Wheedlewheedlewheedle . . .
before the truth has got its boots on. Wheedlewheedlewheedle . . . truth
has got its boots on.

SACHARISSA Are you all right, William?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mr Goodmountain? Those jewels? Can you get me another
press? I want to go to press in half an hour. Otto, I want a picture of
Brother Pin's leg with the dog bite. I want quotes from everyone,
including Wuffles, and I want a printing press!

GUNILLA But we can't just get another press just like . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE We have money. The Engravers have a press. Let's go and
see them, shall we?

_Blackout._

SCENE ELEVEN

_Carney's print room. A sign reads: 'ROMALD CARNEY_ _PRINTERS TO THE
GENTRY. IF IT'S TRUE IT'S IN THE_ _INQUIRER'._ CARNEY _is onstage next
to his press when_ WILLIAM, SACHARISSA, GUNILLA _and_ BODDONY _burst
on._

CARNEY Why, Sacharissa, what can I do for you? May I say how sad I was
to hear about the fire?

WILLIAM DE WORDE It's your office. You can say anything you like.

SACHARISSA _(to_ WILLIAM) Don't be like that, William. _(To_ CARNEY.)
It's because of that we've come to see you, Ronnie.

CARNEY Is there anything I can do?

SACHARISSA Well, I did hope, I wondered if . . . I mean, d'you think you
could see your way clear to . . . letting us use one of your presses
tonight?

CARNEY You what? Are you mad?

SACHARISSA _(sadly)_ Yes, I thought you'd probably say that.

CARNEY _puts a comforting arm around her shoulder._

CARNEY I know we used to play together as children.

SACHARISSA'S AD? _in her handbag as she speaks._

SACHARISSA I don't think we actually _played_ together. You used to
chase me and I used to hit you over the head with a wooden cow. Ah, here
it is . . .

_She whips out_ M r _YIN'S_ _gonne and points it at_ CARNEY'S _head._

Let us use your 'ing' press or I'll blow your 'ing' head off! I think
that's how you're supposed to say it, isn't it?

CARNEY You wouldn't dare!

SACHARISSA It was a lovely cow, too. One day I had to hit you so hard
one of the legs broke off.

CARNEY _(to_ WILLIAM) Can't you talk some sense into her?

WILLIAM DE WORDE We just need the loan of one of your presses for an
hour or so, Mr Carney. And then we'll be gone.

_He nods at_ GUNILLA, _who, with_ BODDONY, _ties_ CARNEY _up and_ _gags
him._

CARNEY What are you doing?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, first we'll tie you up.

_He pulls out a bag of jewels which he places on the press._

Two thousand dollars' worth. At least. Our admission to the Guild. I'll
just leave them here, shall I? No need for a receipt.

SACHARISSA _pulls the trigger. The gonne isn't loaded._ CARNEY
_whimpers._

SACHARISSA I must've forgotten to put the pointy arrow bit in. 'Ing'. I
feel so much better for saying that, you know? 'Ing'. 'Inginginginging'.
I wonder what it means? Take him away please, Boddony.

BODDONY _leads_ CARNEY _out and then re-enters._

WILLIAM DE WORDE All right, Gunilla, let's go. Triple decker headline:
'CONSPIRACY REVEALED'. Next line 'LORD VETINARI IS INNOCENT'. Then: 'A
plot to illegally seize control of Ankh-Morpork was exposed last night
after days of patient detective work by the Watch. Paragraph. _The
Times_ understands that two assassins, both now dead, were hired from
outside the city to blacken the character of Lord Vetinari and depose
him as Patrician. Paragraph. They used an innocent man with a remarkable
resemblance to Lord Vetinari in order to trick their way into the
Palace. Once inside . . . '

GUNILLA _(working away with the type)_ Hold on - the Watch didn't get to
the bottom of this _-you_ did!

WILLIAM DE WORDE I only said they'd been working on it for days. That's
true. I don't have to say they weren't getting anywhere. Look, I'd
rather Vimes was angry with me for making him look good than for making
him look bad. Where was I? Oh yes, 'Once inside . . .' no, make it,
_'The_ _Times_ understands that Lord Vetinari was . . .' Sacharissa, you
say this man looked _exactly_ like Lord Vetinari?

SACHARISSA Yes, haircut and everything.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Right. ' _The Times_ understands that Lord Vetinari was
overwhelmed in the moment of shock on seeing himself entering his own
office. The plan was foiled by Lord Vetinari's dog, Wuffles, sixteen,
who attacked both men. Paragraph. The noise of this attracted the
attention of Lord Vetinari's clerk, Rufus Drumknott . . .' damn, I
forgot to ask him how old he was '. . . who was then knocked
unconscious. Paragraph. The attackers tried to put the interruption to
good use in their . . .' what's a good word . . . _'dastardly_ plan and
stabbed Drumknott with one of Lord Vetinari's own daggers in an attempt
to make it look as if he were insane or murderous. Paragraph. Acting
with vicious cunning . . .'

SACHARISSA You're getting really good at this!

BODDONY Don't interrupt - 1 want to find out what the dastards did next!

WILLIAM DE WORDE '. . . with vicious cunning they forced the bogus Lord
Vetinari to make a false confession to some servants, who had been
attracted by the noise. Then all three, carrying the unconscious Lord
Vetinari and harried by the dog Wuffles, sixteen, took the stairs to the
stables. Paragraph. There they had set up a scene to suggest that Lord
Vetinari had been trying to rob the city, as already reported in . . . '

SACHARISSA _'Exclusively_ reported in . . .'

WILLIAM DE WORDE Right . . . _'exclusively_ reported in _The_ _Times._
However, the dog Wuffles, sixteen, escaped, leading to a city-wide
search by Watch and criminals alike. He had, however, been rescued by a
group of public-spirited citizens.' Let's see how that looks so far.

_He looks at the print._

SACHARISSA Are you sure of all this, William?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm sure it's all journalism.

SACHARISSA But do you know the _names_ of these people?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Gunilla, you can insert a paragraph anywhere in the
story, can't you?

GUNILLA Not a problem.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Right, then set this: _'The Times_ can reveal that the
assassins were hired by a group of prominent citizens led by . . . _The
Times_ can reveal that. . .' _(He takes a_ _deep breath)_ Start again.
'The plotters, _The Times_ can reveal, were headed by . . .' _(He shakes
his head)_ 'Evidence points to the, er . . . 'Evidence, _The Times_ can
reveal . . .'

GUNILLA Is this going to be a long paragraph?

WILLIAM DE WORDE No. Leave it. Put in a line that _The_ _Times_ will be
helping the Watch with its inquiries.

SACHARISSA _(pulling him DS)_ Is there something you want to talk about?

WILLIAM DE WORDE NO.

SACHARISSA Do you know who the conspirators are?

WILLIAM DE WORDE NO.

SACHARISSA Then would it be true to say that you _suspect_ you know who
the conspirators are?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Are you trying journalism on me? _(He sighs)_ 'A lie
can run round the world before the truth has got its boots on.' That's
what the Disorganiser heard Slant say his clients had said to him. It's
my father's favourite saying. Those men had the run of our house. My
father's in this up to his neck! And if he's involved, he'll be the
leader - the de Wordes wouldn't be on any team unless they're captain.

SACHARISSA It would be a bit silly, though, to let them use his own
house . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Arrogant. Not silly. Arrogant. He doesn't think the
ordinary laws apply to people like him. But . . . I must have got
something wrong. Even my father couldn't have been _this_ stupid. I'm
going to go and see him.

_He exits as_ Otto _enters, followed by_ Trixiebell.

OTTO William? _(To_ SACHARISSA.) Vot voz all zat about?

SACHARISSA OH, he's off to see his father, who is not, it seems, a very
nice person.

GASPODE 'Scuse me.

SACHARISSA _and_ OTTO _look round but see no-one._

No, down here. Let's not mess around, eh? Dogs can't talk, right? Got it
in one. So maybe you two have some strange mental power. That's _that_
sorted out, then. Now look, that lad's heading into trouble. I can
_smell_ trouble . . .

OTTO Are you some kind of vere volf?

GASPODE That's right, I get hairy every full moon imagine how much that
interferes with my social life. Now, look . . .

SACHARISSA But surely dogs can't talk?

GASPODE Oh dear, oh dear. Did I say I was talking?

SACHARISSA Well, not in so many words.

GASPODE Right. Now, I just seen a hundred dollars of my money walk out
of here into terrible danger and I want to see it walk back. Dangerous
man, Lord de Worde.

SACHARISSA But he wouldn't _hurt_ William, would he?

GASPODE I'm not a betting man. But if he does, we still get the hundred
dollars, right?

OTTO Ve cannot stand by und let him do zis. I like Villiam. He tries to
be a nice person. Ve must help him.

_They exit as the lights black out._

SCENE TWELVE

_Back at the deserted house._ WILLIAM _enters, with a lantern._ LORD DE
WORDE _appears silently before him._

LORD DE WORDE Ah, William. I thought you'd come here. I think this
nonsense has got to stop now, don't you?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I think it _is_ stopping, father. I just want to hear
the truth from you.

LORD DE WORDE _(with a sigh)_ The truth? I just had the best interests
of the city at heart, you know.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, that's where it becomes difficult, doesn't it? I
mean, _everyone_ says that kind of thing, don't they? 'I did it for the
best', 'The end justifies the means' . . .

LORD DE WORDE But don't you agree it's time for a ruler who listens to
the people?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(taking out his notebook)_ Maybe. Which people did you
have in mind?

LORD DE WORDE You're going to put this in that _rag_ of a news paper,
aren't you? You can't prove anything. You know that.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I can prove enough. The rest will become a matter of .
. . inquiry. Vimes, you know, is called Vetinari's little terrier. He'll
dig and dig and he won't let go.

LORD DE WORDE _puts his hand on his sword._

LORD DE WORDE You have no honour, do you? Well publish and be damned to
you. And the Watch. We gave no order to . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE I expect you didn't. I expect you said 'make it so' and
left all the details to Pin and Tulip. Bloody hands at arms' length.

LORD DE WORDE As your father, I order you to stop this . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE You _used_ to order me to tell the truth.

LORD DE WORDE Oh, William, William! Don't be so naive!

WILLIAM DE WORDE And which truth is this? The truth that is stranger
than fiction? Or the truth that's still putting its boots on when a
rumour is running round the world? I think Mr Pin was going to try to
blackmail you and, you know, so am I, naive as I am. You're going to
leave the city. Right now. And you'd better hope that nothing happens to
me, or anyone I know.

LORD DE WORDE Really?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(shouting)_ Right now! Have you gone deaf as well as
insane? Right now and don't come back because if you do I'll publish
every damn word you've just said. _(He pulls out the_ DISORGANISER.)
Every damn word! And not even Mr Slant will be able to grease your way
out of that! Get out of the city! Now, either draw that sword or take .
. . your . . . hand off it! _(Quieter)_ The truth _has_ got its boots
on. And it's going to start kicking. I told you to take your hand off
that sword.

LORD DE WORDE So silly. So silly. And I believed you were my son.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh yes, that reminds me. You know one of the dwarfs'
customs? No, of course you don't because they're not really people to
you, are they?

_He takes out a bag of jewels and throws it at_ LORD DE WORDE'_s feet._

LORD DE WORDE And this is . . . ?

WILLIAM DE WORDE There's more than twenty thousand in there. That must
cover everything I've cost you, over the years. School fees, clothes,
everything. I'm buying myself off, you see.

LORD DE WORDE Oh I see. The dramatic gesture. Do you really think family
is a matter of _money?_

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, yes. Money, land, titles. It's amazing how
infrequently de Wordes marry someone who hasn't at least _two_ out of
three. I got that money off a man who tried to kill me.

LORD DE WORDE _(surprised)_ Tried to kill you?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Why, yes. You're surprised? If you throw something in
the air, don't you have to worry where it bounces?

LORD DE WORDE Indeed you do.

_He gestures and four thugs enter._

You've been overdoing it. You need a holiday. A long sea voyage. Small
sums of money will be sent to you periodically.

_The thugs take a step towards_ WILLIAM. OTTO _appears, suddenly._

OTTO _(speaking to one of the thugs)_ Good evenink. Oh, vot am I
thinking of? Put zem up in zer traditional Ankh-Morpork vay.

THUG Put them up? Blow that!

_Strobe. Fight._ _OTTO_ _flattens each of the thugs. He then turns to_
LORD DE WORDE,, _crossing to him and 'lifting' him off his feet._

OTTO Ve haf people like you back home. Zey are zer vuns who tell zer mob
vot to do. I come to Ankh-Morpork because I hear it is different, but
always zere are zer same damn people. Vot shall I do viz you?

_He looks down at his jacket and pulls off his temperance badge._

Zere. I never liked zat damn cocoa anyvay.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Otto!

OTTO You think I bite him? Shall I bite you, Mr Lordship? Veil, maybe
not, because Villiam here sinks I am a good person.

_He pulls_ LORD DE WORDE _to him._

Now, maybe I not have to ask myself how good am I? I just have to ask
myself, am I better zan_you?_

_He pauses a second, then pulls_ LORD DE WORDE _to him and kisses_ _him
on the forehead. He releases him and pats him on the head._

Actually, maybe zer cocoa is not _too_ bad and zer young lady who plays
zer harmonium, sometimes she vinks at me.

LORD DE WORDE How dare you . . . !

WILLIAM DE WORDE Shut up! Now I'll tell you what's going to happen. I'm
not going to name names. That's my decision. I don't want my mother to
have been married to a traitor, you see. I'm not going to tell the whole
truth. But those who want to know these things will find out soon
enough. And I expect they'll sort something out quietly. You know . . .
just like you do.

LORD DE WORDE _(offended)_ Traitor? (WILLIAM _nods)_ I could not
possibly take the money. I wish you joy of it, _my_ _son._ Because you
are most certainly a de Worde. Good day to you.

_He walks quietly out._

OTTO Are you OK, Villiam?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I feel sick but, yeah, I'm all right. Of all the
bone-headed, stubborn, self-centred, arrogant . . .

OTTO But you make up for it in ozzer vays.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I _meant_ my father!

OTTO OH.

WILLIAM DE WORDE He's just so certain he's right all the time . . .

OTTO Sorry, this is still your father ve're talking about?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Are you saying I'm _like_ him?

OTTO Oh no. Qyite different. Absolutely qvite different. No similarities
votsoever.

WILLIAM DE WORDE OK. Did I say thank you?

OTTO NO.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Oh dear.

OTTO But you _noticed_ zat you did not and zat is good, yes? So, now it
is time for medals and avards, yes?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Not quite. I must nip back to my lodgings to freshen
up. And _then_ I think I may have some explaining to do to Commander
Vimes back at the press.

_Blackout._

SCENE THIRTEEN

_The lodgings._ MRS ARCANUM, MRS MACKLEDUFF _and_ MR CARTWRIGHT _are
on._ MRS MACKLEDUFF _is reading the latest_ _issue of_ The Times.
WILLIAM _enters as soon as he can get there._

MRS ARCANUM What happened to the real paper, then?

MRS MACKLEDUFF Couldn't get it, so I had to get us this one instead.

_She hands copies to_ MRS ARCANUM _and_ MR CARTWRIGHT.

CARTWRIGHT Anything in it?

MRS MACKLEDUFF Oh . . . Lord Vetinari got away with it.

CARTWRIGHT Well, of course he would. Very clever man, so they say.

MRS ARCANUM _(calling, off)_ Is that you, Mr de Worde? Cup of tea?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(entering_ Er . . . no thanks, Mrs Arcanum. No time.
Oh, what's in the paper then?

CARTWRIGHT Lot of political stuff. All a bit far-fetched. Vetinari got
off.

MRS MACKLEDUFF Any good vegetables today?

CARTWRIGHT No. My firm's thinking of approaching that man to see if we
can sell his seeds for him. Only those vegetables suitable for a family
environment of course, Mrs Arcanum.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Surely it's quite important? If Vetinari's not guilty?

MRS ARCANUM I've always thought Lord Vetinari was a most handsome man.
_(She coughs, embarrassedly)_ I mean, I've always wondered why there
isn't a Lady Vetinari, as it were. Ahem.

CARTWRIGHT Oh well, you know what they say.

WILLIAM DE WORDE _bangs on the table, then grabs_ MR

CARTWRIGHT _by his lapels._

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, Mr Cartwright, I _don't_ know what they say! But
_you_ know what they say! Why don't you tell us what they say? And tell
us _who_ told _you??_

MRS ARCANUM Mr de Worde! Really!

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm very sorry, Mrs Arcanum, but I want to know what
everyone knows and I want to know how they know it. Mr Cartwright?

CARTWRIGHT Well. They _say_ he's got some sort of lady friend who's very
important in uberwald.

WILLIAM DE WORDE That's it? So what? It's a friendly country! Look!
/wrote that article in _The Timesl_ Me! I found things out, checked
things and people tried to kill me! I'm not the man who's the brother of
some man you met in the pub! I'm not some stupid rumour put about to
make trouble! So just remember that before you start that 'everyone
knows' stuff! And I've got to go _right now_ to see Commander Vimes and
whoever's the Patrician and try to sort this lot out! All because I
wanted people to know things that are _important!_

MRS MACKLEDUFF _You_ write this?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _Yes!_

MRS MACKLEDUFF I thought they had . . . special people . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE There isn't a they. There's just me and a young lady.
We write it all!

MRS ARCANUM But who tells you what to put in?

WILLIAM DE WORDE We just decide.

MR CARTWRIGHT _raises his hand._

Yes, Mr Cartwright?

CARTWRIGHT I've quite an important question, actually, what with you
knowing all this stuff . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes?

CARTWRIGHT Have you got the address of the funny vegetable man?

_Blackout._

SCENE FOURTEEN

_CARNEY'S_ _print room._ WILLIAM, SACHARISSA, OTTO, GUNILLA, BODDONY,
VIMES _and_ ANGUA _are on._ VIMES _is_ _reading the current issue._
WILLIAM _looks over his shoulder._

VIMES It's very good. But I need to know _names._ I think you know the
names. And where they met. Things like that.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Some things are a mystery to me. But you've more than
enough evidence to release Lord Vetinari.

VIMES I need to know _more._ Come on, Mr de Worde, we're on the same
side.

WILLIAM DE WORDE No. We're on different sides that happen to be side by
side.

VIMES You assaulted one of my officers.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Really? They weren't in uniform. They didn't identify
themselves to me.

VIMES I could arrest you for withholding evidence.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I demand a lawyer.

VIMES Who?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mr Slant.

VIMES _Slant_ will come out for _you?_

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yep. Guaranteed.

VIMES Look, we don't really need all this, do we? It's the duty of every
citizen to help the Watch.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I know the _Watch_ think it is. But I've never seen
that written down.

VIMES I have reason to believe that you are withholding information
about a major crime and that _is_ an offence.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mr Slant will come up with something. He'll go back
hundreds of years if need be.

VIMES Between you and me, and without your notebook, Mr Slant is a
devious dead bastard who can bend such law as we have into a puzzle
ring.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yep. And he's my lawyer. Guaranteed.

VIMES I could just take you into protective custody.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Protecting from whom?

VIMES Well, I personally have an overwhelming urge to give you a ding
alongside the ear, but I suspect there are others out there without my
self-control.

SLANT _enters._

SLANT Ah, Vimes. I heard you were harassing my client.

VIMES He is withholding information.

SLANT I would argue that if withholding information from the Watch were
a crime, then every citizen would be guilty. Might I speak to my client
in private?

_He and_ WILLIAM _move to one side._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Mr Slant, I do not wish to tell Commander Vimes how and
where I get my information. If I have to, I will have to reveal _all_ of
it.

SLANT _(clearing his throat)_ You really believe those two men had
accomplices?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _draws the Disorganiser out of his pocket._

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm sure of it. I'd say it was a matter of . . .
_record._

SLANT Such a witchhunt would not be in the public interest. This is, I
would suggest, a time for reconciliation.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Good. So you will be able to have a quiet word with
Commander Vimes?

SLANT But of course . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE _And_ will you have one of your special private words
in the ear of the Engravers Guild?

SLANT I shall do my best. And, of course, for such an . . . honoured
client . . . I would be prepared to reduce my fee to . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Nothing.

SLANT Er . . . yes, quite.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And was Mr Scrope elected as Patrician?

SLANT Yes.

WILLIAM DE WORDE By the unanimous vote of the Guilds?

SLANT I don't think I have to tell you . . .

WILLIAM _pulls out the Disorganiser._

The Beggars and the Seamstresses voted to adjourn. So did the Launderers
and the Guild of Exotic Dancers.

WILLIAM DE WORDE So that would be Queen Molly, Mrs Palm, Mrs Manger and
Miss Dixie Voom. What an interesting life Lord Vetinari must have lead.

SLANT No comment. But that is, in fact, the reason I am here. I came to
see Commander Vimes.

_They move back over to_ VIMES.

VIMES Oh?

SLANT Mr Scrope has in fact been taken ill. He sent a note.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Was it signed by his mother?

SLANT I'm sorry?

WILLIAM DE WORDE So - does the city not have a ruler?

SLANT Happily, Lord Vetinari is not only innocent of all charges but
feeling much better after the vicious attack. He said that he will be at
the helm momentarily.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Splendid. So, er, Commander? Do you and I have anything
further to discuss?

VIMES Not right at this moment.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well I must start work on the next edition. The right
to free speech is a fine old Ankh-Morpork tradition.

VIMES Is it? Is it really? How did that one survive when helping the
Watch didn't?

SLANT I couldn't say, your grace. But Mr de Worde is, I believe, a young
man who would not go out of his way to upset the smooth running of the
city?

WILLIAM _smiles and bows, slightly. Blackout._

_Lights up. The next day._ WILLIAM _is on._ BODDONY _and_ GUNILLA _are
at work on the press, watched by_ SACHARISSA. LORD VETINARI _enters._

LORD VETINARI No, please don't bother. This is meant to be an informal
visit.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Are you all right, sir?

LORD VETINARI Oh yes. Busy, of course. Such a lot of reading to catch up
on. But I thought I should take a moment to come and see this free press
Commander Vimes told me about at such length. However, it appears to be
firmly bolted down.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er, no, sir. 'Free' in the sense of what is printed,
sir.

LORD VETINARI But surely you charge money?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Yes, but . . .

LORD VETINARI Oh, I _see._ You meant _you_ should be free to print what
you like?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(carefully)_ Well . . . broadly, yes, sir.

LORD VETINARI Because that's what's in the . . . What was the other
interesting term? Oh yes . . . the public interest?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I think so, sir.

LORD VETINARI Stories about man-eating goldfish and husbands
disappearing in silver dishes?

WILLIAM DE WORDE No, that's what the public is interested in, sir. We do
the other stuff.

LORD VETINARI Amusingly-shaped vegetables?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Well, yes, sir, but at least they're _real_ vegetables.

LORD VETINARI So - we have what the public are interested in, and human
interest stories, which is what humans are interested in, and the
_public_ interest, which no-one is interested in?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Er . . . except the public.

LORD VETINARI Which isn't the same as people and humans? _You_ mean that
the public is a different thing from the public you see walking about
the place. The public thinks big, sensible, measured thoughts while
_people_ run around doing silly things?

WILLIAM DE WORDE I think so. Though I may have to work on that idea.

LORD VETINARI Well, I can see you have an eventful future ahead of you
and I wouldn't wish to make it any more difficult than it is clearly
going to be.

_He glances over at the text being set by_ BODDONY.

That's 'i' before 'e' except after 'c', I think you'll find.

BODDONY But how . . . ?

LORD VETINARI Things that are back to front are often easier to
comprehend if they are upside down as well. In life as in politics.

WILLIAM DE WORDE What have you done with Charlie?

LORD VETINARI Why nothing. Should I have done something?

SACHARISSA Have you locked him up in a deep, dark cell and make him wear
a mask all the time?

LORD VETINARI Er, no, I don't _think_ so. Although it would make a very
good story, I've no doubt. No, I understand he's enrolled in the Guild
of Actors. I forsee a happy career for him - children's parties and so
on.

SACHARISSA What . . . being you?

LORD VETINARI Indeed. Very risible. Any more questions, Mr de Worde?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Lots. _The Times_ will be taking a close interest in
civic affairs.

LORD VETINARI How commendable. I'm sure Drumknott will be able to find
space for you in my schedule . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Whenever your lordship wishes for an interview, _The
Times_ will be quite prepared to grant you one.

LORD VETINARI The Times? Oh, you mean you and this young lady here? Oh I
_see._ It's like 'The Public'.

WILLIAM DE WORDE I'm sure we can pull together, sir.

LORD VETINARI Oh, I do hope not. Pulling together is the aim of
despotism and tyranny. Free men pull in all kinds of directions. It's
the only way to make progress. That and, of course, moving with . . .
the times. Good day to you.

_He exits._

WILLIAM DE WORDE Right. Well, where are the new reporters?

SACHARISSA I've sent them out to find out things that people want to put
in the paper.

WILLIAM DE WORDE And things people _don't_ want to see in the paper.

SACHARISSA And interesting things like that rain of dogs a few days ago?

WILLIAM DE WORDE _One_ puppy fell out of an upstairs window. Let's stick
to the facts, shall we? News is . . . News all depends. We'll know it
when we see it. _(He shakes his head)_ No. Let's go.

_Effect of pulsing light on the press, plus sound effect - to give the_
_impression that the press is a living organism._

SACHARISSA What?

WILLIAM DE WORDE Let's go. Out. Now - for a cup of tea, or a walk, or
shopping. Come on, before it realises. Before it finds a way to stop us.

SACHARISSA What are you talking about? There's a lot of work to do!

WILLIAM DE WORDE It'll still be there tomorrow . . . I mean, would it
really matter if you and I took an afternoon off? It doesn't _say_
anywhere that we have to publish every day, does it?

SACHARISSA Except at the top of the news paper.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But you can't believe _everything_ you read in the
papers!

SACHARISSA Well, I suppose it wouldn't hurt, for an hour or so . . .

WILLIAM DE WORDE Come on!

_As he turns to exit with_ SACHARISSA, SAMUEL ARBLASTER _runs_ _in,
followed by_ FLORRIE PERRY.

ARBLASTER Quick, oh quick! It was a terrible scene!

WILLIAM DE WORDE Who are _you?_

ARBLASTER Samuel Arblaster, forty-three, stone-mason of l lb the Scours.
A-Watch-man-made-a-death-defying-leap-to-rescue-an-old-lady.

FLORRIE I saw it, too. Mrs Florrie Perry, blonde mother of three, from
Treacle Mine Road. It-was-a-scene-of-car-nage.

WILLIAM DE WORDE But . . .

FLORRIE _and_ ARBLASTER _cross to the press._

SACHARISSA Look at it this way. Some people are heroes. And some people
take down notes. And sometimes they're the same person.

WILLIAM DE WORDE You think that's really true?

SACHARISSA _Really_ true? _(She shrugs)_ Who knows? This is a news
paper, isn't it? It just has to be true until tomorrow.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Are you . . . sure?

SACHARISSA Oh yes. True until tomorrow is good enough for me.

WILLIAM DE WORDE Right. That press needs feeding. It's always hungry.

SACHARISSA And nothing has to be true forever - just for long enough, to
tell you the truth. Come on . . .

SACHARISSA _starts to run off._

WILLIAM DE WORDE _(calling off-stage to_ GUNILLA) Gunilla? There's a hot
story coming in - hold the front page!

_He starts to run off as the lights black out._
