Contents

Cover

From _Snuff_

Also by Miss Felicity Beedle

Title Page

Dedication

Foreword and Hopeful Note to Parents by Miss Felicity Beedle, Author

Chapter 1. Arriving for the First Time in Ankh-Morpork

Chapter 2. A Trip to the Park and a New Friend

Chapter 3. A Visit to the Dragon Sanctuary

Chapter 4. A Trip to the Menagerie and Conversation with a Gargoyle

Chapter 5. A Lunch at the Guild of Plumbers and Dunnakin Divers

Chapter 6. An Adventure with Sir Harry King

Copyright

‘Vimes looked at the cover. The title was _The World of Poo_. When his
wife was out of eyeshot he carefully leafed through it. Well, okay, you
had to accept that the world had moved on and these days fairy stories
were probably not going to be about twinkly little things with wings. As
he turned page after page, it dawned on him that whoever had written
this book, they certainly knew what would make kids like Young Sam laugh
until they were nearly sick. The bit about sailing down the river almost
made _him_ smile. But interspersed with the scatology was actually quite
interesting stuff about septic tanks and dunnakin divers and gongfermors
and how dog muck helped make the very best leather, and other things
that you never thought you would need to know, but once heard somehow
lodged in your mind.

Apparently it was by the author of _Wee_ and if Young Sam had one vote
for the best book ever written, then it would go to _Wee_. His
enthusiasm was perhaps fanned all the more because a rare imp of
mischief in Vimes led him to do all the necessary straining noises.’

From _Snuff_

_Also by Miss Felicity Beedle_

Melvin and the Enormous Boil

Geoffrey and the Magic Pillow Case

The Little Duckling Who Thought He Was an Elephant

Daphne and the Nose Pickers

Gaston’s Enormous Problem

The Wee Wee Men

The War with the Snot Goblins

Geoffrey and the Land of Poo

The Boy Who Didn’t Know How to Pick His Own Scabs

The Joy of Earwax

[title-page]

[Image]

FOREWORD AND HOPEFUL NOTE TO PARENTS BY MISS FELICITY BEEDLE, AUTHOR

WHAT TO TELL children about the reality of the human world is always a
subject very close to the thoughts of all parents; traditionally,
requests from young ones for enlightenment as to where babies come from
can be steered in the direction of the stork and the gooseberry bush
with no great harm done. Although, of course, when the child is, shall
we say, of the age to understand, the parent should make haste to see
that they are fully informed. In a well-run household this ought to be
achievable without too much blushing, if the parents are sensible.

However, I fervently believe that not to talk to children about what
goes into and out of their bodies, is to let the subject become furtive
with a tendency to cause sniggering. What we eat and subsequently
excrete plays a major role in human society and especially in what we
are pleased to call civilized society. In my experience the thinking of
intelligent parents, faced with the subject, tends to fall between two
stools, as it were. Surely we can do better than saying it’s nasty?

Our touchstone here is the commonality of mankind: kings and queens and
even the likes of our own Lord Vetinari have to eat and excrete. Why
should this be a subject of comment or mirth to anyone? Therefore, I
decided that young Geoffrey might have a little stroll through what we
may call the underside of our world, facing it with interest, curiosity
and common sense; after all, one man’s waste is another man’s compost.
On this particular point, I must say that I was brought up in the
countryside where, on a weekly basis, the night soil was buried in the
garden, in an area set aside to be the recipient. I can recall, along
with many of my countryfolk, that tomatoes would grow on that site the
following year without anyone having to make shift to plant them. And
what marvellous tomatoes they were!

As they say, what goes around comes around, although you don’t have to
look at it as it floats past. But acting like a cat and believing that
if you can’t see it then it’s not there is no way for polite society to
behave. Without muck, without dung, there would be no agriculture and
without agriculture there would be no people worth talking about.

And so I dedicate this book to my old friend Sir Harry King, a man who
can turn dung into gold!

[Image]

ARRIVING FOR THE FIRST TIME IN ANKH-MORPORK

IT WAS A long journey for young Geoffrey from his home in the Shires to
his Grand-mama’s house in the big city of Ankh-Morpork. For the first
time in his life he was travelling alone in the coach and he sat,
looking out of the window, feeling a bit scared but also a bit excited.
There had been so much going on at home; Cook had said that Mama was
having great expectations. Quite what that meant no one would tell him,
but he did know he’d been moved out of his nursery and was promised a
whole new room of his own with space to keep his model boats and his
collection of interesting sticks and potato-shaped objects, which was
some consolation. And Papa was always busy going off to foreign places
on ‘business’, which meant that he was hardly ever there. The upshot of
all this was a suggestion that Geoffrey visit his Grand-mama while
developments took place.

[Image]

The landscape gradually changed from hills and forests and farms to
acres and acres of cabbages on either side of the road like an endless
greeny-yellow sea.

There was no sound apart from the rumbling of the coach wheels and the
occasional soft trumpeting of the horses’ farting. What with that and
the cabbages, Geoffrey’s world became quite a smelly place. If
greeny-yellow could have a smell, Geoffrey thought, it would smell like
this, as if the whole world had farted at once.

He knew he was getting near the city when the smell changed to that of
wood-smoke and sooty chimneys and, more than anything else, something a
bit like the gardener’s outdoor privy at home.¹ If this smell could have
a colour, thought Geoffrey, it would probably be brown.²

The coach rumbled through the Least Gate and Geoffrey saw, for the first
time, City Watchmen in uniforms, dray-horses pulling massive high-sided
carts, and tall buildings looming up and blocking out the sky. He saw
the commotion and hustle of a street market where pedlars and
greengrocers and butchers were shouting out their wares: more people in
one place than he had ever seen in his life. After a while, the streets
lined with plane trees grew wider and quieter, and the houses had
gardens and looked quite grand. The coach gradually slowed and stopped
and Thomas, the groom, came around and opened the door with a flourish.

‘Here we are, young sir. Number five Nonesuch Street, your Grand-mama’s
house.’

Geoffrey climbed down on to the wide pavement and looked up at the tall
house. There were railings and a gate, and a short path leading to steps
up to an imposing front door and portico.³ Thomas took him by the hand
and together they climbed the steps. Thomas pulled the bell-pull and
there came a distant ringing from inside the house. Geoffrey suddenly
felt a little bit frightened. He had, of course, met his Grand-mama a
few times, but only when she visited his home. Such occasions were
always preceded by his Mama being a bit short-tempered, a lecture on
remembering to say ‘please’ and ‘thank-you’, a scurrying of maids, a
smell of polish and his Papa retiring hurriedly to his study.

The door creaked open and a tall thin figure dressed all in black and
wearing fearsome spectacles looked down at him. He recognized his
Grand-mama, who quickly bent down to give him a kiss before he had time
to flinch, or pull his head between his shoulder blades like a tortoise.
She didn’t say, ‘My how you’ve grown’ or ‘How was your journey?’ or
even, ‘How are you?’ But she took him by the hand, and said, ‘I’m so
pleased you’ve come to stay, Geoffrey. I expect you’d like some cake.’

[Image]

Standing behind his Grand-mama in the doorway was a sour-faced maid
wearing black and white and looking like a penguin that had inexplicably
found a lemon to suck on. ‘This is Lily,’ said Grand-mama. ‘She will
take you to your room and show you where to wash your hands before we
have tea.’

Lily looked so disapproving and unfriendly that Geoffrey was very
grateful that she was just the maid and not someone who might be
inclined to kiss him. He thought he’d be lucky to keep his nose if she
did. He wasn’t to know, but Lily’s life had been somewhat enriched by
being the eldest in a family that otherwise consisted of eleven boys. In
her experience small boys were nothing but trouble and the main cause of
dirt, untidiness and noise. In her somewhat jaundiced view, the only
difference between small boys and small dogs was that small boys
couldn’t be left chained up outside.

Lily picked up Geoffrey’s small trunk and, indicating that he should
follow her, started up a series of narrowing staircases to the very top
of the house and a door marked Nursery. Lily opened the door and put
down the trunk.

 

[Image]

‘There’s water in the basin for you to wash your face and hands,’ she
said. ‘Don’t leave the soap in the water, don’t leave the towel on the
floor and don’t splash about. When you’re done, young master, come
straight down to the dining room for tea.’ With that Lily left, not
exactly slamming the door, but closing it, he thought, with a half-slam
– or perhaps it could be called a sl—, because it bounced back
afterwards.

Geoffrey could hardly take in all the treasures he could see in the
room. There was a stuffed dragon hanging from the ceiling, piles of old
books, a skipping rope which he looked at with a sneer, a very worn
teddy bear and, best of all, a large wooden rocking horse which had a
real mane and leather bridle. He was, however, feeling quite hungry and
a bit scared of Lily, so after a quick look around and a wash he found
his way downstairs to his Grand-mama and cake.

[Image]

After tea, Grand-mama suggested that Geoffrey might like to explore the
garden. She showed him the door to the conservatory, and at the far end
of this the small glazed door that led down some steps to a gravelled
path between tall hedges. Geoffrey wandered along the path, around a
corner and found himself this time at the top of a large area of lawn
and flowerbeds. In the distance he could see an orchard and a vegetable
patch and a collection of old sheds.⁴

Geoffrey made a bee-line towards the sheds. In his experience they were
often the most interesting thing in a garden. As he walked under the
ancient apple trees he felt something fall on his head. It was heavier
than a leaf and was wet but not cold. He put his hand up to feel
something slimy in his hair. As he looked with some dismay at the
greeny-white mess across his fingers he heard a jolly voice behind him
boom: ‘Do you know what that is, my lad?’

[Image]

‘No,’ said Geoffrey, turning round.

‘That’s bird poo,’ said the voice’s owner, who was leaning on a fork,
smoking a pipe. ‘It’s very good luck when a bird chooses to poo on your
head,⁵ young shaver, and the first bit of good luck coming to you is a
Sto Lat pippin, which is the sweetest apple in the world.’

 

[Image]

As he spoke, the old man polished a shiny red apple industriously on his
waistcoat before handing it to Geoffrey. ‘My name, as writ down on my
birth certificate, is Humphrey Twaddle, but no one calls me that
nowadays on account of when they do I hits them with my fork. You can
call me Plain Old Humphrey. Although I owe it to my ancestors to tell
you, young man, that far from meaning a load of old rubbish, “twaddle”
is a valuable ingredient in the making of lemonade. Not many people know
that, but now there’s one more,’ he said. ‘I’m the gardener here, and if
I were you I’d wipe my hand on the grass over there rather than on that
smart white shirt of yours.’

[Image]

Geoffrey did as he was told and then decided that if bird poo was going
to bring him good luck he ought to try to keep what was left of it. He
raced back through the conservatory into the house and looked around
until he found a large pair of scissors in a sewing basket. He ran all
the way up to the nursery and, peering into a mottled old mirror, cut
off as much of the clumpy bird-poo-hair as he could and put it on the
windowsill to dry out.

[Image]

It was beginning to get too dark to see much outside and Geoffrey began
to feel a bit lonely. He wandered downstairs to find his Grand-mama.

‘It’s been a long and busy day,’ said Grand-mama from her big armchair,
‘and I think it’s time for bed. You may take a candle to go up and you
may leave it alight if you like. Don’t forget to say hello to Mister
Lavatory on the way and I shall soon be up to tuck you in.’

Holding his candle, Geoffrey started back up the stairs. He wasn’t
normally afraid of the dark but the flickering candlelight made strange
shadows on the faces in the big old portraits hanging on the walls. He
hurried along the passage to the big mahogany door Lily had pointed out
earlier as the water closet. He’d heard the term before, but nothing had
prepared him for the fantastic sight that now met his eyes. Shiny white
tiles glistened like running water and there was a large china
hand-basin with painted flowers and, at the far end of the room, a great
throne-like construction. This had a huge wooden seat with a large hole
in it and underneath what looked like a small chest of drawers but
without the handles. A gleaming copper pipe joined the chest to a vast
dark-green tank attached to the wall near the ceiling. Hanging down from
the tank was a long chain finishing in a round knob. On the tank were
letters that he had to think about and spell out in his head.

[Image]

Geoffrey knew in theory the function of this marvel but he was mystified
and intrigued by its operation. He worked out that the chain was there
to be pulled, but it was too high for him to reach. He could only manage
to do so by clambering on to the wooden seat and had to be careful not
to fall into the hole. Looking down into the still pool beneath him he
gave the chain a sharp tug and was astonished at the torrent of water
that rushed into the bowl: a deluge indeed. He was even more amazed
when, as the water came down, the chain pulled him inexorably up into
the air. He held on tightly and, as gently as he had risen, he was
deposited back down on to the seat. Even so, Geoffrey wasn’t certain
whether he wanted to be lifted up in the air twice in one day,
especially when there was bubbling water beneath him. He decided that he
needed daylight to get the full benefit of the contraption and, taking
his candle, made his way up to his room.

He set his candle on the small table beside the bed then searched in the
usual place – which was, of course, under the bed – for the familiar
receptacle known in polite circles as the pot, the po, the necessary, or
the gazunder.

His business done, Geoffrey jumped up into the small bed, which had a
well-used, comfortable feel about it, and suddenly found himself missing
his mother and his bedtime story. But before he had too much time to
think, the door of the nursery opened gently and something wonderful
happened. A small brown-and-white puppy with stubby little legs, floppy
ears and a frantically wagging tail was pushed into the room. Without
further ado, it rushed across the floor, jumped on his bed and started
licking his face. Grand-mama followed the puppy into the room and pulled
up a chair to the bedside. ‘I thought you might be a bit lonely, so I
brought you a friend.’

[Image]

‘What’s his name?’ asked Geoffrey with delight.

‘Well, from the little puddle he’s just left outside your bedroom door
while we were waiting to come in, I think I’d call him Widdler if I were
you,’ said Grand-mama. ‘Like you he’s very young and misses his mother,
so you’ll just have to look after each other. Now, would you like me to
read you a story?’

‘Oh, yes please,’ said Geoffrey, as he settled down under the covers.
But with Widdler curled up beside him he was happily asleep within
minutes. Grand-mama blew out the candle and quietly slipped back down
the stairs.

¹ The simplest form of privy is a hole in the ground. Mankind, being
ingenious, especially where it leads to reducing discomfort, soon
devised easier ways of aiming over a hole in the ground without coming
directly into contact with the cold earth. The idea progressed to
building small sheds with a nice comfy seat with a hole in it, or even
two or three holes for convivial occasions. And thus the basic domestic
privy was invented.

In hot weather it was a rich olfactory experience, which enabled the
user to find the place on a dark night and without a candle. In the
circumstances, this was probably a good thing if it was a very old and
ripe privy, because no one should be standing anywhere near it with a
naked flame. In cold weather there was less impact on the nose but the
nether parts could well be exposed to a chilly draught, and proceedings
were often hasty and unsatisfactory.

Sooner or later a hole in the ground, even if constructed carefully,
would fill up. One solution was to move the privy and leave the hole
behind. Eventually, the privy would have moved so far that a trip to the
‘Chapel of Easement’ might involve a walk of several miles and a packed
lunch. The other option was to empty the privy. An intrepid band of
craftsmen emerged; their sole job in life was to empty privies and
dispose of their contents. These faecal heroes were known as night-soil
men or gongfermors, and we shall meet them briefly later. They didn’t
have many friends, except for those of the same occupation … However,
they were well respected and as they walked down the street everyone
would very quickly step out of their way and let them pass.

² The good citizens of Ankh-Morpork burn coal, wood, dried dung and,
when no other alternative beckons, anything that can be persuaded to go
up in flames. There are forges and foundries along with dye-works,
tanneries and slaughterhouses. In fact every smelly occupation you could
think of, and some that you wouldn’t like to think of. In addition, with
so many animals passing through and with so many people staying put, the
heavy sullen smell of poo, in all its varieties, is the main melody in
which the other smells are merely the high notes.

³ Actually, at the time young Geoffrey didn’t know it was a portico, but
it was a portico all right and the fact that he didn’t know it was a
portico didn’t stop it being one.

⁴ Once you have one old shed somehow you always end up with another one,
and after that anything can happen.

⁵ The belief that a bird pooing on your head is good luck is common to
many cultures. When you ask why, the ribald reply is often, ‘Well, it
weren’t a cow.’ In fact birds were often perceived as messengers of the
gods and their movements (both geographical and biological) as part of
some divine plan. Needless to say only those endowed with arcane
knowledge could understand the particular message in bird poo. However,
it is believed that some Ephebian philosophers stood for hours under
trees hoping for ‘a message’ – which they got, but invariably the
message was that they should soon clean their jackets.

Bird poo is one of nature’s special garnishes. A bird’s insides are
cunningly designed to preserve fluid and the slimy green poo is iced
with white solid wee, as every schoolboy knows, or did, back in the days
when schoolboys knew such things.

⁶ Sir Charles Lavatory is the president of the Guild of Plumbers and
Dunnakin Divers in Ankh-Morpork. Geoffrey will make his acquaintance
before too long.

[Image]

A TRIP TO THE PARK AND A NEW FRIEND

VERY EARLY THE next morning Geoffrey ventured back into the water
closet. He sat on the seat with his legs dangling while Widdler the dog
ran round in circles unravelling a roll of soft paper, clearly in some
kind of dog heaven. Geoffrey felt like a king on his grand throne.
Indeed, like many a king, he was perched on the edge precariously, quite
concerned that if he wasn’t careful he might slip off; in his case, into
the great bowl and its contents below. Eventually, the business at hand
being finished, Geoffrey was pleased to see he wouldn’t have to climb up
again to reach the chain because someone had very kindly added a length
of cord with a cotton reel on the end so it was low enough for him to
reach with ease.

 

[Image]

[Image]

Picking up Widdler, Geoffrey wandered down to the kitchen hoping to find
some breakfast. The big kitchen seemed empty but, as in many kitchens in
old houses, there was a lot of life going on out of sight. There were
rats romping along the drains, biting through pipes and the backs of
cupboards, and popping up in the sink and through the skirting board.
There were all manner of beetles and weevils and spiders and, in the
damp corner under the sink, a collection of snails stuck to the wall. As
Geoffrey opened a cupboard or two, hoping to find something to eat, he
heard a scurrying scratchy sound coming from behind the pantry door.
Between a pot of raspberry jam and a large jar of pickled eggs sat a
small grey mouse. The mouse looked at Geoffrey and Geoffrey looked at
the mouse. The mouse looked at Geoffrey again and then, possibly because
it wanted to, or perhaps because it was frightened, did a poo, followed
by another one and another one before running off.¹

Mice are like that. And all that Geoffrey was left with was a number of
small dark droppings, which he scooped up. I wonder if mouse poo is as
lucky as bird poo, he thought. I must ask Mister Twaddle.

[Image]

‘I wouldn’t put that in your pocket if I were you, my dear,’ said a
friendly voice behind him. ‘Let me see what I can find for you.’

 

[Image]

He turned round to see a jolly plump woman, standing in front of the old
range. ‘My name is Hartley,’ she said, handing him an empty matchbox,
‘and I’m the cook. After you’ve washed your hands really well I’ll cook
you some breakfast. How would you like a nice boiled egg and toast
soldiers?’

[Image]

After breakfast, Geoffrey helped Plain Old Humphrey feed the chickens
and collect the eggs. ‘Some of these eggs must be quite lucky,’ said
Geoffrey. ‘They’ve got chicken poo stuck to them.’²

Plain Old Humphrey scratched his head. ‘Well, there’s no doubt that when
bird poo lands on your head it brings good luck, but the bird’s got to
choose, see. Poo may not always be lucky but it’s certainly useful. I
use it in the garden. Look over here. I mix horse apples and straw in
with the garden waste and that rots down to the best compost you will
find. And the thing is, you’ll also find lots of worms there, who burrow
away, pooing to their hearts’ content, which helps to break it up and
make it good and fine.’³

Geoffrey went to put his hand into the smelly compost heap to find some
worm poo. ‘No, don’t do that,’ said Plain Old Humphrey. ‘I’m sure I can
find something that will make it easier for a likely young lad such as
you to start his own poo collection.’

He went off to one of his sheds and Geoffrey heard a clattering and
rattling and a nasty boingggg from within.⁴ Plain Old Humphrey emerged
with a garden hose wrapped around him like a snake, which he finally
managed to fight off and sling back into the shed. He disappeared again
before returning moments later with a bucket and spade.

[Image]

Taking the spade, Geoffrey carefully excavated a small hole at the
bottom of the great heap and uncovered a tangled knot of wriggling pink
worms. ‘What does worm poo look like?’ asked Geoffrey, bending down to
get closer to the worms.

‘Well, it’s quite difficult to spot in there,’ said Plain Old Humphrey,
‘but see the little curly heaps of soil over here on the grass? That’s
your worm poo, that is; it’s called worm casts.’ He brought out a
cobwebby old jam jar and trowel for this delicate work, and with a bit
of help, Geoffrey carefully transferred a sample of worm poo into the
jar.

Meanwhile, Widdler was running in circles and barking at nothing in
particular or anything in general. In the vegetable patch Geoffrey could
see a large black cat digging a hole. ‘What’s that cat doing?’ he asked.

‘That dratted cat,’ said Plain Old Humphrey through gritted teeth, ‘is
digging up my champion leeks again! I’ll swing for him, I will.’

‘Why is he digging?’

‘Because he’s doing a poo. And because cats is a bit particular. They
like to bury it when they’re done, and because they’re a bit lazy, they
like to bury it where I’ve already been digging.’ As the cat finished
its business and stalked off, Geoffrey moved purposefully towards the
spot, holding the bucket and spade. ‘I’d let that cool down a bit before
you dig it up,’ warned Plain Old Humphrey. ‘Mark the place with a stick
and collect it in a day or so. Pretty strong stuff your cat poo.⁵

‘Look, you must excuse me, lad, I need to pay a visit.’ Carefully
lighting his pipe and picking up an old copy of the _Almanak_, Plain Old
Humphrey made his way to his small personal privy between the compost
heaps and the hedge. ‘Why don’t you take that puppy of yours for a walk
in the park?’ he called over his shoulder.

‘Please may I wait until you come out?’ asked Geoffrey, holding up his
bucket.

‘No, you may not,’ replied Plain Old Humphrey firmly. ‘There are some
things a chap needs to do without being under observation, especially by
a small boy holding a bucket. Even if you can’t see him it tends to put
you off your stride, so off you go.’

Geoffrey stood on a pile of old seed boxes and, holding Widdler in his
arms, looked over the hedge and into the park. ‘Shall we go and explore,
Widdler?’ he said. Widdler wagged his tail so hard with excitement that
his whole body shook.

 

[Image]

They crawled through a hole in the hedge together, ran across the grass
and chased each other round and round in circles until Geoffrey fell
over. Out of the corner of his eye and not far away he saw another dog
stop, squat down and produce a small pile of poo before scuttling off.
Geoffrey wished he’d brought his bucket, and was standing looking at the
small brown heap, wondering how to get it home, when a voice asked: ‘Is
that yours?’

[Image]

‘No, I went before I came out,’ Geoffrey replied to the owner of the
voice, a shabbily dressed urchin with a bucket in his hand.

The boy looked satisfied. ‘Well, it’s mine then.’

‘What? Are you a poo collector, too?’ asked Geoffrey excitedly.

 

[Image]

‘I most certainly am! My name is Louis and I collect dog poo for Sir
Harry King. He’ll pay me a penny a bucketful if it’s well stamped down.
Extra too if it’s white dog poo – that’s the very best. We in the
business call it the “pure”.’

‘Is Sir Harry a collector?’ enquired Geoffrey with some interest.

‘No, he sells it to the tanning yards.’

‘Does he buy mouse poo?’ Geoffrey went on, fingering the matchbox in his
pocket.

‘Don’t know,’ said Louis with a shrug of his shoulders, ‘but if there’s
money in it Sir Harry King will collect it, trust me. He’s got a grand
house down at the corner of Dimwell and Grunefair, but he doesn’t keep
the poo there because Lady King won’t let him bring his work home. He
collects all the poo in Ankh-Morpork and deposits it in big yards
outside the City Gates.’

I’d very much like to meet Sir Harry, thought Geoffrey. He sounds like a
very sensible person.

‘Right, I’m off to deliver this to Sir Harry’s yard now,’ Louis declared
when the bucket was full and well stamped down.

‘Can I help you again tomorrow?’ asked Geoffrey.

Louis looked at him sideways. ‘Can’t afford to pay you,’ he said
quickly, ‘but if you like I’m mostly here in the early mornings when
people walk their dogs.

‘This is my patch!’ he added with pride. ‘I fought hard for this. You
just ask the Mitchell brothers: they won’t try to take it over again, oh
no, indeed. It’s a dog-eat-dog world, my friend, is the world of the
pure, and even if I say it myself, I’m one of the best. Sometimes I’m
there with my trowel before little Fido even knows he’s going to go.’
And with that, spotting a small straining figure across the park, the
lad was away as if he had wings on his heels – although what was really
on his heels was probably not wings …

[Image]

Geoffrey and Widdler crawled back under the hedge into Grand-mama’s
garden. Plain Old Humphrey didn’t seem to be around so they climbed the
stairs to the top of the house with a short diversion on the first-floor
landing where Geoffrey tried to look round the back of the suit of
armour. When he got to the nursery he saw with dismay that his lucky poo
was not on the windowsill where he’d left it, and neither were the
scissors.

‘Oh no! I’ve been tidied,’ he cried. ‘Being tidied’ was something that
occasionally happened at home, but since the time his most precious
stick had been tidied away (leading to long and recriminatory searches
in the rubbish bins), he was usually given a bit of warning.

He dashed down to the kitchen again, where Lily the maid was mopping the
floor. ‘Have you seen my lucky poo?’ he asked frantically. ‘I left it on
my windowsill with some scissors.’

‘Is that what it was?’ shrieked Lily. ‘That’s disgustin’, that is. I
threw it out the window and thems was my best scissors, too. Don’t you
go bringing any more dirt up into your bedroom, young man, or I’ll tell
your granny. And what’s that on your shoe?’

[Image]

Geoffrey went back outside hurriedly to find Plain Old Humphrey, who was
wandering down the path with the look of a man whose world was now a
more comfortable place. ‘Lily tidied out my lucky poo,’ he said. ‘I
don’t suppose I’ll ever be lucky enough to be chosen by a bird again.’

‘Never mind, my lad. Just you wander across the park to the pigeon loft
in Dimwell Street, and stand around there for a minute or two. But
here’s a tip: put a bit of cardboard on your head first, then you can
bring it back nice and easy. And I’ve got an old shed I’m not using
where you can keep it safe.’

[Image]

‘Can I keep my mouse poo there as well? Could I make a poo museum? I
think poo is very interesting and it is _not_ nasty,’ he said, his face
going red. ‘After all, without poo everybody would explode.’

‘Of course,’ said Plain Old Humphrey. ‘I shall ask Hartley if she’s got
any more spare jam jars. I think they could be quite useful.’

At that point Geoffrey heard his Grand-mama calling from the house.

‘I think it’s time for your tea,’ said Plain Old Humphrey. ‘Better run
along if I was you.’

Grand-mama met Geoffrey at the back door. ‘If you’d like to wipe your
feet and wash your hands really well, Geoffrey, I think there might be
cake for tea. But first tell me, what have you been doing today?’

‘Well, I’ve started a collection,’ he said breathlessly, ‘and Plain Old
Humphrey said I could use his old shed for a museum, and he gave me a
bucket and spade and a trowel for collecting. And I took Widdler to the
park, but I forgot my bucket and we met a boy called Louis. He was
collecting dog poo in a bucket for Sir Harry King and he said I could
help him again tomorrow.’

‘He would be one of Sir Harry’s pureboys,’ interrupted Grand-mama. ‘It’s
a very useful job. But what exactly are you collecting, Geoffrey?’

‘Oh, any poo at all,’ he said. ‘In fact I want to collect every sort of
poo there is. Plain Old Humphrey says it can be very useful and it’s
interesting and sometimes it can be lucky.’

‘Are you sure that’s what you want to do?’ asked Grand-mama. ‘Your
cousin Robert collects stamps. I believe _they_ are quite interesting
and can sometimes be quite valuable.’

‘No, I think I’d rather collect poo,’ said Geoffrey without hesitation.
‘I don’t think anyone else in the world has a poo collection, so mine
would be the first proper museum and I could charge people to come and
see it.’⁶

 

[Image]

Much to his surprise, his Grand-mama gave him a big, if rather strange
smile. ‘You are a very original thinker, Geoffrey.’ She touched the
pearl necklace strung around her neck. ‘Would it surprise you to learn
that these very expensive pearls are the poo of oysters? Given your
interesting predilection I shall think carefully about where would be
the best places for us to visit while you are staying. Come and see me
after breakfast tomorrow and I shall have a plan.’

¹ Because mice are small they can squeeze in virtually anywhere and
leave their poo around the house. However, they mostly take up residence
in the kitchen and larder where food is stored and prepared. Mouse poo
is about the same size and shape as a grain of rice but thankfully it’s
much darker in colour so can be picked out, not just from carelessly
stored rice, but also from bags of flour and other staples. Beware the
short-sighted cook: not all the currants in the roly-poly pudding grew
on a vine. And don’t ever eat black rice.

² Hen eggs quite often have poo stuck to them as chickens are
indifferent about where they poo. In the Agatean Empire the poo is
carefully scraped off and turned into soup, but by and large it’s best
to wash the poo off the egg just before you boil it, especially if, like
some people, you use the same boiling water to make the tea.

³ The humble earthworm produces its own weight in poo every day. This
amounts to about a gram, which might not seem much except that there are
about 500 worms per square metre of earth. This means that over the
course of a year, in one small flowerbed, they would produce over 180
kilos of poo. It is as well that the Howondaland elephant does not daily
generate its own weight in poo or the whole world would quite soon be
Howondaland. Worm poo is completely inoffensive and much prized by
gardeners and you really wouldn’t know if you’d got it under your
fingernails, as indeed most gardeners have. Some gardeners have it in
their boots, too, especially when attempting that very tricky gardening
manoeuvre known as the transmigration of soils.

⁴ By law a nasty boingggg must always be the last noise you hear when
any humorous search is made in piles of junk. It’s the law; no one knows
whose law it is but, nevertheless, it’s the law.

⁵ Cats are secretive animals and their poo is so offensive that even
they don’t like the smell of it, and so they bury it. Cats also get
terribly embarrassed if they know you are watching and will turn the
other way.

Even witches, who can use most things in creating spells, draw the line
at cat poo. The Ting-Tang-Bang cats of the Counterweight Continent are
revered for the vicious nature of their poo, which is collected,
carefully dried and then used to make fireworks; and with minute
attention to the cats’ diet the most skilled practitioners can get you
displays of vivid blue, which are notoriously hard to achieve in the
field of feline pyrotechnics.

⁶ Sadly Geoffrey was wrong in assuming that his was the first poo museum
on the Disc. In the Unseen University there is a magnificent conundrum
known as the Cabinet of Curiosities and no scholar has yet plumbed its
limitless depths. It is believed to contain samples of poo from every
living animal and insect in the multiverse including such exotic species
as the phoenix, unicorn and quantum butterfly. However, scholars are
confident that it lacks the poo of the rocking horse, which is thought
to be rarer than anything known to humankind.

[Image]

A VISIT TO THE DRAGON SANCTUARY

GEOFFREY WOKE UP excited. Today was the day that Emma, one of
Grand-mama’s god-daughters, was going to take him to the dragon rescue
centre and sanctuary. After breakfast, he put on his best jacket and
stood in the hallway with Widdler, ready and waiting. Before long, his
patience was rewarded when the bell rang. He opened the front door to a
friendly and jolly girl who looked as if she ate hay and enjoyed a good
run before breakfast.

‘Hello, Geoffrey. I’m Emma,’ she said in a booming voice. When he shook
hands with her as he’d been taught to do, she gave him a grip he just
knew would crack a walnut; he liked her immediately.

‘Now, Geoffrey,’ she continued, ‘your Grand-mama gave me five dollars so
we could take a cab to Morphic Street. But it’s not far and if we walked
instead we could buy some sweets on the way. What do you think?’

‘Oh yes,’ said Geoffrey enthusiastically, ‘I’d much prefer to walk. You
never know what you might see.’

They set off along Nonesuch Street past some very grand houses and as
Geoffrey was admiring them he saw what looked like two ugly stone
animals perched on the edge of a roof.

‘What are those creatures doing up there?’ he asked Emma.

‘Oh, they’re just gargoyles,’ she said. ‘If you’ve got a very big house
and a grand piano and a butler and a carriage with your name on it, the
next thing is to hire a gargoyle to sit on the corner and make your
house look even more important.’

‘But what do they do?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Well, originally they would have lived on the tops of very old
buildings like the Unseen University where they sat in the gutters and
fed off what came through in the water. Now many of them are purely
ornamental and have to have food left out. Some, I’m told, even allow
themselves to be painted and made to hold up shields. They’re quite
harmless unless you’re a pigeon; they hate pigeons.’

Geoffrey waved up at the gargoyles as they continued on their way and
thought he got a wave back.

It was not long before they came to a bridge. Geoffrey was amazed at the
houses and shops that lined both sides of its crowded carriageway. Some
had small rooms sticking out over the river and as Geoffrey watched he
saw something fall from one into the river with a splat.

He and Emma squeezed between two buildings and looked down on to the
sluggish River Ankh as it crawled its way to the sea. ‘It’s a bit
smelly,’ said Geoffrey, ‘and why are those people in the boats holding
up umbrellas? It’s not rain— Oh, I see,’ he nodded, as another splash
and splatter reached their ears and the river was further enriched in
its passage under the busy bridge.¹

[Image]

‘Some people are too mean to pay Sir Harry King to collect their privy
buckets and it just goes in the river,’ explained Emma, ‘which makes it
very smelly and extremely unpleasant for anyone going under a bridge.’
She added, ‘I think they’re making a law about it.’

‘Does Sir Harry collect people poo as well as dog poo?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Sir Harry collects everything; they don’t call him the King of the
Golden River for nothing,’ she added. ‘Come along. Let’s go and buy
those sweets.’

They entered a funny little shop with advertisements in the window for
Jolly Sailor Tobacco and Gumption’s Snuff and a large sign above the
door saying SWEETS. Behind the counter was the fattest man Geoffrey had
ever seen. He had a stubbly grey moustache, and was wearing a hat with a
tassel, and a brightly coloured woollen shawl. What really caught
Geoffrey’s attention was the magnificent parrot sitting on his shoulder.

 

[Image]

‘Hello, Mister Thwaite,’ said Emma. ‘May I have some Klatchian Delight,
please? And what sweets do you like, Geoffrey?’

Geoffrey cast his eye around the shop, which had shelves of sweet jars
from floor to ceiling.

‘How about some nutty slack or dragon drops or, if you like, chocolate?’
said Mister Thwaite. ‘I’ve just had a delivery of pig pellets for
Hogswatch.’

‘Wonderful!’ said Geoffrey. ‘And if I don’t eat them all I can put some
in my poo collection.’

‘Your what collection?’

‘I have a poo museum,’ replied Geoffrey proudly.

‘Well, I never did,’ said Mister Thwaite. ‘You can have this packet of
gnoll berries. Goodness knows what’s in them but I can’t shift them for
love nor money.’ He turned and reached up to a high shelf. The parrot
squawked but continued to watch Geoffrey with a beady eye.

As Mister Thwaite turned, Geoffrey noticed that the back of his shawl
was encrusted with bird poo. ‘You must be a very lucky man,’ said
Geoffrey, ‘to have all that bird poo on you. Could I have a bit of that
parrot poo for my museum, please?’

‘Of course. I like to help a young man with his hobby,’ said Mister
Thwaite. And, holding an empty tobacco packet, he let Geoffrey scrape
the well-dried encrustation from the fringes of the shawl. Geoffrey put
the bags of sweets and lucky parrot poo into his pockets and, having
thanked Mister Thwaite, turned to leave. As he opened the door the
parrot suddenly sprang into life, flew to its perch and did one of those
little dances that parrots are wont to do and then shouted very loudly,
‘NOW PISS OFF.’ Mister Thwaite smiled. ‘Don’t worry. He only says that
if he really likes you,’ he said.

[Image]

Geoffrey and Emma continued on their journey and before long they found
themselves looking up at the most impressive gates Geoffrey had ever
seen. As they stood there a change in the wind brought a smell of
burning and fireworks that hit the back of his throat and made his eyes
water. A shower of small sooty particles floated down around them.

‘That can’t be good,’ said Emma. She pushed the gate open in the manner
of someone who knew she would always be welcomed, and they made their
way into a yard surrounded by a collection of sheds and bigger stone
buildings with thick, fortress-like walls. The roofs, however, looked
very insubstantial and, in some cases, very new.

 

[Image]

‘Those are the dragon sheds,’ explained Emma. ‘If one of the little
dears explodes, the blast is channelled upwards. If we’re lucky we only
lose a bit of roof.’

‘What happens if we’re not so lucky?’ asked Geoffrey, looking anxious.

‘Oh, you’ll be all right,’ she assured him. ‘We’ve got good protective
clothing. It’s only the people who forget to wear it who lose their hair
and eyebrows, and sometimes their fingers.’

They went into one of the smaller sheds where they met a girl who seemed
to be wearing armour from the neck down and held a large helmet in her
gloved hands. ‘This is Emma,’ said Emma. ‘Emma, meet Geoffrey.’

‘Hello, Geoffrey,’ said Emma Two. ‘Let’s get you and your dog kitted
up.’ He was lifted up and lowered into big stiff leather trousers that
didn’t bend at all, and was given big boots and gloves and a helmet.
They even found a small helmet for Widdler, making him look like a snail
peering out of its shell.

[Image]

‘Let’s go,’ said the Emmas in unison, and ushered him from the shed into
one of the big stone buildings. At first there didn’t seem much to look
at. There was a series of concrete pens with small, grey-green, huddled
lumps under piles of sticky ash.

‘Why are they all covered in ash?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Well, we’ve not cleaned them out yet because Lady Sybil can usually
tell what’s wrong with them from the colour and smell of their poo.
They’ll have been eating quite the wrong thing.’

‘What should their poo be like?’ asked Geoffrey. ‘And can I have some
for my poo museum?’

‘Well, like I said, in a healthy dragon there’s hardly any poo at all.
Sometimes it’s just a fine ash that floats away in the air.’²

‘I wish I could get some dragon poo,’ Geoffrey said. ‘I want to get poo
from every animal in the world so that people can come to my museum and
see it all and be amazed.’

To compensate for the lack of dragon poo thus far Geoffrey was given a
baby dragon to hold. It perched on his hand blowing smoke rings and then
suddenly, without any warning, deposited a small glowing ember on his
gloved palm. Geoffrey couldn’t believe his luck! He closed his fist
around it tightly for the rest of the tour in case one of the
interchangeable Emmas decided that Lady Sybil needed to inspect it. When
they came to leave, it seemed cool enough to surreptitiously transfer to
his jacket pocket.

[Image]

Geoffrey and Emma One set off back home hand in hand, with Widdler
following so close to heel that he was often in danger of tripping them
up.

Geoffrey kept looking up at the grand houses hoping to see a gargoyle.
They were not far from home when they reached a very grand mansion
indeed with huge curly iron gates and tall stone pillars on either side.
His eyes lit up in delight when he noticed that on top of each tall
pillar was a genuine gargoyle holding a shield. ‘You must get very bored
just sitting up there all day. Would you like a sweet?’ Geoffrey said to
one of the gargoyles.

‘It’s more than my job’s worth,’ said the gargoyle,³ ‘and I don’t get
off duty until the end of the week. But Old Pediment over at number
eight,’ he croaked, ‘is always on the lookout for interesting tidbits.
He’s got a sweet tooth too.’

‘If I leave some sweets on my windowsill at number five do you think
he’d find them?’

‘Doesn’t miss a thing. Old Pediment, he clears all the bird-tables this
side of the road and I don’t just mean the birds’ food.’

[Image]

As they walked away, Emma said to Geoffrey, ‘You are funny. No one I
know talks to gargoyles.’

‘I want to know where they poo. Gargoyle poo would be a very interesting
find for my museum.’

Lily opened the door to them when they arrived back at Grand-mama’s
house. ‘Wipe your feet on the mat,’ she said, wrinkling her nose in
distaste. ‘And who’s got a bonfire going?’

Geoffrey and Emma went into the drawing room to see Grand-mama, who was
having a cup of tea. ‘My goodness,’ she said, ‘what is that smell? It’s
as if someone’s been letting off fireworks.’ Her eyes went straight to
Geoffrey’s jacket. ‘Whatever have you got in your pockets, my boy?’
Geoffrey reluctantly extracted the bags of sweets from one pocket. ‘Now
come on, Geoffrey, you know I mean the other pocket.’

‘It’s baby swamp-dragon poo for my museum,’ said Geoffrey defensively as
Emma helped him off with his jacket while Grand-mama extracted the
charred ember with the sugar tongs and transferred the hot little nodule
to an empty snuff tin. ‘He just laid it in my hand.’

[Image]

‘Well, let me tell you that you are going to wash those hands before you
eat anything, my boy,’ said Grand-mama. ‘I shall also have to buy you a
new jacket before we go to the Guild annual luncheon.’

She gave Geoffrey a severe look from top to bottom and continued, ‘Your
late uncle Cedric was very much the same. If I remember rightly he had a
very large collection of things that looked like other things; one of
the largest such collections in the world, I’ve been given to
understand.’ She made a tut-tutting noise and added, ‘There’s no doubt
about it, incongruity runs in this family. Now I think you should take
your new acquisitions down to your museum before it gets too dark.’

Geoffrey made his way down to the end of the garden, where in the dusk
he saw the shape of Plain Old Humphrey leaning on a shovel.

‘Hello, young man, what have you been up to today?’

‘I’ve had a lovely time,’ said Geoffrey. ‘I’ve spoken to a gargoyle and
I’ve been to a sweet shop – would you like one? – and visited the dragon
sanctuary and guess what I’ve got?’ He opened the snuff tin and showed
the contents to Plain Old Humphrey.

‘Ah, that smells a bit like dragons to me. When I was a boy we had a
little swamp dragon to light the fires. But one day my dad had a bit of
an accident and my mum wouldn’t have them in the house after that.’

‘It’s my best poo so far,’ said Geoffrey. ‘I must put it somewhere
really safe so I can label it up tomorrow morning.’

Later that evening, before he got into bed, Geoffrey remembered to take
a few lumps of toffee from the crumpled paper bag and laid them out on
the windowsill just in case Old Pediment the gargoyle were to drop by.

¹ By and large all rivers passing through cities and towns emerge a lot
muckier than they start out. The River Ankh is notorious for its
crusted, evil-smelling waters – mainly the result of the inhabitants
using it as a drain, occasional burial ground and repository for all
manner of ordure. The worst offenders are those who live or work along
the bridges. Human nature being what it is, if it’s a question of paying
someone to remove a bucket of poo from your dwelling or simply sitting
above a hole where out of sight is out of mind, the latter option will
win every time. In addition, if you’re having a bad day there’s the
small consolation that you can give someone beneath an even worse one,
if you time it right.

² When in good health, _Draco vulgaris_ (the herbivorous swamp dragon)
produces hardly any waste material at all, because combustion is
complete. However, swamp dragons are notoriously susceptible to
digestive disorders and if their diet is not strictly controlled they
can become very unstable. The resulting symptoms range from violent
explosions to the production of large amounts of black or green ash.
Like all immature creatures, baby swamp dragons are unable to completely
digest their food.

_Draco nobilis_ on the other hand is a carnivore. This species is
particularly fond of virgins, but knights in armour are a bonus because
they add a certain amount of roughage to the diet. _Draco nobilis_ poo
is like that of any carnivore, but if knights in armour have featured on
the menu in the recent past, the dragons excrete small tin roundels not
unlike corned beef, but still in the tin as it were.

³ The word ‘said’ is used rather carefully here. If you want to know
what a gargoyle talks like, imagine having a conversation with a
reasonably friendly rock, and if you want to know what they look like,
think of those lizards that spend an awful lot of time apparently
staring at nothing, and then suddenly there is a movement in the air and
something has suddenly become lunch at an extremely fast speed.

[Image]

A TRIP TO THE MENAGERIE AND CONVERSATION WITH A GARGOYLE

GEOFFREY WAS USED to waking up to birdsong at home, and he’d got used to
the early morning sounds of Ankh-Morpork, but what woke him this morning
was quite different. A grinding of stone on stone and a crunching sound
drew him to the window where, to his delight, he saw a very large
gargoyle chewing the last of the toffee he’d left out.

‘Don’t go away,’ said Geoffrey. ‘I’m just going to get dressed.’

The gargoyle shuffled along to make room as Geoffrey and Widdler climbed
out on to the windowsill to join him.

‘I saw you put that toffee out from across the road. I’ve not had a bit
of toffee for a long time, very nice too.’

‘What do you normally eat?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Pigeons are good,’ munched the gargoyle and Geoffrey hardly liked to
draw his attention to the pigeon sitting on his head wearing a very smug
expression. But the gargoyle saw him looking and said, ‘Ah, that’s my
decoy; it’s no good getting old if you don’t get artful. The silly
buggers fly over thinking it’s a safe roost and Bob’s your uncle! A
clever chap over in the Street of Cunning Artificers made it for me. In
return I go down there every week or so and get rid of all of the
pigeons on his skylight.’¹

 

[Image]

‘I’d better go down to breakfast; Grand-mama is taking me to the
menagerie today. But I hope I’ll see you again,’ said Geoffrey, crawling
back through the window. ‘If I can get back to the sweet shop I’ll bring
you some more toffee.’

‘Thank you, but the old grinding teeth are not what they were,’ replied
the gargoyle. ‘Cake is a favourite, though, especially fruit cake, but
not with nuts, they give me the tweaks.’

‘There’s lots of cake here,’ said Geoffrey. ‘I’ll put some out for you
tonight if I can.’

[Image]

After breakfast, Geoffrey and Grand-mama set out for the Palace.

‘I think you should find this very interesting,’ said Grand-mama. ‘I’m
sorry we can’t take Widdler with us, but they don’t allow dogs where
we’re going.’

Geoffrey knew it would be somewhere important because Grand-mama was
wearing a large hat that looked like the top of a big boat and Lily had
pressed his trousers. After much muttering about the state of them,
she’d also polished his shoes.

They travelled by coach up Park Lane, across the Isle of Gods and over
the Brass Bridge. Geoffrey saw several gargoyles perched up high on the
buildings and he leaned out of the window to wave at them.

‘A gargoyle came to visit me this morning, Grand-mama,’ he said, pulling
his head back in the coach. ‘He was very friendly and I’ve promised him
some cake.’

‘Do be very careful, Geoffrey. No wandering around on the roof looking
for gargoyle poo; I know that’s what you’re really after.’

The coach pulled up and they entered the Palace grounds by a small side
gate. There was a pleasant stroll along a narrow path until they came to
a small and mysterious studded door. Without any hesitation Grand-mama
gave the end of the bell-pull, which was in the shape of a snake, a tug.
Geoffrey moved quickly behind her, just in case. The door creaked open
to reveal a short man with a very long beard and a flat-peaked cap. He
wore tall rubber boots a bit like the ones that Geoffrey had for rainy
days, but these were altogether more substantial, the sort of boot that
laughed in the face of (or, come to that, the rear of) any animal’s
nervous activity.

 

[Image]

The beard, which seemed to have a life of its own, enquired politely as
to who they were and what their business was. Grand-mama produced a
small card from her pocket. ‘We are here at the personal invitation of
Lord Vetinari.’ The keeper stood to attention, saluted, and a large
smile broke the crust between the moustache and beard.

[Image]

‘Good morning, ma’am. My name is Pontoon, with an emphasis on the “oon”,
and I have the privilege of being his lordship’s head keeper. Please do
come in, we have been expecting you. What would you like to see first,
young man? The largest animal we have here is the Hermit Elephant from
Howondaland, and the smallest is the Llamedos Swimming Shrew. We’ve got
Acrobatic Meerkats, Counting Camels, a Ring-maned Lion, a Reciprocating
Ocelot – be very careful there – and Dancing Bears, to name but a few.’

‘I would very much like to see the elephants first, please,’ said
Geoffrey.

The old man tapped a finger to his nose and, in the tone of a
connoisseur, said, ‘Very wise choice, young man, everyone should see the
elephants.’

As they walked towards a large enclosure Geoffrey started to explain to
the keeper about his poo museum. ‘I’d really like to collect some poo
from all of your animals. I’ve even brought my own bucket,’ he added.

Mister Pontoon scratched his beard, causing a number of unidentified
objects to fall out. ‘Well, young man, that is a rare and unusual hobby,
but his lordship did say that I was to help you in every way. Your
Grand-mama must be a very influential lady. But it wouldn’t be safe for
you to go in their cages with your bucket and spade. Besides, all of the
poo would get a bit mixed up in just one bucket and you would end up
with what we in the industry call miscellaneous poo, and you don’t want
that.

‘I’ll ask young Gus – he’s the junior assistant keeper – to get the
wheelbarrow out. It’ll be good experience for him.’

He whistled sharply and a boy of about fourteen, with a shock of
straw-coloured hair on which was perched, back to front, an old keeper’s
hat, emerged from a shed pushing a very official-looking wheelbarrow. He
seemed too big for his clothes, with the exception of his boots, which
would have fitted a giant.

‘We’ve got some old feed bags,’ said Mister Pontoon, ‘and there’s some
waxed-paper bags that my missus puts my sandwiches in. That should do us
for now and we can gather your samples as we go, so to speak.’

They followed the boy pushing his barrow to a large enclosure, with a
very high fence made of strong iron bars. Inside were a number of
tea-cosy-shaped haystacks, some of which seemed to have door-openings,
showing a dark interior. Quite suddenly one of the haystacks rose up on
four stumpy grey legs and began to wander away. When it stopped a huge
pile of poo dropped to the floor with a wet splatty sound.

‘Gosh,’ said Geoffrey, ‘I don’t think I’ve ever seen a poo as big as
that before. If Plain Old Humphrey were here he’d want that for his
compost heap.’²

Geoffrey and his Grand-mama continued past what they now knew to be
elephants to a large cage holding a sulky-looking camel. Unusually, the
bars of this cage were horizontal rather than vertical, with large
spherical beads threaded at intervals, which the camel listlessly pushed
to and fro.

[Image]

‘That’s a Counting Camel from Djelibeybi,’ said Mister Pontoon. ‘He gets
really bored if we don’t keep him occupied. Careful in there, young Gus,
don’t spoil the arrangement. You know how bad it gets if you move the
decimal point when he’s in the middle of something.’

‘He does look very bad tempered,’ said Geoffrey.

‘He’ll spit at you as soon as look at you and I don’t think you want to
start collecting _that_,’ said Mister Pontoon. ‘He’s very particular
about his floating-point integers. So we’ll move on now, if you don’t
mind. Now, look over there: that’s the Coat-Hanger Elk from
Nothingfjord. It’s called that because its antlers make wonderful
coat-hangers. Shame really, there’s not many left in the wild. If you
want to have one you have to obtain a special permit and allow it to
live in your wardrobe. It can get a bit whiffy, but you’ll always know
where your best suit is.’

 

[Image]

‘Ah, I think we’ve timed it just right here,’ said Mister Pontoon. ‘Wait
for it … Oh, straight in the bag! Very neat, young Gus. Now, see that
pond, we think we’ve got one of the famous Chameleon Alligators from
Genua. Could be a log, mind you, because it hasn’t moved in a long
while. But every now and then we see a few feathers near it and Bert,
one of the other keepers, reckoned he left a pair of rubber boots on the
bank over there last week and they went missing.’ Geoffrey peered at the
log doubtfully. ‘Don’t you get too close, young Geoffrey, the paperwork
can be a real trial and we already owe Igor for sorting out old Bert
when he put his— Well, he got too close to the rotating nogo cage and I
shall say no more with a lady present. Now, can you hear that noise?’

Geoffrey stopped and listened; in the distance he detected a boingy sort
of sound.

‘That comes from the Bouncing Kangaroo enclosure just around the corner.
Let’s make our way over. They come all the way from Fourecks, and they
think that we don’t know that they’re digging a hole under that
trampo-line to try to get home. Won’t get them anywhere, though, his
lordship had us build a metal cage under the enclosure.’

Out of the corner of his eye Geoffrey spotted a small hunched-over
kangaroo making a furtive dash towards an unfeasibly tall and
precarious-looking pile of straw and earth in the corner of the
enclosure. Mister Pontoon noticed it too. ‘Catch them on the hop if you
can, Gus, there’s a good lad.’

‘Do the animals often escape?’ asked Geoffrey earnestly, fearful that
potential exhibits for his poo collection might be about to hop off over
the fence.

‘Not often, but look across there at our troupe of Acrobatic Meerkats.
They’re always trying to escape too – them and their three-ringed
circus. It’s not even as if they can juggle very well. We could never
keep them in their old cage because they’d form themselves into a
pyramid, the one at the top would throw himself across the gap and the
others would climb over and out of the top. Later on they’d send a
little postcard.’

Geoffrey watched the cartwheeling meerkats for a minute.

‘Dreadful show-offs, your meerkats,’ said Mister Pontoon. ‘No, please
don’t applaud, it only encourages them. Better be quick in there, Gus,
or they’ll start their clown routine and you know what Lord Vetinari
thinks about clowns.’

As they walked away, some of the meerkats paraded round the cage holding
up a badly painted sign that said: ‘The Incomparable Meerkats’, and
underneath: ‘Performances every 5 minits’.

‘Isn’t that amazing?’ said Geoffrey.

The keeper shrugged. ‘I don’t think so. Sometimes they spell
“performance” wrong.’

[Image]

As they moved on, Mister Pontoon put his finger to his lips. ‘Now hush,
walk as quietly as you can, otherwise you won’t see a thing. You wait
outside with the wheelbarrow, Gus, I’ll call you if there’s anything to
pick up.’

They entered a darkened shed with a large caged area to one side. ‘Here
we have the last breeding pair of Bashful Pandas from the Agatean
Empire,’ the keeper whispered. Geoffrey peered into the gloom. He could
make out two large shapes sitting at opposite ends of the cage with
their backs to the far wall. One of them seemed to be smoking a pipe and
the other seemed to be knitting something. ‘We’re not holding our
breath,’ said Mister Pontoon, ‘but it’s a funny old world. And you’re in
luck – they’ve not got round to hiding their poo yet. Shy about all
their bodily functions, they are, and, just like them, their poo comes
out in black and white. Come along, Gus, bring in the shovel.’

‘This must be very rare poo indeed,’ said Geoffrey.

‘It most certainly is,’ said Mister Pontoon, ‘and if they don’t get
round to producing a Bashful Panda baby soon there won’t be any more of
it. So you take good care of it.’

‘I certainly will,’ said Geoffrey.

‘Mister Pontoon?’ said Grand-mama. ‘I wonder if I might make a
suggestion. Why don’t you just leave them in peace, you know, with a
curtain or something? Or maybe some light music? I have no reason to get
coarse with my grandson here, all ears, but I think that might be the
way forward, as it were.’

‘Ooh, are you a biologist, madam?’

‘No, but I am a married woman and a married woman who is telling you to
give these creatures some privacy. Then I guarantee you will reap
dividends and, indeed, pandas.’

‘How did all these animals get here?’ asked Geoffrey inquisitively.

‘They were mostly given as presents to his lordship from visiting
indignitaries and ambassadors and the like,’ said Mister Pontoon. ‘A bit
silly, really, because I reckon he’d prefer a nice book, but it’s become
a bit of a tradition, see. You know, heads of state giving each other
animals they don’t want. I can still remember the Sultan of Ymitury
turning up with half a dozen creatures bound up in black cloth like
oversized skittles. He told us to keep them warm and they would hatch
out into giant butterflies. It took us a while to work out that they
were his less-favoured concubines.’

[Image]

‘What’s a concubine?’ asked Geoffrey.

Before the keeper could answer, Grand-mama interjected in a voice of
thunder, ‘It’s a kind of vegetable.’

‘Are there any animals that I can feed?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘We’ve got some Woolly Goats from the Trollbone mountains,’ said the
keeper. ‘Mind you, it’s not easy to tell them front from back at this
time of year. Though old Bert is quite clever with them: he waits until
they fart and that gives him a clue as to which end to feed.’

[Image]

In their enclosure Geoffrey studied the incredibly hairy goats and,
being an observant boy, and having a special interest, he looked at the
ground and saw a pile of droppings. He duly collected these in his
bucket and then walked to the other end with the handful of cabbage
leaves the keeper had given him. He was rewarded with a long leathery
tongue shooting out of the hairy thatch and taking the leaves out of his
hand.

‘There must be an awful lot of poo every day,’ said Geoffrey as the
small party walked back towards the gate. ‘The compost heaps would be as
big as a mountain if you kept it all.’

‘Anything we can’t use is taken away by Sir Harry King’s men; his
lordship has a daily collection. Sir Harry pays us a bit extra if we
keep the lion dung separate, so lucky for you I can give you a sample of
that. It’s a bit pongy, mind.’

‘Do you have a hippo or a wyvern in the Menagerie?’

‘No,’ said Mister Pontoon, ‘they’re your heraldics, a different kettle
of fish altogether, as it were, most exotic. There’s only one place
you’ll find them, young Geoffrey, and that is at the Royal College of
Heralds. They’ve rebuilt most of it since the fire but it’s a strange
old place. You’ll have a job getting in there: you’ve got to be nobby
before they’ll even answer the door. Apart from sirs and lords, the only
other person I know who can get in is Doughnut Jimmy the vet. He looks
after our animals and was called in there to look at their wyvern only
last week.’

‘Thank you very much for helping me, Mister Pontoon,’ said Geoffrey.

‘My pleasure, young man, and it’s made a nice change for young Gus. I’ll
get him to pack up your specimens and we’ll put them on top of the
carriage because I don’t suppose your Grand-mama will want to travel
with that lot inside.’

[Image]

‘I think we should go and have our picnic in the park; it’s a bit smelly
in here, Geoffrey,’ said Grand-mama after they had said their farewells.

And so they walked across a large area of lawn and trees, and under one
particular tree Geoffrey saw a rather elderly and portly man sitting on
a small stool. He was wearing a keeper’s hat but Geoffrey couldn’t see
any animals. Geoffrey edged closer and very politely asked the keeper
what he was keeping. ‘My job, young sir,’ said the man, ‘is of
fundamental importance in this whole menagerie, because I, young sir, am
the Re-Director.’

‘The Re-Director?’ said Geoffrey. ‘That sounds very important. What do
you re-direct?’

At Geoffrey’s feet and stretching for quite some distance was a thin
stone trough filled with greenish water. ‘That,’ said the old keeper,
‘is one of the greatest achievements in engineering by the late and some
would say unlamented B. S. Johnson, engineer, architect and scholar. And
that, young sir, is the most unusual and peculiar fish stream in the
entire world.’

Geoffrey stood on the edge of the narrow strip and saw a shape in the
depths below, slowly moving towards him.

‘Stand back now, young sir,’ said the keeper, rising to his feet as the
shape drew near to where he was sitting.

‘This re-directing requires years of experience.’ He picked up off the
grass a most peculiar object. It was a large net, quite narrow but with
a long and sturdy handle. It fitted perfectly into the channel and with
a great effort the keeper plunged the net into the water, levered forth
a very large, rectangular fish and then, stepping over the trough and
turning hubwards, he placed the fish, this time facing the other way,
back into the stream. He heaved the dripping net over his shoulder, lit
his pipe and walked slowly to the other end of the stream where there
was another small canvas stool with a parasol attached.

 

[Image]

‘How often do you have to do this?’ Geoffrey asked the back of the
receding figure.

‘Forty-eight and a half times a day, young sir.’

‘What is the half time?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Well, the fish and me aren’t getting any younger and so sometimes we
just goes halfway. And once a week,’ said the keeper, ‘I do a bit of
cleaning out after the fish has done his business.’

‘So where do you put the business?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Ah, well, young sir, fish business is not as useful for gardeners as
most businesses are, but if you look carefully when you walk away, you
will see the trees behind my chairs are slightly bigger than the rest of
the trees in the park.’

Before he went to bed that evening Geoffrey carefully put a piece of
fruit cake that he’d managed to smuggle up from the kitchen on the
windowsill for Old Pediment the gargoyle.

¹ It is suspected that gargoyles are, in fact, a type of troll. Over the
years of their exposure to the abnormal magical activity that always
surrounds Unseen University they have evolved into mobile and sentient
beings. Their diet is varied but the emphasis now is on pigeons. Their
alimentary tract, which is a complex U-shaped organ, was originally
designed for the digestion of a watery mineral diet that entered the
body through the ears. The solids were filtered and digested in the
usual fashion while the liquid was extracted and expelled through the
mouth. The recent change in food source has resulted in their ears
becoming vestigial, and a small and isolated loop of intestine between
the ears and throat, not unlike the human appendix, is all that remains.
Another result of this change in diet is their ability to move their
jaws and even close their mouths, making it much easier to have a
conversation with them. Saying that, gargoyles seldom talk about
anything but pigeons and how much they dislike them.

² Elephants, including hermit elephants, eat grass, leaves and sometimes
whole tree branches, but only absorb 40 per cent of the nutrients. This
means that elephant poo not only makes good compost but is also of
considerable nutritional value to other animals, especially birds and
insects. An elephant can produce about 20kg of poo a day; over a year
that would stack up to over 7,000kg. On the basis that an elephant lives
for sixty-five years or so, we’re looking at a lifetime production of
poo not far short of 5,000 tonnes, which is, it has been calculated,
enough poo to fill the Ankh-Morpork Opera House up to the small trap
door in the loft.

[Image]

A LUNCH AT THE GUILD OF PLUMBERS AND DUNNAKIN DIVERS

LIKE ALL CHILDREN, Geoffrey woke at dawn with every switch in his body
turned full on. Older people generally check to see that nothing has
fallen off in the night. There is always a careful but thorough audit of
which limb to get out of bed first so the rest of the body can follow.
Geoffrey, however, simply bounded out of bed and, after saying hello to
the gleaming Mister Gazunder, went straight to the window to see if the
cake had gone. It had, and Geoffrey, being of an observant mind and now
informed in the ways of the world of digestion, climbed out on to the
ledge to look downwards. He was overjoyed when he saw what he took to be
a small deposit on the border of the flowerbed beneath his window.
Without a thought he raced down the stairs, past an astonished Hartley,
out through the back door – pausing only to pick up his bucket from the
top step – and round the corner of the house, looking up until he was
standing under his bedroom window. It was only then, looking down, that
he realized he was barefoot. Luckily, gargoyle poo so much resembles
gravel that you may think of it as gravel. Geoffrey was thankful to see
he had not stepped in all of it and there was still enough to scrape up
into his bucket.

As he made his way back round to the scullery door, finding along the
way some long grass on which to wipe his toes, he saw at the end of the
garden two burly men hoisting on to their shoulders a pole from which
hung a large container. A gentle morning breeze brought a whiff of the
privy and he was about to go wandering off following his nose, as it
were, when Hartley the cook came to the door and in a kindly voice said,
‘Now you come here, young man. Get washed and dressed and your breakfast
will be ready when you come down.’

 

[Image]

After breakfast Geoffrey took his bucket of gargoyle poo down to the
sheds to put in his museum, hoping to see Plain Old Humphrey. Sure
enough, he found the gardener sitting on a bench at the bottom of the
garden, carefully cleaning his spade. There was no sign of the men
Geoffrey had seen earlier, but there was still a whiff hanging around
like a smelly ghost. ‘Plain Old Humphrey? Who were those men here early
this morning?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘That was Jimmer and Bob the gongers. They should have been here last
night,’ said Plain Old Humphrey, ‘but their cart got clamped down at The
Soake so they were running a bit late.’

‘What do gongers do?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Jimmer and Bob work for Sir Harry King and they empty all the cesspits
and privies around here,’ said Plain Old Humphrey.¹

‘I know about privies, but I don’t know what a cesspit is,’ said
Geoffrey, determined to get to the bottom of this mysterious occupation.

‘Well, using these new-fangled lavatory contraptions, like the Deluge
Supreme your Grand-mama has installed, means there is a lot of water in
with the business. It all goes into a pit where the water can soak away
and then every now and then you have to dig out what’s left, and I’m
sure your Grand-mama wouldn’t want to do that.’

‘And it all goes to Sir Harry?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Yes, Sir Harry has collecting carts waiting all round the city to take
this valuable night soil down to his yard.’

‘I wish I could go to his yard!’ said Geoffrey, enthusiastically. ‘He
must have the biggest collection of poo in the world!’

‘Watch out, here’s trouble,’ said Plain Old Humphrey. As he spoke, Lily
the maid appeared.

‘Your Grand-mama has been looking all over for you, young man,’ she said
to Geoffrey. ‘You’re to come straight inside.’ She turned on her heel
and walked away without waiting for a reply. Plain Old Humphrey winked
at Geoffrey, took his pipe out of his mouth and poked his tongue out at
the retreating figure.

Geoffrey giggled but obediently followed Lily into the kitchen where he
found his Grand-mama, who was talking to Hartley the cook. ‘Geoffrey and
I will be out for lunch, but we will be back for dinner,’ she was
saying. ‘Geoffrey, oh there you are, we have been invited to a luncheon
at the Guild of Plumbers and Dunnakin Divers by my good friend Sir
Charles Lavatory, so you’ll need to look smart. I’ve bought you a new
jacket; it’s in your room. Please don’t ruin this one because I’ve had
it tailored especially for you.’

[Image]

Geoffrey ran upstairs and was delighted to find his new jacket had at
least eight pockets, and they were all lined with a rubbery material
that looked as though nothing could stain or even seep through to the
surface. How kind of Grand-mama, he thought. I could collect a lot of
interesting stuff wearing this jacket.

Their carriage took them up Nonesuch Street, along Park Lane, past the
Opera House and across the Brass Bridge to the Street of Alchemists,
where the coach stopped outside the grand entrance to the Plumbers’
Guild, which had a bell-pull that looked just like the chain and lever
on Grand-mama’s water closet and a door knocker that was shaped like a
long-handled spade with a rounded end.

Grand as the entrance was, nothing prepared Geoffrey for the sight that
greeted them when they went in. The room was vast and the walls were
completely covered from floor to ceiling with shiny patterned tiles.
There were large pictures, also made up of tiles, of serious men with
expressions of stern contentment and jobs well done.

‘How nice to see you, Maud, and this must be your grandson Geoffrey.’ A
tall, grey-haired, distinguished-looking man with mutton-chop whiskers
approached, greeting Grand-mama with a bow, and a smile for Geoffrey.

 

[Image]

‘This, Geoffrey, is Sir Charles Lavatory,’ said Grand-mama.

Geoffrey shook Sir Charles’s hand politely like a pupil meeting his
master.

‘Now, Geoffrey, in accordance with the rules of the Guild of Plumbers
and Dunnakin Divers you need to wash your hands, and I shall do the
same.’ Sir Charles pointed to a long line of shiny sinks along one wall,
many in constant use as one plumber greeted another. The air had the
deliciously sharp smell of lye soap.

Ablutions completed, Sir Charles then led Geoffrey and Grand-mama into a
lounge where a number of other gentlemen were seated together in small
groups.

‘Sir Charles,’ said Geoffrey. ‘Do you mind if I ask whether you like
having the name of Lavatory?’

For a moment the hubbub of noise from conversations around them fell
silent as the whole room listened. Every eye was watching Sir Charles,
whose face was at first blank and then all smiles.

‘What an excellent question!’ he cried. ‘To tell you the truth, young
man, as you may expect, I was teased a lot when I went to school, but as
they say, that which does not kill you makes you stronger. And so, as
soon as I could, with the help of my late father, I set to work to make
the Lavatory the marble marvel of the age and a boon and blessing to all
mankind. I can truly say that I have ended up flushed with pride, now
knowing that the name is associated with satisfaction and ease.’ To his
surprise, Geoffrey saw a small tear form in the corner of Sir Charles’s
eye as he continued: ‘There are times of an evening when I go down to
the workshops, all silent, and look at the work that’s going on on this
year’s model, with the seat-warmer and the patented straining bars, and
I can’t help thinking that I’ve done my best for mankind. I wonder how
many men with hands cleaner than mine can say that.’

Every seat in the house was vacated as the plumbers got to their feet
and clapped their scrupulously clean hands together until the echoes
piled up. When it had all died away and conversations around the room
restarted, Sir Charles took Geoffrey by the hand and said, ‘Now, come
with me, Geoffrey, there is someone here whom I know you would like to
meet and who, I think, would very much like to meet you as well.’

They walked into the large dining room which was filled with tables laid
ready for lunch. Already sitting at one was a large, red-faced man with
short, wiry grey hair and a grizzled beard. Geoffrey couldn’t help
noticing the big golden rings on every finger and the large golden chain
around his neck. ‘I’d like to introduce you, young man, to Sir Harry
King,’ said Sir Charles.

Geoffrey was speechless with delight and awe.

‘It’s not like you to have nothing to say,’ said Grand-mama, chivvying
him forward. ‘I must tell you, Sir Harry, Geoffrey has a very keen
interest in something dear to your heart, that is to say, muck in all
its various ramifications.’

‘Then come and sit beside me, young Geoffrey, and tell me all about it,’
said Sir Harry, in a gruff voice. Sir Harry was a man with daughters and
granddaughters, none of whom really wanted to know anything about the
source of the family fortune that they enjoyed.

‘Well,’ began Geoffrey, ‘I am very interested in poo and I’ve got this
museum in Grand-mama’s garden with thirty-seven different sorts of poo
and I’m trying to collect specimens from every animal in the world so
that people will come and visit and they’ll be able to see rare and
unusual poo.’

‘Well,’ said Sir Harry, ‘I am so pleased to find a young man like you
keen to make his way in the world, seeing that so many young men are
skivers and slackers. But I have to tell you, Geoffrey, that I’m not
sure there’s a living to be made out of simply collecting poo samples. I
made my money in the bulk market by collecting poo from people who
simply wanted to get rid of it – even paid me to take it away – and then
selling it on to other people who could find a use for it.’

‘Do you collect from the Royal College of Heralds?’

‘I expect so,’ said Sir Harry, who had an instinct for when a question
was more than just a polite enquiry. ‘Was there something in particular
you wanted?’

‘Well, I need wyvern poo and hippo poo. Mister Pontoon said that only
sirs and lords and nobs can get in there, and sometimes the vet is
allowed in when they need help with the wyvern.’

‘I think I can help you there,’ said Sir Harry with a smile. ‘In fact, I
have an appointment to visit them this afternoon to discuss my coat of
arms. And if your Grand-mama allows it, you could always come with me.’
He winked at Grand-mama.

‘May I go, Grand-mama, may I?’ asked Geoffrey. ‘Please? Please? Please?’

‘If you promise to behave yourself and do what Sir Harry tells you and
not bother the staff too much, then I think it would be fine.’

At this point large tureens of soup were brought to the table, shaped
very much like outsize chamber pots emblazoned with the guild’s coat of
arms. For the first time Geoffrey looked properly around the room. A
large sideboard ran along one wall with great silver candlesticks and
buckets and strange-shaped bowls and platters laid upon it. More
pictures of serious men with forbidding beards lined the wall and there
was a list of names painted in gold paint under the heading ‘Presidents
of the Guild’.

[Image]

A magnificent pie, that was served in a very deep dish reminiscent of a
bucket, with lots of good gravy, followed the soup. But for Geoffrey the
real treat was a huge trifle, just like Cook made, but presented here in
a crystal glass dish modelled on one of Sir Charles’s recent creations.

‘Now, Geoffrey, before you go off with Sir Harry,’ Grand-mama warned, ‘I
think you ought to visit the cloakroom.’ Geoffrey went in the direction
indicated and found a large mahogany door with brass handles and a sign
saying ‘Gentlemen’. Inside, shining white tiles covered the walls, floor
and ceiling. Geoffrey felt as though he were in a giant upturned sink. A
row of hand-basins decorated with flowers ran along one wall, and
opposite them stood a row of cubicles. Inside these were water closets
grander even than Grand-mama’s, with huge brass cisterns above flowery
china bowls and polished copper pipes.

Geoffrey washed his hands with the soap provided, noticing that even
that had the guild coat of arms on it, then dried them on the spotless
white fluffy towel.

[Image]

‘That’s a very grand cloakroom,’ he said to Sir Harry as he emerged.

‘I’ll tell you this, young man,’ said Sir Harry. ‘The men who do the
dirtiest jobs are always the cleanest whenever that is possible, and it
is only right they should have the very best for themselves.’

‘Goodness!’ said Geoffrey. ‘I expect that means that you must have an
even grander cloakroom.’

‘Personally, I’m not too worried,’ said Harry, ‘but Lady King has what
she calls her en suites and I’m not allowed in the house without walking
through a tray of disinfectant. Now, it’s coming up to the time of my
appointment at the Royal College of Heralds,’ he said, turning to
Grand-mama. ‘I’ll drop your boy home when we’re done, if that’s all
right, ma’am. It’s just around the corner from you.’

They travelled in Sir Harry’s coach, which was painted a dark and glossy
green with the letters H and K in shiny gold leaf on the doors.
Fortunately for Geoffrey there was enough ventilation for him to escape
the very worst of Harry King’s very large cigar.²

[Image]

As they turned the corner by the Palace Sir Harry remarked, ‘See that,
Geoffrey? My lads collect not far short of a tonne a week there. Not
much paperwork to speak of because his lordship expects his employees to
bring their own – and he expects me to do the collecting pro bono.’

‘What does pro bono mean?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘For nothing, lad; free, gratis, goodwill. Still, mustn’t grumble. At
least we’ve got a ruler who understands the worth of your working man.’

They had now reached Pseudopolis Yard, and, gesturing towards the Opera
House, Sir Harry continued: ‘Even though the performers don’t eat very
much, that place gets through so much fizzy wine it’s a golden river in
its own right, and that, my boy, is why they call me King of the Golden
River.’

‘Sorry, Sir Harry,’ said Geoffrey. ‘I don’t know what you mean.’

Harry King smiled and said, ‘Well, lad, there’s poo, isn’t there? And
there’s piss! And, to tell you the truth, I started my career leaving
buckets outside every public house for people to piss in, and me and my
lads would take them away when they were full. And we would sell it.
Amazing stuff. I mean, it’s almost alchemical really. It’s astonishing
what you can get out of it, even explosives if you’re careful – but
don’t worry about that yourself, of course, it never actually happens
while you’re doing it.’

[Image]

As the journey progressed, every now and then Sir Harry would bang on
the roof of the coach with his stick and give the driver instructions to
either detour round the back of a building or turn off into an alley and
stop near one of his collection points, where he would lean out of the
window to make sure everything was in order. He seemed to know everyone
by name and his gruff voice cut through the clamour of the street
straight into the un-fragrant ears of his employees. ‘Just you clean up
that spillage, Jake,’ he shouted to a young man trying to kick something
into the gutter. ‘That’s money straight down the drain, that is!’

Just as the Royal College of Heralds came into view in the distance, Sir
Harry said: ‘And after the piss pots I realized that there was money to
be made in the things that people were throwing away. Everything.
There’s always someone who could use something, and they have to get it
from Harry King.’

They drew up at the large green gates, stepped down from the coach and
rang the bell. A small wicket gate in the main door was opened by a
liveried porter who asked them their business. ‘I have an appointment
with the Herald, smart boy,’ said Sir Harry, taking his cigar out of his
mouth. ‘To discuss the progress of my coat of arms.’

‘Which herald would that be?’ asked the doorman, seeming a little
unnerved.

‘Search me,’ said Harry. ‘Something like, er, reddish breakfast roll?’

The porter let them into the courtyard and Geoffrey looked around. It
was much smaller than he expected, but quite smelly. In the middle was a
muddy pond with a couple of hippos wallowing in it, and a small owl was
perched on the handle of an old broom leaning against the wall.

‘If you would like to come this way, Sir Harold,’ said the returning
porter, ‘we have a design mapped out for your approval. And is there
anything we can do to help your young friend?’ he asked, eyeing
Geoffrey.

‘Oh, I expect he’ll find something to do around here, he likes the
animals,’ said Sir Harry, giving Geoffrey a big wink. ‘Very studious
boy, this young lad, very interested in what you gentlemen would call, I
suspect, animal excrement.’

‘I’ll let old Joseph keep an eye on the young man. He cleans the yard
for us and knows his way around all the pens,’ said the porter, leading
Sir Harry away.

A small elderly man, his head bent forward, emerged slowly from a shed
and, transferring the owl to his shoulder, took hold of the broom, which
he used as a support to walk across the yard. ‘Can I help you clean the
animals’ cages?’ asked Geoffrey, seeing a definite poo opportunity.

 

[Image]

‘Well, I’ve been round the hippos,’ said the old man, ‘but they’ll
probably start again soon. You could give me a hand with the wyvern if
you like, he always needs scraping out.’

Geoffrey and the old man walked towards a cage where a miserable-looking
creature lay slumped on damp straw. ‘Here, use this,’ said the old man,
handing Geoffrey a flat wooden shovel. Just scrape his doings into that
bucket there.’

[Image]

Geoffrey did as instructed and contrived at the same time to get a small
amount of the surprisingly green poo into one of his lined pockets.

They wandered slowly back towards the hippos. ‘Oh no, here we go, look
out,’ said Joseph. ‘Mind your back against the wall, just stand with me
in the corner here and we should be all right.’

Geoffrey watched with amazement as one of the hippos emerged from the
pond and started whirling his short tail round like a windmill, spraying
poo in a wide arc.³

‘Goodness, do they always do that?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘Mostly they do,’ said the old man. ‘I cleans up what I can, but
sometimes I can’t reach because it goes so high.’

Geoffrey looked at the wall behind him and sure enough there were lumps
of dried hippo poo plastered across the stones above him. The old man
pushed the broom across the yard. ‘I’ll move what I can now,’ he said,
‘because once it sets it’s a bugger to shift.’ Geoffrey managed to
dislodge a dried lump and secrete it in another of his jacket pockets.

He looked hopefully at the morpork still sitting on the old man’s
shoulder. The owl, somehow knowing what was required, hunched down and
obliged by doing a poo, which landed on the old man’s back.

‘Oh dear,’ said Geoffrey, suppressing a smile, ‘that owl’s done a poo on
your jacket. Would you like me to wipe it off?’

He was just scraping his morpork specimen into yet another pocket when
Sir Harry emerged into the yard. ‘Ready to go, Geoffrey?’ Sir Harry
asked, taking in the scene.

‘Yes, thank you,’ said Geoffrey. And so they climbed into the coach and
swiftly set off for Nonesuch Street.

‘Well, you certainly take your hobby seriously, young man,’ said Sir
Harry. ‘I like a boy with purpose. How would you like to visit my yard
tomorrow? I’ll send a coach to pick you up bright and early and we can
go down the river together in my launch.’

‘I’d like that more than anything in the world,’ said Geoffrey,
enthusiastically.

‘Very well. We’ll check with Grand-mama when we drop you off,’ said Sir
Harry.

[Image]

Grand-mama came to the door as they arrived back home. ‘That is most
kind of you, Sir Harry,’ she said, when Sir Harry proposed tomorrow’s
outing. ‘I know Geoffrey has become very interested in your enterprise
while he has been staying here in Ankh-Morpork, and as his visit’s
coming to an end it’s a very good opportunity for him. Geoffrey, I think
you probably need to take your new acquisitions into your museum, don’t
you? And emphatically refrain from leaving them anywhere in the house,’
she added, her nose twitching in distaste. ‘And while you’re there ask
Plain Old Humphrey to help you wash out your pockets with Doctor
Painforth’s Hygienic Restorative.’

¹ Working at night, gongers or gongfermors are sometimes known as
‘night-men’. It requires a steady hand, nerves of steel and the sense of
smell of a turnip to do this job, although the rewards can be great:
just consider what may be lost down a privy at night with the only light
a candle flame guttering in the wind. I mean, who’s going to notice if a
locket has gone or even a ring slipped from a cold finger in those
conditions? Where there’s muck there’s brass, as they used to say, or
even better than brass, if you’re lucky.

² Harry King smoked cigars all the time, apparently, but given the way
he earned his money, the acrid cigar smoke probably counted as fresh
air.

³ Hippos really are the most dangerous of animals, and at both ends. Not
only can they move very quickly to close their jaws on the unwary
swimmer, but they can go on to spray any unfortunate onlooker with poo
by whirling their tails like propellers as they excrete. Zoologists
would say that this is behaviour designed to mark their territory. The
author thinks that it is one of nature’s more interesting jokes.

[Image]

AN ADVENTURE WITH SIR HARRY KING

THE DOORBELL RANG at 9 a.m. and Geoffrey raced to pick up his jacket and
find Widdler’s lead. Sir Harry was standing outside on the top step,
smoking a fat cigar and wearing a tall stovepipe hat and a coat with a
velvet collar. He greeted Geoffrey with a wide smile and a puff of
smoke. ‘Are you ready to see Harry’s world, young man? We’ll walk down
to the Linnet Landing today; it’s a lovely morning and it’s no
distance.’

 

[Image]

‘Please may I bring Widdler?’ asked Geoffrey hopefully, indicating the
little dog, who was wagging his tail expectantly.

‘Good name for a dog that,’ said Sir Harry with a laugh. ‘I don’t see
why not, but be sure you keep him on a lead. And any little deposit he
makes on my property belongs to me, especially if it’s white. The
tanners love white,’ he said with a wink.

As the trio walked up Nonesuch Street Sir Harry kept a close eye on the
ground, using his stick to turn over the occasional pile of leaves in
the gutter. Off in the distance a boy was assiduously scraping something
into a bucket. As they approached, Geoffrey recognized Louis and waved
at him. ‘That’s my friend Louis! I helped him collect dog poo in the
park. He works for you, doesn’t he?’

‘Yes, good lad that, works hard and knows his stuff. He’ll go far. Here,
Louis, go back up to number sixty-four, there’s a little white pearl
there as bright as a penny. And you know what, it’s got your name on it.
Be quick before some other bugger gets it.’

‘Thank you, Sir Harry,’ said Louis, disappearing up the road.

They reached the river where Sir Harry’s boat, _Lady Euphemia_, was
moored at the landing. It was a large rowing boat with three liveried
oarsmen and a coxswain at the stern. At the bow was a covered area with
several seats, and amidships several large steel-lined wooden bins with
a collection of nets, hooks and grappling irons alongside. ‘Just in case
I see anything along the way I think should be mine,’ said Sir Harry,
lighting another cigar.

They cast off, the coxswain negotiating the craft into the main channel
of the river. Sir Harry changed his hat for a nautical peaked cap
emblazoned with the word ‘captain’ and a small embroidered anchor. He
took the large seat in the centre, all the while looking around to see
who and what was floating in his vicinity. There was a bell beside him
so he could attract the coxswain’s attention to give him instructions,
via a speaking tube, as to any change of course.

[Image]

Geoffrey had never travelled in a boat before and to be there with Sir
Harry was his best adventure yet. There was a lot to see: the river was
very busy with barges and small ferries and water taxis. He reached over
and made to dangle his fingers in the brown sludge.

‘I’d keep your hands out of the water if I were you,’ warned Sir Harry.
‘Are you enjoying youself?’

‘Oh, yes,’ said Geoffrey. ‘At home I don’t get to see anything like
this.’

‘So what do you do to amuse yourself?’ asked Sir Harry.

‘Well, I’ve got lots of toys. I like playing with my soldiers and Papa
bought me a Captain Carrot last Hogswatch, though I really wanted the
Omnian Quisition game.’

‘When I was a lad we had to make our own amusement,’ said Harry. ‘On
rainy days if we couldn’t play foot-the-ball and if we were lucky, and
in the right place at the right time, we might spot a brace of floaters
coming down in the gutters. Oh, we used to have some fun wagering which
one would hit the grating first. Like men-o’-war they were, a convoy of
pure delight for us kids. We called it poo sticks.’

As they approached the Ankh Bridge the coxswain shouted, ‘Umbers up,
lads.’ The oarsmen, who could not see where they were going, but only
where other people had been, without breaking their rhythm pulled up a
large tarpaulin canopy over their heads.

‘Folks think it’s funny to take a potty shot at me and my boat,’ said
Sir Harry. ‘They didn’t laugh so much the day I took a marksman with a
crossbow along for the ride. There’s still a few fools that can’t sit
comfortably for trying it on with Harry King.’

He saw the expression on Geoffrey’s face and said, ‘Don’t worry, it was
only rock salt. They’ll get better when it works off.’

They continued downriver, where on either side there were tall
warehouses and queues of barges waiting to be unloaded. Large sailing
ships were anchored by the wharves, and lighters and other small craft
darted to and fro on the scummy, barely moving water. Occasionally, a
warning shout of ‘Watch out below’ was to be heard as the stevedores
scurried over a ship like ants. Suddenly Sir Harry leapt to his feet.
‘By Offler’s tooth, lad, we’ve got a couple,’ he cried, pointing out a
pair of floaters. ‘Look, there, I’ll bet you a dollar to a penny that
the one nearer the bank will hit that wall first.’

[Image]

With a practised eye they both studied the movement of their movements
in the current.

‘Ah, well, I reckon that one’s yours, lad; I’ll settle up with you
later. And thank you very much for letting an old man revisit his
boyhood for a while.’

As they rowed through the ancient portal of the River Gate, Sir Harry
was hailed by a group of watchmen who were huddled smoking in the lee of
one of the old battlements. ‘Any chance of an extra pick-up, Sir Harry?’
one of them shouted. ‘Trap four is full and some of the lads had a
Klatchian last night.’

‘What? I’m the bloody boss, ain’t I,’ said Harry, angrily. ‘There’s one
of my lighters along in about fifteen minutes, they’ll help you out.’

Outside the city walls the view changed to ramshackle sheds and old
farmhouses, reedy swamps and a tow-path. ‘Not far now,’ said Sir Harry.
‘You can just see the top of my biggest heap, over there.’

[Image]

Geoffrey looked afresh at what he’d taken to be a small hill in the
distance. As they drew nearer he could see smoke rising, and the general
miasma of smells grew much more concentrated. They came to what looked
like a small city of shacks and lean-tos. ‘I let some of my workers live
there free,’ said Sir Harry. ‘It means they’re always willing to make an
effort and squeeze out the last drop, so to speak, and they’re never
late for work.’

The boat turned towards a landing quay where the oarsmen helped
Geoffrey, who was carrying Widdler under his arm, to disembark.

‘Now hold my hand, lad,’ said Sir Harry. ‘There’s a lot going on; you
need to keep your wits about you.’

A maze of moving belts criss-crossed the vast yard and carts were being
loaded and unloaded from various bins and heaps of rubbish. Above
Geoffrey’s head pulleys with rows of buckets rattled along on heavy
chains. The whole world around him seemed to be moving and, from the
stink, Geoffrey guessed it was mainly poo on the move. There were two
golems working on giant treadmills and more golems and trolls and humans
and goblins working at the moving belts. Every now and then one of them
would reach out, pick something off the belt and put it into one of
several bins alongside them. Gnolls, with brushes and buckets and
wearing muzzles over their mouths to stop them eating everything in
sight – including the brush – were clearing anything that fell from the
great creaking edifice.

Geoffrey and Sir Harry climbed some steep stairs to Sir Harry’s office,
which was like a crow’s nest with windows all around, designed so that
he could see everything that was going on in every corner of his empire.

 

[Image]

‘I’ve a couple of jobs I need to attend to,’ said Sir Harry, ‘so I’ll
get my foreman to give you a guided tour and I’ll join you later.’

Sir Harry opened one of the windows and, looking down, shouted, ‘Barker?
Come on up here if you please, I’ve a job for you.’ He then held out a
pair of stout waders. ‘Right, you better put these boots on, Geoffrey,
and it’s probably best if you leave little Widdler in my office. I’ve
got dogs down there that would have him for lunch.’

A short man with a broad grin but unsmiling, steely eyes came up the
steps to the office. He was wearing a flat cap, a much-patched tweedy
jacket, a big leather apron tied up with string and long boots. He
looked at Geoffrey as if calculating how much he’d be worth in his
component parts.

‘Would you show my young friend around the works for me, Barker? He’s a
keen student of the world of waste. Make sure he comes to no harm and
keep him well away from the thaumic dump,’ warned Sir Harry as he picked
up his overcoat and disappeared down the stairs.

‘What’s the thaumic dump, Mister Barker?’ asked Geoffrey, as they
descended into the maelstrom of the busy yard.

‘That’s where we store waste from the University. We have to keep it in
a lead-lined pit or it gets out and crawls all over the place. Sir Harry
doesn’t mind having it here because it generates so much heat, so it’s
never cold down here, even in winter. Admittedly things walk around on
their own, but I suppose that’s progress, that is.’

‘Where exactly is it?’ asked Geoffrey, looking around keenly.

‘More than my job’s worth to take you there,’ said Barker, shaking his
head. ‘We’ll start at goods inwards, shall we? You stay close beside me,
don’t talk to anyone and don’t pick up anything. And I mean _anything_,
right?’ They made their way, through large gates guarded by trolls and
big fierce dogs, to the riverside, where men were shovelling the cargo
from the barges into the backs of carts.

‘Right, as you see, most solid waste comes in by river these days and
it’s all taken by cart to the moving belts for sorting.’

Geoffrey’s eyes were everywhere. ‘How do you know where it’s all come
from?’ he asked.

‘Barge-master’s got a docket, but we can usually tell by the colour and
smell. After you’ve worked here a few years you get to know if it’s from
the privies in the Shades or down The Soake or from the Park Lane
cesspits. It’s all down to diet in the end: what goes in must come out.
This barge is from the Cable Street area, that’s mostly dwarfs, very
concentrated and compact, needs to stand a bit before we can use it. The
other problem is that some of the deep-downers use fine chain-mail for
the paperwork and if a few links drop in and aren’t picked out it causes
merry hell with the grinding machine.’

They walked back into the yard and Barker pointed to a covered area
where several people with clipboards were walking up and down a long
trestle table making notes and occasionally sniffing the contents of
long-handled, saucer-like containers. ‘Over there are the nosers,’ he
said. ‘They can tell, almost to the street, where the stuff comes from
and what’s in it, then they can blend the right mix to go to the tanners
or the dyers or perfume makers or whatever. Clever blokes. And you see
that big heap of fish bones? That’s come from the Temple of Offler; it’s
been a big feast day up there. And over here is the remains of last
year’s beetroot festival that the folks from Uberwald staged. The
tanners had a real problem with pink leather until we separated it out
for them.’

[Image]

‘What happens to the stuff from the Menagerie?’ asked Geoffrey.

‘We keep that separate too, that comes under exotics, along with the
stuff from the College of Heralds. Good thing is the elephant poo is
bagged up and sold for compost as soon as it comes in, otherwise it’d
take over the place.’

As Geoffrey and Barker walked along by one of the moving belts, Sir
Harry joined them again. He’d taken off his hat and overcoat and was
wearing a brown cotton smock with a row of cigars in the top pocket, a
flat cap and leather boots. ‘I hope you’re impressed by what you’ve
seen, lad?’ he asked.

Before Geoffrey could answer, a dwarf climbed up to a platform in the
centre of the yard and blew an enormous horn. ‘That’s old Helmhammerhand
sounding the shift change,’ said Sir Harry, looking at his watch. ‘It
must be time for a spot of lunch. Right, young lad, let’s go and see
what we have to eat today. On your way up to my office use the
facilities. Here’s the key, make sure you lock it after you.’

In this lavatory, Geoffrey was interested to see there was a large wad
of old newspaper hanging on a hook; but the soap was scented and the
towel was clean. He smiled and thought: Sir Harry King doesn’t waste
anything.

 

[Image]

The moment Geoffrey arrived back in the office Sir Harry lifted a large
wicker hamper on to his desk, pulled out a packet of sandwiches and two
slices of cake, and passed them across.

‘And here’s a bottle of lemonade and a glass, Geoffrey,’ said Sir Harry.

‘Are you going to have some?’ asked Geoffrey politely.

‘No, lad, I’m having a bottle of beer. As for food, I have to tell you,
young man, that what I like most is leftovers. I love leftovers and my
good lady wife, who has Cook send lunch up every day, has trained her in
the art of creating leftovers without the necessity of the posh meal
beforehand. _I’ve_ got cold mutton chops with Merkle and Stingbat’s very
fine brown sauce. Lovely! Tuck in, lad, and then I’ll get you taken
home.’

‘Thank you very much indeed, Sir Harry,’ said Geoffrey, finishing every
drop of his lemonade so that there would be no leftover. ‘It’s been a
really interesting day and I think I must have seen more poo than any
other boy in the world!’

‘Well, then, here’s a present for you,’ said Sir Harry. ‘I owe you a
dollar for the poo-sticks race, and no doubt young Widdler has been
leaving me a few presents around the place, so this here paperweight is
a very special item indeed. They call them Pearls of the Pavement; I got
young Derek Proust to do me a one-off.’ He handed Geoffrey a perfect
replica of a small white dog turd in which a large gold dollar was
embedded. ‘Put this in your museum, lad, it’s the only one of its kind
and worth a bob or two. I’ve enjoyed our time together, Geoffrey, and if
you ever want to come and work for me I’d take you like a shot. You’d
have to start at the bottom, though,’ he said with a wink.

[Image]

He escorted Geoffrey to where his coach was waiting. ‘Take the boy home
now,’ he ordered the coachman. ‘And make sure you see him in the door.’
Geoffrey thanked Sir Harry again and waved from the coach until he was
out of sight.

As they passed the River Gate guard-house on their way back into the
city, Geoffrey was pleased to see one of Harry King’s carts parked
outside.

They drove through a busy market and Geoffrey noticed a horse stop in
the road. After a day spent with Sir Harry, he had no hesitation in
politely asking the coachman to halt so that he could gather some fresh
horse apples for Plain Old Humphrey to put on the roses.

 

[Image]

When they got home, while the coachman waited, Widdler relieved himself
on the gatepost then Geoffrey picked him up and carried him up the steps
to the front door. To his great surprise and delight it was opened by
his Mama even before he’d pulled the bell.

‘I’ve been looking out for you, Geoffrey!’ she cried. ‘I’ve missed you
so much.’

Geoffrey knew he was theoretically too old for a kiss but he threw
himself into her arms and she gathered him up. Over her shoulder he saw
Grand-mama holding a very young baby. ‘This is your new sister Holly,’
said Grand-mama. ‘She’s very pretty, but she smells a bit. I’ll get
Nanny to change her, shall I?’

Geoffrey looked at his Mama and Grand-mama. ‘Can I help?’ he asked,
picking up his bucket.

 

[Image]

 

THE END

Now don’t forget to wash your hands …

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
A Random House Group Company
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

First published in Great Britain
in 2012 by Doubleday
an imprint of Transworld Publishers

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett and The Discworld Emporium 2012
Illustrations by Peter Dennis

Discworld® and Unseen University® are trademarks registered by Terry
Pratchett

Terry Pratchett and the partnership known as The Discworld Emporium have
asserted their right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
to be identified as the authors of this work.

This book is a work of fiction and, except in the case of historical
fact, any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, is purely
coincidental.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

Version 1.0 Epub ISBN 9781448127221

ISBN 9780857521217

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Addresses for Random House Group Ltd companies outside the UK can be
found at:
www.randomhouse.co.uk
The Random House Group Ltd Reg. No. 954009

2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1
