
About the Book

Most of us grow up having always known to touch wood or cross our
fingers, and what happens when a princess kisses a frog or a boy pulls a
sword from a stone, yet sadly some of these things are now beginning to
be forgotten. Legends, myths, fairytales: our world is made up of the
stories we told ourselves about where we came from and how we got there.
It is the same on Discworld®, except that beings which on Earth are
creatures of the imagination – like vampires, trolls, witches and,
possibly, gods – are real, alive and in some cases kicking on the Disc.

In _The Folklore of Discworld®_, Terry Pratchett teams up with leading
British folklorist Jacqueline Simpson to take an irreverent yet
illuminating look at the living myths and folklore that are reflected,
celebrated and affectionately libelled in the uniquely imaginative
universe of Discworld®.


Contents

Cover

About the Book

Title Page

Introduction by Terry Pratchett

Introduction by Jacqueline Simpson

1 The Cosmos: Gods, Demons and Things

2 Dwarfs

3 The Elves

4 The Nac Mac Feegle

5 Trolls

6 Other Significant Races

7 Beasties

8 The Witches of Lancre

9 The Land of Lancre

10 The Witches of the Chalk

11 The Chalk

12 Heroes!

13 Lore, Legends and Truth

14 More Customs, Nautical Lore and Military Matters

15 Kids’ Stuff … You know, about ’Orrid Murder and Blood

16 Death

Notes on the folklore of _Unseen Academicals_

Bibliography and suggestions for further reading

Index

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright



THE FOLKLORE OF
DISCWORLD®


Legends, myths and customs from the Discworld®
with helpful hints from planet Earth

Terry Pratchett
and
Jacqueline Simpson


Introduction
by Terry Pratchett

A number of things conspired to cause this book to be written.

There was the time when I was in a car with several other grown-up,
literate people and we passed a sign to the village of Great Dunmow, in
Essex. I said aloud, ‘Oh, yes. Home of the Dunmow Flitch.’ They had not
heard of it, yet for centuries a married man could go to that village on
a Whit Monday and claim the prize of a flitch (or side) of bacon if he
could swear that he and his wife had not quarrelled, even once, during
the past year. And that he had never wished he was a bachelor again.
Back in the late fifties and early sixties the Flitch ceremony used to
be televised, for heaven’s sake.

Not long after this I did a book-signing on the south coast, when I took
the opportunity to ask practically every person in the queue to say the
magpie rhyme (I was doing research for _Carpe Jugulum_). Every single
one of them recited, with greater or lesser accuracy, the version of the
rhyme that used to herald the beginning of the 1960s and 70s children’s
TV programme _Magpie_ – ‘One for sorrow, two for joy’. It wasn’t a bad
rhyme, but like some cuckoo in the nest it was forcing out all the other
versions that had existed around the country (some of which will appear
in a later chapter). Then a distinguished-looking lady was in front of
me with a book, and I asked her, with some inexpressible hope in my
heart, how many versions of the magpie rhyme she knew. After a moment’s
thought, she said ‘about nineteen’.

And that was how I met Jacqueline Simpson, who has been my friend and
occasional consultant on matters of folklore, and once got me along to
talk to the British Folklore Society, where I probably upset a few
people by saying that I think of folklore in much the same way a
carpenter thinks about trees.

Some of the things in this book may well be familiar, and you will say
‘but everybody knows this’. But the Discworld series, which on many
occasions borrows from folklore and mythology, twisting and tangling it
on the way, must be the most annotated series of modern books in
existence. And one thing I have learned is this: not many people know
the things which everyone knows.

But there are some things we shouldn’t forget, and mostly they add up to
where we came from and how we got here and the stories we told ourselves
on the way. But folklore isn’t only about the past. It grows, flowers
and seeds every day, because of our innate desire to control our world
by means of satisfying narratives.

I used to live a short distance away from a standing stone which, at
full moon and/or Midsummer’s Eve, would dance around its field at night,
incidentally leaving unguarded a pot of gold which, in theory, was
available to anyone who dared to seize it and could run faster than a
stone. I went to see it by daylight early on, but for some reason I
never found the time to make the short nocturnal journey and check on
its dancing abilities. I now realize this was out of fear: I feared
that, like so many stones I have met, it would fail to dance. There was
a small part of me that wanted the world to be a place where, despite
planning officers and EU directives and policemen, a stone _might_
dance. And somewhere there, I think, is the instinct for folklore. There
should be a place where a stone dances.

For those who feel the same way we have included a short reading list,
in theory for those readers who would like to know more, but also
because people who love books always want to recommend them to other
people at the least excuse.


Introduction
by Jacqueline Simpson

Ah yes, I remember it well, that book-signing on the south coast! A
misty, moisty November evening in 1997, a long queue inching its way
towards a very impressive black hat, the eager voice demanding, ‘Tell me
_everything_ you know about magpies!’

A little ahead of me in the queue, one woman had been explaining to all
and sundry as we waited that it was for her nephew, not herself, that
she wanted a signed copy of _Jingo_. She herself never, ever read novels
of any kind, let alone fantasy fiction. ‘I only want facts. What’s the
point of reading about things that aren’t real? As for a world flying
through space on a turtle …’ Her voice died out in a splutter of
indignation, and the combined arguments of a dozen Discworld readers
couldn’t budge her one inch. I was not surprised to learn what her job
was; she was an accountant – which is to say, very nearly an Auditor of
Reality. Give her a small grey robe with a cowl, and she would find a
perfect niche on the Disc.

The truth of the matter is, the Disc is the Earth, but with an extra
dimension of reality. On the Discworld, things that on Earth are
creatures of the imagination (but sometimes quite powerful, even so) are
alive and, in some cases, kicking. Sometimes we recognize them at once
(is there anyone who doesn’t know a dragon when they meet one?).
Sometimes we simply feel that something is deeply familiar and
completely right, but we have no idea why. Hours, days or weeks later,
we may find the key, when the rich soil that accumulates at the back of
the mind suddenly yields the fruit of memory.

Then we realize that the key to the familiarity lies in folklore.
Whatever is folklore on Earth finds its mirror in the reality of the
Disc. Of course it’s perfectly natural that Mrs Gogol’s house moves
about on four large duck feet, because Baba Yaga’s hut spins around on
chicken legs in the forests of Russia; of course the Nac Mac Feegle are
_pict_sies, not pixies, because of stories the Scots told about Picts;
of course there’s an ancient king sleeping in a cavern deep under a
mountain in Lancre, because that’s what King Arthur does in England and
Scotland, and the Emperor Barbarossa in Germany. We’ve known about such
things for ages, even if we called them fairy tales, myths, and
folklore; now that we’re on the Disc, they are real, and we feel quite
at home.

Well, then, what is the ‘folklore’ of Earth, and more specifically of
British tradition? It’s the sum total of all those things people know
without ever having been officially _taught_ about them, all those
stories and images which drift around with no apparent source, all those
funny little customs people follow simply because everyone has always
done them (and, usually, it’s fun). If we were bookish children, we may
remember precisely when we first discovered some of them. Terry still
has the copy of Brewer’s _Dictionary of Phrase and Fable_ which he
bought second-hand when he was twelve years old, and read from end to
end (it cost him 10/6 – OK, OK, 50p, about three weeks’ pocket money). I
remember the hot summer day I spent sitting against a haystack, aged
thirteen, and embarking for the first time on the genuine full-length
tales of King Arthur and his knights, as written by Sir Thomas Malory in
the 1460s, funny spellings and weird words included. But most people,
most of the time, just grow up having always known how and when to touch
wood or cross their fingers, and what happens when a princess kisses a
frog or a boy pulls a sword from a stone. They take for granted that
there will be pancakes on Shrove Tuesday, pumpkins and scary costumes at
Halloween, bonfires on Guy Fawkes Night, mince pies at Christmas.
(Non-British readers, please adjust to fit your own traditional foods
and calendars.)

So who are the ‘folk’ who have all this ‘lore’? The answer is, ‘any of
us’. It’s a mistake to think that the only folklore worthy of the name
is what you get by finding the oldest crone in the dirtiest cottage in
the poorest village in the remotest mountain valley, and cross-examining
her on her deathbed. Every group and sub-group in society has its jokes,
its beliefs, its tales and traditions. At this very moment, there are
children in the playground giggling over the latest naughty joke (it may
or may not be one their great-grandparents knew too); young mothers who
take for granted that little girls _must_ wear pink; college students
teaching each other the equivalent of Nanny Ogg’s ‘Hedgehog Song’. And
because where there is fun there is also money to be made, there’s a
large-scale trade in birthday cards, Easter eggs, Mother’s Day cards,
Halloween masks and so forth, which no parent dares ignore. And any town
or pub or castle which wants to attract tourists will go looking for
colourful local legends and customs to exploit.

The days are long gone when scholars insisted that ‘real folklore’ must
always be something passed on by word of mouth, not in print. This was
never very realistic, at any rate in literate societies, where
generations of poets and novelists and dramatists have drawn material
from myth and folk tale, twisted and embroidered it, and then handed it
on to future readers. And then, maybe, the readers become tellers in
their turn, and hand it on again. The Tree of Folklore has no objection
whatever to creative carpenters.

Stories and beliefs grow and multiply in all the media available, old
and new; they are forever feeding on, and then feeding back into, the
rich soup of tradition. Take vampires, for instance. How much of ‘what
everybody knows who knows anything about vampires’ comes from the basic
five-hundred-year-old East European folklore, and how much from novels,
films, comics, TV? Specialists can work it out, but does it really
matter? Here and now, in the twenty-first century, all vampire lore has
blended together into a luscious soup.

Folklore may _look_ as if it never changes, but if you keep a watchful
eye on it, you will notice some things dying out and others springing
up. In Britain nowadays, people do not wear mourning for months on end
after a death in the family, but because grief needs an outlet a new
custom has appeared out of nowhere and is spreading fast – thirty years
ago nobody built roadside memorials of flowers and mementoes at the site
of tragic accidents, but now this is felt to be right and proper.
Customs also travel from one country to another much faster and more
frequently than they once did; since the 1980s Britain has learned from
America that if you tie a yellow ribbon to a tree or a fence, this means
you’re praying for the safety of some prisoner or kidnap victim who is
in the news. In fact, variously coloured ribbons and plastic wrist-bands
in support of good causes are popping up all over the place now, in the
way that lapel badges used to do, and everyone understands what each one
means.

On the Discworld, folklore is much more stable. New symbols sometimes
arise – the black ribbon recently adopted by reformed vampires, for
instance (its Earthly parallel was the blue ribbon of Victorian
teetotallers), and the commemorative spray of lilac which Vimes and some
others in Ankh-Morpork wear on one day of the year, as explained in
_Night Watch_ – but nothing ever seems to be discarded and forgotten.
This makes the Discworld a wonderful place in which to rediscover the
solidity, the _depth_ which tradition brings to a society, and learn to
cherish it.

So when Terry invited me to join him in exploring this incredibly rich
network of links, I had only one misgiving. Is it wise to _explain_ so
much? Might it not be best to let readers enjoy the glimpses and hints
and clues half understood, and gradually make their own discoveries?

But as Terry has said elsewhere, a conjurer is more entertaining than a
wizard because he entertains you twice: once with the trick, and once
with the trickery.

So now, there’s a drum-roll, the curtains part, and you can watch how
the conjurer works …

[image]


Chapter 1


THE COSMOS:
GODS, DEMONS
_and_ THINGS

 

VERY VAST IS the expanding rubber sheet of the space-time continuum.
Should we not call it infinite?

No, as a matter of fact, we should not, not unless we want to get into
an interminable argument with both physicists and philosophers – the
kind of argument where people steeple their fingers and say, very
slowly, ‘_We-ell_, it all depends on what you _mean_ by “infinite”.’ And
go on saying it, with variations, till the beer runs out. If you are
very unlucky, they will explain how infinities come in different sizes.

What we can fairly safely say is that there are clumps of matter on that
rubber sheet, moving about and organizing themselves into complicated
systems. Billions of them. Two of these deserve our close attention. One
consists of a rather lumpy and intensely hot spherical core of iron and
rock, much of it in a molten state, held together by its own pressure,
and wrapped in a thin solid crust. It is whirled through space by the
force of gravity. This is the Earth, which is round-like-a-ball. The
other is round-like-a-plate, and is moved at a more sedate pace by a
team of elephants and a turtle. This is the Discworld.

What they have in common is that each carries through the cosmos a cargo
of conscious, imaginative – we could even say, charitably, intelligent –
living species. Over the many centuries of their existence, these
species have generated an accumulation of thoughts, information,
emotions, beliefs and imaginings which envelops their world like a
mental atmosphere, a _noosphere_. Within this noosphere patterns have
formed, driven by the irresistible force of narrativium, the narrative
imperative, the power of story. Some scholars call the patterns
_motifs_, others _topoi_, others _memes_. The point is, they’re there,
everyone knows them, and they go on and on. More remarkably, some of the
strongest can replicate themselves and go drifting off across the
multiverse as particles of inspiration, which leads to some truly
amazing similarities between the Earth and Discworld.

THE ELEPHANTS AND THE TURTLE

The absolutely central, incontrovertible fact about the Discworld is
that it is a disc. At least, it’s incontrovertible unless you adhere to
the Omnian religion, in which case you must controvert it like billy-o.
This disc rests upon four gigantic elephants (named Berilia, Tubul,
Great T’Phon and Jerakeen), whose bones are living iron, and whose
nerves are living gold. These elephants themselves stand upon the shell
of the Great A’Tuin, a ten-thousand-mile-long star turtle, which is
swimming through space in a purposeful manner. What this purpose may be,
is unknown.

A child once asked, ‘Why does the Turtle swim?’
A wise man replied, ‘Child, there is no Why. IT … IS … SO.’
And that could be said of many things.

On Earth ‘everyone knows’ that people used to believe that their planet
was also flat, if they thought about it at all. In fact for several
thousand years a growing number of educated people have shared the
knowledge that it is a globe. Generally speaking it was wisest not to
shout about it in the street, though, because of the unrest this could
cause. No doubt scholars in the ancient Hindu India partook of this
knowledge, but since truth comes in many forms, the age-old epic poems
of India declare the world to be a disc.

Further details of Hindu cosmology vary. According to one myth, there
are four (or eight) great elephants named the _diggaja_ or
_di[image][image]gaja_, ‘elephants of the directions’, guarding the four
(or eight) compass points of this disc, with a type of god called a
_lokapala_ riding on the back of each one. But the oldest texts do not
claim that they _carry_ the world. According to another myth, however,
the world rests on the back of a single elephant, Maha-Padma, and he is
standing on a tortoise named Chukwa. Finally, it is said in yet another
myth that the god Vishnu once took on the form of a vast tortoise or
turtle (_k[image]rma_), so huge that Mount Meru, the sacred central
mountain of the world, could rest on his back and be used as a stick to
churn the ocean. At some stage, though nobody knows just when, these
insights began to blend, with the result that some (but not all) Hindu
mythographers now say the world is a disc supported by four elephants
supported by a turtle.

Variations of the myth spread out from India to other areas of the
globe.¹ One that has proved particularly popular involves an infinite
regression of turtles. It is said that an arrogant Englishman once
mocked a Hindu by asking what the turtle stood on; untroubled, the Hindu
calmly replied, ‘Ah, Sahib, after that it’s turtles all the way down.’²
Another variation, briefly mentioned in the film _A Thief of Baghdad_,
involves different creatures but is of value because it adds one vital
factor, that of movement. It tells how the world rests on seven pillars,
carried on the shoulders of a huge genie, who stands on an eagle, which
perches on a bull, which stands on a fish – and this fish swims through
the seas of eternity.

Chinese mythology also knows of an immense cosmic turtle, but with a
difference. According to the Chinese, our world is not balanced upon the
creature’s back (with or without elephants), but is sloshing about
inside it. Its plastron contains the oceans upon which all our
continents are floating, and when we look up at the dome of the night
sky we are seeing the inside of its vast carapace, studded with
innumerable stars.

Clearly, fragments of information have drifted through the multiverse
and taken root here and there. But the full and glorious Truth is known
only on the Discworld. The Turtle Moves!

And beyond that Truth lies an even deeper mystery, one hinted at in the
legends of the dwarfs – the legend of the Fifth Elephant. For the dwarfs
of Uberwald say there was once a fifth elephant supporting the Disc, but
it crashed:

They _say_ that the fifth elephant came screaming and trumpeting through
the atmosphere of the young world all those years ago and landed hard
enough to split continents and raise mountains. [_The Fifth Elephant_]

Nobody actually saw or heard this, but the dwarfs _say_ that the vast
deposits of iron ore, gold and fat under their mountains are all that
remains of the Fifth Elephant. Also that the crash buried thousands of
acres of prehistoric sugar cane, creating a mass of dense crystalline
sugar which can now be mined. These raw materials form the basis for a
flourishing trade in confectionery and in very fine-quality candles,
soaps and lamp-oils.

The iron, the gold and the fat undoubtedly exist. Yet the legend itself
poses great problems. If the Four Elephants mark the four quarters,
where did the Fifth stand? Centrally, to form the pattern known as a
quincunx? If it slipped and fell from the Turtle’s back, how could it
strike the Disc – did it fall _upwards_? And if so, wouldn’t it strike
the underside of the Disc rather than crashing down through the
atmosphere? Did it perhaps briefly go into orbit? Dwarfs are a secretive
race, so we are unlikely ever to learn the truth of this.

Some philosophers in Ephebe, hearing the tale, have concluded that the
Fifth Elephant is not a gross material being subject to normal physical
laws, but the pure, subtle, ethereal Quintessence of Cosmic
Pachydermacy. It is nowhere to be seen because it is present everywhere.
Without it, the whole Universe of the Discworld would cease to exist. By
a remarkable coincidence, this is exactly how the Earth philosophers of
Ancient Greece described their hypothetical Fifth Element – the
invisible, impalpable, ethereal Quintessence which provides the
essential counterbalance to the four material elements of Earth, Air,
Fire and Water, the five together making up their universe. Or it may
just be a legend. Legends don’t have to make sense. They just have to be
beautiful. Or at least interesting.

THE GODS

At the last count, the number of major gods known to research
theologians on the Discworld was 3,000, and rising. The potential number
is unlimited, since at any moment a new one may be called into existence
by the mere fact that it has occurred to a human being (or to a member
of any other sentient species) to believe he, she or it exists, and to
feel an urge to worship him, her or it. The greater the number of
devotees, rituals, shrines, temples, sacrifices, and sacred books which
develop from this initial urge, the greater the status of the deity.
Conversely, of course, since belief is the life-force and nourishment of
gods, in the course of time particular gods can and do lose power as the
number of their believers drops. Rarely, however, do they dwindle into
total insignificance, and any good dramatic miracle quickly restores
them to their previous status, as was proved by the events narrated in
_Small Gods_. Two of them, Fate and Luck (The Lady), are almost
certainly immune to change – they don’t have temples, but there can
hardly be anybody, anywhere in the multiverse, who does not believe in
_them_. In addition, dwarfs have formulated the notion of a Creator
quite distinct from any individual gods, whom they call Tak; we shall
have more to say on this in the next chapter.

Discworld people vary considerably in their attitude to the gods.
Certain groups, notably witches, wizards, policemen and dwarfs, ignore
them. Not that anybody would actually deny that they exist – it is known
that they are quick with a thunderbolt if they detect actual atheism –
but it is perfectly possible to get on with one’s life without thinking
about them. Similarly, the citizens of Ephebe do not pay very much
attention to their numerous divinities. On the other hand, the land of
Djelibeybi is swarming with local gods, in whose honour devoted priests
carry out an endless round of sacred rituals. In Omnia and Borogravia,
every aspect of life is dominated by the very demanding cult of a single
god, Om and Nuggan respectively. As for Ankh-Morpork, it is rather a
paradox. Street after street has a temple in it, enough of them to suit
every ethnic group, yet nobody could call it a pious city, exactly. The
citizens seem willing to worship any god at all, provided he or she is
good for trade. In that city, we learn (in _Making Money_), there is
even a god-of-the-month club. And a deity currently in the ascendant is
Anoia, goddess of Things That Get Stuck in Drawers. That’s life in the
big city for you. People will take a chance on heaven, but they would
like to get their hands on the corkscrew right now, amen.

The major gods, loosely organized into a rather grumpy pantheon, have
chosen to make their home on the peak of a truly remarkable mountain,
Cori Celesti – a spire of rock and ice, ten miles high, rising above the
clouds at the very centre and hub of the Disc. The home itself is of
course a vast marble palace, a pile of pillars, pilasters, pinnacles,
pyramids, parapets, peristyles, porticos, porches, portals and
pavilions, which they have decided to call Dunmanifestin. Gods are not
noted for good taste or a sense of the ridiculous, nor indeed, in most
cases, for intelligence.

If the gods have the ability to look into other dimensions, then they
will see some remarkable resemblances to themselves in the cosmic soap
operas of Earth. One thing they have apparently taken notice of is
fashions in divine accessories and lifestyles – thunderbolts, goat’s
feet, a jackal’s head, and so on – whatever. If Zeus and his gang have a
Mount Olympus, and Vishnu and _his_ gang have a Mount Meru, they get
themselves their Cori Celesti, and it’s higher than the other two put
together. This passion for keeping up with the Zeuses means that anyone
with a working knowledge of inter-dimensional mythology who drops in at
Dunmanifestin will feel quite at home there.

The Disc gods will have noticed, too, that all pantheons pass their time
in banqueting, and that many also like playing board games. For example,
one of the first things the Norse gods did when they had finished
creating the cosmos was to settle down for a happy session of
_hnefatafl_, played with pieces made of pure gold. As _hnefi_ is ‘fist’
and _tafl_ is ‘table’ or ‘board’, the name means roughly ‘The Punch-up
Board-Game’; it is a bit like draughts but much more like the Discworld
game of Thud. It is thought that the run of play determines the
destinies of men, gods, giants and the world itself. Apparently the game
will be disrupted and the pieces scattered when gods and monsters fight
at Ragnarok, the War at the End of the World, also known as the Doom of
the Gods and the Twilight of the Gods. Afterwards, according to the Old
Icelandic prophetic poem _Völuspá_, a new world will arise and the
surviving younger generation of gods will restore both the cosmic order
and the game which expressed it:

Then once again in the grass are found

Draughtsmen all of gold,

The wondrous draughtsmen the gods had owned

In the earliest days of old.

On Earth, however, not everyone relishes the idea of being a pawn in a
game played by gods. The twelfth-century Persian poet Omar Khayyám made
a resigned but gloomy comment on life in his _Rubâíyát_:

’Tis all a Chequer-board of Nights and Days
Where Destiny with Men for Pieces plays:
Hither and thither moves, and mates, and slays,
And one by one back in the Closet lays.

The gods of the Discworld lack the patience and imagination to play
chess, draughts, _hnefatafl_, or even chequers; their idea of amusement
is a form of Snakes and Ladders (played with greased rungs), accompanied
by heavy betting and a good deal of bluffing and cheating, which brings
it nearer to poker. The currency staked is the souls of men. The gaming
board is a finely carved map of the Disc, overprinted with squares.
Occasionally, the playing pieces represent monsters; more often, they
are beautifully detailed models of those human beings who have foolishly
done something to get themselves noticed. It is said that these
unfortunate mortals sometimes faintly hear, as they hasten to their
doom, the rattle of dice in the celestial (skull-shaped) shaker.

This is one of the reasons it’s wise to steer clear of the gods, as the
wizard Rincewind knows:

‘I don’t like the idea of going _anywhere_ near the gods. We’re
like toys to them, you know. And they don’t realize how easily
the arms and legs come off.’ [_The Last Hero_]

Or maybe (and even Rincewind in his darkest moments didn’t think of
this) they _do_ realize, and find it funny. That at any rate is what
Will Shakespeare thought when he wrote _King Lear_, in one of _his_
darkest moments:

As flies to wanton boys are we to the gods;
They kill us for their sport.

The gods have an age-old feud with the Ice Giants, a species of
super-troll the size of large houses, craggy and faceted, and composed
entirely of ice which glints green and blue in the light – apart from
their small, deep-sunken, coal-black eyes. Just as Zeus and the
Olympians defeated the gigantic Titans and imprisoned them inside
volcanoes such as Etna (where they still wriggle about, causing
eruptions and earthquakes), so Blind Io and the other Discworld gods
defeated the Ice Giants and imprisoned them under the eternal ice at the
Hub. There is, however, a prophecy. A very Norse-sounding prophecy, a
prophecy of End Time doom:

At the end of the world they’ll break free at last, and ride out on
their dreadful glaciers and regain their ancient domination, crushing
out the flames of civilization until the world lies naked and frozen
under the terrible cold stars until Time itself freezes over. Or
something like that, apparently. [_Sourcery_]

Whether it comes with ice ages, global warming, a nasty bang or a little
whimper, the end of a world is never much fun.

_BLIND IO_

Io is the chief of the gods. He is elderly, white-haired and
white-bearded, dressed in a toga and wearing a white blindfold which
conceals the blank skin where his eyes should be. Despite this, and
despite his name, he sees everything that is going on, since in fact he
has a number of detached eyes (several dozen of them) which hover around
him and keep a sharp look-out in all directions. His throne too is
encrusted with eyes. He is the Supreme Thunderer, having absorbed every
other thunder-god on the Disc into himself. However, he keeps a stock of
seventy hammers, double-headed axes, and thunderbolts, each of a
different design, to blend in with local expectations wherever he may
appear. This avoids unnecessary distress to worshippers.

At one time he employed a pair of ravens to fly hither and yon and keep
him informed of everything going on in the world. In another universe
Odin, chief of the Norse gods, had had exactly the same idea; his two
ravens were named Memory and Thought. From the god’s point of view, it’s
a good plan, efficient and energy-saving. From the ravens’ point of
view, regrettably, Io’s free-floating eyeballs were altogether too much
of a temptation (Odin’s one eye is firmly fixed in his head, so in his
case the problem did not arise) and after some embarrassing scenes Io’s
ravens had to be dismissed.³

Earth is well stocked with thunder-gods, including Zeus, Jupiter, Thor,
Perkun, Indra and Jehovah. Usually, a thunder-god is also the ruler of
his particular pantheon, but Thor is an exception, taking second place
to Odin (god of war, magic, death and poetry). Blind Io’s insistence on
being the Disc’s _only_ Thunderer is an example of how Discworld gods
love to outdo those of Earth in displays of status. It’s the same with
his lavish use of detached eyeballs, whereas on the Earth even the
mightiest deities are satisfied with only one. These are mostly to be
found in Ancient Egypt, where the Eye of a major god such as Ra, Atum,
or Horus embodied the concentration of his divine power and could be
sent out to act on his behalf. The separated Eye, called the _wedjat_,
was often shown in religious art, and worn as an amulet. It was
sometimes identified with the sun or the moon, and sometimes personified
as itself a goddess. That’s something Io has not yet thought of.

_DAGON_

A very ancient, mysterious and probably unpleasant god, believed to have
been once worshipped on the mud-flats where the city of Ankh-Morpork was
later built. At least, _something_ happened not so long ago when the
late Mr Hong opened a takeaway fish bar on the site of an old temple in
Dagon Street, at the time of the full moon – or, some say, of a lunar
eclipse. Everybody has heard about it, in general terms, but nobody says
just _what_ it was …

Traditions of the Earth are fuller. It appears that Dagon was first
worshipped there some four thousand years ago by Philistines and
Phoenicians in the Middle East; there were temples to him in Gaza and
other coastal towns. According to the Bible (1 Samuel 5), his statue
stood in a mighty temple at Ashdod, but when the captured Jewish Ark was
brought into this temple the statue crashed to the ground and its head
and hands broke off, leaving only a stump on the threshold.

There is argument among scholars as to what he looked like, and what it
was he was god of. The older generation thought his name came from a
word for ‘fish’ and that he must have been the god of fishes, shaped
like a merman, human above the waist and fishy below. Most poets and
occultists agree. More recent scholars say no, the name comes from a
word for ‘corn’, and he was a god of farming (no fish tail required).
The matter could easily be settled if one could find an old temple of
his and set up a bakery in one corner and a fish-and-chip shop in the
other, and see what happened.

One writer who had no doubts at all on the matter was the American H. P.
Lovecraft, whose eerily receptive mind picked up many strange influences
from the worlds of gods and demons, and indeed from the dreaded Dungeon
Dimensions. In 1917 he published a story, ‘Dagon’, in which a
shipwrecked man reaches an unknown land of mud and rocks, newly risen
from the ocean floor. There are weird buildings there, with repulsive
carvings. Then he sees, emerging from a deep abyss, a vast and loathsome
monster with scaly arms, webbed hands and feet, shockingly wide and
flabby lips, and bulging, glassy eyes. Though he escapes, he remains
haunted by the thought of huge nameless things crawling and floundering
at the bottom of the ocean until the day when they will come to destroy
mankind:

Once I sought out a celebrated ethnologist, and amused him with peculiar
questions regarding the ancient Philistine legend of Dagon the Fish-god;
but soon perceiving that he was hopelessly conventional, I did not press
my enquiries.

This may well be significant, since it is strongly suspected on the
Discworld that Dagon had some connection with the sunken land of Leshp,
which occasionally rises to the surface of the Circle Sea, as described
in _Jingo_. On Leshp, there are fragments of buildings with an
uncomfortably non-human look about them, a bodeful atmosphere, and
plenty of pretty mosaics showing squid and octopuses. All in all, it
seems probable that Dagon is actually one of the Things from the Dungeon
Dimensions still lurking on the Disc, like Bel-Shamharoth (see below).

_FATE_

This, possibly, is the god most feared and hated by men. He is
proverbially stern and implacable. Some Earthbound poets have claimed
that he is blind, but this is far from true; anyone who looks into his
dark and bottomless eyes will see that they are holes opening on to the
blackness of infinite night. He enjoys gambling and chess, largely
because when he plays, the roll of the dice is always fixed and there
are always two queens on his side of the board – unless, of course, his
eternal rival the Lady has a hand in the game, in which case there is a
million-to-one chance that somebody might cheat Fate.

In the mythologies of the Earth, Fate is sometimes personified as three
old women, the Fates – three because triplicity symbolizes power. More
often, however, he remains an abstract figure.

_THE GODS OF DJELIBEYBI_

In the river kingdom of Djelibeybi, the national religion has been
accreting and fermenting and bubbling away for seven thousand years,
during which time nobody ever threw away a god, in case he might come in
useful one day. As a result, the gods are far too numerous to list. One
might start by mentioning Scrab the Pusher of the Ball of the Sun, Thrrp
the Charioteer of the Sun, Jeht the Boatman of the Solar Orb, Vut the
Dog-Headed God of Evening, Bunu the Goat-Headed God of Goats, Ket the
Ibis-Headed God of Justice, Hat the Vulture-Headed God of Unexpected
Guests, Bast the Cat-Headed Goddess of Things Left on the Doorstep or
under the Bed … From which, two things are already obvious: they just
love fooling around with funny faces, and most of them reckon they can
do the top job. They can also be quarrelsome:

There was a monstrous splash out in the river. Tzut, the Snake-Headed
God of the Upper Djel, surfaced and regarded the assembled priesthood
solemnly. Then Fhez, the Crocodile-Headed God of the Lower Djel, erupted
beside him and made a spirited attempt at biting his head off. The two
submerged in a column of spray and a minor tidal wave. [_Pyramids_]

There are remarkably close and no doubt wholly coincidental similarities
here to the pantheon of Ancient Egypt, where many of the deities have
the heads of animals or birds, and where it was perfectly possible for
several of them to be credited with the same important function. Thus,
Amun, Aten, Atum, Ptah, and Ra were each said to have been the creator
of the world, and all except Ptah were also sun gods. This does not seem
to have caused any quarrels, either among the gods themselves or among
their priests. In Egypt, as in Djelibeybi, priests, very much in the way
of advanced physicists, took for granted that mutually incompatible
statements could still both be true, and that in any case the _really_
important thing was to carry out rituals correctly.

The kings of Djelibeybi, also called pharaohs, are regarded as gods even
while still alive; the divine part of their souls comes from the sun in
the form of a bird – in the case of Teppicymon XXVII, a seagull. Kings
have the power (and duty) to make the sun rise every morning, and to
make the river Djel flood the land in due season; they do this by
carrying out daily rituals as tradition requires. There may be minor
supernatural manifestations too – rivers flowing more strongly as a
pharaoh passes by, grass and corn springing up in his footsteps, and so
on. On the Earth, the pharaohs of Egypt had similar powers and
responsibilities.

It has to be said that the Egyptian pantheon fits snugly into the
Discworld way of thinking with barely more than a few changes of name.
At one point the author of _Pyramids_ declared: ‘I bought half a shelf
of books on Ancient Egypt, and after a while I decided to make things
up, because when you got down to details the real thing was just too
weird.’

_HERNE THE HUNTED_

Wherever humans go in for hunting, because they need the meat, or just
because it’s such good fun, they tend to create a god (or goddess) of
the hunt. They pray, and make offerings. They believe the god (or
goddess) will provide a good fat deer or buffalo or wild boar for them,
and ensure that they don’t break their necks as they gallop after the
deer, or shoot one another by accident, or get gored by the boar. But it
never occurs to them that the prey could be praying too, though probably
not to the same deity.

On the Discworld, where divinities are called into existence by the very
fact that someone hopes and believes that they exist, this often urgent
prayer is catered for. There, in the mountains and forests of Lancre,
lives Herne the Hunted, who is a god of the chase, though not in the
usual sense:

Herne was the god of the chased and the hunted and all small animals
whose ultimate destiny is to be an abrupt damp squeak. He was about
three feet high, with rabbit ears and very small horns. But he did have
an extremely good turn of speed. [_Lords and Ladies_]

His role as a deity is to hear the occult voice of the prey. He is a
good listener, but his success rate at answering prayers is not high.
His worshippers, unfortunately, tend to die shortly after calling upon
his name.

How he got his name is an interesting example of interaction between one
universe and another. At any one time there are millions of particles of
inspiration and information pulsating through the multiverse, pouring
out from the minds of various sentient species. One of the most powerful
sources was on Earth, in the creative mind of a human being named
William Shakespeare. In the world of Shakespeare’s imagination – to be
precise, in his play _The Merry Wives of Windsor_, written in 1597 –
there is a Herne the _Hunter_. The two heroines of the play decide to
make a fool of a man who is pestering them by persuading him to disguise
himself as a ghost and meet them at midnight under an oak tree in
Windsor Park. Describing this ghost, one says:

There is an old tale goes, that Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
Doth all the winter time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragg’d horns;
And there he blasts the trees, bewitches cattle,
And makes the cows yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.

According to another version of the play, some mothers used Herne as a
bogeyman to frighten children:

Oft have you heard since Herne the hunter dyed,
That women, to affright their little children,
Say that he walkes in shape of a great stagge.

Shakespeare tells us nothing more about Herne’s life or death, but about
two hundred years later, in 1792, a writer called Samuel Ireland says he
had heard say that Herne was a gamekeeper who had turned to crime, and
who hanged himself on the oak, fearing he was about to lose his job.
This fits the traditional belief that suicides haunt the scene of their
death. The rattling chain is also standard equipment for a ghost, but
the stag’s antlers are not. Perhaps Shakespeare felt they matched the
forest setting. Or perhaps he just wanted to get a laugh; Elizabethan
audiences thought horns side-splittingly funny, even better than custard
pies, and this is a comedy after all.

To Shakespeare, Herne was simply an earthbound ghost, for ever walking
round and round one particular tree, in the same way as the ghostly
kings of Lancre must never move far from the stone walls of their
castle. But the job-description ‘hunter’ caught the eye of Jacob Grimm,
a German expert on mythology in the early nineteenth century, and
started up a whole new train of thought. It reminded him of the Wild
Hunt – a horde of phantom riders who, according to European folklore,
gallop across the night sky during midwinter storms. Their leader is
sometimes said to be a lost soul who is doomed to hunt for ever,
sometimes the Devil pursuing the souls of sinners, occasionally a god
hunting forest elves. Maybe, said Grimm, Herne had once been a Wild
Huntsman, not a common-or-garden gamekeeper’s ghost.

This is Grimm’s theory, _not_ Will Shakespeare’s. But people liked the
idea, and so on the Earth Herne the Hunter, the stag-headed god of
hunting, was born. He has enjoyed a brilliant career, thanks to those
fascinating antlers. In the 1930s, people started wondering if he could
be connected with various old Celtic gods who had horns or antlers on
their heads, especially a Gaulish one to whom sailors raised an altar in
Paris early in the first century AD, calling him Cernunnos, ‘Horned One’
(or possibly ‘Old Horny’). Others thought he might even have as his
remote ancestor a prehistoric man painted on the wall of a French cave,
wearing a skin and antlers. By now, there are many, many people ready to
swear that Herne is an age-old god, the lord of wild nature. But there
is the truth and, then again, there is The Truth, in the face of which
truth can only shrug and grin.

According to a popular 1980s British TV series, Robin Hood used to meet
a horned man in the forest, and this was none other than Herne. Well,
maybe so – provided Robin had an efficient time machine to whisk him
forward two or three centuries to Elizabethan times, or backwards to the
first century AD to meet up with Cernunnos.

And so, while Will Shakespeare lies giggling in his grave, the story
goes drifting off across the dimensions, twisting itself into other
shapes, and creating Herne the Hunted. Stories and folklore always
tangle, and never more than on Discworld.

_HOKI THE JOKESTER_

Hoki is a localized nature-god, only to be found in the deep forests of
the Ramtops. Sometimes he manifests himself as an oak-tree, sometimes as
half a man and half a goat, and pretty well always as a bloody nuisance.
He plays the flute, very badly.

Hoki has a typically mix-and-don’t-match approach to the business of
filching attributes and character traits from the gods of another
universe. He admired and copied the shaggy goat-legs and the pipes of
Pan, a cheerful, sexy little nature-god living in Arcadia in Ancient
Greece. His name, however, he took from that of the Norse Loki, a
trickster and trouble-maker, whose most infamous deed was a
murder-by-proxy: he caused the death of the popular and handsome young
Baldur by getting a blind god to throw a twig of mistletoe at him,
supposedly as a joke. Hoki must have got to hear about this, since it is
said that he was thrown out of Dunmanifestin for playing ‘the old
exploding mistletoe trick’ on Blind Io.

The oak-tree manifestation is something Hoki picked up more recently. In
some countries of the Earth over the past fifty or sixty years there has
been a revival of paganism, and sexy male nature-gods are once again in
fashion, including a Green Man who manifests himself as a face sprouting
leaves, peering through leaves, or entirely made up of leaves.
Sometimes, they are oak leaves. Observing this, Hoki decided to go one
better and be the whole tree.

_THE LADY_

Though everyone believes in her and longs to win her favour, nobody ever
calls her by her true name, or tries to summon her, for this would make
her vanish. Her eyes are pure green, from edge to edge, and green is her
favourite colour. Her realm is that of the throw of the dice, of
uncertainty and chance, especially the million-to-one chance. She
thwarts the rigid rules of Fate.

And on the Earth too, that’s exactly how things are. Except as regards
the colour green. That information has not seeped through into our
world, where many people regard green as unl— er, quite the opposite.

_NUGGAN_

Nuggan, the god of Borogravia (and also of paperclips, desk stationery
sets, and unnecessary paperwork), is small and podgy, and has the
sourest face one could wish never to see, with a fussy little moustache.
He has revealed himself unto his faithful people via the holy _Book of
Nuggan_, which – unlike other holy writs – is published in a ring
binder, since it is permanently incomplete, especially as regards the
List of Abominations. Updates appear regularly as an appendix. At the
last count, the things that are Abominations in the eyes of Nuggan
included garlic, chocolate, certain mushrooms, dwarfs, cats, babies,
shirts with six buttons, cross-dressing, jigsaws, and the colour blue.

Nuggan’s temper being notoriously tetchy, Borogravians mostly pray to
their ruler, the Duchess Annagovia, whom they call Little Mother, and
whose icon is displayed in every house. She herself is never seen,
having shut herself away in a castle for years, in mourning for her
husband who was gored by a wild boar when hunting, they say. (Another
instance of trans-dimensional parallels, since on the Earth Adonis, a
human lover of the Greek goddess Aphrodite, met his death in just the
same way.) She may possibly be dead. She is (or was) human, of course,
yet somehow rather more, as the Ankh-Morpork consul to Zlobenia
explained to Commander Vimes:

‘The royal family in Borogravia have always had a quasi-religious
status, you see. They’re the head of the church, and the peasants, at
least, pray to them in the hope that they’ll put in a good word with
Nuggan. They’re like … living saints. Celestial intermediaries. To be
honest, that’s how these countries work in any case. If you want
something done, you have to know the right people. And I suppose it’s
easier to pray to someone in a picture than to a god you can’t see.’
[_Monstrous Regiment_]

According to Commander Vimes, Nuggan has dwindled away to a mere voice,
and it is time for the Borogravians to find themselves a new god. The
Duchess herself agrees; speaking through her most fervent devotee, she
declares:

Fight Nuggan, for he is nothing now, nothing but the poisonous echo of
your ignorance and pettiness and malicious stupidity. Find yourselves a
worthier god. And let … me … go! All those prayers, all those entreaties
… to me! Too many hands clasped, that could more gainfully answer your
prayers by effort and resolve!

A _very_ unusual message for a divinity, or a semi-divinity, to give
unto the faithful, in any universe, but it might bear repeating.

_OFFLER THE CROCODILE_

Offler is a very old god, who first arose from steamy swamps in the hot
dark land of Klatch, and finds worshippers anywhere where there is a
large river and a warm climate, including Djelibeybi and Ankh-Morpork.
He is sometimes known as ‘Offler of the Bird-Haunted Mouth’, because of
the flock of brave and holy birds which attend upon him, pecking out
those little shreds of meat which are such a nuisance when they get
stuck between your fangs. Apart from his crocodile head, he is of normal
human shape, though he has occasionally manifested himself with six arms
instead of two. He lisps, because of the fangs.

His counterpart on the Earth is the Egyptian Sobek, son of the primeval
waters, whose name means ‘the Raging One’ and who manifested himself
either as an entire crocodile wearing a crown, or as a man with a
crocodile head. He lived in the marshes by the Nile, and was ardently
worshipped by prudent river fishermen. Nile crocodiles are notoriously
savage.

_OM_

The Great God Om is the sole god of the land of Omnia, his devotees
having zealously exterminated everybody who worshipped any others. By
nature he is very liable to outbursts of Wrath, expressed through
cursing, trampling of infidels, and smiting with lightning. According to
the Omnian priests, he spoke – indeed, he spake – to a series of chosen
prophets, dictating to them a vast number of Laws, Precepts and
Prohibitions which are enshrined in numerous sacred writings, not to
mention some Codicils written on slabs of lead ten feet tall. Sometimes,
it is said, Om did his spaking from out of a pillar of flame. Sometimes
the chosen prophet sprouted glowing horns, for Holy Horns are Om’s
symbol.

The priests also claim that Om made the world, and revealed to them that
it is not a disc carried by a turtle, but a perfectly smooth ball moving
in a perfect circle round the sun, which is another perfectly smooth
ball; this has become a vital dogma in the Omnian Church. Actually, Om
now denies that he ever said this, or that he made the world – and if he
_had_, he says, he wouldn’t have made it as a ball. Silly idea, a ball.
People would fall off. Come to that, Om has only very vague memories of
having met any prophets, and doesn’t recognize the things he is supposed
to have said to them.

Om’s views on these matters are known because he spent three years or so
in the world in the form of a tortoise. This was an embarrassing
accident. He had meant to manifest himself briefly in some suitably
impressive avatar – most likely, a bull – but what he got was a
tortoise. Not a vast mountain-bearing tortoise such as the Hindu god
Vishnu once chose, but a mere common-or-garden tortoise. And he found he
was quite unable to get back to his own shape. This humiliating failure
of god-power was due to the fact that hardly any Omnians had real, true,
deep-down belief in Om. Possibly, only one. The rest _thought_ they
believed in him, but what they really believed in was the terrifying
authority of the Omnian Church and its Quisition. As the philosopher
Abraxas wrote:

Around the Godde there forms a Shelle of prayers and Ceremonies and
Buildings and Priestes and Authority, until at Last the Godde Dies. Ande
this maye notte be noticed. [_Small Gods_]

To make matters worse, Om-as-tortoise found his physical life in danger.
Far too many people he met knew that ‘there’s good eating on one of
those’. He was also being hunted by an eagle who had found out that if
you carry off a tortoise in your talons and drop it on a rock from a
great height, the result is a shattered shell and a rather fiddly meal.
If, on the other hand, you drop it on somebody’s head, then you are
recreating the Earth legend which claims that the Ancient Greek
dramatist Aeschylus was killed when a flying eagle dropped a tortoise on
his bald head, mistaking it for a rock.

That eagles in some places have learned to drop tortoises in order to
crack them open has been attested to by various sources, and our
suspension of disbelief in a bird’s ability to target humans in the
course of breaking its lunch was occasioned by a _Daily Telegraph_
obituary of Brigadier John Mackenzie. In the Second World War he worked
with partisans in the mountains of Greece, and ‘… on one occasion a
brigade rifle meeting on a mountain was disrupted when a flock of
vultures carrying various small tortoises in their talons decided to
drop them on the mountainside to crack their shells. Two soldiers
sustained fractured skulls from the tortoises and there were other
injuries; the meeting was abandoned.’

Om has been affected by his spell as a humble tortoise. The Omnian
Church has now disbanded its Quisition. Divine smitings have become
noticeably rare. Om’s devotees grudgingly allow foreigners to worship
their own deities without being massacred, and his missionaries simply
afflict the infidel with hymns and excruciatingly boring tracts.
Clearly, this is all made up and the story has nothing to do with any
‘Earthly’ deity.

_VALKYRIES_

Valkyries form a group of very specialized goddesses honoured by
Barbarian Heroes; their name means ‘Choosers of the Slain’. They are
found both on the Discworld and in the Nordic and Germanic myths of
Earth, where they serve Odin the God of War (also known as Wotan or
Woden). They became even better known through a nineteenth-century opera
by the German composer Wagner. They are tall, powerfully built women,
wearing chain mail and horned helmets, and riding magnificent airborne
horses. Since Wagner’s time, a good singing voice is also a requirement
for the job, for they ride to a rousing chorus of ‘Hi-jo-to! Ho!
Hi-jo-to! Ho!’

The task of a Valkyrie is to hover over battlefields where her chosen
Hero is fighting, bringing him good luck for as long as the God of War
decrees. Then, when the fated time comes for the Hero to be killed, she
swoops down and carries his soul to Odin’s Valhalla, ‘Hall of the Slain’
– or to its Discworld equivalent, the Halls of Blind Io – where he will
enjoy a blissful afterlife of quaffing mead and feasting on roast boar.
The Valkyries will be on hand to make sure the drinking horns are kept
filled. And there is other fun to be had too, as the medieval Icelandic
writer Snorri Sturluson explained in his account of heathen Nordic
mythology, _The Edda_, in the 1220s:

‘What sport is there for the Chosen Warriors when they aren’t drinking?’
asked Gangleri the Wanderer.

The High One said: ‘Every day, when they have dressed they put on their
armour and go out into the open country and have a battle, and they kill
one another, every one of them. That is their sport. And when the time
for the evening meal comes round, they ride back home to Valhalla and
sit down together to drink again.’

It’s a magnificent option, an offer one can’t refuse. But sometimes,
sometimes – well, maybe only once in all the centuries of the Discworld,
and never on Earth – there come Heroes like Cohen the Barbarian and his
Silver Horde, who do refuse it, as is told in _The Last Hero_. As their
confederate Mr Saveloy had once pointed out (in _Interesting Times_), it
does sound like spending forever in a room full of sports masters. And
it involves hobnobbing with gods, which isn’t to everyone’s taste.
Instead, Cohen and the Horde choose to ride away to the stars.

DEMONS OF THE NETHER PIT

Demons have existed on the Discworld for as long as the gods, whom in
many ways they closely resemble. There are millions of them. They find
it very galling that those stuck-up bastards in Dunmanifestin refuse to
take them seriously.

The demons live in a spacious dimension which is more or less on the
same space-time continuum as that of humans, and which they have
tastefully decorated in shades of flame and keep heated to roasting
point, as tradition requires. It is arranged in eight circles,
surrounding a bubbling lake of lava-substitute, from which rise the
majestic towers of Pandemonium, the Demon City. Demonic society is
strongly hierarchical, murderously competitive, and devoted to
tradition. Its higher ranks have added impressive titles to their
sonorously supernatural names – Lord Astfgl, Duke Vassenego, Earl
Beelzemoth, Duke Drazometh the Putrid. This, incidentally, is equally
true on Earth, where the famous grimoire known as the _Lemegeton_,
attributed to King Solomon, is intensely class-conscious. It lists
seventy-six aristocratic demons: eighteen kings, twenty-six dukes,
fifteen marquises, five earls and twelve presidents, besides various
minor groups.

Demons take a lively interest in observing human affairs, partly out of
curiosity and partly because they do so much admire human ingenuity when
it comes to devising ways of hurting one another. Like the gods, they
can peer across multidimensional space, and take note of events and
ideas on the Earth as well as on the Disc. This is useful to them, since
they are about as capable of original thought as a parrot is of original
swearwords. Their Infernal Regions would have been pretty bleak without
the picturesque notions they pinched from human imaginations. From the
Bible they got the idea of a lake of fire, mentioned in the Apocalypse
(Book of Revelation); from the medieval Italian poet Dante, the idea
that Hell is a deep funnel-shaped pit, with circular terraces running
round it – Dante talked of nine circles, but the Discworld demons opted
for eight, the preferred magical number in their universe. In Milton’s
_Paradise Lost_, it is said that devils built themselves a palace in
Hell by the power of magic and music, and called it Pandemonium:

Anon out of the earth a fabric huge
Rose like an exhalation, with the sound
Of dulcet harmonies and voices sweet –
Built like a temple, where pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave; nor did it lack
Cornice and frieze, with massive sculptures graven;
The roof was fretted gold …

And so on and so forth – brazen doors, marble pavements, starry lamps, a
jewelled throne – the lot. But still, it was just one palace. The
Discworld demons can do better than that: _their_ Pandemonium is a whole
city.

Most demons are rather old-fashioned as regards their personal
appearance, liking to look as disgusting as possible. Thus Urglefloggah,
Spawn of the Pit and Loathly Guardian of the Dread Portal, who welcomes
newcomers to Hell, has various well-fanged mouths and more tentacles
than legs, though fewer arms than heads. First impressions are _so_
important. Then there was Quezovercoatl the Feathered Boa, a demon who
went off to become a god to the humans of the Tezuman Empire and teach
them how to cut the hearts out of one another on top of pyramids. It is
thought that he had picked up his ideas from the Aztecs of Mexico, and
likewise (more or less) his name. He was half-man, half-chicken,
half-jaguar, half-scorpion, and half mad. However, he was also only six
inches high, so when forced to manifest himself physically he came to a
sad, squishy end.

At the time of the events described in _Eric_, Hell was ruled by a
relatively new king named Astfgl, who was determined to modernize
everything, including his own appearance. His predecessors had gone in
for hoofs and shaggy hind legs, but such things were beneath him. Nor
would he ever consider tentacles, or grotesque faces in unseemly places.
Instead, he favoured a red silk cloak and gloves, crimson tights, a cowl
with two rather sophisticated little horns on it, and a trident. A brief
glance at the theatrical archives of Britain had been enough to show him
that this is the correct formal dress for a Demon King. Regrettably,
whenever he lost his temper his neat costume would get ripped apart in a
sudden sprouting of claws and wings.

Lord Astfgl also revamped the whole infernal regime to conform to
up-to-date business practices. He abolished good traditional tortures
such as pushing a rock uphill only for it to roll down again, or having
your liver eaten by an eagle every day – both copied from excellent
models in Greek myth, the punishments of Sisyphus and Prometheus.
Instead, he issued memos, policy statements, and morale-boosting notices
to staff. In agonies of outrage and boredom, the lesser demons conferred
on him the title of Supreme Life President of Hell and gave him a
luxurious but remote office to himself, where he is still happily busy
compiling an in-depth analysis of the role, function, priorities and
goals of the demon race. After which, the old familiar flames flickered
once again. It was for the best (or, technically, for this is Hell, for
the worst). It is only a matter of time before he invents the first-ever
mission statement, causing his world to end in self-defence.

It is a curious fact that demons, powerful though they are in their own
dimension, can nevertheless be summoned into the human world and told to
make themselves useful. In theory, this requires elaborate magic
circles, runes, pentacles (on Earth) or octograms (on the Discworld),
plus special robes, wands, knives, swords, candles, talismans, and
incense, all of which come expensive. Then there are the chants and
invocations, which go on and on and on. Part of a conjuration composed
in the 1640s by the learned Elias Ashmole (antiquary, alchemist,
astrologer, and founder of Oxford’s Ashmolean Museum) runs as follows:

I, Elias Ashmole, adjure thee Elaby Gathen, straightly charge and
command thee by Tetragrammaton, Emmanuel, messias, sether, panton,
cratons, Alpha and Omega, and by all other high and reverend names of
Almighty God both effable and ineffable … that thou appear meekly and
mildly in this glasse, without doinge hurt or daunger unto me or any
other living creature … and truly, without fraud, dissymulation or
deceite, resolve and satisfye me in and of all manner of such questions
and commands and demandes as I shall either aske, require, desire or
demande of thee …

Demons love this kind of language. They think it shows proper respect.
And so long as you are ceremonially robed and equipped, and chanting
jargon by the bucket-load, they manage to forget that what’s actually
going on is that they are being _ordered about_ by a human.

They are less happy if someone cuts out the frills, as the three witches
of Lancre did in an emergency. Being in Nanny Ogg’s washroom at the
time, they used a sharp and terrible copper-stick, scattered some rather
old washing soda and extremely hard soap flakes, and bound the demon by
the names of the bald scrubbing brush of Art and the washboard of
Protection. And if the Summoning was unorthodox, the Dismissal was
frankly insulting:

‘_May I go now?_’

‘Um?’

‘_Please?_’

Granny jerked upright again.

‘Oh. Yes. Run along,’ she said distractedly. ‘Thank you.’

The head didn’t move …

‘_You wouldn’t mind banishing me, would you?_’ said the demon, when no
one seemed to be taking the hint.

‘What?’ said Granny, who was thinking again.

‘_Only I’d feel better for being properly banished. “Run along” lacks
that certain something_,’ said the head …

‘Certainly,’ said Magrat. ‘Right. Okay. Um. Begone, foul fiend, unto the
blackest pit—’

The head smiled contentedly as the words rolled over it. This was more
like it.

It melted back into the waters of the copper like candlewax under a
flame. Its last contemptuous comment, almost lost in the swirl, was,
‘_Run aaaalonggg_ …’ [_Wyrd Sisters_]

Finally it has to be said that on the Disc there are certain low-grade
demons who stay permanently in the human world, working inside pocket
watches, picture-making devices, personal disorganizers, and similar
contraptions. Some are eager to please, others distinctly surly. The
great lords of Hell never, ever, mention this.

THINGS FROM THE DUNGEON DIMENSIONS

It is well known on the Discworld that _Things_ from the shadowy,
chaotic wastelands outside space and time which some call the Dungeon
Dimensions are always trying to break through into the little circle of
candlelight loosely called ‘the real world’. They prowl round its flimsy
stockades, searching for places where the fabric of reality has worn
thin. Their shapes are unstable, but nasty, with random combinations of
tentacles, talons, mandibles, spindly limbs, and wings; this reflects
their sad, mad, incoherent minds. They hoot and howl and buzz, giggle
and flutter, and produce a horrible chittering sound. Any large
concentration of magic attracts them. They crave the solidity, light,
and life of real worlds, and hate all living creatures with a deep and
jealous hate; if they did gain a foothold on the Disc they would
inevitably drain all life from it. Occasionally some deluded
power-seeking magician imagines that he can safely invoke and control
them – or manages to trap the even more mysterious parasitic entity
known as the hiver, described in _A Hatful of Sky_. This brings disaster
on the magician himself, and on others. More often, someone accidentally
creates a point of entry by, for example, conducting a powerful magical
or religious ceremony at a spot where the walls between the dimensions
are already weak. So far, the breaches in the walls have always been
healed and the Things repulsed before too much harm has been done.

It appears from the obscure writings of some exceptionally erudite
wizards that the Things were once Dark Gods, existing on the Discworld
until they were driven out by even more ancient and powerful beings, the
Old High Ones. Their names are listed in the utterly forbidden and
totally perilous grimoire known as the _Necrotelicomnicon_ or _Liber
Paginarum Fulvarum_ (Book of Yellow Pages) compiled by the Klatchian
necromancer Achmed the Mad. The first edition of this dread opus is kept
in conditions of maximum security in the vaults of Unseen University,
and students are only permitted to read tenth- or twelfth-hand copies.

Awareness of these occult matters first reached the Earth through the
receptive mind of the American writer H. P. Lovecraft, creator of horror
fantasies in the 1920s and 30s. He too described monstrous beings from
other dimensions forever trying to break through into the normal world;
he too wrote of a potently evil book of spells written by a mad Arab,
the _Necronomicon_, which could be used to summon and worship them.
Alarmingly, it appears from his writings that these creatures have more
than once managed to establish themselves in isolated parts of America.
One can only hope he was mistaken, but sometimes one fears he was not.

BEL-SHAMHAROTH

It is hard to know how to classify this extremely unpleasant entity.

On the one hand, it could be argued that he should be considered a god,
since he inhabits a black eight-sided temple deep in the forest of
Skund, near the Hub. He lurks there under an eight-sided stone slab in a
hall with eight walls, reached by eight corridors and lit by the dim,
eldritch glow of eight-sided crystals. Whether he currently has any
worshippers is a very moot point – those who built the temple died long
ago, and people who enter it now have an extremely short life-span.
However, the level of belief they experience during the few moments that
they are face to face with Bel-Shamharoth is so exceptionally intense
that it keeps him in existence. His appearance is totally non-humanoid.
He looks rather like a spider, or maybe an octopus or squid, or maybe
something altogether more strange; something black, at any rate, that is
all suckers and tentacles and mandibles, with a single great glaring eye
in the middle.

On the other hand, the gods of Cori Celesti have never accepted
Bel-Shamharoth as one of their number. The Lady went so far as to say on
one occasion that he should never have been spawned, and that she
thought all such creatures had died out at the beginning of Time. This
seems to imply that he was one of the Old Dark Gods that once existed on
the Discworld, and that he managed to remain there when the others were
driven out to the Dungeon Dimensions.

One of his powers, we are told in _Equal Rites_, is an ability to enter
people’s dreams. Amazingly, this is so strong that he has been able to
reveal something of himself even in another universe. His title of
‘Soul-Eater’ is echoed in the mythology of the Ancient Egyptians, who
believed that when the dead entered the Afterlife their hearts were
weighed against the Ostrich Feather of Truth. If they failed this test,
they would be devoured by a hideous monster which crouched beside the
scales, called the Eater of Souls. It did not, however, _look_ like
Bel-Shamharoth, simply being part lion, part crocodile, and part
hippopotamus – no tentacles or suckers whatsoever.

Many centuries later, the image of a monstrous tentacular creature
stamped itself deeply on the mind of H. P. Lovecraft. He described an
incredibly ancient being named Cthulhu, one of the Old Ones who once
ruled the Earth, now banished below the ocean bed, but still remembered
and worshipped by some. A small stone figurine, of unfathomable
antiquity, shows Cthulhu as ‘a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline,
but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers’. Even
more appalling is the Dunwich monster, child of a human mother and
Yog-Sothoth, another of the Old Ones; this creature is bigger than a
barn, made of what looks like squirming ropes, ‘an octopus, centipede,
spidery kind of thing’ with great bulging eyes all over it, and ten or
twenty mouths all opening and shutting … Definitely an echo or emanation
of Bel-Shamharoth.

THE AUDITORS

The most deeply negative and destructive forces in the cosmos of the
Discworld have no fangs, no tentacles, no red glowing eyes. They look
like small grey hooded robes, with nothing whatsoever inside. They are
the Auditors of Reality, who see it as their job to make sure that the
universe functions smoothly and efficiently, without unpredictable
interruptions. Above all, they distrust and reject the notion of
individual personality, since they hold that to have a personality means
to have a beginning and an end, and hence to forfeit immortality. The
way to be immortal, they maintain, is to avoid living. Therefore they
operate entirely by consensus, never permitting themselves to show
personal tastes, feelings or opinions; if any of them becomes aware of
itself as an individual, it self-destructs instantly. They are the
enemies of all imagination, creativity and emotion, and hence of life
itself.

Mercifully, their power on the Discworld has so far been restricted. On
Earth, their presence grows daily.

¹ And some may be locally grown. Humanity seems predisposed to see the
turtle as a massive carrier.

² Yes, we know that there are several versions of this story!

³ Only to find a job with Miss Treason (see page 228). Mythology loves
ravens.

 

 

[image]


Chapter 2


DWARFS

 

IN A MINE, there are many levels. Some, anybody can visit. But lower
down, there are hidden galleries, closed-off corridors, places which
only the oldest and wisest miners know. And so it is with dwarfs. Pretty
well everyone on the Discworld has _seen_ a dwarf, but very, very few
really understand what it is like to _be_ a dwarf.

What you _see_ is easily told. A dwarf is a smallish humanoid (about
four foot tall on average), strongly built, bearded, dressed in layer
upon layer of leather, plus chain mail and helmet if circumstances
warrant it, and never without an axe. This description applies to both
male and female dwarfs, though some close observers have claimed that
the beards of the latter are silkier. All dwarfs are tireless, highly
skilled workers; their traditional, ancestral occupations are mining and
smithing, but they are also excellent engineers, jewellers, printers,
and so forth. Thousands of them have migrated to Ankh-Morpork, where
they work hard and mostly keep themselves to themselves; some of the
young ones, regrettably, like to congregate in dwarf bars where they
drink too much, sing interminable songs about gold, and get into fights.

These facts find close parallels in the myths and legends of Earth,
especially in pre-Christian Scandinavia and the Germanic areas. There,
tradition tells of a race of small beings who live inside rocks and
under mountains, and are so skilled in metalworking that they make
magical weapons and rings for the gods themselves. They are old, wise,
and very rich. Female dwarfs are never mentioned (unlike she-elves and
giantesses), so one must assume that on our world, as on the Discworld,
they looked just like the males and worked at the same crafts. Although
in later centuries the names for various types of small supernatural
beings have become seriously confused, one can be sure that those that
inhabit human mines (as gnomes and kobolds do in Germany, and knockers
in Cornwall) and those that work as smiths are kin to the true ancient
dwarfs.

One need only look at the names, nicknames and patronymics of many
Discworld dwarfs to find confirmation of this link with Nordic and
Germanic dwarfdom – from their ancient king B’hrian Bloodaxe to the
modern Albrecht Albrechtsson or Bjorn Stronginthearm, there are echoes
everywhere. Other dwarf names (Ringfounder, Helmcrusher, Hammerhock)
allude to battle prowess and craftsmanship. But from time to time,
curiously unsuitable ones occur, such as Cheery, Snorey, Dozy, and
Bashfull; these must be due to some alien influence, possibly that which
affected the Discworld during the time when moving pictures were being
made at Holy Wood. It was certainly at that time that some dwarfs first
felt an urge to sing the irritating, and previously unknown, Hiho Song
(which is utterly undwarfish, since it does not mention gold and is less
than an hour long).

These are only the upper levels of their culture. To understand the
nature of a Discworld dwarf, one must dig much deeper. There, dwarfish
identity is not defined by mere genetics and size, but by a whole
complex culture of laws, taboos, customs, moral principles and
traditional knowledge. It is not precisely a religion, but it is as
vital to their sense of selfhood as any religion could be. Height, in
Discworld dwarf culture, plays no part in defining a dwarf. Dwarfishness
is about what you do, not how high you do it. Captain Carrot
Ironfoundersson, for example, happens to have been born of human parents
and to be well over six foot tall, but his upbringing has made him
socially and spiritually a dwarf. As he explains to Vimes:

‘Adopted by dwarfs, brought up by dwarfs. To dwarfs I’m a dwarf, sir. I
can do the rite of _k’zakra_, I know the secrets of _h’ragna_, I can
_ha’lk_ my _g’rakha_ correctly … I am a dwarf.’

‘What do those things mean?’

‘I am not allowed to tell non-dwarfs.’ [_The Fifth Elephant_]

The legal aspects of this culture are known collectively as _kruk_.
Outsiders think of this as ‘mining law’, which is true as far as it
goes, but as Carrot explains:

‘It’s a lot more than that. It’s about … how you live. Laws of
ownership, marriage laws, inheritance, rules for dealing with disputes
of all kinds, that sort of thing. Everything, really.’

Each dwarf mine⁴ has its own ‘king’ (a title roughly equivalent to
‘chief engineer’), but in disputes where the _kruk_ is unclear the final
arbiter is the Low King, whose authority extends over all dwarfish
communities. He is chosen by the senior dwarfs, usually from among the
leading families, and is crowned sitting upon the Scone of Stone. He
must sit on it to give his judgements, as all Low Kings have done ever
since the days of King B’hrian Bloodaxe, fifteen hundred years ago. This
scone is the supreme example of a traditional dwarf bread – a highly
prized product used by dwarfs as a food of last resort, and regarded as
utterly inedible by all other races. It also serves as a weapon. Some
observers claim to have seen it being fashioned with hammer and anvil.
Specimens kept in museums for decades, if not centuries, show little
change from the day they were baked. That, however, is not why the Scone
is held in deep reverence and guarded with the utmost care. King B’hrian
Bloodaxe, fifteen hundred years ago, sat on it while it was still soft,
and left his impression upon it. It is now the very seat of majesty,
conferring legitimacy on each new ruler.

This should not seem surprising to us. Pretty well every country can
show at least one rock on to which some ancient hero or holy man has
stamped his footprints – or hand-prints, or the mark of his knees, or
the hoof-prints of his horse. Many are sites of pilgrimage. Some, in
Britain and Ireland, are symbols of authority. One famous Scottish one
was the Stone of the Footprints on the island of Islay in the Hebrides,
a rock about seven foot square marked with two prints; at his
inauguration, each chief of the MacDonalds would set his feet in them
and stand there, sword in hand, to take his oath. This showed that he
would walk in the ways of justice established by his forebears, and held
his power by right. This particular stone, alas, was destroyed some
three hundred years ago.

The most famous of all inauguration stones is the Stone of Scone, on
which generations of medieval kings of Scotland were crowned. Some say
it originally came from Ireland, and is identical with the legendary
Liafail, which screamed a greeting when a rightful high king of Ireland
stood on it; if so, it is at least 2,300 years old. It does not,
however, bear any imprints. It was removed from the castle of Scone,
near Perth, in 1296 by Edward I of England after his victory over the
Scots; for centuries it was kept in Westminster Abbey, built into an
ornate wooden throne on which every monarch (including the present
Queen) has sat for her or his coronation. In 1950 it was stolen, and
recovered a few months later – or was it? Some say what was recovered
was only a replica. In any case, real or replica, the Westminster stone
was returned to Scotland in 1996, and is now in Edinburgh Castle.
Clearly the Stone of Scone and the Scone of Stone echo one another
across the multiverse.

Curiously, and we advance it with some caution, our world may offer a
more direct parallel with the Scone of Stone. In her book _Footprints in
Stone_ Janet Bord mentions a local legend that there’s said to be a
stone behind the main altar in Reims cathedral with the marks of
Christ’s _buttocks_. He was helping masons build the main doorway, and
felt a bit tired. So many comments spring to mind, but the only one we
will allow to spring further is that stories of Jesus helping in the
construction were endemic during the cathedral-building era, and this
one has the feel of a workmen’s legend, especially the sort which would
be told to wide-eyed apprentices.

Let us return to the Discworld. There, dwarfs are famous workmen. As
Captain of the City Watch, Vimes had to learn about the folkways of this
important ethnic minority. When one of the city dwarfs was murdered, and
later when one who had joined the multiracial City Watch was killed in
the course of his duties, Vimes learned a good deal. For one thing, a
dead dwarf’s tools are always melted down, however fine they are, since
no one else would want to use them:

‘What, use another dwarf’s actual tools?’ Carrot’s mouth twisted in
distaste. ‘Oh no, that’s not … right. I mean, they’re … part of him. I
mean … someone else using them, after he’s used them all these years, I
mean … urrgh!’ [_Men at Arms_]

And a weapon, of the finest quality, will be placed in his grave. Vimes,
examining the murdered Bjorn Hammerhock’s workshop, noticed a
particularly heavy axe etched with intricate patterns. This, Carrot
explains, is a burial weapon:

‘It’s made to be buried with a dwarf. Every dwarf is buried with a
weapon. You know? To take with him to … wherever he’s going.’

‘But it’s fine workmanship! And it’s got an edge like— aargh,’ Vimes
sucked his finger, ‘like a razor!’

Carrot looked shocked. ‘Of course. It would be no good facing them with
an _inferior_ weapon.’

‘What them are you talking about?’

‘Anything bad he encounters on his journey after death,’ said Carrot, a
shade awkwardly.

This is so essential that Cuddy, the dwarf watchman, flatly refuses to
depart into the afterlife because his axe has been shattered in the fall
that killed him. He protests to Death that he needs a good weapon:

‘If I’m not going to be properly buried, I ain’t going. My tortured soul
will walk the world in torment.’

IT DOESN’T HAVE TO.

‘It can if it wants to,’ snapped the ghost of Cuddy.

Many, many human societies in this world have agreed with the dwarfs
that the dead should be given their weapons, and anything else they
might need on the journey. And archaeologists are very grateful to them
– especially to the ones who carefully laid the stuff in the grave,
rather than those who tossed it on to a funeral pyre, even if from the
ghost’s point of view both methods are equally good. Obviously,
archaeologists can’t tell from material remains whether in these old
societies the living also felt (as Carrot does) that there’s something
disgusting about using weapons and tools that had belonged to the dead,
but it would not be surprising if they did. In the modern world, Gypsies
traditionally approve of the idea of burning a dead man’s caravan and
all its contents, though this means such financial loss to the family
that nowadays it is rarely done. So too on the Disc, the Chalkland
shepherds burned Granny Aching’s hut after her death, knowing none of
them would dare use something she had made so much her own (see _A
Hatful of Sky_).

One of us recalls a metalwork shop staffed by very old men. When one of
them died, his personal tools were left on the bench where he’d put
them, untouched, and were gradually buried under workshop debris. It
does not need a fevered imagination to see that in the days when tools
were an expensive lifetime investment, shaped over the years to their
owner’s hand, there would be a certain unfocused distaste for handling
them after a workmate’s death.

*

Outsiders often assume that because all dwarfs look, dress and behave
alike, have masculine names, and refer to one another as ‘he’, they are
in fact all male. This is completely untrue – the population, as with
other humanoid races, is fifty per cent male and fifty per cent female.
But very, very, _very_ few dwarfs would ever admit this statistic in
public. And (until very recently) _none_ would let it be publicly known
that they themselves belong to the female fifty per cent.

Even when outsiders know about this, they underestimate the distress it
can cause. When the dwarf Cheery Littlebottom joined the Ankh-Morpork
Watch, the werewolf Angua guessed that ‘he’ was really ‘she’, but
couldn’t understand why being spotted was so shattering:

Cheery sagged on to a seat. ‘How could you tell? Even other _dwarfs_
can’t tell! I’ve been so careful!’

‘I don’t know why you’re so upset,’ said Angua. ‘I thought dwarfs hardly
recognized the difference between male and female, anyway. Look, there’s
plenty of women in this town that’d love to do things the dwarf way. I
mean, what are the choices they’ve got? Barmaid, seamstress, or
somebody’s wife. While _you_ can do anything the men do …’

‘Provided we do only what the men do,’ said Cheery.

Angua paused. ‘Oh,’ she said. ‘I _see_. Hah. Yes, I know _that_ tune.’
[_Feet of Clay_]

Encouraged by Angua, Cheery gradually yields to her suppressed longing
for a bit of jewellery and a dab of lipstick; eventually and with much
nervousness, she dons a mid-calf leather skirt (still keeping helmet,
breastplate, and beard, naturally). Some other dwarf watchmen react with
horror:

‘That’s … _female_ clothes, isn’t it?’

‘Well?’ she quavered. ‘So what? I can if I want to.’

‘That’s … my mother never even … urgh … That’s disgusting! In public
too! What happens if kids come in? I can see your _ankles_!’

As it turns out, other she-dwarfs in Ankh-Morpork soon follow Cheery’s
lead and pluck up courage to ‘come out’. But when her duties take her to
the old homelands in the mountains, she has to face traditionalists who
think it an obscene abomination, a denial of all true dwarfishness, for
a female even to admit her gender, let alone to flaunt it by her
appearance. The fact that the relatively liberal King Rhys Rhysson
accepts her presence, and actually shakes hands with her, is for them a
major culture shock.

It is fascinating to compare the way Discworld dwarfs view femininity
with the rules, taboos and superstitions about women in many Earthly
societies, past and present. At first glance, they seem to be opposites.
Dwarfs expect females to conceal their gender, to dress exactly like
males, to be warriors, miners, blacksmiths and so forth, just like
males. On Earth, on the contrary, societies and religions which feel
strongly on questions of gender abominate the idea of a woman dressing
like a man. They expect her to wear distinctively female clothing,
obeying rules as to what is or is not ‘modest’: the most important
concerns usually being the length of the skirt and how much of the hair,
head and face should be concealed. In extreme cases, women end up
looking more like small perambulating tents than human beings. So,
although their garb proclaims their gender, at the same time it hides
it, as surely as that of a Discworld she-dwarf.

As regards work practices, however, Discworld dwarfs are not hampered by
the same taboos as Earth’s older traditional societies, where it would
be out of the question for a woman to take up man’s work. Even in
European countries in recent times, in some ultra-masculine occupations
it was believed that the mere presence of a woman brought bad luck.
Women were not allowed to go down mines or on board fishing boats –
indeed, simply to meet a woman on the road down to the beach would make
a fisherman give up his plans for the day and head back home.

Behind this, rarely mentioned openly, is a deep-rooted horror of
menstruation, regarded as a source of magical harm in primitive
societies, and as a pollution in the Bible. Sir James Frazer’s _The
Golden Bough_ gives examples of taboos among the native peoples of
Australia, North America and elsewhere: a menstruating woman must not
touch a man, or his tools and weapons, or any object he may use, or he
will surely die; she must not touch freshly killed meat, or it will go
bad; she must not go anywhere near the pastures, or the cows will die.
There is a whole list of similar notions in the writings of the Roman
naturalist Pliny, who regarded them as proven scientific facts: her
touch will turn milk sour, cause plants to wither, blunt razors, cloud
mirrors, and so on. Most of them crop up again in relatively modern
European folklore. As recently as 1846 Victor Hugo noted that
menstruating women were not allowed into parts of the Paris catacombs
where mushrooms were grown, as their presence would make the mushrooms
rot. And to this day some Orthodox Jews will not shake hands with a
gentile woman, for fear she might be having her period (a Jewish woman
would know she must keep out of their way at this time).

Dwarfs say of themselves that they are not a religious race. True, they
have been heard to utter some rather strange words, which _may_ be the
names of gods, if they drop something heavy on their toes. They also
talk about Agi Hammerthief, a mischievous sort of sprite who hangs about
in mines and makes off with the tool you were quite sure you’d put down
just _there_. Sometimes, in a dark tunnel, you can hear his distant
laughter. But they don’t count these things as religion; they don’t take
them seriously.

What dwarfs do take very seriously indeed are the Laws, which were
called into existence, at the beginning of time, by Tak. Who Tak was or
is, is something they do not discuss, but every dwarf knows the Tale of
the Things Tak Wrote:

The first thing Tak did, he wrote himself.
The second thing Tak did, he wrote the Laws.
The third thing Tak did, he wrote the World.
The fourth thing Tak did, he wrote a cave.
The fifth thing Tak did, he wrote a geode, an egg of stone. [_Thud!_]

When the geode hatched in the twilight of the cave, the First Man and
the First Dwarf were born, but only the First Dwarf found the Laws Tak
had written. Finally came the First Troll. The conclusion of the Tale
was deliberately distorted for thousands of years in order to justify
the hatred dwarfs felt for trolls, but the true text has now been
recovered. It runs:

Then Tak looked upon the stone and it was trying to come alive, and Tak
smiled and wrote ‘All things strive’. And for the service the stone had
given he fashioned it into the First Troll, and delighted in the life
that came unbidden. These are the things that Tak wrote!

This, as any Earthbound reader can see, is a philosophically and morally
profound Creation Myth, and Tak a more impressive figure than any of the
gods on Cori Celesti. We can no longer accept that dwarfs are a
non-religious race.⁵

Yet in some dwarf communities devotion to the Laws spawned an outlook as
rigid as the unchanging ritualism in the kingdom of Djelibeybi, though
not as cruel as the enforcement of dogma by the Omnians. At the time of
the events described in _The Fifth Elephant_ and in _Thud!_ the
influence of traditionalist mountain dwarfs, especially those from
Schmaltzberg, had grown strong. They held that those who had moved to
Ankh-Morpork and other lowland cities were _d’rkza_, ‘not proper
dwarfs’, because they had become lax, they had let the old ways slide.
If Albrecht Albrechtsson had become Low King, he would have declared all
these city-dwellers _d’hrarak_, ‘non-dwarfs’; this would have made their
marriages and business contracts invalid, and would have meant that old
dwarfs would not be allowed to be buried back home.

Albrecht did not become Low King, so this did not happen. Instead,
traditionalists themselves began coming to Ankh-Morpork, hoping to
re-establish orthodoxy by their teaching and example. They are called
grags. They are greatly respected by the city dwarfs; they conduct
marriages and other necessary ceremonies, give judgement in disputes and
advice on problems:

Please come and say the death-words over my father … Please advise me on
the sale of my shop … Please guide me in my business … I am a long way
from the bones of my grandfathers, please help me to stay a dwarf.
[_Thud!_]

The grags, or deep-downers, go beyond even the strictest letter of the
Laws. They have dug themselves new dwellings under the cellars of
existing houses, where they live as much as possible underground; if
they do have to come up to the surface, they wear heavy black leather
robes and hoods with a mere slit for the eyes, and are carried about in
curtained sedan chairs, so as never to commit the crime of seeing
daylight. The strictest among them form enclosed communities, and never
come out. They send a junior novice, called ‘the daylight face’, to do
any errands above ground and to speak with visitors in an antechamber.
They claim that everything that happens underground should be governed
by _kruk_, ‘mining law’, not by the laws of Ankh-Morpork. This is
something Commander Vimes vigorously rejects; city law, he argues,
applies just as much _below_ the city as _in_ the city.

It should not be too difficult to find parallels to all this in other
universes, including ours. One thinks of fundamentalist movements in
various religions, of cultic communities, of the rules of enclosed
orders of monks and nuns. Humans and dwarfs think the same way.
Regrettably, here there is no Commander Vimes around to put a stop to
the endless revival of Koom Valley …

⁴ Any assembly of dwarfs for a common purpose is technically a ‘mine’,
even if it is a boat or a farm.

⁵ For a given value of ‘non-religious’. Study of the text suggests that
Tak, in the dwarfs’ understanding, is both the creator of, and immanent
in, the fundamental laws of the universe. There is no act of worship,
any more than gravity is worshipped, although it may be argued that
living a ‘right life’ is such a thing. Even then the dwarf laws seem
open to slow change by long argument. Dwarfs are artisans, after all;
tools that don’t work are recast.

 

 

[image]


Chapter 3


THE ELVES

 

IT’S EASY, ALL too easy, for people nowadays to get hold of the wrong
end of the stick if you tell them there are ‘elves’ about. And if you
say ‘fairies’, that just makes matters worse. People think of tall,
shining figures dancing in rings in the moonlight to the loveliest music
one could hope to hear; or tiny dainty creatures with butterfly wings,
fluttering round flowers.

And in a way, some of this is true. For elves do generally choose to
appear tall, beautiful and glamorous to humans. Their real appearance is
thin, dull, and grey, with triangular faces and big slanty eyes (oddly,
they occasionally let themselves be seen like this by the people of our
world, who then label them ‘aliens’ and ‘extraterrestrials’, and get
very excited). They do sing and dance, and sometimes they laugh a lot,
though you would probably not like it if you knew what they are laughing
about. And there are indeed little flying ones, though they have more in
common with hornets than with butterflies. In truth, elves and fairies
are a predatory, cruel, parasitic race, who will use other living
beings, and hurt them, because this is fun. They break into a world
through those strange places where the barrier between dimensions is
just a bit too _thin_ for safety. Places which are like a door, half
open. Places where it’s wise to put a marker of some kind – a solitary
tree, say, or some standing stones – to warn everybody to keep away.

And yet, foolish people _will_ go there. In Lancre, for instance, a
group of men in a wood, looking for somewhere private to rehearse a
play:

‘Let’s go right,’ said Jason.

‘Nah, it’s all briars and thorns that way.’

‘All right, then, left then.’

‘It’s all winding,’ said Weaver.

‘What about the middle road?’ said Carter.

Jason peered ahead.

There was a middle track, hardly more than an animal path, which wound
away under shady trees. Ferns grew thickly alongside it. There was a
general green, rich, dark feel to it, suggestive of the word ‘bosky’.

His blacksmith’s senses stood up and screamed.

‘Not that way,’ he said.

‘Ah, come _on_,’ said Weaver. ‘What’s wrong with it?’

‘Goes up to the Dancers, that path does,’ said Jason. [_Lords and
Ladies_]

The blacksmith Jason Ogg knows that the Dancers – a ring of eight stumpy
man-sized stones, one of which is The Piper – are to be avoided, though
he doesn’t know why. Nor does his conscious mind know why he fears the
ferny path; it is his instincts which (as we shall see) have picked up a
warning from the lore of another world. These are signs of a gateway, a
short cut between dimensions, a place where elves can enter.

One clue that elves have broken in, or are just about to, is that crop
circles start appearing in cornfields; the growing wheat bends over
sharply, breaks, and lies down in a circle. This strange phenomenon has
been observed several times in Lancre, and also on the Earth in recent
years.

Earlier generations on Earth got no such warnings, but then they didn’t
need them. They knew for sure that there were elves and fairies lurking
in pools and streams, in deep woods and inside mounds and rocks, and
sweeping across the sky in the wild winter winds. And they knew that
these beings were cold-hearted, revengeful, often cruel, however
beautiful their faces and however enchanting their music. Any countryman
in Ireland or the Scottish Highlands 150 or 200 years ago would have
known of a dozen cases of someone who died, or lost his wits, or became
paralysed, or simply was ‘never the same again’ after meeting them.
Similarly in England, at an earlier period – in 1684, for instance, a
writer named Richard Bovet reported that he knew someone (completely
reliable, of course) who knew a man who had once seen fairies holding a
market on Blackdown Hill in Somerset and foolishly tried to join them.
He felt a sudden pain, and by the time he got home ‘lameness seized him
all on one side’ and he remained so, though he survived for many years.
We still call such a thing a ‘stroke’, even if we have forgotten who did
the striking. And we still say of somebody who seems vague, dim-witted,
or slightly crazed that he or she is ‘away with the fairies’.

In Eastern Europe, the fear of elves and fairies was still powerful in
quite recent years. The American folklorist Gail Kligman, working in
Romania in 1975, learned about wondrously beautiful but malevolent fairy
maidens called _iele_, which literally means ‘They’ or ‘Themselves’,
since it is dangerous to utter their true name. They live in woods and
wild places. They travel by night, singing and dancing, but those who
listen to their music or join their dance will regret it – at best, they
will be deaf for life, and may well be crippled, or go mad. There is
hardly any limit to the sickness and trouble which the _iele_ can
inflict on humans, even those who have never offended them. In Russia
and other Slavonic lands, there are forest elves who trick travellers
into leaving the path to wander helplessly among the trees until they
starve to death, and water elves who catch and drown the unwary.
Beautiful? Yes, usually. Nice? Never.

Wherever elves go they feed on the awe, the terror, the superstition
they inspire. They take control of people’s minds. They enslave. When
they invaded Lancre, as is told in _Lords and Ladies_, Granny Weatherwax
warned King Verence II:

‘When they get into a world, everyone else is on the bottom. Slaves.
Worse than slaves. Worse than animals, even. They take what they want,
and they want everything. But worst of all, the worst bit is … they read
your mind. They hear what you think, and in self-defence you think what
they want. And it’s barred windows at night, and food out for the
fairies, and turning around three times before you talks about ’em, and
horseshoes over the door.’

Horseshoes are important, and so are the blacksmiths who make them,
since almost the only protection humans have against fairies is the
power of iron. It is known throughout the multiverse that all creatures
of this species fear and detest iron, which causes them intense pain.
Various more or less foolish theories have been proposed to account for
this. On the Earth, it is often claimed that it shows ‘fairies’ are
nothing more than a folk memory of some prehistoric human society which
did not have iron weapons, and fled from others who did. But on the
Discworld people know the real reason. Elves have a powerful sixth sense
based on awareness of magnetic fields, and use it to know precisely
where they are, and where and what all other living creatures are. So to
them iron is:

… the terrible metal that drinks the force and deforms the flux universe
like a heavy weight on a rubber sheet and blinds them and deafens them
and leaves them rudderless and more alone than most humans could ever
be. [_Lords and Ladies_]

The other picture people have of fairies, the picture of their beauty
and charm, is partly created by the fairies themselves as they
infiltrate the collective memory and imagination of humanity. Nanny Ogg
knows this, yet even she finds it hard to keep a clear mind when
thinking about elves:

People didn’t seem able to remember what it was _like_ with the elves
around. Life was certainly more interesting then, but usually because it
was shorter. And it was more colourful, if you liked the colour of
blood. It got so people didn’t even dare talk openly about the bastards.

You said: The Shining Ones. You said: The Fair Folk. And you spat, and
touched iron. But generations later, you forgot about the spitting and
the iron, and you forgot why you used those names for them, and you
remembered only that they were beautiful.

Elves! The bastards … and yet … and yet … somehow, yes, they did things
to memory.

We only remembers that the elves sang [thought Nanny Ogg]. We forgets
what it was they were singing about.

How completely people forget depends very much on when, where and how
they live. In the cities – in London, New York, or Ankh-Morpork – elves
and fairies are nothing more than fantasy, just a bit of fun for the
kids. But people who live on the land, especially in remote and wild
parts of the country, those people know they are real. And they remember
that though they _might_, just occasionally, bring good luck, they are
far more likely to inflict diseases, kidnap people, and steal human
babies, replacing them with their own sickly and mentally deficient
‘changelings’.

Changelings were a particularly sad obsession. A healthy young couple
out in the country and in a world without modern medical understanding
or any idea of the meaning of the term ‘limited gene pool’, give birth
to a child who looks like a little old man, or is beautiful but very
backward, or eats incessantly but nevertheless fails to thrive … and the
only reason the family can find lies in folklore: ‘the fairies stole our
beautiful child and left one of their own.’ A horrible thought, yet not
_quite_ so horrible for the parents as one religious alternative: ‘It’s
our own fault the baby is like this, it’s a judgement on us for our
sins.’

In a disturbing but fascinating paper published in the journal of the
Folklore Society in 1988, Susan Shoon Eberley cites many accounts of the
appearance and behaviour of changelings as they were described in
nineteenth-century sources, and maps them against dozens of childhood
disorders which produce children that look and act ‘like the fairies’.
The Victorian medical establishment was coming to grips with the idea
that these children were victims of disease; but the common people fell
back on folk myth, which was reinforced with every case.

Folk myth also supplied a cruel remedy. You had to make life so
miserable for the changeling that it would flee and the ‘real’ child
would miraculously return. Custom handed down various ‘remedies’,
including putting the child in a hot oven or leaving it out on the
midden all night – child abuse at best, socially condoned infanticide at
worst. The wonderful child did not return, but at least there was no
longer the inconvenient changeling in the cradle, and everyone nodded
and understood …

Nanny Ogg, a midwife, knew what she was doing when she took the king of
the elves to task in _Lords and Ladies_. A society does not want elves
in the driving seat.

Yet by the nineteenth century, in much of Europe, memories were fading,
and people spoke of elves and fairies without such fear. Their world was
under attack by education and street lights and medicine and technology;
the telegraph could beat Puck when it came to putting a girdle round the
earth.

And thus their decline continued. Though people still told stories about
changelings and abductions, on the whole they believed (or half
believed, or suspended disbelief) that the Hidden Folk could be good
neighbours to humans, and were just mischievous, not truly dangerous.
They could lead you astray even in woods which you knew quite well, so
that you felt hopelessly lost and would maybe fall into a ditch, but
that was just their fun (and in any case it was easier to blame the
fairies than the cider). They would do you no harm, provided you were
careful not to offend them. The rules were clear: don’t cut down their
favourite trees, don’t damage the mounds where they live, don’t build a
road across their paths, be careful where you throw dirty water, keep
your house clean and your hearth swept in case a fairy comes there in
the night.

There was even one type, the house-elves, whom humans welcomed. The
English called them hobs, pixies or pucks, the Scots brownies, the
Scandinavians nisses and tomtes. These would actually live in a farm and
bring it luck; they would help with harvesting, tend the animals, even
do housework, in exchange for an occasional bowl of milk or porridge –
provided nobody spied on them or laughed at them. Russian country folk
said there were several on each farm; the most important one lived
behind the stove, others guarded the barn, the bath-house, the henhouse,
and so on. On the Discworld, only the Wee Free Men have ever done such a
favour for humans, and then only once, in the very special circumstances
created by their bond with Tiffany Aching. Their reward was Special
Sheep Liniment, which smells suspiciously like whisky.

Another sign that people in Europe were forgetting the true nature of
elves, and no longer took them seriously, is that they so often thought
of them as _small_. The Little People, the Wee Folk. Some people said
they were about the size of a rabbit; others, that of a six-year-old
child. Some said they were really, really small – like the little
farm-elf in Sweden who sweated and panted as he dragged a single ear of
wheat into the barn, but went off in a huff when the farmer laughed at
him; once he was gone, the farm went to rack and ruin. So he had his
revenge. Even so, one can’t be seriously scared of something a few
inches high (unless, of course, it is a Nac Mac Feegle).

Why did the menace of elves dwindle in this way? How can they have been
so reduced? Once again, it was Will Shakespeare’s plays which nudged the
human imagination on to a new path. In _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_ he
gave elves sweet but silly names: Peaseblossom and Cobweb, Mustardseed
and Moth. They were, by his reckoning, just about big enough to kill a
red-hipped bumble-bee on top of a thistle. True, he also wrote about
Puck, who was bigger and more active and enjoyed playing practical
jokes, but there is no real malice or danger in Puck’s tricks. In _Romeo
and Juliet_ he described Mab, Queen of the Fairies, who controls
people’s dreams, like the Fairy Queen whom Tiffany encounters in _The
Wee Free Men_. But whereas _that_ Queen is terrifying, Queen Mab is a
delightful little thing as she drives her tiny, dainty chariot across
the bodies of sleeping humans:

Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners’ legs;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
The traces, of the smallest spider’s web;
The collars, of the moonshine’s watery beams;
Her whip, of cricket’s bone; the lash, of film;
Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat …

This new image of fairies and their world proved irresistible. From
Shakespeare’s time right down to the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries it has gone on spreading in literature, painting, children’s
books, films, television. So now there are plenty of pretty fairies and
quaint little elves on Earth – they make a good story to entertain a
child. And so some become Santa’s Little Helpers, and some bring money
for a tooth, and there are fairies at the bottom of the garden (it’s not
so very, very far away). There’s one who says she’ll die if children
don’t clap their hands to prove they believe in her. And for very young
children, just to get them properly addicted to tweeness, there are
dumpy little baby-fairies in romper suits, with horns, living in a land
where it’s all trees and flowers and sunshine. So nice. Such good fun.

There is another way in which Earthly folk have tamed the notion of the
elf, and this too involves children. Adults who have stopped believing
in elves can make damn sure that their children are still scared of
them, because that way they’ll stay away from dangerous places, and
learn to obey the rules. They turn elves and fairies into Nursery
Bogeys: ‘Don’t play in the woods after sunset, the hytersprites will get
you’ – ‘Don’t stand at the edge of the pond, Jenny Greenteeth will drag
you in and gobble you up’ – ‘Behave yourself while I’m out, remember the
tomte who lives under the stairs will be watching you’.

Nanny Ogg understands this principle. Consider the copper in her
washhouse:

The water under the lid was inky black and, according to rumour,
bottomless; the Ogg grandchildren were encouraged to believe that
monsters from the dawn of time dwelt in its depths, since Nanny believed
that a bit of thrilling and pointless terror was an essential ingredient
of the magic of childhood. [_Wyrd Sisters_]

But not _entirely_ pointless. After all, a toddler could drown in a
copper.

However, fashions in child-rearing change. In many parts of the Earth it
is now considered quite wicked to deliberately frighten a child, even
for its own good, so Nursery Bogeys are an endangered species. Some have
reinvented themselves as Funny (but Nice) Fairies in order to survive.
In Iceland, children used to be told that in the thirteen nights leading
up to Christmas thirteen hideous hobgoblins would come down from the
mountains and creep into the house, one by one; they would carry off any
child who was naughty, and probably eat it. Nowadays, this simply won’t
do. The Thirteen Christmas Lads still _look_ hideous, but that’s just a
joke, and nobody is afraid of them. In fact, each of the Lads pops a
sweet, or some other little present, under the child’s pillow. Perhaps
this delicacy is because we think we know of more complex monsters now?
But we always have. The world of the fairy tale is a map of
prohibitions: do not open that door/enter that wood … and above all,
young lady, don’t talk to the wolf.

There have been many theories as to what the true home of the elfin
races is like, and where it may be found – if indeed they have a home,
for they might simply be alien nomads, creating the illusion of a
Fairyland in any territory they invade. The Nac Mac Feegle (who ought to
know, as they are fairies of a sort themselves) say that there _is_ an
elf-world, but it’s a mere parasite. One of them tells Tiffany Aching:
‘It floats around until it finds a place that’s weak on a world where no
one’s payin’ attention, and opens a door. Then the Queen sends in her
folk. For the stealin’, ye ken.’

_The Wee Free Men_ is the story of how elves ‘open a door’ between
standing stones on the Chalk hills, and how Tiffany crosses into their
world to rescue her little brother, kidnapped by the Queen, and also,
incidentally, an older boy named Roland. One can’t properly describe
this ‘Fairyland’, for it is full of human dreams and nightmares, which
keep on changing. But in its true nature, before the illusions begin, it
is a cold, snowy land which somehow does not feel like a real place.
There is no sun in the sky. The woods are full of dimness and shadows,
and no birds sing. Nothing grows older there, because nothing grows at
all.

Yet the Nac Mac Feegles tell Tiffany that ‘Fairyland’ was not always
such a terrible place. It has been ruined by a domestic dispute:

‘It wasnae so bad then. It wasnae perfect, mark you, but the Quin wasnae
as cold in them days. The King was still aroound. She was always happy
then.’

‘What happened? Did the King die?’

‘No. They had words, if ye tak’ my meanin’,’ said Rob.

‘Oh, you mean like an argument—’

‘A bit, mebbe,’ said Rob. ‘But they was _magical_ words. Forests
destroyed, mountains explodin’, a few hundred deaths, that kind of
thing. And he went off to his own world. Fairyland was never a picnic,
ye ken, even in the old days. But it was fine if you kept alert, an’
there was flowers and burdies and summertime.’ [_The Wee Free Men_]

There are mysteries here. Will Shakespeare must have picked up some echo
of them, since his _Midsummer Night’s Dream_ tells of a quarrel between
the King and Queen of Fairyland, whom he calls Oberon and Titania,
ending in reconciliation. Whether there can be the same happy ending
elsewhere in the multiverse remains to be seen. But where, meanwhile,
has Oberon’s Discworld counterpart disappeared to? And who is he? The
witches of Lancre know the answer. He is the powerful antlered figure
who lies in the cavern beneath the barrow known as the Long Man,
dreaming the days away in his steam-filled sweat-house. One day, maybe,
he will return. Meanwhile (as we learn in _Lords and Ladies_), he
occasionally intervenes to frustrate the plans of his Queen.

When Tiffany asks the Nac Mac Feegles what will become of her brother if
she can’t rescue him, they explain that he will probably return one day,
_but_ …

‘Time passes slower the deeper ye go intae this place. Years pass like
days. The Quin’ll get tired o’ the wee lad after a coupla months, mebbe.
A coupla months _here_, ye ken, where time is slow an’ heavy. But when
he comes back intae the mortal world, you’ll be an old lady, or mebbe
you’ll be deid. So if youse has bairns o’ yer own, you’d better tell
them to watch out for a wee sticky kid wanderin’ the hills shoutin’ for
sweeties, ’cos that’ll be their Uncle Wentworth. That wouldna be the
worst o’ it, neither. Live in dreams for too long and ye go mad, ye can
never wake up prop’ly, ye can never get the hang o’ reality again …’

The grim picture of a sunless land where time does not run true matches
some accounts in the folklore which took shape before Shakespeare’s
influence was felt. Take the story of Thomas the Rhymer, also called
Thomas of Erceldoune, a poet and seer who lived on the borders between
Scotland and England at the close of the thirteenth century. Some time
in the next couple of hundred years, someone wrote a ballad about him
(it is still sung today). It tells how Thomas, resting on a hillside
near Edinburgh, saw the Queen of Elfland ride by on a milk-white horse
with silver bells on its mane; she summoned him to be her harpist, he
kissed her and mounted behind her on her horse.

O they rade on, and farther on,

The steed gaed faster than the wind;

Until they reached a desert wide,

And living land was left behind.

In that desert is a place where three paths meet, just as they do in
Lancre. One is a narrow path, thick beset with thorns and briars; this,
says the Queen, is the Christian Path of Righteousness. The second is a
broad path through flowery meadows, and that’s the Path of Wickedness.
As for the third:

‘And see ye not yon bonny road,

That winds about the fernie brae?

That is the road to fair Elfland,

Where thou and I this night maun gae.’

But the bonny road among the ferns isn’t so very bonny after all:

O they rade on, and farther on,

And they waded rivers abune the knee,

And they saw neither sun nor moon,

But they heard the roaring of the sea.

It was mirk, mirk night, there was nae starlight,

They waded thro’ red blude to the knee;

For a’ the blude that’s shed on earth

Runs through the springs o’ that countrie.

Finally they reach a garden, where the Queen gives Thomas an apple as
his wages, and with it the unwelcome gift of ‘a tongue that can never
lie’. He eats (one should _never_ eat the food in Elfland),

And till seven years were gane and past,

True Thomas on earth was never seen.

It could have been worse. He was away only seven years, after all, and
when he returned he became a famous seer and prophet, thanks to his
truth-telling tongue.

People who are kidnapped by elves can be rescued, but this needs courage
and a cool head, as there won’t be a second chance. Sometimes the
rescuer has to go deep into Elfland (as Tiffany does). Sometimes,
according to our own tales, it is enough to go back a year later to the
place where the person was taken – a fairy ring, perhaps, where elves
gather to dance, or some crossroads which they pass when they ride out
hunting – and wait and watch. When they appear, their human captive will
be seen among them. The rescuer must drag him or her out of the dance,
or off the horse, and hold on tight, no matter what monsters and
terrifying illusions the elves call up. Another method, known in
Scotland, is to throw a dagger over the captive’s head. Some would-be
rescuers have lost their nerve, but others do not:

‘I remember a folksong about a situation just like this,’ said Magrat.
‘This girl had her fiancé stolen by the Queen of the Elves and she
didn’t hang around whining, she jolly well got on her horse and went and
rescued him. Well, I’m going to do that too.’ [_Lords and Ladies_]

The song Magrat remembers is known in Scotland as the ballad of Tam Lin.
To save him, his lover Janet must pull him off the fairy horse and hold
on as he turns into a snake, a deer, and a red-hot iron, before
returning to human form. She has the courage, and Tam is free and
unharmed.

Others were not so lucky. Some never escaped, others fell victim to the
distortion of time in Fairyland. An Irish hero, Bran the son of Febal,
heard an elf-woman singing and followed her to her magical island in the
western seas. He remained there for a year (so he thought), but then he
and his companions grew homesick. She told them they were allowed to
sail close to the coast of Ireland and speak with anyone standing on dry
land, but must not step ashore themselves. And so they anchored in a
harbour, and shouted to the men on the beach. Nobody recognized them,
though someone remembered that there were old stories about a man called
Bran who once, long ago, had sailed into the West. One of Bran’s friends
jumped into the water and swam ashore, but as soon as he touched land he
crumbled to dust. As for Bran, he put out to sea again, and has never
been seen since.

And it’s not only bards, seers and heroes – quite ordinary people get
taken too. During a wedding dance on a Danish farm the bride went out
for a breath of air, and walked as far as a little mound in one of the
fields, a mound where elf-folk lived. It had opened up, and elves were
dancing there too, and one of them came out and offered her some wine.
She drank. She joined in the dancing, just one dance, and then
remembered her husband and went home. But the village and the farm
looked different; she couldn’t recognize anybody, and nobody recognized
her. There was just one old woman who listened to her story and
exclaimed, ‘Why, you must be the girl who disappeared a hundred years
ago, at my grandfather’s brother’s wedding!’ At these words, the bride’s
true age came upon her in an instant, and she fell dead.

In tales such as this, told in the European countryside, elves were
often lurking in quite normal, familiar places. Just a little mound in a
field which you pass every day, nothing particularly eldritch about it,
no marker stones to warn you off. It might of course be an ancient
burial mound, like the one on the Chalk Downs which the Wee Free Men
take as their home, but on the other hand it might be a simple natural
hillock. But if you lie down and press your ear to the ground, you hear
faint music … Then one day it is standing open, and there They are. They
are the Hidden People, the Underground Folk, the Good People, the Good
Neighbours. Maybe they’ve come to do you a favour, or to ask for one.
There’s no need to be frightened, is there? Is there?

Yet long after the ‘enlightened’ and well-educated generations had lost
their faith and fear, after the wild elves had been safely reduced to
Peaseblossoms, an occasional artist recaptured the older image. The
crazed painter Richard Dadd did so in his sinister picture _The Fairy
Feller’s Master Stroke_, which he worked on from 1855 to 1864, while
living in an asylum. So did the composer Rutland Boughton in the key
aria of his opera _The Immortal Hour_ (1914), based on a poem by Fiona
Mcleod:

How beautiful they are,
The lordly ones
Who dwell in the hills,
In the hollow hills.
Their limbs are more white
Than shafts of moonshine.
They are more fleet
Than the north wind.
They laugh and are glad
And are terrible.
When their lances shake and glitter
Every green reed quivers.
How beautiful they are,
How beautiful,
The lordly ones
In the hollow hills.

Beautiful, yes. And terrible.

[image]


Chapter 4


THE NAC MAC
FEEGLE

 

THE WEE FREE MEN, also known as the Nac Mac Feegle (and, sometimes, as
‘the defendants’), are a fiercely independent species, organized into
numerous interrelated clans. Outsiders sometimes call them gnomes. To
humans, they are one of the most feared of the fairy races – indeed,
they can put trolls to flight, and even Nanny Ogg’s cat Greebo retires
under the furniture at the sight of them. They have shaggy red hair, and
are covered all over with blue tattoos and blue paint, in patterns which
indicate their clan. They wear kilts or leather loincloths, use
feathers, bones or teeth as decorations, and carry swords almost as
large as themselves – though they go in for kicking and head-butting
too. They are about six inches tall.

Originally, they were denizens of Fairyland, and served its Queen as her
wild champion robbers who went raiding on her behalf into every world
there is, but all that is over. Why so, is not certain. Some say they
were thrown out of Fairyland for being drunk and disorderly, making rude
gestures, and using language which would be considered offensive by
anybody who could understand it. They themselves say they left in
disgust because the Queen was a spiteful tyrant, and ordered them to
steal from the poor as well as the rich, ‘But we said it’s no _right_ to
steal an ol’ lady’s only pig, or the food frae them as dinnae ha’ enough
to eat.’ Whatever the truth of it, they are now out-and-out rebels
against any authority whatsoever. Their war-cry is ‘Nac Mac Feegle! The
Wee Free Men! Nae king! Nae quin! Nae laird! Nae master! We willna be
fooled again!’

They now live in the human territories of the Discworld, but it is hard
to say just where they are at any one time. Not only do they stay well
hidden, but they often shift from one area to another at high speed,
rather like a swarm of locusts, while indulging in their favourite
occupations: drinking, stealing, and fighting anything that gets in
their way. They get such pleasure from this that they think they’re
dead, and gone to heaven, where there’s lovely sunshine (not like the
perpetual half-light of Fairyland), good hunting, and plenty of monsters
to fight:

An amazing world like this couldn’t be open to just _anybody_, they say.
It must be some kind of a heaven or Valhalla, where brave warriors go
when they are dead. So, they reason, they have already been alive
somewhere else, and then died and were allowed to come [to the
Discworld] because they have been so _good_. [_A Hatful of Sky_]

They don’t mourn much for those that actually get killed while fighting
on the Disc:

‘Oh, they’ve gone back to the land o’ the livin’. It’s nae as good as
this one, but they’ll bide fine and come back before too long. No sense
in grievin’.’ [_The Wee Free Men_]

They do not limit themselves to the Discworld, for, as one of their
leaders, Rob Anybody, proudly declares, ‘We’ve been robbin’ an’ runnin’
aroound on all kinds o’ worrlds for a lang time.’ Their running around
within a particular world is done normally, with feet (though very, very
fast); but their transit from one universe to another is done by magic.
They are unwilling to discuss the process, which they call ‘the
crawstep’. Those who have seen them actually doing it say they simply
thrust out one leg straight ahead of them, wiggle the foot, and are
gone.

For many centuries, one of their favourite places was an area of the
Earth called Scotland. They were already there in the time of the
Ancient Romans, who spoke of them as _picti_, ‘painted men’; Julius
Caesar himself records that the tribes of Northern Britain had ‘designs
carved into their faces by iron’, a clear reference to tattooing.
Needless to say, they refused to submit to the Empire, conducting such a
persistent guerrilla war that the Romans gave up hope of conquering
Scotland, and the Wee Free Men remained both wee and free.

Later generations of Scottish humans were well aware of their presence,
and called them Pehts, Pechs, Pechts or Picts. They themselves like the
last version best, and have adopted it for their own use, in the form
‘pictsies’. (Be careful, however, never to confuse them with the
‘pixies’ of Devon and Cornwall, since pixies are an altogether inferior
race, whom the Feegles despise as ‘wee southron shites’, whatever that
means.) Several Scotsmen have described the Pechs, who were somewhat
taller than the Discworld clans, but in other respects pretty similar.
They were ‘unco wee bodies, but terrible strang’, wrote a certain James
Knox in 1831, and lived in underground chambers and burial mounds.
Indeed, for generations the Scots took it for granted that any odd stone
structures found underground were ‘Picts’ houses’. Robert Chambers, in
his _Popular Rhymes of Scotland_ (1870), wrote: ‘Short wee men they
were, wi’ red hair, and long arms, and feet sae braid that when it
rained they could turn them up owre their heads, and then they served
for umbrellas. The Pechs were great builders; they built a’ the auld
castles in the kintry.’

This refers to the brochs, a type of ancient round tower, which Scotsmen
called ‘Picts’ castles’. Why they built them is a mystery, since they
never lived in them; perhaps they had struck some bargain with the local
human ruler, broch-building in exchange for hunting rights, or the like.
It was said they could raise a broch in a single night, quarrying the
stones, forming a long chain from the quarry to the chosen site,
flinging the stones from hand to hand, and then piling them into massive
walls. This is much the same technique as that of the Feegles when
fighting people bigger than themselves; they work in groups, running up
one another’s backs to form a pyramid, till the top one is high enough
to punch the enemy, or, preferably, to head-butt him. Once he is down,
it is all over bar the kicking.

Feegles can easily lift things far heavier than themselves; to steal a
sheep or cow, for instance, needs only four of them, as Nanny Ogg
explains:

‘Four. One under each foot. Seen ’em do it. You see a cow in a field,
mindin’ its own business, next minute the grass is rustlin’. Some little
bugger shouts “Hup, hup, hup,” and the poor beast goes past, voom!
without its legs movin’. Backwards, sometimes. They’re stronger’n
cockroaches. You step on a pictsy, you’d better be wearin’ good thick
soles.’ [_Lords and Ladies_]

Another clan of Feegles settled in Ireland, where they changed their way
of dressing to suit local fashions, but continued to spread undiluted
terror. People there were too scared to use their proper name, so they
called them ‘the good folk’, hoping they might take the hint. It didn’t
work. The poet William Allingham records the lament of some Irish
humans:

Up the airy mountain,
Down the rushy glen,
We daren’t go a-hunting
For fear of little men.
Wee folk, good folk,
Trooping all together,
Green jacket, red cap,
And grey cock’s feather.

On the Discworld, Feegles initially took up residence on the high moors
of Uberwald, but some came into conflict with vampires who objected to
the presence of any others of the ‘old races’. Since vampires can fly
and Feegles can’t (except on large birds), the former had an unfair
advantage, and the latter decided to move on. They arrived in Lancre,
where, in return for timely help given to King Verence, they were
granted possession of an island on a lake, with lots of fish around, and
the chance of good hunting up the valley, provided they promised not to
go cattle-raiding.

There are other Feegle clans on the Downland Chalk. One group lives
inside the large burial mound of some ancient king, whose bones don’t
bother them at all, and whose gold occasionally comes in useful. These
particular Feegles are probably unique in that some of them have
actually been seen doing chores for a human girl, Tiffany Aching, a
young witch whom they greatly respect. In general, however, we must
repeat the warning that pictsies are not pixies. As Nanny Ogg has
remarked, if you leave a saucer of milk out for them, hoping they’ll do
the washing-up while you’re asleep, all that’ll happen is that the
‘little buggers will break into your cottage and steal everything in
your drinks cabinet’.

Very occasionally, for reasons unknown, an individual Feegle may leave
his clan for a while, to get a taste of city life. One such is Wee Mad
Arthur, rat-catcher and pest-destroyer in Ankh-Morpork, who plays a
crucial role in _Feet of Clay_. The locals refer to him as a ‘gnome’,
but his accent, his strength and his fondness for head-butting all show
he is a true Feegle.

No one could clear out rats like Wee Mad Arthur. Old and cunning rats
that knew all about traps, deadfalls and poison were helpless in the
face of his attack, which was where, in fact, he often attacked. The
last thing they felt was a hand gripping each of their ears, and the
last thing they saw was his forehead, approaching at speed. [_Feet of
Clay_]

The same may well be true of the ‘gnome’ Buggy Swires, a recently
recruited Corporal in the City Watch, where he is the head (and only
member) of the Airborne Section, as mentioned in _Monstrous Regiment_.
He patrols the skies by riding on a large female buzzard named Morag,
who was trained by pictsies and is well worth the crate of whisky she
cost the Watch. Typical! Shakespeare’s Ariel thought himself a fine
fellow because he could fly on a bat’s back, but only a large bird of
prey will do for a Feegle.

The time that the Feegles or their ancestors spent in Scotland has had a
deep influence on them (unless, who knows, it was the other way around).
Besides the tattoos and the kilts, they have developed a taste for
strong liquor, and even for haggis. Each clan keeps a bard and musician,
called a gonnagle, with a repertoire of heroic lays, laments, and
martial music played on the mousepipes. Such performers are invaluable
in battle, for terrorizing the enemy. When Tiffany Aching and the
Feegles of the Chalk are attacked by a pack of fairy grimhounds, the
venerable William the gonnagle takes out his pipes:

‘I shall play,’ he announced, as the dogs got close enough for Tiffany
to see the drool, ‘that firrrm favourite, “the King Underrr Waterrr”.’

As one pictsie, the Nac Mac Feegles dropped their swords and put their
hands over their ears.

William put the mouthpiece to his lips, tapped his foot once or twice,
and, as a dog gathered itself to leap at Tiffany, began to play …

The dog in front of her went cross-eyed and, instead of leaping, tumbled
forward.

The grimhounds paid no attention to the pictsies. They howled. They spun
around. They tried to bite their own tails. They stumbled, and ran into
one another. The line of panting death broke into dozens of desperate
animals, twisting and writhing and trying to escape from their own
skins. [_The Wee Free Men_]

What had happened was that William had played ‘the notes of pain’,
pitched too high for human ears, but agonizing to dogs. There is
precedent for such skill in our world. According to ballad singers in
Shetland, there was once a King Orfeo whose wife had been slain by a
dart flung by the King of Fairies. So Orfeo went into Fairyland to win
her back. He entered in at a grey stone, and played his pipes at the
Fairy Court. First he overwhelmed his hearers with pain, then filled
them with joy, and finally played a wild dance tune to make their hearts
whole again:

An first he played da notes o noy,

An dan he played da notes o joy,

An dan he played da göd gabber reel

Dat meicht ha made a sick hert hale.

Naturally, his wife was given back to him. And, unlike the Ancient Greek
Orpheus, he did _not_ lose her by looking back.

The title of office for a Feegle bard, ‘the gonnagle’, is a touching
tribute to the memory of William McGonagall (born 1825), a famously
excruciating Scottish poet. He had grasped one basic point about poetry,
namely that it should rhyme, eventually, but since he had not the
faintest conception of rhythm he was capable of stretching a line of
verse like chewing gum. As for his choice of words, the less said the
better. His most celebrated production was a lament over the collapse of
a railway bridge. It is long, so the first and last verses must suffice:

Beautiful Railway Bridge of the Silv’ry Tay!
Alas! I am very sorry to say
That many lives have been taken away
On the last Sabbath Day of 1879,
Which will be remembered for a very long time.

…

Oh! Ill-fated Bridge of the Silv’ry Tay,
I must now conclude my lay
By telling the world fearlessly without the least dismay
That your central girders would not have given way,
At least many sensible men do say,
Had they been supported on each side with buttresses,
At least many sensible men confesses,
For the stronger we our houses do build,
The less chance we have of being killed.

The Feegles of the Chalk have an aspiring young bard who has mastered
this style to perfection, and deploys it when they are under attack from
vicious little flying fairies, rather like dragonflies. Standing with
one hand pressed to his heart and the other outstretched very
theatrically, and rolling his eyes, he utters a long-drawn mournful
moan, and launches forth.

‘Oooooooooooooiiiiiit _is_ with great lamentation and much worrying
dismay,’ the pictsie groaned, ‘that we rrregard the doleful prospect of
Fairyland in considerrrable decay …’

In the air, the flying creatures stopped attacking and began to panic.
Some of them flew into one another.

‘With quite a large number of drrrrrreadful incidents happening everrry
day. Including, I am sorrrry to say, an aerial attack by the otherwise
quite attractive fey …’

The flyers screeched. Some crashed into the snow, but the ones still
capable of flight swarmed off amongst the trees.

‘Witnessed by all of us at this time, And celebrated in this hasty
rhyme,’ he shouted after them.

And they were gone.

The old bard congratulates the young one:

‘That, lad,’ he said proudly, ‘was some of the worst poetry I have heard
for a long time. It was offensive to the ear and a torrrture to the
soul. The last couple of lines need some work but ye has the groanin’
off fiiine. A’ in a’, a verrry commendable effort! We’ll make a gonnagle
out o’ ye yet!’ [_The Wee Free Men_]

The speech of the Feegles is markedly Scottish, to the point that,
though it is not technically a foreign language (unlike, for example,
that of dwarfs), most people in Lancre and Ankh-Morpork find it very
hard to follow. Yet it’s a good language, as Nanny Ogg says, ‘with a
hint of heather and midden in it’. Most of it is a form of Lowlands
Scots peppered with Glasgow slang, but there are several words adopted
from Gaelic, the Celtic language of the Highlands and Isles, one of
which is of considerable folkloric significance. In its original tongue
it is _Cailleach_, pronounced approximately ‘kall-yack’ and meaning ‘old
woman, hag’. Like ‘hag’, it often implies magical power, and so can mean
‘witch’. In the Feegle language it has developed two quite different
forms. The first, used light-heartedly in ordinary speech, is
‘callyake’. For example, a Feegle who had been startled by Greebo
shouted at Nanny Ogg, ‘Ach, hins tak yer scaggie, yer dank owd
callyake!’, which appears to mean, ‘Oh, devil take your moggy, you daft
old woman!’ But the second form, ‘kelda’, is a title to be used with the
deepest respect.

Feegles are matriarchal. Each community is ruled by a kelda, who has
come from some different clan when young, to choose one of them as her
husband and be their Queen and their Wise Woman for the rest of her
life. Like a queen bee, she bears an incredible number of offspring, but
in her case (unlike the bee’s) all but one or two of them are male. This
means that all the men of the clan are either her sons or her husband’s
brothers, apart from a few of her own brothers who came with her as
bodyguards, and probably the gonnagle, since these travel from clan to
clan. Keldas are rather taller than the male Feegles, and very, very
fat, looking just like the little figurines of goddesses carved on Earth
way back in the times of ice and mammoths. Their word is law, as truly
as if they were indeed goddesses. As for the title itself, though
centuries of use have worn it down, its origins can still be guessed. It
comes from Cailleach Dubh, ‘the Black Hag’, a supernatural figure in
Scottish and Irish tradition who shapes the landscape, rules the
seasons, protects wild animals, and confers power on favoured humans.
The Cailleach Dubh was a true Mother Goddess, and the language of the
Feegles honours her memory.

And what of their own name? Here again we see the influence of the
Scottish and Irish lore they picked up during their stay on the Earth
(or vice versa). ‘Mac Feegle’ means ‘Sons of Feegle’, and ‘Feegle’ is
clearly a variation of ‘Fingal’, the eighteenth-century Scottish name
for a great hunter and warrior hero in Celtic tradition. Tales about him
under his older name of Finn or Fionn mac Cumhaill have been popular for
over twelve hundred years in Ireland, and almost equally long in
Scotland, where he is called Finn MacCool. He was the chieftain of the
_fianna_, a band of wild young men who lived by hunting deer and wild
boar, fighting, cattle-raiding and robbing. At times they might take
service under some king and fight in his wars; at other times they chose
an independent life. All were fearless in confronting any enemy, natural
or supernatural. Fionn himself more than once entered some sinister
region of the Otherworld and had to fight his way out against great
odds. It is very understandable that the race now known as the Nac Mac
Feegle should wish to take his name.

[image]


Chapter 5


TROLLS

 

TROLLS ARE A unique life-form because their ‘flesh’ is composed of
silicon in various complex combinations. At least, so it is said. They
_look_ rocky. Lichen grows on their heads. They have carbon as well as
silicon in their make-up – in their teeth, which are of diamond – and
from time to time, at intervals of many centuries, there appears a King
of Trolls who is pure diamond. In one sense, therefore, trolls belong in
the mineral kingdom, and exposure to strong sunlight often puts them
into a fully stony state until nightfall – although in truth it is heat
rather than light that slows down their brains.

At the same time, they do have most of the attributes of animal life:
they eat and drink (mineral and chemical substances only), walk and
talk, are male or female, make love and have children. Their given names
are always related to geology – Mica, Bluejohn, Flint, Morraine (or
Brick, for one born in the city). They can be killed by force, but do
not (as far as is known) ever die a natural death. Instead, after
several centuries of active life, a troll withdraws to some remote
mountain area and settles down in one spot among the rocks to think
long, slow thoughts about nothing in particular. Gradually he becomes
more and more rock-like, till he is to all intents and purposes simply a
landscape feature.

Many have come down from the Ramtop Mountains, which for most of them is
their native region, and have come looking for work in towns and cities.
Being immensely strong and intimidating, they are welcome wherever a
hired fist is needed – as private bodyguards, barmen, bouncers or
splatters (who carry out the same duties, but with messier results).
One, who has adopted the human name of Big Jim Beef, is employed as a
customs officer and frontier guard for the kingdom of Lancre; when not
making checks on travellers, he lives under the Troll Bridge. It is not
a good idea to mention billygoats in his hearing. Unfortunately, some of
the young city-dwelling trolls give themselves unpleasantly thuggish
airs; they go in for elaborate body-carving and real skull pendants, and
become addicted to various brain-rotting substances (and practically
anything can slow down a troll’s brain).

The best-known troll is Detritus, who was recruited into the
Ankh-Morpork City Watch by Captain Vimes, and has proved a most keen and
loyal Sergeant, if a little slow on the uptake. Trolls are not in fact
stupid, despite what most people think, but their brains function
properly only at low temperatures (because of the silicon), so the warm
climate of the valleys and plains makes them very sluggish, especially
in the daytime. Detritus now gets some help from a small fan attached to
his helmet, but it was only when he was accidentally shut in the
refrigerated Pork Futures Warehouse that his true intelligence was
revealed – as he gradually froze, he scratched calculations worthy of
Einstein all over the iced-up walls. There are hints that trolls have
age-old cultural traditions which no outsider knows anything about;
there is talk of their history chants and stone music, for instance, and
of their Long Dance. They think of Time in a curious though logical way:
the future, they say, must be behind you, since you can’t see it, but
the past, which you can see in your memory, must be ahead.

There is an age-old feud between trolls and dwarfs, possibly arising
from the fact that both races live in the same mountain regions, and
that dwarfs spend their lives mining and tunnelling through rock –
something which trolls find it upsetting to think about. It is even
rumoured that dwarfs have occasionally tunnelled into the underside of a
particularly stony and immobile troll. Be that as it may, the feud led
to the disastrous battle of Koom Valley, said to be the only occasion in
military history where each army ambushed the other. It was long ago and
far away, but has never been forgotten. Koom Valley has become a myth, a
state of mind.

Where any dwarf fought any troll, there was Koom Valley. Even if it was
a punch-up in a pub, it was Koom Valley. It was part of the mythology of
both races, a rallying cry, the ancestral reason why you couldn’t trust
those short, bearded / big, rocky bastards. [_Thud!_]

And yet … and yet … if _other_ myths can be trusted, the first man, the
first dwarf and the first troll all originated in a single egg of stone,
a geode, more than 500,000 years ago, and are therefore, in some sense,
brothers. This myth was mentioned above, in the section on dwarfs. Its
implications, together with the story of what _really_ happened in Koom
Valley, are explored in _Thud!._

Trolls also have a dislike of druids, who can be found in the small,
rainy, mountainous kingdom of Llamedos. There is no mystery about the
reason, for the druids of the Disc went around erecting huge stone
circles in much the same way as (some folk used to say) British druids
did at Stonehenge. Regrettable errors occurred:

Any sapient species which spends a lot of time in a stationary,
rock-like pose objects to any other species which drags it sixty miles
on rollers and buries it up to its knees in a circle. It tends to feel
it has cause for disgruntlement. [_Soul Music_]

Even the dragging on rollers is not the worst of it. It is said (as
recorded in _The Light Fantastic_) that one particularly skilled group
of druids found a way to quarry huge slabs of high-quality stone and
_fly_ them hundreds of miles along ley-lines to the snowy Vortex Plain,
where they set them up as an immense construction of concentric circles,
towering trilithons, and mystic avenues, to be a great computer of the
skies. It proved hopelessly inaccurate. This act of wanton cruelty to
minerals made trolls still more bitter towards druids.

On Earth, there are two quite different races claiming the name ‘troll’.
One lot is to be found in Denmark: these are smallish mischievous
goblins with red hair, living inside mounds and hillocks near farmland.
They can be disregarded here since, apart from the name, they have
nothing in common with Discworld trolls, and seem akin to Feegles.

The other ones, however – the huge mountain trolls who live in Iceland
and Norway – are remarkably like those of the Discworld, but wilder and
more hostile to human beings. They are thought to be the direct
descendants of the dangerous Giants of Scandinavian myth, but differ
from them in being generally solitary creatures. They are immensely old
and strong, and probably not as stupid as humans say they are. They have
had a considerable impact on the landscape – quite literally so, since
they often quarrel and hurl huge boulders at one another, and never
clear the pieces away afterwards. They also send avalanches and
rock-falls crashing down on anybody who annoys them by shouting among
the mountains. Many of them object to humans building churches in their
district, partly because they dislike Christianity itself, and partly
because they hate the noise of bells. The troll’s solution is always the
same: heave a large rock at it. He always misses. At least, so the
stories say, but can we be sure that there are no squashed churches
under _any_ of the rocks that litter the landscape? Has anyone checked?

There was once a Norwegian troll who tried a different plan. Hearing
that St Olaf was trying to build himself a church at Trondheim, he
volunteered his services as a stonemason. But this was in fact a plot to
kill Olaf. ‘I’ll build your church for you,’ said the troll, ‘but I’ll
take the sun and the moon and the heart out of your breast as my fee –
unless you can guess my name before the last stone is in place.’ The
troll turned out to be not only extremely strong but also a remarkably
quick worker, and in no time the walls were done, and the tower was
rising fast. But then one night as the saint wandered gloomily along the
mountain paths, he heard the voice of a she-troll from inside the rocks,
as she sang her little ones to sleep: ‘Hushabye, hushabye, your daddy
Finn will soon be home, and he’ll bring you the sun and the moon to play
with, and the priest’s heart too.’ Next morning St Olaf strolled up to
the church, just as the troll was setting the last course of stones on
the tower. ‘Splendid work, Finn,’ said Olaf. Now, it is one of the basic
rules of folklore that to know a magical creature’s name gives you the
power to destroy him – and another, that somehow or other the secret is
sure to get out. So the troll crashed down dead, but Trondheim cathedral
is still there.

The physiology of Earth’s mountain trolls must be based on silicon, like
that of their Discworld counterparts, judging by the way they all too
easily turn into large boulders, which in their case are permanent. One
variety, the Icelandic Night-troll, hides in caves all day and only
comes out at night, because any ray of direct sunlight petrifies it at
once. There are several spectacularly tall rocks offshore which are said
to be trolls caught unawares by the sunrise while wading out to sea.

Naturally, the best defence against a Night-troll is to keep it talking
till the sun comes up. There was once an Icelandic girl who had been
left at home on Christmas Eve, to look after her baby brother while
everyone else went to church. In the middle of the night she heard a
deep voice outside the window, serenading her.

Fair seems your hand to me,
Hard and rough mine must be,

Dilly-dilly-do.

But she did not look round. Instead, she sang to the baby in the cradle:

Dirt it did never sweep,
Sleep, little Kari, sleep,

Lully-lully-lo.

When the troll praised her eyes and her feet, she told the baby that she
had never looked on anything evil, never trodden on dirt. And so it went
on all night, till dawn broke and the girl sang in triumph:

Stand there and turn to stone,
So you’ll do harm to none,

Lully-lully-lo.

And when the family came home from church, they found a huge boulder on
the path between the farm buildings, which had certainly not been there
the night before.

As this tale shows, one difference between the way trolls evolved on
Earth and in the Discworld is that the Earth ones can get amorous
towards humans, an idea which would never enter the head of a troll on
the Disc. Icelandic she-trolls sometimes kidnap a handsome young man to
be their mate, or lure him up into their caves by magic chants. There,
they do all they can to seduce him, and to persuade him to eat trolls’
food; they rub him with strange ointments, stretch his limbs, and bellow
into his ear, to make a troll of him. It is said that men who do not
manage to escape gradually do turn into trolls themselves. In the
Norwegian legend of Peer Gynt, the King of the Mountain wanted Peer to
marry his daughter, who was apparently quite good-looking, whereas it is
unlikely that a female Discworld troll would ever appeal to a male
human, no matter how cheap the beer and however bad the club lighting.

Earthly trolls can, in fact, look like humans and humans can become
trolls, and it has been suggested that trolls have their origins in
‘folk memories’ of earlier races (even Neanderthals) who were pushed to
the edges of the habitable world by the stumbling advance of
civilization, and then into myth and story. This attractive and
beguiling idea is very familiar to folklorists as an explanation for
‘fairy’ folk of any sort (who look outlandish and have strange powers),
and so we will back tactfully away and leave it to the anthropologists.

It’s worth adding that Discworld trolls cannot digest human beings
(though they have been known to try), whereas those of Earth find them
both tasty and wholesome. In Norway, men have heard she-trolls bellowing
to one another among the crags, discussing their cooking: ‘Sister, can I
borrow your big pot?’ – ‘What for?’ – ‘Here’s Jon the woodcutter coming
up this way, I want to make a stew of him.’ – ‘All right, Sister. When
you skim the broth, save some of the fat for me.’ Somehow, bellowing
across the landscape that you are waiting in ambush seems so very troll.

Trolls were still being talked about in Iceland as late as the
nineteenth century. There were certain cliffs where seabirds nested, and
it was said that when men went over the edge on ropes to gather eggs or
to catch the birds themselves for food, great, grey, shaggy hands
carrying very sharp knives would reach out from caves and cut the ropes,
and so kill the men who hung there. So then some priest would be sent
for to drive the trolls out by going down on a rope and blessing the
cliff, while men on the cliff-top sang psalms as loud as they could. The
really intelligent priests would bring a hammer, and chip away the sharp
ridges on the cliff face as they blessed it – after which, the ropes
hardly ever frayed and broke. But there remain a few cliffs which were
never blessed, and where egg-gatherers never go, however many birds
there may be. This is because once, when a bishop had gone down on a
rope and was working his way along the cliff face, a voice from inside
the rocks called out: ‘Don’t bless anything more! The wicked do have to
have _somewhere_ to live!’ And the bishop, being a fair-minded man, left
this place unblessed.

GARGOYLES

Although gargoyles are very different from a standard troll in size,
appearance, habitat and habits, they are in fact a subspecies which has
evolved to fit an urban environment. They are, if anything, even more
stony; they squat motionless on some rooftop, which they are very
reluctant to leave. On the other hand, their digestive system is quite
different from that of trolls; they are carnivores, preying on pigeons.
Their main occupation is absorbing rainwater from the gutters and
ejecting it vigorously, through their gaping jaws, on to the heads of
pedestrians below. When they do move, it is in slow, grinding jerks;
their mouths are permanently fixed open, making it hard to understand
their speech. But their endless patience and keen eyesight make them
valuable members of the Watch in Ankh-Morpork, somewhat like CCTV
cameras in a modern city on Earth.

Gargoyles are also a familiar sight on the roofs of Earth’s medieval
churches and castles, where they got their name. It suits them well, for
they gurgle, gargle and glug in their gullets, and most of them goggle
too. But there are few, if any, stories about them, probably because
they are too high up for anyone to see them properly.

SEA-TROLLS

It should be mentioned that ‘trolls’ of one sort or another apparently
exist elsewhere in the multiverse. The wizard Rincewind, in one of his
early adventures described in _The Colour of Magic_, was almost swept
over the Edge of the Disc, where an endless cascade of ocean pours away
into space. Instead, he crashed into the Circumfence – a single rope,
suspended a few feet above the water from occasional wooden posts, and
extending for tens of thousands of miles round the rim of the Disc. This
particular section was patrolled by a sea-troll, a creature of a
pleasantly translucent blue colour, apparently composed of sea-water and
very little else. As for size, he gradually swelled as the hours went
by, then just as gradually shrank; owing to the strength of the
Discworld moon, he was suffering from chronic tides.

The sea-troll was not native to the Discworld. He came from a
_different_ disc, quite a small one (mostly blue), where the seafolk
lived in thriving civilized communities on its three oceans.
Unfortunately, he had been blown over the edge in a great storm, fell
through outer space (which froze him solid), and eventually landed on
the Disc. Curiously, the name of his own world is Bathys, which on Earth
is Greek for ‘ocean depths’, and the troll’s personal name is Tethis,
remarkably close to that of the Ancient Greek sea-nymph Thetis.

Interestingly, the Norwegian artist Theodor Kittelsen, who painted a
large number of what we now call fantasy paintings, did several based on
trolls, including, in 1887, a fearsome sea-troll. Alas, it is not
transparent.

[image]


Chapter 6


OTHER SIGNIFICANT
RACES

 

VAMPIRES

THE CHILDREN OF the night are an increasing presence in Ankh-Morpork
these days, thanks to the efforts of the Uberwald League of Temperance.
Sensible vampires have realized that a diet of black pudding and blood
sausage _and_ a stake in a growing economy is much to be preferred to
just a stake. However, it was not always thus: the vampire – or at least
the _image_ of the vampire – has evolved quite markedly over the
centuries.

Do vampires suck blood? Silly question, nowadays. If there’s one thing
everybody knows about vampires, it’s that they suck your blood, leaving
you with two neat puncture marks at the base of your neck. Of course,
what everyone knows is wrong, and nearly everyone knows it. At least, we
think so; the trouble with what everyone knows is that you can never be
sure that everyone knows it. But surely everyone knows that vampires,
like werewolves, have stepped out of folklore and into popular culture.
The movies, of course, were the major influence; in the 1950s and 60s a
generation grew up (thanks to Hammer Films) _knowing_ that female
vampires _always_ wore underwired nightgowns, and male ones a
high-collared black cloak with a red satin lining.⁶

But it was not always so. In the folklore of the Balkans, Greece, and
Central Europe a vampire, also known as a _nosferatu_, a _vrykolakas_,
or a _nachzehrer_, was simply an Undead revenant – a corpse that gets
out of its grave and wanders about. Some sucked blood, others didn’t.
Instead, they might breathe on you and give you plague, cholera or
consumption; or sit on your chest and give you nightmares; or strangle
you; or beat you black and blue; or simply get into your house and smash
the furniture. Subtle and elegant they were not. Their close relative,
the _draug_ of medieval Iceland, would break every bone of your body,
and of your cattle too.

Early European vampires were not aristocrats, but village folk. They did
not look like noble gentlemen in black cloaks, or luscious women in
low-cut ball gowns. They looked like what they were, corpses. To be
precise, corpses that have been buried long enough to begin decaying,
but not long enough to turn into nice clean skeletons. When terrified
locals dug into the grave of a suspected vampire to destroy him, they
would find a body bloated with gases, and therefore plumper and bigger
than when alive; the skin taut; the blood no longer congealed, but
runny, and often oozing from the mouth or nose; the face puffy and red,
or in some cases dusky. If they jabbed a stake or spade into it, nasty
reddish liquids gushed out. They might even hear a sort of grunt or
squawk as the blow forced the gases out through the windpipe. Who could
doubt that this was an Undead?

Such a corpse must then be destroyed by burning. If this is too
difficult (dead bodies take a lot of burning), at least it can be
mutilated or pinned down in some way, so that it will never walk again.
Which is where staking comes in, or beheading, or tearing the heart out.

Vampires as the Earth knows them now are rather different. They were
created by English writers in the Romantic and Victorian periods, and
perfected by that most powerful myth-making medium, the cinema. The
first was Lord Ruthven in John Polidori’s story ‘The Vampyre’ (1819), an
evil blood-sucking deathless aristocrat. Then in 1872 came Joseph
Sheridan Le Fanu’s story about the beautiful young Carmilla, who (like
Salacia in _Thud!_ ) assumed she could evade discovery by making
anagrams of her name – Millarca, Mircalla. She was gentler than Lord
Ruthven, but she too brought death; she was eventually found in a
blood-filled coffin, staked, and decapitated.

And then, in 1897, Bram Stoker’s _Dracula_ appeared, presenting the
sinister but elegantly seductive Count, his female victims, and three
erotic female vampires. Stoker stole the Count’s name from the real-life
Vlad Dracul, also known as Vlad Tepes the Impaler, one of the great
warrior-princes of Romanian history, who in his native country is
respectfully remembered as a hero, and is never, _never_ thought of as a
vampire. Stoker also adopted many details from East European folklore.
For over a hundred years now, the Dracula figure and its variants have
been fixed in modern popular mythology – fangs, swirling black cloaks
with red linings, brocaded waistcoats, a haughty manner, and an escort
of bats, rats, and wolves.

On Discworld, the Count de Magpyr is a magnificent example of the
aristocratic vampire, sprung from an ancient family whose motto is
_Carpe Jugulum_, ‘Go for the Jugular’. His son Vlad is very much the
dandy; his daughter Lacrimosa is a thin girl in a white dress, with very
long black hair and far too much eye make-up. Their home is a castle on
a crag in Uberwald, complete with sinister ancestral portraits. One of
these shows Aunt Carmilla, a far more savage figure than Le Fanu’s
heroine of the same name; she used to bathe in the blood of up to two
hundred virgins at a time, just as the real-life Hungarian Countess
Elizabeth Bathory was rumoured to do. It was a good cosmetic. There is
also the portrait of the _old_ Count de Magpyr (father of the present
one, and remembered by some as ‘Old Red Eyes’):

A bald head. Dark-rimmed, staring eyes. Two teeth like needles, two ears
like batwings, fingernails that hadn’t been trimmed for years …

That’s something known on this world too. That’s Nosferatu, perhaps the
most terrifying vampire in the history of the cinema, as created in
1922.

But the current Count de Magpyr is adapting to modern times. To the fury
of his servant Igor, whose attitude can be described as
more-gothic-than-thou, he and his family wear full evening dress in the
evenings only, not all the time, as his father the _old_ Count did; the
rest of the time, it’s fancy waistcoats for the men and lacy skirts for
the women. In the castle, squeaky door-hinges must now be oiled,
guttering candles removed, spiders chased out of the dungeons. There
must be no black plumes on the coach or its horses – coaches looking
like hearses are not at all cool.

The Count’s aim is to train his family, little by little, to overcome
all the taboos which limit a vampire’s freedom, and which are only
cultural conditioning – a conditioning which, strangely, seems to be
much the same on the Discworld and the Earth. He believes that with a
little effort and practice, modern vampires could and should learn to
drink … wine, go out in sunlight, cross running water, eat
garlic-flavoured canapés, bear the touch of holy water, and look at any
sacred symbol without wincing. By and large, the plan seems to be
succeeding. But they still can’t enter a house unless invited.

As was noted above, quite a number of Discworld vampires hope to become
integrated into society as a whole, and so have joined the Uberwald
League of Temperance; members have forsworn the drinking of human blood
– or, as they prefer to call it, ‘the b-word’. They carry their badge, a
small twist of shiny black ribbon, and gather regularly in mutual
support groups for a nice singsong with cocoa and a bun. One Black
Ribboner is Otto Chriek, a brilliant iconographer on the staff of the
_Ankh-Morpork Times_. He dresses as the cinematic stereotype requires,
and speaks (when he wants to) with a thick Uberwald accent –
deliberately so, to make people laugh. That way, no one fears him, or
hates him. Since Otto personally has not overcome his hereditary allergy
to strong light, he suffers intensely whenever he has to use a flash,
sometimes even crumbling to dust. He carries a card for such
emergencies:

DO NOT BE ALARMED. The former bearer of this card has suffered a minor
accident. You vill need a drop of blood from any species, and a dustpan
and brush. [_The Truth_]

If some kind person dribbles a drop or two from, say, a piece of raw
steak on to the dust, it mushrooms up into the air, becomes a mass of
coloured flecks, and once again is Otto Chriek.

From the information so far available, it looks as if all Discworld
vampires become such either by their genetics, or by being bitten.
Admittedly, one may suspect that the genes of the late Count Notfaroutoe
were pretty reluctant to be activated in the unlikely DNA of his only
remaining relative, his nephew Arthur Winkings, who was a coming man in
the wholesale fruit and vegetable business. And Arthur was even more
reluctant to receive them, as we learn in _Reaper Man_. But that’s how
it goes – if you inherit the title and the estates, you get the coffin
and the batwings too. Genetics, or a bite. Take your choice.

On the Earth, this is true in the literary and cinematic mythology, but
in European folklore there are plenty of other reasons why the dead
become vampires. They may have lived an evil life, committed suicide, or
practised black magic; they may have been conceived in sacrilege, their
parents having had sex on a holy day; they may have been born with
teeth, or a tail, or two hearts,⁷ or a caul. In Romania, anyone with red
hair and blue eyes is regarded as a potential vampire. In many parts of
Europe, a corpse will become a revenant if it is left unburied, or
buried secretly without proper rites. If it is laid out at home, it
should be in a lighted room, and there should always be somebody keeping
watch; no dog or cat should be allowed to jump on to or over it. Break
any of these rules, and you will soon have a vampire in the village.

And when you do, what do you do about it? As the Quite Reverend Oats,
self-appointed Omnian missionary to Lancre, explained to Nanny Ogg,

‘It depends exactly where they’re from, I remember. Uberwald is a very
big place. Er, cutting off the head and staking them in the heart is
generally efficacious … in Splintz they die if you put a coin in their
mouth and cut their head off … in Klotz they die if you stick a lemon in
their mouth – after you cut their head off. I believe that in Glitz you
have to fill their mouth with salt, hammer a carrot into both ears, and
then cut off their head … And in the valley of the Ah they believe it’s
best to cut off the head and boil it in vinegar … But in Kashncari they
say you should cut off their toes and drive a nail through their neck.’

‘And cut their head off?’

‘Apparently you don’t have to.’ [_Carpe Jugulum_]

Decapitation was the folk method in parts of Europe too, especially
among Germans and western Slavs, with the addition that the severed head
must be placed between the legs of the corpse, behind its buttocks, or
below its feet – so that it couldn’t find it and put it back on. The
southern Slavs preferred staking the corpse; Greeks cremated it, often
cutting the heart out first; Russians would throw it into a lake or
river. Danes staked revenants; medieval Icelanders beheaded and/or
burned them.

There was no need to stick to one method at a time. In Germany, one
woman who ‘walked’ was dug up, decapitated, and then reburied at a
crossroads with her mouth full of poppy seeds. Another corpse was taken
to a border between two districts, cut open, staked through the heart,
and beheaded; a stone was put in the mouth, and both body and head were
left lying there, for animals to eat.

Of course, it was best if you could stop the corpse from leaving its
grave at all, by giving it something to do which would keep it there.
For example, Oats told Nanny Ogg, you can defeat vampires by stealing
their sock:

‘They’re pathologically meticulous, you see. Some of the gypsy tribes in
Borogravia say that if you steal their sock and hide it somewhere
they’ll spend the rest of eternity looking for it. They can’t abide
things to be out of place or missing … They say in some villages that
you can even slow them down by throwing poppyseed at them. Then they’ll
have a terrible urge to count every seed. Vampires are very
anal-retentive, you see?’

Paul Barber, a notable American authority on vampires, has similarly
stressed their ‘limited, rigid, and compulsive nature’. This makes it
easier to stop them from coming home after burial. For instance, they
have to re-enter the house in the same way they left it, so if you lift
the coffin out through a window or a hole in the wall, instead of using
the door, and then shut the window or refill the hole, they’ll never
find the way back. If you bury them face down, when they try to dig
themselves out they’ll just go down deeper and deeper. If you put seeds
or sand in a vampire’s mouth or coffin, or on the path to the graveyard,
this activates his compulsions: ‘he must collect the grains one at a
time, and often only one grain per year. This so engages his attention
that he is obliged to drop all other pursuits.’ Nets and knitted
stockings in the coffin are just as good; he has to unpick them, one
knot or stitch per year. As for putting coins, pebbles, dirt or food in
the corpse’s mouth, that gives him something satisfying to chew on.

So a girl setting out to be a vampire-slayer in Uberwald needs a big
sack, to be ready for all possibilities. She must carry a stake and
mallet, a spade, and a strong knife; nets, seeds, coins, sand, salt,
stones, lemons, garlic, assorted vegetables; thorns and needles to stick
in the vampire’s feet to stop him walking, and in his tongue to stop him
sucking; a flask of holy water and the sacred symbols of all major gods.

But, as Nanny Ogg could tell her, there is a better way. She could
simply borrow Greebo the cat, and wait till a very large red-eyed bat
comes by. For that would be a flabberghast (‘which is foreign for bat,’
Nanny Ogg explains), and a flabberghast is a shape-shifted vampire. And
it would very soon learn the useful truth set down in _Witches Abroad_:

Vampires have risen from the dead, the grave and the crypt, but have
never managed it from the cat.

BANSHEES

These unpleasant (and mercifully rare) creatures, native to the Uberwald
mountains, are the only humanoid species on the Discworld that has
evolved wings, apart from certain small elves; vampires who fly, such as
the Count de Magpyr and his family, simply do so by a form of
levitation. However, there may possibly be some remote genetic
connection between the two races, since a banshee has two hearts, which,
according to some folk traditions, is a characteristic of vampires. No
research has been done on this topic, nor is likely to be.

A Discworld banshee is about the same size as a man, but far more
lightly built, consisting almost entirely of thin bones and very strong
sinews, several rows of pointy teeth, and huge claws. At first glance,
you would think it is wearing a black leather cloak. This, as you will
soon discover, is its wings. And then there is its scream.

It was harsh, guttural, it was malice and hunger given a voice. Small
huddling shrew-like creatures had once heard sounds like that, circling
over the swamps. [_Going Postal_]

It is well known that to hear the banshee’s scream means that you are
going to die. With the more civilized banshees, all this means is that
they have taken on the job of a death-omen, and will sit screeching on
your roof to make sure you get plenty of warning that Death is on his
way. Indeed, in Ankh-Morpork there is one solitary and gloomy banshee
named Ixolite who suffers from a speech impediment and just writes
OoooEeeeOoooEEEeee on a scrap of paper and slips it under your door. But
the wild banshees, such as the Mr Gryle described in _Going Postal_, do
the whole job themselves. One minute you hear the scream, next minute
there’s a swoop and a pounce and some quite remarkable claws.

Over in our own parallel universe, banshees are only to be found in one
particular habitat, namely Ireland. The name, if not the species, must
have originated there, since _bean sí_ makes good sense in Irish, though
it is mere gibberish in Discworld languages. It means ‘woman of the
otherworld’ – for in Ireland the creature is invariably female. Her
mission is to announce the imminent death of someone in one of the old
aristocratic Irish families, by screaming and wailing near their homes.
She is more often heard than seen, but when she does let herself be
glimpsed it is as an old woman with long, loose white hair which she
combs as she wails. Sometimes she is seen crouching by a river, washing
a winding-sheet. In some parts of the country she is also known as the
_badhbh chaointe_, pronounced ‘boheenta’ and meaning ‘the keening
scaldcrow’, though she does not nowadays actually appear in crow-shape.

Though the Irish banshee is no predator, it is best to be wary of
offending her. There was once a man who saw a banshee combing her hair
on the riverbank at twilight, crept up behind her, and snatched her
comb. He ran home with it. That night there were terrifying shrieks all
around his house, and something was hammering on his window. So he
opened the window just a little way and pushed the comb out, holding it
in the big iron tongs from the fireplace. And it was well for him that
he did so rather than putting his hand out, for the thing that grabbed
the comb grabbed the tongs too and threw them to the ground, all bent
and twisted. Such is a banshee’s strength.

GOLEMS

In all societies there is a good deal of boring, dirty, heavy work which
nobody really wants to do, whatever the pay. So what could be better
than to find a race of strong, tireless, silent workers to take on these
jobs? Especially if they don’t need paying.

The historical solution, in Ankh-Morpork, is the golems – large,
powerful creatures made of baked clay, roughly humanoid in form but
seven or eight foot tall. They need no food or sleep; they can work
underwater, or in extremes of heat or cold, or in total darkness; they
cannot feel pain or boredom. They can repair themselves, and last for
centuries. Their triangular eyes have the faint, dark red glow of a
banked fire, and on the rare occasions when they open their mouths you
get a brief glimpse of an inferno. According to the original
specifications they cannot speak, though they can write; this, however,
was changed at the insistence of Commander Vimes, after the events
recounted in _Feet of Clay_.

A golem’s head is hollow, and flips open when you press a line across
the forehead; inside is a yellowing scroll bearing words in Cenotine, an
ancient sacred script, the language of a dead religion. This has to have
been written by a priest. Take out the scroll, and the light in the
golem’s eyes goes out, and its life (if it can be called life) ceases.
Put it back, and it comes ‘alive’ again. When the golem Dorfl is asked
to explain itself, it writes on a slate:

I am a golem. I was made of clay. My life is the words. By means of
words of purpose in my head I acquire life. My life is to work. I obey
all commands. I take no rest … Golem must work. Golem must have a
master. [_Feet of Clay_]

The written commands in a golem’s head are those which the Cenotine god
is said to have given to the first people on earth, after he had baked
them out of clay. ‘Thou shalt labour fruitfully all the days of your
life’ is one of them, and another is ‘Thou shalt not kill’, and a third
‘Thou shalt be humble’.

Not surprisingly, factory owners are prepared to pay a good price for
golems. There are stories that sometimes one of them over-does things,
being too stupid to stop work unless actually ordered to, so your house
gets flooded as it brings pail after pail from the well. This, however,
always seems to have happened somewhere else, some good while ago, and
can be disregarded. One minor snag is that just occasionally they down
tools and go off for a few hours, leaving a message that today is for
them a holy day. Apart from that, they are perfect machines for work.

Few in Ankh-Morpork remember who first made a golem, or why, or how.
Recent archaeological discoveries (described in _Making Money_) indicate
that particularly fine specimens existed in the ancient City of Um, back
in the Clay Age some sixty thousand years ago. When Rincewind visited
the Counterweight Continent (see _Interesting Times_) he accidentally
roused a vast Red Army of seven thousand terracotta golems, which were
standing guard inside the burial mound of some very ancient emperor –
but again, nothing is known of their making. To learn more, one must
turn to the more recent traditions of Jewish communities in Central and
Eastern Europe. For there, by one of those remarkable freaks of cosmic
resonance, the story of the making of the golem first appeared in
fifteenth-century Germany, and by the seventeenth century had become
famous.

In Hebrew, the word ‘golem’ means an unshaped lump of matter, an
imperfect or incomplete creation. According to legend, various extremely
learned and pious rabbis knew how to create a humanoid being out of
clay, thanks to the magical power of holy words and letters, especially
the four letters forming the Name of God. The act echoed that of God
Himself in forming Adam from the dust of the earth, and for that reason
most rabbis never put their knowledge into practice, for fear of
blasphemy. But a few did, to get themselves a servant, or to get help in
times of great danger.

The fullest and most famous story is about Judah Loew ben Bazalel, Chief
Rabbi of Prague towards the end of the sixteenth century. In 1580 the
Jews of Prague were under attack from anti-Semitic fanatics, and Rabbi
Loew received a divine message telling him to create a golem for their
protection. Four elements would be required: earth, fire, water and air.
He went with two disciples to the bank of the River Vltva, and moulded a
human form of clay. Then one disciple danced round it seven times from
right to left, saying certain words which invoked the element of fire,
causing it to glow like red-hot metal. The other disciple danced round
it seven times from left to right, saying words to invoke the element of
water, and by the time he had finished steam was rising, and the golem’s
hair and nails had begun to grow. Finally Rabbi Loew himself danced
round seven times, breathed air into the golem’s nostrils, and put a
parchment with a word on it into its mouth – or, some say, wrote a word
upon its brow.

Then the golem came to life and stood up, though it lacked the power of
speech. Rabbi Loew said: ‘Your mission is to walk the streets of Prague
and keep my people safe from persecution. You will obey my commands, and
go wherever I send you – into fire, into water, or down to the floor of
the sea.’

What was the word that gave a golem life? Some say it was _schem_, which
means ‘name’, and refers to the Tetragrammaton JHVH, the
never-to-be-spoken Holy Name of God. Others say it was _emeth_, ‘truth’,
and that one could destroy the golem by rubbing out the first letter,
leaving _meth_, which means ‘death’. For eventually, all legends agree,
something will go wrong, and the golem will have to be ‘killed’. Perhaps
it has grown so big and powerful that its maker can no longer control
it. Or perhaps he has forgotten to give it its orders for the day, and
it has gone berserk through having nothing to do, and is about to
devastate the city.

In Prague, Rabbi Loew kept his golem till 1593, but then, knowing the
danger of persecution had passed, he and his disciples reversed their
rituals, reducing it to a mere mass of clay. This they sealed up in the
attic of the Synagogue, and Rabbi Loew ordered that nobody was ever to
set foot in that attic again. And nobody ever has.

Such was the sad destiny of Earth’s golems. In the Discworld, thanks to
the ferocious sense of justice of Commander Vimes and the pragmatism of
Lord Vetinari, golems are now in process of buying their freedom from
their masters, and have acquired speech and independence of thought. The
words in their heads are those they have chosen themselves. Still
untiring and sternly moral, some have found a role as law enforcers (one
instance of this is described in _Going Postal_). Naturally, this
requires a certain modification of one of the basic Laws of Golems,
which now runs: ‘You shall not harm a human being, or allow a human
being to come to harm – unless ordered to do so by a properly
constituted authority.’ As we have said, Lord Vetinari is a _pragmatic_
ruler. That is not the same as nice.

WEREWOLVES

Wherever wolves are found in the multiverse, there are werewolves too,
yet the condition of werewolfery (or lycanthropy, as those of more
scientific bent prefer to call it) remains mysterious. What can be the
cause? Is it voluntary or involuntary? Is it a magical power, or a form
of madness? Are werewolves heroes, victims, or criminals?

The clash of theories is obvious on Earth. Several Ancient Greek writers
blamed religious cannibalism, allegedly practised in honour of Lycean
(i.e. ‘Wolfish’) Zeus in the wild hilly region of Arcadia. According to
Pausanias, a Greek geographer writing in AD 166, the first werewolf was
a certain King Lycaon of Arcadia, whose very name means ‘wolf’.

Lycaon brought a human baby to the altar of Lycean Zeus and sacrificed
it and poured out the blood upon the altar, and they say that
immediately after the sacrifice he was turned into a wolf. For my own
part I believe the tale: it has been handed down among the Arcadians
from antiquity, and probability is in its favour. They say that from the
time of Lycaon downwards one man has always been turned into a wolf at
the festival of Lycean Zeus, but that the transformation is not for
life, for if while he is a wolf he abstains from human flesh, in the
ninth year afterwards he changes back into a man, but if he has tasted
human flesh he remains a beast for ever.

About a hundred years earlier, the Roman author Petronius had included a
werewolf story, more or less as a joke, in his comic novel _Satyricon_.
To him, it was simply magical shape-shifting: a young soldier
deliberately turned into a wolf by taking off his clothes in a graveyard
by moonlight and pissing round them, and went off to kill cattle and
sheep – but then, like many shape-shifters before and since, he was
wounded while in animal form, and so his secret was discovered.

In later European folklore, all sorts of explanations were suggested.
Some said it was a magic art of warriors, who went into battle as wolves
by wearing a wolf’s pelt. Others, that it was due to a spell which a
witch could lay on a man by striking him with a wolfskin glove. Others,
that it came from accidentally eating a particular magic plant, or
bathing in a particular lake. Others, that it was a curse that a child
was born with, as a punishment because his parents conceived him on a
holy day when sex was not allowed,⁸ or because his mother used magic to
avoid a painful childbirth. Others, that the man had made a deliberate
pact with the Devil, and went about murdering people while in his wolf
form. In more recent centuries, it has been generally assumed that
lycanthropy was a madman’s delusion. Attitudes varied according to the
theories – wolf-warriors were admired as heroes, the victims of spells
and curses were to be pitied as well as feared, the lunatics were to be
locked up, but murderous Satanist werewolves were to be tried and
hanged.

There are no such crazy notions on the Discworld. There, everybody knows
that being a werewolf is just something that you’re born with, something
that runs in families. It’s not supernatural, but it’s very, very
embarrassing. Especially if you live in a town. Most humans and dwarfs
find werewolves both frightening and disgusting, so werewolves do all
they can to keep their condition secret, and most of the time they can
pass as human. But if when in wolf shape they were to meet real wolves,
they could never pass as wolf – the scent is quite different. And for
the most part real wolves _detest_ werewolves. So, one way and another,
werewolves lead a lonely life.

The genetic laws governing Discworld werewolfery are logical, but far
more complex than the transformation rules of Earth, since the condition
can show itself in different forms. Ludmilla Cake, who is a ‘classic
bimorph’ werewolf, is a tall, strong girl for three weeks in every
month, though a careful observer might note that her hair is unusually
thick and long. In the week of the full moon, however, she becomes a
wolf and stays in her room, so as not to upset the neighbours. Sometimes
preliminary signs appear a day or two before what her mother coyly
refers to as ‘your Time’:

Something came in from the back yard. It was clearly, even attractively
female in general shape, and wore a perfectly ordinary dress. It was
also apparently suffering from a case of superfluous hair that not all
the delicate pink razors in the world could erase. Also, teeth and
fingernails were being worn long this season. You expected the whole
thing to growl, but it spoke in a pleasant and definitely human voice.
[_Reaper Man_]

Mrs Cake’s forebears had originally come from the Ramtop Mountains, and
she suspected that Ludmilla was a throwback to this distant past; she
was pretty sure that her own mother had once alluded circumspectly to a
Great-Uncle Erasmus who sometimes had to eat his meals under the table.

The exact opposite of a werewolf is a wolfman. For three weeks in every
month he is simply a wolf, but as soon as he sees the full moon he
_stops_ howling, most of his hair temporarily falls out, and next minute
he’s standing up, walking and talking. The problem is, no clothes. So
when the full moon is due to rise, a canny wolfman takes care to get
back to where he keeps a pair of trousers stashed. It is to be hoped
that Lupine the Wolfman and Ludmilla the Werewolf have managed to find
happiness together, despite having to pay more attention to the calendar
than most couples.

Sergeant Angua of the Ankh-Morpork City Watch is different again. Like
Ludmilla, she is compelled to become a wolf during the time of the full
moon, but in addition she has the power to shape-shift at will, by day
or night, at any time of the month. This gift is a great advantage to
her in police work; when in wolf form she has a superb sense of smell,
thanks to which she can track anyone anywhere and decipher subtle clues
at crime scenes. And, as many a villain has found out, it is most
disconcerting to chase an attractive and unprotected girl into a dark
alley, only to find a pile of discarded clothes and a large she-wolf,
teeth bared. However, she has certain weaknesses. For a day or two
before her Change she becomes irritable, due to Pre-Lunar Tension. When
she is in wolf form the touch of any silver object gives her intense
pain, and (like werewolves on the Earth) she is vulnerable to silver
bullets. Some strong smells overwhelm her delicate nose, bringing on the
equivalent of acute hay fever.

Angua’s parents are the extremely aristocratic Baron Guye von Uberwald
(also known as Silvertail) and Baroness Serafine von Uberwald (also
known as Yellowfang). The Baron spends most of his time in wolf form, to
the annoyance of his wife. Angua had a brother named Wolfgang, a
magnificently built and very athletic young man, with strongly
Nietzschean views, who made a terrifying wolf and would have felt quite
at home in the SS. Even his father was afraid of him. But, as she tells
Carrot, she also has another brother, Andrei, and she did have a sister
named Elsa, till Wolfgang killed her.

‘He _said_ it was an accident. Poor little Elsa. She was a yennork, just
like Andrei. That’s a werewolf that doesn’t change, you know? I’m sure
I’ve mentioned it. Our family throws them up from time to time. Wolfgang
and I were the only classic bimorphs in the litter. Elsa looked human
all the time, even at full moon. Andrei was always a wolf.’

‘You mean you had a human sister and a wolf brother?’

‘No, Carrot. They were both _werewolves_. But the, well, the little …
switch … inside them didn’t work. They stayed the same shape. In the old
days the clan would kill off a yennork quickly, and Wolfgang is a
traditionalist when it comes to nastiness. He says they made the blood
impure. You see, a yennork would go off and be a human or a wolf but
they’d still be _carrying_ the werewolf blood, and then they’d marry and
have children … or pups … and, well, that’s where the fairytale monsters
come from. People with a _bit_ of wolf, and wolves with that extra
capacity for violence that is so very human. But Elsa was harmless.
After that, Andrei didn’t wait for it to happen to him. He’s a sheepdog
over in Borogravia now. Doing well, I hear. Wins championships.’ [_The
Fifth Elephant_]

Not surprisingly, Angua has broken with her family.

But the existence of the yennork explains a lot. No doubt the
aristocratic werewolves guard their pedigrees carefully, but mistakes
will happen, even in the best regulated families.

IGORS

The Igors are a very numerous humanoid family in the Uberwald region,
each of whom is named either Igor or Igorina. They are not, of course,
undead, but are usually standing very close to a corpse. They are, in
fact, a big nod to the cinematic cliché that whenever there is a brain
to be collected or a big crackling switch to be pulled, then there is an
Igor, or someone who looks very much like him, ready and willing to do
the job.

Igors are heavily built, with a strong tendency to lurch and shamble,
and they speak with a heavy, spluttering lisp. For generations many of
them have gone into service in the households of aristocratic vampires
in Uberwald, where it is their pride and joy to ensure that massive
doors creak, candles gutter, cobwebs abound, and carriages look as much
like hearses as possible. They have a keen appreciation of all the
traditional trappings of horror. Sadly, Earthly vampires, unlike those
of the Disc, seem never to have employed Igors. As we have pointed out,
they did not have many visitors.

Another reason why Igors like working for vampires is that their castles
usually have large, deep, cool cellars where an Igor can quietly pursue
his real interests. The whole clan has a remarkable hereditary skill in
surgery, especially transplants and wound repair, including the
replacing of severed limbs. This they practise both on themselves and on
others. You can always recognize an Igor by his distinctly patchwork
look and interestingly individual scar patterns, and maybe an extra
thumb or mismatched eyes. In many cases, you could place a ball on the
top of his head, and it would not roll off.

The Igorinas, on the other hand, use their skill to look absolutely
stunning, but always include some fetching little detail – a beautifully
curved scar under one eye, a line of decorative stitching round the
wrist – to maintain the Family Look.

Since Igors hate discarding any body part that could be recycled, an
elderly member of the clan will make arrangements for the best bits of
himself to be shared out among his kin when the time comes. They have a
great fondness for heirlooms; among Igors, ‘he’s got his grandfather’s
hands’ is likely to be literally true.

There is a tradition among Igors that the ancestor who first learned
surgery was working for a mad doctor at the time. A more recent member
of the clan, who diversified into extremely delicate clock-making,
produced references from a series of employers whose hold on sanity
appears to have been shaky – Mad Doctor Scoop, Crazed Baron Haha
(crushed by a burning windmill), Thcreaming Doctor Bertherk (died of
blood poisoning caused by a dirty pitchfork), and Demented Doctor
Wimble, who discovered how to make the perfect clock while working on a
scheme to extract sunshine from oranges. This particular Igor has a
passion for electricity and thunderstorms, as described in _Thief of
Time_.

There are few echoes of the Igors on Earth. And those that there are are
only to be found in modern cinema and comic strips, not in age-old
folklore. However, they do support the idea that an Igor once worked for
a Doctor Frankenstein (who was definitely crazy) on a job which involved
a great deal of stitching body parts together and exposing them to
lightning. The Doctor wouldn’t have got far without his help.

Despite the people they work for, Igors are generally well-intentioned,
nay, spiritual beings. Most religions teach that the body is just an
outer garment, to be shed in due time, and Igors think, in a provident
way, that items with some wear left in them should not be wasted.

ZOMBIES

It is not strictly accurate to include the Discworld zombies in this
chapter, since (unlike werewolves, golems or Igors) they do not
constitute a separate race or species. On the contrary, a zombie is
simply a human being who obstinately remains sort-of-alive when he has
in fact died. He ought to lie a-mouldering in his grave, instead of
wandering around looking vaguely grey, with fingers dropping off
occasionally. No one knows why some people are natural zombies; it may
simply be stubborn bloody-mindedness, an inborn refusal to kowtow to any
authority, even that of Death. What Death thinks of this situation has
not been recorded.

On the Disc, it would seem that zombies keep the personalities they had
when alive, more or less intact, with the result that the four we know
best are strikingly different. One is Mr Slant, the eminent lawyer who
can count most of the upper-class families in Ankh-Morpork among his
clients. He is dry-as-dust, in a very literal sense, and though he would
never (of course) do anything illegal, it is not wise to cross him. He
knows family secrets going back for an uncomfortable number of
generations. At the opposite end of the city’s social and political
spectrum is Reg Shoe. In life he saw himself as a romantic
revolutionary; in death he devotes most of his energies to protesting at
society’s unjust prejudice and discrimination towards the Undead. Then
there is the old wizard Windle Poons, who finds his time as a zombie
considerably more exciting than his actual life had been, as we learn in
_Reaper Man_; in his case, however, it is merely a temporary state – the
default setting for someone who happens to die when Death is not around
to do whatever it is he does with his scythe. And in distant Genua there
is Baron Saturday, a zombie who may be something more than just that.
His name and his appearance suggest that he has an Earthly counterpart
in the sinister Baron Samedi in Haiti – a being who is not himself a
zombie or ghost, but a spirit Lord of the Dead. He is seen at crossroads
and in cemeteries, and can be recognized by his black tuxedo, white top
hat, dark glasses, and skull-like face. He is greatly feared.

Earth’s zombies, who are only to be found in the traditional beliefs of
Haiti, are very, very different, despite the identical name, and despite
the fact that they too are Undead humans. Their condition is due to the
spells of some voodoo sorcerer who has called them from their graves –
and who, some say, was responsible for putting them down there in the
first place, having sent them into a death-like trance by a secret
poison, concocted from the liver of a very rare fish (it appears, from a
conversation recorded in _Reaper Man_, that the wizards of Unseen
University have heard rumours about this). When Haitian zombies emerge,
their minds and souls have gone; they have become mere robots, incapable
of speech, who must serve the sorcerer as his slaves. However, there is
one way to rescue a zombie: give him salted food, or salt water to
drink, and his soul and his power of speech will be restored.

It is said there was once a girl who died and was buried, but she was
seen three years later, working very long hours in a boutique; she
looked much the same as in the past, except that her neck was twisted –
and that was because her coffin had been too small, and they had had to
force her head down. But she spoke to nobody, and her eyes had no life
in them.

Reg Shoe, the tireless revolutionary and champion of the Rights of the
Undead, would be unspeakably angry if he knew the plight of the poor,
exploited, downtrodden zombies of Haiti.

⁶ And also that in the inevitable chase scene the coach would always
break down in the same place in Black Park, near Pinewood Studios –
according to Terry. This may not be strictly true, but it gave him the
idea for Don’tgonearthe Castle.

⁷ As we will see later, two hearts are magical. However, the only known
person with two hearts on the planet Earth is Doctor Who.

⁸ See the section above on vampires, where this same thing is mentioned
as one possible cause for the condition. For much of the early history
of these creatures (that is, before the days when vampires dressed
snappily and werewolves generally managed to keep their trousers on)
they were in most cultures pretty much the same thing. Someone who was a
werewolf when alive would keep up the bad work by becoming a vampire
when dead.

[image]


Chapter 7


BEASTIES

 

IT IS ONE of the mysteries of the multiverse that animals which exist as
normal flesh-and-blood creatures in one world are regarded as imaginary,
legendary or folkloric in another – and yet, in many cases, the
descriptions tally almost perfectly. Whether this is due to the
perpetual drifting of particles of knowledge through cosmic space, or
whether such species did once inhabit all worlds and have regrettably
become extinct in some of them, is a matter of debate.

But nobody can deny that the fauna of the Discworld is particularly rich
in species which other worlds have dreamed of. Not for nothing does the
old song run:

All beasts bright and beautiful,

All monsters big and small,

All things weird and wonderful,

The Discworld has them all.

DRAGONS

On our world, the image of the dragon is so widespread and so
deep-rooted that it can truly be said that its origins are lost in those
famous mists of time. It’s a persistent image, too. Even after the last
land masses had been explored, and map-makers were forced to admit that
‘Here be _no_ dragons’, people still reported seeing sea-serpents, and
huge scaly things in lakes. And to this day there are innumerable
storytellers and artists, still eagerly creating and re-creating dragons
in their works. There must be a powerful flow of draconicons still
pouring into the Earth from some other universe. It seems likely that
the source is the Discworld, which can boast of two flourishing species
and has some awareness of a third.

_(A) DRACO VULGARIS_

Visitors to Ankh-Morpork and other Discworld cities have often commented
on the charming fashion for society ladies to wear small, colourful
dragons on their shoulders; in the winter months, they are also popular
as muffs and foot-warmers. These are miniature specimens of _Draco
vulgaris_, the Common Swamp Dragon, which probably no longer exists in
the wild but has been bred in captivity for many generations. The basic
type is the Common Smut, familiar to all, from which numerous distinct
varieties have been developed; some three dozen are recognized for show
purposes (details obtainable from the Cavern Club Exhibitions
Committee). Most are of amiable disposition, but it should be noted that
the Golden Deceiver retains some characteristics of its wild ancestors;
it makes a good watch dragon but should not be allowed near children.

To own a pedigree Swamp Dragon is a mark of taste and refinement, but
also requires a degree of patience which, alas, all too few would-be
owners possess. Where dragons are kept, damage to furniture and clothing
is inevitable, and chemical effluvia are frequently emitted which some
persons of delicate constitution may find offensive. Most dragons are
highly strung, excitable little creatures, so great care must be taken
in approaching and handling them, if the owner wishes to avoid
scratches, bites, and unsightly loss of hair through sudden flaming at
close range. The owner can also expect much expense on vets’ bills,
since dragons suffer from a multitude of ills – Slab Throat, Skiplets,
The Black Tups, Storge and Staggers, to name but a few (see _Diseases of
the Dragon_, by Sybil Deirdre Olgivanna Ramkin). Their digestive systems
are liable to catastrophic malfunctions, notably Blowback, which is
invariably fatal. Needless to say, all varieties readily explode under
stress.

There has been much debate as to how so delicate and vulnerable a
species can have evolved and survived. True, their native habitat in the
swamps of Genua was fairly inaccessible, and they had no natural
predators; the only external danger was from callous young men who had
worked out that the simplest way to set yourself up as a hero was (in
the words of Sir Samuel Vimes) ‘to come plodding into the swamp to stick
a sword into a bag of guts that was only one step away from
self-destruction anyway’. Yet their entire metabolism seems radically
unsuited to Discworld conditions. Leonard of Quirm has proposed the bold
theory that swamp dragons did not originate on the Disc but are
descended from the non-discly species _Draco nobilis_ (see below),
showing adaptations for a heavy-air environment. The difference in size
would thus be an example of evolutionary dwarfism, a process well
attested in isolated populations.

_(B) DRACO NOBILIS_

Everyone on the Discworld and on Earth has heard of the Noble or Great
Dragon – a creature many times larger than the Swamp Dragon, fierce,
untameable, with scales and claws and breath like a blast furnace,
coiled up in its secret lair on top of a great hoard of gold. In
traditional tales, such dragons fed on virgins and could only be slain
by heroes (preferably the long-lost heirs of kingdoms), and we shall
have more to say on this in a later chapter. But were they myth, or were
they real?

At the time of the events recounted in _Guards! Guards!_ the most that
could be said was that they were a great mystery. Lady Sybil Ramkin knew
that they used to turn up from time to time, full of vim and vigour, but
had ceased coming. She believed they had migrated to somewhere where
gravity wasn’t so strong, where they could fulfil their potential and be
all that a dragon should be. Lord Vetinari was positive that they were
extinct, despite the fact that something large, hot and angry was
incinerating portions of the city. The Unique and Supreme Lodge of the
Elucidated Brethren of the Ebon Night were using rituals to summon and
control a Great Dragon. They discovered that if summoning is hard,
control is much, much harder. But at least nobody could still argue that
_Draco nobilis_ was a myth. Ensuing events confirmed that _Draco
vulgaris_ and _Draco nobilis_ are indeed related, but gave no clue as to
the latter’s current habitat.

The wizard Rincewind claimed to have learned, in the course of a very
alarming early experience of his own, that most of the time they do not
exist as people generally understand ‘existence’, but only potentially:

The _true_ dragon is a creature of such refinement of spirit that they
can only take on form in this world if they are conceived by the most
skilled imagination. And even then the said imagination must be in some
place heavily impregnated with magic, which helps to weaken the walls
between the world of the seen and unseen. Then the dragons pop through,
as it were, and impress their form upon this world’s possibility matrix.
[_The Colour of Magic_]

Some years later, Rincewind revised his views on the mystery in the
light of fresh discoveries. When the intrepid voyagers on Leonard of
Quirm’s flying machine landed briefly on the Disc’s moon (as recounted
in _The Last Hero_), they found a population of magnificent silver
dragons of all sizes, feeding on moon-plants with metallic silver
leaves. They were completely unafraid of humans; indeed, the little ones
would swarm all over people, like kittens. It is plausible to assume
that these superb creatures are a variety of _Draco nobilis_. How we
yearn to know more about them! But it seems the gods have decreed that
no more flying machines shall be built. Probably this is for the best.
Let the Moon Dragons enjoy their serene life, safe from the deplorable
impact of humanity. The true dragon-lover must rejoice for them.

_(C) DRACO MARITIMUS IMMENSIS_

No other dragon species has actually been observed on or near the Disc,
but according to Scandinavian mythology there was (or is) a third one on
Earth, the aquatic Midgardsorm or Middle-Earth Worm (_Draco maritimus
immensis_). It is written that it lies on the seabed, encircling the
whole Earth, where it will remain till the end of the world, when it
will emerge, and a particularly stupid Norse god named Thor will clobber
it with a hammer. It is some comfort that it is also written that its
dying breath will poison him.

This myth is hard to believe. The distribution of land masses on the
Earth is so untidy that no dragon could encircle the whole planet while
lying on the seabed without suffering painful and possibly fatal
dislocations of its spine. However, somewhere there exists another
universe which was once briefly summoned into a prism by the gifted
young wizard Simon, and this one does appear to contain a Middle-Earth
Worm.

A prism … held another slowly turning disc, surrounded by little stars.
But there were no ice walls around this one, just a red-gold thread that
turned out on closer inspection to be a snake – a snake big enough to
encircle a world. For reasons best known to itself it was biting its own
tail. [_Equal Rites_]

This is confirmed by something the sea-troll Tethis told Rincewind (see
_The Colour of Magic_). While tumbling through space after being swept
off the edge of his own world, Tethis passed within a few leagues of a
world with a strange ring of mountains round it – mountains that turned
out to be ‘the biggest dragon you could ever imagine, covered in snow
and glaciers and holding its tail in its mouth’. A dim awareness of this
universe may explain the Earth myth of _Draco maritimus immensis_, and
also the image of the _ouroboros_ or tail-biting serpent known to
alchemists and hermetic philosophers as the symbol of the ever-circling
eternity of time and space.

THE BASILISK AND THE CHIMERA

The basilisk is a particularly dangerous species of serpent, which can
kill any other animal merely by glancing at it with its fierce, fell and
fiery eyes; its breath destroys all vegetation, so it is necessarily a
desert-dweller; its blood is said to be of great value to magicians. On
Earth, it was first identified by the Ancient Greeks, who gave it a name
meaning ‘little king’, because (as the Roman naturalist Pliny explained)
it has a golden mark like a crown on its head.

Later, during the Middle Ages of western Europe, people believed that it
wore an actual coronet of pure gold, and some described it as a snake
with four pairs of legs. They gave it a second name, ‘cockatrice’, and
said it was a mortal enemy of crocodiles. They also claimed to know how
it is born: when a farmyard cock lives longer than is normal for his
species, in the last stage of his life he starts to lay eggs, and if, in
the hottest days of summer, some venomous serpent or toad coils itself
round such an egg and hatches it, what comes out is the cockatrice or
basilisk. It has the head and legs of a cockerel, but its body tapers
down to a snake’s tail, ending in a dart. It was much feared for its
death-dealing glance, until a method of destroying it was devised.
Writing a _Historie of Serpents_ in 1608, the naturalist Edward Topsell
mocked the legend:

I cannot without laughing remember the old wives’ tales of the vulgar
cockatrices that have been in England, for I have often-times heard it
confidently related, that once our nation was full of cockatrices, and
that a certain man did destroy them by going up and down in glasse,
whereby their own shapes were reflected upon their own faces, and so
they died.

Topsell was wrong to laugh. The method is perfectly valid. It exploits
an instinct which can also be seen in young male swamp dragons in the
breeding season, when they are so eager to drive off a rival that they
will attack their own reflections (as Chubby did in _Men at Arms_).

On the Discworld, the basilisk inhabits the burning deserts of Klatch.
On one occasion, as we read in _Sourcery_, a hungry basilisk which lay
panting in the baking shade of a rock, dribbling corrosive yellow slime,
heard the thumping of hundreds of little feet. This, the creature
thought, must mean that its dinner was on the way. But what was
approaching was the wizard Rincewind’s fearsome Luggage, which was in a
particularly foul mood because it had become separated from its master
and had recently had to fight its way across a river infested with
alligators.

The basilisk blinked its legendary eyes and uncoiled twenty feet of
hungry body, winding out and on to the sand like fluid death.

The Luggage staggered to a halt and raised its lid threateningly. The
basilisk hissed, but a little uncertainly, because it had never seen a
walking box before, and certainly never one with lots of alligator teeth
stuck in its lid. There were also scraps of leathery hide adhering to
it, as though it had been involved in a fight in a handbag factory, and
in a way that the basilisk wouldn’t have been able to describe even if
it could talk, it appeared to be glaring.

Right, the reptile thought, if that’s the way you want to play it.

It turned on the Luggage a stare like a diamond drill, a stare that
nipped in via the staree’s eyeballs and flayed the brain from the
inside, a stare that tore the frail net curtains on the windows of the
soul, a stare that—

The basilisk realized something was very wrong. An entirely new and
unwelcome sensation started to arise just behind its saucer-shaped eyes.
It started small, like the little itch in those few square inches of
back that no amount of writhing will allow you to scratch, and grew
until it became a second, redhot, internal sun.

The basilisk was feeling a terrible, overpowering and irresistible urge
to blink …

It did something incredibly unwise.

It blinked. [_Sourcery_]

The Luggage went on its way, with a few traces of yellow slime rapidly
drying on its lid. What a tragic misunderstanding! If only the basilisk
had been less hungry that day, and the Luggage less ill-tempered, they
would have seen how much they had in common – a domineering gaze, a
dislike of alligators and crocodiles, perhaps even a multiplicity of
feet, if some pictures of basilisks can be trusted. A beautiful
friendship might have been born. But it was not to be.

Pursuing its erratic course across the dunes of Klatch, the Luggage next
encountered a Chimera, which was sitting on a stone pinnacle the shape
and temperature of a firebrick. Before recounting the outcome, it will
be useful to see what books from our own world can tell about this
monster – legendary here, but real enough on the Discworld.

According to John Milton, a chimera is just about the worst thing you
could meet on a guided tour of Hell. In Book 2 of his _Paradise Lost_ he
lists the horrors in the infernal landscape at some length, and caps
them all with the assertion that Hell is a place

Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds (Perverse) all
monstrous, all prodigious things, Abominable, inutterable, and worse
Than fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived, Gorgons, and Hydras,
and Chimaeras dire.

After which it comes as a bit of a let-down to find that, according to
Ancient Greek poets, the Chimera was a rather muddled female monster,
consisting of a fire-breathing nanny-goat with a lion’s head and a
snake’s body. An alternative view, supported by Ancient Greek artists
who had to draw the damn thing, was that she had two heads at the front
end, one leonine and one capriform, and a long scaly tail at the back
end, terminating in a snake’s head. The Greek Chimera’s family was an
unpleasant one. Her father Typhon, the god of storms at sea, was nothing
but a writhing mass of serpents from the waist down, and had snakes
instead of fingers, while his wings darkened the whole sky; her mother
was a sea-monster, half woman and half snake, who ate humans raw; her
siblings included Cerberus, the three-headed Hound of Hell, and the
hundred-headed Hydra.

The Greek Chimera did her best to be dire; she tried to look as
abominable and inutterable as she could, but the goat component
undermined the effect. Her biggest asset was her fiery breath, yet even
this turned out to be unhelpful when the hero Bellerophon was sent to
kill her, on the orders of an enemy of his, who assumed this was a
mission impossible – indeed, fatal. But Bellerophon was as canny as he
was good-looking, and devised a cunning plan. Mounted on his good flying
horse Pegasus, he swooped over the Chimera, firing arrows at her, and
when she opened her lion’s jaws to puff flame at him he dropped a lump
of lead down her throat. The heat of her stomach melted the lead,
sealing her doom from the inside.

The chimera of the Discworld may be related, but separate evolution has
brought about several differences, including some unexpected wings.
According to Broomfog’s bestiary _Anima Unnaturale_,

It have thee legges of an mermade, the hair of an tortoise, the teeth of
an fowel, and the winges of an snake. Of course, I have only my worde
for it, the beast having the breathe of an furnace and the temperament
of an rubber balloon in a hurricane. [_Sourcery_]

Such was the creature which attacked Rincewind’s Luggage.

The chimera’s technique was to swoop low over the prey, lightly boiling
it with its fiery breath, and then turn and rend its dinner with its
teeth. It managed the fire part but then, at the point where experience
told the creature it should be facing a stricken and terrified victim,
found itself on the ground in the path of a scorched and furious
Luggage.

The only thing incandescent about the Luggage was its rage. It had spent
several hours with a headache, during which it seemed the whole world
had tried to attack it. It had had enough.

When it had stamped the unfortunate chimera into a greasy puddle on the
sand, it paused for a moment, apparently considering its future …
[_Sourcery_]

There is a distinct possibility that the Discworld chimera, always an
endangered species, is now extinct.

THE SPHINX

Though there can be no doubt that Prince Teppic of Djelibeybi once met a
Sphinx, there has been much argument over whether the creature is truly
part of the Discworld’s fauna. Teppic himself was unclear as to where he
was when he encountered it. Space and time had been behaving strangely.
A spokesman for Unseen University expressed the view that:

The Sphinx is an unreal creature. It exists solely because it has been
imagined. It is well known that in an infinite universe anything that
can be imagined must exist somewhere, and since many of them are not
things that ought to exist in a well-ordered space-time frame they get
shoved into a side dimension. [_Pyramids_]

To which Teppic replied that that’s as may be, but he was in no doubt
that either he broke into the Sphinx’s dimension or it broke into his,
and that what has happened once may happen again. Provisionally,
therefore, the Sphinx has been listed as a potential (if unwelcome)
denizen of the Discworld.

On Earth, its existence is better documented. According to ancient
writers, a Sphinx is a creature with the body of a lion or lioness and a
human head; one subspecies has wings and human female breasts; another
has a serpent’s tail; yet another exists only in the form of conjoined
twins. The name means ‘throttler’ in Greek. They were native to Egypt,
where they guarded the borders of the kingdom, the entrances to temples,
and the approaches to important pyramids and tombs. They were not
normally dangerous to humans. Many statues of them were made, and can be
seen to this day.

The Egyptians themselves had no generic word for sphinxes, each one (and
there were hundreds of them) having a name of its own. Tourists visiting
the Great Sphinx of Giza should address it, cautiously, as Horemakhet
Khepri-Ra-Atum. If they get the pronunciation right, it may choose to
reveal some of the hidden treasures which it guards. If they get it
wrong, it may choose to reveal its claws.

The Great Sphinx of Giza has two aims in its existence. The first is to
guard the royal tombs at Memphis, which it has successfully done for
some 4,500 years; the second is to keep itself, and the town of Giza,
free from drifting sand, because sand makes it ache in all its limbs.
This has been a sorry failure. After a mere eleven hundred years it was
buried in dunes right up to the neck, until it was dug clear by Prince
Thutmose, whom it gratefully made Pharaoh. Other people have had to dig
it out again since then, but they don’t now get to be made Pharaoh. In
fact, the Great Sphinx seems to have pretty well given up on its
sand-repelling duties, allowing Giza to be engulfed, and relying on
humans to give it the occasional brush-up. The Arabs say it is sulking
because a holy man smashed its nose.

According to Greek mythology, the goddess Hera brought a single female
sphinx from Egypt to Greece, for vindictive reasons; she must have hoped
that, as so often, the introduction of a foreign species would seriously
damage the local ecology, but since she neglected to provide it with a
mate it did not breed, and the devastation it caused ended with its
life.

This Greek Sphinx was more active, more malevolent, than her Egyptian
relatives. She perched herself on a rock overlooking the main road into
Thebes, where she forced every traveller to try to guess her utterly
perplexing Riddle: ‘What animal walks on four legs in the morning, two
at midday, and three in the evening, and is at its weakest when it has
most legs?’ If they couldn’t answer, she throttled them, and ate them.
And so it went on, until one day Oedipus came along, and replied, ‘That
animal is Man. As a feeble baby, he crawls on all fours; as an adult, he
walks upright; as an old man, he uses a stick.’ The Sphinx was so
furious that she beat her brains out against the rock.

Prince Teppic’s Sphinx, like the Egyptian one, guarded a border – in
this case, a fold in the space-time continuum which was a border between
dimensions. Like the Greek one, it relied upon The Riddle to provide it
with entertainment and with innumerable meals. Now Teppic, despite being
a fully qualified Assassin, was not a man of violence, and had a proper
concern for wildlife, even in its more alarming forms. He tried polite
conversation (‘We’ve got any amount of statues to you at home’), but the
Sphinx, though flattered, could not be sidetracked for long, and
challenged him with its Riddle. Teppic admitted defeat, so the gloating
Sphinx itself gave him the explanation.

Now, Teppic had been born into a culture profoundly distrustful of
metaphors, symbolism, allegories, and figures of speech of every sort.
The people of Djelibeybi took all religious, poetic, and metaphysical
statements as literal physical truths; to them, a metaphor was a lie.
Furthermore, Teppic had recently visited Ephebe, where he had heard the
philosopher Xeno expounding his famous logical proof that if you shoot
an arrow at a tortoise you cannot possibly hit it.

So Teppic launched an attack, not on the Sphinx, but on its metaphor.
Combining the deadly literalism of Djelibeybi with the debating skills
and logic of Ephebe, he demanded clarifications. Did all this actually
happen in one day, to one individual? Well, no, the Sphinx admitted, it
is a figure of speech, but what’s wrong with that? ‘An element of
dramatic analogy is present in all riddles,’ it claimed. ‘Yes, _but_,’
said Teppic, ‘is there internal consistency within the metaphor?’ Step
by step, the hapless Sphinx was forced to concede that in an analogy
where the human lifespan of seventy years is represented by twenty-four
hours, the crawling stage only lasts for about twenty minutes, and can’t
be called ‘morning’, as it comes just after midnight. There are other
problems too. Since some old folk need no sticks while others use two,
would it not be more accurate to say that after supper-time ‘it
continues to walk on two legs or with any prosthetic aids of its
choice’?

When everything had been settled to their mutual satisfaction, the
Sphinx repeated its challenge. But of course Prince Teppic already knew
the answer. The Sphinx itself had told him, earlier on. He now gave it,
and the Sphinx had to let him go free. He got away just in time as an
angry bellow erupted behind him, when the Sphinx finally worked out what
had happened.

Should the creature ever reappear on the Discworld or in our own
universe, people will now know how to deal with it.

THE PHOENIX

Everyone agrees that the phoenix, also known as the firebird, is
extremely beautiful, and that it is the rarest bird that has ever
existed, or could ever exist, anywhere in the multiverse. It’s said,
both on the Discworld and on Earth, that you only get one phoenix at a
time, that it lives to be five hundred years old, and that when it feels
its death approaching it builds a nest, in which it lays a single egg.
Then it bursts into flame and burns itself up, so that the warmth will
hatch out the new bird from the ashes. This way of life, and death,
makes it extremely useful as an allegory or metaphor. It also makes some
people think that it is only a mythical creature.

However, there are people in Lancre who, having observed nature closely,
think the commonly accepted story cannot be accurate. Both Hodgesaargh
the falconer and Granny Weatherwax have found the occasional phoenix
feather, a small flickering flame-like thing which nothing can quench.
Granny keeps hers in a little glass bottle. One day the other witches
are examining it:

‘I saw her pick that thing up years ago,’ said Magrat. ‘It was around
this time of year, too. We were walking back through the woods and there
was a shooting star and this sort of light fell off it and we went to
look and there it was. It looked like a flame but she was able to pick
it up.’

‘Sounds like a firebird feather,’ said Nanny. ‘There used to be old
stories about them. They pass through here. But if you touch their
feathers you’d better be damn sure of yourself, because the old stories
say they burn in the presence of evil—’

‘Firebird? You mean a phoenix?’ said Agnes.

‘Haven’t seen one go over for years,’ said Nanny. ‘Sometimes you’d see
two or three at a time when I was a girl, just lights flying high up in
the sky.’

‘No, no, the phoenix … there’s only _one_ of it, that’s the whole
point,’ said Agnes.

‘One of anything’s no bloody use,’ said Nanny. [_Carpe Jugulum_]

On the Discworld, the firebird is said to have its main home in the hot
deserts of Klatch, even though its seasonal migrations take it over
Lancre. So, the best place to look for its equivalent on Earth would be
in the hot deserts of Ancient Egypt. And there, sure enough, it is – not
yet called the phoenix, but the Benu Bird. The name probably means
‘rise-and-shine’. According to one Egyptian myth it is the oldest of all
creatures; its cry was the first sound ever heard, when it perched,
glowing, on the first mound of earth to rise up out of the primeval sea
– or, others said, on the first sacred obelisk, the Benben stone at
Heliopolis. It was usually described as a heron, or as a huge golden
hawk with a heron’s beak.

Many generations later, in the fifth century BC, the Greek writer
Herodotus visited Heliopolis, where he was told about a marvellous
red-gold bird which would come to the temple of the sun there once every
five hundred years. He called it ‘phoenix’, meaning that its brilliant
colouring was as fine as the richest Phoenician purple dye. This bird,
he was told, would arrive carrying an egg which it had formed from the
ashes of its parent mixed with myrrh; the next phoenix would be born
from this egg.

Later writers changed the bird’s homeland from Egypt to Arabia, and gave
a different explanation of its death and rebirth. An aged phoenix, they
said, would build itself a nest full of spices, and settling there would
sing a last sad song. Then it would burst into flame and burn itself to
ashes. But from the ashes a new young bird would arise.

Thanks to this story, the phoenix is famous in poetry and folklore as a
symbol of indestructible life. As Will Shakespeare put it:

Thus when

The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix,

Her ashes new-create another heir,

As much to be admired as she herself.

The witches of Lancre would not entirely agree. ‘Bird of wonder’, yes;
‘maiden’, no. For, as Granny Weatherwax pointed out, ‘One of anything
ain’t going to last for very long, is it?’

THE SALAMANDER

Salamanders are a species of lizard, pinkish in colour, sluggish in
behaviour, and in no way dangerous. The only interesting thing about
them is that they do not eat in the normal sense of the word; instead,
they subsist entirely on the nourishing quality of octarine, the eighth
colour in the Discworld’s sunlight, which they absorb through their
skins. Since the wavelengths corresponding to the other colours have no
food value for them, they store this surplus light in a special sac and
discharge it when the sac is full, or when they are alarmed, causing a
vivid flash. A cage of salamanders is a very useful piece of equipment
for anyone who wants to keep a pictorial record of events (such as
Twoflower the tourist, or Otto Chriek the journalistic iconographer),
for the flash enables the imp in the picture-box to function even in the
dark.

On Earth the name was applied, in the days of the Ancient Greeks, to
what must be a related species – a lizard that lives in the midst of
fire, remaining unharmed because its body is so intensely cold that it
extinguishes the flames around it. Centuries later, the alchemist
Paracelsus taught that each of the four elements (earth, air, fire and
water) had its own elemental spirit, and that of fire was a salamander.
These dramatic creatures are now regarded on Earth as mere myths, useful
only in poetry and heraldry. Confusingly, however, there are also on
that world several species of flesh-and-blood lizards which are called
‘salamanders’. Throwing them into a fire as an experiment is not
considered an environmentally friendly act.

THE UNICORN

This elegant but sometimes ferocious beast is an elvish creature, not
native to the Discworld. The one which appeared in Lancre (as told in
_Lords and Ladies_) came from an alternative universe where it was the
Elf Queen’s pet; it had crossed accidentally, at one of those places
where worlds come too close together, and the wall between them is
thinner than one would wish. It could not return. Terrified and enraged,
it became a danger – for a large stallion with a twelve-inch razor-sharp
horn growing from its forehead is not to be treated lightly.

Yet Granny Weatherwax was able to cope. When the unicorn charged at her,
she created an invisible wall into which it crashed, and as it writhed
on the ground she let down her hair, and broke off a single hair at the
root.

Granny Weatherwax’s hands made a complicated motion in the air as she
made a noose out of something almost too thin to see. She ignored the
thrashing horn and dropped it over the unicorn’s neck. Then she pulled.

Struggling, its unshod hooves kicking up great clods of mud, the unicorn
struggled to its feet.

‘That’ll never hold it,’ said Nanny, sidling around the tree.

‘I could hold it with a cobweb, Gytha Ogg. With a _cobweb_.’

And so indeed she does, dragging the unicorn to Jason Ogg’s forge, where
its hooves are shod – not with iron, of course, since that would kill an
elvish animal, but with silver horseshoes made from Granny’s own best
tea-set. Her ability to control the beast should not surprise anybody,
for, as Nanny Ogg says, there are some things which _everybody_ knows
about trapping unicorns – ‘who is qualified to trap ’em is what I’m
delicately hintin’ at.’ It takes a maiden to do it, in any universe. And
Granny may be old, but she _is_ qualified.

Granny emerged from the forge, leading the unicorn … It walked politely
alongside the witch until she reached the centre of the square. Then she
turned it loose, and gave it a slight slap on the rump.

It whinnied softly, turned, and galloped down the street, towards the
forest …

‘_She’ll_ never get it back, though she calls for it for a thousand
years,’ said Granny, speaking to the world in general …

The unicorn reached the forest, and galloped onwards.

There are clear affinities here with what people on Earth have long been
saying, though, regrettably, in that world the fate of the captured
unicorn is more cruel. As early as the seventh century, the Spaniard
Isidore of Seville described the unicorn, and how to hunt it:

The unicorn is a most savage beast. It has this name because in the
middle of its forehead it has a horn, four foot long. And that horn is
so sharp and so strong that it knocks down or pierces everything it
strikes. This beast often fights against the elephant and pierces him in
the belly and throws him to the ground. And the unicorn is so strong
that he cannot be taken by the might of hunters. But men who write about
the nature of animals say that a maiden is brought where the unicorn may
come; and she opens her lap and the unicorn lays his head on it, and
abandons all his fierceness, and falls asleep there. And thus the beast
is caught, and slain by the huntsmen’s spears.

Granny’s device of using a hair as a noose and leash is a remarkable
piece of magical skill, and very rare. In Earthly legends one
occasionally reads about a maiden tying a defeated dragon with the
girdle of her robe and leading it away – St Martha did this, at Tarascon
in southern France, and so did the girl St George rescued – but a hair,
no. However, a few malevolent hags in the Scottish Highlands did know
the trick. If one of these hags found a huntsman sheltering in a
mountain bothy, she would kill him, provided she was safe from his dog.
So she would ask him to tie the dog up with one of her own long hairs.
When she cried, ‘Tighten and choke, hair!’ the dog died.

But that is an unpleasant thought. Instead, let us turn to what the poet
Alexander Pope has to say about a girl’s charming ringlets:

Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains,
And mighty hearts are held in slender chains.
Fair tresses man’s imperial race ensnare,
And beauty draws us with a single hair.

THE LUGGAGE

Perhaps the strangest of all life-forms on the Disc is the Luggage. It
is certainly made of wood, yet its multiple legs and strong aggressive
instincts are equally certainly proof that it is no mere plant or
plant-product. And very, very certainly it has a mind of its own.
‘Vegetable with animal connections’ is a fair summary. Yet much mystery
remains, even after careful study of various Earthly traditions which
help to throw light on its possible evolution.

On Earth, there was a time when travelling was truly Travelling, not
just a matter of hopping on to a jet for a five-day break on the Costa
del Sol. People said, ‘I go south in the winter’, meaning they made a
habit of spending a couple of months on the Riviera every year; they
went off for half their lives to govern a chunk of far-flung Empire; in
extreme cases, they went round the world in eighty days. En route, they
tended to acquire pterodactyls, mummies, and bits of old temples. So
when an English gentleman travelled, a whole host of trunks, crates,
chests, portmanteaux, packing cases, suitcases, dressing-cases,
shoe-cases, hatboxes, bandboxes, Gladstone bags, carpet bags, and pistol
cases travelled with him. Arriving at his destination, he would leave
most of them at the quayside or station and enter his hotel with a mere
smattering of hand baggage (say, as much as two porters could carry),
telling the manager, ‘My luggage will follow’. And so it would, pushed
on handcarts, or carried on the backs or heads of porters.

But as time rolled on, the race of porters became mysteriously extinct,
and evolutionary pressures caused luggage itself to develop mechanisms
enabling it to obey its instinct to _follow_. The first scientific
record of this phenomenon was by Terry himself, when he wrote in 1988:

Many years ago I saw, in Bath, a very large American lady towing a
_huge_ tartan suitcase very fast on little rattly wheels which caught in
the pavement cracks and generally gave it a life of its own. At that
moment the Luggage was born. Many thanks to that lady … [Dedication of
_Sourcery_]

The Discworld environment is hostile to things with little rattly
wheels, as we learn in _Reaper Man_, when it is menaced by an incursion
of alien supermarket trolleys. Therefore on the Disc evolution has
produced a more elegant solution: the Luggage hurtles across the
landscape (and, if need be, through space, time, and dimensions) on
several hundred energetic but retractable little legs, always following
the person it has adopted as its owner.

If that were all, one could reasonably claim to understand the origins
and characteristics of the Luggage. But it has more mysterious
properties, whose equivalents on Earth are obscure, though not beyond
all conjecture. Outwardly it looks like a pirate’s treasure-chest, the
kind one expects to find brim full of ill-gotten gold and jewels, but
its interior is larger than its exterior, and probably does not occupy
the same space-time framework. Sometimes it does indeed contain bags of
gold, at other times food and drink, or its owner’s neatly folded
clothes, smelling of lavender; but when it is in fighting mode it opens
its lid menacingly to reveal rows and rows of large square teeth, as
white as bleached sycamore or tombstones, and a red, pulsating, mahogany
tongue. It is wholly impervious to magic, being itself made of sapient
pearwood from the Counterweight Continent, possibly the most
concentrated magical substance on the Disc. When angry (as it so often
is) it is a fearsome enemy, as was amply demonstrated during a fight in
the Broken Drum.

The door burst open. Two trolls hurried through it, slammed it behind
them, dropped the heavy bar across it and fled down the stairs.

Outside there was a sudden crescendo of running feet. And, for the last
time, the door opened. In fact it exploded, the great wooden bar being
hurled far across the room and the frame itself giving way.

Door and frame landed on a table, which flew into splinters. It was then
that the frozen fighters noticed that there was something else in the
pile of wood. It was a box, shaking itself madly to rid itself of the
smashed timber around it …

A raven swooped down from its perch in the rafters and dived at the
wizard [Rincewind], talons open and gleaming.

It didn’t make it. At about the half-way point the Luggage leapt from
its bed of splinters, gaped briefly in mid air, and snapped shut.

It landed lightly. Rincewind saw its lid open again, slightly. Just far
enough for a tongue, large as a palm leaf, red as mahogany, to lick up a
few errant feathers. [_The Colour of Magic_]

It would be reassuring to think that no such devastating piece of
carpentry exists, ever has existed, or ever could exist elsewhere in the
multiverse. But the myths of olden time and the inspirational insights
of modern authors both show that a race of deadly chests has evolved on
Earth, with all the destructive power of the Luggage, and none of its
usefulness and charm.

The first hint of their existence comes from Plutarch, a Greek writer
living in Rome who died in AD 126; he visited Egypt, whose ancient
religion fascinated him, and wrote a book _Concerning Isis and Osiris_
based on the legends current there in his time. He recounts in detail
how the virtuous king Osiris was murdered by his evil brother Seth. Seth
secretly obtained the exact measurements of Osiris, and had a
magnificent chest made; he then displayed it during a feast, promising
to give it to whoever could fit inside it exactly. Many tried, but in
vain. Finally Osiris laid himself in the chest, which immediately became
a perfect fit for him; Seth promptly bolted it shut, sealed it with
lead, and threw it into the Nile. It floated magically for many miles,
and when it washed ashore in the Lebanon it grew at once into a
marvellous tree, still containing the dead body of Osiris; then it was
cut down and made into a pillar in a king’s palace. Isis, wife of
Osiris, claimed the pillar and had it opened, revealing the
chest/coffin, which held the wonderfully preserved corpse; it thus
became the prototype for all Egyptian mummy-cases.

Another death-dealing chest is recorded in Norse tradition as the
property of the legendary goldsmith Volund (or, in English, Wayland). A
cruel king held him captive on an island, forcing him to work at making
golden treasures; his sword had been taken from him, and he had been
deliberately lamed to prevent any escape. The king had two young sons,
who one day went hunting on that island and came to Volund’s forge.
There they saw a great chest, and asked Volund for the key. He opened
it, and they looked in. It held great evil, but to the boys it seemed
filled with gold rings and fine jewels. ‘Come back tomorrow,’ said
Volund, ‘and all this will be yours. But tell no one that you are
visiting me.’ And so they did, and, as the Old Icelandic poem
_Völundarkvid–a_ says:

They came to where the great chest stood,

Asked Volund for the key;

When they looked in, there was revealed

Evil and enmity.

He struck off the heads of those two boys

As they bent down to gaze,

And under the pit of the anvil there

He buried their bodies.

‘He struck off the heads’ … but how, as he had no sword? One has a nasty
suspicion that the chest did the deed itself, using its lid as a weapon.

Suspicion also surrounds a tragic event chronicled by Thomas Haynes
Bayly in his poem ‘The Mistletoe Bough’ in the 1820s. It was in the
times of Merrie England that one of our typical Merrie barons was
holding a typically Merrie Christmas dance in his typically Merrie
castle, together with his retainers (who all were blithe and gay), his
newly married daughter, and the latter’s bridegroom, young Lovell.
Seized by a sudden Merrie whim, the bride decided to play hide-and-seek,
challenging Lovell to find her secret lurking place. But it all went
horribly wrong:

They sought her that night! They sought her next day!

And they sought her in vain when a week passed away!

In the highest – the lowest – the loneliest spot,

Young Lovell sought wildly – but found her not.

Many, many years passed by, and then:

At length an oak chest, that had long lain hid,

Was found in the castle – they raised the lid –

And a skeleton form lay mouldering there,

In the bridal wreath of that lady fair!
Oh! Sad was her fate! In sportive jest

She hid from her lord in the old oak chest.

It closed with a spring! – and, dreadful doom,

The bride lay clasp’d in her living tomb!

Sheer accident? The corresponding tragedy in the history of Lancre does
indeed seem so, judging by Nanny Ogg’s account:

‘I remember years ago my granny telling me about Queen Amonia, well, I
say queen, but she never was queen except for about three hours because
of what I’m about to unfold, on account of them playing hide-and-seek at
the wedding party and her hiding in a big heavy old chest in some attic
and the lid slamming shut and no one finding her for seven months, by
which time you could definitely say the wedding cake was getting a bit
stale.’ [_Lords and Ladies_]

Yet over in our own world, suspicion lingers. Did the chest Bayly speaks
of have some rudimentary capacity for bloody-minded malevolence? And how
exactly had it managed to lie hidden while everybody was searching the
castle from turret to dungeon? There is a sinister mystery here.

A later generation glimpsed what may be a related phenomenon in Robert
Louis Stevenson’s _Treasure Island_ (1883). Jim Hawkins, looking back on
the adventure of his boyhood, recalled how it began on the day the
‘brown old seaman with the sabre cut’ arrived, _followed_ by his
sea-chest, and took lodgings at the inn which Jim’s parents owned.

I remember him as if it were yesterday, as he came plodding up to the
inn-door, his sea-chest following behind him in a hand-barrow … I
remember him looking round the cove and whistling to himself as he did
so, and then breaking out in that old sea-song he sang so often
afterwards:–

‘Fifteen men on the dead man’s chest –

Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!

Drink and the devil had done for the rest –

Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!’

This ill-omened shanty echoes again and again through the story, and is
never completed, or explained. Jim writes that ‘At first I had supposed
the “dead man’s chest” to be that identical big box of his upstairs in
the front room’, the great sea-chest which none of them had ever seen
opened. The thought gave him nightmares, as well it might. For how could
fifteen men be on one chest? Knowing what we now know of the Luggage, we
must query the correctness of the preposition. Not _on_ but _in_,
perhaps? Let us recall Rincewind’s conversation with Conina, on an
occasion when the Luggage had just emerged from the Shades with several
arrowheads and broken swords sticking in it. She asks him if it is
dangerous.

‘There’s two schools of thought about that,’ said Rincewind.

‘There’s some people who say it’s dangerous, and others who say it’s
very dangerous. What do you think?’

The Luggage raised its lid a fraction …

Conina stared at that lid. It looked very like a mouth.

‘I think I’d vote for “terminally dangerous”,’ she said.

‘It likes crisps,’ volunteered Rincewind, and then added, ‘Well, that’s
a bit strong. It _eats_ crisps.’

‘What about people?’

‘Oh, and people. About fifteen so far, I think.’ [_Sourcery_]

_Fifteen_, eh?

But it would be unfair to take leave of the Luggage without any mention
of the gentler, more domestic side of its nature. During a brief return
to its native country, described in _Interesting Times_, it gallantly
rescued a rather charming trunk with inlaid lid and dainty feet (with
red toenails) from the unwelcome attentions of three big, coarse cases
covered in studded leather. Romance blossomed. Mysterious sounds of
sawing and hammering were heard by night on a hillside where pear trees
grew. And when the Luggage reappeared it – or shall we say he? – was
followed by the dainty-footed Luggage, and then, in descending order of
size, four little chests, the smallest being about the size of a lady’s
handbag. But the Luggage could not deny its inner calling. After one or
two sad backward glances, or what might have been glances if it had had
eyes, it cantered away through the dimensions, still following
Rincewind.

[image]


Chapter 8


THE WITCHES OF
LANCRE

 

WHY THREE? WHY ‘WYRD’?

THE GREATEST CONCENTRATION of natural magical talent in the Discworld is
found in the Ramtop Mountains, especially in the small kingdom of
Lancre. There have been witches there for generations, remembered to
this day with fondness and fear. And still one can hear the age-old
rallying call, as an eldritch voice shrieks through a thunderstorm,
‘When shall we three meet again?’ To which, after a pause, another
replies in far more ordinary tones, ‘Well, I can do next Tuesday.’

Which is all very well, but it does raise questions. Lancre witches
normally work alone, each having her own personal approach to her craft.
So why do these particular witches (Granny Weatherwax, Nanny Ogg, and
Magrat Garlick) often meet as a threesome? Why is the first account of
their deeds entitled _Wyrd Sisters_, when they are _not_ sisters? And
isn’t wyrd a weird way to spell weird, even if they _are_ weird?

As with so many other things, it’s all down to Will Shakespeare. His
impact on the universe certainly stretches as far as Lancre.

In Will Shakespeare’s _Macbeth_, there is a trio of secret, black and
midnight hags who forgather in a thunderstorm on a blasted heath, boil
up unappetizing brews in a cauldron, and utter tricky prophecies which
shape the destinies of kings. The stage directions are quite clear as to
what they are (‘Thunder and lightning; enter three witches’), and the
text is equally clear as to their name. They are the Weird Sisters. That
is what Macbeth calls them, and what they call themselves. The Weird
Sisters.

Being strong individualists, it would never occur to Granny Weatherwax,
Nanny Ogg and Magrat to give themselves a collective name. But the book
does. Being receptive to inspiration, it calls them Wyrd Sisters.

That, actually, is how Shakespeare _ought_ to have spelled the name of
his own three witches, since it is their true and original title. It
doesn’t mean they were peculiar or crazy. It is the Anglo-Saxon _wyrd_,
a word meaning Fate or Destiny, which is now completely forgotten in
England, but is still sometimes heard in Scotland, in encouraging
remarks such as ‘Weel, laddie, ye maun e’en dree your weird’ (roughly,
‘That’s _your_ bad luck, son, and you’ll just have to put up with it’).
Shakespeare’s witches could foretell, and probably direct, your destiny.

Shakespeare found their name in the book where he first read about
Macbeth’s career, Raphael Holinshed’s _History of Scotland_ (1577).
Holinshed was too cautious to commit himself as to what exactly the
three women on the heath can have been. He wrote:

The common opinion was, that these three women were either the weird
sisters, that is (as ye would say) the goddesses of destinie, or else
some nymphs or feiries, indued with knowledge of prophecie by their
necromanticall science, because euerie thing came to pass as they had
spoken.

Goddesses, nymphs, fairies, witches, necromancers, prophets? You can
take your pick. But there is no doubt that they had power.

But why, in both universes, are there precisely three of them? It is of
course true that this suits the theatre, as the great playwright Hwel
remarks when he looks through a script which, emanating from the mighty
power-source of Shakespeare’s mind, has drifted over to the Discworld
without too much damage.

There were, he had to admit, some nice touches. Three witches was good.
Two wouldn’t be enough, four would be too many. They could be meddling
with the destinies of mankind and everything. Lots of smoke and green
light. You could do a lot with three witches. It was surprising no one
had thought of it before. [_Wyrd Sisters_]

But the true reason lies far, far deeper. Three has always been an
important number in stories, and in magic. All good things come in
threes, and all bad things too. Which is why the Ancient Greeks and
Romans spoke of three Fates who held in their hands the thread of each
person’s life: Clotho spun it on her distaff, Lachesis measured it, and
in due time the dreaded Atropos (‘She who can’t be turned aside’)
snipped it with the shears of death. They were usually said to be old
women, looking much alike, except that the first two wore white robes
and the third, guess who, black.

Norsemen too believed in goddesses of destiny, the Norns. According to
one poem there were just three, whose names were Urd–r, Verd–andi, and
Skuld – meaning ‘what’s-happened-already’, ‘what’s-happening-now’, and
‘what’s-bound-to-happen’. But others said there were many of them, and
that they came to every child when it was born, to shape its life.

In southern Europe people thought that there were supernatural women who
bestowed wishes and gifts on newborn babies. They were a kind of fairy,
but it was most unwise to use that word – better to refer tactfully to
‘Ladies from outside’, or ‘Ladies who must not be named’. They were the
original fairy godmothers. In Greece and the Balkans, they would arrive
on the third night after the birth, and there were three of them.
Everyone went to bed early that night, the dogs would be chained up, the
door of the house left unlocked. The baby’s cot would be placed near the
icon in the main room, and beside it a table with three low stools for
the Ladies. There would be a candle burning, and heaps of food – bread
and wine, fruit, nuts, honey-cakes. Nobody could enter the room till
morning, when the midwives and female relatives would eat up the goodies
themselves, for the Ladies had already magically taken what they wanted
of them during the night.

On one occasion (as recounted in _Wyrd Sisters_), Granny Weatherwax,
Nanny Ogg and Magrat saved a baby’s life and appointed themselves his
godmothers. In normal circumstances, they would certainly have
appreciated a cosy midnight feast, if one had been on offer. But the
circumstances were far from normal, and they had to bestow their gifts
from a distance.

Magrat sighed.

‘You know,’ she said, ‘if we _are_ his godmothers, we ought to have
given him three gifts. It’s traditional.’

‘What are you talking about, girl?’

‘Three good witches are supposed to give the baby three gifts. You know,
like good looks, wisdom and happiness.’ Magrat pressed on defiantly.
‘That’s how it used to be done in the old days.’

‘Oh, you mean gingerbread cottages and all that,’ said Granny
dismissively. ‘Spinning wheels and pumpkins and pricking your finger on
rose thorns and similar. I could never be having with all that.’

In the end, however, Granny agreed. Each gave her gift separately, and
these gifts shaped the child’s destiny, for, as the Anglo-Saxons used to
say, _Wyrd bid– swid–ost_, ‘Fate is the strongest’, and _Wyrd bid– full
aræd_, ‘Fate is inflexible.’

As a result of this episode and of the events in _Witches Abroad_, Fairy
Godmothers are officially defined in the _Discworld Companion_ as ‘a
specialized form of witch with particular responsibility for the life of
one individual or a group of individuals’.

MAIDEN, MOTHER, CRONE

When Magrat got married, she gave up witching for a while. This caused
problems for the other two, because not only is three a good number for
witches, but it has to be the _right_ sort of three. The right sort of
_types_. Nanny Ogg brooded on the matter:

As a witch, she naturally didn’t believe in occult nonsense of any sort.
But there were one or two truths down below the bedrock of the soul
which had to be faced, and right in among them was this business of,
well, the maiden, the mother and the … other one.

Of course, it was nothing but an old superstition and belonged to the
unenlightened days when ‘maiden’ or ‘mother’ or … the other one …
encompassed every woman over the age of twelve or so, except maybe for
nine months of her life.

Even so … it was an _old_ superstition – older than books, older than
writing – and beliefs like that were heavy weights on the rubber sheet
of human experience, tending to pull people into their orbits.

They needed to be three again. [_Maskerade_]

Nobody would dream of arguing with Nanny on a point like this. The
Discworld is about what people _believe_ is true. So if Nanny says it’s
a truth down below the bedrock of her soul that three witches must be of
different ages, then – on the Discworld – it is. If she says that it’s a
superstition older than books, older than writing, then – on the
Discworld – it is.

But on Earth it’s not. It’s just over one hundred years old, actually.
Will Shakespeare’s witches were all the same age. So were the three
Fates, the three Norns, the three Graces, the three Mothers in early
Britain, the three War Goddesses in Ireland, and other female trios in
old mythologies.

It was in 1903 that a Cambridge scholar, Jane Ellen Harrison, decided
that all the many goddesses in ancient religions could be tidily sorted
out into three aspects of one great Earth Goddess: the Maiden, the
Mother, and a third she did not name. She was mainly interested in the
first two; so was her colleague Sir James Frazer (he of _The Golden
Bough_), who thought they were a mother-and-daughter pair like Demeter
and Persephone in Greece.

The first writer to pay much attention to the third one was the magician
Aleister Crowley, who called her ‘the crone’ and identified her with the
sinister Hecate, a Greek goddess of darkness and black magic. He seems
to have loathed her. In his novel _Moonchild_ in 1921, he wrote:

Artemis [the moon goddess] is unassailable, a being fine and radiant;
Hecate is the crone, a woman past all hope of motherhood, her soul black
with envy and hatred of happier mortals; the woman in the fullness of
life is the sublime Persephone.

And then the idea took root in the mind of the poet Robert Graves, and
grew into his book _The White Goddess_ (1948), the picture of a lovely,
cruel threefold deity who brings both life and death, inspiration and
despair. Her third aspect is the crone, the hag, the destroyer, but
beyond the pain she represents there is a promise of reward and renewal,
so she is not to be seen as evil. This powerful image which Graves
created is now firmly imprinted on the minds of modern occultists on
Earth, where the trio of identical figures which Shakespeare knew has
faded away, morphing into the sharply differentiated group of Maiden,
Mother, and Crone.

But if Nanny Ogg is right (and she always is) it all began on Discworld
way back in the mists of time. There is leakage between universes.

So she and Granny Weatherwax had to find some way of setting up a
threesome of the right type, to spread the load. They began by
recruiting shy young Agnes Nitt (also known, in the recesses of her own
mind, as Perdita) to replace Magrat and carry out the traditional tasks
of the Maiden, which consist mainly of fetching the tea and getting
bullied. But then Magrat had a baby, and so would be qualified to return
as Mother. This, however, is Nanny Ogg’s natural role, seeing as she has
had fifteen children, and revels in an ever-growing horde of
grandchildren and great-grandchildren. In literal years, Nanny belongs
to the same generation as Granny, but in these matters it is not literal
facts that count. It is no accident that her cottage is called Tir Nani
Ogg, which, as Tiffany Aching rightly suspects, means ‘The Land of the
Ever-Young’ (_Tir nan Og_) in the ancient Celtic speech which the Nac
Mac Feegles brought to the Discworld – and _not_, regrettably, ‘Nanny
Ogg’s Place’ [_Wintersmith_].

It is understandable that when it seemed that Granny might be about to
withdraw from witching, Nanny disliked the consequences for herself:
‘Can’t say I fancy being a crone. I ain’t the right shape and anyway I
don’t know the sound they make.’

So, for the present at least, the threesome is a quartet, and
who-stands-for-what still has to be sorted out. Nevertheless, Granny and
Nanny have grown into their roles during the course of the series: Nanny
is the notionally soft big-hearted one, an expert on midwifery, while
Granny is the one you will, with some trepidation, call in when death is
in the air.

BORROWING IS NOT SHAPE-CHANGING

Granny Weatherwax is the most skilful Borrowing Witch in all Lancre.
While her body lies cold and rigid in her bed, her mind goes off and
borrows the consciousness of any bird or animal she chooses. Steering it
gently, she sees with its eyes, feels its pleasures and fears and
appetites, absorbs any knowledge it has. In due course she guides it
into her bedroom, and quietly slips out of its mind. Then she has a
short lie-down, just to get used to the feel of her own body again. And
then, since things have to balance, for the next few days she will put
out some food for the creature whose mind she entered.

She is so skilled that she has even Borrowed a swarm of bees:

‘She’s going to swank about this for _weeks_,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘No one’s
ever done it with bees. Their mind’s everywhere, see? Not just in one
bee. In the whole swarm.’

‘I done it with beezzz! _No one_ can do it with beezzz, and I _done_ it!
You endzzz up with your mind all flying in different directionzzz! You
got to be _good_ to do it with beezzz!’ [_Lords and Ladies_]

Which also goes to show that some of what you’ve Borrowed stays with you
for a while, such as, in this case, a certain confusion in the vocal
cords, plus a need for a bunch of flowers, a pot of honey, and someone
to sting. The bees themselves – or the owl, bat, hare, or whatever –
remain almost unaware that a human mind has been riding them. At least,
that is how it should be. If someone ruthless does it, an Elf Queen for
example, she goes through the animal’s mind like a chainsaw, leaving it
half crazed.

There are dangers, of course. No magical procedure is without risks. A
young inexperienced witch with a natural talent can become so
intoxicated by the joy of Borrowing that she sinks too deep in, and
stays there. So can an old one, come to that. For years Nanny Ogg used
to put out lumps of fat and bacon rind for a bluetit that she was sure
was old Granny Postalute, who went out Borrowing and never came back.
Even Granny Weatherwax knows that she must be careful. It’s addictive,
like a drug.

There is also the practical problem that someone might mistake your body
for a corpse, and pop it into a coffin before you can get back. To avoid
this embarrassment, Granny Weatherwax always holds, in her rigid hands,
a small card which says I ATE’NT DEAD.

Not all Discworld witches are able, or willing, to Borrow, while on
Earth the skill is almost unknown. There, one of the very few accounts
of what appears to be a Borrowing Witch comes from St Briavels in
Gloucestershire, and was reported in the journal _Folk-Lore_ in 1902.
There was a girl there who, for some reason, had to share a bed one
night with a certain old woman and her daughter.

During the night she happened to wake, and was alarmed to feel how very
cold the old woman was. She shook her, but in vain. So she then woke the
daughter, crying, ‘I do believe your mother’s dead!’ – ‘Dead?’ laughed
the daughter. ‘Her bain’t dead, her be out and about now!’

Shape-changing witches, on the other hand, are extremely common in the
lore of this world. The difference is that whereas a Borrower sends her
separated mind to ‘ride’ in an animal (which has its own real existence,
before, during and after the process), the shape-changer changes herself
entirely, body and mind together, into the _appearance_ of an animal.
There is no real animal there at all, simply the transformed witch.

Witches of the Earth could turn into any animal they wanted, but hares
seem to have been the favourites, with cats a close second. Being a hare
was especially good fun because it gave them the chance to infuriate
huntsmen. Stories about this were told throughout Britain well into the
twentieth century, for instance one which was collected by members of a
local Women’s Institute for their book _It Happened in Hampshire_
(1937):

When I was a boy, they did say there was a woman over to Breamore that
could turn herself to a hare up there on the Downs. If the dogs did
press her too much she could turn herself back again and they wouldn’t
see nothing but a woman combing her hair. One day the dogs were after
her, just as she was getting near her cottage. She did shoot through the
keyhole, but they were after her. The children cried out, ‘Run, Granny,
run! or the dogs’ll have ’ee.’ But her was up on the top of the old
brick oven so they never had her. Whether ’twas true or whether it
wasn’t, that is what I did hear when I was a boy.

The witch-hare did not always escape. If the hounds were particularly
fast, or if the huntsman was a good shot with a bullet made from a
silver sixpence, she might get bitten or shot in the rump as she bolted
indoors. And next day everyone would see that she was limping badly.

People on the Discworld have heard about this somehow, and those who do
not understand Granny Weatherwax sometimes think this is what she gets
up to. Thatcher the carter, for instance:

‘Cor, she frightens the life out of me, her. The way she looks right
through you. I wouldn’t say a word against her, mark you, a fine figure
of a woman, but they do say she creeps around the place o’ nights, as a
hare or a bat or something. Changes her shape and all. Not that I
believes a word of it, but old Weezen over in Slice told me once he shot
a hare in the leg one night and next day she passed him on the lane and
said “Ouch” and gave him a right ding across the back of his head.’
[_Lords and Ladies_]

In _Equal Rites_, there is an argument on this point between Esk, an
intelligent little girl, and her brothers Gulta and Cern:

‘They say,’ said Gulta, ‘she can turn herself into a fox. Or anything. A
bird, even. Anything. That’s how she always knows what’s going on. They
say there’s a whole family over Crack Peak way that can turn themselves
into wolves. Because one night someone shot a wolf and next day their
auntie was limping with an arrow wound in her leg, and …’

‘I don’t think people can turn themselves into animals,’ said Esk,
slowly.

‘Oh yes, Miss Clever?’

‘Granny is quite big. If she turned herself into a fox what would happen
to all the bits that wouldn’t fit?’

‘She’d just magic them away,’ said Cern.

‘I don’t think magic works like that,’ said Esk.

But occasionally, very occasionally, Granny does shape-shift, or appears
to do so. This happened during her confrontation with Archchancellor
Cutangle of Unseen University, as described in _Equal Rites_. The
Archchancellor had unwisely hurled white fire at her, and she had
deflected it towards the roof. Then:

Cutangle vanished. Where he had been standing a huge snake coiled,
poised to strike.

Granny vanished. Where she had been standing was a large wicker basket.

The snake became a giant reptile from the mists of time.

The basket became the snow wind of the Ice Giants, coating the
struggling monster with ice.

The reptile became a sabre-toothed tiger, crouched to spring.

The gale became a bubbling tar pit.

The tiger managed to become an eagle, stooping.

The tar pit became a tufted hood …

This is what students of folklore on the Earth have labelled The
Transformation Combat. A typical instance would be the battle recorded
in the medieval Icelandic _Saga of Sturlaug Starfsama_, between an
Icelandic youth and a Lapland wizard. To the bewilderment of the
observers:

They set upon one another and fought fiercely, so swiftly that they
could not be followed with the eye, but neither managed to wound the
other. When men looked again, they had vanished, and in their place were
two dogs, biting one another furiously; and when they least expected it,
the dogs disappeared too, and they heard a noise going on in the air.
They looked up and saw two eagles flying there, and each tore out the
other’s feathers with claws and beak so that blood fell onto the earth.
The end was that one fell dead to the ground, but the other flew away,
and they did not know which one it was.

That was a well-matched fight, but sometimes one of the magicians is
simply trying to escape. A medieval Welsh tale tells how the witch
Ceridwen has spent a year and a day boiling a magic potion. She sets a
boy called Gwion to keep the fire going under the cauldron. But the
potion splutters, and three scalding drops splash Gwion’s finger, so he
automatically sucks it – and all the magic power becomes his. He flees,
in the form of a hare. The furious Ceridwen turns into a greyhound. He
runs to the river, and changes into a fish. She chases him, as an otter.
He becomes a small bird, she a hawk. He becomes a grain of wheat, and
she a high-crested black hen – and swallows him. And that, Ceridwen must
have thought, was that. But not so. The grain of corn made her pregnant,
and the son she bore (who was really Gwion) grew up to be the great seer
and poet Taliesin.

It is interesting that in her contest with Cutangle, Granny Weatherwax
does not counter-attack aggressively, but chooses forms which restrain
and control. For the snake, an Indian snake charmer’s basket; for the
dinosaur, a coating of ice; for the tiger, sticky tar; for the eagle, a
falconer’s hood. Granny is always a careful minimalist in the magic
arts.

CHANGING THE SHAPES OF OTHERS

Throughout the multiverse, there is a persistent story that if you annoy
a witch she will utter a curse which turns you into some small and
unpleasant animal, probably a frog. And an animal you will be for ever,
unless somebody finds a way to break the spell. This idea is common in
fairy tales and old ballads, where the witch is quite often the victim’s
Wicked Stepmother. In this world, there used to be people who seriously
believed that a witch might change you temporarily into a horse, if she
wanted to ride to a sabbat. At Pendle in Lancashire in 1633, according
to the records of a witch trial there, a young boy accused a neighbour
of having done this to him. He later admitted he was lying.

The annals of the Discworld record only three clear instances of such a
transformation. One occurred when the malicious witch Lilith of Genua
turned two coachmen into beetles, and _trod_ on them, as told in
_Witches Abroad_. The second case concerns the talking toad which is the
familiar of Miss Perspicacia Tick, a witch of the Chalk Country (see
_The Wee Free Men_); though initially suffering from memory loss, he
later recalls that he was once a human lawyer, who foolishly took a
witch to court for supplying substandard magic. The third was when
Tiffany, under the influence of the hiver, turned a useless wizard,
Brian, into a frog, as described in _A Hatful of Sky_. Admittedly, there
have also been one or two occasions when Granny Weatherwax messed with
someone’s head, causing him to _believe_ that he was a frog, but she
knew the effect would wear off fairly soon.

What is far more common on the Disc is the reverse process, where a
witch uses her power to transform an animal’s outward appearance (and,
to a lesser extent, its behaviour) into that of a human. But here too
the result is unstable. The three witches of Lancre encountered some
nasty examples of this type of magic when they travelled to Genua (as
told in _Witches Abroad_) – the work of Lilith (real name Lily), whose
hobby was to enslave the wills of those around her and force them to
re-enact the plots of fairy tales, whether they wanted to or not. She,
meanwhile, kept all true power in her own hands, because she was the one
in charge of the stories. As part of her plans, she had turned a swamp
frog into a prince – but the spell held only during daylight hours, so
at night he turned back into his old shape, and had to have a pond in
his bedroom. Lilith also turned two snakes into apparent women, to guard
the potential heroine of the tale she was concocting, and mice into
horses to draw her coach.

Faced with this cruelty, Nanny Ogg persuades the other two that it is
right to fight fire with fire, using her own beloved one-eyed cat,
Greebo, who she thinks is nearly human anyway. ‘And it’ll only be
temp’ry, even with the three of us doing it,’ she said. And so the three
of them concentrated.

Changing the shape of an object is one of the hardest magics there is.
But it’s easier if the object is alive. After all, a living thing
already knows what shape it is. All you have to do is change its mind.

Greebo yawned and stretched. To his amazement he went on stretching.

Through the pathways of his feline brain surged a tide of belief. He
suddenly believed he was human. He wasn’t simply under the _impression_
he was human; he believed it implicitly. The sheer force of the
unshakeable belief flowed out into his morphic field, overriding its
objections, rewriting the very blueprint of his self.

In his human form, Greebo is a grinning, swaggering, six-foot bully-boy
in black leather, with a broken nose, an eye-patch, and an excitingly
lascivious smile. He is just as keen on fighting and love-making as when
he was in cat-shape. And there can still be claws on his hands, if he so
wishes. A few hours later he reverts to his natural felinity, but it
turns out that he has been left with a problem seldom encountered by
cats. It is one of the laws of magic that no matter how hard a thing is
to do, once it _has_ been done it becomes a whole lot easier, and will
therefore be done a lot. For the rest of his life, part of Greebo’s soul
knows that he has one extra option for use in a fight, and that is:
Become Human. He has become a spontaneous shape-changer, even if the
effect never lasts long – fortunately for him, and for others.

THE DIS-ORGANIZATION OF WITCHES

There have been times and places in the multiverse when people got
really paranoid about witches. For about three hundred years in most
countries of Europe, they felt sure that there was a huge conspiracy of
malevolent women, hundreds of whom would gather to hold sabbats where
they worshipped the Powers of Evil, plotted magical murder and mayhem,
and held unimaginably sexy orgies. German and Swedish witches were said
to choose the peak of a bare mountain for these gatherings.

In England, early in the twentieth century, one scholar (Margaret
Murray) maintained that witches had indeed been members of a real secret
society, but that they did no harm – all they were doing was to keep an
old religion going, honouring gods and goddesses of earth and moon, of
sex and seasons and crops. She claimed that they were tightly organized
into covens of thirteen, and had been holding exactly the same
ceremonies to mark the seasons on the same dates all over Europe for
hundreds of years. Nobody seems to have reminded her that spring in,
say, Italy doesn’t come in on the same date as in, say, Sweden, weather
being rather more relevant to the idea of a ‘season’ than the
mathematics of the calendar.

Nowadays, historians and folklorists think Murray’s theory is an
elaborate house of cards built up on hardly any evidence at all. On the
other hand, a whole new religion called Wicca sprang up in England in
the mid twentieth century, based on her ideas. Wiccans worship the
powers of nature as personified by a Triple Goddess and a Horned God,
and yes, many of them do gather in groups of thirteen. They tend to say
that it doesn’t matter too much what the facts of history may have been.
What matters is whether their magic works _for them_.

Whatever may or may not have happened on this planet, the true witches
of Lancre don’t form covens and secret societies, and they don’t go in
for sabbats. They are totally dis-organized, though they do hold
periodic competitive Witch Trials, where each can display her skills.
Each is an individual, working in her own way, and often alone, though
when she grows old she will probably take on a girl and train her (in
exchange for a bit of help with the housework), so as to hand over the
area to her when she dies. Even those witches who act as a threesome
only do so on the understanding that the arrangement is entirely
voluntary and non-hierarchical. Except, naturally, that Granny
Weatherwax gives the orders, and Magrat makes the tea.

Your average witch is not, by nature, a social animal as far as other
witches are concerned. There’s a conflict of dominant personalities.
There’s a group of ringleaders without a ring. There’s the basic
unwritten rule of witchcraft, which is ‘Don’t do what you will, do what
I say.’ The natural size of a coven is one. Witches only get together
when they can’t avoid it. [_Witches Abroad_]

Yet something of the notion of a coven has leached into the Discworld,
particularly affecting the minds of beginners in the craft. In her
younger days, Magrat yearned for one:

It had seemed such a lovely idea. She’d had great hopes of the coven.
She was sure it wasn’t right to be a witch alone, you could get funny
ideas. She’d dreamed of wise discussions of natural energies while a
huge moon hung in the sky, and then possibly they’d try a few of the old
dances described in some of Goodie Whemper’s books. Not actually
_naked_, or skyclad as it was rather delightfully called … that wasn’t
absolutely necessary …

What she hadn’t expected was a couple of crotchety old women who were
barely civil at the best of times and simply didn’t enter into the
spirit of things. [_Wyrd Sisters_]

Occasionally, there were Lancre girls who preferred a more intellectual
and ritualistic kind of magic, more like wizardry – the kind which
involves chalk circles and Cones of Power and candles and Tarot cards,
and which promises spectacular displays (on Earth, it’s often called
High Magick). Such a girl has had an education. She probably wears a big
floppy black hat, and black lace, and lots of occult silver jewellery.
She paints her fingernails black. She adopts a new, flamboyant name.
Arrogant and domineering, she creates a coven which she runs entirely to
suit herself, bullying and mocking her followers. One such girl was
Diamanda (real name Lucy Tockley), who thought she could challenge
Granny Weatherwax, and became dangerously involved with elves, as is
told in _Lords and Ladies_.

THE TOOLS OF THE CRAFT

Young witches tend to attach too much importance to their tools. Magrat,
for instance, at the start of her career, used to read grimoires, drew
sigils on her cottage walls, and owned a fine assortment of wands,
robes, crystals, grails, crucibles, magical knives, mystic coloured
cords, candles, incense, and occult jewellery, including bracelets
bearing the hermetic symbols of a dozen religions. (She would have felt
quite at home among the Wiccans and Neo-Pagans of Earth today, in a
society where a pentacle is just another ornament; fifty years ago most
people would simply think you were Jewish but hadn’t thought to count
the points on your star.)

But older witches avoid showy items of magical equipment. Crystal balls,
for example. Granny Weatherwax loathes crystal balls, especially big
expensive quartz ones (‘Never could get the hang of this damn silicon
stuff. A bowl of water with a drop of ink in it was good enough when I
was a girl’). Instead, both she and Nanny Ogg use old green glass ones,
which had once been buoys for fishing nets.

Pondering on this fact, young Agnes Nitt sees that there are good
historical reasons for it.

A glass fishing float, five hundred miles from the sea. An ornament,
like a shell. Not a crystal ball. You could use it like a crystal ball,
but it wasn’t a crystal ball … and she knew why that was important …
Witches hadn’t always been popular. There might even be times – there
_had_ been times, long ago – when it was a good idea _not_ to advertise
what you were, and _that_ was why all these things on the table didn’t
betray their owner at all. There was no need for that any more, there
hadn’t been in Lancre for hundreds of years, but some habits get passed
down in the blood.

In fact things now worked the other way. Being a witch was an honourable
trade in the mountains, but only the young ones invested in real crystal
balls and coloured knives and dribbly candles. The old ones … they stuck
with simple kitchen cutlery, fishing floats, bits of wood, whose very
ordinariness subtly advertised their status. Any fool can be a witch
with a runic knife, but it took skill to be one with an apple-corer.
[_Carpe Jugulum_]

There are practical reasons too. If you believe that a spell will only
work if you wear your robes and use the right coloured ink on the right
kind of parchment while burning the right kind of incense on the right
day of the week, you will be helpless if an emergency arises and you
don’t have all your paraphernalia at hand. The three Lancre witches once
needed to invoke a demon, but as they were in Nanny Ogg’s washhouse at
the time Magrat protested:

‘Oh, but you can’t. Not here. You need a cauldron, and a magic sword.
And an octogram. And spices, and all sorts of stuff.’

Granny and Nanny exchanged glances.

‘It’s not her fault,’ said Granny. ‘It’s all them grimmers she was
bought.’ She turned to Magrat.

‘You don’t need none of that,’ she said. ‘You need headology.’ She
looked around the ancient washroom.

‘You just use whatever you’ve got,’ she said. [_Wyrd Sisters_]

And in fact the demon was successfully summoned by means of a copper,
its paddle, a scrubbing brush, a washboard, and a lump of soap. Magrat
learned the lesson well, and not long afterwards was able to bring
surging life back into the long-dead timbers of a dungeon door, by sheer
force of imagination and will, with no artificial aids whatsoever.

Yet tools can be very, very useful for impressing the client, especially
when combined with a few little white lies. Take healing, for example.
Magrat is a good healer because she knows a lot about herbs, but Granny
is an even better one because of her skill in stage-management and the
use of props. She gives people a bottle of coloured water, tells them
they feel better, and they do. As she explains to young Esk:

‘I saved a man’s life once. Special medicine, twice a day. Boiled water
with a bit of berry juice in it. Told him I’d bought it from the
dwarves. That’s the biggest part of doct’rin, really. Most people’ll get
over most things if they put their minds to it, you just have to give
them an interest.’ [_Equal Rites_]

Similarly on Earth, the village healers who were known as ‘cunning folk’
or ‘wise women’ knew just how important it was to add a touch of drama.
In County Clare in Ireland in the nineteenth century there was a woman
called Biddy Early with a great reputation as a healer. She used all
sorts of herbal brews, but what impressed people most was the small blue
bottle which she kept always at hand, and used as a focus for her Second
Sight when she was scrying (which is the same as crystal-gazing, only
without the crystal). When a sick person came to consult her she would
shake it, stare fixedly into its cloudy depths, and then tell him what
ailed him, and what he must do to get well. Some said this bottle had
been given to her by fairies. It is said, too, that on her death-bed she
made her family swear to throw it into a lake, on pain of some terrible
curse if they disobeyed. So they did, but as soon as she was dead they
hurried down to the lake to fish it out again – after all, she hadn’t
expressly told them not to, had she? But they never found it, and though
many people have tried, no one has yet. At least, that is one story;
another is that the parish priest threw it into the lake. And there is
another, which says that later on, a dark stranger appeared in the
village, went to the lake and—

But that’s another story, and stories cling to Biddy like iron filings
to a magnet. There is a consensus that she was born in County Clare in
1798 and died in Kilbarron, near Feakle, in 1874. In between, she has
become folded and moulded by narrativium, and defined by the kind of
accounts that begin, ‘I heard tell when I was a boy’. In short, for the
purposes of this book, she could be thought of as Granny Weatherwax and
Nanny Ogg rolled into one. By all accounts she had a fine grasp of
practical psychology as well as some expertise in folk medicine, and was
famous for her cures; she was said to have got her powers from the
fairies or some similar ‘sponsor’ and probably did nothing to discourage
this belief. She liked a drink, too, and when it came to payment she was
on the Whiskey and Chickens standard. She must also have liked men,
because she had four husbands.

Nowadays, if you go looking for ‘Biddy Early’s Cottage’, you will
eventually be directed to a lonely, tumbledown building at the far end
of a weed-choked path. You will find that others have been there before
you, leaving their tokens on windowsill and doorstep – coins, flowers,
strips of cloth, candles, beer bottles. She is not forgotten.

In fact Biddy Early needs a book of her own, and our bibliography has at
least two.

OF HATS AND BROOMS

There is of course the pointy hat. And the broomstick. Every Discworld
witch uses these, and as far as we know they always have. Yet the
broomstick is merely a convenience, and the hat is not in itself
magical. Its secret – and it is one of the great secrets of witchcraft –
lies elsewhere. When Granny challenges clever young Esk to discover it,
Esk examines the hat carefully.

There was nothing particularly strange about it, except that no one in
the village had one like it. But that didn’t make it magical … It was
just a typical witch’s hat. Granny always wore it when she went into the
village, but in the forest she just wore a leather hood …

‘I think I know,’ she said at last.

‘Out with it, then.’

‘It’s sort of in two parts.’

‘Well?’

‘It’s a witch’s hat because you wear it. But you’re a witch because you
wear the hat. Um.’

‘So –’ prompted Granny.

‘So people see you coming in the hat and the cloak and they know you’re
a witch and that’s why your magic works?’ [_Equal Rites_]

On Earth too, some people who practised magic for a living appreciated
the value of eye-catching clothes and headgear, though there was no
uniform style. There was Mother Redcap, for instance, a fortune-teller
in Camden Town in London in the seventeenth century, whose appearance
was definitely eccentric. She was strikingly ugly, kept a huge black
cat, and always wore the red bonnet which gave her her nickname, plus a
grey shawl with strange black patches. From a distance, they looked like
flying bats. Then there was Billy Brewer, the most famous fortune-teller
and magical healer in nineteenth-century Somerset, who practised in
Taunton from the 1840s till his death in 1890 and called himself the
Wizard of the West; he went about the streets wearing a long Inverness
cloak, a tattered brown wig, and a sombrero, with gold and silver rings
glittering on every finger. This did wonders for his reputation.

In the matter of pointy hats and broomsticks, it is a curious fact that
nowadays, as soon as you say ‘witch’ people just _see_ the hat and the
broom, and yet three hundred years ago they were very, very rare. Many
people believed that witches could fly through the air, but they were
said to do this by riding on all kinds of everyday objects and animals,
not just brooms. The fashion for broomsticks began in late medieval
France and Flanders, and only started spreading after about 1600; in
Germany, cooking sticks were preferred; in Britain, pitchforks and
hurdles. In Russian fairy tales, there’s the famous witch Baba Yaga, a
child-eating ogress who lives in the forest; she often travels high
above the tree-tops, sitting in an iron kettle or a stone mortar.

As for the hat, nobody, in all the witch trials of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, ever stepped into court and said, ‘I know she’s a
witch because she wears a pointy hat.’ No paintings, prints or pamphlets
of that period show it; if a witch is wearing any headgear at all, it is
that of ordinary everyday dress. But then things change. If we look at
William Hogarth’s cartoon of 1762 which mocks ‘Credulity, Superstition
and Fanaticism’, we can see a preacher brandishing a doll dressed as a
witch. She’s an ugly old woman. In a pointy hat. Astride a broom.
Something remarkable must have happened, since Hogarth obviously
expected everybody to know what his picture meant. And that was only the
beginning, because now there are broomsticks, black cloaks and pointy
hats in every toyshop in the run-up to Halloween. They are spreading
fast, even in countries which had never heard of them fifty years ago.
In Sweden, for instance, until quite recently witches wore aprons and
head-scarves when they gathered for their annual Great Sabbat (held at
Easter), but now it’s cloaks and pointy hats for them too.

So what can have happened? There can only be one explanation – this
costume was invented on the Discworld and rightfully belongs there, but
the image it creates is so powerful that it is seeping out across the
multiverse, and before long people will recognize it in every other
world there is.

SO WHAT DO WITCHES ACTUALLY
DO, THEN?

Whatever might be the case elsewhere and elsewhen, in Lancre witchcraft
is seen as an honourable profession. Witches get respected. They don’t
go in for fancy titles, but use good old-fashioned homely names which
speak volumes for their solid respectability – Dame this, Old Mother
that, Gammer t’other, and of course Granny and Nanny. It is to them that
the village turns when a child or a cow falls desperately sick, when a
woman is having a difficult labour, when those who are dying cannot
actually die. It is then that the witch has to bring help – and take
responsibility. Nobody knows this better than Granny Weatherwax.

There were stories that were never to be told, the little secret stories
enacted in little rooms …

They were about those times when medicines didn’t help and headology was
at a loss because a mind was a rage of pain in a body that had become
its own enemy, when people were simply in a prison made of flesh, and at
times like this she could _let them go_. There was no need for desperate
stuff with a pillow, or deliberate mistakes with the medicine. You
didn’t push them out of the world, you just stopped the world pulling
them back. You just reached in, and … showed them the way …

She’d been a witch here all her life. And one of the things a witch did
was stand right on the edge, where the decisions had to be made. You
made them so that others didn’t have to, so that others could even
pretend to themselves that there _were_ no decisions to be made, no
little secrets, that things _just happened_. You never said what you
knew. And you didn’t ask for anything in return. [_Carpe Jugulum_]

Well, true enough, you didn’t _ask_, but, as Nanny Ogg says, ‘There’s
ways and ways of not askin’, if you get my meaning. People can be very
gen’rous to witches. They do like to see a happy witch.’ And it was
indeed amazing how many people would pop round to a witch’s cottage from
time to time with a basket of this or a bottle of that, and would
volunteer to do a bit of digging, or to check that the chimneys were OK.

Magrat once grumbled that Granny Weatherwax hardly ever did ‘real magic’
– ‘What good is being a witch if you don’t do magic? Why doesn’t she use
it to help people?’

To which Nanny Ogg replied that it was precisely because she knew how
good she would be at it that she didn’t. Nanny meant that magic is
power, and where there is power, there is always the temptation to abuse
it. Granny steered clear of that temptation, knowing its strength only
too well. Moreover, she thought that you could not help people with
magic, though you could certainly help them by headology and hard work.

All this is very much like what used to go on on Earth up to a hundred
years or so ago – maybe even more recently, in some parts. There were
women who knew charms and cures, who told fortunes, who acted as
midwives and nurses, who knew what counter-spells to use against
bewitchment. And men too. You could find them in both villages and
towns, and their clients came from miles around. Some openly made a
career of it, taking payment in cash for their services, others used
Nanny Ogg’s technique (with an edge to it). A Sussex village witch in
the 1890s, for example, was described to a folklorist in 1941, in the
_Sussex County Magazine_.

Her reputation was very valuable to her. If she stopped a child and
said, ‘What a fine crop of plums your mother had down Crabtree Lane,
dearie,’ the result would be a basket of the best plums, as otherwise
the tree would wither and die. So she kept herself provided with good
things.

But you had to be careful what you called such people, since on Earth
the word ‘witch’ so often meant someone who uses magic to harm, not to
help. It was more polite to say ‘wise woman’, ‘white witch’, ‘charmer’,
‘cunning man’, even ‘wizard’ – and latterly a ‘District Nurse’. But
shorn of the little nods to superstition, what they had and have in
common has been a certain strength of character, practical experience
and the ability to take charge of a situation.

Yet, in spite of these parallels, there are important differences
between magical practitioners in the two universes.

The most far-reaching concerns the source of their power. On the Earth
it was generally assumed that magic power must originate in some
non-human source, and that the witch had received it as a gift or
reward, or through some pact or bargain. Those who feared and hated
witches accused them of having pledged their souls to devils. Some of
the more learned magicians boasted that their knowledge came from angels
and spirits. Some Scottish wise women claimed they had been taught
charms and remedies by elves, whom they would visit in the hollow hills,
or by the dead. In other lands, gods and the spirits of ancestors were
the power sources.

The witches of Lancre have no such ideas. Their skill and power are
their own innate gifts, carefully honed by practice and observation.
They have no dealings with the gods or the dead, despise demons, and
rightly regard elves as dangerous and evil. Nor do they depend on
‘familiars’ to act on their behalf, as Earthly witches were said to do –
these being minor demons, usually in the form of toads, mice, or cats,
who were loaned to witches by the Devil and would perform magical tasks
in exchange for a few drops of blood. (The cat Greebo is no demon; he is
nothing more, and nothing less, than a cat. Miss Tick’s toad appears to
have no magical abilities at all; his power of speech is merely the
residue of his previous human faculties.)

Another major difference is that on the Discworld witches undertake one
dangerous duty that ‘our’ witches have no idea of. It is their
responsibility to defend their homeland against insidious supernatural
invasions. Blatant attacks by Creatures from the Dungeon Dimensions are
usually dealt with by the wizards of Unseen University, who can be
relied on to recognize a tentacular threat when it turns up on their
doorstep, but it takes a witch to fight the more subtle menace of
vampires or elves. Their epic struggles on behalf of Lancre are
recounted in _Lords and Ladies_ and _Carpe Jugulum_. Never, in the field
of inter-species conflict, was so much owed by so many to so few. But do
the people of Lancre appreciate this? Do they, hell! They don’t even
notice. Which is perhaps how it should be.

WICKED WITCHES

The witches of Lancre remember stories about other witches long ago, or
maybe not so long ago, whom they disapprove of. Witches who have gone to
the bad, who have crossed over to the Dark Side. There is something of
the dark in the Weatherwax heredity, and Granny was for a long time
worried about her own Nana, Alison Weatherwax, who disappeared in
Uberwald and was rumoured to have hobnobbed with vampires. Fortunately,
the rumour was false. She didn’t hobnob with them, she staked them.

Then there was Black Aliss. Not exactly a bad witch, but so powerful
that one couldn’t really tell the difference, and deeply affected by
narrative patterns similar to those which the Brothers Grimm recorded on
Earth. Magrat asked about her once.

‘She was before your time,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘Before mine, really. She
lived over Skund way. Very powerful witch.’

‘If you listen to rumour,’ said Granny.

‘She turned a pumpkin into a royal coach once,’ said Nanny.

‘Showy,’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘That’s no help to anyone, turning up
at a ball smelling like a pie. And that business with the glass slipper.
Dangerous, to my mind.’

‘But the biggest thing she ever did,’ said Nanny, ignoring the
interruption, ‘was to send a whole palace to sleep for a hundred years
until …’ She hesitated. ‘Can’t remember. Was there rose bushes involved,
or was it spinning wheels in that one?’ …

‘Why did they call her Black Aliss?’

‘Fingernails,’ said Granny.

‘And teeth,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘She had a sweet tooth. Lived in a real
gingerbread cottage. Couple of kids shoved her in her own oven at the
end. Shocking.’ [_Wyrd Sisters_]

One sign that things weren’t quite right with Black Aliss was that she
used to cackle. So one day when Granny Weatherwax uttered a cackle
(though she swore it was just a rather rough chuckle), Nanny Ogg warned
her:

‘You want to watch out that you don’t end up the same way as she did.
She went a bit funny at the finish, you know. Poisoned apples and
suchlike.’ [_Wyrd Sisters_]

But Black Aliss wasn’t really bad, not out and out bad. It was just that
she got so involved in old stories – those rural myths that happen over
and over again and everyone knows about – that they sent her weird in
the head, so she lost track of what was real and what wasn’t. ‘I mean,
she didn’t ever really _eat_ anyone,’ said Nanny. ‘Well. Not often. I
mean, there was talk, but …’

Her name can’t have helped, for names shape people, and this one carries
sinister echoes drifting across from the Earth. There, in the city of
Leicester, a hideous hag called Black _Annis_ lived in a cave in the
Dane Hills, just outside the town. She had a dark blue face, and her
nails were long sharp talons. There can be no doubt that _she_ ate
people – naughty children mostly, but good ones too if they stayed out
late. She would lurk in a tree overhanging the mouth of her cave, ever
ready to spring like a wild beast on any stray children passing below;
then she would scratch them to death with her claws, suck their blood,
and hang up their skins to dry. If memories from Black Annis’s mind had
infected Black Aliss, it’s a wonder that she didn’t become far more
wicked than she did.

Names shape people. When a young witch gives herself a new name, it
tells you who and what she wants to be – who and what she will
inevitably become. Most times, all it means is a little vanity, a little
snobbishness and misplaced romance. If a girl named Violet prefers to be
‘Magenta’, or an Agnes becomes ‘Perdita’, that does no great harm. But
if a Lucy turns into a ‘Diamanda’, that shows she’s already a bright,
hard little bitch, and intends to become brighter and harder.

So what of that most powerful and evil of witches, who began her life in
Lancre as plain Lily Weatherwax, but took the name Lilith when she moved
to Genua? How did it come into her mind? Surely it must have arrived as
a particle of inspiration, originating in a parallel universe. For in
Earthly myth and legend ‘Lilith’ is the name of a terrible female demon,
noted for pride as well as cruelty. It is said that she was Adam’s first
wife, but refused to submit to his authority and fled from Eden into the
desert, where she consorted with demons and became a demon herself. Ever
since, she has exploited her beauty by seducing sleeping men in their
dreams, and satisfied her cruelty by killing women in childbirth and
strangling young babies. She feeds on their blood and sucks the marrow
from their bones. And so, in her own way, does Lilith of Genua. She
takes people’s lives and twists them, sucking away their will-power and
personality, forcing them into the patterns of old stories where she,
and she alone, is in control. Yet all the time she is enslaving them,
she convinces herself that she is the good godmother, the good witch.
And if that’s not being a wicked witch, what is?

[image]


Chapter 9


THE LAND OF
LANCRE

 

LANCRE LANDMARKS

_THE DANCERS_

WHEN PEOPLE HAVE lived in the same place for generations, they know
every inch of the countryside as if it were their own backyard, which it
often is. They like things to have reasons, a name, a history, an
explanation. Particularly an explanation. Everything inexplicable
demands an explanation. Narrativium takes over, the land becomes filled
with stories, and the result is a fine crop of folklore. On the
Discworld the process is most obvious in Lancre and on the Chalk, though
much the same thing would be found in every country if anyone went to
look.

Of course, there are always people who wouldn’t take a folk tale
seriously even if it jumped up and bit them (which, given the power of
narrativium, it might quite well do). Consider the case of Eric
Wheelbrace, that most resolute and rational of ramblers, now alas
missing and presumed dead. Among interesting features noted in his essay
‘Lancre: Gateway to the Ramtops’ (included in _A Tourist Guide to
Lancre_), he briefly mentions the Dancers, a group of standing stones on
a small area of moorland about midway between Lancre River and the
Ramtops:

There are eight of them, in a circle wide enough to throw a stone
across. They are reddish, about man height, and barely thicker than a
man as well. Local legend has it that they are a gateway into the
kingdom of the elves but the truth is likely to be much more prosaic.
They are typical of a style of silicon chronograph constructed in the
dawn of time by our ignorant forebears. Basically, they are an underused
resource, and I for one intend to organize a Lancre Music and Dance
Festival next year, based round the stones, which are in a perfect
location for that sort of activity. It is my belief that the stories are
put about by the locals in order to keep people away, but we will not be
deterred. [_A Tourist Guide to Lancre_]

Oh deary, deary me. Eight of them, a magic number. And called The
Dancers, too, with a Piper and a Drummer among them. This looks very
much like a warning that something eldritch happened there in the olden
days, and maybe could happen again. The witches have done their best to
make sure everyone avoids the place. Even the more stupid locals have
some notion of the dangers:

‘I remember an old story about this place,’ said Baker. ‘Some man went
to sleep up here once, when he was out hunting.’

‘So what? I can do that,’ said Carter. ‘I go to sleep every night,
reg’lar.’

‘Ah, but _this_ man, when he woke up and went home, his wife was
carrying on with someone else and all his children had grown up and
didn’t know who he was.’ [_Lords and Ladies_]

These weird tricks of time always happen when someone is taken out of
their own world into Elfland, as we noted in an earlier chapter. But in
what sense are the stones themselves Dancers? Since the locals didn’t
tell Wheelbrace, or if they did he wasn’t listening, we must look to the
Earth for the explanation, thanks to some of those remarkable parallels
and echoes between one universe and another.

Stone circles are powerful or, at least, become cloaked in powerful
stories. In various parts of England – Cornwall, Devon, Dorset,
Derbyshire – there are circles of stones known as the Nine Ladies or
Nine Maidens or Merry Maidens. There may or may not actually be nine of
them (it’s a magical number, like eight is on the Disc), but their story
is everywhere the same: there were once some girls who loved dancing so
much that they would go off to the hills to dance together whenever they
could, even on Sundays when they should have been in church. So one
Sunday they were smitten by the Wrath of God, which turned them to
stone. No more dancing for them – except maybe for the ones near
Okehampton in Devon, where (some people say) they are allowed to take a
few steps every day at noon. Sometimes one stone in the circle, or close
beside it, is named the Piper or Fiddler; it is said he was playing the
music for the girls to dance to, and was smitten too.

Back in Lancre, Eric Wheelbrace insisted that there was a right of way
across the Dancers, and that he would organize his Festival there.
Dismissing local objections as mere superstition, and declaring that a
determined rambler will laugh with scorn at threats, he set off to cross
the circle one Midsummer Eve. His boots were found frozen solid, in a
hedge a mile away. He has presumably now discovered that the Dancers are
indeed, as legend claims, ‘a gateway into the kingdom of the elves’, and
he may even understand that such gates are meant to be kept _shut_.
That’s why the stones chosen for the job are reddish and magnetic; they
contain a good deal of iron, a tried and trusted elf-repellent.

_THE STANDING STONE_

On the crest of a moor in the Ramtops, there is a solitary bluish
Standing Stone (well, sometimes there is). It is a painfully shy
megalith, so although there is only one of it, nobody has ever been able
to count it. If it sees anyone approaching with a calculating look, it
shuffles off to hide among the gorse bushes or flops into a peat bog.
There are rumours that other huge standing stones on the moor are mobile
too, but are too keen on their privacy to let themselves be seen when on
the move.

The folklore of Earth is, as so often, remarkably close to the facts of
the Disc. It is almost commonplace on Earth to be told that at midnight,
or at dawn, a particular standing stone will spin round on its base, or
dance, or walk down to the river to drink. But if someone tells you
about this, do listen carefully – it could be folklore, or it could be a
leg-pull. If what he said was, ‘That stone turns round whenever it hears
the church clock strike midnight’, he’s speaking a very literal kind of
truth, and what you have to ask yourself is, ‘How often does a stone
_hear_ a clock?’ Never, actually. That’s the leg-pull. On the other
hand, if what he said was, ‘That stone turns round when the church clock
strikes midnight’, he’s folk, and that’s lore.

As for counting, Earthly megaliths absolutely hate being counted, and
will do anything to prevent it. Stonehenge used to be very good at this
– a rumour got around that anyone who reckoned up its stones and got the
number right would be sure to die. And those who did try got wildly
different results. Yet Daniel Defoe, writing in the 1720s, said he had
seen them counted four times, and each time the total was 72; the only
problem, he thought, was that many were fallen and half buried, so one
could not easily tell whether one was seeing two parts of one stone, or
two separate stones. In 1740 the antiquary William Stukeley published
_his_ count, making it 140 and exclaiming triumphantly, ‘Behold the
solution of the mighty problem, the magical spell is broke which has so
long perplexed the vulgar.’ Modern archaeologists disagree with them
both; having tidied the place up and mapped it, they have settled on 96.

In several places where there are ‘countless stones’, people have had
the same bright idea: take a basket of loaves, count them, and put one
on top of each stone till you have gone all round the ring, then see how
many loaves are left, do a simple sum, and, bingo, that’s it. This did
work with The Hurlers in Cornwall, but not at Stonehenge, nor yet at
Little Kit’s Coty in Kent. There, some say, a baker who tried this trick
ended up with more loaves than he started out with; others say he
completed his calculations but dropped dead before he could announce the
result.

Some people might suggest that all you need to do is chalk a number on
each stone as you go, but somehow that just doesn’t do the trick,
lore-wise. It lacks style. Besides, there’s sure to be _Something_ that
comes creeping up behind you to rub the figures out.

_THE LONG MAN_

In a valley a few miles from Lancre’s solitary Standing Stone is an even
more significant landmark, the Long Man. This name could mislead someone
from our world, since _here_ the Long Man is a giant human figure carved
into the chalk of a hillside at Wilmington, on the Sussex Downs. Lancre
has no chalk, and hence no hill-figures, but it does have plenty of
burial mounds (‘barrows’), housing the dead of long-gone generations,
and sometimes housing the Wee Free Men as well. Some have partly
collapsed, exposing their huge stones to the sky, and attracting
folklore of their own. There’s one that’s supposed to be the workplace
of an invisible blacksmith; people put a sixpence on the stone and leave
a horse there overnight to be shod, just as people of this world used to
do at Wayland’s Smithy on the Berkshire Downs. There, this magic worked
(or so they say); in Lancre, both coin and horse would be gone by
morning, people there having more of a sense of humour.

What Lancre calls ‘the Long Man’ is a group of burial mounds close
together, two round ones at the foot of a long one. Nanny Ogg says that
the first time she saw them from the air she laughed so much she nearly
fell off her broomstick. She has also given a pithy description of a
much-loved Lancre custom, the Scouring of the Long Man.

This takes place about every twenty years in early May, when the men and
the married women go up to the Long Man and cut away all the bracken and
seedlings which have grown up since the last Scouring. Says Nanny:
‘Unmarried girls ain’t allowed to join in, but it’s amazin’ what a good
view you can get from up a tree and if you ain’t got brothers you can
get an education there which will prevent surprises later in life. When
it’s decently dark there’s a pig roast and then people wander off and
make their own entertainment.’ [_A Tourist Guide to Lancre_]

If the memories of Nanny Ogg’s great-grandmother can be trusted, things
had been a good deal wilder in the old days, when the menfolk used to go
up to the Long Man for strange rites which no woman ever saw (unless,
being an Ogg, she hid in the bushes):

‘She said they just used to build sweat lodges and smell like a
blacksmith’s armpit and drink scumble and dance around the fire with
horns on and piss in the trees any old how. She said it was a bit cissy,
to be honest. But I always reckon a man’s got to be a man, even if it
_is_ cissy.’ [_Lords and Ladies_]

In Lancre Town, as Eric Wheelbrace notes, one can buy ‘vulgar and
inappropriate souvenirs which allegedly depict the Long Man and some of
the legends attached to it’. Well, well.

There is nothing on the Earth which fully matches the three-dimensional
majesty of Lancre’s Long Man, where, as Nanny Ogg puts it, the landscape
itself is boasting, ‘I’ve got a great big tonker.’ The poor old Long Man
of Wilmington, in fact, has no tonker at all. In Dorset, however, there
is the Cerne Abbas Giant, which is the outline of a huge man with an
erect penis, carved into the chalk. It requires to be scoured every
seven years, to keep it clear of grass and weeds. There is a strong
local tradition that couples who want a child but have failed to
conceive should visit the Giant and make love at the appropriate spot.
We are not certain if an appointment is required.

The Scouring of Lancre’s Long Man, though, would seem to have more in
common with the periodical Scouring of the White Horse, a magnificent
and very ancient figure carved into a hillside near Uffington in
Berkshire (see the section on the Chalk). On irregular occasions the
Horse was cleaned up, and this became the occasion for a fair and games
such as chasing cheeses down a hill, climbing the greasy pole,
cudgelling, wrestling and, as the ale and the sun both went down,
brawling, drunkenness and, after dark, ‘making your own entertainment’.

But there is more to Lancre’s Long Man – much, much more. At the foot of
the long mound three large irregular stones form a low cave. One wall
has a drawing scratched on it, showing an owl-eyed man wearing an animal
skin and horns, who appears to be dancing. A shaman, performing a
magical hunting ritual? A god, half human and half beast? A shaman,
dressed as this god? Whoever and whatever he is, he has an identical
twin brother on Earth, painted several thousand years ago on the wall of
the Trois Frères cave in the south of France.

Force the stones apart, and the opening reveals steps leading down into
the vast underground network of the Lancre Caves. This too is an
entrance to an elf world – but this is the _other_ elf world, the one
the Queen’s elves don’t talk about, the one which is an integral part of
Lancre, not a malevolent, parasitic universe. A spiral path goes further
and further down under the Long Man, till one comes to a hot, dark,
steamy tent of skins, a shaman’s sweat-lodge. There, sprawled half
asleep beside a bowl of red-hot stones, lies the huge figure of the
Antlered One, the only god for whom Nanny Ogg has a soft spot. He is the
Lord of the Elves, the Queen’s estranged husband; at Nanny’s request, he
forces the Queen to give up her attack on Lancre, as described in _Lords
and Ladies_.

Will Shakespeare, whose finely tuned mind often unconsciously picked up
the particles of information which drift from one universe to another,
echoed the strained relations between the Elf Queen and her husband when
he described the quarrel of Titania and Oberon in his play _A Midsummer
Night’s Dream_. Yet he had no inkling of the true nature and appearance
of the Antlered Elf Lord. In fact, it is less than a hundred years since
this image began to coalesce in the imaginations of English witches and
pagans. It has been built up out of bits and pieces of various myths,
some far older than others – the figure in the Trois Frères cave, the
Greek Pan, the Celtic antlered god Cernunnos, the medieval idea that the
Devil has bull’s horns and goat’s feet. Plus the fact that horns are a
natural, universal symbol of a male animal’s strength and sexuality. Put
all this together, and you get what modern witches call The Horned God –
the incarnation of maleness, the personification of the ever-renewed
vital force of Nature. Some now say he is the oldest god man has
created. And on the Discworld, he is real.

_SLEEPING WARRIORS_

There are other things too in the labyrinthine Lancre Caves, for these
are one of those areas where the normal rules of time and space do not
apply. When Nanny Ogg goes there with the dwarf Casanunda, they pass a
certain cavern:

There were hundreds of dust-covered slabs ranged around the cavern in a
spiral; at the centre of the spiral was a huge bell, suspended on a rope
that disappeared into the darkness of the ceiling. Just under the
hanging bell was one pile of silver coins and one pile of gold coins.

‘Don’t touch the money,’ said Nanny. ‘’Ere, watch this, my dad told me
about this, it’s a good trick.’

She reached out and tapped the bell very gently, causing a faint _ting_.

Dust cascaded off the nearest slab. What Casanunda had thought was just
a carving sat up, in a creaky way. It was an armed warrior … He focused
deepset eyes on Nanny Ogg.

‘What bloody tyme d’you call _thys_, then?’

‘Not time yet,’ said Nanny.

‘What did you goe and bang the bell for? I don’t know, I haven’t had a
wynke of sleep for two hundred years, some sodde alwayes bangs the bell.
Go _awaye_.’

The warrior lay back.

‘It’s some old king and his warriors,’ whispered Nanny as they hurried
away. ‘Some kind of magical sleep, I’m told. Some old wizard did it.
They’re supposed to wake up for some final battle when a wolf eats the
sun.’ [_Lords and Ladies_]

The legend of the Sleeping Warriors recurs so often that its narrativium
drive must be unusually powerful. On the Discworld it has been found in
at least three other places, far from Lancre.

First, in a huge burial mound on the Counterweight Continent there are
seven thousand terracotta warriors, each seven foot tall, who form an
invincible Red Army when aroused. Their Earthly counterparts were
discovered by archaeologists some years ago, drawn up in military array
in pits all round an Emperor’s grave in China; wisely, nobody has yet
attempted to arouse them. It is as yet unclear whether the golems who
have come to Ankh-Morpork, as is told in _Making Money_, and who were
last seen digging themselves into trenches round the city, will be
taking on a similar role. Secondly, inside a hill at Holy Wood, there is
a gigantic knight in golden armour lying on a dusty slab in front of a
silver screen, and beside him is the gong to wake him. And thirdly, in
the limestone caverns under Koom Valley, there is the Kings’ Cave, where
Dwarf King and Troll King, encased in stalactites, sit eternally at
their game of Thud, as they were when death overtook them:

There was the dwarf king, slumped forward across the board, glazed by
the eternal drip, his beard now rock and at one with the stone, but the
diamond king had remained upright in death, his skin gone cloudy, and
you could still see the game in front of him. It was his move; a healthy
little stalactite hung from his outstretched hand. [_Thud!_]

Many European traditions tell of an ancient king who lies asleep inside
a mountain. Some say he will awake in the hour of his country’s greatest
need, and return to save his people; others, that when he wakes it means
the End of the World is near. In France, he is Charlemagne; in Britain,
King Arthur; in Denmark, Holger Danske; in Germany, the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa (‘Red Beard’). Barbarossa is in Mount Kyffhausen:

He sits on a bench at a round stone table, resting his head on his hand,
sleeping, nodding his head and blinking his eyes. His beard has grown
long – according to some, right through the stone table. But according
to others, the beard grows around the table, and when it has encircled
it three times it will be the time of his awakening. It has now grown
around twice.

A shepherd was once led into the mountain by a dwarf. The emperor rose
and asked him, ‘Are the ravens still flying round the mountain?’ When
the shepherd assured him that they were, he cried, ‘Now I am going to
have to sleep for another hundred years.’ [_German Legends of the
Brothers Grimm_ (1816), no. 23; transl. Donald Ward, 1981]

In Britain, the sleeper is King Arthur. Many people claim to know the
very place where he and his knights are lying in some cavern under a
hill, with their horses and hounds beside them – inside Alderley Edge in
Cheshire, inside Cadbury Hill in Somerset, under Sewingshields Crag in
Northumberland, under Richmond Castle in Yorkshire, in the Eildon Hills
near Edinburgh. If you can find your way in and reach the place where
Arthur sleeps, you may see a pile of gold; you are allowed to take some
_once_, but don’t ever go back to get more. There will certainly be
significant objects – maybe a bell, maybe a sheathed sword, a garter, or
a horn. There are just two problems: first, you have to know whether you
must or must not touch them in order to wake the king (assuming that is
what you want to do); and then, you have to keep your nerve. So far,
things have never worked out properly. At Richmond Castle, one man who
found his way down to the sleepers’ vault saw a sword and a hunting
horn. He drew the sword half out of its scabbard, and the sleepers began
to stir, but this terrified him so much that he thrust the blade back.
An angry voice called out:

Thompson, Potter Thompson,

If you’d drawn the sword or blown the horn,

You’d ha’ been the luckiest man

That ever yet was born.

The man who got into the vault at Sewingshields did a bit better. He saw
a sword, a garter, and a bugle. He drew the sword right out of the
scabbard, and Arthur and the knights opened their eyes. Then he cut the
garter, and this too was the right thing to do, and they slowly sat up.
But then he stopped. The spell took hold again, and the king and his
warriors sank back on their couches, but not before Arthur had cursed
the man:

O woe betide that evil day

On which this witless wight was born

Who drew the sword, the garter cut,

But never blew the bugle horn!

_THE GNARLY GROUND_

Gnarly ground is hard to see, let alone describe. There’s a patch of it
on the highest part of the moorlands, beyond the forest and among the
mountains. If you look at it in one way, it’s just a pathless stretch of
heather and furze, less than a mile across (even if the furze is
horribly matted and thorny), and at one point there’s a little stream
which has cut a groove among the rocks, scarcely more than a foot deep.
You could easily jump it. Yet somebody has laid a broad stone slab
across it, as a bridge. Now look at the scene the _other_ way … You see
an endless, nasty-looking, desolate expanse; a long, narrow, dizzying
bridge spanning a ravine; a raging torrent far below. They say a deer
will sometimes run on to gnarly ground if hard-pressed in the hunt, but
it has to be pretty desperate.

‘What _is_ gnarly ground?’ said Agnes.

‘There’s a lot of magic in these mountains, right?’ said Nanny. ‘And
everyone knows mountains get made when lumps of land bang together,
right? Well, when the magic gets trapped you … sort of … get a bit of
land where the space is … sort of … scrunched up, right? It’d be quite
big if it could, but it’s like a bit of gnarly wood in an ol’ tree. Or a
used hanky … all folded up small but still big in a different way.’
[_Carpe Jugulum_]

In _Carpe Jugulum_, Granny Weatherwax sets out alone to cross the gnarly
ground, and the younger witches go after her. Their socks, knitted from
Lancre’s toughest, most wiry wool, protect them from the savage spikes
of furze. But then comes the gorge, an abyss so deep one can barely see
the river below, and a high, slender bridge that shifts and creaks
underfoot. And then a cavern, some tunnels, a flash of fire.

It is a strange, perilous journey, but not unparalleled. Time and again,
in myths and folk tales from all parts of the multiverse, those who take
the road to the Otherworld must pass a water barrier by way of a Bridge
Perilous. A Scottish ballad describes one leading from Purgatory to
Paradise:

The brigge was as heigh as a tower,

And as scharpe as a rasour,

And naru it was also;

And the water that ther ran under

Brennd of lightning and of thunder,

That thought him mikle wo.

The closest match for Granny’s journey is the strange medieval funeral
chant known as ‘The Lyke-Wake Dirge’, which Yorkshire women sang, as
late as the sixteenth century, as they kept watch over a corpse. The
tale it tells was already old; it had begun (in so far as such things
can be said ever to begin) four hundred years before, as a vision which
came to a German monk called Gottskalk in December 1189, as he lay sick
of a fever. He saw the souls of the dead gathering on the edge of a
great wild heath covered with thorns and furze. There was a tree nearby,
its branches loaded with pairs of shoes, but the newly dead soul must
cross the thorny ground barefoot – unless, while alive, he or she had
given socks and shoes as alms to the poor. And so the Yorkshire women
sang:

If ever thou gavest hosen or shoon,

Every night and all,

Sit thee down and put them on,

And Christ receive thy soul.

If hosen and shoon thou never gave none,

Every night and all,

The whinnies shall prick thee to the bare bone,

And Christ receive thy soul.

Having passed over Whinny Moor, the soul comes to The Bridge of Dread,
which is ‘no broader than a thread’, and finally to Purgatory Fire.
Those who once gave food and drink to the needy will not shrink from its
flames; those who never did will be burned to the bare bone. The song
stops at this point, but since in Christian belief Purgatory is never a
final state, simply the last stage on a sinner’s journey to God in
Heaven, we can assume a happy ending.

As for Granny Weatherwax, the message she sends the world is, I ATE’NT
DEAD YET.

BELIEFS OF LANCRE

The people of Lancre are, on the whole, remarkably free from irrational
beliefs. Things which in another universe would be considered
superstitions are plain commonsensical everyday facts in Lancre. People
there don’t _believe_ that a horseshoe over the door keeps you safe from
elves, they _know_ it, and if you ask them why it works they can explain
just why (the magnetic effect of iron disrupts the sixth sense so vital
to an elf’s well-being). Beekeepers are careful to tell their bees
everything important that concerns the family and household – births,
marriages, deaths, a new set of curtains, and suchlike. But that’s not
superstition, just the practical observation that if you don’t tell
them, they will fly indoors to find out for themselves.

Or take the matter of controlling horses. On the Earth, there were
farriers and farm workers who had learned the secret magic of the
‘Horseman’s Word’. They could make any horse follow them, or utterly
refuse to move on, by whispering it into its ear. To become a Horse
Whisperer or Toadman wasn’t easy. In Scotland, you had to be initiated
into a secret society and swear blood-curdling oaths. In East Anglia,
you had to kill a toad, leave it on an ant-hill for a month till the
bones were picked clean, then on the next night of the full moon put the
bones in a stream (ignoring the eldritch sounds which would break out
just behind you). One single bone would float _upstream_. Take it home,
rub it with oils, grind it to powder. That powder holds the power.

In Lancre, the blacksmith and farrier Jason Ogg has no need of all that
palaver, but he does have a more immediately practical approach. He can
calm the wildest stallion by whispering a definitely non-magical Word in
its ear – he simply points out what all those pliers and hammers _could_
be used for, ‘if you don’t stand still right now, you bugger’.

_ROYAL PHANTOMS_

Curiously, the royal family of Lancre have one strong superstition,
though it only affects them once they are dead. They believe that they
are bound to the stones of their ancient castle (especially if they
happen to have been murdered on the premises), and must haunt it
indefinitely. When this happened to King Verence I, he found he disliked
most of his fellow-ghosts:

Champot was all right, if a bit tiresome. But Verence had backed away at
the first sight of the Twins, toddling hand in hand along the midnight
corridors, their tiny ghosts a memorial to a deed darker even than the
usual run of regicidal unpleasantness.

And then there was the Troglodyte Wanderer, a rather faded monkeyman in
a furry loincloth who apparently happened to haunt the castle merely
because it had been built on his burial mound. For no obvious reason a
chariot with a screaming woman in it occasionally rumbled through the
laundry room. [_Wyrd Sisters_]

Being not entirely stupid, King Verence found a way of escape. He
persuaded Nanny Ogg to help him, pleading, ‘Pray carry a stone out of
the palace so’s I can haunt it, good mother, it’s so bloody boring in
here.’ So he left the castle, clinging to a bit of rock that Nanny broke
off the battlements and put in her apron pocket, and took up residence
in her cottage. Unfortunately all the other ghosts came along too, but
she got used to them in the end.

_MAGPIES_

Creatures which in other parts of the multiverse are a topic for wild
rumour and proliferating legend are regarded in Lancre simply as rare
and interesting species. To see the occasional phoenix or unicorn is
sometimes a surprise, always a pleasure, but never an omen, either for
good or ill. (Details of these and other remarkable fauna are to be
found in the chapter on ‘Beasties’.) But there is one exception –
magpies are definitely bodeful.

The magpies which come down into Lancre from Uberwald are the spies and
messengers of a powerful vampire, Count de Magpyr. But even apart from
that, magpies are unpopular there for their thieving ways and for being
omens.

Something chattered at them from a nearby branch …

‘Good morning, Mister Magpie,’ said Agnes automatically.

‘Bugger off, you bastard,’ said Nanny, and reached down for a stick to
throw. The bird swooped off to the other side of the clearing.

‘That’s bad luck,’ said Agnes.

‘It will be if I get a chance to aim,’ said Nanny. ‘Can’t stand those
maggoty-pies.’

‘ “One for sorrow”,’ said Agnes, watching the bird hop along a branch.

‘I always take the view there’s prob’ly going to be another one along in
a minute,’ said Nanny, dropping the stick.

‘ “Two for joy”?’ said Agnes.

‘It’s “two for mirth”.’

‘Same thing, I suppose.’

‘Dunno about that,’ said Nanny. ‘I was joyful when our Jason was born,
but I can’t say I was _laughin’_ at the time.’

Two more magpies landed on the cottage’s antique thatch.

‘That’s “three for a girl—”,’ said Agnes nervously.

‘ “Three for a funeral” is what I learned,’ said Nanny. ‘But there’s
lots of magpie rhymes.’ …

‘ “Seven for a secret never to be told”,’ said Agnes.

‘ “Seven’s a devil, his own sel’ ”,’ said Nanny darkly. ‘You’ve got your
rhyme, I’ve got mine.’ [_Carpe Jugulum_]

*

Things are much the same on the Earth, where magpies (also known as
pies, pyats, mags, or maggoty-pies) are sinister and unpopular birds.
They are shameless thieves, snatching anything bright and glittery and
carrying it off to decorate their extremely untidy and badly built nests
– behaviour which earned one of them a vital but non-singing role in
Rossini’s opera _The Thieving Magpie_. It is said they will even fly
down into Hell if there is a bag of gold to be found there. They love
gossiping, chattering, and causing trouble; they are evil birds who know
far more than they ought, always peering about and prying into other
people’s business. They have always enjoyed disasters. Even in the days
of Noah’s flood, the magpie refused to enter the Ark, preferring to
perch on the roof and jabber with glee at the sight of the drowning
world.

Magpies are so malicious that Spanish peasants say each one has seven
bristles from the Devil’s beard among its feathers, and seven bladders
of bitter gall in its body. They are the Devil’s spies and messengers.
In Russia, too, they are considered the Devil’s forces; there are said
to be forty of them perched on fir trees to guard a bog where he sits
enthroned on a white rock.

Throughout England and Scotland for the past two hundred years and more,
there have been rhymes to warn you what to expect if you see magpies
flying across your path. However, as Nanny Ogg would certainly point
out, they are not very reliable, since they are not the ones the magpies
know themselves. There are many versions, all agreeing that a single
magpie brings bad luck, but two bring good. With three and four, there
is more choice:

One for sorrow,

Two for joy,

Three for a girl,

And four for a boy.

Or:

One for sorrow,

Two for mirth,

Three for a wedding,

Four for a birth.

Or on the other hand, in the oldest known version (from Lincolnshire in
1780) it is:

Three for a wedding,

And four for a death.

After which things become more complicated. You can have:

Five for silver, six for gold,

Seven for a secret never to be told.

Or:

Five for rich, six for poor,

Seven for a witch, I can tell you no more.

Or:

Five for England, six for France,

Seven for a fiddler, eight for a dance.

Or:

Five for heaven, six for hell,

Seven, you’ll see the devil himsel’.

To be on the safe side when a magpie crosses your path, and to turn
aside the bad luck, you can draw a cross on the ground, or lay two
straws or sticks crosswise; or bow to the bird, saying ‘Good day, Mr
Magpie!’, or blow a kiss towards it; or recite this charm:

I crossed the magpie, and the magpie crossed me;

Devil take the magpie, and God save me!

CUSTOMS OF LANCRE

For some years now, the Ankh-Morpork Folk Dance and Song Society has
been compiling an archive of old folk customs and fertility rituals from
the countryside around. One summer a lady folklorist arrived on Nanny
Ogg’s doorstep, demanding information. ‘Well,’ said Nanny, ‘there’s only
one fertility ritual that I knows of and that’s the one that comes
nat’rally.’ But the lady said, ‘No, there’s got to be loads of folk
stuff hanging on because I am writing a book, and I will give you this
handsome silver dollar, my good woman.’

So Nanny Ogg gave her what she reckoned was one dollar’s worth, but no
more. This included the Scouring of the Long Man, as described above,
and two or three others, which will be found in _A Tourist Guide to
Lancre_:

_The Seven-Year Flitch_. This is an old custom datin’ back to one
Miscegenation Carter who left some money in his will to set it up to
provide a flitch of bacon for the deservin’ poor. It is held every five
years. It is open to any man who has been married for more than seven
years to appear before the Flitch Court, which consists of six old
married couples, an’ swear that in that time he has never had a cross
word with his wife or regretted bein’ married. If he does, he is beaten
near senseless with the flitch for lying, but brought round with strong
drink and the rest of the day is a fair. So far no man has ever
convinced the Court an’ the flitch is the original one, which is as hard
as oak now.

_The Lancre Oozer._ The Oozer, attended by people dressed up as his
Squeasers, dances from house to house in every village on Old Hogswatch
Eve until people gives them money to go somewhere else. It is said that
any maiden kissed by the Oozer is sure to be pregnant before the year is
out but this is an odds-on bet in these parts anyway.

_The Slice Mummers’ Play._ This is performed on the first Saturday after
Marling Day, when the characters of Old Hogfather, Death, Merry Hood and
the White Knight perform an age-old ritual tellin’ of the death and
resurrection of really bad acting. This is the high spot of the Slice
Fair and Revels. There is not a lot to do in Slice. Well, not that isn’t
mostly banned everywhere else.

The similarities to Earthly customs here are truly astonishing. Anyone
who knows anything about English traditions will recognize the name of
the Dorset Ooser, a large, heavy wooden head with bull’s horns, goggle
eyes, and movable snapping jaws. Folklorists found out about it in 1891,
at which time it was kept by a family in Crewkerne, but could get no
information on how it was used. It has since disappeared, or perhaps it
took a dislike to the folklorists and ran away. Its Discworld
counterpart behaves very much like the May Day Obby Oss at Padstow in
Cornwall, which dances from house to house through the narrow streets,
led by a Teaser, and accompanied by singers and a massed band of
accordions and drums. This goes on all day. If the Oss catches a woman,
she will be married and/or pregnant within a year.

Mumming Plays can be seen in many towns and villages of England, Lowland
Scotland, and parts of Ireland around Christmas time (or Easter, in
Lancashire). They always involve a lot of shouting of bad verse, two or
three fights, a death, and a resurrection brought about by a quack
doctor. And then someone takes up a collection from the spectators.
Folklorists used to think this was some sort of extremely ancient
fertility ritual, but eventually got around to noticing the collection,
and the odd fact that performances used to take place outside rich men’s
houses, and nowadays at a pub.

As for the Seven-Year Flitch, this recalls something which has been
going on, off and on, for at least six hundred years at Great Dunmow in
Essex. Originally, any man who, having been married for more than a
year, could convince the monks at Little Dunmow Priory that he had never
once had words with his wife or wished he was single again, would be
given a flitch of bacon and carried in procession. Successful claims
were few and far between. When the monastery was closed down at the
Reformation, successive Lords of the Manor took responsibility for
keeping the custom going, and did so till 1751, when they dropped it.
Fortunately, in 1854 the bestselling novelist Harrison Ainsworth wrote
an enthusiastic description, _The Flitch of Bacon, or the Custom of
Dunmow_ (it can still be found). This inspired a revival, which has
flourished ever since. Nowadays there is a mock trial, with the wives
giving evidence, and the whole thing is treated as a joke.

_SOUL CAKING_

If the lady folklorist from Ankh-Morpork had produced another dollar,
she could have learned about the excitements of the Soul Cake Days,
which are celebrated in the Ramtops and on the Sto Plains on the first
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday after first half-moon in the month of
Sektober. Readers attempting to work out this date should bear in mind
that on the Discworld it is extremely dangerous to utter the magic
number ‘eight’, or any of its derivatives, in any language.

According to the _Discworld Almanak_, the Soul Cake Days are ‘celebrated
by Dwarfs and Men with great fires, much noise, and mysterious customs,
too many to catalogue, and some too moist to recommend’. It is known
that Morris Dancing is involved; also that dwarfs play at Bobbing for
Toffee-Rats on a Stick, and human children go Trickle-Treating. Lady
folklorists in Ankh-Morpork assume that this is just a local
pronunciation of ‘Treacle-Treating’, meaning that the kids who dress up
and go from house to house are hoping to be given treacle gob-stoppers
as their treat. Male folklorists hold the opinion (never mentioned in
print, or in the hearing of their female colleagues) that the name arose
because people who refuse to hand out any treats later find a rather
nasty trickle on their doorstep.

Lancre children are also given eggs with funny faces on them (Nanny Ogg
is a dab hand at painting them). There must be some connection with the
Soul Cake Tuesday Duck, a magical creature which lays chocolate eggs for
children in Ankh-Morpork, as will be described in a later chapter. And
this in turn links up with the fact that the duck-hunting season begins
that Tuesday. The good people of Ubergigl (in Uberwald) mark the date by
‘The Running of the Ducks’, when maddened untamed ducks run, more or
less, through the streets, pursued by young men who vie with one another
to snatch the coveted rosette from the beak of the biggest drake.
Perhaps their minds have been affected by some floating awareness of the
Running of the Bulls, which is done every July at a fiesta at Pamplona
in Spain.

All of which is well and good, but does not even begin to explain what
souls, and cakes, have to do with it. Here, by remarkable coincidence,
English traditions can again cast light on the problem. In the Middle
Ages 2 November, All Souls’ Day, was the day when Christians prayed
particularly for the souls of the dead, to speed them on their way from
Purgatory to Heaven (as is still done in Catholic countries); on this
and the preceding days, it was customary for those who could afford it
to give away little cakes to the poor, asking them too to pray for the
donor’s dead family and friends. Long after the religious purpose had
been forgotten, people made fancy cakes at this time of year, and called
them ‘soul cakes’; in the nineteenth century in the rural parts of
Cheshire and Shropshire, the poorer people went from farm to farm asking
for money, food or drink, with the song:

Soul, soul, for a souling cake,

I pray you, good missis, for a souling cake,

Apple or pear, a plum or a cherry,

Anything good to make us merry.

Up with your kettles and down with your pans,

Give us an answer and we’ll be gone.

They said they were ‘Going Soul Caking’, but secretly they hoped there’d
be some beer to go with the cakes, or, better still, some money. By the
end of that century the custom had died out among adults; children,
however, were still keeping it up in the 1950s. Though sometimes they
forgot about the cakes:

Soul, soul, for an apple or two,

If you’ve got no apples, pears will do;

If you’ve got no pears, ha’pennies will do;

If you’ve got no ha’pennies, God bless you.

_MORRIS DANCING, LIGHT AND DARK_

There are some things Nanny Ogg took good care not to mention to the
lady folklorist from the city – the things she calls the ‘real stuff’,
things like the Dark Morris. The lady would be bound to get them all
wrong anyway.

Now, even ordinary Morris dancing, what we may for convenience call the
Light Morris, is a curious thing, both on Earth and on the Disc. A
typical dance involves six men in two lines of three, facing each other;
they are all dressed alike, usually in white, with coloured baldrics and
decorated hats, and possibly with ribbons and rosettes too; they clash
sticks in time to the music, miraculously avoiding one another’s fingers
by a hair’s breadth, or wave large handkerchiefs, or clap; they have
bells strapped to their ankles and knees. There will be one or two
reserve dancers in the team, to replace anyone who retires exhausted or
injured; a musician playing an accordion, or a fiddle, or in earlier
centuries a pipe and tabor; a Fool; and someone to go round taking the
collection.

On one level it’s a public display of skill, strength, stamina and sheer
bloody-mindedness, which some people in Lancre think of as entertainment
and others as a form of martial art (especially when sticks and buckets
are involved). There is a definite competitive edge to it. You can have
events like the Fifteen Mountains All-Comers’ Championships, which the
Lancre Morris Men have won no fewer than six times. It gives the teams a
chance to dress up and swagger around, to be someone special.

In Elizabethan England, the strict Puritans thought the swaggering was
much too much fun, both for the dancers and the crowd. In 1583 Philip
Stubbes complained furiously in his _Anatomie of Abuses_ that at village
festivals there would be Morris Men dressed in ‘green, yellow, or some
other light wanton colour’:

And as though that were not gaudy enough, I should say, they bedeck
themselves with scarfs, ribbons and laces, hanged all over with gold
rings, precious stones and other jewels; this done, they tie about
either leg twenty or forty bells, with rich handkerchiefs in their
hands, and sometimes laid across their shoulders and necks, borrowed for
the most part from their pretty Mopsies or loving Betties, for bussing
them in the dark … Then march this heathen company towards the church
and churchyard, their pipers piping, their drummers thundering, their
stumps dancing, their bells jingling, their handkerchiefs fluttering
above their heads like mad men, their hobby horses skirmishing among the
throng.

On a second level – at any rate in England, where it has flourished (off
and on) for at least six hundred years – Morris dancing used to be an
excellent way for working men in country districts to get free beer and
food and some extra cash. They would appear at seasonal festivals such
as May Day and Whitsun, and also at whichever date the local fair was
held; in winter they would go round performing outside the houses of the
wealthy. This was a great asset when times were hard, as they so often
were in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Nowadays, Morris teams
usually perform outside pubs and in town centres; they still take up a
collection, but simply to cover their expenses or for a charity.

Some English teams used to go out on tour for several weeks, and even
visit towns. At a fair in London in 1823, for example, there was:

a group of young rustics attired in garments decorated with numerous
bows of ribbon. They had small jingling bells fastened to their knees
and ankles. Some waved white handkerchiefs and others wands … keeping
time by striking their wands against one another.

It was so pleasant, wrote another London eyewitness in 1830,

to observe the monotony of some long dull street of dingy houses broken
by the simple music of the pipe and tabor, and the ringing of the bells
on the legs of the morris-dancers … There seems a patch of old-time
merriment in the active motions of the ruddy and sunburnt countrymen.

Just _how_ old was the merriment? When and why did it come to be such an
essential part of the rose-tinted picture of the happy, simple, country
life of Old England? A theory popular in the eighteenth century was that
the name ‘Morris’ was a corruption of the Spanish word _morisco_,
‘Moorish’, and that it was a fashion introduced from Spain in the
fourteenth century. This would imply that at first it was danced by the
upper classes, not among country folk, and that they called it ‘Moorish’
not just for being foreign, but because it was so wild and energetic, in
contrast to the stately dances of the Court. It is a plausible
suggestion, but apart from the name itself there is no actual evidence
for it.

Then, in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, a dramatic
new theory emerged and became instantly popular and widely accepted. The
origins of the Morris, it was claimed, lay in the fertility rituals of
prehistoric Europe; the noisy bells, the waving hankies, and aggressive
sticks were meant to drive away evil spirits; the high leaps into the
air were meant to make the crops grow tall. On this level, the third and
for many people the most important one, Morris dancing is an immensely
ancient magical rite for the promotion of life. There is no evidence for
this either, but as the English scholar Keith Chandler recently wrote,
‘viewing a dance which is supposedly several thousand years old appears
to satisfy some indefinable need in the human psyche’.

Whether or not this theory holds good on Earth, it is well known to be
the truth of the matter on the Disc. There, Morris dancing is done to
bring good luck and drive bad things away; there’s nothing like the
jangle of little iron bells for getting rid of elves. What’s more, it’s
all about the cycles of growth and decay, summer and winter, life and
death. It involves the Light Morris, yes, but the Dark Morris too.

This is why there’s one village in the Ramtops, the one where they
really do know what they are doing, where the Morris Men dance twice,
and twice only, in every year (we shall have more to say on this in the
next chapter). The first time is at dawn on the first day of spring, and
everyone is welcome to watch. But the second time is in autumn, and it’s
private.

On a certain day when the nights are drawing in, the dancers leave work
early and take, from attics and cupboards, the _other_ costume, the
black one, and the _other_ bells. And they go by separate ways to a
valley among the leafless trees. They don’t speak. There is no music.
It’s very hard to imagine what kind there could be.

The bells don’t ring. They’re made of octiron, a magic metal. But
they’re not, precisely, silent bells. Silence is merely the absence of
noise. They make the opposite of noise, a sort of heavily textured
silence.

And in the cold afternoon, as the light drains from the sky, among the
frosty leaves and in the damp air, they dance the _other_ Morris.
Because of the balance of things.

You’ve got to dance both, they say. Otherwise you can’t dance either.
[_Reaper Man_]

This is the Dark Morris Nanny Ogg was keeping quiet about. If it is
danced elsewhere in the multiverse – and it surely is – people there are
keeping quiet about it too. (Well. Not that quiet. Terry is occasionally
informed of a sighting, and once saw it danced in Chicago.)

[image]


Chapter 10


THE WITCHES
OF THE CHALK

 

HOSTILITY TOWARDS WITCHES

IN THE LOWLANDS and in the Chalk country, witches do not receive the
same respect as in Lancre. There have been times when they were
systematically persecuted, even burned, and though that no longer
happens many of the Chalk people still distrust them, and are quick to
blame them when there is trouble. So witches who go there are wary, and
try not to attract attention. They wear ordinary clothes, and disguise
their true craft behind a slightly more socially acceptable calling,
such as teaching. That is why, when Miss Perspicacia Tick visits the
Chalk, or surrounding villages, she wears what looks like a simple black
straw hat smothered in paper flowers, but is actually a collapsible
stealth model. Press a spring, and it unfolds into the classic pointy
shape. Among the paper flowers lurks a talking toad which she refers to
as her familiar, though so far it has not displayed any magical powers –
unlike the toad-familiars of English witches in Wessex, which are so
dangerous that the worst threat their mistress can utter is, ‘I’ll set
my toads on ’ee!’

Miss Tick’s equipment too looks far from witchy. She does her scrying by
pouring a few drops of ink into rainwater in a cracked saucer which she
carries about in one of her many pockets. Also in her pockets are other
insignificant objects – twigs, loose beads, string, a reel of cotton, a
holed stone, a few feathers, scraps of coloured paper. These she can
thread together to make a ‘shamble’, a powerful magic-detector and
projector which looks a bit like a particularly complicated cat’s
cradle, a bit like a broken set of puppet-strings, and a bit like a very
untidy dream-catcher. To do this requires high skill in making
string-figures, an art practised in various parts of the multiverse, and
often linked to myths and magic. On Earth, Germans call it _das
Hexenspiel_, ‘the Witch’s Game’.

A shamble won’t work if you buy it ready-made. You have to make your
own, fresh every time, out of whatever there happens to be in your
pockets. In the centre you put something alive – an egg, say, or a
beetle or small worm – and pull the strings, and as the objects twirl
past or even through one another, the device works. In the presence of
really powerful magic, it may explode. But if you pull the right bit of
string, it all falls apart in a moment and becomes just a small pile of
harmless rubbish. Nothing suspicious. Nothing that makes people say
‘witch’.

Because once people think you’re a witch, things can go terribly,
terribly wrong, as they did for poor old Mrs Snapperly, who died in the
snow one winter, but who probably wasn’t a witch at all. As Tiffany
Aching tells Miss Tick, Mrs Snapperly used to live alone in a strange
cottage in the woods, and had no teeth, and talked to herself. And she
had a cat, and she squinted. So when a young boy went riding in those
woods one summer day and never came back, people said she’d killed him,
and maybe cooked him in her oven too.

‘And so after he vanished they went to her cottage and they looked in
the oven and they dug up her garden and they threw stones at her old cat
until it died and they turned her out of her cottage and piled up all
her old books in the middle of the room and set fire to them and burned
the place to the ground and everyone said she was an old witch.’ [_The
Wee Free Men_]

To make matters worse, this lost boy was the Baron’s son, and the Baron
(whose family had held the Chalk for generations without ever changing
their minds about anything) was full of taken-for-granted prejudices. He
too blamed Mrs Snapperly, and gave orders that nobody was to have
anything to do with her, and that any witch found in the country should
be tied up and thrown in a pond. The old woman managed to live through
the autumn, begging and stealing food here and there and sleeping where
she could, but there came a cold night when no one would open their
doors to her, and it snowed, and by morning she was dead.

Thankfully, such small rural tragedies are now rare on Discworld, but
they were common on Earth until modern times. As late as the 1920s, in
one Sussex village there was an old widow called Betsey Shadlow who was
forced into isolation by the fears and suspicions of her neighbours. She
was a wicked old woman, they said, and had ‘powerful books with a deal
of evil written in them’. She lived alone and in poverty, and was
crippled with rheumatism, but nobody would help her dig up her potatoes
for fear of what she might do to them. When she went to the farm to buy
milk, the farmer wouldn’t let her pass the gate in case she bewitched
the cows, so she had to stay in the road and yell until somebody heard
her. There came a time when people realized that they hadn’t seen her
around for a couple of weeks, so the Rector called at her cottage and
found her sick in bed, too ill to move. The man who told her story to
the _Sussex County Magazine_ in 1943 remembered how it all ended:

The workhouse people came next day and took her away. One of the head
men stayed behind to sort out her belongings. She hadn’t much furniture,
but they found a pile of books. My neighbour, who was very fond of
reading and very curious as well, asked the official if he could have
them, or at least read them, but we said it wasn’t right, and anyway we
didn’t want anyone else learning the secrets and playing us up – Betsey
Shadlow was trouble enough – and we asked the workhouse chap to burn
them. He looked at them, and said they were rubbish anyway. It’s a
strange thing, but when they came to set fire to all the unwanted stuff
from the cottage along with those books, we lookers-on saw _green_
flames coming from the fire!

The Baron’s notion that the thing to do with witches is to throw them
into ponds must be one of those thought-particles drifting through the
multiverse and taking root in any suitable mind. It echoes a practice
once common in many countries of the Earth, the ‘swimming test’. It
began in the Middle Ages as a way of discovering whether someone was or
was not a witch, and reached its peak in the first half of the
seventeenth century. The suspect would be tied up, hands to feet, and
thrown in. It was believed that if she was guilty, water, being a pure
and holy element, would reject her, and she would remain floating on the
surface; if she was innocent, she would sink – and, hopefully, someone
would haul her out before she drowned. Though popular, this was not
actually legal, and the vast majority of lawyers and church leaders
refused to accept it as evidence in court. One famous writer who did
believe in the test was King James VI of Scotland and I of England, who
linked it with the idea that witches had rejected the Christian faith in
which they had been baptized:

So it appears that God hath appointed, for a supernatural sign of the
monstrous impiety of witches, that the water shall refuse to receive
into her bosom those who have shaken off them the sacred water of
baptism and wilfully refused the sacred benefit thereof.

There came a time when all laws against witchcraft were dropped, and
people could no longer take a woman to court if they thought her spells
had harmed them. So, remembering the old ways, village mobs sometimes
took matters into their own hands by ‘swimming’ her themselves, not as a
test but as a punishment. Even in Victorian England, there were one or
two cases where people died of this, by drowning or by pneumonia. In
view of the Baron’s decree, it is fortunate that Miss Perspicacia Tick
is good at untying knots with her teeth and swimming underwater, and can
lurk under the weeds, breathing air through a hollow reed.⁹

WITCHES HAVE A DUTY

As in Lancre, so on the Chalk a witch has a duty to her land and her
people. It is because young Tiffany Aching has an instinctive ability to
accept responsibility, to cope with threats to herself and others, that
she is a natural born witch. As the kelda of the Wee Free Men tells her:
‘Ye’re the hag noo, the witch that guards the edges and the gateways. So
wuz yer granny, although she wouldnae ever call hersel’ one.’

Granny Aching had lived and died as a shepherd. The chalk and flint were
in her bones, the sky was her hat and the wind her cloak. All spring and
summer she stayed out on the hills, sleeping in her old wheeled
shepherding hut, which could be dragged across the downs to follow the
flocks. Tiffany knew (probably by reading _The Goode Childe’s Booke of
Faerie Tales_) that any old woman who lived in a house that _moved
about_ must be at least slightly a witch. She was sure of this, even
though she had never heard of Mrs Gogol, the swamp-witch in Genua whose
hut paddled along on duck’s feet, let alone Baba Yaga in Russian fairy
tales, whose cottage stood on hen’s legs and spun round and round.

Granny Aching was a supremely skilful and conscientious shepherd, with
all the toil and responsibility this entails.

[One would see] Granny Aching’s light, weaving slowly across the downs,
on freezing, sparkly nights or in storms like a raging war, saving lambs
from the creeping frost or rams from the precipice. She froze and
struggled and tramped through the night for idiot sheep that never said
thank you and would probably be just as stupid tomorrow, and get into
the same trouble again. And she did it because not doing it was
unthinkable. [_The Wee Free Men_]

She used no magic, though some shepherds’ tricks look like magic if you
don’t know how they’re done. But she had wisdom, and authority, and
sometimes anger too; she saw to it that where there was injustice there
would be a reckoning, since ‘Them as can do, has to do for them as
can’t, and someone has to speak up for them as has no voices.’ Within
two or three years of her death, the memory of her had grown into
something larger than life, something like a spirit of the downs:

There were always buzzards over the Chalk. The shepherds had taken to
calling them Granny Aching’s chickens, and some of them called clouds
like those up there today ‘Granny’s little lambs’. And Tiffany _knew_
that even her father called the thunder ‘Granny Aching cussin’’.

And it was said that some of the shepherds, if wolves were troublesome
in the winter, or a prize ewe had got lost, would go to the site of the
old hut in the hills and leave an ounce of Jolly Sailor tobacco, just in
case …

No wonder that when monsters and elves from another world appear in the
Chalk country, Tiffany’s first thought is that Granny would have known
how to deal with them. But Granny is dead. It is now young Tiffany who
must become the witch-as-shepherd, guarding the borders, driving
invaders away, keeping an eye on things. She has a duty.

BECOMING A WITCH

How does a girl become a witch? First, she must have some natural inborn
talent, even if she does not yet realize it. Here, heredity can help,
and in Tiffany’s case it does; the Achings, like the Weatherwaxes, have
witching in their blood. It _might_ also be significant that she is the
seventh daughter. On the Earth it certainly would be, for in that
universe many a magical healer and fortuneteller has found that being a
seventh son (or daughter) is good publicity. But the supreme magical
number on the Discworld is eight, not seven, so it is usually the eighth
son (or daughter) who is born with power, as we learn in _Equal Rites_
and _Sourcery_.

The really unmistakable sign that Tiffany is destined to be a witch is
her name – a sign all the more powerful for being the result of sheer
chance (if there _is_ such a thing as chance). In the languages of the
Discworld ‘Tiffany’ has no meaning, but the kelda of the Wee Free Men
tells her that in their Old Speech (a Celtic tongue, learned in another
universe) its true form is Tir-far-Thóinn, meaning ‘Land Under Wave’.¹⁰
Chalk hills are land which was once under the waves, land formed from
the shells of countless millions of sea creatures. Knowing this, and
knowing what her name means, is the core of Tiffany’s power.

She saw herself set her boots firmly on the turf, and then …

… and then …

… and then, like someone rising from the clouds of a sleep, she felt the
deep, deep Time below her. She sensed the breath of the downs and the
distant roar of ancient, ancient seas trapped in millions of tiny
shells. She thought of Granny Aching, under the turf, becoming part of
the chalk again, part of the land under wave. She felt as if huge
wheels, of time and stars, were turning slowly around her.

She opened her eyes and then, somewhere inside, opened her eyes again.

She heard the grass growing, and the sound of worms below the turf. She
could feel the thousands of little lives around her, smell all the
scents on the breeze, and see all the shades of the night …

The wheels of stars and years, of space and time, locked into place. She
knew exactly where she was, and who she was, and what she was. [_The Wee
Free Men_]

However, even if you are born with an aptitude for magic, there are
still skills to be learned, and it is not wise to try to learn witching
all by yourself. Get one little thing wrong, and you’re stuck among
dangers you don’t understand. Even if you make no mistakes, you’ll be
desperately lonely. Unless you can meet people of your own sort, you may
end up mad – or bad.

Things aren’t so bad for boys who are potential wizards, since they can
go to Unseen University. Occasionally, in those few times and places in
the multiverse where girls have been allowed to study the same things as
their brothers, there has been some talk of boarding schools for young
witches, and even of co-educational establishments. But on the Disc
there is nothing like that. When Miss Tick tells Tiffany that yes, there
is indeed such a school – very magical, nowhere else quite like it –
this is a trick or test. The true ‘school’, as Tiffany soon understands,
is all around you, once you know how to open your eyes and then open
them again. As for the detailed skills of the craft, they are passed on
from elderly witches to young ones on a one-to-one basis, together with
some very necessary guidance and protection. It is Miss Tick’s
responsibility, as a secret witch-finder, to pick out girls with talent
and make suitable arrangements for them.

So when Tiffany was eleven, she left her home in the Chalk country and
travelled to the mountains, where she went into service with Miss Level,
partly as a maid and partly as an apprentice. She learned about herbs,
and broomsticks, and tried patiently to make a shamble. She accompanied
Miss Level round the villages and isolated farms doing medicine and
midwifery, and learned that though a witch never expects payment and
never asks for it, there is a constant interchange of gifts and favours.
There was nothing romantic about this work, nothing dramatic, no magic
potions to cure the sick in an instant. Witchcraft, said Miss Level, was
mostly about helping people by doing quite ordinary things. This has
been the task of the true Wise Woman in every universe, and we can
assume (though evidence is lacking) that girls who became Wise Women on
Earth learned their skills and duties by some similar informal
apprenticeship.

However, cures and advice are more likely to be accepted if they _sound_
magical, as Tiffany learned. Miss Level had been carefully telling one
family that their well was much too close to their privy, so the water
was full of tiny, tiny creatures which were making the children sick.
They listened politely, but did nothing. Then Granny Weatherwax visited
them and told them the illness was caused by goblins who were attracted
to the smell of the privy, and that very day the man of the house and
his friends began digging a new well at the other end of the garden. A
story gets things done.

Yet there was part of Tiffany’s mind which hankered for power and drama
and picturesque paraphernalia. This is a very common weakness in young
witches, and Tiffany meets one group of girls who practise ‘The Higher
MagiK’.

‘Magic with a K?’ said Tiffany. ‘MagiK_kkk_?’

‘That’s deliberate,’ said Annagramma coldly. ‘If we are to make any
progress at all we _must_ distinguish the Higher MagiK from the everyday
sort.’

‘The _everyday_ sort of magic?’ said Tiffany.

‘Exactly. None of that mumbling in hedgerows for _us_. Proper sacred
circles, spells written down. A proper hierarchy, not everyone running
around doing whatever they feel like. Real wands, not bits of grubby
stick. Professionalism, with respect. Absolutely no warts. That’s the
only way forward.’ [_A Hatful of Sky_]

Annagramma has learned this approach from Mrs Letice Earwig, a tall thin
witch who wears so much silver that she gleams, uses words like ‘avatar’
and ‘sigil’, and writes books. This has earned her Granny Weatherwax’s
heartfelt contempt. ‘That’s just wizard magic with a dress on,’ and ‘She
thinks you can become a witch by going shopping,’ are two of Granny’s
milder comments.

Annagramma runs a coven of young girls, whom she bullies and sneers at,
and chivvies through complex ceremonies involving such things as the
Wand of Air, the Cauldron of the Sea, the Shriven Chalice, the Circlet
of Infinity. They all go in for robes and occult jewellery, and
patronize the very expensive shop of Zakzak Stronginthearm, a dwarf
craftsman who supplies everything the Higher MagiKkkkian might require:
wands of metal or rare woods, elaborately pretty ready-made shambles,
crystal balls, luxurious cloaks, star-spangled hats, rings, pendants,
your personal grimoire (‘Book of Night’, or ‘Book of Shadows’) bound in
heavy leather with an actively rolling eye on the cover.

It is really remarkable how similar ideas spring up across the
multiverse. On the Earth groups like this have become common over the
past hundred years or so. There too, some of them insist on an eccentric
spelling for what they do, calling it Magick, to make sure that nobody
mistakes it for that boring old-fashioned folk magic. They go in for
formal initiations, oaths, grades, and hierarchies, and their founders
and leaders (generally men) are notably authoritarian. They take
grandiose names for themselves, their organizations, their ritual
ceremonies, and the objects used in ritual. And the Zakzaks of our world
do very good business. Well, whatever … but one instinctively feels that
Granny’s ‘every stick is a wand, every puddle is a crystal ball’ is
closer to the truth. Or _a_ truth, at least.

‘SEE ME’

The most remarkable of Tiffany’s abilities was one which she ought
really to have mentioned to Miss Tick, but she didn’t, being too young
and inexperienced to know how unusual, and how risky, it was. Closing
her eyes and concentrating, she would say ‘See me’. Then, reopening her
eyes, she would find herself standing a few feet away from herself. She
had walked out of her own body, and now her detached self could move
around, looking at her physical self from every side. When she had seen
all she wanted, she would say ‘See me not’, and the two selves were
instantly reunited.

As a child, Tiffany simply thought of this as a handy little trick to
use if you didn’t have a proper mirror. She had no notion that it is the
basis of Borrowing, that supreme skill of great witches. Still less did
she suspect that if you just walk out of your body and leave it there,
without taking proper precautions, there are creatures only too ready to
move in and take control.

This ability, or something very like it, has been observed elsewhere in
the multiverse, though not under the deliberate control of those who
have it. One form is the ‘Near Death Experience’, much discussed
nowadays on the Earth. People who are semi-conscious from heart failure
or anaesthetic, and almost on the point of death, feel the mind
detaching itself from the inert body and floating upwards; they can
watch the body from above, and see what is going on around it, but
eventually are reunited with it and regain consciousness.

Older Earthly sources speak of the soul, rather than the mind,
separating itself from the sleeping body and wandering off on its own.
According to folk tradition, it is possible for an observer to see this
happening, for the soul emerges in visible form, as a small animal, an
insect, or a puff of smoke. This is said to have happened once to King
Guntram of the Franks, who ruled Burgundy from 561 to 592; the story was
written down some two hundred years later.

One day, Guntram felt tired while out hunting, and took a nap under a
tree, while a courtier kept watch. This man saw that while the king was
asleep a little animal slithered out of his mouth and went down to a
tiny brook, where it ran to and fro on the bank, looking for a way to
cross. Amused at this, the courtier laid his sword across the brook. The
little creature crossed at once, and disappeared into a hole on the
opposite bank. After a bit, it returned across the sword bridge, and
slipped back into the king’s mouth. Then Guntram woke up, and said to
his companion, ‘I must tell you what a strange dream I’ve just had. I
saw a very large, very wide river, and across it a great iron bridge had
been built. I crossed the bridge, and went into a cave in the side of a
towering mountain, and it was filled with treasure!’ Then the courtier
told the king what had actually happened, and they decided to dig into
the bank of the brook, and sure enough, there was a treasure buried
there.

It is important that no one should touch or shake or shift the
unconscious body while its soul is away, because if the soul cannot find
its way back, the person will die.

MAKING A MYTH OF ONESELF

Tiffany’s next post is as apprentice to an extremely odd – nay,
terrifying – witch named Miss Eumenides Treason, one hundred and
thirteen years old, quite blind, and quite deaf. Yet these disabilities
scarcely bother her, because she is skilled at Borrowing and uses the
eyes and ears of any nearby animal as if they were her own. On occasion,
she even Borrows Tiffany’s eyes, which is rather irritating of her.

Whereas Miss Tick is a stealth witch, Miss Treason flaunts witchery in
every detail of her lifestyle. All witches like wearing black, but she
has gone further; the walls and floors in her cottage are black, and so,
of course, are her candles; she keeps black goats and black hens; even
cheeses must be coated with black wax. Everything has been carefully
crafted to match images stamped deeply into the human psyche by the
force of narrativium, since it is her aim to turn herself into a myth,
in life and in death. She knows exactly how to do it.

Every witch has her particular skill, and Miss Treason’s is to deliver
Justice. People would come to her from miles around with disputes about
land, or cows, or rent, or legacies, and she would sit in judgement. So,
how does the image fit the role?

First, blindness. Everyone knows that when Justice is personified she
wears a blindfold, and so does Miss Treason – a black one, naturally. So
indeed does Blind Io, chief of the gods, who has blank skin where his
eyes should be and an impressive number of detached eyeballs floating
round him. It is not known whether Miss Treason is deliberately mocking
him; it is not impossible, for witches don’t have much respect for gods.
What is quite certain is that she strikes terror into the hearts of
disputants when she removes the blindfold from her pearly grey eyes and
prepares to give judgement, saying: ‘I have heard. Now I shall see. I
shall see what is true.’ Her blind eyes seem to look right into the
soul. People say if you lie to her, you’ll be dead in a week.

Then there is her name, Eumenides, which she must have found in the
pages of _Chaffinch’s Ancient and Classical Mythology_ – one of her
favourite books, crammed full with bookmarks. On the Earth, in Ancient
Greece, this was the polite name for the Erinyes or Avenging Furies,
terrifying goddesses whose function was to hound the guilty to death; it
literally means ‘Sweet-Tempered Ladies’ and was meant to be flattering
to them and reassuring to us, but nobody was ever fooled by that. Her
chosen hobby is weaving, which (like the spinning of the Fates) is a
traditional metaphor for the way supernatural beings decide human
destinies. One tale from the Earth (the medieval Icelandic _Njal’s
Saga_) tells how twelve valkyries were seen setting up a gruesome loom,
just before the great Battle of Clontarf between Vikings and Irishmen in
1014. As they worked, they sang:

We weave, we weave a web of war.

Human guts our warp and weft,

Skulls our loom-weights, spears our shuttles,

Swords to beat the blood-stained cloth.

We decide who lives, who dies.

We weave, we weave a web of war.

Next, her birds. At the time Tiffany was living with Miss Treason, she
kept two ravens, which had once worked for Blind Io; one would sit on
each side of her head on a wooden perch which fitted like a yoke across
her shoulders. The effect was very witchy, and mythic too; no doubt she
had been reading about the Norse god Odin and his ravens Huginn and
Muninn (‘Thought’ and ‘Memory’), which perched on his shoulders and told
him everything they had seen as they flew round Middle Earth.

Before the ravens, she had kept a pet jackdaw. There are no links
between jackdaws and Justice, but good precedents for their use as
magical familiars. The medieval English chronicler William of Malmesbury
wrote in his _Gesta Regum Anglorum_ (1125) of a witch who had lived at
Berkeley in Gloucestershire some sixty years before his time, in the
year 1063. She was skilled in interpreting omens, and had a tame jackdaw
as her very great favourite; one day, the bird chattered more loudly
than usual, and she turned pale, knowing this was a warning that her own
death was at hand. (A Discworld witch wouldn’t mind knowing this, but
the Witch of Berkeley had made a pact with the Devil, so for her it was
not good news.) In much more recent times, in the 1960s, to be precise,
a well-known witch in the New Forest in Hampshire, Mrs Sybil Leek, would
always appear in public with a tame jackdaw called Hotfoot Jackson
perching on her shoulder. Very eye-catching, but (like Miss Treason) she
did have to put up with mess down the back of her cloak.

Myth-making is a communal activity, even if most people involved don’t
see that that’s what they’re doing. It’s built up from fears, rumours,
thrills and stories, all driven by powerful doses of narrativium. Miss
Treason takes a keen interest in the process, since she has a reputation
to keep up. She asks Tiffany:

‘Have you heard the stories about me, child?’ …

‘Er, that you have a demon in the cellar?’ Tiffany answered … ‘And you
eat spiders? And get visited by kings and princes? And that any flower
planted in your garden blooms black?’

‘Oh, do they say so?’ said Miss Treason, looking delighted. ‘I haven’t
heard that last one. How nice. And did you hear that I walk around at
night in the dark time of the year and reward those who have been good
citizens with a purse of silver? But, if they have been bad, I slit open
their bellies with my thumbnail like this?’

Tiffany leaped backwards as a wrinkled hand twisted her round and Miss
Treason’s yellow thumbnail scythed past her stomach. The old woman
looked terrifying.

‘No! No, I haven’t heard that one,’ she gasped, pressing up against the
sink.

‘What? And it was a wonderful story, with real historical antecedents!’
said Miss Treason, her vicious scowl becoming a smile. ‘And the one
about me having a cow’s tail?’

‘A cow’s tail? No!’

‘Really? How very vexing … I fear the art of story-telling has got into
a pretty bad way in these parts. I really shall have to do something.’
[_Wintersmith_]

It is to be hoped that she did, for they are indeed splendid stories,
and it would be a great pity if they were forgotten. Their historical
antecedents have deep roots in the Scandinavian and German-speaking
parts of the Earth. The cow’s tail is characteristic of elf-women in the
mountain forests of Norway and Sweden. From in front, they look
beautiful, and many a human huntsman or charcoal-burner has been seduced
into making love with one of them. But if he gets a glimpse of her back,
he will see either that it is hollow, mossy and rotten like an old
tree-stump, or that it ends in a long, dirty cow’s tail. If he runs off
in horror, she will chase him, and if she catches him she will tear him
to bits. They are not to be trifled with, these forest elf-women.

As for the stomach-slitting, here Miss Treason is surely thinking of
some Discworld equivalent of a famous supernatural hag known as Frau
Holle in Germany and Frau Perchte or Frau Berthe in Bavaria, Austria and
Switzerland. Stories about her go back at least a thousand years. Some
say she lives on a mountain peak, but others say up in the sky; when it
snows in the human world everyone knows that she’s shaking out her
feather beds until the feathers drift about in the wind. In midwinter,
during the Twelve Days of Christmas, she comes to earth and travels
round the countryside, checking on whether children have been good and
obedient, and whether the village girls have worked hard on the farms,
and spun as much flax or wool as they should have done in the course of
the year. Then comes Twelfth Night itself, sometimes called Perchtanacht
and reckoned to be the last night of the year. At midnight she comes
into every house. Those who have been good and done their work properly
may find a silver coin in their shoes, or in the milking pail. But as
for those who haven’t, she will slit their bellies open, remove the
contents, and fill them up with chopped straw, pebbles and dirt. Then
she sews them up again, using a ploughshare as a needle and an iron
chain as thread.

Another notion which Miss Treason picked up from the tales of Earth is
that of the External Soul. A good example is the legendary Russian evil
wizard Koshchei the Deathless, who placed his Life or Soul in an egg.
The egg was inside a duck, and the duck was inside a hare, and the hare
was lying in a great hollow log floating in a pond in a forest on an
island far, far away from Koshchei’s palace. Miss Treason’s version is
less complicated. She wears a heavy iron clock on her belt, and is
always winding it up. There is a story in the villages that this clock
is her heart, which she has used ever since her first heart died.

‘Miss Treason,’ said Tiffany severely, ‘did you make up the story about
your clock?’

‘Of course I did! And it’s a wonderful bit of folklore, a real corker.
Miss Treason and her clockwork heart! Might even become a myth, if I’m
lucky. They’ll remember Miss Treason for thousands of years!’

She is brilliant at stage-setting too. Her all-black cottage is thick
with cobwebs, though there are no spiders to be seen. The black candles
by the loom are set in two skulls, and dribble wax all down them; one
skull is carved with the Greek word for ‘guilt’, the other with the
Greek for ‘innocence’. This is the kind of thing people expect of her,
and it all helps to build her reputation. But the skulls hold a secret.
There is a label underneath, and it says:

Ghastly Skull No. 1 Price $2.99

The Boffo Novelty and Joke Shop

No. 4, Tenth Egg Street, Ankh-Morpork

“If it’s a Laugh … it’s a Boffo!”

The cobwebs also came from there, and Boffo does masks and warts and
green bubbling cauldrons too.

So, where is the difference between Miss Treason buying skulls from
Boffo’s catalogue and Mrs Earwig buying silver pendants and crystals at
Zakzak’s shop? The point is this. Mrs Earwig thinks that power _comes
from_ elaborate devices, and to think this is to misunderstand the whole
essence of the craft. But Miss Treason knows that you don’t need a wand
or a shamble or even a pointy hat to _be_ a witch, but that it helps a
witch if she puts on a show. Give people what they expect to see. It’s
all a form of ‘headology’, like the hat or Granny Weatherwax’s bottle of
coloured water. That way, you get respect.

Looking back on her life’s work as death approaches, Miss Treason muses:

‘Oh, my silly people. Anything they don’t understand is magic. They
think I can see into their hearts, but no witch can do that. Not without
surgery, at least. No magic is needed to read their little minds,
though. I’ve known them since they were babes … I see their lies and
excuses and fears. They never grow up, not really …’

‘I’m sure they’ll miss you,’ said Tiffany.

‘Ha! I’m the wicked ol’ witch, girl. They feared me, and did what they
were told! They feared joke skulls and silly stories. I chose fear. I
knew they’d never love me for telling ’em the truth, so I made certain
of their fear. No, they’ll be relieved to hear the witch is dead.’

As a Roman general said long ago, _Oderint dum metuant_ – ‘Let them hate
me, so long as they fear me.’

If you want to be remembered for generations in folk tradition, whether
as a hero, a saint, or a sage, a good death scene is vitally important.
Now, one of the minor benefits of being a witch is that you know, months
or even years in advance, exactly when you are going to die, so you can
stage-manage the event to perfection. (On Earth, legend says that
exceptionally holy people have this privilege too.) Having done all the
obvious things (cleaned the cottage, made a will, destroyed any
embarrassing old letters or spells still lying around), you can throw a
really good ‘going-away party’. This is like a wake, but with yourself
as guest of honour, still taking a keen interest. People, especially
other witches, come from miles around to enjoy the food (as Nanny Ogg
says, you cannot go wrong with a ham roll) and to let it be discreetly
known that they have always rather admired your brass candlesticks, or
your big carving-dish with the blue-and-gold border. It saves a great
deal of squabbling if you, the soon-to-be-late witch, can organize the
distribution of these little mementoes yourself.

And then, when everyone has gone home and there’s been a few hours of
peace and quiet, you just head for the garden, where some helpful
neighbour has dug a neat grave (in Miss Treason’s case, it was the Nac
Mac Feegles who did the job), climb down into it (watched by an awed but
appreciative audience of village folk), lie down carefully, and wait …
It is a fine thing to be able to organize your own Rite of Passage, and
Miss Treason pulls it off perfectly.

And she succeeds in her aim of turning herself into a myth. Within a few
weeks of her death, her grave was covered with scraps of paper pegged
down with sticks, each bearing a message:

_‘Miss Treason please keep my boy Joe save at see.’_

_‘Miss treason, I’m goin bald please help.’_

_‘Miss Treason, please find our girl Becky what run away I’m sorry.’_

Even though there was a new young witch dispensing justice – and quite
impressively too, in her own way – people still put their trust and
hopes in what they knew. They brought their small prayers to Miss
Treason’s grave, just as the shepherds of the Chalk left packets of
Jolly Sailor tobacco where Granny Aching’s old shepherding hut used to
stand:

They didn’t write their petitions down, but they were there, all the
same, floating in the air:

‘Granny Aching, who herds the clouds in the blue sky, please watch my
sheep. Granny Aching, cure my son. Granny Aching, find my lambs.’

And so a witch, or a shepherdess, can indeed turn into a myth – a local
saint – maybe even a goddess. It’s been known before, and it still goes
on, and not just on the Discworld. Go visit Biddy Early’s cottage.

⁹ Regrettably, some things don’t change. Terry recalls a case in the USA
some years ago when a somewhat New Age lady got a visit from her local
sheriff after a neighbour reported that she was ‘saying spells’ in her
garden. She’d been singing a Christian hymn – in Latin.

¹⁰ But in the languages of Earth it comes from the same Greek root as
‘epiphany’, meaning ‘revelation of god”.

[image]


Chapter 11


THE CHALK

 

THE LAND

THE REGION KNOWN to its people simply as ‘the Chalk’ lies on the Sto
Plains about fifty miles from Lancre. It is a land of gentle, rolling,
turf-covered hills with occasional patches of woodland, small villages
and scattered farmsteads. Above all, it is good land for sheep.

No other place on Discworld is so patently a thinly disguised part of
Earth. The Tiffany Aching/Wee Free Men books are, whatever other
splendid things they may be, a hymn to a time and a landscape. And here
it’s found as it was in the time of our great-grandfathers – open
country, unfenced, unploughed, turf-covered, a land fit for sheep.

Green downlands roll under the hot midsummer sun … the flocks of sheep,
moving slowly, drift over the short turf like clouds on a green sky.
Here and there sheepdogs speed over the turf like comets.

And then, as the eyes pull back, it is a long green mound, lying like a
great whale on the world … [_The Wee Free Men_]

In both worlds, these lands are full of memories of distant times:

Men had been everywhere on the Chalk. There were stone circles, half
fallen down, and burial mounds like green pimples where, it was said,
chieftains of the olden days had been buried with their treasure. No one
fancied digging into them to find out.

There were odd carvings in the chalk, too, which the shepherds sometimes
weeded when they were out on the downs with the flocks and there was not
a lot to do. The chalk was only a few inches under the turf. Hoofprints
could last a season, but the carvings had lasted for thousands of years.
They were pictures of horses and giants, but the strange thing was that
you couldn’t see them properly from anywhere on the ground. They looked
as if they’d been made for viewers in the sky.

The oldest and most magical of the carvings on the Chalk is the White
Horse, on a steep hillside at the head of a little valley (on Earth, the
place is called Uffington, in Berkshire, and it is on the north slopes
of the Berkshire Downs). It was cut out of the turf way back in the
earliest times, perhaps by the same folk who raised the stone circles
and buried their dead in the mounds, and for generation after generation
people have kept it clear of grass and weeds. It doesn’t look much like
a horse, not unless you look at it in the right way. It’s just lines –
long, flowing lines that don’t even join up – but, as Granny Aching told
Tiffany’s father when he was only a little boy, ‘’Tain’t what a horse
_looks_ like, it’s what a horse _be_.’ And if the Chalk has a guardian
spirit, this is it.

The landscape is full of stories. A hill near Tiffany’s home, for
instance:

There was a flat place at the top where nothing ever grew, and Tiffany
knew there was a story that a hero had once fought a dragon up there and
its blood had burned the ground where it fell. There was another story
that said there was a heap of treasure under the hill, _defended_ by the
dragon, and _another_ story that said a king was buried there in armour
of solid gold. There were lots of stories about the hill; it was
surprising it hadn’t sunk under the weight of them.

In our world, there is just such a Dragon Hill, with just such a flat,
bare top where a dragon’s blood was spilled – in that case, by St
George. It is at Uffington, alongside the White Horse. Elsewhere, on the
South Downs, there are many hills and burial mounds in which, according
to local tales, there are pots of gold, or dead men lying in their
golden armour.

Interesting things can be found in or on the Chalk. There are small
sharp flint arrowheads, made by men thousands of years before (on the
Discworld, though alas not on _our_ Chalk, shepherds still have the
skill of chipping flints into very sharp little knives, for their own
amusement; it is said that a good flint is sharper than a scalpel).
Occasionally, one can pick up a stone with a hole in it; these are
called ‘dobby stones’, just as they are in the Yorkshire Dales, and are
said to be lucky. Tiffany keeps one in her pocket, though she is unsure
what use it is; if she lived in Yorkshire, she would know you can hang
them at your door or window to keep evil spirits out, and over your bed
to prevent nightmares. She also keeps a fossilized sea urchin, which she
once used as part of a shamble; it is the sort which looks like a bun
with grooves on it making a five-pointed star, which on the Sussex Downs
is called a ‘shepherd’s crown’. It’s said that if you put them on the
kitchen windowsill they will keep thunderstorms away and prevent milk
from going sour.

THE SHEPHERDS’ LIFE

Iron-wheeled shepherding huts like the one Granny Aching used were once
common all along the South Downs, and indeed in other sheep-rearing
regions too. Shepherds lived in them at lambing time, when it was
essential to stay near the ewes day and night; they were also used at
other times of year, but less regularly. They were sturdy wooden
structures, warmed by a small stove, with a chair, a table, a simple
bunk bed, and plenty of shelves, boxes and hooks to hold the shepherd’s
gear – a horn lantern, crooks, shears, knives, a hay fork, a feeding
bottle for sickly lambs and a saucepan to warm the milk for them, tins
and bottles of sheep medicines, one or two spare sheep bells, and so on.
The huts would be set up close to the lambing-fold; farm horses could
draw them from place to place, if need be. The stove made the hut very
cosy indeed, though sheep tended to creep under it on cold nights, their
stomachs gurgling and rumbling till the dawn – but the shepherd would
probably snooze in his chair at busy times, and be too tired to notice.

To count their flocks, Discworld shepherds have special words and a
special way of reckoning, known only to them (and to the Nac Mac
Feegle). It begins with ‘yan tan tethera’ for ‘one two three’, and goes
up as far as ‘jiggit’ for twenty. There it stops. The same system was
used by English shepherds, and sometimes also by fishermen reckoning
their catch and women counting the stitches of their knitting. Bits of
it are still remembered by children when they are ‘counting out’ to
start a game. The names of the numbers vary a bit, but they are always
grouped in fives and make a kind of rhyme; for instance:

Yan, tan, tethera, pethera, pimp;

Sethera, lethera, hovera, dovera, dick;

Yaner-dick, taner-dick, tether-dick, pether-dick, bumfit;

Yaner-bumfit, taner-bumfit, tether-bumfit, pether-bumfit, jiggit.

Maybe one reason children have remembered this ditty is that some of the
words do sound a bit rude.

When he reached ‘jiggit’, the shepherd would cut a notch on a stick, or
put a stone in his pocket, and start over again. When all the sheep were
counted, he would reckon up his notches or stones; suppose there were
123 sheep, this would mean six notches, plus three extra beasts – ‘six
score sheep and three’.

It sounds cumbersome, but in fact comes easily to any creature that has
two hands, with five fingers on each hand. The idea of reckoning by
twenties has left traces on the English language even where the special
words are not used, as when a psalm says: ‘The days of our age are
threescore years and ten, and though men be so strong that they come to
fourscore years, yet is their strength but labour and sorrow.’ In French
too, the word for ‘eighty’, _quatrevingts_, means literally ‘four
twenties’. Come to that, in English currency there used to be twenty
shillings to the pound.

At lambing time, shepherds are extremely busy, too busy to come down off
the hills. And so they are at sheep-dipping time, sheep-washing time,
sheep-shearing time, and in the run-up to sheep fairs. This rather gets
in the way of regular religion, and may cause offence to some of the
more touchy gods, who dislike being neglected. To make sure there were
no unwelcome consequences in the afterlife, precautions were taken at
the funerals of Discworld shepherds:

Granny Aching had been wrapped in a woollen blanket, with a tuft of raw
wool pinned to it. That was a special shepherd thing. It was there to
tell any gods who might get involved that the person being buried there
was a shepherd, and spent a lot of time on the hills, and what with
lambing and one thing and another couldn’t always take much time out for
religion, there being no churches or temples up there, and so it was
generally hoped that the gods would understand and look kindly on them.
[_The Wee Free Men_]

This was done on Earth, too: in some villages of the South Downs up to
the 1930s shepherds were buried with a lock of wool in their hands, so
that at the Last Judgement they could prove what their work had been,
and why they had so often missed church on Sundays. Occasionally, a
crook, shears and a sheep-bell were also put in the coffin. It all added
up to the same thing: a hope and also perhaps a belief that one Good
Shepherd would recognize another.

Granny Aching’s grave was dug on the hill, alongside her hut, and after
the funeral there was an additional and very unusual ceremony – the hut
was burned. There wasn’t any shepherd, anywhere on the Chalk, who would
use it after her. This was a mark of respect, almost unparalleled on
Earth, where only Gypsies would think of making such a gesture.

THE WATCHING OF THE DEAD

A newly dead corpse must be carefully prepared, watched over, protected
– and treated with caution, for it might become dangerous.

People died. It was sad, but they did. What did you do next? People
expected the local witch to know. So you washed the body and did a few
secret and squelchy things and dressed them in their best clothes and
laid them out with bowls of earth and salt beside them (no one knew why
you did this bit, but it had always been done) and you put two pennies
on their eyes ‘for the ferryman’ and you sat with them the night before
they were buried, because they shouldn’t be left alone.

Exactly why was never properly explained, although everyone had been
told the story of the old man who was slightly less dead than everyone
thought and rose up off the spare bed in the middle of the night and got
back into bed with his wife. [_Wintersmith_]

Things were done in much the same way on Earth, in the days when people
died at home (not in a hospital) and were laid out at home (not in an
undertaker’s parlour). Laying out the corpse was both a practical
necessity and a social duty; it was a woman’s task, and was often done
by the local midwife. It involved washing the body, plugging its
orifices, and closing the eyes and mouth – and ensuring that they
remained closed, by laying a penny on each eye, and tying up the jaws
with a bandage under the chin which was knotted on top of the head. A
man would be shaved, a woman would have her hair braided. Then the body
would either be dressed in good clothes or wrapped tightly in a
winding-sheet, with its legs straightened and tied at the ankles and its
arms crossed over the chest. The face would not be covered. That way,
everything looked clean and decent when family and neighbours came to
‘view the body’ before it was coffined.

These actions were not just practical. Washing the body could be seen as
a purification which echoes baptism, like the Catholic custom of
sprinkling a corpse with holy water; a Suffolk woman who used to lay out
the dead told the social historian Ruth Richardson in 1980 that ‘the
washing is so you’re spotless to meet the Lamb of God’.

The pennies had once had a mythical meaning too. In England in the
seventeenth century, the antiquarian John Aubrey reported that some
old-fashioned people still put a coin in the mouth of the dead ‘to give
to St Peter’ at the gates of Heaven. Way back in Ancient Greek and Roman
times people used to put a coin into the dead person’s mouth ‘to pay the
ferryman’; his name was Charon, and he would row the dead across the
river Styx, which was the boundary of the Underworld. And so too in the
Discworld there is also (sometimes) a Styx to be crossed, and a cowled
ferryman to be paid.

‘I have the money,’ Roland repeated. ‘Two pennies is the rate to cross
the River of the Dead. It’s an old tradition. Two pennies to put on the
eyes of the dead, to pay the ferryman.’ [_Wintersmith_]

Nobody had given Tiffany any explanation for the bowls of salt and earth
which she had to set down beside the corpse. In many countries on Earth
the same thing was done, and various reasons were offered. The most
common was that it prevents the body swelling – which might well work,
if the dishes were heavy enough and were laid actually on the chest or
belly, as they generally were. As one Welsh woman said, ‘There’s no
weight so heavy as salt gets when it is on the dead.’ Other people gave
a religious explanation. In Highland Scotland in the mid eighteenth
century, people said the earth was an emblem of the corruptible body,
and the salt of the immortal spirit. In nineteenth-century Sussex, they
said that to sprinkle a good handful of salt over the body would prevent
the Devil flying away with it. It is common for salt to be used in
religion and magic to drive away evil spirits; this may be because it
resists decay – salted meat and fish last much longer. (Western people
now, who worry that too much salt is bad for one’s health, might find it
hard to believe how important the getting and keeping of salt was to
their ancestors.)

The unspoken reason behind much of the ritual, on the Disc and on Earth
too, is the need to prevent any demons who might be around from getting
at the corpse before it is safely buried, and to stop the corpse itself
from reviving as a malevolent zombie or vampire. So the dead must never
be left alone; someone should sit with them, night and day, and there
must always be candles or lamps burning. These keep the evil spirits and
ghosts away, and light up the deceased’s journey to the otherworld. And
they keep the watcher safe.

Because sitting up with the dead is – well, just a little strange.
Sometimes the body makes little noises in the night, or moves just a
bit, and you have to remind yourself firmly that it’s simply because
it’s cooling down. And there are so many stories of worse things.
Suppose the candle goes out, and the corpse sits up, saying, ‘Isn’t it
fun in the dark?’ They say that happened once in Iceland; luckily the
watcher was a strong man, who flung himself on the corpse, forced it on
to its back, and held it down till daybreak. Or suppose the Devil gets
into the house and tries to carry off the body? Or suppose that, as
Petunia tells Tiffany, a thousand vampire demons arrive, each with
enormous teeth? (Never chronicled, as far as we know.)

All things considered, it’s not surprising that in many parts of the
multiverse people prefer to do their corpse-watching in groups and make
a proper wake of it, with cards, tobacco, and a nip of whisky to get
them through the night. And a prayer or two doesn’t come amiss.

AN INCURSION OF MONSTERS

All regions of the Discworld are at risk of invasion by predatory races
from elsewhere in the multiverse, since one universe quite often
collides with another. When this happens, the roaming predators may well
find some weak or ‘thin’ place, where people are off their guard, and
where they can open a door between the worlds. In the case of the Chalk,
as we learn from _The Wee Free Men_, it is the Queen of the Fairies who
finds a way through from her own small and icy world, where nothing
grows and no sun shines, and everything has to be stolen from elsewhere.
And with her come the monsters.

‘D’you know what’ll be turning up?’ asked Miss Tick. ‘All the things
they locked away in those old stories. All those reasons why you
shouldn’t stray off the path, or open the forbidden door, or say the
wrong word, or spill salt. All the stories that give children
nightmares. All the monsters from under the biggest bed in the world.’

The first to arrive is Jenny Greenteeth, erupting out of a shallow
stream, and trying to snatch Tiffany’s little brother. She has long
skinny arms, a thin face with long sharp teeth, huge eyes, and dripping
green hair like waterweed. She is, as Miss Tick explains, nothing more
than a Grade One Prohibitory Monster – that is to say, a creature
deliberately invented by adults to scare children away from dangerous
places. But though the adults don’t believe they’re real, the children
do, and so they _become_ real. (This also happens in Ankh-Morpork, as we
shall see later.)

On Earth too, adults have invented many Prohibitory Monsters (also
called Nursery Bogeys), including a Jenny or Ginny Greenteeth who lurks
in deep pools of stagnant water, hiding under the duckweed. She was well
known in Lancashire, Cheshire and Shropshire. Even in the 1980s, elderly
people remembered being warned against her as children. In his _Plant
Lore_ (1995) the botanist and folklorist Roy Vickery records what one
Merseyside woman told him:

‘As I recall, Ginny only lived in ponds which were covered in a green
weed of the type that has tiny leaves, and covers the entire surface of
the pond. The theory was that Ginny enticed little children into the
pools by making them look like grass and safe to walk upon. As soon as
the child stepped on to the green, it of course parted, and the child
fell through into Ginny’s clutches and drowned. The green weed then
closed over, hiding all traces of the child ever having been there. This
last point was the one which really terrified me and kept me well away
from ponds. As far as I know Ginny had no known form, due to the fact
that she never appeared above the surface of the pond.’

But another Merseyside woman knew exactly what the Jenny Greenteeth who
inhabited two pools in Fazakerley looked like: ‘pale green skin, green
teeth, very long green locks of hair, long green fingers with long
nails, and she was very thin with a pointed chin and very big eyes’.
Jenny was not the only creature of this species in England. In Leicester
there was a Polly Long Arms hiding in the green murky water of the
canal, waiting to drag in any child that came near the edge.

The next menacing creature to arrive in the Chalk country is a dark
rider, a horseman who has no face – since he has no head to hang a face
on. Now, ghosts that appear as headless horsemen are quite common in the
Earthly world, but this creature might be something worse than a mere
ghost. Especially as it _breathes_ through the windpipe it hasn’t got,
making a wheezy whistling noise which one really would rather not be
hearing. Earthbound headless horsemen tend to be more spectral.

Later, the Queen sends three of her grimhounds – big heavy-built black
dogs with orange eyebrows, eyes of red fire, and teeth like razor
blades. They are said to haunt churchyards. This would imply a
connection with the Church Grim, a sinister animal which, according to
Earthly tradition, patrols graveyards and is an omen of death for anyone
who sees it. In Britain the Grim is a Black Dog; in Scandinavia, there
are also Grims which are lame grey horses, three-legged lambs or black
pigs. They are said to be the ghosts of real animals deliberately killed
when a churchyard was established and buried on the north side, to be
its guardian. If this wasn’t done, people thought that the first person
buried there would not enter Heaven but would have to remain on duty as
a ghostly sentinel till the end of the world.

Most of the Black Dogs of our world are grim creatures, in nature if not
in name; some are ghosts (of humans or of dogs), but the majority are
demons and devils in animal form. Indeed, the Black Dog or Hell Hound is
a universally recognized image of evil in European and American
folklore. They are generally large, shaggy creatures with huge fiery
eyes (unless they happen to be headless); they may wear collars of
flame, or drag heavy clanking chains. However, their eyebrows are never
mentioned. Only in the folklore of Estonia is it said that a dog (a real
flesh-and-blood one, not a demon) which has patches of different colour
on its eyebrows has ‘four eyes’, and can detect and attack beings that
are invisible to humans. This would appear to be a good thing.
Nevertheless, the principle ‘Never trust a dog with orange eyebrows’,
discovered on the Discworld, is so self-evidently true and useful that
it will surely spread.

FOUND IN A FISH

And then there was that odd business with the fish, as told in
_Wintersmith_. You would really think that if someone drops or throws
into deep water something small but too heavy to float (a ring, say, or
a key), that’s the last he or she will ever see of it.

In fact you probably wouldn’t, depending on your childhood reading. You
might already know that a powerful narrative drive decrees that it will
be swallowed by a fish, and one day that fish will be caught, and when
it’s being gutted something glittery will be found in its belly, and
will be brought to the very person who lost it in the first place. Which
is precisely how Tiffany’s precious silver horse pendant returned to
her, although she had thrown it into a river.

Here on Earth, such things have been happening, off and on, for many
centuries. Polycrates, who ruled in Samos some two-and-a-half thousand
years ago, was so rich and had such constant good luck that they say a
friend warned him that the gods would soon be jealous, and advised him
to create some deliberate bad luck by losing something he really valued.
So Polycrates took a magnificent seal-ring, the finest of his jewels,
and threw it into the sea. But a few days later someone sent a beautiful
big fish as a gift for the king’s table, and in its belly … It was not
long before Polycrates was treacherously captured and killed.

Or again, in Ireland in St Patrick’s time, there was a robber called
Macaldus who tried to trick the saint and make a fool of him, but then
repented, and promised to do whatever penance was fitting. St Patrick
wrapped a chain round him and padlocked it and threw the key in a river,
and then set Macaldus adrift in a small boat, telling him to go wherever
God sent him, and to wear the chain until the key was returned to him.
The boat floated out to sea, and finally came to the Isle of Man, where
Macaldus was taken into the Bishop’s household and led a holy life. One
day the Bishop’s cook was puzzled to find a key inside a fish he was
cleaning … so Macaldus was able to take the chain off. He eventually
became Bishop of Man himself, and is reckoned to be a saint. There was
also St Egwin, founder of Evesham Abbey and Bishop of Worcester from 692
till his death in 711. Falsely accused of crimes, he put fetters on his
legs, threw the key into the Avon, and set off on pilgrimage to Rome to
convince the Pope of his innocence. And there, in the market, he
happened to buy a fish … The Pope duly cleared him of all charges and
restored him to his diocese.

It is particularly striking that the fish which swallowed Tiffany’s
pendant should be a pike, for in the Yorkshire town of Pickering people
say it got its name because Pendirus, a legendary king of the Britons
who is alleged to have reigned there about 270 BC, lost his _ring_ while
bathing in the river Costa, but later recovered it from the belly of a
_pike_. Everyone knows pikes will swallow just about anything. So will
some people. Nevertheless, there is a comfort in these stories, even for
the godless. They suggest a kind of cosmic rightness. And they still
turn up, every few years.

PS: An odd thing happened to Terry once. He bought a ring in a small
shop in Pike Place Market, Seattle. It was slightly over-sized and he
soon lost it, and couldn’t find it anywhere. A year later he was back in
the city, went to the same shop to buy a replacement, and in reaching
into his jacket pocket (a jacket which, of course, he’d worn many times
during the year) for some loose change, he put a finger through the very
same ring. How could it have been otherwise? Rings try to find their way
back to their owner. Someone ought to write a book about it.

THE DANCE OF WINTER AND SUMMER

It has long been believed, and may very well be true, that the whole
multiverse moves in one perpetual dance, though almost all its motions
are either too swift or too slow for the human mind to grasp. Whirling
electrons, wheeling galaxies, cycles of time, cycles of energy, the
pulsations of the blood, angels in the skies or on the head of a pin –
all make patterns in the cosmic dance. This is not a matter of couples
moving independently (like a waltz), nor of a group simply dancing
hand-in-hand in a ring; it involves complicated figures in which dancers
change places and partners, advance and retreat, meet and part and meet
again.

Many poets have written about this. Sir John Davies in his _Orchestra_
(1596) declared that everything in heaven and earth dances:

Kind nature first doth cause all things to love,

Love makes them dance, and in just order move.

And so the sun dances with the earth, flowers with the wind, the tides
with the moon:

And lo the sea, that fleets about the land
And like a girdle clips her solid waist,

Music and measure both doth understand;

For his great crystal eye is ever cast

Up to the moon and on her fixèd fast.

And as she danceth in her pallid sphere,

So danceth he about his centre here.

In John Milton’s _Comus_ (1637), a magician boasts that by dancing while
others sleep, he and his companions are echoing the dance of time and
nature:

We that are of purer fire

Imitate the starry choir,

Who, in their nightly watchful spheres

Lead in swift round the months and years.

Oceans and seas, with all their finny drove,

Now to the moon in wavering morrice move …

Others too have sensed that the Morris has a particular affinity with
the cycles of nature. T. S. Eliot wrote in _East Coker_ (1940) of
glimpsing ghostly Morris Men round a bonfire on a summer midnight, with
their ‘music of the weak pipe and the little drum’,

Keeping time,

Keeping the rhythm in their dancing

As in their living in the living seasons

The time of the seasons and the constellations

The time of milking and the time of harvest

The time of the coupling of man and woman

And that of beasts. Feet rising and falling.

Eating and drinking. Dung and death.

In _Wintersmith_ we learn more about the Dark Morris, first brought to
our attention in _Reaper Man_, when Tiffany is taken one icy midnight to
a clearing in a leafless wood, where six men, their faces blacked and
wearing black clothes, dance to the powerful beat of a silent drum,
while shadowy forms look on. She already knows the white-clad Morris
teams that dance on the village green to bring Summer in, but what is
this? Unable to resist the beat, she runs forward and jumps into the
dance, weaving to and fro in the space where a team’s Fool should go,
and becoming aware for a few seconds that someone other than human is
dancing with her.

What she has seen is part of the never-ending Dance of the Seasons, in
which the Wintersmith and the Summer Lady meet and change places in
spring and autumn. Explaining this, Miss Treason shows her a picture in
_Chaffinch’s Ancient and Classical Mythology_ of a tall, blonde,
beautiful Summer, carrying a cornucopia and dancing with old grey
Winter, who has icicles in his beard.

‘The year is round! The wheel of the world must spin! That is why up
here they dance the Dark Morris, to balance it. They welcome the winter
because of the new summer deep inside it!’

The spring and autumn Morris dances are a way of marking the moment when
the season of ice and the season of fire meet briefly to exchange their
dominion over the world. In our world, other ways have been found of
bringing Summer in – a young man dressed in leaves and flowers fights
and defeats an older man dressed in furs; girls carry an ugly straw
figure called Winter or Death out of the village, tear it to bits or
throw it into a river, and come back carrying leafy branches; people
bring in the maypole. Frazer’s _The Golden Bough_ has much to say about
all this. At the other end of the year, the secrets are better kept, yet
even so one can guess that in the season of bonfires and fireworks, nuts
and apples, beer, beef, and new wine, there is an underlying celebration
that Winter is taking over the power that is rightfully his – for a
while. And at midwinter, there is guising, feasting, mummers’ plays, and
yes, Morris dancing again. The wheel spins.

But Tiffany has made a serious mistake by entering the dance herself.
She has taken the place of the Summer Lady, attracting the attention of
the Wintersmith, and now is trapped in her role. She is turning into a
goddess, or at least an avatar, or an anthropomorphic personification.

The first symptom is that she develops ‘Fertile Feet’ – wherever she
treads with bare feet, flowers spring up. Even the floorboards in Nanny
Ogg’s cottage, being wood, start sprouting leaves. Much the same thing
happened to Prince Teppic of Djelibeybi as soon as the spirit of his
father, a recently deceased pharaoh, entered into him, as is told in
_Pyramids_. Even on the cobbled streets of Ankh-Morpork grass appeared
where he put his feet, and in the bakers’ shops loaves cracked open and
grew wheat.

On Earth too, avatars of Spring or Summer are, very understandably,
credited with the gift of Fertile Feet. In the medieval Welsh tale of
‘Culhwch and Olwen’ in the _Mabinogion_, it is said of the lovely young
heroine that ‘four white trefoils sprang up behind her wherever she
went, and for that reason was she called Olwen’ – which means ‘white
track’. The Italian painter Botticelli represents Primavera (Spring) as
a beautiful woman walking across a flower-filled glade, throwing down
more flowers as she goes, which is the closest a painter can get to the
idea that they spring up as she passes. And then there are four famous
lines from a poem written by Alexander Pope in 1704, when he was only
sixteen:

Where’er you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade;

Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade;

Where’er you tread, the blushing flowers shall rise,

And all things flourish where you turn your eyes.

The poem is one of a set of four seasonal love-poems, and is entitled
‘Summer’. These particular lines are so famous because Handel set them
to music in his opera _Semele_, as a song addressed by the god Jupiter
to the human girl he loves. They are so appropriate to Tiffany’s
situation that they cross over into the Discworld and into the mind of
the schoolmistressy witch, Miss Tick:

‘The myth of the Summer Lady says that flowers grow wherever she walks,’
said Granny Weatherwax.

‘_Where e’er_,’ said Miss Tick primly.

‘What?’ snapped Granny, who was now pacing up and down in front of the
fire.

‘It’s where e’er she walks, in fact,’ said Miss Tick. ‘It’s more …
poetical.’

‘Hah,’ Granny said. ‘Poetry!’ [_Wintersmith_]

The next sign of Tiffany’s new status is that a Cornucopia (aka Horn of
Plenty) crash-lands in the garden. It is a curly shell-like object, of
magically variable size, containing every kind of fruit, vegetable and
grain – in fact, it turns out, anything and everything one can eat or
drink. These things it produces on request, in lavish quantities. It is
a definitely mythological object:

‘According to Chaffinch,’ [Tiffany] said, with the _Mythology_ open on
her lap … , ‘the god Blind Io created the Cornucopia from a horn of the
magical goat Almeg to feed his two children by the Goddess Bisonomy, who
was later turned into a shower of oysters by Epidity, god of things
shaped like potatoes, after insulting Resonata, goddess of weasels, by
throwing a mole at her shadow. It is now the badge of office of the
Summer Goddess.’

The corresponding myth in Ancient Greece is not _quite_ so complicated.
As a baby, the god Zeus had to be hidden from his murderous father in a
cave in Crete, where he fed on the milk of a nanny-goat called Amalthea
(unless this was the name of the nymph who owned her). Later, when he
became ruler of the gods, he showed his gratitude by placing the goat
among the stars as the constellation Capricorn. But first he broke off
one of her horns; it became the Cornucopia, which supplies whatever food
or drink one desires. This horn later belonged to Demeter, also called
Ceres, goddess of the harvest, and was sometimes carried by Flora, the
flower goddess, who scattered corn and wine and fruit and flowers from
it. Painters and sculptors are very fond of it, it’s such a pretty
shape.

Tiffany struggles to cope with these rather embarrassing attributes, and
the even more embarrassing compliments lavished on her by the
Wintersmith. But where, meanwhile, is the real Summer Lady? It turns out
that, like many a goddess before her, she is trapped in the Underworld,
powerless to return. Without her presence, the Disc will suffer
permanent and catastrophic discal cooling, with incalculable
environmental repercussions. It is, in short, time for a Hero and a
Descent into the Underworld.

This Descent is one of the most powerful stories in the multiverse. On
Earth, for example, it can be found in one form or another in at least a
dozen mythologies from ancient Babylonia onwards. Sometimes it is a god
or goddess who descends, sometimes a human. Sometimes the purpose is to
gain foreknowledge by questioning the dead; sometimes it is to learn the
secret of immortality, or to carry off a magical object; but most often,
it is to rescue a captive. There have been missions that were entirely
successful, as when Odysseus went down to consult the dead seer Tiresias
or when Herakles (Hercules) brought Queen Alkmene back from the dead;
and others that failed, most famously when Orpheus lost his beloved
Eurydice when they had very nearly reached the land of the living,
because he looked back at her.

And some myths tell of partial successes – and these, curiously, are
linked to the cycle of the seasons, just like the rescue of the Disc’s
Summer Lady. The oldest comes from ancient Sumeria, about 2000 BC, and
tells how the great goddess Ishtar went into the Underworld,

To the Land of No Return, the realm of Ereshkigal,

To the house which none leaves who has entered it,

To the road from which there is no way back,

To the house wherein the entrants are bereft of life,

Where dust is their fare and clay their food,

Where they see no light, residing in darkness,

Where they are clothed like birds, with wings for garments,

And where over door and bolt is spread dust.

[_Ishtar’s Descent_, transl. John Gray]

She was seeking her human lover Tammuz, who had apparently been
kidnapped by Ereshkigal, Queen of the Underworld, and was now among the
dead. Ishtar fought Ereshkigal, but was defeated, tortured, and held
captive in a corpse-like condition. Without her, there was nothing but
famine and sterility on earth, so the High Gods forced Ereshkigal to
sprinkle Ishtar with the water of life and let her go free. Tammuz too
was revived and freed, but not entirely; every year he died again during
the long sterile drought season, and the people wept for him. But then,
with the coming of the rains, he returned to life.

Similarly in Classical Greece and Rome, myths told how Demeter (Ceres),
the goddess of fertile crops and harvest, was distraught with grief when
her daughter Persephone (Proserpina) was kidnapped. Neglecting her
divine duties, Demeter went searching everywhere for Persephone, until
she found her girdle floating in a pool near a great crevice which was
known to be an entrance to the Underworld. This remarkably fortuitous
clue proved that it was Hades (Pluto), god of death, who had carried her
off. Demeter did not descend into the Underworld herself, but appealed
to Zeus for justice. Zeus knew that without Demeter’s care all crops
would fail, so he decreed that Persephone could return to earth,
provided she had eaten nothing while in the realm of Hades. But, alas,
she had eaten – a mere trifle, just six pomegranate seeds – but because
of this Zeus ruled that she must spend six months of the year in the
Underworld, though she could come back to earth for the other six. Which
is why there are six months of summer and six of winter.

‘They are ancient stories. They have a life of their own. They long to
be repeated. Summer rescued from a cave? Very old,’ said Granny
Weatherwax.

So Tiffany’s friend Roland de Chumsfanleigh (pronounced Chuffley) makes
the Descent, accompanied by Feegles, and passes through a cave into a
gloomy land of shadows and mindless people whose memories have been
stolen by bogles. There is a dark river and a dark ferryman who as we
have seen has to be paid with two pennies from the eyes of the dead,
just as in Earthly myth there is the river Styx and Charon the ferryman
who takes coins from the mouths of the dead. And then:

There was a big pile of bones on the path. They were certainly animal
bones, and the rotting collars and lengths of rusted chain were another
clue.

‘Three big dogs?’ said Roland.

‘One verrae big dog wi’ three heids,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Verrae popular
in underworlds, that breed. Can bite right through a man’s throat. Three
times!’ he added, with relish. ‘But put three doggy biscuits in a row on
the groound and the puir wee thing sits there strainin’ and whinin’ all
day. It’s a wee laff, I’m tellin’ ye!’

In the classical myths of Earth, the representative of this three-headed
breed is called Cerberus. It is his task to guard the entrance of the
Underworld so that no one alive may enter, nor may any of the dead
escape – but his attention can be distracted by throwing him soft cakes
sweetened with honey (and, preferably, also laced with poppy juice). He
was also once lulled by the music of Orpheus, and once he was
overwhelmed by the physical strength of Herakles. But mostly he is just
sitting there, on guard.

Despite all perils, Roland brings the Summer Lady back to the upper
world, and Tiffany finds a way to dismiss the Wintersmith. The Dance of
the Seasons resumes, in which Summer and Winter must each die and sleep
and wake again, year after year. No one should meddle with it.

‘Here is the heart of the summer,’ hissed the voice of the Summer Lady.
‘Fear me as much as the wintersmith. We are not yours, though you give
us shapes and names. Fire and ice we are, in balance. Do not come
between us again …’

[image]


Chapter 12


HEROES!

 

WE’RE NOT TALKING about small-h heroes, here. Given a smidgeon of
courage and a suitable crisis, practically anybody could turn out to be
a small-h hero. But a capital-h Hero is a star in the firmament of myth
and legend, a precious asset to any bard or storyteller who happens to
meet him. People hoping for a quiet life are less enthusiastic, since a
considerable amount of mayhem erupts wherever a Hero passes, even one
who is seeking justice rather than, say, the green eye of the little
yellow god.

Heroes come in two main types: the Heir to the Kingdom, and the
Barbarian. Both are recognizable by certain signs, well known to anyone
who knows anything about folklore and the power of narrativium, and
abound in the semi-historical legends of many nations. Less common is
the First (or Culture) Hero, found on the Discworld and in certain
Earthly mythologies. Yet since he is the most ancient of the three, it
is only right to begin with him.

THE FIRST HERO

In the myths and folklore of some lands there are tales of a First Hero
who walked the earth at the dawn of time, bringing mankind essential
gifts and skills without which society could not survive. Such a hero is
more than human, but he is not a god; indeed, he may be acting in
defiance of gods who wish to keep men helpless and ignorant. In one way
he is the opposite of the Barbarian Hero, since he brings civilization,
not mere pillage and carnage; some therefore call him the Culture Hero.
His courage is the courage of endurance.

On the Disc, the First Hero’s name is Mazda – a remarkable coincidence,
since on Earth there is a morally admirable deity called Mazda who is
the god of light, truth, and justice in Zoroastrianism, the ancient
religion of Persia (Iran). He is the Power of Good, locked in combat
with the evil Ahriman, whom he will defeat at the Last Day. The
Discworld’s Mazda is not so exalted, but he too worked for good, and
suffered for it. Of course, much depends on the point of view, since an
unsympathetic mind would say that what he did was theft. He stole fire
from the gods.

‘I thought I’d start off with the legend of how Mazda stole fire for
mankind in the first place,’ said the minstrel.

‘Nice,’ said Cohen.

‘And then a few verses about what the gods did to him.’

‘Did to him? Did to him?’ said Cohen. ‘They made him immortal!’

‘Er … yes. In a _way_, I suppose.’

‘What do you mean, “in a way”?’

‘It’s classical mythology, Cohen,’ said the minstrel. ‘I thought
everyone knew. He was chained to a rock for eternity and every day an
eagle comes and pecks out his liver.’

‘I’m not much of a reader,’ said Cohen. ‘Chained to a rock? For a first
offence? He’s still there?’

‘Eternity isn’t finished yet, Cohen.’

‘He must’ve had a big liver!’

‘It grows again every night, according to legend,’ said the minstrel.

Cohen stared at the distant clouds that hid the snowy top of the
mountain. ‘He brought fire to everyone, and the gods did that to him,
eh? Well … we’ll have to see about that.’ [_The Last Hero_]

This is indeed, as the minstrel says, a classical myth. In Ancient
Greece, it was the story of Prometheus, the benefactor of mankind –
maybe even the creator of mankind, for some old writers claimed that he
formed the bodies of the first men and women from water and clay, after
which the goddess Athene breathed life into them. Whether that is true
or not, all agree that he brought them civilization, teaching them the
skills he had himself learned from Athene – metal-working, building,
mathematics, astronomy, medicine – to the great anger of Zeus, who had
intended them to remain ignorant. And then, to cap it all, Prometheus
stole fire from the gods. He lit a torch from the chariot of the sun,
broke off a smouldering ember, hid it in a hollow stalk of fennel, and
so carried it down to the earth as a gift to humanity.

Furious, Zeus had Prometheus stripped naked and chained to a rock in the
Caucasian mountains. Every day at dawn a monstrous bird, part griffin
and part vulture, would fly down and tear his body open, pecking out and
eating his liver; every night, as he lay freezing, his liver would grow
again, ready for the dawn. Yet he knew he would be released one day. And
so it was. When Prometheus had spent a thousand years fettered to the
rock (or, some say, ten thousand), Herakles, a hero of the wild and
monster-slaying type, persuaded Zeus to let him shoot the
griffin-vulture through the heart and set Prometheus free. The Barbarian
Hero came to the rescue of the Culture Hero, on Earth as on the Disc.

THE ROYAL HEIR

The people of Ankh-Morpork know all about heirs who arrive incognito to
claim their rightful kingdom and turn out to be ideal rulers, brave,
wise and just:

The throne had been empty for more than two thousand years, since the
death of the last of the line of the kings of Ankh. Legend said that one
day the city would have a king again, and went on with various comments
about magic swords, strawberry birthmarks, and all the other things that
legends gabble on about in these circumstances. [_Sourcery_]

What is more, pretty well all of them know the rumour that such an heir
is currently living in the city, as a mere watchman. And they can put a
name to him: Captain Carrot Ironfoundersson (a conspiracy to groom Nobby
Nobbs for the role failed utterly). In fact, the only person who _seems_
unaware of the rumour is Carrot himself. He is a foundling; he has a
strong sword, well-used, though quite unmagical and lacking any
mysterious inscriptions; he has an oddly shaped birthmark, rather like a
crown. But _still_ he resists the pressures of narrativium, and goes
around ignoring his manifest destiny in a most irritating manner.

Perhaps there have been Carrots on Earth, but if so, their strategy has
been so successful that nobody has ever heard of them. In that universe,
the nearest thing to Carrot’s attitude is the naïve simplicity of the
teenage Arthur. As is well known, he had no idea he was a dead king’s
son, and was simply acting as squire to his elder foster-brother Sir
Kay. Kay needed a replacement sword to use in a tournament, and sent
Arthur to find one. Arthur wandered off into a churchyard, where he
noticed something which he thought would come in useful. As Malory
writes in his _Morte D’Arthur_:

there was seen in the churchyard … a great stone four square, like unto
a marble stone, and in the midst thereof was like an anvil of steel a
foot on high, and therein stuck a fair sword naked by the point, and
letters there were written in gold about the sword that said thus:–
Whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil, is rightwise king
born of all England.

Without bothering to read the inscription, Arthur casually pulled the
sword out and took it to Kay. When people realized where it had come
from, and also that when it was put back nobody but Arthur could get it
to move at all, he was acknowledged to be the Long-Lost Heir.

One might easily assume that this was the famed Excalibur which Arthur
always bore in battle, but Malory says not – according to his account,
the sword drawn from the stone was broken two or three years later in a
duel between Arthur and Pellinore, but Merlin promised to find him
another:

So they rode till they came to a lake, the which was a fair water and
broad, and in the midst of the lake Arthur was ’ware of an arm clothed
in white samite, that held a fair sword in that hand. Lo! said Merlin,
yonder is that sword that I spake of. With that they saw a damosel going
upon the lake. What damosel is that? said Arthur. That is the Lady of
the Lake, said Merlin … speak ye fair to her that she will give you that
sword … And so they went into the ship, and when they came to the sword
that the hand held, Sir Arthur took it up by the handles, and took it
with him, and the arm and the hand went under the water.

_This_ is the true Excalibur, the one which the dying Arthur ordered Sir
Bedivere to throw into a lake:

Then Sir Bedivere [took up the sword and] went to the water side; and
there he bound the girdle about the hilts, and then he threw the sword
as far into the water as he might; and there came an arm and an hand
above the water and met it, and caught it, and so shook it thrice and
brandished, and then vanished away the hand with the sword in the water.

Whether King Arthur ever really died is a mystery. True, there was a
tomb for him in the medieval Glastonbury Abbey, but it was a fake, and
rumours abounded. As Malory wrote:

Some men say in many parts of England that King Arthur is not dead, but
had by the will of Our Lord Jesu into another place, and men say that he
shall come again, and he shall win the Holy Cross. I will not say it
shall be so, but rather I will say, here in this world he changed his
life. But many men say that there is written upon his tomb this verse:
_Hic jacet Arthurus, Rex quondam Rexque futurus_[‘Here lies Arthur,
former King and future King’].

This is no longer the tale of a Lost Heir. This is a Hero of another
sort: the Sleeping King under the Mountain, the King who will come back
from ‘another place’ to save his people and achieve heroic feats – a
tale we have met already in Lancre and elsewhere. It is a powerful
narrative pattern, widely scattered through the multiverse as a
consolation and a source of inspiration and hope.

THE BARBARIAN HERO

There was no mistaking that shape. The wide chest, the neck like a tree
trunk, the surprisingly small head under its wild thatch of black hair
looking like a tomato on a coffin … Hrun was one of the Discworld’s more
durable heroes: a fighter of dragons, a despoiler of temples, a hired
sword, the kingpost of every street brawl. He could even speak words of
more than two syllables, given time and maybe a hint or two. [_The
Colour of Magic_]

Hrun dresses only in a leopard-skin loincloth and numerous gold
arm-bands and anklets. It goes without saying that he is totally
fearless and unimaginative, while being at the same time as alert to any
danger as a cat and as lithe as a panther. His life is one long string
of adventures, which don’t surprise him in the least:

‘Oh,’ said Hrun, ‘I expect in a minute this dungeon door will be flung
back and I’ll be dragged off to some sort of temple arena where I’ll
fight maybe a couple of giant spiders and an eight-foot slave from the
jungles of Klatch and then I’ll rescue some kind of princess from the
altar and then kill off a few guards or whatever and then this girl will
show me a secret passage out of the palace and we’ll liberate a couple
of horses and escape with the treasure.’

Hrun leaned back on his hands and looked up at the ceiling, whistling
tunelessly.

‘All that?’ said Twoflower.

‘Usually.’

Earth too knows heroes of this type, notably Conan the Barbarian from
Cimmeria, whose many adventures as pirate, mercenary, and eventual
war-lord and emperor were chronicled in America in the 1930s by the
fantasy writer Robert E. Howard and others. An admirer wrote: ‘Conan is
a true hero of Valhalla, battling and suffering great wounds by day,
carousing and wenching by night, and plunging into fresh adventures
tomorrow.’ Besides ordinary human enemies, he is forever attacking, or
being attacked by, evil lords, sorcerers, witch-queens, magical
monsters, dark gods. An indestructible stone toad-thing as bulky as a
buffalo, with seven green-glowing eyes, crouching on an altar in a
temple of lustreless black stone whose geometry obeys no human laws, is
just the kind of thing he _would_ meet. He always wins.

A Barbarian Hero, like his Kingly counterpart, often possesses a
remarkable sword. Hrun’s is called Kring, and he stole it from the
impregnable palace of the Archimandrite of B’Ituni. It is forged from
black meteoric iron, with highly ornate runes on the blade and rubies on
the pommel. Not only does Kring have a name of its own, it has a soul;
it talks incessantly in a voice like a claw being scraped across glass,
and it has a very irritating personality. In the course of its
multidimensional existence it has of course starred in numerous battles,
and at one point belonged to a pasha who used it to cut silk
handkerchiefs in mid-air; on the other hand, it once spent two hundred
years at the bottom of a lake, which was not really fun. Can this
possibly mean that Kring has existed on Earth too – that Kring and
Excalibur are aspects of a single entity? And is that why Kring remarks,
when stuck in a tree branch, that ‘it could have been worse, it could
have been an anvil’?

Come to think of it, even the tree could be significant. The Volsungs, a
family of Norse and Germanic heroes, had as their heirloom a sword which
came to them by way of a test very like Arthur’s. Odin, the God of War,
had driven it up to the hilt into a tree-trunk, challenging kings and
warriors to pull it out: ‘Whoso draweth this sword from this tree shall
have the same as a gift from me, and shall find in good sooth that never
bare he better sword in hand than this.’ Sigmund the Volsung was the
only one who could draw it out, and it served him well until in his last
battle it broke against the spear-shaft of Odin himself. But when
Sigmund’s son grew up (he is called Sigurd in Iceland, and Siegfried in
Germany), he reforged the blade that was broken, naming it Gram, and
became an even greater hero than his father had been. Perhaps this too
is something Kring knows about.

Many heroes undertake adventures just for the fun of it, while others
(young Nijel in _Sourcery_, for instance) see themselves as ruled by a
special kind of destiny called a ‘geas’. This is a form of the Irish
word _geis_, and has nothing at all to do with large, waddling, grey or
white birds. It means an obligation, enforced by magical penalties, to
do or not to do some particular thing. A hero may be born with a _geis_
(or more than one), or someone may lay it on him. Either way, it usually
spells trouble, especially if he gets into a situation where two of his
_geissa_ clash. One great Irish warrior, Cú Chulainn, was trapped in
this way. He was under two obligations: one was never to eat dog’s
flesh, which seems simple enough, but the other was never to refuse an
offer of food and hospitality. So when an enemy, knowing this, invited
him to a meal of dog-stew he was forced to break either one rule or the
other, and was doomed. Nijel, luckily, has no such dilemma.

The greatest by far of the Discworld’s Barbarian Heroes is Cohen.
Anything others have done, he has done better, faster, more often. He is
the bravest, the most famous. He has been an Emperor in the
Counterweight Continent, and during this phase of his career was
respectfully referred to as Genghis Cohen. There is just one small
problem – he is now somewhere around ninety years old. Most of the
friends and foes of his younger days are dead. His surviving companions
are now known as the Silver Horde. Like him, they suffer a variety of
age-related afflictions (piles, deafness, toothlessness, stiff joints),
and like him they will never cease to be Heroes.

And yet, in the long run, what does the life of a Hero amount to?
Standing on a mountain peak, Cohen surveys the kingdoms of the world as
he sets out on his last and greatest enterprise, accompanied by the
Silver Horde and a very puzzled minstrel.

‘I bin to everywhere I can see,’ said Cohen, looking around. ‘Been
there, done that … been there again, done it twice … nowhere left where
I ain’t been.’

The minstrel looked him up and down, and a kind of understanding dawned.
I know why you are doing this now, he thought. Thank goodness for a
classical education. Now, what was the quote?

‘ “And Carelinus wept, for there were no more worlds to conquer”,’ he
said.

‘Who’s that bloke? You mentioned him before,’ said Cohen.

‘You haven’t heard of the Emperor Carelinus?’

‘Nope.’

‘But he was the greatest conqueror that ever lived! His empire spanned
the entire Disc! … Well, when he got as far as the coast of Muntab, it
was said that he stood on the shore and wept. Some philosopher told him
there were more worlds out there somewhere, and that he’d never be able
to conquer them. Er … that reminded me a bit of you.’

Cohen strolled along in silence for a moment.

‘Yeah,’ he said at last. ‘Yeah, I can see how that could be.

Only not as cissy, obviously.’ [_The Last Hero_]

And later, trying to explain why he and his companions mean to blow up
the mountain of the gods, though they themselves will be killed doing
it, Cohen remembers the rage and frustration of Carelinus that the
unjust gods have granted such short lives to men:

‘I ain’t much good with words, but … I reckon we’re doing this ’cos we
_are_ goin’ to die, d’yer see? And ’cos some bloke got to the edge of
the world somewhere and saw all them other worlds out there and burst
into tears ’cos there was only one lifetime. So much universe, and so
little time. And that’s not right.’

Carelinus, the mighty conqueror of distant kingdoms, has a counterpart
in the history of Ancient Greece. His name was Alexander the Great, and
there are strange similarities in the careers of these two great men.
The Knotty Problem, for one. Carelinus once came to the Temple of Offler
in Tsort, where there was a huge, complicated knot tying two beams
together, and it was said that whoever untied it would reign over the
whole continent; Carelinus simply sliced right through it with his
sword, and went on to build a huge empire. Was this cheating? Cohen
thinks it wasn’t:

‘It wasn’t cheating, because it was a good story. I can just imagine it,
too. A load of whey-faced priests and suchlike standin’ around and
thinkin’, “That’s _cheatin’_, but he’s got a really _big_ sword so I
won’t be the first to point this out, plus this damn great army is just
outside.” ’

Amazingly, exactly the same thing happened to Alexander. As a young
general, he led his army into the town of Gordium (near modern Ankara,
in Turkey), where there was an ancient ox-cart which their first king
had dedicated to Zeus after tying up its axle tree with a weirdly
knotted rope. It was prophesied that anyone who could untie it would
rule all Asia, but nobody had managed it in over a hundred years.
Alexander tried, failed, and then drew his sword and cut it. That night
there was a terrible thunderstorm. The priests of Zeus wisely decided
this showed the _approval_ of the gods.

Another story told of him (if properly understood) shows that he felt
just the same way as Carelinus and Cohen did about the limits of his
achievements.

It is popularly said that Alexander, at the height of his power, stood
on the shores of the Indian Ocean and ‘wept to think that there were no
worlds left for him to conquer’. Like so much that is popularly said,
this is nonsense; it is a medieval legend, not to be found in any
ancient source. Alexander was no fool. He knew perfectly well that
though he had conquered Afghanistan, reached the borders of Kashmir, and
then marched down the Indus Valley to the sea, there remained many more
kingdoms in Asia and India which he had not defeated. Come to that,
there were large tracts of Europe itself, to the north and west of
Greece, where his armies had never set foot. No way could he have
thought there was nothing left for him to conquer.

This medieval legend distorts an older and more subtle anecdote, which
is to be found in the Ancient Greek author Plutarch – not in his
full-scale _Life of Alexander_, but in an essay ‘On Contentment of the
Mind’ in his collection of _Moralia_. Among the members of Alexander’s
court was a philosopher named Anaxarchus, who by pure reasoning achieved
a remarkably modern understanding of the nature of the multiverse.
According to Plutarch, ‘Alexander wept when he heard Anaxarchus speak
about the infinite number of worlds in the universe. One of Alexander’s
friends asked him what was the matter, and he replied: “There are so
many worlds, and I have _not yet conquered even one_.” ’

Cohen is not alone in sharing the frustration of Carelinus and
Alexander. So, in a different way, does the normally cheerful tourist
Twoflower, standing at the rim of the Disc and staring out at the stars.

‘Sometimes I think a man could wander across the disc all his life and
not see all there is to see,’ said Twoflower. ‘And now it seems there
are lots of other worlds as well. When I think I might die without
seeing a hundredth of all there is to see it makes me feel,’ he paused,
then added, ‘well, humble, I suppose. And very angry, of course.’ [_The
Colour of Magic_]

It is also intriguing to note how Fortune (Lady Luck) decided the fate
of both Alexander and Cohen by a throw of the dice. Writers in Antiquity
and in the Middle Ages argued about the influence of Fortune on the life
of Alexander – he had been amazingly successful as a conqueror and
ruler, yet he was only 33 when he unexpectedly died, struck down by
sickness or, some believed, treacherously poisoned. So was Fortune on
Alexander’s side or not? Did he owe his achievements to her, or to his
own virtues? Did she turn against him in the end? In Chaucer’s
_Canterbury Tales_, the Monk is certain that she did. He laments over
the long list of great men who first enjoyed Fortune’s favours, but whom
she then betrayed. One of them is Alexander, at one time ‘the heir of
her honour’, till she destroyed him in a game of dice where she
magically transformed his winning throw, a six, into the lowest possible
one.

O worthy, noble Alexander, O alas

That you should ever fall in such a case!

Poisoned by people of your own you were.

Your six did Fortune change into an ace,
And yet she never wept for you one tear.

In the Discworld, Cohen accepts a challenge to roll dice against the
harsh god Fate (_not_ against Fortune, the Lady). Fate throws a six, and
tells Cohen that to win he must throw a seven – though the die is a
perfectly normal one with only the regulation six sides.

‘So … seven and I win,’ said Cohen. ‘It comes down showin’ seven and I
win, right?’

‘Yes. Of course,’ said Fate.

‘Sounds like a million-to-one chance to me,’ said Cohen.

He tossed the die high in the air, and it slowed as it rose, tumbling
glacially with a noise like the _swish_ of windmill blades.

It reached the top of its arc and began to fall.

Cohen was staring fixedly at it, absolutely still. Then his sword was
out of its scabbard and it whirled around in a complex curve. There was
a _snick_ and a green flash in the middle of the air and …

… two halves of an ivory cube bounced across the table. One landed
showing the six. The other landed showing the one. [_The Last Hero_]

The situation is not without precedent on the Discworld (a five thrown
by the Lady turns into a seven in _The Colour of Magic_), or even in our
own world, where it is said that King Olaf of Norway played dice against
the King of Sweden for a disputed island, and won when his die
accidentally split in half, one face showing the six and the other the
one. Nevertheless Fate accuses Cohen of cheating, and would have reneged
on the bargain if the Lady – whom none of the gods ever opposes – had
not intervened on Cohen’s behalf. But Cohen does not appreciate the
favour.

‘And who are _you_?’ snapped Cohen, still red with rage.

‘I? I … am the million-to-one chance,’ she said.

‘Yeah?’ said Cohen, less impressed than the minstrel thought he ought to
be. ‘And who are all the other chances?’

‘I am those, also.’

Cohen sniffed. ‘Then you ain’t no lady.’

‘Er, that’s not really—’ the minstrel began.

‘Oh, that wasn’t what I was supposed to say, was it?’ said Cohen. ‘I was
supposed to say, “Ooh, ta, missus, much obliged”? Well, I ain’t. They
say fortune favours the brave, but _I_ say I’ve seen too many brave men
walkin’ into battles they never walked out of. The hell with all of it.’
[_The Last Hero_]

Nothing, not even a marvel that has saved his own life, can persuade
Cohen to give up his fury at the injustice of old age and inevitable
death.

Those who want a happy ending every time had better steer clear of epic
poetry and heroic sagas, for the wages of heroism is death. True, there
are a few legendary heroes who vanish into fairyland, but the great
majority die by violence, and their deaths are at least as memorable as
their lives. Some fall in battle against overwhelming odds, as did
Charlemagne’s noble warriors Roland and Oliver facing a Saracen army at
Roncevalles; some, like the Irish Cú Chulainn and the Danish Hrolf
Kraki, die because the enemy host is strengthened by the spells of evil
magicians and malevolent deities; some are murdered by the treachery of
trusted relatives or comrades, as were Sigurd the Dragon-Slayer and
Robin Hood.

On the other hand, death is what offers a Hero the finest chance to
display his mettle. An Anglo-Saxon poet put these words into the mouth
of an ageing English warrior facing certain defeat and death in battle
against Vikings at Maldon in Essex in 991:

Our minds shall mount higher, our hearts beat harder,

Our spirits grow stronger, as strength dwindles.

Always at the last there is the burial mound, the funeral pyre, the
death ship – which may be set on fire, or simply pushed out to sea, as
was done for Scyld Scefing, a legendary Danish king:

The prince’s ship with curving prow,

Glinting with hoar-frost, eager to leave,

Lay in the harbour. They laid their dear lord,

Their ring-giver, in the ship’s bosom, beside the mast,

And treasures too, from far-off lands.

High over his head a banner hung,

Gold embroidered. They let the waters bear him away,

Trusted him to the ocean. Sad were their hearts. [_Beowulf_]

Or, as Cohen puts it, remembering one of his old comrades,

‘Where would he have been if we weren’t there to give him a _proper_
funeral, eh? A great big bonfire, that’s the funeral of a hero. And
everyone else said it was a waste of a good boat!’ [_The Last Hero_]

And where was the boat heading? Well, there was always the possibility
of Valhalla or the Elysian Fields or the Happy Isles, but ancient epics
and sagas have little to say on this point. What mattered far more was
that the hero should be _remembered_. It was said of Sigurd that ‘his
name will last as long as the world endures’, and the same was – or
should be – true of every hero. As the Old Icelandic poem _Hávamál_ puts
it,

Cattle die, kinsmen die,

And each man too shall die.

I know one thing that never dies,

A dead man’s reputation.

An eye-catching grave is useful publicity too; not for nothing did
Beowulf’s people cover his ashes with a large mound, high on a headland
where every passing ship would see it. But the centuries roll on, and
memories fade. We can make a fair guess at who lies in the royal barrow
at Sutton Hoo in Suffolk, but there are dozens upon dozens of mounds
along the South Downs and on Salisbury Plain that were raised for men
whose names and deeds are now utterly forgotten. Which is wrong. Which
is why Cohen is found one day sitting on an ancient burial mound and
refusing to come back into camp for dinner, because he ‘hadn’t
finished’.

‘Finished what, old friend?’

‘Rememb’rin’,’ said Cohen.

‘Remembering who?’

‘The hero who was buried here, all right?’

‘Who was he?’

‘Dunno.’

‘What were his people?’

‘Search me,’ said Cohen. ‘Did he do any mighty deeds?’

‘Couldn’t say.’

‘Then _why_—?’

‘_Someone’s_ got to remember the poor bugger!’

‘You don’t know anything about him!’

‘I can still _remember_ him!’ [_The Last Hero_]

Time also creates a problem for the rare hero who does _not_ die young.
Is it fitting for him to settle down quietly, while Old Age, the enemy
he can never conquer or outwit, advances steadily upon him? Is he to lie
in his bed, old and sick, meekly waiting for death – a straw death, as
Vikings would mockingly call it? Of course, Fate might send him, even in
old age, the chance of a last good fight; Beowulf had been a king for
fifty years when he went to face the dragon. But if not … well, it is in
the nature of heroes to rage against the dying of the light.

In history, one of the great medieval warlords of Asia was the Mongolian
Timur-I-Lenk, called Tamerlane by westerners, who was descended on his
mother’s side from Genghis Khan. His empire was centred in Samarkand,
and stretched from Turkey to the Ganges valley and the borders of China;
he died a natural death in 1405 at the age of seventy-two, while making
plans to invade China itself. According to legend, as told by the
Elizabethan playwright Marlowe (who called him Tamburlaine), on his
deathbed he declared war on the gods for striking him down:

What daring god torments my body thus,

And seeks to conquer mighty Tamburlaine?

Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,

That have been termed the terror of the world?

Techelles and the rest, come, take your swords,

And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul.

Come, let us march against the powers of heaven,

And set black banners in the firmament,

To signify the slaughter of the gods.

He may not have been the only one who refused to go quietly. Odysseus
may have done the same, though less fiercely. In Homer’s _Odyssey_ we
hear how this resourceful hero, whose cleverness led to the Greek
victory in the Trojan War, eventually got home to his island kingdom of
Ithaca after ten years of struggling against monsters, enchantments, and
shipwrecks. And there Homer leaves him, happily reunited with his wife
Penelope, to grow old in peace. But did he?

A thousand years later Dante (who, like all Italians, called him
Ulysses) thought his story ended differently. The bonds of family and
homeland could not overcome his passion to learn more about the world.
So he set sail with a small band of his faithful comrades, all grown
old, urging them on towards the lands beyond the sun; men were not made
to live like brutes, he said, but to pursue knowledge and excellence.
They sailed through the straits of Gibraltar and out into the deep
ocean, past the equator, and far southwards, till they saw a towering
mountain – which, though they did not know it, was the Mount of
Purgatory crowned with the Earthly Paradise. But there came a whirlwind
from this unknown land, and spun their ship three times round, and sank
it. And thus ended the life of Ulysses.

In Victorian times, Tennyson took up the theme. In his poem ‘Ulysses’
the aged hero looks back on a life spent ‘always roaming with a hungry
heart’, and resolves never to pause, never to make an end, but still

To follow knowledge like a sinking star,

Beyond the utmost bound of human thought.

He gathers his former comrades, urging them to defy the years and the
approach of death, and join him on a last voyage into the unknown:

For my purpose holds

To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths

Of all the western stars, until I die.

It may be that the gulfs will wash us down;

It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,

And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.

Though much is taken, much abides; and though

We are not now that strength which in old days

Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are:

One equal temper of heroic hearts,

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will

To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.

Cohen and the Silver Horde would have understood.

[image]


Chapter 13


LORE, LEGENDS
_and_ TRUTH

 

THE FOUNDATION LEGENDS

ANY SELF-RESPECTING CITY has to have a legend about its own foundation.
Ankh-Morpork, as is right and proper for the oldest and greatest city on
the Disc, has two.

The first is the official one. According to this, there were once two
orphaned brothers, mere babies, who had been left on the shores of the
Ankh to die. There they were found by a she-hippopotamus, who suckled
them. When they grew up, they decided to build themselves a home, and so
founded what must at the time have been a very small city indeed. In
memory of this, the shield on the coat of arms of Ankh-Morpork has as
its supporters deux Hippopotâmes Royales Bâillant, un enchainé, un
couronné au cou. Which, stripped of its aristocratic herald-speak, means
two royal hippos yawning, one wearing a chain and the other with a crown
round its neck. The conventions of heraldry do not permit the sex of the
beasts to be clearly indicated, but in view of the tale we can safely
state that at least one of them is female. The legend is also
commemorated by eight hippo statues on the city’s Brass Bridge, facing
out to sea. It is said that if danger ever threatens the city they will
run away.

Some people have expressed doubts over this ancient and uplifting
tradition. Why and how, they ask, would a she-hippo suckle human babies?
And how could they thrive on this eccentric diet? Did they but know it,
these doubters could find a tale on Earth proving that such things are
perfectly possible. It tells of twins, Romulus and Remus, who were the
sons of Mars the God of War and a human princess. Their evil
great-uncle, having just usurped his brother’s throne, seized the boys
and threw them into the Tiber, for fear they might grow up to challenge
him.¹¹ But the river washed them safely to the bank, where a she-wolf
fed them with her milk until a kindly shepherd found them. Later, they
built the city of Rome. Considering what wolves normally eat, this tale
is even more wondrous than that of the hippo, but the Romans had no
difficulty in believing it. And, naturally, making a statue about it.

The second legend is not told _quite_ so often by the citizens of
Ankh-Morpork, but is surprisingly widespread in other towns. It is said
that way back in the fogs of time there was once a great flood sent by
the gods, and that a group of wise men survived by building a huge boat
into which they crammed two of every type of animal then existing on the
Disc. After a few weeks the combined manure was beginning to weigh the
boat low in the water, so – the story runs – they tipped it over the
side and called the heap Ankh-Morpork. Anybody who doubts the truth of
this should go and stand on one of the bridges over the Ankh, preferably
on a warm day, and breathe deep.

SUNKEN CITIES AND VANISHING ISLANDS

There is also the legend of the Lost City, the City-before-the-City. It
is not an uncommon tale – indeed, there are variants in all the cities
of the Sto Plains – but hardly anyone takes it seriously.

There had been a city once, in the mists of pre-history – bigger than
Ankh-Morpork, if that were possible. And the inhabitants had done
_something_, some sort of unspeakable crime not just against Mankind or
the gods but against the very nature of the universe itself, which had
been so dreadful that it had sunk beneath the sea one stormy night. Only
a few people had survived to carry to the barbarian peoples in the less
advanced parts of the Disc all the arts and crafts of civilization.
[_Moving Pictures_]

According to the dreaded grimoire _Necrotelecomnicon_, there had been a
hill at the edge of the city:

… and in that hill, it is said, a Door out of the World was found, and
people of the City watched what was Seen therein, knowing not that Dread
waited between the universes … for _Others_ found the gate of the Holy
Wood and fell upon the world, and in one nighte All Manner of Madnesse
befell, and Chaos prevailed, and the Citie sank beneath the Sea, and all
became one with the fishes and the lobsters, save for a few who fled.

The hill is still there, on a lonely stretch of coast about thirty miles
from Ankh-Morpork. It is not very high, yet high enough to be visible
for miles, standing out from the wind-blown sand dunes all around. It is
covered with wretched scrubby trees. People call it Holy Wood. And they
say that if you stand on the beach at Holy Wood on a stormy night, you
can still hear the bells of old temples ringing under the sea. The
events chronicled in _Moving Pictures_ would suggest that there is after
all rather more than a grain of truth in these old tales.

There are many, many legends about sunken cities on Earth, where islands
bob up and down like the chorus in _HMS Pinafore_. The oldest on record
was told by the Greek philosopher Plato about 2,400 years ago, and
according to him it was true, and had happened some 9,000 years before
_that_. And it was not just one city that had sunk, but the whole large
island of Atlantis – rich, civilized, with many mighty cities, harbours
and palaces. There, men had at first been wise and virtuous, but in time
they became obsessed with wealth and power, so the gods destroyed their
land in a single day and night.

There occurred portentous earthquakes and floods, and one grievous day
and night befell them when the whole body of warriors was swallowed up
by the earth, and the island of Atlantis in like manner was swallowed up
by the sea and vanished; wherefore also the ocean at that spot has now
become impassable and unsearchable, being blocked up by the shoal of mud
which the island created as it settled down. [Plato, _Timaeus_, transl.
R. G. Bury]

Plato does not mention any door or gate, for the large-scale destruction
he describes must have involved some great natural disaster – an
earthquake, a volcanic eruption, a tsunami – and was the direct work of
the gods. There are other, more recent traditions along the sea-coasts
of western Europe telling of lands and towns submerged by the foolish or
treacherous act of someone who opened a sluice gate. In Wales, for
instance, they talk of the lost land of Cantre’r Gwaelod under the
waters of Cardigan Bay – forty miles long by twenty wide it was, with
sixteen fine towns on it. There was a great dyke protecting it from the
sea, but Seithenhin, the keeper of the dyke, was a drunkard, and one
night forgot to close the sluice gates. The way others tell it,
Seithenhin was lord of the land, and it was his daughter who let in the
sea, curses upon her! Or it was God’s doing, because Seithenhin was a
proud and presumptuous ruler. Whatever, you can still see the pebble
ridge which was once the protecting wall; you can still hear bells
ringing underwater.

Then there is the Breton tale of the drowning of Kêr-Is. This, they say,
was a magnificent city built on land reclaimed from the sea in what is
now the Bay of Douarnenez in Brittany, and ruled by a King Grallon or
Gradlon. He himself was a virtuous man, but his courtiers and subjects
were drunken and debauched, though a holy man warned them that there
would be a reckoning:

After happiness, grief!

Anyone who eats the meat of the fish,

By the fish he will be eaten.

And anyone who swallows will be swallowed.

And anyone who drinks wine and mead

Will drink water like a fish;

And anyone who doesn’t know will learn.

[_Livaden Geris_, transl. James Doan]

Yet the king let the revellers go on feasting, while he took himself
quietly to bed. Now, the king had a daughter named Dahut, and she had a
lover (some say he was the Devil himself, but they always say that sort
of thing) who coaxed her into stealing the golden key which her father
wore on a chain round his neck as he slept. This was the key to the gate
in the dykes protecting the city from the sea. They were opened, and the
ocean swept in and submerged everything; only Grallon himself escaped,
thanks to the saint’s warning and to his fine horse. Dahut tried to
mount behind him, but the saint miraculously appeared and struck her
with his crozier, so that she fell into the raging waters and drowned.
As for the sunken city, its buildings can sometimes be glimpsed when the
sea is calm and clear, and its bells are heard ringing. Legend loves the
sound of sunken bells.

In Cornwall, tradition tells of the lost land of Lyonesse, which once
stretched all the way from Land’s End to the Scilly Isles, though no one
now remembers just why it sank. The strange rocky outcrop of St
Michael’s Mount overlooks Mount’s Bay, where the lost land once began
and where one can still, at very low tides, find fossilized bits of wood
from the trees which once grew there. In the Cornish language, four
hundred years ago, the Mount was called Carrack Looz en Cooz, ‘The Grey
Rock in the Wood’. The drowned forest was important, once. Maybe it was
a Holy Wood.

Such legends have always been particularly popular among fishermen. They
are the ones who, peering down through unusually clear water, sometimes
glimpse curious structures that look more like streets and ruined
buildings than simple rocks; they are the ones whose nets sometimes snag
on underwater obstacles where, according to their charts, no obstacles
should be. Oddly, the fishermen of Ankh-Morpork do _not_ have such
legends. So it came as a total surprise to Solid Jackson and his son,
out fishing by night in the middle of the Circle Sea, when a sound came
from below the surface, the sound of a bell or gong slowly swinging …
followed by a weathercock … a tower … a surge of huge, weed-encrusted
buildings … a whole malevolent-looking city on an oozy, weedy island
rising up out of the sea. They had discovered the Lost Island and City
of Leshp.

They did not like it. In fact, it gave them the willies. Partly, this
was because of the smell of sulphur and rotting seaweed. Partly, because
of nasty little ripples and soft splashing noises in the dark pools that
lingered in the deeper cellars. But mainly it was because of the city
itself. There were _some_ buildings which looked more or less as human
buildings should, with pillars and arches and steps and suchlike, and
nice tiled floors with patterns of shells and squid and octopuses. But
besides these, there were the remains of massive structures which had
nothing to do with human architecture. It came as a relief when the
island, after a few weeks, settled back down on to the seabed.

Some faint awareness of these events, chronicled in _Jingo_, may have
reached parts of the Earth. There is talk there of a ‘Green Land of
Enchantment’ which occasionally rises to the surface in the Bristol
Channel, and then vanishes again. A certain Captain Jones had a curious
experience in the 1890s which was reported in the _Pembroke County
Guardian_:

Once when trending up the Bristol Channel and passing Grassholm Island,
in what he had always known as deep water, he was surprised to see to
windward of him a large tract of land covered with a beautiful green
meadow. It was not, however, _above water_, but just a few feet _below_,
say two or three, so that the grass waved and swam about as the ripple
flowed over it, in a way quite delightful to the eye, so that as one
watched it made one feel quite drowsy. ‘You know,’ he continued, ‘I have
heard old people say there is a floating island off there, that
sometimes rises to the surface, or nearly, and then sinks down again
fathoms deep, so that no one sees it for years, and when nobody expects
it comes up again for a while. How it may be, I do not know, but that is
what they say.’

There are similar tales of intermittent islands off the coasts of Norway
and Ireland. If you want to make them stay permanently above water
(since they offer good grazing), the thing to do is to throw a knife, or
a burning torch, or a lit tobacco-pipe on to them before they can sink
again, but this is very hard to achieve. The largest and loveliest
Norwegian one is called Utrøst, inhabited by kindly beings; it only
becomes visible to humans if their lives are in deadly danger, when its
harbour offers them safety. Those who shelter there will have good luck
all their lives.

These are _nice_ islands, of course, even if they are imaginary. One
that was undoubtedly real and very Leshpian in its effects appeared in
July 1831. It was a pumice island, and it rose to the surface off the
coast of Sicily, due to volcanic action. A British fleet landed on it
and claimed it for Britain, naming it Graham Island, but the Italians
also claimed it, naming it Ferdinandea. The French and Spaniards showed
interest too. The ensuing diplomatic dispute was still not settled when
the island sank back into the sea in December of the same year, which
was rather a shame, but averted a possible war.

Finally, it should be noted that an island which pops up and then sinks
again is, as Leonard of Quirm remarked, rather like a certain type of
folklore current among sailors on the Discworld:

‘It puts me in mind,’ said Leonard, ‘of those nautical stories of giant
turtles that sleep on the surface, thus causing sailors to think they
are an island. Of course, you don’t get giant turtles that small.’
[_Jingo_]

In our world, in the absence of any turtles larger than, say, a
decent-sized dining-table, traditional nautical lore warns instead of
the risks involved in landing on a really, really big fish or whale
which happens to be dozing on the surface. In particular, it is very
unwise to light a small fire and start cooking breakfast. St Brendan the
Navigator, who was Abbot of Clonfert in Ireland in the sixth century, is
said to have done just that while sailing far out in the Atlantic.
Suddenly what he’d thought was an island began to twitch, and then to
sink. Brendan and his crew were lucky to get back to their ship in time.

Exactly the same thing happened to Sindbad the Sailor on his first
voyage in the Indian Ocean, as is told in _The Thousand and One Nights_.
The ship came to a little island which seemed as fair as the Garden of
Eden, where the passengers disembarked; some wandered off to explore,
while others busied themselves cooking, eating and drinking.

While we were thus engaged we suddenly heard the captain cry out to us
from the ship: ‘All aboard, quickly! Abandon everything and run for your
lives! The mercy of Allah be upon you, for this is no island but a
gigantic whale floating on the bosom of the sea, on whose back the sands
have settled and trees have grown since the world was young! When you
lit the fire it felt the heat and stirred. Make haste, I say; for soon
the whale will plunge into the sea and you will all be lost!’ [transl.
N. J. Dawood]

According to the poet Milton, the enormous creature is none other than
Leviathan, mentioned in the Bible –

… that sea-beast

Leviathan, which God of all his works

Created hugest that swim the Ocean stream.

Him, haply slumbering on the Norway foam,

The pilot of some small night-foundered skiff,

Deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell,

With fixèd anchor in his scaly rind

Moors by his side under the lee, while night

Invests the sea, and wishèd morn delays.

Atlantic, Indian Ocean, seas off Norway … the monster (or the story)
certainly does get around.

In Cambridge University Library and in the British Library there are
manuscripts of a Latin Bestiary (that is, a Book of Beasts) dating from
the early twelfth century. It includes a section about the sea-monster
which gets mistaken for an island, beginning thus:

There is an ocean monster which is called an _aspido delone_ in Greek.
On the other hand, it is called an _aspido testudo_ in Latin. It is also
called a Whale … This animal lifts its back out of the open sea above
the watery waves … [transl. T. H. White]

_Testudo_ is Latin for ‘tortoise’. _Delone_ makes no sense, and must be
a mistake for _chelone_, which is indeed a Greek word, meaning ‘turtle’.
Why on earth should English monks a thousand years ago get the
traditional whale mixed up with tortoises and turtles? Some echo from
the Discworld, maybe? As for _aspido_, this must refer to a snake of
some sort, so it would seem that the Sea Serpent has somehow got into
the mix. It makes a good yarn even better.

KINGS AND HEROES

A certain legendary glow surrounds the (rather vague) memory of the
Kings of Ankh, a dynasty which came to an end some 2,000 years ago. They
are said to have been thoroughly wise, just, charismatic, and so on,
plus being of course extremely powerful. As for the later Kings of
Ankh-Morpork, they are remembered in many a merry anecdote, for
recurrent lunacy, sadistic cruelty, and general bloody-mindedness.
(These anecdotes, being factually accurate, do not count as folklore.)
If a ruler made himself too disagreeable to the rest of the aristocracy,
the Guild of Assassins would eventually be contacted, and he would be
discreetly inhumed. Curiously, this tactful and civilized procedure is
seen by some as the survival of something extremely archaic:

There was a tradition once, far back in the past, called the King of the
Bean. A special dish was served to all the men of the clan on a certain
day of the year. It contained one small hard-baked bean, and whoever got
the bean was, possibly after some dental attention, hailed as King. It
was quite an inexpensive system and it worked well, possibly because the
clever little bald men who actually ran things and paid some attention
to possible candidates were experts at palming a bean into the right
bowl.

And while the crops ripened and the tribe thrived and the land was
fertile, the King thrived too. But when, in the fullness of time, crops
failed and the ice came back and animals were inexplicably barren, the
clever little bald men sharpened their long knives, which were _mostly_
used for cutting mistletoe.

And on the due night, one of them went into his cave and carefully baked
one small bean.

Of course, that was before people were civilized. These days, no one has
to eat beans. [_Night Watch_]

That, at any rate, is a theory of kingship put forward by speculative
folklorists in Ankh-Morpork, and enthusiastically adopted by people who
feel tradition must always be bloodthirsty, or about sex, or
(preferably) both. Naturally, when dealing with such a remote period one
can’t expect to find documentary evidence to back up one’s hypothesis
(cave-dwelling clans don’t keep diaries or committee minutes). But Quoth
the Raven, who is a member of an occult species with links to the gods
and therefore knows what he’s talking about, does mention a midwinter
custom, thousands of years ago, which sounds rather similar. It involved
some poor bugger finding a special bean in his food at the Hogswatch
feast. It made him king, but also meant he’d be killed off a few days
later. A merry reign, but a short one. (We have more to say about this
in the section on the Hogfather.)

To return to the early kings of Ankh. Theirs was a Golden Age, from
which little remains – some well-built ancient sewers, a few ruined
walls, a worm-eaten throne, and, if legend can be believed, a very
special Sword. Nobody has set eyes on it for centuries, and many think
it must be lost.

And yet, there are always rumours. Although they are so proud of being
modern and living in an Age of Reason, the citizens of Ankh-Morpork have
surprisingly romantic imaginations. Their minds are littered with
mangled myths and fragmented fairy tales. Deep down, they feel sure that
one day a long-lost heir will turn up, brandishing the Sword and
displaying a birthmark, to claim the throne. He will right all wrongs,
and the Golden Age will return.

Since the rules of fairytale narrative are known to every child in the
multiverse (even in worlds where the books of Grimm and Andersen are not
to be found), the people of Ankh-Morpork naturally assume that the heir
will have begun life as a humble swine-herd, and/or revived a princess
who has been asleep for a hundred years, and/or proved how royal he is
by sleeping on a huge pile of mattresses and a few very small peas. His
hands will have sensational, but highly specialized, healing powers,
though there appears to be some uncertainty about what exactly it is
that he cures. Some citizens think a true king can cure baldness by his
touch, while the aristocratic Lord Rust mentions dandruff, and scrofula,
a disease of the throat glands. On Earth, it was definitely scrofula,
which was therefore known as ‘king’s evil’. Several kings of England,
from the time of Edward the Confessor to the end of the Stuart dynasty,
made a point of ceremonially touching sufferers; so did the kings of
France.

Best of all, if the heir to a kingdom encounters a dragon he will most
certainly slay it. As Cut-Me-Own-Throat Dibbler says to the sceptical
Vimes:

‘You’ve got no romance in your soul, Captain. When a stranger comes into
the city under the thrall of the dragon and challenges it with a
glittery sword, weeell, there’s only one outcome, ain’t there? It’s
probably destiny.’ [_Guards! Guards!_]

In the same way, people know just how things will go if a dragon
appears. It will fly around, flaming and ravening; it will want a pile
of gold to sleep on; it will expect people to give it virgins to eat,
chained to rocks; it will speak, quite likely in riddles; _but_, it will
have one vulnerable spot, which a good archer can hit as it flies
overhead. That’s what always happened in the old stories, and so that’s
what will happen again.

These expectations are moulded by all the dragon-lore which has been
drifting from one universe to another from the dawn of time. There is no
mythology in any world which doesn’t have dragons in it, together with
gods or heroes to kill them. The tales known in Ankh-Morpork are just as
famous on Earth. There, it was the Ancient Greek hero Perseus who was
the first to rescue a virgin who had been left chained to a rock for a
dragon to eat; her name was Andromeda. Later, St George did the same,
though he, being a Saint, didn’t marry the girl. Several great warriors
of Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian legend – Beowulf, for instance, and the
two Volsung heroes, Sigmund and Sigurd (whom Germans call Siegfried) –
slew dragons which lay on hoards of treasure. One of these, the one
named Fafnir which Sigurd killed, did indeed speak, and could ask and
answer riddles.

As for the one vulnerable spot, this is sometimes on the belly, as it
was with Fafnir, and with Smaug in the tale of Bilbo the hobbit. More
often, it is when a dragon opens his mouth that he becomes vulnerable to
a well-aimed spear or arrow going down his gullet and into his vitals;
this technique was pioneered by the Babylonian god Marduk, who destroyed
the primeval dragoness Tiamat by hurling deadly winds down her throat.
And then there is the sad case of the Yorkshire Dragon of Wantley, whom
More of More Hall kicked in the arsehole with a spiked boot:

‘Murder, murder!’ the dragon cried,

‘Alack, alack for grief!

Had you but missed that place, you could

Have done me no mischief!’

Then his head he shaked, trembled and quaked,

And down he laid and cried;

First on one knee then on back tumbled he,

So groaned, kicked, shat, and died.¹²

SOME MORE LEGENDS

Many town-dwellers have, lurking in the corners of their minds, various
half-remembered tales and no-longer-properly-believed beliefs which pop
up again in the right circumstances. The tale of the shifting shop, for
instance:

Glod looked up at a blank wall.

‘I knew it!’ he said. ‘Didn’t I say? Magic! How many times have we heard
this story? There’s a mysterious shop no one’s ever seen before, and
someone goes in and buys some rusty old curio, and it turns out to—’

‘Glod—’

‘—some kind of talisman or a bottle full of genie, and then when there’s
trouble they go back and the shop—’

‘Glod—?’

‘—has _mysteriously disappeared_ and gone back to whatever dimension it
came from— yes, what is it?’

‘You’re on the wrong side of the road. It’s over here.’ [_Soul Music_]

But in fact Glod was right. This shop _was_ magic, and contained, among
other things, a flute which you mustn’t blow unless you want to be
knee-deep in rats, a trumpet which can make the world end and the sky
fall down, and a gong which can make seven hundred and seventy-seven
skeletal warriors spring up out of the earth. Two out of the three would
work on Earth too. Not the gong, since according to Greek myth, the
correct way to make warriors spring up out of the earth is to sow the
ground with dragon’s teeth, as the heroes Cadmus and Jason did. But the
Bible does mention a Last Trump with which, according to prophecy, an
angel will announce that Doomsday has come; and the flute is clearly a
pair to the fife with which the Pied Piper of Hamlin summoned rats.

The Hamlin story is a fine example of the weird power of narrativium. It
seems reasonably certain that something did happen in the German town of
Hamlin in 1284, something involving a stranger and the children of the
town, and that everyone found it very upsetting. There are sober,
reliable chronicles, written less than a hundred years after the event,
which declare that someone marched into the town on 26 June in 1284 and
marched away with 130 of its children. But they do _not_ say anything
about rats, or a pipe, or curiously coloured clothes. In fact, there’s
no magic involved at all. He marches in, he marches away, taking the
children … that’s all there is to it, at first.

But that won’t do. Surely, people thought, something so terrible as the
loss of all those children must have more to it than that. It must be
due to sorcery, or a punishment for some sin – or both. Now, it was
widely believed throughout Europe that some men had an uncanny power
over snakes, or rats, or mice; they would summon the vermin by playing
on a flute or pipe, and then lead them into deep water or order them to
leap into a bonfire, and so destroy them all. Perhaps a man who could
lure rats could also lure children? Could one of these legendary
ratcatchers have come to Hamlin in great-great-grandfather’s time? Could
something have angered him? Maybe the townsfolk tried to cheat him of
his pay, and he took his revenge?

And so the story of the Pied Piper was born. Back in 1284, people said,
the town had been overrun with rats, until a stranger arrived,
proclaiming himself a ratcatcher. He was dressed in a multi-coloured
coat and carried a small fife, so they called him the Pied Piper, and
promised him a great deal of money if he would help them. As soon as he
started playing rats came running out of every house, and followed him
as he marched out of town. He led them down to the river Weser and waded
in; they followed, and drowned. But then the citizens regretted having
promised so much money, so they made excuses not to pay, and he went off
in a furious rage. On 26 June he returned, this time dressed as a
hunter. Again he played his fife, but this time it was children who came
running to him, and he led them out of the town, where they disappeared
with him into a cave in a mountain, and were never seen again – though
some said they came out alive, hundreds of miles away, in Transylvania.

By the middle of the sixteenth century this had become the official
explanation. The Mayor had the entire story illustrated in stained-glass
windows in the main church; a new city gate erected in 1556 carried an
inscription stating that it was put up ‘272 years after the sorcerer
abducted 130 children’; another inscription on the City Hall
commemorated ‘130 children lost by a piper inside a mountain’.

Of course, there are always some people who prefer a rational
explanation to a magical one. With the Hamlin story, it’s not difficult
to think of something that could fit, and many modern commentators have
offered suggestions. There were wars going on in thirteenth-century
Germany, so maybe a recruiting sergeant passed through the town and led
away 130 young men, and maybe they were all killed in battle. Or maybe
the date is wrong, and the story really recalls how friars came
preaching wild sermons to get youngsters to join the so-called
Children’s Crusade to Jerusalem in 1212; they never got there, and those
who did not die on the road ended up as slaves. Or maybe it refers to
the forced emigration of local families to colonize new territories far
away. For example, Bishop Bruno of Olmütz recruited families from Lower
Saxony to build up a German population in his diocese in Bohemia; a
comparison of city records in Hamlin and Olmütz reveals a startling
agreement in the family names in each place, which bears out the rumour
that the lost children of Hamlin reappeared safe and sound in
Transylvania.

Be that as it may, it’s the rats, the pipe, and the pied coat that we
remember now. And only a beastly spoilsport would point out that rats
can swim.

As for drums …

There was even an Ankh-Morpork legend, wasn’t there, about some old drum
in the Palace or somewhere that was supposed to bang itself if an enemy
fleet was seen sailing up the Ankh? The legend had died out in recent
centuries, partly because this was the Age of Reason and also because no
enemy fleet could sail up the Ankh without a gang of men with shovels
going in front. [_Soul Music_]

There is a curiously close parallel here with the patriotic English
legend of Drake’s Drum. After the great Elizabethan seaman Sir Francis
Drake died off Panama in 1595 a drum painted with his coat of arms was
brought back to his home at Buckland Abbey in Devon, and is still kept
there. It is traditionally believed to have come from the ship on which
he had once sailed round the world. In 1895, for the three-hundredth
anniversary of the hero’s death, Sir Henry Newbolt wrote a vigorous poem
telling how Drake on his deathbed promised that if the drum was struck
when England was in danger, he would return to save the country once
again, as he had done when the Spanish Armada came.

Drake he was a Devon man an’ ruled the Devon seas,

(Capten, art tha sleepin’ there below?)

Rovin’ tho’ his death fell, he went wi’ heart at ease,

An’ dreamin’ arl the time o’ Plymouth Hoe.

‘Take my drum to England, hang et by the shore,

Strike et when your powder’s runnin’ low;

If the Dons sight Devon, I’ll quit the port o’ Heaven,

An’ drum them up the Channel, as we drummed them long ago.’

In 1916, when England was at war, a poet named Alfred Noyes gave this
story an even stronger patriotic twist. Writing an article in _The
Times_ about submarine warfare, he declared that Devon fishermen
believed that the drum had sounded of its own accord in times of crisis,
and that Drake would always hear and answer its call. It had been heard
when Nelson’s fleet went to meet the French at Trafalgar, and again in
that very year of 1916 before the naval battle of Jutland in the North
Sea. And this, the fishermen said, showed that Drake had returned to
inspire Nelson and Admiral Jellicoe and guide them to victory. Whether
Noyes really had heard Devon fishermen saying this, or whether he made
it up himself, hardly matters. It’s folklore now. And now people say
Drake’s drum was heard in 1940 at the evacuation of Dunkirk.

The citizens of Ankh-Morpork show in their legends an appreciation of
virtue which is rarely evident in their lives. They can in fact be
downright sentimental. Take the story of the famous dog Gaspode – not to
be confused with the mangy, flea-ridden speaking cur of the same name,
who was simply called after him. The reason the _famous_ Gaspode is
famous is his devotion to his master.

‘It was years and years ago. There was this ole bloke in Ankh who
snuffed it, and he belonged to one of them religions where they bury you
after you’re dead, an’ they did, and he had this ole dog—’

‘Called Gaspode?’

‘Yeah, an’ this ole dog had been his only companion, and after they
buried the man he lay down on his grave, and howled and howled for a
couple of weeks. Growled at everybody who came near. An’ then died.’
[_Moving Pictures_]

Strangely, there are two cities on Earth – Edinburgh and Tokyo – where
almost the same story is told, the main difference being that the dog
survives for many years, fed by passers-by, though still faithfully
grieving. In Edinburgh, this model of doggy devotion is a terrier called
Greyfriars Bobby, after the graveyard where his master, a night-watchman
called John Gray, was buried in 1858, and where there is now a statue of
him (the dog, that is, not John Gray). He lived on for fourteen years;
some say he spent all day at his master’s grave, but others say he was
regularly fed in a nearby restaurant. When he died, a place was found
for him near the entrance of Greyfriars Kirkyard, though not actually in
consecrated ground. The stone is inscribed: ‘Let his loyalty and
devotion be a lesson to us all.’

In Tokyo, the faithful dog, named Hachi-koh, used to go daily to Shibuya
Station to meet his master, a professor, when he got off the train on
his return from work. The professor died in 1925, but the dog lived on
for ten years more, loyally meeting the train every day at the usual
time, and resisting all attempts to re-home him. A statue of him was set
up in the station even in his lifetime, and a special section of the
concourse was set aside as his home; his stuffed body is now in the
Natural Science Museum in Tokyo, and his statue is always garlanded with
flowers on the anniversary of his death.

What Gaspode – the modern, mangy, flea-bitten Gaspode – would make of
these stories is not hard to guess, considering his cynical ideas about
his famous namesake:

‘That’s very sad,’ said Victor.

‘Yeah. Everyone says it demonstrates a dog’s innocent and undyin’ love
for ’is master,’ said Gaspode, spitting the words out as if they were
ashes.

‘You don’t believe that, then?’

‘Not really. I b’lieve any bloody dog will stay still an’ howl when
you’ve just lowered the gravestone on his tail,’ said Gaspode.

The modern Gaspode takes good care to keep his skills hidden, which is
relatively easy since most people refuse to believe that any dog can
talk. Even so, rumours get around. William de Worde, editor of the
_Ankh-Morpork Times_, who is professionally inclined to scepticism,
struggles (in vain) against that strange phenomenon, the urban myth:

A couple of months ago someone had tried to hand William the old story
of there being a dog in the city that could talk. It was the third time
this year. William had explained that it was an urban myth. It was
always the friend of a friend who had heard the talk, and it was never
anyone who had seen the dog … There seemed to be no stopping that kind
of story. People swore there was some long-lost heir to the throne of
Ankh living incognito in the town. William certainly recognized wishful
thinking when he heard it. [_The Truth_]

Alas for William, who has chosen the wrong city in which to be an
enlightened thinker …

Meanwhile, other people, even more cynical, know how to take a legend
and turn it into a nice little earner. One is the con-man known as the
Amazing Maurice (who may in fact, according to rumour, be a remarkably
cunning cat). He travels from town to town with his gang of Educated
Rodents, who infiltrate the buildings. A musical confederate then
undertakes, for a good fee, to summon them with his magic pipe and lead
them all far, far away. It has always worked. Here, we know this as a
rather inverted version of the Pied Piper story.

TREACLE MINES

Embedded in place-names, lurking like hidden diamonds, are precious
traces of past history and traditions. There is, for example, a street
in Ankh-Morpork called Treacle Mine Road, running from Misbegot Bridge
to Easy Street. It takes its name from the treacle mines which used to
be worked in this area, which are ancient, very ancient indeed. The
deepest levels contain the remnants of pig-treacle measures that are
estimated to be 500,000 years old, intermingled with basalt slabs carved
with archaic trollish pictograms. The mines were abandoned many years
ago, and most people believe that this was because they were exhausted.
However, when some deep-down dwarfs (grags) bought property on that
street and began mining below it, for reasons of their own (as told in
_Thud!_), they reopened old tunnels and galleries, and their bores
struck some residue of deep treacle.

Up in the mountains, on the borders of Uberwald, there are still very
productive treacle mines, enabling the dwarfs of that region to make a
handsome profit exporting both raw pig-treacle and luscious
treacle-based confectionery to the cities of the plain. Far away in the
hot and swampy realm of Genua, there are lakes of liquid treacle
fermenting happily only a little way underground, and occasionally
bursting out under pressure to create springs of rum. Near Quirm, there
are toffee beds. The origin of all this succulence goes back to the Dawn
of Time, when the Fifth Elephant collided with the Disc with so great an
impact that thousands of acres of prehistoric wild sugar cane was buried
under massive landslides, and compacted into a dense crystalline mass.

Those who study the effects of cosmic resonance in the space-time
continuum of the multiverse often cite the Treacle Mine Phenomenon with
amazement and awe, for it has been shown without doubt that these mines,
which are a plain fact of geography on the Disc, have insinuated
themselves into the folklore of a world where they do not actually
exist, and never have done. In England, there are at least thirty
villages reputed to have a secret treacle mine tucked away somewhere on
their territory. Even more astonishing, there is one place, the village
of Patcham in East Sussex, where people have a fairly accurate idea of
how the treacle was formed (allowing for the fact that this world sadly
lacks any cosmic elephants). A Mrs Austen told the _West Sussex Gazette_
in 1973 the tale she knew, and had passed on to her children:

Millions of years ago, when England was a tropical country, before the
Ice Age, sugar cane grew here. Year after year it grew, ripened and
rotted unharvested, the molasses draining away down into the folds of
the hills, where it accumulated above an impermeable layer of clay. The
centuries passed, the colder weather came, and sugar cane no longer grew
on the Downs, but the underground layer of treacle lay patiently waiting
until in 1871 Peter Jones, a scientist who had long suspected its
existence, sank the first shaft. The ensuing treacle gusher spouted for
three days, covering the countryside for several miles around with a
fine rain of treacle, until it was at last brought under control.

Elsewhere, other explanations are offered. At Chobham in Surrey,
military incompetence is alleged to be the cause. It is said that
soldiers who encamped on Chobham Common before setting out to the
Crimean War (others say, American troops stationed nearby during the
First World War) buried vast stockpiles of supplies, including drums of
treacle and molasses, and forgot to remove them when they left. The
drums corroded, and a subterranean reservoir of treacle was formed.

Other places do not attempt to account for the origin of the precious
substance, but tell ingenious tales about its discovery and use. The
mine at Jarvis Brook near Crowborough (Sussex) was supposedly begun by
the Romans, who carved the solid treacle rock into jewellery, but never
found out how sweet it was; this was discovered accidentally when a
medieval baby prince was visibly soothed by sucking his mother’s
necklace. At Sabden (Lancashire) it is claimed that boggarts (a species
of goblin) are employed in the mine to lick up any spilt treacle; cards
and souvenirs about the mine are sold to tourists.

Yet, sad to say, the people who tell these tales do not take them
seriously. It is all a poker-faced joke, a hoax, a leg-pull, used by the
locals to hoax gullible outsiders, by parents to entertain their
children, by older children to make fools of young ones. While all the
time, did they but know it, the remains of a _real_ treacle mine lie
below the streets of Ankh-Morpork.

WIZARDRY AND CEREMONIAL MAGIC

Any comment upon wizardry in a book with ‘Folklore’ in the title will
have to be made _very quietly_, since there is nothing that infuriates a
scholar more than to be mistaken for a member of the folk, after he has
spent all his waking hours for the past fifty years with his nose in a
book (mealtimes partially excepted). Naturally, he may have come across
the odd scrap of folklore in the course of his reading, but he will make
it very plain that he does not _believe_ it. Arch-chancellor Ridcully,
for example, has heard of the kind of monster called a Sciopod by
Ancient Greeks and a Uniped in Latin: a humanoid with only a single leg
and foot, this being so huge that if it lies on its back and sticks its
leg in the air, the foot makes an excellent sunshade. But he thinks it’s
just something travel writers invented.

‘They always make up that sort of thing. Otherwise it’s too boring. It’s
no good coming home and just saying you were shipwrecked for two years
and ate winkles, is it? You have to put in a lot of daft stuff about men
who go around on one big foot and the Land of Giant Plum Puddings and
nursery rubbish like that.’ [_The Last Continent_]

Magic as actually practised by wizards generally consists of
transformation spells, the skilled hurling of fireballs, the creation of
illusions, and the occasional summoning of demons or, in extreme cases,
of Death himself. These things are done as rarely as possible. But the
theory underpinning these few simple acts is immense, and subdivided
into innumerable branches – divination, theurgy, runes ancient and
modern, cabbalistic rites, gramarye, knowledge of amulets and talismans,
magianism, thaumatology, astrology, morbid spellbinding, sortilege,
invisible writing – and so on and so forth. Not necromancy, however;
this is frowned upon, and has been replaced by a far more acceptable
Department of Post-Mortem Communications. The very heart and soul of
Unseen University is its Library. With over 90,000 volumes of grimoires
and magical texts, it is by far the largest concentration of magical
scholarship anywhere in the multiverse, and so dangerous that most of
the books have to be chained up.

Folklore? Oral tradition? Old wives’ tales? Tchah! It is an insult to
the grand intellectual achievements of wizardry to think their work has
anything in common with the foolish ways of the peasantry.

No doubt the famous and learned occultists of medieval and Renaissance
Europe – such men as Albertus Magnus in the thirteenth century, or
Paracelsus, Cornelius Agrippa, and Dr John Dee in the sixteenth – would
have been just as dismissive. They wrote books which straddled the
ill-defined boundaries between magic, science and philosophy – massive,
expensive tomes in Latin, the international language of the wise.
Albertus, for instance, wrote a treatise on the practical procedures of
alchemy, and was also reputed to be the author of a much simpler _Book
of Secrets_ which described the magical properties of stones, herbs, and
beasts. For example:

_If thou wilt know whether thy wife be chaste or no_. Take the stone
which is called Magnet, in Englishe the Loadstone. It is of a sadde blew
colour, and it is found in the sea of Inde, and sometime in part of
Almaine. Lay this stone under the head of a wife. And if she be chaste,
she will embrace her husband. If she be not chaste, she will fall forth
of her bed …

_If thou wilt Overcome thine Enemies_. Take the stone which is called
Draconites, from the dragon’s head. And if the stone bee drawne out from
him alive it is good against all poisons, and he that beareth it on his
left arme shall overcome all his enemies …

_The Marygold_. The vertue of this herbe is marvellous for if it be
gathered, the Sunne being in the Signe Leo in August, and wrapped in the
leafe of a Lawrell, or May tree, and a wolf’s tooth added thereto, no
man shall be able to speake one word against the bearer thereof, but
only words of peace. If anything bee stolen, and the bearer of the
things before named shall lay them under his head in the night, he shall
see the theefe in a vision.

And so on. It must remain one of the mysteries of trans-dimensional
correspondence whether this Albertus Magnus of medieval Europe has any
connection with Alberto Malich, the exceptionally powerful wizard who
founded Unseen University some two thousand years ago, and disappeared
while performing the Rite of AshkEnte backwards. He had intended to
achieve immortality, and so he did, in a way. He now exists (one can’t
_quite_ say ‘lives’) as cook, valet and gardener in the House of Death,
which suits him nicely.

On Earth, grimoires were often attributed to prestigious figures from
legendary times, such as King Solomon the Wise and Hermes Trismegistus.
As time went on, the practice of magic slid down the social scale; by
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries cheap, simple books of spells
and conjurations were selling in thousands to village cunning men and
wise women, and to ordinary households. In Germany, there was _The Sixth
and Seventh Books of Moses_; in France, _Le grand Albert_ and _Le petit
Albert_, _Le dragon rouge_, _La poule noire_, and the splendidly named
_Abracadabra monumentissima diabolica_. Intellectual wizardry was being
drawn into the vast melting-pot of folk tradition.

This has not happened in Ankh-Morpork, nor is it likely to, so long as
the Librarian has an ook to say in the matter. Nevertheless, far outside
the hallowed walls of Unseen University, lurking in shadowy and
insalubrious back-alleys and keeping out of sight of qualified wizards,
are magical practitioners of a lower sort. Their ambitions are great;
their skills are not. They know far less than they suppose. They band
together in secret societies with imposing titles, and attach vast
importance to ritual, ceremony, and magical tools. They are led by
pompous, bullying men, calling themselves Supreme Grand Masters. Such
are, for instance, the Elucidated Brethren of the Ebon Night, guardians
of the sacred knowledge since a time no man may wot of.

Such groups would be just as indignant as the academic wizards at the
notion that what they were doing had anything in common with folk magic.
No, their Grand Master had been taught profound secrets from the Heart
of Being while undergoing tuition from Hidden Venerable Sages on a
distant mountain. Furthermore, the Sages had given him a book of ancient
wisdom … actually, he had arranged for it to be stolen from the Unseen
University Library, but no matter, it was a Book. And it was ancient.

But it would be a mistake to think that everyone in Ankh-Morpork has
such a highbrow approach to magic. There are people who need no books,
no apparatus, no complex rituals – people with a natural inborn talent
for the occult, like the redoubtable medium Mrs Evadne Cake, noted for
her precognition and her numerous spirit contacts. In some ways she is
very like a witch, and every community needs its witch.

Even in Unseen University itself the housekeeper, Mrs Whitlow, dabbles
in the occult. She loves trying to peer into the future, and owns a
crystal ball which she keeps under a sort of pink frilly tea cosy,
several sets of divinatory cards, a pink velvet bag of rune stones, an
ouija board, and special dried monkey turds which can be thrown in such
a way as to reveal all the secrets of the universe. Granny Weatherwax,
for purposes of her own, offered Mrs Whitlow her services as a reader of
tealeaves. No doubt she had her own opinion of such amateurish
goings-on, but she kept it to herself.

SATOR SQUARE

Most of those who walk through the streets of Ankh-Morpork never pause
to wonder why the square in front of Unseen University is named Sator
Square. There is indeed a reason, though you have to search the annals
of a different universe to discover it: on Earth, Sator Square is the
most famous of all magic squares. But it’s no use looking for it on the
street map of any city, for it is not _that sort_ of square. It is a
palindromic word square.

These are talismans, difficult to invent, but very powerful. You have to
choose a group of words which can be laid out as a square of letters and
which (this is the hard bit) will remain the same whether you read it
downwards, upwards, from the left or from the right. Most of them are
mere gibberish, but the Sator formula does make sense, of a sort. It
goes:

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| S           | A           | T           | O           | R           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| A           | R           | E           | P           | O           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| T           | E           | N           | E           | T           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| O           | P           | E           | R           | A           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| R           | O           | T           | A           | S           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Four out of the five are normal Latin words, meaning ‘the sower holds
the works [and] the wheels’, but _arepo_ is either pure nonsense or the
mysterious, mystical name of the mysterious, mystical Sower who controls
the Wheels (of Fate? Of the heavenly spheres?). The earliest known
example of the square is in one of the houses of Pompeii, buried by the
eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79; another early one was found scratched on
wall plaster in a Roman villa at Cirencester in Gloucestershire. At
these dates, both homes could have belonged to Christian families, and
the square could have served as a coded signal of their faith. It can
hardly be a coincidence that its letters can be unpacked to reveal the
first words of the Our Father (_Pater noster_) twice over, plus A and O
twice. The latter could mean Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End,
which is a title of Christ in the Apocalypse, the Bible’s Book of
Revelation. What’s more, the whole thing can be laid out as a cross,
thus:

[image]

The Sator-Arepo Square was known all over medieval Europe, and in some
countries (Russia, America and Germany, for example) was still being
used in folk magic right up to modern times, almost two thousand years
after it was invented. People said it would put out a fire, if you wrote
it on a piece of wood and threw the wood into the flames; if you cut it
into dough, baked it, and swallowed it, it would cure the bite of a mad
dog; in the United States in the nineteenth century, a cheap book of
spells recommended it as a fire precaution, a detector of witches, a
protection against disease, and good for the cows.

Some echo of all this must surely have filtered through to the wizards
of Unseen University, but whether they actually use word squares
themselves remains unknown.

THE BLACK SCHOOL

For centuries, Earth has known rumours of a Black School where magic was
taught, though none quite matches the venerable antiquity of the Disc’s
Unseen University, now some two thousand years old. The only possible
contenders would be certain secret academies where (if we can believe
the rather unreliable Roman author Pomponius Mela in the first century
AD) druids trained pupils for twenty years on end ‘in sequestered and
remote places, whether in a cave or in secluded groves’.

Once real universities became established in the Middle Ages, there soon
grew up the legend of their secret counterpart, a college called the
Black School where one could learn all the occult arts. It was deep
underground, windowless, and pitch dark. Nobody ever saw the Teacher,
for that was the Devil himself. Students never went outside. Every
evening, they would say aloud what they wanted to learn, and by next
morning the right books would have appeared magically on their desks,
written in fiery letters that glowed in the dark; or the information
would be written in fire upon the walls. And when the course of studies
ended, the students would rush to escape through the single door, for it
was known that the Devil would take the hindmost – unless he was cunning
enough to trick him into seizing his cloak, or his shadow, instead.

And where was this wondrous Black School? Usually it was said to be in
one of the great medieval universities, but not of course in one’s own
country. The learned French scholar and scientist Gerbert d’Aurillac
(946–1003), who became Pope Sylvester II, was rumoured to have studied
magic at the Islamic university in Cordoba, Spain. The Icelander
Sæmundur the Learned (1056–1133) was said to have attended a Black
School somewhere in France. In Romania, folk tradition tells of an
underground academy called Scholomance, near Sibiu in the mountains of
Transylvania (Bram Stoker had heard of this). Others have talked of a
Black School in Paris, Padua, Salamanca, Prague, or Wittenburg (Faust
studied there). Probably students at Wittenburg and Prague whispered
about the fearful occult activities at Oxford and Cambridge.

An aside: It has been suggested by the learned science fiction writer
Isaac Asimov that the general western antipathy towards witches is at
least partly to do with teeth and beards. The hypothesis runs like this:
until the advent of modern dentistry, people who lived to a great age
tended to lose their teeth – to get gummy, in fact. For the old widow,
perhaps with no family to care for her, that added another problem. She
_looked_ like a crone, with the lower part of the face dished in and the
nose appearing to hook. Of course, the same thing happened to the old
men, but _they_ could grow long white beards to hide the wrinkles
behind, and looked as wise as an Old Testament prophet. Wise wizard,
wicked witch … what a difference a razor makes.

¹¹ Tyrants insist on doing this, despite the fact that it never works.

¹² It’s the little details that charm.

[image]


Chapter 14


MORE CUSTOMS,
NAUTICAL LORE _and_
MILITARY MATTERS

 

THERE IS A widespread feeling among folklorists that city-dwellers do
not have customs. Maybe there had been some in the very old days, when
the city was little more than a collection of villages, but they are
long forgotten now. Of course there are various civic and academic
occasions which require serious-minded men to process through the
streets in outdated ceremonial robes and plumed helmets, but these
aren’t proper _folk_ customs. They are all too obviously well organized
and official. They are not archaic and bloodthirsty, nor, on the other
hand, do they involve jolly yokels and winsome maidens prancing around
with many a merry fol-de-rol. Folklore collectors therefore feel free to
ignore them.

However, there comes a time in the history of most cities when somebody
says, ‘We really ought to have a few customs. They could do wonders for
the tourist trade.’ Books are consulted. Ideas from elsewhere are
forcibly uprooted and shamelessly reworked to fit their new environment.
And lo! Suddenly, there are Morris dancers everywhere, and age-old
traditions spring up overnight like mushrooms.

This is beginning to happen in Ankh-Morpork. There is a team of folk
dancers who have revived the Morris – probably more than one, since
Morris dancing is essentially a competitive pastime, sometimes quite
dangerously so. Nobby Nobbs is known to be a participant. There are also
enthusiastic and delightfully melodious wassailers, who put in weeks of
practice before setting out to spread seasonal cheer through the streets
of Ankh-Morpork at Hogswatch.

The custom was referred to by Anaglypta Huggs, organizer of the best and
most select group of the city’s singers, as an occasion for fellowship
and good cheer …

The singers were halfway down Park Lane now, and halfway through ‘The
Red Rosy Hen greets the Dawn of the Day’ in marvellous harmony. Their
collecting tins were already full of donations for the poor of the city,
or at least those sections of the poor who in Mrs Huggs’ opinion were
suitably picturesque and not too smelly and could be relied upon to say
thank you …

In fact the hen is not the bird traditionally associated with heralding
a new sunrise, but Mrs Huggs, while collecting many old folk songs for
posterity, had taken care to rewrite them where necessary to avoid, as
she put it, ‘offending those of a refined disposition with unwarranted
coarseness’. Much to her surprise, people often couldn’t spot the
unwarranted coarseness until it had been pointed out to them.

Sometimes a chicken is nothing but a bird. [_Hogfather_]

Thanks to the humorous workings of narrative necessity, these well-bred
singers, so beautifully free from anything that could distress either
the musical ear or the moral susceptibilities of their audience, find
themselves face to face with what may well be the last vestige of pure,
raw wassailing in the city, the makers of the Rough Music of Time – Foul
Ole Ron and the Canting Crew of deranged beggars, singing and swearing
at the tops of their voices, and banging saucepans together. The beggars
are not well versed in folkloric theory, but they do know this is the
sort of thing one does at midwinter, and have good reason to believe
that if you make enough din people will give you money to stop.

Those who have looked into the history of folklore of western Europe
over the last couple of hundred years will notice some quite astonishing
similarities to this situation. There too, some genteel Victorian
collectors, while professing their deep love of tradition, took for
granted that it must be stripped of all coarseness and daintily
repackaged. There too, some customs slipped down the social scale till
they were little more than a way for the poorest of the working class
(or even beggars) to extract a little beer-money from their betters at
festive seasons. And there too, these same customs might be
rediscovered, imitated, revived and updated by later and more
sophisticated generations.

As soon as people begin to _notice_ a custom (as opposed to just doing
it), they start wondering where, when and why it began. They weave
wonderful theories. But this is futile, since folklore is almost always
unaccountable:

Very few people do know how Tradition is supposed to go. There’s a
certain mysterious ridiculousness about it by its very nature – _once_
there was a reason why you had to carry a posy of primroses on Soul Cake
Tuesday, but _now_ you did it because that’s what was Done. [_Jingo_]

The ceremony still carries on, of course. If you left off traditions
because you didn’t know why they started you’d be no better than a
foreigner. [_Hogfather_]

In both worlds, old customs discarded by adults are often kept going for
a few generations by children. According to the Bursar, when he was a
boy there was a custom on Soul Cake Tuesday that children would roll
boiled eggs down the Tump, a large steep hill on the outskirts of the
city. Naturally, nobody can say what the point of it is, apart from the
fairly obvious fact that it is fun, and that the eggs are nice to eat,
even if they are a bit cracked and muddy. As Nanny Ogg would say, with
surprising Biblical insight, ‘We all have to eat a peck of dirt before
we die.’

Since children in Lancre and other rural areas also get given eggs on
this date, as we mentioned earlier, there is every reason to think the
custom is genuinely folksy – possibly even mythic, if the Soul Cake Duck
is involved. If so, it would have begun as something serious, to be done
by adults. There are some people, including the compiler of _The
Discworld Almanak_, who claim that the duck plays a major role in
primeval mythology:

Curiously written out of early legends of the creation of the Universe
is the _Great Duck_, from whose single egg the whole of Creation was
hatched. However, truth will out, and it is now known that, from the
outside, infinity is duck-egg blue.

It turns out that this was written in haste by a member of the _Almanak_
staff to justify an error elsewhere in the book, but there once were
similar myths scattered throughout our own world (in ancient Egypt,
Finland, India, Greece and Persia, for example), telling how the
universe was hatched from an egg laid by some Great Bird, often a duck
or goose. And _that_, in a roundabout sort of way, might explain those
chocolate eggs people buy at Easter, without quite knowing why.

Folk custom also explains why one occasionally sees visitors to
Ankh-Morpork leaning over the Brass Bridge in a meaningful manner. They
are acting upon an old superstition that if you throw a coin into the
Ankh you’ll be sure to return to the city – or is it if you just _throw
up_ into the Ankh? Probably it is a coin after all, since a remarkable
number of supposedly rational species in various worlds feel compelled
to toss coins into rivers, fountains, wishing-wells, and even oddly
shaped cascades in airport terminals, in a vague expectation of good
luck and wishes fulfilled. Why? Well, in the case of airports it is a
convenient way of getting rid of small change you won’t need in Sydney
while at the same time getting a small smug feeling of having done some
good, but in the other cases? What mechanism is operating here, in the
twenty-first century? On the Discworld, though, they know why. The Lady
is a real presence.

*

Unseen University has a whole clutch of traditional ceremonies and
festivals of its own, carried out with unfailing regularity. These of
course have nothing whatever to do with anything or anybody beyond the
University’s walls. They are ‘gown’, not ‘town’, and emphatically not
‘folk’. Those which involve processing through the public streets do so
as a way of inspiring due respect in the uncultured masses. A prime
example is the Convivium, when the Archchancellor, Council, and entire
senior staff proceed ceremonially from the University to the Opera
House, where new graduates are awarded their degrees in the presence of
the Patrician. The procession then returns, rather more quickly, for a
large banquet.

But one ceremony which has a certain impact on the townsfolk is the
Beating of the Bounds every 22 Grune. This involves a choir, all
able-bodied members of staff, and a gaggle of students retracing the
exact route of the boundaries of the University, as originally laid down
centuries ago. They walk through or if necessary climb over any
buildings that have since been built across the route, while
ceremonially striking members of the public with live ferrets (in
memory, for reasons unknown, of a long-ago Archchancellor Buckleby).

Any red-headed men encountered are seized by several strong young men
and given a ‘plunking’; this tradition has, most unusually – and
subsequent to an incident which left three wizards hanging precariously
from a gutter – been amended to read ‘any red-headed men except of
course Captain Carrot Ironfoundersson of the Watch’. After the progress,
the entire membership of the University heads back to the Great Hall for
a huge breakfast at which duck must be served. [_The Discworld
Companion_]

Why red-heads? In Ankh-Morpork the reason, if there ever was one, is
forgotten. On Earth, folklore asserts that red hair was the mark of
Judas, and is found in descendants of Jews and of Viking raiders. They
were distrusted, though there is no record of people plunking them.

In Britain and Europe, processions to Beat the Bounds (also known as
Rogation Processions) were mainly found in country districts, where
priests led the people round the parish boundaries, blessing the fields
and praying for a good harvest. The custom was legally useful too; when
local administration was organized by parishes, it was important that
everyone knew just where one parish ended and another began. That way,
taxes and tithes could be fairly assessed, and if a penniless beggar
dropped dead on the road one knew whose job it was to bury him. Boundary
markers on walls, stones or trees were inspected, renewed if necessary,
and ritually ‘beaten’ with rods. Sometimes boys were upended and beaten
too, to make sure the next generation remembered everything quite
clearly.

The custom does not often survive in towns, but in Oxford on Ascension
Day two parishes still provide a spectacle remarkably similar to what
can be seen in Ankh-Morpork (but without the ferrets, alas). In the
words of folklorist Steve Roud:

The boundary markers in Oxford can be set into walls, high or low, or
even into the floor, and can be down narrow alleyways, in basements, and
behind or inside buildings. The routes take in the college buildings
within the parish as well as shops and pubs, much to the surprise of
people they meet on the way. They stop for refreshments at various
locations, and at one point students throw coins and sweets for the
choristers to scramble for. [_The English Year_ (2006)]

In Ankh-Morpork there are also traditional student activities, notably
the dreaded Rag Week, which has all the normal perils of student humour
with the additional seasoning of magic. Prudent citizens take evasive
action, but the event is welcomed by the landlords of the Mended Drum,
the Bunch of Grapes, and other hostelries, since much alcohol is
traditionally consumed.

The even more dreaded mass football match is now discontinued. This used
to involve teams of fifty students apiece from the University itself and
from each of the Guild Colleges attempting to kick or carry a football
from the outskirts of the Shades to the Tower of Art. Goals were scored
by kicking the ball through the door (or more often the window) of
landmarks along the way, most of them having names like the Mended Drum,
the Bunch of Grapes, etc. The scoring team had then to be bought drinks
by the other teams. Much alcohol was traditionally consumed. There were
occasions when the match went on for a month.

Something very similar used to happen on Earth, and in some cases still
does. For, just as there is a whole area of folklore that concerns
singing very loudly until being given money to stop, or at least to go
away and infest some other street, so there is an area chock-full of
folk games that consist of two sides trying to get a ball (or similar
token) into an opposing goal by means of, apparently, a bout of allin
wrestling.

In many towns of Britain, some five or six hundred years ago, the
streets would periodically be jammed tight with a heaving mass of young
men shoving, kicking and head-butting one another. If you watched long
enough, you would probably work out that it was not a fight after all,
but some kind of game played between two teams. Somewhere down out of
sight there would be a ball being kicked or carried, for this was the
true, the original, form of British football. No rules worth mentioning,
no limit on the number of men crazy enough to play for one team or the
other. No goal posts either; the ‘goals’ would be at opposite ends of
the town, at least a mile apart, and might just as likely be ponds or
streams as buildings. It was a wild, violent type of game, and might
very well last all day. In Derby in 1829 a writer explained how it was
done:

The game commences in the market-place, where the partisans of each
parish are drawn up on each side, and about noon, a large ball is tossed
up in the midst of them. This is seized on by some of the strongest and
most active men. The rest of the players immediately close in upon them,
and a solid mass is formed. It then becomes the object of each party to
impel the crowd towards their own particular goal. The struggle to
obtain the ball, which is carried in the arms of those who have
possessed themselves of it, is violent … It would be difficult to give
an adequate idea of this ruthless sport. A Frenchman passing through
Derby remarked that if Englishmen called this playing, it would be
impossible to say what they called fighting.

If you asked the players what the point was, they’d probably tell you it
celebrated the defeat of some Scotsmen (or Englishmen, or Vikings,
according to taste), whose heads were then kicked round the battlefield.

The tough young fellows who played it absolutely loved it. Others were
less enthusiastic. People got injured, as the respectable citizens of
Chester complained in the 1530s, ‘some having their bodies bruised or
crushed, some their arms, heads or legs broken, and some otherwise
maimed or in peril of their lives’. Worse still, windows got broken,
which was expensive. The town authorities stopped the Chester game in
1539, but in some other places people were more stubborn; in Derby it
took soldiers, special constables, and the reading of the Riot Act to
finally subdue the footballers in 1849. Some towns kept their mass
football till late in the nineteenth century. Indeed, there are a few
places where it is still vigorously played. It can be seen at Alnwick in
Northumberland and Ashbourne in Derbyshire every Shrove Tuesday, and at
Kirkwall in Orkney at the New Year.

The ‘Haxey Hood Game’ at Haxey in Lincolnshire every January is similar,
though it is surrounded by more ceremonial, and though the object
tussled over is not a ball but a roll of leather, like a truncheon.
Allegedly, this represents the hood of a long-ago medieval lady which
blew off, causing twelve or thirteen labourers to go chasing after it.
Who knows, but for that unthinking piece of gallantry we might now be
watching Association Archery on Saturday afternoons.

GHOST SHIPS

In _Small Gods_ there’s a description of a shipwreck. When the captain
cries, ‘We’ll have to abandon ship!’ Death replies, NO. WE WILL TAKE IT
WITH US. IT IS A NICE SHIP. And so, though the ship has been completely
smashed up and everyone aboard is drowned, it seems to become whole
again (in a way) and sails away, grey and slightly transparent, through
darkness and silence, bearing the ghosts of men and of rats.

Sailors on Earth also find it perfectly natural that a ship can become a
ghost, since before it sank it had been a living creature, with a soul
of its own – a ‘she’, in fact, not an ‘it’. She’s got a name, hasn’t
she? And wasn’t she christened, just like a human being, with somebody
blessing her and smashing a bottle of champagne over her? In French
fishing villages, there would be a full-scale religious ceremony for a
new boat, with a godfather and godmother, and a priest to sprinkle holy
water; everyone was given blessed bread, including the boat herself –
scraps of the bread would be put into holes in the mast.

Many also thought that a ship had a guardian spirit. Some said it lived
in the figurehead. Others, from Ancient Egypt to modern China and the
Mediterranean, have painted huge eyes on the prow; these are the eyes of
its guardian, to bring luck, to see the way ahead, and to outstare any
evil spirits. The Swedes have a different notion; they say that when
boat-builders cut a tree down to make the keel, the tree’s guardian
gnome follows it, and becomes the boat’s luck-bringer.

Ships and death go well together. Vikings thought a dead man should sail
in his own boat to the land of the dead. So some of them buried or
burned the man and the boat together; others lit a pyre for the corpse
on board a ship, which was then set drifting out to sea; others marked
the site of the man’s grave by an oval of standing stones, forming the
outline of a boat. An English poet, D. H. Lawrence, wrote in the 1920s
of ‘The Ship of Death’:

We are dying, we are dying, so all we can do
is now to be willing to die, and to build the ship
of death to carry the soul on its longest journey.

A little ship, with oars and food
and little dishes, and all accoutrements
fitting and ready for the departing soul.

There are also the phantom ships doomed to sail the seas of Earth for
ever, because of some crime or sin committed on board, or because of the
tragic circumstances in which they sank. To see one is an omen of
disaster, or at least of very bad weather. You can recognize them
because they are sailing at full speed against the wind, or when there
is no wind at all. Often they have no crew; if there is one, they are
skeletons. They never reach a port; they never answer when hailed. There
is at least one, at Porthcurno in Cornwall, which has been seen to sail
straight for the shore at dusk, rise up into the air, and go on sailing
_across dry land_.

The most famous of the phantom ships is the _Flying Dutchman_. She
haunts the seas around the Cape of Good Hope, because her captain
blasphemously swore he would round the Cape, despite a gale, even if it
took him till Doomsday. In Britain, several ghost ships haunt the Solway
Firth, as a result of crimes. Two were pirate vessels; one was
deliberately wrecked by a jealous murderer as it carried a bridal party;
one was a slave trader, homeward bound, whose rich but godless captain
refused to go ashore to attend church on Christmas Day. There is also
the _Lady Lovibund_, which is supposed to appear on 13 February once
every fifty years, heading for the Goodwin Sands (in the Channel, off
Deal), because the first mate deliberately ran it aground there, being
driven crazy with jealousy because he was in love with the captain’s
newly wedded bride. This is said to have happened in 1748, and some
people claim the spectral ship was sighted at fifty-year intervals up to
and including 1948. Oddly, when boatloads of journalists went looking
for it in 1998, it failed to appear.

The derelict ghost ships in _Going Postal_ are real, or rather, the way
they hang suspended in the depths of the sea was once thought to be a
real scientific possibility. But the wonderful image of skeletons
crewing rotting hulks faded in the light of deep oceanic research in the
nineteenth century. Until then, it was quite respectable to assume that
water, like air, got denser with depth, and that a stricken ship would
sink only until it encountered water at a density slightly higher than
its own, where it might then drift on the interface until it rotted. In
fact water does not compress like air, which is why fish at the bottom
of the sea don’t have to drill holes in it. When you sink, you sink.

FEMALE SOLDIERS

Folk songs, most notably ‘Sweet Polly Oliver’, keep alive the theme of
the cross-dressing girl who goes off to war in men’s attire:

As sweet Polly Oliver lay musing in bed,

A sudden strange fancy came into her head:

‘Nor father nor mother shall make me false prove,

I’ll ’list for a soldier and follow my love.’

So early next morning she softly arose,

And dressed herself up in her dead brother’s clothes.

She cut her hair close, and she stained her face brown,

And went for a soldier to fair London Town.

The songs were based on fact, and _Monstrous Regiment_ was only an
exaggeration for comic effect – very little which is said in that book
about the girls’ cross-dressing experiences was made up.

There are plenty of references to such women in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries¹³ (up to 1,400 of them in the American Civil War,
it has been suggested, but 500 or fewer seems more acceptable). They
made the decision out of love, for adventure, or from a desire to escape
from a burdensome life. They came to light as a result of falling in
love, betraying themselves by lack of acting skill, or being wounded
somewhere that obliged the surgeon to remove the patient’s trousers; or,
quite often, by proudly admitting it much later on. When some of them
were grandmothers. Obviously, we will never know about ones who didn’t
own up.

The subject is a fascinating one, and well documented. We give a couple
of titles in the bibliography, but there are many more. What is
interesting is how easily women could get away with it (after the
not-really-serious were weeded out very early on). The Pollys often did
well, acting as spies, where their wonderful skill at dressing up as
women was a great help, and even getting promoted. There is a whole slew
of explanations as to how they kept their secret while living with
hundreds of men, and some of these turn up in _Monstrous Regiment_. For
instance, in an age long before unisex fashions, trousers meant ‘man’
and skirts meant ‘woman’. Trousers plus high-pitched voice meant ‘young
man’. People didn’t expect anything else, and saw what they expected to
see. Many Pollys joined up as boys, and if the lad was a little shy, no
one thought that odd. People did not often see one another naked, and
the surgeon amputating a foot might only roll the trouser leg above the
knee. But the big reason is that, if they are determined and careful,
women can easily fool men.

However, there was one thing, according to accounts, that many of them
just could not manage. It was swearing. Many could not bring themselves
to cuss, and found the ripe language of their comrades hard to bear, let
alone imitate. So … a bit of a change there, at least!

¹³ Indeed, more or less throughout recorded history, but this is when it
happened in a major way.

[image]


Chapter 15


KIDS’ STUFF … YOU
KNOW, ABOUT
’ORRID MURDER _and_
BLOOD

 

THERE ARE MANY links between folklore and the mental world of children,
but they do not always follow the paths one might expect. Theoreticians
in the Ankh-Morpork Folklore Society (and indeed in similar institutions
here) love to think that some age-old memory, preferably of something
quite horrible, lurks in the background of the simplest rhyme or game.
They claim, for example, that when children shape big fat figures out of
piled-up snow and push in lumps of coal as eyes, these are ‘obvious
survivals’ of primitive idols representing the dreaded Ice Giants with
their tiny, deep-set black eyes who, according to mythology, will one
day overwhelm the world. Of course, the children say they just do it for
fun – they would, wouldn’t they? But a theoretical folklorist rarely if
ever takes note of what the folk themselves have to say. It stands to
reason that he or she is far better equipped than they are to roll back
the mists of time. And in two shakes of a duck’s tail, the theory is
accepted as a proven fact. If the moving pictures enterprise once begun
at Holy Wood had succeeded, by now every audience in Ankh-Morpork would
know that when a film-maker shows a brief shot of a snowman he means
everyone to shudder at this sinister symbol of ecological doom and the
imminent End of the World. Meanwhile, the kids go on throwing snowballs
and lumps of coal around, regardless.

In our Earthly culture, many parents and teachers worry whether fairy
tales and nursery rhymes and children’s games and customs are
respectable, morally and educationally sound, and fully in accord with
health and safety regulations. Judging from existing records, few adults
on the Disc are bothered by these issues. There, at least in the poorer
parts of Ankh-Morpork, children freely play brutal and unhygienic street
games, hallowed by long tradition. These include Dead Rat Conkers and
Tiddley-Rat, though a recent observer has noted that Turd Races in the
gutter appear to have died out, despite an attempt to take them upmarket
with the name Poosticks. Hopscotch too is popular, especially a
variation which Captain Vimes played in childhood, in which you kicked
the least popular kid from one square to another, singing ‘William
Scuggins is a bastard’ – actions and words which do not figure in
handbooks designed for games teachers.

Throughout the multiverse, parents have repeatedly discovered the useful
fact that the best way to control a child is by working on its
imagination to create a gruesome anthropomorphic personification: ‘Don’t
you dare play in the cornfield! If you do, the Corn Mother will come
with her long iron teeth and her long iron claws, and tear you to bits’
– ‘Behave yourselves while I’m out. Remember that
Rawhead-and-Bloody-Bones is watching you!’ Used in moderation, these
Frighteners and Prohibitory Monsters have a great deal to recommend
them. If Nanny Ogg’s grandchildren believe there’s a demon inside the
copper in her wash-house,¹⁴ and if country children everywhere are
scared of deep pools because there’s something down there with green
eyes and big teeth just _longing_ to pull them in, a lot of nasty
accidents will be avoided.

But there are snags, particularly on Discworld. Even though the adults
don’t believe the Frighteners are real, the children do, and the high
magic quotient built into the very fabric of the Disc ensures that
whatever is powerfully believed in will, very shortly, exist. (‘If only
people would _think_ before they invent monsters,’ sighed Miss Tick, the
teacher-witch of the Chalk country.) The problem seems to be at its
worst in cities. True, there are fewer natural dangers there, but
semi-sadistic adults still enjoy inducing irrational fears, as Susan
Sto-Helit found when she became a governess in Ankh-Morpork. Since she
was one of the rare adults capable of seeing the resulting monsters, she
knew how to deal with them:

One of the many terrors conjured up by the previous governess’s happy
way with children had been the bears that waited around in the street to
eat you if you stood on the cracks [in the pavement].

Susan had taken to carrying the poker under her respectable coat. One
wallop generally did the trick. The bears were amazed that anyone else
saw them …

The previous governess had used various monsters and bogeymen as a form
of discipline. There was always something waiting to eat or carry off
bad boys and girls for crimes like stuttering or defiantly and
aggravatingly persisting in writing with their left hand. There was
always a Scissor Man waiting for a little girl who sucked her thumb,
always a bogeyman in the cellar. Of such bricks is the innocence of
childhood constructed. [_Hogfather_]

It is impossible to describe what bogeymen look like, since they are
skilled shape-shifters and mould their appearance to match whatever
horrors they find lurking in their child-victim’s subconscious. But one
_can_ say how to get rid of them – at any rate, on the Discworld. They
are terrified of blankets, especially those with blue fluffy bunnies on.
Even a small square of blanket fabric drives them off. Which stands to
reason, for if you can protect yourself from a bogeyman by hiding your
head under the blanket, how much more effective it will be to drop a
blanket on _his_ head!

Most of the Frighteners exist on Earth too. A poem by A. A. Milne tells
how Pavement Bears lurked in the streets of London in the 1930s;
sensible children watched their feet as they walked, taking care to
tread only on the square paving stones, never on the cracks between
them.

The Earthly Scissor Man, a monstrous tailor, was first described in
nineteenth-century Germany by Heinrich Hoffman in _Struwwelpeter_, a
book of verses known in English as _Shock-Headed Peter_. There, he is a
tailor, a ‘great, long, red-legged Scissor Man’.

One day Mama said, ‘Conrad dear,

I must go out and leave you here.

But mind now, Conrad, what I say,

Don’t suck your thumb while I’m away.

The great tall tailor always comes

To little boys that suck their thumbs;

And ere they dream what he’s about,

He takes his great sharp scissors out,

And cuts their thumbs clean off, and then,

You know, they never grow again.’

On the Discworld, he looks different:

When Susan turned to go up the stairs the Scissor Man was there.

It wasn’t man-shaped. It was something like an ostrich, and something
like a lizard on its hind legs, but almost entirely like something made
out of blades. Every time it moved a thousand blades went snip, snip.

Its long silver neck curved and a head made of shears stared down at
her.

‘You’re not looking for me,’ she said. ‘You’re not _my_ nightmare.’
[_Hogfather_]

Then there’s the Sandman. He sweeps right across the world at the speed
of dark, just as dusk falls, and gets inside every house where there are
children. It’s up to him to make sure that they go up the wooden hill to
_Bed_fordshire the _very minute_ they’re told, and get straight into bed
and go straight off to sleep, no fooling about. If the mother is
kind-hearted and modern in her views, she will say he does this by
sprinkling magic sand which makes them so sleepy that they can’t keep
their eyes open. Those who are less soppy know that the bag of sand he
carries is small, but heavy, and he doesn’t bother to take any out
before he swings it against the child’s skull.

These days, on our world, he has been ‘dwindled’; mums all have the same
idea of a _nice_ Sandman. But go back a couple of hundred years, to a
time when people really knew how to keep children in a constant
wholesome state of terror, and listen to what a nanny says in a story by
another German author, E. T. A. Hoffman:

‘Oh, the Sandman is a wicked man, who comes to little children when they
won’t go to bed, and throws handfuls of sand in their eyes, so they jump
out of their heads all bloody; and he puts them in a bag and takes them
to the half-moon as food for his little ones; and they sit there in the
nest and have hooked beaks like owls, to pick at the eyes of naughty
little boys and girls.’

The magic of childhood is not what it was.

Thankfully, not all Anthropomorphic and Theriomorphic Personifications
are so sinister. Jack Frost, an elderly man who draws ferns and paisley
patterns on window panes at night, has no dealings with children at all.
The Soul Cake Duck lays chocolate eggs for them, in gardens, on the
Tuesday of the Soul Cake Days in the month of Sektober; she hides them
well (but not too well), so that the kiddies can have fun hunting for
them. In spite of her name, she does _not_ lay cakes. Her equivalent on
Earth is the German and Swiss Easter Hare, who has been laying eggs for
children to find since the sixteenth century. Nowadays he is known in
Britain and America under the name of the Easter Bunny – a terrible
come-down. At first the Hare only laid real eggs, often brightly
painted; more recently he has been producing chocolate ones. German and
Swiss children enjoy building little nests of moss and flowers and hay,
ready for the Hare to use. Just how a hare – and a male hare at that –
can _lay_ chocolate eggs will be no mystery to anyone who has noticed
certain little brown oval objects in the corner of the rabbit hutch.

Then there are the ever-welcome tooth fairies. Everybody knows what
_they_ do – when a child loses a tooth, he or she must slip it under the
pillow, and a tooth fairy will come in the night to take it away,
leaving at least half an Ankh-Morpork dollar as payment. Despite the
name, they do not belong to the same species as elves, or even gnomes.
They are human-sized, rather plain and dumpy, and none too bright.

Fairies aren’t necessarily little twinkly creatures. It’s purely a job
description, and the commonest ones aren’t even visible. A fairy is
simply any creature currently employed under supernatural laws to take
things away or, as in the case of the Verruca Gnome, to bring things.
[_Hogfather_]

Tooth fairies are to be found chiefly in towns (there are at least half
a dozen in Ankh-Morpork alone), and then only in moderately well-off
homes. This is probably due to socio-economic factors, since it is
generally supposed that the coins the fairy brings have been recycled
(by bogeymen) after being lost in the very same house. You won’t find
many coins under the furniture of a cottage in Lancre, where the basic
unit of currency is the chicken. Nor, come to that, in the poor quarters
of Ankh-Morpork, in a place like Cockbill Street. Pennies were precious
in Cockbill Street; if you had any spare ones you put them by to get you
a decent funeral; you didn’t lose them under the settee, because you
didn’t have one. The Tooth Fairy rarely visits Cockbill Street.

Actually, it is wrong to speak of _The_ Tooth Fairy, as if there was
only one of her. The mistake originated in America somewhere around
1960, and has mysteriously leapt across the dimensions in an attempt to
gain a footing in the Discworld. Fortunately, in Ankh-Morpork Violet
Bottler and her fellow workers are united in loyalty to one another and
to their weekly wage, insisting that they are all, each and every one of
them, tooth fair_ies_.

In Britain, it is certain that fairies (in the plural) have been
collecting children’s shed milk teeth from under pillows for about a
hundred years, leaving money in exchange. What happened earlier is a
mystery. Victorian folklore books do not mention tooth fairies, but this
is probably because the collectors spent their time hunting for
excitingly unusual customs and beliefs; it did not occur to them that
the everyday stuff in their own homes was interesting too.

Nowadays, owing to pervasive American influence, British children
believe in one single Tooth Fairy. She is immensely popular. Even
dentists talk about her, and keep a stock of dinky little envelopes with
her picture on, so that when children have a tooth professionally
extracted, they can take it home and pop it under the pillow just the
same.

So, how long have tooth fairies been around? There is one small scrap of
evidence that in seventeenth-century England elves and fairies were
already busy collecting pretty little items in the human world and
carting them off to fairyland to decorate their dwellings – which
answers the question, ‘What exactly do the fairies _do_ with the teeth?’
This evidence comes in the poem ‘Oberon’s Palace’ by Robert Herrick,
number 444 in his book _Hesperides_ (1648). The poem describes a
charming little cave or grotto where Oberon the Fairy King goes to make
love to Queen Mab. They are very small fairies, possibly the same
species as are often mistaken for wasps on the Disc. The cave walls are
decorated with bits of peacock feathers, fish scales, blue snake skins,
dewdrops etc. The floor is a mosaic of plum-tree gum, dice, brown
toadstones, human fingernails, warts, and the teeth of squirrels and
children ‘lately shed’. These bits and pieces, says Herrick, are
‘brought hither by the Elves’. They are not following _quite_ the same
procedure as a modern tooth fairy, since they don’t leave money, but
they’re well on the way.

There is another way of dealing with shed teeth, and this too goes back
to the seventeenth century. Children would just rub the tooth with salt
and throw it in the fire. This was still done in some homes in the
1950s, especially in the north of England, sometimes with a verse:

Fire, fire, burn a bone,

God send me a tooth again,

A straight one, a strong one,

A white shiny bright one.

In many parts of Europe, especially Germany and Russia, it wasn’t
fairies that took the teeth, but mice or rats. And what they gave in
exchange was not a coin, but lovely new teeth to grow in place of the
old – teeth as strong, sharp and well shaped as their own. So children
would shove the tooth as far as they could down a mousehole, with some
suitable rhyme:

Mousey, mousey, mousey,

Here’s my tooth of bone,

Mousey, bring a new tooth,

A tooth as hard as stone.

Tooth Mice didn’t care whether a home was rich or poor, and they were
one hundred per cent reliable. No child who put a tooth in a mousehole
ever failed to find a new one growing through its gums.

Unfortunately, the same magic law of like-to-like meant that if people
were careless about shed teeth, the unlucky child could end up with
something very ugly indeed. According to the folklorist Charlotte
Latham, writing in 1878 about superstitions she had noted in Sussex ten
years earlier:

A servant girl said children’s cast teeth must never be thrown away,
because if an animal found and gnawed them, the new tooth would grow
just like that animal’s. ‘Look at old Master Simmons,’ she said, ‘with
that gurt big pig’s tooth in his upper jaw. He allus says ’twas his
mam’s fault, she having dropped one of his baby teeth in the hog’s
trough, accidental like.’

Poor Master Simmons! If he had lived on the Disc, people would have told
him how lucky he was to look just like the Hogfather, whose teeth are
remarkably tusk-like.

But there is an older, darker reason why shed teeth must either be
entirely destroyed by fire, or be hidden somewhere where nobody can ever
lay hands on them. It has to do with power, and control, and magic – a
magic so old and so simple it’s hardly magic at all. In our world, this
is explained by Sir James Frazer in his famous work _The Golden Bough_:

The most familiar example of Contagious Magic is the magical sympathy
which is supposed to exist between a man and any severed portion of his
person, such as his hair or nails; so that whoever gets possession of
human hair or nails may work his will, at any distance, upon the person
from whom they were cut. This superstition is worldwide.

Exactly the same principle works on the Discworld, as the assassin
Teatime knows only too well, especially as regards teeth. So does
Archchancellor Mustrum Ridcully, who remarks, with reference to his own
toenails,

‘You can’t be too careful. Get hold of something like someone’s nail
clippings and you’ve got ’em under your control. That’s real old magic.
Dawn of time stuff.’ [_Hogfather_]

HOGSWATCH

In the bleak midwinter, frosty winds make moan. People, on the other
hand, make as much loud and cheerful noise as they can:

People have always had the urge to sing and clang things at the dark
stub of the year, when all sorts of psychic nastiness has taken
advantage of the long grey days and the deep shadows to lurk and breed.
Lately people in Ankh-Morpork’s better districts had taken to singing
harmoniously, which rather lost the effect. Those who really understood
just clanged something and shouted. [_Hogfather_]

They also gather to eat and drink and dance, to light bonfires, and to
give one another presents. This happens in many parts of the multiverse,
provided the climate is suitable. Obviously, you’ve got to have a
midwinter before you can have a midwinter festival, so there’s no point
looking for one in hot regions like Djelibeybi or the Rimward hinterland
of Klatch, but wherever there’s a cold dark season you can find
something pretty much like Hogswatchnight. It’s a way of telling the Sun
what you expect of him – ‘Rise and shine, Sun, start to grow strong
again, drive back the Ice Giants, bring us the warmth of Spring.’ The
Sun needs a little encouragement, whatever astronomers may say.

The Disc is a lucky world in that the sensible arrangement of its sun,
its disc, and its supporting elephants has ensured that the dates of its
solstices can be easily observed without any need for complicated maths
– unlike Earth, where the hours of sunrise and sunset stay apparently
the same for three or four days around midsummer and midwinter, giving
rise to muddled arguments over whether Midsummer Day is 21 June or 24
June, and why the Romans chose 25 December rather than the 21st as the
Feast of the Unconquered Sun. It is also lucky for the inhabitants of
Lancre, Ankh-Morpork and the Sto Plains that some sensible ruler in
ancient times decided that the night of the winter solstice,
Hogswatchnight, would also count as New Year’s Eve. Would that all
calendars were as simple and rational! As a result, it is _both_ the
time of the darkest shadows, _and_ the time when all the old year’s
occult rubbish has piled up and must be cleared away, _and_ the time for
the largest, loudest feast of the year.

The name ‘Hogswatch’ makes perfectly good sense for the Discworld, where
the festive fare at midwinter is centred on pig-meat in one form or
another – roast boar, pork joints, pork pies, sausages, hams, pigs’
heads, black puddings – and where the Hogfather, the seasonal
gift-bringer, gallops across the skies in a sledge drawn by wild boars.
This is a world where pigs (at least, certain special pigs on a certain
special night) can and do fly. Oddly, in Scotland and northern England
there is a rather similar-sounding name for New Year’s Eve, Hogmanay – a
word which has been known since the sixteenth century, but which nobody
has managed to explain. Moreover, British Methodists call Christmas Eve
and New Year’s Eve the _Watch_ Nights, and hold midnight services. There
are parts of Europe (notably Romania, Serbia, Sweden and Norway) where
roast pig or a pig’s head is _the_ thing to eat at Christmas. All this
surely proves that echoes of the great Discworld festival drifted across
the dimensions and became fruitfully confused in receptive Earthly
minds.

Be that as it may, there is a good practical reason why midwinter
feasting is so lavish – it’s the season for a mass slaughter of
livestock. Why use up large amounts of fodder keeping _all_ your animals
alive through the winter? Come the spring, a single young healthy bull,
ram and boar will be enough to service all your cows, ewes and sows. So,
kill off the surplus males, and for once everyone can eat as much fresh
meat as they like, and then salt or smoke the rest, and with luck
they’ll have enough to last all winter. Farmers have been doing this for
thousands of years. The people who built Stonehenge, about 2500 BC, left
enormous piles of half-eaten bones littering a village some two miles
away – bones of cattle, and many, many pigs. The pigs’ teeth show they
were young beasts, killed at about nine months old, just right for the
winter solstice. And there were so many bones that people must have been
gathering from miles around for this annual feast. Whatever its name may
have been, it was the Hogswatch of its time.

Very likely, it went on for more than just one night and day. There’s
not much work needed on farms at midwinter, so why not spread the fun
out for as long as possible? Many peoples have had this idea. The
Ancient Romans managed to turn most of December into one long festive
season. First came the Saturnalia, a period of five or six days of
revelry beginning on 17 December and honouring Saturn, god of new-sown
crops. Shops were closed, work was forbidden (except cooking and
baking), people gave one another presents, and everyone was expected to
be full of jests and japes and jollity. There were parties, at which men
drew lots to see who would preside as ‘king’ of the feast; his word was
law, and he could order the guests to do all kinds of ridiculous things
– dance naked, for instance, or pick up the flute-girl and carry her
three times round the room. Often, social distinctions were turned
topsy-turvy: slaves sat at table and gorged, while their masters waited
on them. We suspect that the slaves were magnanimous in office, though;
tomorrow the masters would be the masters again.

Then came the Feast of the Unconquered Sun on the 25th, a relatively
sober affair. And then the wild three-day celebration of the Kalends,
beginning on New Year’s Day, 1 January. All Romans, rich or poor, ate
and drank the best they could afford. Adults gave one another presents
yet again (children are not mentioned). Houses were decked inside and
out with evergreens – holly, ivy, laurel, branches of conifers, whatever
was still alive and green in the dead season. There were torches and
lamps everywhere. People hardly went to bed, but roamed the streets
disguised in masks and weird costumes of animal skins. A great deal of
wine was consumed.

So powerful were these traditions that when the Roman Empire became
Christian most of its midwinter customs were adapted so as to fit in
with the new religion. Christ’s birth was being celebrated on 25
December in Rome as early as the year 354, while in 567 a Church Council
at Tours laid down that the whole period of twelve days from 25 December
to 6 January (feast of the Epiphany) would be one long festal cycle,
during which all but the most essential work must cease. And so the
Twelve Days of Christmas were born.

There are echoes of all this on the Disc. There are songs about what
gifts one’s true love sends on the Twelve Days of Hogswatch, involving
partridges and pear trees, and others about the rising of the sun and
the running of the deer. Homes are decorated with special Hogswatch
trees, not to mention holly, ivy, mistletoe. The mistletoe is felt,
obscurely, to be especially significant, even in Unseen University,
where there can be no question of anyone kissing anyone:

‘Well, er … it’s … well, it’s symbolic, Archchancellor.’

‘Ah?’

The Senior Wrangler felt that something more was expected. He groped
around in the dusty attics of his education.

‘Of … the leaves, d’y’see … they’re symbolic of … of green, d’y’see,
whereas the berries, in fact, yes, the berries symbolize … symbolize
white. Yes. White and green. Very … symbolic.’

He waited. He was not, unfortunately, disappointed.

‘What of?’

‘I’m not sure that there _has_ to _be_ an _of_,’ he said.

‘Ah? So,’ said the Archchancellor, thoughtfully, ‘it could be said that
the white and green symbolize a small parasitic plant?’

‘Yes indeed,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘So mistletoe, in fact, symbolizes mistletoe?’

‘Exactly, Archchancellor,’ said the Senior Wrangler, who was now just
hanging on.

‘Funny thing, that,’ said Ridcully, in the same thoughtful tone of
voice. ‘That statement is either so deep that it would take a lifetime
to fully comprehend every particle of its meaning, or it is a load of
absolute tosh. Which is it, I wonder?’ [_Hogfather_]

_Not_ tosh, probably. Plants which insist on staying green, and even
bearing white berries or red berries, when others are bare and dry are,
in their own way, as unconquered as the midwinter sun. They are life,
and they refuse to die.

Unseen University observes another age-old custom at Hogswatch, the
appointment of a Boy Archchancellor. A first-year student is selected to
be the Archchancellor for a whole day, from dawn till dusk. During this
period he can exert the full powers of that office, and there are many
tales of japes played on senior members of the College Council. Yet
inevitably, inexorably, dusk will come. For this reason the student
selected for the honour is usually the most unpopular boy in the
University, and his life expectancy the following day is brief.

On Earth too there are traces of this urge to turn normal authority
upside down during midwinter and New Year celebrations. At the Roman
Saturnalia, as we have said, slaves feasted while masters acted as
servants. In medieval France, low-ranking clergy sometimes took charge
of the services in cathedrals on New Year’s Day or Twelfth Day and
turned them into a Feast of Fools or Asses’ Feast. Their leader would
call himself ‘bishop’ or ‘pope’ for the day. Theologians in Paris in
1445 complained that these clerical revellers came into church dressed
up in ridiculous costumes and masks, pretending to be women and
minstrels; they ran up and down the aisles, leaping and dancing; worse
still, they sat round the altar eating black puddings, gambling, and
singing wanton songs, and then went out into the streets to entertain
the crowds with their foolery.

There was another medieval ‘reversal ritual’ known in towns all over
western Europe, but this one was absolutely respectable, well
controlled, and full of charm – the custom of the Boy Bishop. Either on
6 December, the feast of St Nicholas (the patron saint of children), or
on 28 December, the feast of the Holy Innocents (the babies Herod
killed), the choirboys had a day off, and chose one of their number to
be the Boy Bishop. He held office until Twelfth Night. Dressed in full
episcopal robes, he could sit in the bishop’s throne and preside at
certain services, while the rest of the boys also wore fine robes and
sat in the chapter stalls; the real bishop (if present) and the other
higher clergy had to go and sit in the choir-stalls. The custom was
especially popular in England, where it spread to abbeys, some Oxford
and Cambridge colleges, and many wealthy parish churches. Henry VIII
forbade it, but it survived (or was revived) in some places. It is still
done in Hereford Cathedral, where the Boy Bishop preaches a sermon on St
Nicholas’s Day.

Meanwhile, out in the countryside, people have their own little ways, as
Albert explains when Death talks about the ‘real meaning’ of Hogswatch:

‘What, you mean that the pigs and cattle have all been slaughtered and
with any luck everyone’s got enough food for the winter?’

WELL, WHEN I SAY THE _REAL_ MEANING—

‘Some wretched devil’s had his head chopped off in a wood somewhere ’cos
he found a bean in his dinner and now the summer’s going to come back?’

NOT EXACTLY THAT, BUT—

‘Oh, you mean that they’ve chased down some poor beast and shot arrows
up into their apple trees and now the shadows are going to go away?’

THAT IS DEFINITELY _A_ MEANING, BUT I—

‘Ah, then you’re talking about the one where they light a bloody big
bonfire to give the sun a hint and tell it to stop lurking under the
horizon and do a proper day’s work?’

YOU’RE NOT HELPING, ALBERT.

‘Well, they’re all the real meanings that _I_ know.’

It is amazing how much of all this used to happen in our world too, in
the days when farming _was_ farming, and no one had invented Health and
Safety Regulations and Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. Bonfires
blazed; burning barrels and cartwheels were rolled down steep hills into
watching crowds; men ran through the streets carrying barrels of flaming
tar on their heads. In regions where cider apples were grown, villagers
would come at midwinter to ‘wassail’ the trees. This meant they would
beat the trunks with sticks, fire guns up into the branches, pour ale
over the roots, yell, howl, and blow horns. And they told the trees what
was expected of them:

Here stands a jolly good old apple tree.

Stand fast, root; bear well, top.

Every little bough, bear an apple now;

Every little twig,

Bear an apple big!

Hats full, caps full,

Three-bushel-sacks full!

Whoop, whoop, holloa!

Blow, blow the horns!

The trees had better take notice, or else …

Apple-tree, apple-tree,

Bear good fruit,

Or down with your top

And up with your root!

As for ‘chasing down some poor beast’, there was plenty of that too. In
the nineteenth century, bricklayers from Sussex towns would get a day
off at the end of November, and go in gangs to the nearest woods armed
with short, heavy sticks which they would hurl at squirrels and any
other small animals they saw. If they _did_ manage to hit a squirrel,
they took it home to eat. Foxes, on the other hand, are quite inedible.
Which has never discouraged generations of English from going
fox-hunting on 26 December, a date called Boxing Day or St Stephen’s
Day.

Then there was the very curious custom of hunting the wren, which was
once widespread in England, France, the Isle of Man, Wales, and
especially in Ireland; it happened on St Stephen’s Day, or Christmas
Day, or Twelfth Day. One would hardly think this tiny bird worth
hunting, even though it is nicknamed ‘king of the birds’. What makes it
odder still is that on any other date it would be _extremely_ wicked to
kill one, a crime which only the lowest coward would stoop to, and which
would bring terrible bad luck.

But on the _right_ day, a dead wren was the luckiest thing in the world.
The young men who had hunted and killed it would make a big display of
it. Some fastened it to a long pole, with its wings extended; others
hung it by the legs between two crossed hoops garlanded with greenery;
others carried it on a little bier decorated with ribbons. Then they
formed a procession and solemnly carried it from house to house,
chanting:

We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,

We hunted the wren for Jack the Can,

We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,

We hunted the wren for everyone.

and:

The wren, the wren, the king of the birds,

On Stephen’s Day was caught in the furze.

Although he is little, his family’s great,

I pray you, good lady, give us a treat.

Those who did give the ‘wren-boys’ money or a drink would get one of the
wren’s feathers to keep for luck, and as a charm against shipwreck.

What can all this mean? Was it just a way of getting beer and money? Or
a joke (for the humans, if not for the bird), making fun of upper-class
huntsmen who are so proud of trophies? Or was it a survival of some
incredibly ancient magic ritual involving the sacrifice of a sacred
animal at midwinter? On the Discworld, there’s no doubt at all, as Quoth
the Raven explains:

‘Blood on the snow, making the sun come up. Starts off with animal
sacrifice, y’know, hunt some big hairy animal to death, that kind of
stuff. You know there’s some people up on the Ramtops who kill a wren at
Hogswatch and walk around from house to house singing about it? With a
whack-fol-oh-diddle-dildo. Very folkloric, very myffic.’

‘A _wren_? Why?’

‘I dunno. Maybe someone said, hey, how’d you like to hunt this evil
bustard of an eagle with his big sharp beak and great ripping talons,
sort of thing, or how about instead you hunt this wren, which is
basically about the size of a pea and goes “twit”? Go on, _you_ choose.’

But killing a bird or beast, however sacred, is not half as impressive
as killing a human, especially an important one, especially a king. The
Raven says that once, long ago, that’s what used to happen, up to a
point – the king was not a _real_ king, presumably because real kings
don’t take kindly to being killed off after just one year on the throne,
and have bodyguards to see no one tries it.

‘Then they start this business where some poor bugger finds a special
bean in his tucker, oho, everyone says, you’re _king_, mate, and he
thinks “This is a bit of all right” only next thing he’s legging it over
the snow with a dozen other buggers chasing him with holy sickles so’s
the earth’ll come to life again and all this snow’ll go away.’

This is a very remarkable piece of information, which probably explains
what happened when Sir James Frazer, that most famous of Victorian
speculative folklorists, turned his attention to a cheerful, innocent
little Christmas custom, and came up with a splendidly melodramatic
theory. In England and France, from Tudor times onwards, people used to
round off the Twelve Days of Christmas with a lavish party on Twelfth
Night. There was a big, rich cake. In that cake was a bean. Whoever got
the slice with the bean in it would be ‘King of the Bean’ for the rest
of the day, and would preside at the celebrations. It was simply a bit
of fun – no violence, no sinister implications. But Frazer decided that
it was _really_ the survival of a bloodthirsty primitive ritual, long,
long ago, in which the King of the Bean had been put to death when the
revels were over. He had no shred of evidence, just a powerful hunch
that mock kings must somehow also be sacred sacrificial victims. In the
light of what we now know to be the case on the Discworld, it seems
certain that Frazer’s mind had been invaded by some drifting inspiration
from that distant universe.¹⁵

Way back in the early centuries of the Disc’s existence, the Hogfather
had been a sacred victim, hunted and slaughtered in animal or human form
so that the sun would rise and the snows melt. He had been the boar, the
wren, the Bean King. But times change, and old gods must find new jobs.
Nowadays, the Hogfather is the Midwinter Visitor, the Gift-Bringer, and
Hogswatch is meant to be, on the whole, just for kids. Toys, stockings
on the end of the bed, crackers and puddings, holly and cards, jolly
little figures of elves and fairies. But he still lives in a Castle of
Bone, far away in the icy regions near the Hub. People still make
offerings to him, of a sort – the glass of sherry and the pork pie left
on the mantelpiece, the carrots for the boars that pull his sledge. His
colours are red and white, even if nobody now thinks about blood on the
snow. And he is, still, just a little scary, even when he is handing out
toys in a sparkly grotto in Crumley’s Emporium:

HAPPY HOGSWATCH AND BE GOOD. I WILL KNOW IF YOU’RE GOOD OR BAD, YOU
KNOW. HO. HO. HO.

‘Well, you brought some magic into _that_ little life,’ said Albert.

IT’S THE EXPRESSION ON THEIR LITTLE FACES I LIKE, said the Hogfather.

‘You mean sort of fear and awe and not knowing whether to laugh or cry
or wet their pants?’

YES. NOW _THAT_ IS WHAT I CALL BELIEF.

The Hogfather’s duties include moral judgement. Has the child been good
or bad, naughty or nice? A good little boy gets, say, a model Klatchian
war chariot with real spinning sword blades. A bad little boy
traditionally gets nothing but a bag of smelly old bones, though modern
and enlightened parents are beginning to back off from this practice, on
the grounds that (a) it causes a nasty complex, and (b) you really do
_not_ want to be woken up by all this weeping and wailing at six in the
morning.

On Earth, supernatural midwinter visitors have been around in Europe for
centuries. They are a very mixed lot – saints and angels and even the
Child Jesus on the one hand, hags and goblins and mock-terrible monsters
on the other – and they turn up on various dates from November through
to Twelfth Night. One of the first to arrive is St Martin (11 November),
who comes to Antwerp, Ypres, and other Flemish towns. He wears a red
cloak, and rides a white horse. Children hang up stockings stuffed with
hay in their bedrooms; by morning the hay has disappeared, replaced by
apples, nuts, and little cakes shaped like horseshoes. That’s assuming
the children have been _good_, naturally; if they haven’t, all they find
is a cane to beat them.

Then there is St Nicholas, patron saint of children, who brings them
gifts either on the eve of his own feast day (6 December) or on
Christmas Eve. He is famous in Holland and Belgium, and in the Catholic
parts of Germany, Switzerland and Austria. He comes in the night riding
a white horse (or donkey); he is dressed as a bishop in red robes
embroidered with gold, and has a fine white beard. Children put out hay
and carrots for his steed, and a glass of schnapps for his servant who
carries the bag of presents, whose name is Scruffy Johnny, or Black
Peter. Often there is someone else with them – the hideous Krampus or
Klaubauf, a shaggy monster with horns, black face, fiery eyes, and
chains that clank as he moves. Children who know their catechism will be
rewarded with sweets; those who don’t had better look out, for Krampus
and Black Peter both carry a stick to beat them.

The Protestant parts of Germany disapproved of saints, so St Nicholas is
not mentioned there. Instead, it is the Christ Child, imagined as a
radiantly lovely little boy, who comes at midnight on Christmas Eve to
bless the good children and leave presents for them. However, it
wouldn’t do for things to be all sweetness and light. So in north
Germany there is also Knecht Ruprecht, a weird figure dressed in skins
or straw; if children have been good and can sing a hymn nicely, he
rewards them with apples and gingerbread from his wallet, but if they
can’t he beats them with a bag of soot and ashes. In some parts people
call him Rough Klas or Ashy Klas; since ‘Klas’ is short for ‘Nicholas’,
they must think he is an avatar of the saint.

Nowadays, the mood has changed. It is not now thought to be good for
little children to be scared out of their wits, even if it does make
them behave themselves. So in the course of the twentieth century some
of the worst bogey-figures have reinvented themselves as comic and
kindly. Take the Icelandic Gryla, for example, who has been around for
some seven hundred years. She is a huge ugly she-troll with fifteen
tails, carrying a sheepskin sack and accompanied by her thirteen sons,
the Christmas Lads, who are smaller but equally ugly. Until fairly
recently, the whole point about Gryla was that she was hunting for
naughty children, to carry them off in that sack, and eat them; a fine
old tradition with the smack of authenticity. Now she brings sweets and
goodies in the sack, and the thirteen Lads slip into a child’s room, one
by one, during the thirteen nights before Christmas, to pop something
nice under the pillow … They still _look_ like goblins, though.

The best-known of all the gift-bringers on Earth, and most like the
Hogfather, is the one whom some call Father Christmas and others Santa
Claus and others Le Père Noël. He has been around for over 600 years,
and is now stronger than ever. The myth just grows and grows and grows,
since it is powered by money.

When first glimpsed, in England at the end of the Middle Ages, he had
nothing to do with children, and little to do with gifts. He wasn’t even
necessarily called _Father_ Christmas, but could be ‘Captain Christmas’,
‘Prince Christmas’, or ‘Sir Christmas’. His job was to personify all the
joys of eating, drinking and general jollity. In the 1460s the rector of
Plymtree in Devonshire wrote a lively carol about Sir Christmas singing
‘Nowell, Nowell!’ outside the door, and urging everybody to drink as
much as possible:

Buvez bien par toute la compagnie,

Make good cheer and be right merry!

He was still at it in the early seventeenth century (in spite of Puritan
disapproval), when he was featured in Ben Jonson’s play _Christmas his
Masque_ (1616), coming on stage followed by his equally jolly sons,
whose names were Misrule, Carol, Mince Pie, Pots-and-Pan, New Year Gift,
Mumming, Wassail, and Baby Cake. He wore doublet and hose and a
high-crowned hat with a brooch, and had a long thin beard.

It was Charles Dickens who gave the finest account of a personified
Christmas Spirit who embodies the joys of food and drink, in his _A
Christmas Carol_ (1843). He told how Scrooge came face to face with a
‘jolly Giant, glorious to see’, in a room thickly hung with holly, ivy
and mistletoe, and piled high with food:

Heaped up on the floor, to form a kind of throne, were turkey, geese,
game, poultry, brawn, great joints of meat, sucking-pigs, long wreaths
of sausages, mince pies, plum puddings, barrels of oysters, red-hot
chestnuts, cherry-cheeked apples, juicy oranges, luscious pears, immense
twelfth-cakes, and seething bowls of punch, that made the chamber dim
with their delicious steam.

This Spirit looks like a younger version of Father Christmas, or indeed
of the Hogfather. Like them, he wears a long simple robe, trimmed with
white fur, but in his case it is _green_, not red, and has no hood; he
has long curly brown hair, and is wearing a wreath of holly set with
icicles. And though he takes Scrooge on a visionary journey through the
night, wandering invisibly from house to house to watch the
celebrations, he does _not_ bring presents for the kiddies.

Even so, the idea of Father Christmas as a gift-bringer started
infiltrating Victorian Britain, probably from Germany. He became quite a
familiar figure – an old man, bearded, trudging through the snow with
his sack of presents, dressed in a long hooded gown which was often, but
by no means always, red. He did not have a companion to beat or threaten
naughty children, as his Continental kinsmen had.

Meanwhile, on the other side of the Atlantic, something quite
extraordinary had been happening. The Dutch settlers in New Amsterdam
(later renamed New York) had kept up the tradition that St Nicholas
would come in the night of 5/6 December to pop presents in the shoes or
stockings of sleeping children, just as he did in their old homeland. In
1809 the very popular writer Washington Irving drew attention to this,
but transferred the idea to Christmas Eve. And then in 1822, suddenly,
inexplicably, inspiration gripped a clergyman and professor of Hebrew
and Oriental Languages called Clement Clark Moore, and he wrote a little
poem for his children. He called it ‘A Visit from St Nicholas’, but most
people now think of the first line, not the title:

’Twas the night before Christmas, and all through the house …

Moore probably disapproved of saints, and even bishops, since his
Nicholas is not a bishop in full regalia on a white horse, but a fat
little gnome, hurtling through the sky in a miniature sleigh drawn by
eight tiny reindeer. (Why reindeer? Nobody knows. There are no reindeer
in Holland.) He comes and goes by way of the chimney. He carries a sack
of presents. As for his appearance:

He was dressed all in fur, from his head to his foot,

And his clothes were all tarnished with ashes and soot …

His droll little mouth was drawn up like a bow,

And the beard of his chin was as white as the snow;

The stump of his pipe he held hard in his teeth,

And the smoke it encircled his head like a wreath;

He had a broad face and a little round belly,

That shook when he laughed, like a bowlful of jelly.

Before too long, the folk imagination got to work. Bishops were
forgotten, and the gift-bringer’s name was shortened to Santa Claus. In
the 1860s the artist Thomas Nash began drawing him. Nash dropped the
furs, preferring the typical Dutch costume of a belted jacket, blue
breeches, and a flat sailor’s cap. But by the end of the nineteenth
century red became the standard colour (with or without white
trimmings), and the cap became a red one, long and floppy. In the
twentieth, Santa Claus acquired a team of elves as little helpers, and a
home near the North Pole.

This American Santa Claus arrived in England in 1854, by way of a
fictional story by Susan and Ann Warner, ‘The Christmas Stocking’.
Little by little he became popular, and he and the native Father
Christmas blended together, sometimes using one name, sometimes the
other; sometimes in a long robe, sometimes in a jacket. And now the
combined figure is spreading all over the world.

This extraordinary history shows beyond doubt that a truly powerful idea
bounces to and fro across space and time, from mind to mind and from one
universe to another. In a way, both Santa and the Hogfather are communal
‘Shakespearean’ creations. As we point out elsewhere, Will would happily
drag some fragments of myth and folklore together and weld them into
something new in such a way that the end result suits our sense of
narrative grammar.

Did people in northern Europe make sacrifices at the winter solstice?
Yes. Human? Could be, long, long ago, to the extent that as a species we
have occasionally indulged in human sacrifice, but later the most likely
sacrifice would have been a horse or a farm animal. And the King of the
Bean? A good story, which satisfies our desire for a thrilling
narrative, but almost certainly untrue. The evolution of the proto
Hogfather? Indeed, the person seen by Susan going through his different
personifications does add up to the ‘festive spirit’. And the suggestion
that, via some deep visceral means, the colours of the said spirit have
become the colours of blood on snow? That’s a happy coincidence, and a
good story, but it’s not folklore!

One final thing. The Coca-Cola company is often credited with the
‘modern’ look of Father Christmas, but it is much truer to say that it
popularized, over much of the world, one ‘look’ among many that already
existed. Exposure wins. (For example, as Terry mentions in his
introduction, the ‘magpie rhyme’ that introduced the ITV children’s
series in the late 1960s and the 1970s almost certainly did a lot to
wipe out the existing regional variations of the rhyme.) But across the
Channel, at least, older avatars often appear alongside, or even instead
of, the red and white demigod of Christmas expenditure. HO. HO. HO!

¹⁴ In this particular case, the demonic warning might well be justified.

¹⁵ Both the authors discovered Frazer in their teens and were bowled
over, as probably most readers are, but became more sceptical later on.
Folklorists have learned to be careful; if it looks like a jolly good
story, it may very well _be_ one.

[image]


Chapter 16


DEATH

 

DEATH MAY WELL be the only supernatural entity (strictly speaking, an
anthropomorphic personification) which is known and acknowledged
throughout the entire multiverse. His arrival is quite, quite certain –
and yet, most people secretly hope that for them and their friends it
will be indefinitely delayed, and his actual manifestation generally
comes as a surprise. On the Discworld only wizards and witches can
foresee his arrival; on Earth, only exceptionally holy men and women.

Some people try to bargain with him, staking lives on the outcome of a
game of chess or cards. This rarely succeeds, though Granny Weatherwax
did once win against him at Cripple Mr Onion (of course, he knew she
would). Others try to run away. This is quite hopeless, since Death
keeps an appointments diary, and knows precisely where and when he is
scheduled to find them.

A story is told about this on our world. It is part of the age-old
traditions of Muslim lands, and reached English-speaking countries in
the 1930s through a play by Somerset Maugham and a novel by John O’Hara.
It tells of a servant who was buying food for his master’s household in
the street market in Baghdad one morning when someone jostled him, and
he turned to find himself face to face with Death, who made an abrupt
gesture. Terrified, the servant ran home, begged his master for the loan
of a horse, and galloped off to Samarra, which is about 75 miles away.
The master then went to the market-place himself, and there he too saw
Death. ‘Why did you raise your hand to threaten my servant?’ said he.
‘That was no threat,’ answered Death, ‘only a start of surprise. I was
astonished to see him here in Baghdad, for I have an appointment with
him tonight in Samarra.’

Something similar happened once on the Disc, as we learn from _The
Colour of Magic_, when Rincewind jostled a tall dark figure in the
bazaar of Ankh-Morpork, and was told I WAS EXPECTING TO MEET THEE IN
PSEPHOPOLOLIS. Actually, it turned out to be a misunderstanding.

On both the Disc and the Earth Death manifests himself to humans and
humanoid races (e.g. dwarfs) as a very tall human skeleton, every bone
pleasantly polished, with remote but piercing points of blue light in
his eye sockets. His deep resonant voice has been compared to many
things of a funereal nature, such as the clang of the leaden doors of a
crypt when slammed deep underground, yet no comparison really does it
justice. He wears a hooded robe woven of absolute darkness. Normally he
carries a scythe, but also owns a sword for use on kings; both weapons
have shimmering semi-transparent ice-blue blades, for separating souls
from bodies. There is usually an hourglass hidden in the folds of his
robe; this is a lifetimer, which measures the life-span of the person he
is about to visit.

On Earth there are some countries in whose languages ‘death’ is a
feminine word (_la mort_, _morte_, _muerta_). This has no effect at all
on the manifested appearance of Death in those lands. In any case, it
takes a calm, well-trained eye to tell a male from a female skeleton,
and black hooded robes are unisex attire.

There was a time when Death thought it polite to appear in whatever form
the client expected – at least, for human clients; what shape he assumes
when manifesting himself to, say, a sea anemone, a mayfly, or a nettle
is beyond conjecture. However, he discovered that most people have no
clear expectations at all, probably because in their hearts they never
_really_ believe they will die. And those who do think they know what
they will see have some pretty strange ideas. For example, King
Teppicymon XXVII, Pharaoh of Djelibeybi, found that the hooded robe
lacked a certain something:

‘I understood that Death came as a three-headed giant scarab beetle,’
said the king.

Death shrugged. WELL, NOW YOU KNOW.

‘What’s that thing in your hand?’

THIS? IT’S A SCYTHE.

‘Strange-looking object, isn’t it?’ said the pharaoh. ‘I thought Death
carried the Flail of Mercy and the Reaping Hook of Justice.’

Death appeared to think about this. WHAT IN? he said.

‘Pardon?’

ARE WE STILL TALKING ABOUT A GIANT BEETLE?

‘Ah. In his mandibles, I suppose. But I think he’s got arms in one of
the frescoes in the palace. Seems a bit silly, really, now I come to
tell someone. I mean, a giant beetle with arms. And the head of an ibis,
I seem to recall.’ [_Pyramids_]

There have been times and places on Earth where Death would have found
it just as tricky to fit in with his local image. For the Ancient
Egyptians, he would have had to appear as Anubis, a man with the head of
a jackal or wild dog; for certain South American peoples, as a cross
between a jaguar and an eagle; for some Hindus, as the ferocious
many-armed goddess Kali, adorned with garlands of skulls. So he decided
to stick to what he liked best, using the costume and attributes he had
been gradually collecting over the past 2,000 years or so.

His starting-point was the Bible, specifically the sixth chapter of the
Apocalypse (or Book of Revelation), which speaks of a ‘rider on a pale
horse’ whose name was Death, wearing a crown, and flourishing a sword.
The same passage mentions three other riders as his companions, War,
Famine, and Pestilence. On the Discworld too, in suitable circumstances,
he teams up with them and they appear together as the Four Horsemen of
the Apocralypse, as a sure sign that the world is just about to end –
probably. Some of their doings on the Disc are recorded in _The Light
Fantastic_, _Sourcery_, _Interesting Times_, and _Thief of Time_; and on
Earth in _Good Omens_.

Death liked the idea of a horse, and got himself a handsome white steed
named Binky, who is real flesh-and-blood, though capable of galloping in
the air and across the dimensions as well as on land. He did briefly
experiment with skeletal horses, but found bits kept dropping off; and
fiery horses, which tended to burn down the stable. Binky is far more
practical, and more reliable. He is well fed and well groomed (Death
strongly disapproves of artists who represent the Pale Horse as a mangy,
starving creature). From time to time he requires new horseshoes, and on
these occasions Death takes him to the best farrier on the Disc, Jason
Ogg of Lancre. Jason’s gift as a craftsman is that he can shoe anything,
_anything_, that anyone brings him – a horse, a goose, a unicorn, an
ant. But the price to be paid for the gift is that he _must_ shoe
anything anyone brings. So on certain nights, when he hears a certain
knock and a certain voice, he does as his father and grandfather did
before him: he puts on a blindfold, and shoes what must from the feel of
it be the finest horse in the world – and certainly the most docile.

As far as is known, Death has not made similar arrangements on Earth.
But apparently the Devil did, once. It’s said that there was once a
blacksmith at Keenthorne in Shropshire who was so proud of his skill
that he boasted that ‘if the Devil himself came to his forge he would
shoe his horse for him, aye, and shoe him to rights too!’ And then, one
dark midnight, a traveller on a great black horse arrived, demanding
that it be shod – and the smith noted with horror that the rider himself
had a hoof. The smith ran off in a panic and roused the parson, begging
him for help. The parson answered that he must fulfil his boast, but
should accept no payment, for that would be selling himself to the
Devil. So the smith did shoe the Devil’s horse, most efficiently, but
though the Devil repeatedly offered him good payment, he would take
nothing. The Devil and his horse vanished in a flash of fire.

To return to Death. In the course of the Middle Ages he became
dissatisfied with the idea of himself as the crowned and sword-wielding
Rider of the Pale Horse. He disliked the idea of kingship, even though
it appealed to many artists and poets – to Milton, for example, who in
_Paradise Lost_ describes Death as a dark, faceless but menacing shadow:

What seemed his head

The likeness of a kingly crown had on.

On one occasion on the Discworld, Death (who at the time had become more
or less human and was calling himself Bill Door) encountered an entity
which had taken on his role, and had adopted much the same wraith-like
manifestation as Milton described. This filled him with fury:

The new Death raised his cowl.

There was no face there. There was not even a skull. Smoke curled
formlessly between the robe and a golden crown.

Bill Door raised himself on his elbows.

A _CROWN_? His voice shook with rage. I NEVER WORE A CROWN!

_You never wanted to rule_. [_Reaper Man_]

And so Death went looking for another image from our world. He decided
he liked the look of Old Father Time, an old man carrying a scythe and
an hourglass. This figure had evolved out of a god called Cronus in
Ancient Greece and Saturn in Rome, who carried a sickle or a scythe
because he was a god of agriculture, and an hourglass because he had
also become the god of Time (this happened because ‘Cronus’ sounds
almost exactly like _chronos_, meaning ‘time’ in Greek). Now, harvesting
and death are two faces of the same thing, depending on the point of
view. If you are the farmer reaping corn or grass, you’re looking ahead
to the bread, the beer, the hay for the cattle, and you go home for a
cheery Harvest Supper with plenty of drink and a hey-nonny-no, and maybe
a barn dance. But if you are the plant being reaped, what you’re going
through is death. Seeing the sense in this, Death copied the scythe and
hourglass of Cronus, and adopted the title of the Grim Reaper. It was,
after all, his job to separate the wheat-germ of the soul from the chaff
of the mortal body.

Both the Rider and the Reaper were thought of, at first, as having the
normal body of a living man. However, the European Middle Ages had a
rather morbid interest in physical decay, so for a while Death adopted
the appearance of a rotting corpse, with split belly, peeling skin, and
crawling worms, wearing (if anything) a shroud. Many medieval painters
and sculptors showed him in this form. Then, little by little, he
changed over to something more hygienic – just clean, gleaming bones.
His new idea of himself as a Skeleton Reaper seeped into the minds of
Italian artists during the fourteenth century. He can be seen in this
guise, for example, on early packs of Tarot cards (he is Number 13 among
the Greater Trumps, which accounts for a lot). Then, soon after 1400,
painters in the Netherlands who had to do the illustrations for
manuscripts of the Apocalypse got the message, and started drawing the
Rider on the Pale Horse as a skeleton too. At first they kept the sword
(after all, that’s what the Book _said_), but by the end of the century
woodcuts in German Bibles were giving him the scythe instead. And that,
give or take a black cloak and hood, is how Death still usually chooses
to be seen: a skeleton on a white horse, with a scythe and an hourglass.
He allows himself one touch of luxury – the robe is fastened with a
silver brooch engraved with an omega, which is the last letter of the
Greek alphabet and so very definitely signals The End. Also, it’s a
pretty shape.

It was also towards the end of the European Middle Ages that Death
learned how to dance. He is famed for it. Any dance, every dance –
square dances, round dances, reels, the polka, the mazurka, the waltz,
the tango, the Quirmish bull-dance (oh-lay!):

A high-speed fusillade of hollow snapping noises suddenly kept time with
the music.

‘Who’s playing the maracas?’

Death grinned.

‘MARACAS? I DON’T NEED … MARACAS.’ [_Reaper Man_]

That was on the Disc. He can be just as energetic on Earth too, judging
by old prints of skeletons wildly leaping about, and by a story told in
Sussex in the 1860s, as recorded by Charlotte Latham:

There stood upon the Downs close to Broadwater an old oak tree, and
people said that always on Midsummer Eve, just at midnight, a number of
skeletons started up from its roots and, joining hands, danced round it
till cock-crow, then as suddenly sank down again. They said several
persons had actually seen this dance of death; one young man in
particular, having been detained by business at Findon till very late,
and forgetting that it was Midsummer Eve, had been frightened out of his
very senses by seeing the dead men caper to the rattling of their own
bones.

On other occasions, his dancing is sedate and courtly. In Europe in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the Dance of Death was often painted
on the walls of cemeteries and churches; it showed a line of men and
skeletons, hand in hand, pacing along in a slow and stately chain-dance.
In England there was a famous mural in the cloister of London’s Old St
Paul’s Cathedral (the one that burned down in the Great Fire of 1666),
and there is still a set of carvings on the ceiling of Roslyn Chapel
near Edinburgh. The Dance was also painted in the margins of prayer
books, and acted out in religious pageants. Nowadays, it is best
remembered as the closing shot of Ingmar Bergman’s film _The Seventh
Seal_.

On the Discworld, Death has often tried to act in human ways as a relief
from his unremitting memory of both past and future, but he rarely gets
much satisfaction from it. Fishing, gambling, getting drunk and joining
the Klatchian Foreign Legion in order to forget have not really worked
for him. His greatest success was his spell as a farm labourer
(harvesting a speciality), as described in _Reaper Man_; he also on one
occasion enjoyed riding a rather special motorbike:

There were two small cart-wheels, one behind the other, with a saddle in
between them. In front of the saddle was a pipe with a complicated
double curve in it, so that someone sitting in the saddle would be able
to get a grip.

The rest was junk. Bones and tree branches and a jackdaw’s bouquet of
gewgaws. A horse’s skull was strapped over the front wheel, and feathers
and beads hung from every point. [_Soul Music_]

Death is clearly the patron saint of album covers. And in some cultures
a saint is just what he is – or rather _she_ is: Santa Muerte, a
(female) folk saint. Devotees say she is an offshoot of the Catholic
Church; the Church dismisses them as a cult. The case continues, but one
follower delivered a quote with a near Discworld pragmatism: ‘It’s
better to make her your friend.’¹⁶

Sainted or otherwise, Death is attracted to Mexico, where he takes part
in all kinds of human activities, expertly and with great enjoyment.
This is especially obvious around the time of the Day of the Dead (1 and
2 November). At this season, streets and shops are full of cheerful
images of male and female Deaths not just dancing but playing all kinds
of musical instruments, flirting, fighting, drinking, showing off their
fine clothes, working at any and every trade. Nothing, in short, could
be more alive than Death, in Mexico.

And what of the dead themselves, on the Discworld? What happens when
Death comes to them? Well, that usually seems to be up to them. The only
group who had no say in the matter were the luckless pharaohs of
Djelibeybi, mummified and immured in pyramids which were supposed to
ensure a blissful afterlife but which simply imprisoned them inside a
time-distortion. After centuries of excruciating boredom, they broke
free and passed over into Death’s world (with great relief, and forming
an orderly queue). It is not known whether the Ancient Egyptian pyramids
had the same unwelcome side-effect on _their_ pharaohs.

On Earth, according to the myths of Ancient Greece, the gods would
occasionally, as a mark of great favour, take someone newly dead and
turn him or her into stars. The hero Perseus is a constellation now, as
is Andromeda, the girl he rescued from a sea-monster, and indeed Cetus
the monster too. So is Orion the hunter, lover of at least two
goddesses; so is Amalthea the Goat, who became the constellation
Capricorn. Some people on the Disc are aware of this possibility, though
as far as is known the Disc gods have never actually done it – Cohen and
his Horde rode for the stars because _they_ wanted to, and gods had
nothing to do with it. In any case, becoming a constellation is not a
permanent solution:

Mrs McGarry looked up at the stars.

‘In the olden days,’ she said, ‘when a hero had been really heroic, the
gods would put them up in the stars.’

THE HEAVENS CHANGE, said Death. WHAT TODAY LOOKS LIKE A MIGHTY HUNTER
MAY LOOK LIKE A TEACUP IN A HUNDRED YEARS’ TIME. [_The Last Hero_]

There are a few who, when Death comes to them, refuse to move on,
preferring to become ghosts – certain kings of Lancre who haunt their
ancestral castle, for example, and dwarfs who may choose to walk the
earth in torment if they have not been buried with their finest weapons.
According to the myths and folklore of our world, such situations are
pretty common here; people linger as ghosts because they have not been
properly buried, or have been particularly wicked, or have died by
violence, or are looking for money they buried, or simply can’t bear to
leave home. But nobody, in any universe, can match the obstinacy of the
political activist Reg Shoe, who insists on remaining a zombie in order
to campaign for the rights of the dead and the undead.

The normal course of events is that Death escorts those who die to the
edge of a vast desert of black sand under a brilliant starry sky, where
he informs them that what they do next, or what happens to them next, is
not his responsibility – for in the universe of the Discworld Death is
never the supreme reality. It appears that no two people have the same
experience, since it will accurately reflect the beliefs and personality
of each one.

In _Small Gods_, for instance, five deaths are described. One, a
sea-captain who believes that the souls of sailors become friendly
porpoises (in British lore, it would be seagulls), sails away in search
of paradise in a ghostly ship (for ships too have a soul), with a
ghostly crew, and ghostly rats, and an escort of ghostly porpoises. The
second and third are soldiers – Fri’it, an Omnian general who secretly
disbelieves the hell-fire doctrines of that church, and Ichlos, a
private who has never given much thought to religion. Both remember a
childhood song:

You have to walk a lonesome desert,

You have to walk it all alone …

Fri’it asks Death: ‘What is at the end of the desert?’ and is told,
JUDGEMENT.

The memory stole over him: a desert is what you think it is.

And now, you can think clearly …

There were no lies here. All fancies fled away. That’s what happened in
all deserts. It was just you, and what you believed.

What have I always believed?

That on the whole, and by and large, if a man lived properly, not
according to what any priests said, but according to what seemed decent
and honest _inside_, then it would, at the end, more or less, turn out
all right.

You couldn’t get that on a banner. But the desert looked better already.

Fri’it set out.

It is the same for Ichlos, though he puts it more simply:

‘My mum told me about this,’ he said. ‘When you’re dead, you have to
walk a desert. And you see everything properly, she said. And remember
everything right.’

Death studiously did nothing to indicate his feelings either way.

‘Might meet a few friends on the way, eh?’ said the soldier. POSSIBLY.

Ichlos set out. On the whole, he thought, it could have been worse.

The next who dies is Vorbis, the single-minded, pitiless, utterly
unshakable Omnian Exquisitor. When he sees the desert, his certainties
drain away. Though he has taken for granted that there would indeed be a
Judgement according to the rules of his religion (and that he would do
very well in it), all he can feel is the echo of his own thoughts, and
when he looks inside himself all he can see is the horror of what he has
done, and the terror of emptiness and solitude.

The last to die is the compassionate monk Brutha. He too follows Death
to the black sand under the starry sky.

‘Ah. There really _is_ a desert. Does everyone get this?’ said Brutha.

WHO KNOWS?

‘And what is at the end of the desert?’

JUDGEMENT.

Brutha considered this.

‘_Which_ end?’

Death grinned and stepped aside.

It’s only natural to want to know what lies at the far end of the
desert. But this, as Tiffany told the hiver in _A Hatful of Sky_, is
something no words can describe, which is why you have to cross the
desert to find out. But before you can even begin, there is something
important to be done. You must face and accept Judgement, the Judgement
you pass on yourself in the light of clear self-knowledge and accurate
memory. And _that_, as Brutha guessed, begins as soon as you die, at
_this_ end of the desert.

And then Brutha sees Vorbis, hunched on the sand, too paralysed with
fear to have even started the journey.

‘But Vorbis died a hundred years ago!’

YES. HE HAD TO WALK IT ALL ALONE. ALL ALONE WITH HIMSELF. IF HE DARED.

‘He’s been here for a hundred years?’

POSSIBLY NOT. TIME IS DIFFERENT HERE. IT IS … MORE PERSONAL.

‘Ah. You mean a hundred years can pass like a few seconds?’

A HUNDRED YEARS CAN PASS LIKE INFINITY.

Whereupon Brutha, true to his own nature, offers companionship to
Vorbis, and they set out to cross the desert together.

It may come as a surprise to those whose notion of Christian teaching
about the afterlife is based on, say, the famous hell-fire sermon in
James Joyce’s _Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man_, that what is
described in Discworld terms in _Small Gods_ is pretty well what many
modern theologians say – at any rate, as regards Brutha, Vorbis, and
Fri’it, though maybe not the ship’s captain. Such teachers say that a
lifetime’s daily choices determine what we are at the moment of death,
and that God’s ‘Judgement’ consists in letting us see, accurately and
fully, what we have chosen to become. He does not hurl punishments;
those who suffer, like Vorbis, do so because they have imprisoned
themselves in their own evil. It is to be hoped that every Vorbis finds
a compassionate Brutha.

The same point emerges from the post-mortem experience of the brutal,
murderous, but mentally subnormal thug Mr Tulip (in _The Truth_). Death
makes him see the value of the many lives he had destroyed, and once he
understands the truth about himself he is filled with huge remorse and
passes his own judgement on himself, saying he wishes he could go back
in time to kill himself before he could do such harm, but as that’s
impossible he wants to spend the rest of his afterlife feeling ‘really
sorry’. As Death notes, Tulip has ‘something in him that could be
better’, given enough time. His purgatory is not harsh. Since he has
been taught to expect reincarnation, reincarnation is what he gets, in a
form agreeable to the best part of him, his love of good craftsmanship
and beautiful antiques. He becomes a woodworm in a fine old desk.

However, there is nothing good in the other thug, Mr Pin, who puts his
trust in a lucky potato and whose remorse is simply pretence. He too
reincarnates, but the outcome will not be pleasant. He becomes a potato,
and is fried, since ‘Reincarnation enjoys a joke as much as the next
philosophical hypothesis.’

But to Death, a nature like Mr Pin’s is no joke.

Death sighed deeply. WHO KNOWS WHAT EVIL LURKS IN THE HEART OF MEN?

The Death of Rats looked up.

SQUEAK, he said.

Death waved a hand dismissively. WELL, YES, OBVIOUSLY _ME_, he said. I
JUST WONDERED IF THERE WAS ANYONE ELSE. [_The Truth_]

One who _may_ have answers to the questions that trouble Death’s lonely
mind – questions about goodness and evil, and justice – is Azrael, his
Lord. On Earth, ‘Azrael’ is the name given in the traditions of Islam to
the Angel of Death, whose name is nowhere mentioned in the Bible itself.
Muslims say he is one of the great Archangels, equal to Michael, Raphael
or Gabriel in rank, and greater than them in wisdom. His name is Arabic,
and means ‘Help of God’.

But the nature of Azrael is best seen on the Discworld. He is known
there as the Great Attractor, the Death of the Whole Multiverse, the
Beginning and End of Time. He is so vast that he can only be measured in
terms of the speed of light, and whole galaxies are lost in his eyes.
_Our_ Death, the Death who harvests all lives on Earth and on the
Discworld, is only a _little_ Death, and Azrael is his Lord.

And at the end of all stories, Azrael, who knows the secret, thinks: I
REMEMBER WHEN ALL THIS WILL BE AGAIN. [_Reaper Man_]

¹⁶ Perhaps she recalled the words of St Francis: ‘By your holy death,
help us to live each day as our last and to welcome sister Death.’


Notes on the folklore of


_Unseen Academicals_


(Terry Pratchett’s latest Discworld novel)


by Jacqueline Simpson


WARNING: SPOILER ALERT!


DO NOT READ UNTIL AFTER YOU HAVE FINISHED READING _UNSEEN ACADEMICALS_

 

HUNTING THE MEGAPODE

Strange, yea strange indeed, are the cherished traditions of Academe.
Once in every hundred years the midnight silence of Unseen University is
torn by the clatter of hobnailed boots and cries of ‘Aho! The Megapode!’
Members of the Senior Faculty, each carried piggy-back by a stout
bowler-hatted university porter, are in hot pursuit of one of their
number who flees before them. He wears a special headdress involving a
huge yellow and red beak, and utters doleful quacks. The explanation (in
so far as there is one) is given by Ponder Stibbons, Master of the
Traditions:

The original Megapode was found in the under-butler’s pantry. It escaped
in the middle of dinner and caused what my predecessor eleven hundred
years ago called…’ he referred to the book, ‘a veritable heyhoerumbelow
as all the Fellows pursued it through the college buildings with much
mirth and good spirits.’

It is with great satisfaction that we can report that one of Earth’s
most respected academic institutions, All Souls’ College, Oxford, can
boast of something very similar – the Hunting of the Mallard. It began
(probably in Tudor times) as an annual custom, but later was reduced to
just once in a hundred years, being held in 1801, 1901, and 2001; few of
those reading about it today are likely to be there to see it in 2101.

According to legend, workmen discovered this mallard in a drain while
the foundations of the College were being laid in 1437, but it escaped
them and flew off. And so 14 January was declared to be Mallard Night.
The Fellows and their friends enjoyed a lavish and prolonged supper
presided over by one of their number in the role of the Lord Mallard.
Then at midnight they set out in procession, carrying lanterns and
torches, and singing the Mallard Song, to search every nook and cranny
of the building in the hope of finding their lost bird, from cellar to
attic and beyond. In 1801, at four in the morning, an onlooker in a
nearby college watched the proceedings from his garret window:

I had thus a full view of the Lord Mallard and about forty Fellows in a
kind of procession on the library roof, with immense lighted torches,
which had a singular effect… I am sure that all who had the gift of
hearing within half a mile must have been awakened by the manner in
which they thundered their chorus, ‘O, by the blood of King Edward!’

The chorus of the Mallard Song runs:

Ho, the Blood of King Edward!

By the Blood of King Edward!

It was a swapping, swapping Mallard!

Nobody has any idea which of the various King Edwards is meant, or
indeed why a king is mentioned at all. This very ignorance proves the
traditionality of the tradition.

The verses declare that other people may like to eat chicken, turkey or
buzzard, but All Souls men must have their Mallard; that this bird is
more praiseworthy than the geese which saved the Roman capitol; that
when Jupiter went a-wooing he became a swapping mallard, not a swan;
and, finally, that the feasters should ‘dabble, duck and dive’ into the
punch-bowl, like mallards on a pond. But in the middle comes a verse
which was omitted from the 1901 performance, though reinstated in 2001,
and also deleted from nineteenth- and twentieth-century descriptions of
the custom, since it might upset persons of nervous disposition and
refined sensibility. It makes clear that ‘swapping’ means… well, large,
obviously, but also… exactly what anyone could guess that it meant:

Hee was swapping all from bill to eye,

Hee was swapping all from wing to thigh,

His swapping Tool of Generation

Out-swappèd all ye Winged Nation.

Ho the Blood of King Edward! (Etc.)

Details of the performance have changed over time. In 1801 (and
presumably earlier too) the quarry was a man carrying a live duck; when
he was finally cornered, the Fellows cut off the bird’s head and drank
its blood. In 1901 they used a stuffed duck on a pole, in 2001 a wooden
decoy duck. In 2001 the supper was less lifethreatening than the
thirteen courses of 1901, and the procession did not clamber over the
library roof, though it did still go up the tower. Yet the essentials
remained: a fair amount of alcohol was consumed, and mirth and good
spirits were displayed. May it still be so in 2101!

FOOT-THE-BALL

If football isn’t about football, what is it about? As so often, people
who enjoy something are too busy doing it to waste time talking about
it, whereas those who disapprove are loud, persistent, and crystal clear
in their objections. In the days when Earth’s football was a wild, free
game for dozens if not hundreds of players (as it was from the twelfth
century until about 150 years ago), those who wanted to ban it claimed
that its main purpose was to hurt people. It is ‘nothing but beastly
fury and extreme violence’, said Sir Thomas Eliot (1531); ‘a bloody and
murderous practice’, said the Puritan propagandist Philip Stubbs (1583),
adding:

Doth not every one lie in wait for his adversary, seeking to overthrow
him and to pitch him upon his nose, though it be upon hard stones, in
ditch or dale, in valley or hole, he careth not, so that he hath him
down… Sometime their necks be broken, sometime their backs, sometime
their legs, sometime their arms, sometime one part thrown out of joint,
sometime another, sometime their noses gush out with blood… They have
sleights to meet one man betwixt two, to dash him against the heart with
their elbows, to hit him under the short ribs with their gripped fists,
and with their knees to catch him upon the hip, and a hundred such
murdering devices.

A Frenchman, watching the mass football surging through the streets of
Derby in the 1820s, remarked with awe ‘that if Englishmen called this
playing, it would be impossible to say what they called fighting’.

Yet young working men adored this game. They played it on Sundays (which
was one reason why Stubbs was so angry), and on public holidays like
Shrove Tuesday crowds would come from miles around for an annual
mega-match – sometimes in open fields, but often in the streets of a
city or town. A game could easily last all day. There were no rules, and
no limit on the number of players in each team. They would all gather at
the town centre, and somebody would throw the ball into the middle of
the crowd, which immediately turned into a tightly packed, heaving mass
of bodies shoving, kicking and head-butting at one another, while
somewhere down out of sight the ball might or might not be advancing
slowly towards one of the goals. Today’s rugby scrum is a faint, feeble
image of this, the mighty Sway or Hug.

Nobody cared whether the ball was kicked, carried or thrown. As for the
goals, they were on the outskirts of the town, hundreds of yards apart
(or even two or three miles), and could be anything from a pond to a pub
or a mill; in some places the idea was to carry the ball into your
opponent’s goal, in others to keep hold of it and bring it safely home
to your own. At Atherstone in Warwickshire, where the game is still
played for several hours on Shrove Tuesdays in front of large crowds,
the winner is whoever is actually holding the ball when a klaxon sounds
to signal the end of play, never mind about goals. He keeps the ball as
his trophy.

In Cornwall, where the game is called ‘hurling’, the ball is made of
wood or cork, painted silver, and is about the size of an orange. At
Atherstone it is twenty-seven inches in diameter, made of leather, and
filled with water; it weighs four pounds, so cannot be kicked far. In
the Bottle-Kicking on Easter Mondays at Hallaton in Leicestershire there
is no actual ball, instead there are three small wooden kegs, used one
at a time. At Haxey in Lincolnshire (Humberside) the object for which
the teams tussle is a ‘Hood’, a kind of rolled-up leather truncheon;
legend claims that this represents a medieval lady’s silken hood which
Haxey men saved when it blew away in a high wind.

In several places, it is said that the game first began after a battle
in which local men celebrated their victory by playing football with the
severed head of one of their enemies. At Chester, they say these enemies
were Danish Vikings; at Alnwick in Northumberland, the Scots. At
Kirkwall in the Orkneys (where mass football is played twice a year, on
Christmas Day and New Year’s Day) the story goes that their
twelfth-century ruler Earl Sigurd fought the Scottish Earl Mælbrigte,
known as Tusker from his protruding tooth. Sigurd cut off Mælbrigte’s
head, tied it to his saddle, and rode home in triumph – but the tusk
gashed his leg, giving him gangrene, from which he died. It is said that
the people of Kirkwall were so furious that they kicked the head out of
town.

So, what _is_ football really about? It’s not actually a battle, but
it’s definitely about being Us, not Them, about belonging. Though
outsiders could join in, the teams were originally based on where people
lived, or what they did for a living – this parish against that parish,
people from one end of the town against the other (‘uppies’ against
‘downies’), those born north or south of a particular river, farmers
against fishermen, sailors against miners. In the Sway or Scrum or Hug
(or, in Ankh-Morpork, the Shove) every man’s strength counts, but no man
is alone. He Belongs.

JUST WHAT _ARE_ ORCS, THEN?

In every universe where orcs are found, accepted opinion declares that
they are hopelessly, irredeemably evil. Accepted opinion, however, is
sometimes wrong. We must wait and see.

On the other hand, there is no accepted opinion as to what exactly orcs
are, and how the race came into being. Are they a naturally occurring
species of predator? Or were they originally more amiable creatures, who
were deliberately corrupted by some evil power? Or did a great magician
design and breed them, to serve him in battle?

On Earth, the unknown Anglo-Saxon poet who composed the epic _Beowulf_
had a theory about the origin of various evil, monstrous beings,
including the huge man-eating ogre Grendel, whom the hero Beowulf had
sworn to destroy. He believed they could be fitted into the history of
the world as told in the Bible. They were all, he said, descended from
Cain, whom God had cursed and driven away into the wilderness because he
had murdered Abel:

From him were born all evil offspring,

Ettins and elves and orcnēas

And giants too, who waged war on God.

‘Ettins’ are a species of giant; elves we know; but what is an ‘orcnē’?
(It is pronounced ‘ork-nay’, and the ‘-as’ is merely a plural ending.)
There is no other word like it in Old English. After some puzzlement,
scholars decided that the first part must come from Latin, from the name
of Orcus, the Roman god of death – a fearsome, devouring, demonic ogre
of the Underworld. The second part, _nē_, is clearer; it simply means
‘corpse’. Yet to grasp the whole meaning, we still have to decide which
is the main part of the word, and how the two parts are linked.

Is _nē_ the more important element, giving ‘corpse from the Underworld’,
as most interpreters believe? If so, the threatening creature is
basically a walking corpse, what we would now call a zombie. This fits
the grammar very well, but raises a logical problem: can one really
classify zombies as a non-human _species_, on a par with giants and
elves, all genetically related by descent from a single ancestor? Surely
they are simply humans who have died individually, and who, for a
variety of unfortunate reasons, have emerged, individually, from their
graves?

The alternative is to take _orc_ as the main element (‘deathly
creature’, ‘hellish creature’), and assume the corpse is its prey. The
great scholar J. R. R. Tolkien thought so; in his Middle-Earth, orcs are
loathsome goblins created by a magician to be an army; they are
carrion-eaters, devouring any kind of flesh, including humans, and
perhaps even one another. And that is also what people on the Disc
believe about orcs:

They came in thousands, like lice, killing everything and eating the
dead, including theirs. The Evil Empire had bred them in huge cellars,
grey demons without a hell.

For the sake of pedantic thoroughness, it should be added that from the
sixteenth century onwards _orke_, _orque_, _orca_, or _orch_ was also
the name for various real or imagined sea-beasts, especially the killer
whale. But we should not allow this to confuse the issue. Whatever
people know or suspect about Mr Nutt, they have never accused him of
being a killer whale.

[image]


Bibliography and suggestions
for further reading

Barber, Paul. _Vampires, Burial and Death: Folklore and Reality_ (Yale
University Press, 1988. ISBN 0-300-04126-8 hardback, 0-300-04859-9
paperback)

Briggs, Katharine M. _A Dictionary of Fairies, Hobgoblins, Brownies,
Bogies and Other Supernatural Creatures_ (Penguin Books, 1977. ISBN
0-14-00-4753-0 paperback)

Briggs, Katharine M. _The Vanishing People: A Study of Traditional Fairy
Beliefs_ (Batsford, 1978. ISBN 0-7134-1240-2 hardback)

Davies, Owen. _A People Bewitched: Witchcraft and Magic in
Nineteenth-Century Somerset_ (Bruton, 1999. ISBN 0-9536390-0-2)

Frazer, Sir James G. _The Golden Bough: Abridged Edition_ (Macmillan &
Co., 1922, frequently reprinted)

Lenihan, Edmund. _In Search of Biddy Early_ (Mercier Press, 1987;
paperback 1995)

MacManus, Dermot. _The Middle Kingdom; the Faerie World of Ireland_
(London: Max Parrish & Co., 1959. Paperback edition: Gerrards Cross:
Colin Smythe & Co., 1973. ISBN 0-900675-82-9)

Maxwell-Stuart, P. G. _Witchcraft: A History_ (Tempus Publishing, 2000.
ISBN 0-7524-2305-3 paperback)

Miles, Clement A. _Christmas Customs and Traditions: Their History and
Significance_ (1912; reprinted by Dover Books, New York, 1976. ISBN
0-486-23354-5)

Roud, Steve. _The Penguin Guide to the Superstitions of Britain and
Ireland_ (Penguin Books, 2003. ISBN 0-141-00673-0)

Roud, Steve. _The English Year: A Month-by-Month Guide to the_

_Nation’s Customs and Festivals_ (Penguin Books, 2006. ISBN
0-140-51554-2)

Russell, Jeffrey B. _A History of Witchcraft_ (Thames and Hudson, 1980.
ISBN 0-500-27242-5 paperback)

Ryan, M. _Biddy Early: The Wise Woman of Clare_ (Mercier Press, 2000)

Silver, Carole G. _Strange and Secret Peoples: Fairies and Victorian
Consciousness_ (Oxford University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-19-512199-6)

Simpson, Jacqueline. _British Dragons_ (Batsford, 1980. ISBN
0-7134-2559-0 hardback. Wordsworth paperback, 2001. ISBN 1-84022-507-6)

Simpson, Jacqueline, and Steve Roud. _A Dictionary of English Folklore_
(Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-2100019-x hardback,
0-19-860766-0 paperback)

Westwood, Jennifer, and Jacqueline Simpson. _The Lore of the Land: A
Guide to England’s Legends_ (Penguin Books, 2005. ISBN 0-141-00711-7
hardback, 0-141-02103-9 paperback)

Wills, Barclay. _Shepherds of Sussex_, 1938.

Yeats, W. B. _Fairy and Folk Tales of Ireland_ (Gerrards Cross: Colin
Smythe Ltd, 1973; paperback Pan Books, 1979. ISBN 0-330-25769-2)
Originally published as two books, 1888 and 1892.

NOT FOLKLORE BUT NEVER MIND

Blanton, De Anne, and Lauren M. Cook. _They Fought Like Demons: Women
Soldiers in the American Civil War_ (Louisiana State University Press,
2002. ISBN 0-8071-2806-6)

Dekker, Rudolf M., and Lotte C. Van De Pol. _The Tradition of Female
Transvestism in Early Modern Europe_ (Palgrave MacMillan, 1997. ISBN13
978-0312173340)

Hornby, Hugh. _Uppies and Downies: The Extraordinary Football Games of
Britain_ (English Heritage, 2008.ISBN 13 978-1905624645)

AND FOR THOSE WHO WANT TO GO FURTHER

Burn, Lucilla. _Greek Myths_ (British Museum Publications, 1990. ISBN
0714-120-618)

Evans, George Ewart. _The Horse in the Furrow_ (Faber and

Faber, 1960; paperback Faber and Faber, 1971. ISBN 0-571-08164-9)

Hart, George. _Egyptian Myths_ (British Museum Publications, 1990. ISBN
0714-120-642)

Hughes, Thomas. _The Scouring of the White Horse_ (1859; reprint Alan
Sutton, 1989. ISBN 0-86299-563-9)

Judge, Roy. _The Jack in the Green_ (D. S. Brewer, 1979; revised edn FLS
Books, The Folklore Society, 2000. ISBN 0-903515-20-2) Opie, Iona and
Peter. _The Lore and Language of Schoolchildren_ (Oxford University
Press, 1959. ISBN13 978-0940322691)

Opie, Iona and Peter. _Children’s Games in Street and Playground_
(Oxford University Press, 1969. ISBN13 978-0192814890)

Page, R. I. _Norse Myths_ (British Museum Publications, 1990. ISBN
0714-120-626)

Pegg, Bob. _Rites and Riots: Folk Customs of Britain and Europe_
(Blandford Press, 1981. ISBN 0-7137-0997-9)

Philip, Neil. _The Penguin Book of English Folktales_ (Penguin Books,
1992. ISBN 0-14-013976-1)

Philip, Neil. _The Penguin Book of Scottish Folktales_ (Penguin Books,
1994. ISBN13 978-0140139778)

Quiller-Couch, Arthur. _The Oxford Book of Ballads_ (Clarendon Press,
1910, many reprints)

Thomas, Keith. _Religion and the Decline of Magic_ (Weidenfeld and
Nicolson, 1971. ISBN 0-297-00220-1)

Wilson, Stephen. _The Magical Universe: Everyday Ritual and Magic in
Pre-Modern Europe_ (Hambledon and London, 2000. ISBN 1-85285-251-8)

We have put in a couple of the pioneering regional studies, as they give
a taste of the whole _range_ of folklore in a community (tales, beliefs,
customs, sayings etc.). The hyphen isn’t a mistyping, that was the way
the word was spelled then:

Burne, Charlotte. _Shropshire Folk-Lore A Sheaf of Gleanings_ (London,
1883)

Leather, Ella Mary. _The Folk-Lore of Hereford_ (London, 1912)


Index

The page references in this index correspond to the printed edition from
which this ebook was created. To find a specific word or phrase from the
index, please use the search feature of your ebook reader.

Abraxas, on the Quisition, 46

Aching, Granny, 70, 280-2, 298, 304, 306

Aching, Tiffany, 89, 92, 93, 96, 108, 109, 206, 214, 276, 303, 305-6,
309, 311, 466

abilities, 280, 287

and Dance of the Seasons, 320-8

ties with the Chalk, 280, 282-3

training as witch, 282-96

Achmed the Mad, 56

afterlife

as constellation, 463

Christian teaching about, 467

for dwarfs, 68-70

for Heroes, 47-9, 350

for Nac Mac Feegle, 104

Hell, 51-4

in Ancient Egypt, 57

individuals’ experience after death, 462-8

journey to, 254-5, 310-12

Judgement in, 465-7

Agi Hammerthief, 73

Ainsworth, Harrison, 264

Albert (Alberto Malich), 388

on Hogswatch, 436-7

Albertus Magnus, 387-8; _Book of Secrets_, 387

Alexander the Great, 345-7

Aliss, Black, 231-2

alligators, 170, 171; _see also_ crocodiles

Allingham, William, 107

Amalthea the Goat (Capricorn), 324, 463

America, North: traditions in, xiv, 17, 316, 341, 392

among native peoples, 73

Easter Bunny, 424-5

Santa Claus, 447-8

Tooth Fairy, 426

_see also_ H. P. Lovecraft

American Civil War, women soldiers in, 412-13

Amonia, Queen, 191

Andromeda, 373, 463

Angua, Sergeant, 70-1, 152-3, 154

Ankh, kings of, 370-2

Ankh-Morpork

banshees in, 142-3

City Watch, 68, 109, 120, 128, 152

customs of, 264-5, 399-408

dragons as pets, fashion for, 164

dwarfs in, 63, 68-70, 75-6, 383

foundation legends, 359-61

golems in, 144-5, 148, 249

Nac Mac Feegle in, 108-9, 112

religion in, 27, 44

royal heir to, 336-7, 371-3

secret societies in, 389

treacle mines, 383, 385

trolls in, 120

vampires in, 133

_see also_ Unseen University

Ankh-Morpork Folk Dance and Song Society, 261

Ankh-Morpork Folklore Society, 419

Annagovia, Duchess of Borogravia, 43-4

Annagramma, 285-6

Annis, Black, 232-3

Anoia, goddess of Things That Get Stuck in Drawers, 27

Anybody, Rob, 105, 327

Apocalypse, the, 456, 459

Apocralypse, Four Horsemen of the, 456

Arthur, King, 14, 15, 250-2, 337-9, 342

Arthur, Wee Mad, 108

Ashmole, Elias, 53

Asimov, Isaac, 394

Assassins, Guild of, 370

Astfgl, Lord, 49, 51-2

Athene, 335

Atlantis, 362-3

Aubrey, John, 310

Auditors, the, 58-9

Azrael, 469

Aztecs, the, 51

Baba Yaga, 12, 225, 280

banshees, 142-4

Barber, Paul, 140

basilisk, 169-72

Bathory, Countess Elizabeth, 136

Bayly, Thomas Haynes, 190, 192

bean, conferring kingship, 370-1, 437, 440-1

Bears, Pavement, 422

Beating of the Bounds, 404-5

bees, 207, 255

Bellerophon, 173

Bel-Shamharoth, 56-8

Beowulf, 351, 352, 373

Bergman, Ingmar: _The Seventh Seal_, 461

B’hrian Bloodaxe, 64, 66

Bible, the, 33, 50, 368, 392, 456, 459, 469

Binky, 456-7

Black School, 393-4

bogeymen, 39, 422, 425

books, magical, 50, 56, 386-90

Bord, Janet, 67

Borogravia, 27, 42-4

Borrowing, 207-9, 287, 289

Botticelli, 322

Boughton, Rutland: _The Immortal Hour_, 98-9

Bovet, Richard, 83

Bran, 97

bread, dwarf, 66 476

Brendan the Navigator, St, 368

Brewer, Billy (Wizard of the West), 225

British Folklore Society, 10

brochs, 106

Broomfog: _Anima Unnaturale_, 173

broomsticks, 224-5

Brutha, 466-7

Caesar, C. Julius, 105

Cailleach Dhugh, 113-14

Cake, Mrs Evadne, 151, 390

Cake, Ludmilla, 151-2

Cantre’r Gwaelod, 363

Carelinus, Emperor, 344-6

Carmilla, 135

Carmilla, Aunt, 136

Cenotine script, 144-5

Cerberus, 173, 327

Ceres, see Demeter

Ceridwen, 212-13

Cerne Abbas Giant, 246

Cernunnos, 40, 41, 248

_Chaffinch’s Ancient and Classical Mythology_, 290, 321, 324

Chalk, the, 303-28

Nac Mac Feegle, 108, 109, 111

shepherds, 70, 281, 298, 305-9

watching of the dead, 308-11

White Horse, 304-5

witches in, 214, 275-98

Chambers, Robert, 106

Chandler, Keith, 270

changelings, 86-8

Charon, 311, 327

Chaucer, Geoffrey: _Canterbury Tales_, 347

chests, wooden, deadly, 188-94;

_see also_ Luggage

children

and Pied Piper, 375-8

Christmas gift-bringers for, 442-8

customs kept by, 402, 419-21, 424-9

fairy tales for, 90, 419-29

games, 307, 419-21

Hogswatch and, 442-3

_see also_ changelings, Nursery Bogeys, Prohibitory Monsters, tooth
fairy

Chimera, the, 172-4

Chriek, Otto, 137-8, 182

Christ, buttocks of, 67-8

Christ Child, 444

Christmas traditions and observance, 91, 294, 431-4, 438, 441-2, 443-9

Boy Bishop, 436

gift-bringers, 442-8

hunting the wren, 438-9, 440

King of the Bean, 440-1, 449

Santa Claus/Father Christmas, 445-6, 447-8

cinema, influence of, 133, 135, 136, 154, 156, 419

Coca-Cola company, 449

cockatrice, _see_ basilisk

Cohen the Barbarian, 49, 335-6, 343-52, 463

Conan the Barbarian, 341

Cori Celesti, 28, 57

Cornucopia, 323-4

crocodiles

and basilisk, 169, 172

crocodile gods, 44-5

Cronus, 458-9

crop circles, 83

Crowley, Aleister, 205; _Moonchild_, 205

Cthulhu, 58

Cú Chulainn, 342-3, 350

Cutangle, Archchancellor, 211

Dadd, Richard: _Fairy Feller’s Master Stroke_, 98

Dagon, 33-5

Dahut, 364

dance, cosmic, 318-20; Dance of the Seasons, 321-8; _see also_ Death;
Morris dancing

Dante, 50, 353

Davies, Sir John: _Orchestra_, 319

Death (anthropomorphic personification), 451-69

appearance and attributes, 454-60

appointments with, 453-4

bargains with, 453

dancing ability, 460-1

dealings with clients, 454-5, 463-9

horse of, 456-7

House of, 388

on Discworld, 68-9, 156-7, 387, 409, 436-7, 453, 454-5, 456, 458, 460,
461-9

on Earth, 410, 453, 454-5, 457-60, 461, 462-4

_see also_ afterlife

de Chumsfanleigh, Roland, 92, 327, 328

Defoe, Daniel, 243

de Magpyr family, 136-7, 142, 257

Demeter (Ceres), 205, 324, 326-7

Demons, 49-54, 221, 312

relationship with humans, 49, 50, 52-3

Detritus, 120

Devil, the, 40, 150, 230, 248, 259, 311, 364, 393-4, 457

de Worde, William, 381-2

Dickens, Charles: _A Christmas Carol_, 446

Djelibeybi

gods, 27, 35-7, 44

pharaohs, 37, 463

portrayal of Death, 455

Sphinx, 174-5, 177-8

dobby stones, 305

dogs

Black Dogs, 315-16

devotion to master, 380-2

grimhounds, 315

three-headed, 327-8

_see also_ Cerberus, Gaspode

Dorfl, 145

_Dracula_, 135

dragons, 163-9, 185, 305, 373-4

Common Swamp Dragon (_Draco vulgaris_), 164-6, 170

_Draco maritimus immensis_ (Middle-Earth Worm), 168-9

_Draco nobilis_, 165, 166-7 478

hold on Earthly imagination, 163-4, 166, 373-4

Moon Dragons, 167

teeth, producing warriors, 375

Drake’s Drum, 378-9

draug, 134

dress, traditional

for women, 72, 413

of Christmas gift-bringer, 442, 443, 445, 446, 447-9

of demons, 51-2

of dwarfs, 63, 70-2

of Nac Mac Feegle, 103, 105-6, 109

of Valkyries, 48

of vampires, 133, 135-6

of witches, 224-6

druids, 122, 393

ducks, 402-3

Running of the Ducks (Ubergigl), 265

Soul Cake Tuesday Duck, 265, 402, 424

Dungeon Dimensions, the, 34, 35, 55-6, 57, 230

Dunmanifestin, 28, 42

Dunmow Flitch, 9, 263-4

Dunwich monster, the, 58

dwarfs, 61-76, 264

and religion, 73-4

associated with mines and metalworking, 63-4, 121, 383

culture and law, 63-6, 72-6

females, 63, 64, 70-2

feud with trolls, 74, 121-2

funerary customs, 68-70

grags, 75-6

legends among, 25, 73-6

names, 64

Early, Biddy, 222-3, 298

Earwig, Mrs Letice, 286, 295

Eberley, Susan Shoon, 87

Edda, The, 48

eggs

cosmic, 403

Easter, 403, 424-5

on Soul Cake Tuesday, 265, 402, 424

repository for soul, 294

Egwin, St, 317

Egypt, Ancient

gods, 32, 36-7, 45, 456

myths: of Afterlife, 57;

of Benu Bird (phoenix), 180;

of Osiris, 189

sphinxes, 175-6

eight, magical number on Discworld, 50, 56-7, 240, 264, 282

elephants

in Hindu cosmology, 23

supporting the Disc, 22;

Fifth Elephant, 25-6, 383

Eliot, T. S.: East Coker, 320

elves, 79-99, 230

abductions by, 92-7, 240

and changelings, 86-8

and Santa Claus, 90, 448

as Nursery Bogeys, 90-1

decline on Earth, 88-92

glamour, 81, 83, 85, 99

hatred of iron, 85, 183, 242, 255, 270

home of (Elfland/Fairyland), 92-9

house-elves, 88

king, 87, 92-3, 247-8

malevolence to humans, 81-2, 83-8

precursors of tooth fairy, 90, 427

_see also_ Fairy Queen

Ephebe

attitude to gods, 27

philosophical ideas in, 25-6, 177-8

Ereshkigal, 326

Esk (Escarina Smith), 210-11, 222, 224

Eurydice, 325

eyes, detached, 31-3

fairies, _see_ elves; gnomes;

godmothers; Nac Mac Feegle;

pixies; tooth fairy

Fairyland, nature of, 92-9

Fairy (or Elf) Queen, the, 89, 93-6, 103, 183, 208, 247-8, 313; _see
also_ Mab

Fate, 27, 35, 42, 347-9

Fates, the, 35, 201-2, 204, 290-1

Father Christmas, 445-6, 448-9

Feegles, _see_ Nac Mac Feegle

femininity, attitudes to

among dwarfs, 70-2

in Earthly societies, 72-3

Fertile Feet, 322-3

Finn MacCool (Fingal), 114

firebird, _see_ phoenix

fish, lost items discovered in, 316-18

fishermen, beliefs and customs among, 45, 72, 307, 365, 379, 409-10

flabberghast, 141

_Flying Dutchman_, 411

folklore

children and, 402, 419-29

in cities, 399

nature of, 10, 13-17, 399

origin in ‘folk memory’, 126, 419

patterns of, 22-3, 126, 232, 317-18, 339, 370, 387, 448-9; _see also_
narrativium

folklorists, 263-4, 399-402, 426-7, 441

theories of, 126, 217, 263-4, 266, 370-1, 399, 401-2, 405, 426, 441

football, 406-9

Frankenstein, Doctor, 156

Frazer, Sir James, 441; _The Golden Bough_, 73, 205, 321, 429

Frederick Barbarossa, Emperor, 14, 250

Frighteners, _see_ Nursery Bogeys;

Prohibitory Monsters

Fri’it, 464-5, 467

funerary customs

in Djelibeybi, 463

in the Chalk country, 308-11

laying out and watch-night, 254, 309-12

of dwarfs, 68-70

of Gypsies, 69-70, 309

of Heroes, 349-54

of Igors, 155-6

of shepherds, 308-9

of Vikings, 411

of witches, 296-8

on Earth, 69-70, 309-12, 315, 409-10

games

children’s, 307, 419-20

of the gods, 28-9, 30, 345-6

Thud, 29, 250

_see also_ football

gargoyles, 127-8

Garlick, Magrat, 54, 96, 179, 199, 200, 202-3, 206, 218, 219, 221, 228,
231

Gaspode (the famous one), 380-1

Gaspode (the modern one), 381-2

George, St, 305-373

German folk traditions, 64, 216, 293-4, 342, 424, 428, 443, 444, 446

ghosts, 39-40, 256-7, 315, 463-4

ghost ships, 409-12, 464

Giza, Great Sphinx of, 176

gnomes, 108-9

Verruca Gnome, 425

_see also_ Nac Mac Feegle, tooth fairy

goblins, 122, 285, 443

godmothers, fairy, 202-3, 234

gods, 26-49

adherence to fashion, 28, 41

and First Hero, 334-6

and the seasons, 321-8

ban flying machines, 167

belief in, 26-7

Cenotine god, 145

Christian God, 467, 469

Dark Gods, 56, 57

dwarfs and, 73

horned gods, 38-41, 217, 247-8

_lokapala_, 23

love of board games, 28-9, 30

mass destruction by, 361, 362-4

shepherds and, 308-9

triple goddess, 204-5, 217

_see also_ Agi Hammerthief; Summer Lady; Tak; Wintersmith; _and entries
for individual gods_

Gogol, Mrs, 14, 280

gold

attraction for magpies, 259-60

importance to dwarfs, 63

of sleeping warriors, 248-50

golems, 144-8

ancient Discworld specimens, 145-6, 249

appearance and composition, 144

given life by written words, 144-5, 147

in Jewish tradition, 146-8

need for master, 145, 147

gonnagles, _see under_ Nac Mac Feegle

Gottskalk, 254

Grallon, King, 363-4

Graves, Robert: _The White Goddess_, 205

Great A’Tuin, 22, 24; _see also_ turtles

Great Dunmow, Essex, 9

Greebo, 103, 113, 141, 215-16, 230

Greece, Ancient

funeral customs, 311

gods, 28, 30-1, 41, 43, 129, 201, 205, 290, 324, 335, 458

heroes, 172-3, 324-5, 326-7, 335-6, 345-7, 353-4, 373, 375

myths: of Atlantis, 362-3; of basilisk, 169; of Chimera,172-3; of
constellations, 463; of Cornucopia, 324; of Hell and Underworld, 52,
311, 324-8; of Prometheus, 335; of salamander, 182; of sphinx, 175,
176-7; of werewolves, 149

philosophical ideas in, 26

green, as lucky colour, 42

Green Man, 42

Greyfriars Bobby, 380

Grimm, Brothers, 231, 251, 372;

Jacob, 40

Gryla, 444-5

Gryle, Mr, 143

Gwion (Taliesin), 212-13

Guntram, King of the Franks, 288-9

Gynt, Peer, 125

Gypsies

funerary customs, 69-70, 309

Hachi-koh, 381

Hades, 326

hair, used as snare, 183, 185

Haiti, zombies in, 157-8

Halloween, 226

Hammer Films, 133

Handel, George Frideric: _Semele_, 323

hare

Easter Hare, 424-5

favoured shape for witches, 209-10, 213

Harrison, Jane Ellen, 205

hats, witches’, 224-6, 275, 295

_Hávamál_ (poem), 351

Hawkins, Jim, 192-3

Haxey Hood Game, 408

Hecate, 205

Hell, 50, 51-4, 172

Herakles (Hercules), 325, 328, 336

Herne the Hunted, 37-41

Herne the Hunter, 38-41

Herodotus, 180

Heroes, 331-54

and Descent to Underworld, 324-8

and dragons, 165-6

and gods, 334-6, 344-9, 353-4

attitudes to death, 349-55

Barbarian, 49, 334, 336, 340-55

First Hero, 334-6

Heir to the Kingdom, 333, 336-9, 371-3

of Ancient Greece, 172-3, 326-8, 335-6, 345-7, 353-4,373, 375

Herrick, Robert: ‘Oberon’s Palace’, 427

Hiho Song, the, 64

hippopotamus: in Ankh-Morpork legend, 359-60

hiver, the, 55

_hnefatafl_ (board game), 28-9

Hodgesaargh, 179

Hoffman, E. T. A., 424

Hoffman, Heinrich: _Struwwelpeter_, 422

Hogarth, William, 226

Hogfather, 431, 441-2, 445, 446, 448

Hogmanay, 431; _see also_ New Year

Hogswatch traditions, 371, 400, 401, 430-7, 441-2

Hoki the Jokester, 41-2

Holinshed, Raphael, 200

Holland, and St Nicholas tradition, 443, 447-8

Holle, Frau (Frau Perchte/Berthe), 293-4

Holy Wood, 64, 249, 362, 419

Homer: _Odyssey_, 353

horns

as comic symbols, 39

Holy Horns (symbol of Om), 45

horned gods, 38-41, 217, 247-8

Horn of Plenty, 323-4

of elf king, 93, 247

Horseman’s Word, 255

horseshoes, protection against elves, 85, 255

Howard, Robert E., 341

Hrun, 340-1

Hugo, Victor, 73

Hwel, 201

Hydra, the, 173

Ice Giants, 30-1, 419

Iceland, _see_ Norse legend, Scandinavian folklore

Ichlos, 464, 465-6

_iele_, 84

Igor (de Magpyr servant), 136

Igors, 154-6

appearance, 154

heirlooms among, 155-6

interest in surgery, 155-6

Io, Blind, 31-2, 42, 290, 291, 324

Ireland, Samuel, 39

Irish legend

banshees, 143

Cailleach Dhugh, 113-14

fairies in, 83, 97

Fionn mac Cumhaill, 114

geissa, 342

Liafail, the, 67

iron, used against elves and fairies, 85, 86, 242, 255, 270

Ironfoundersson, Captain Carrot, 65, 68-9, 153, 337, 404

Irving, Washington, 447

Ishtar, 325

_Ishtar’s Descent_, 326

Isidore of Seville, 184

Isis, 189

Ixolite, 143

jackdaws, 291-2

Jack Frost, 424

James VI and I, King, 279

Jenny Greenteeth, 90, 313, 314, 421

Jones, Captain, 366

Jonson, Ben: _Christmas his Masque_, 445

Joyce, James: _Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man_, 467

Kali, 456

keldas, _see under_ Nac Mac Feegle

Kér-Is, 363-4

Kittelsen, Theodor, 129

Klatch, 44, 170

Kligman, Gail, 84

knockers, 64

Knox, James, 106

kobolds, 64

Koom Valley: battle of, 76, 121;

Kings’ Cave, 249-50

_kruk_ (dwarf ‘mining law’), 65-6, 76

Lady, The, 27, 35, 42, 57, 347, 348-9, 403

Lancre, 38, 237-71

beliefs, 255-61

customs of, 245-7, 261-71, 402

elves in, 82-3, 84, 230

gnarly ground, 252-3

Lancre Caves, 247, 248-50

Long Man, 244-6

Nac Mac Feegle in, 112, 244

standing stones, 239-44

witches of, 193-234; _see also under individual names_

Latham, Charlotte, 428, 460

Lawrence, D. H.: ‘The Ship of Death’, 410

Leek, Mrs Sybil, 292

Le Fanu, Joseph Sheridan, 135, 136

_Lemegeton_, 50

Leonard of Quirm, 165, 167, 367

Leshp, 34, 365

Level, Miss, 284-5

on witchcraft, 285

Leviathan, 368-9

_Liber Paginarum Fulvarum_, 56

Librarian, the, 389

Lilith (demon), 233-4

Lilith (Lily Weatherwax), 214, 233

Littlebottom, Cheery, 70-1

Loew ben Bazalel, Rabbi Judah, 146-8

Loki, 41

Long Man (Lancre), 93, 244-7

Long Man of Wilmington, 244, 246

Lovecraft, H. P., 34, 56, 58;

‘Dagon’, 34-5

Low King, 66, 75

Luck _see_ The Lady

Luggage, the, 170-2, 174, 185-94

antecedents in Earthly luggage, 186-7

Lycaon, King of Arcadia, 149

lycanthropy, _see_ werewolves

‘Lyke-Wake Dirge’, 254

Lyonesse, 364

Mab, Queen, 89, 427

_Mabinogion_, 322

Macaldus, 317

McGonagall, William, 110-11

Mcleod, Fiona, 98

_Magpie_ (TV programme), 9, 449

magpies, 257-61

magpie rhyme, 9-10, 259-61, 449

Malich, Alberto, _see_ Albert

Malory, Sir Thomas: _Morte d’Arthur_, 15, 337-9

Marlowe, Christopher, 353

Martha, St, 185

Martin, St, 443

Maugham, Somerset, 453

Maurice, the Amazing, 382

Mazda (First Hero), 334-5

Mazda (Zoroastrian god), 334

menstruation, 73

Mexico, and Death, 462

mice, and milk teeth, 428

Middle-Earth Worm (Midgardsorm), 168-9

midwinter festival, 430-4; _see also_ Christmas, Hogswatch, New Year,
Saturnalia

Milne, A. A., 422

Milton, John, 368; _Comus_, 319; _Paradise Lost_, 50, 172, 458

mining law (of dwarfs), _see kruk_

mistletoe, 41-2, 434-5

‘Mistletoe Bough, The’, 190

moon

dragons on, 167

effect on werewolves, 151-2

Moore, Clement Clark: ‘A Visit from St Nicholas’, 447-8

Morris dancing, 264, 266-71, 320-2, 399-400

Dark Morris, 267, 270-1, 320

mumming plays, 262-3

Murray, Margaret, 216-17

myth-making process, 292-7, 375-8, 446-8

_nachzehrer_, 134

Nac Mac Feegle, 88-9, 92, 98, 101-14, 206, 244, 297, 303, 307, 327

attitude to authority, 104, 105

belief in afterlife, 104

clan structure, 103, 113-14

crawstep, 105

fighting techniques, 106, 109, 111-12

gonnagles, 109-12, 113

in Ireland, 107

in Scotland, 105-6, 109-10, 112-113

keldas, 113, 280

on Discworld, 107-10

physical characteristics, 103, 105-6, 113-14

speech, 112-13

use of birds, 109

names

influence of, 232-3

knowledge of conferring

power, 123-4

not to be spoken, 42, 86, 107, 147

use in magic, 53, 146, 147

narrativium, 22, 223, 239, 249, 289, 292, 333, 337, 375

Nash, Thomas, 448

nature gods, 41

near death experience, 288

_Necronomicon_, 56

_Necrotelecomnicon_, 56, 361

Newbolt, Sir Henry, 378-9

New Year traditions and observance, 431, 433-4, 435-6

Nicholas, St, 436, 443-4, 447

Nijel the Destroyer, 342-3

Nitt, Agnes, 206, 220

_Njal’s Saga_, 291

Nobbs, Nobby, 337, 400

Norns, the, 202, 204

Norse legend, 28-9, 41, 47-9, 291, 342, 351

dwarfs in, 62-3

Giants, 123-7

Midgardsorm (Middle-Earth Worm), 168-9

Norns, 202, 204

Volund’s chest, 189-90

_see also_ Scandinavian folklore

Norway, _see_ Scandinavian folklore

_nosferatu_, 134

Nosferatu, 136

Notfaroutoe, Count (Arthur Winkings), 138

Noyes, Alfred, 379

Nuggan, 27, 42-4

Nursery Bogeys, 90-1, 314, 420-4, 444; _see also_ Prohibitory Monsters

Oats, Quite Reverend Mightily: on vampires, 139, 140

Obby Oss (Padstow), 263

Oberon, 93, 247, 427

occult equipment, 219-22, 282-7, 295, 391-3

octarine, 182

Odin, 32, 48, 291, 342

Odysseus (Ulysses), 325, 353-4

Oedipus, 177

Offler, 44-5

Ogg, Gytha (Nanny), 15, 53, 91, 183, 191, 199, 200, 202-3, 204, 206-7,
215, 220-1, 231-2, 257, 297, 322, 402, 420

on Borrowing, 207-8

on elves, 85-6, 87, 247

on folk customs, 261-2, 266-7, 271

on gnarly ground, 253

on Long Man, 244-5

on Nac Mac Feegle, 106-7, 108, 112-13

on phoenix, 179-80

on vampires, 139-41

on witchery, 228

Tir Nani Ogg, 206

Ogg, Jason, 82, 183, 256, 457

O’Hara, John, 453

Olaf, King, 348

Olaf, St, 123-4

Olwen, 322

Om, the Great God, 27, 45-7

Omnianism, 22, 27, 45-7, 464, 466

Omar Khayyám: _Rubâíyát_, 29

Ooser, Dorset, 263

Oozer, Lancre, 262

Orfeo, King, 110

Orpheus, 110, 325, 328

Osiris, 189

_ouroboros_, 169

Pan, 41, 247

Pandemonium, 49, 50, 51

Paracelsus, 182, 387

Patrick, St, 317

Pausanias, 149

Pechs, _see_ Picts

Pegasus, 173

Perdita, _see_ Agnes Nitt

Persephone, 205, 326

Perseus, 373, 463

Petronius: _Satyricon_, 149

phoenix, 179-81, 257

Pickering, naming of, 318

Picts, 14, 105-6

pictsies, _see_ Nac Mac Feegle

Pied Piper, 375-8, 382

pigs, and winter festivals, 431-2; _see also_ Hogfather

Pin, Mr, 468

pixies, 88, 105, 108

Plato, 362, 363

Pliny, 73, 169

Plutarch, 189, 346

Polidori, John, 135

Polycrates of Samos, 317

Pomponius Mela, 393

Poons, Windle, 157

Pope, Alexander, 185, 322-3

Prague, golem of, 146-8

Prohibitory Monsters, 314-15, 420-4

_see also_ Nursery Bogeys

Prometheus, 52, 335-6

Puck, 89

pyramids, 463

Quezovercoatl the Feathered Boa, 51

Quintessence, as fifth element, 25-6

Quisition, Omnian, 46, 47

Quoth the Raven, 371

on Hogswatch hunts, 440

Ragnarok, 29

Ramkin, Lady Sybil, 165, 166

rats, and Pied Piper, 375-8;

Educated Rodents, 382

ravens

serving gods, 32, 291

_see also_ Quoth

Redcap, Mother, 224

reindeer, and Santa Claus, 447

ribbons, as symbols, 17

black, for reformed vampires, 17, 137

yellow, 17

Richardson, Ruth, 310

Ridcully, Archchancellor Mustrum, 386, 429, 435

Rincewind, 128, 146, 188, 454

on dragons, 167-8

on the gods, 30

on the Luggage, 193

Robin Hood, 41, 350

Roland and Oliver, 349

Romania, 431

Black School in, 394

fairies in, 84

vampires in, 138

Vlad Dracul, 135

Romans, Ancient, 73, 105, 201, 311, 326, 360, 391, 458

midwinter festivals, 431-3, 435

Romulus and Remus, 360

Russian folklore, 140, 392, 428

Baba Yaga, 12, 225, 280

elves in, 84, 88

Koshchei the Deathless, 294

magpies in, 259

Ruthven, Lord, 135

_Saga of Sturlaug Starfsama_, 212

sailors’ tales, 366, 409-12

salamanders, 181-2

salt, use of

against evil spirits, 311-12

in laying out corpses, 309-11

on shed milk teeth, 427

Samedi, Baron, 157-8

Sandman, 423-4

Santa Claus, 445-8

sapient pearwood, 187-8

Sator Square, 390-2

Saturday, Baron, 157

Saturn, 432, 458

Saturnalia, 432, 435

Scandinavian folklore, 97-8, 212-13, 216, 315, 350, 410, 431-2

_draug_, 134

farm-elves, 88

forest elf-women, 293

Grims, 315

island of Utrøst, 367

thirteen Christmas Lads, 91, 444

trolls, 123-7, 444-5

witches, 212, 225

_see also_ Norse legend

Scissor Man, 422, 423

Scone of Stone, 66, 67

Scotland

elves in, 83, 88, 96

hags, 113-14, 185

Hogmanay, 431

Nac Mac Feegle and, 105-6, 109-10, 112-13

Seithenhin, 363

Seth, 189

Seven-Year Flitch (Lancre), 262, 263

Shadlow, Betsey, 277-8

Shakespeare, William, 30, 109, 448

_A Midsummer Night’s Dream_, 89-90, 93, 247

and fairies, 89-90, 93, 247

and Herne the Hunter, 38-41

and witches, 199-201, 204-6

_King Lear_, 30

_Macbeth_, 199-201

on phoenix, 181

_Romeo and Juliet_, 89

_The Merry Wives of Windsor_, 38-9, 40

shamans, 246-7

shambles, 276, 306

shape-shifting

by Greebo, 215-16

by vampires, 141

by witches, 209-13

Transformation Combat, 212 _see also_ Borrowing;

werewolves

shepherds, 305-9

and Granny Aching, 70, 280-1, 298

counting system, 307-8

funeral customs, 308-9

ships, 409-12

Shoe, Reg, 157, 158, 464

shop, shifting, 374-5

Sigmund the Volsung, 342, 373

Sigurd (Siegfried), 342, 350,351, 373

silver: effect on werewolves, 152;

to shoe unicorn, 183

Silver Horde, the, 49, 343, 355, 463

Simon (student wizard), 168

Sindbad the Sailor, 368

Slant, Mr, 157

sleeping warriors, 14, 248-52, 339

smiths

blacksmiths, 85, 244, 457

dwarfs as, 63, 64

_see also_ Jason Ogg, Volund

Snapperly, Mrs, 276-7

Snorri Sturluson, 48

Solomon, King, 50, 389

soul, external, 294

soul, separation from living

body, 287-9; _see also_ Borrowing

soul cake, 264-6

Soul Cake Days, 264-5, 402, 424

Soul Cake Tuesday Duck, 265, 402, 424

Sphinx, the, 174-8

standing stones, 239-44

Dancers, the, 82, 239-42

dancing, 10-11, 241

reluctance to be counted, 242-4

Standing Stone (Lancre), 242-4

stone circles, 122, 241

stepmothers, wicked, 213

Stevenson, Robert Louis: _Treasure Island_, 192

Sto Helit, Susan, 421, 423

Stoker, Bram, 135-6, 394

Stonehenge, 122, 243, 432

Stone of Scone, 67

Stone of the Footprints, Islay, 66-7

Stubbes, Philip: _Anatomie of Abuses_, 267

Stukeley, William, 243

suicide

haunting as result of, 39

Summer Lady, 321-8

summoning

of Death, 387; Rite of AshkEnte, 388

of demons, 53-4, 221, 387

of Things from the Dungeon Dimensions, 55-6

sunken cities, 361-6

‘Sweet Polly Oliver’, 412

Swires, Buggy, 109

swords

Excalibur, 338, 342

Gram, 342

Kring, 341-2

of barbarian heroes, 341-2

of Death, 454, 456, 457-8, 459

of lost heirs, 337-8, 371-2

Tak, 27, 74-5

Taliesin, 213

Tam Lin, 96-7

Tammuz, 326

Tarot, 459

Tennyson, Alfred, Lord: ‘Ulysses’, 354

Teppic, Prince (Teppicymon XXVIII)

and Fertile Feet, 322

and Sphinx, 174-5, 177-8

Teppicymon XXVII, 37, 322, 455

Tethis (sea-troll), 129, 168-9

_Thief of Baghdad, The_, 24

Things from the Dungeon Dimensions, 55-6

Thomas the Rhymer, 94-6

Thor, 32, 168

three, importance of number:

Fates, 35, 199-200; goddesses, 205-6; paths, 82, 95; witches, 199-206

Thud (board game), 29, 250

thunder gods, 31-3

Thutmose, Prince, 176

Tick, Miss Perspicacia, 214, 230, 275-6, 279, 284, 287, 313, 323, 421

Time, Old Father, 458-9

Timur-I-Lenk (Tamurlane), 352-3

Tir nan Og, 206

Titania, 93, 247

tooth fairy, 90, 425-9

Topsell, Edward: _Historie of Serpents_, 170

tortoises, 369-70

and eagles, 46-7

Great God Om as, 46-7

in Hindu cosmology, 23

treacle mines, 383-5

Treason, Miss Eumenides, 32n, 289-98, 321

Trickle-Treating, 264-5

Troll Bridge (Lancre), 120

trolls, 117-29

created by Tak, 74

cultural tradition, 120, 121

death, 119-20

Diamond King, 119, 250

dislike of druids, 122

feud with dwarfs, 74, 121-2

gargoyles, 127-8

hostility to churches and Christians, 123-4, 127

in Scandinavia, 123-7

intelligence, 120, 126

names, 119

Night-trolls, 124-5

physical nature and appearance, 119-20, 122-3, 126

sea-trolls, 128-9

traditional occupations, 120

Trondheim, 123-4

Tulip, Mr, 468

turtles

in Chinese mythology, 24

in Discworld cosmology, 22, 24, 45-6

in Hindu cosmology, 23-4

mistaken for islands, 367-9

Twoflower, 182, 346-7

Typhon, 173

Uberwald

Igors in, 154-6

legend of Fifth Elephant, 25, 383-4

treacle mines, 383

Uffington: Dragon Hill, 305;

White Horse, 246, 304

Ulysses, _see_ Odysseus

Undead, _see_ vampires, zombies

Underworld, Descent into, 324-8

unicorns, 182-5, 257

Unseen University, 56, 158, 175, 230, 284, 387, 388, 389, 390, 393, 434

ceremonies and customs, 404-6, 435

Library, 387, 389

Urglefloggah, 51

Valhalla, 48, 341, 351

Valkyries, 47-9, 291

vampires, 16, 107-8, 133-41, 230, 312

allergies and taboos, 137-8

and Igors, 136, 154-5

appearance and dress, 133-4, 135-6, 138-9

blood-sucking, 133, 134, 137, 138

causes of vampirism, 138

changes in image of, 133-6

in European folklore, 134, 138, 139-40

integration with modern

society, 136-7

methods to defeat or kill, 134-5, 139-41

social status, 134

Uberwald League of Temperance, 133, 137

‘Vampyre, The’ (Polidori), 135

Verence I, King, 256-7

Vetinari, Havelock, Lord, 148, 166

Vickery, Roy: _Plant Lore_, 314

Vimes, Commander Sir Samuel, 43-4, 68-9, 76, 120, 144, 148, 165, 372,
420

Vishnu, 28

as tortoise, 23, 46

Vlad the Impaler, 135

Volund, 189-90

_Völundarkviđa_ (poem), 190

_Völuspá_ (poem), 29

von Uberwald family, 153; see also Angua

Vorbis, 466, 467

_vrykolakas_, 134

Wagner, Richard, 48

Warner, Susan and Ann: ‘The Christmas Stocking’, 448

wassailing, 400, 401, 437

Wayland, _see_ Volund

Wayland’s Smithy, 244

weapons

of dwarfs, 63, 64, 68-9

of thunder-god, 31

Weatherwax, Alison, 231

Weatherwax, Esmerelda (Granny), 54, 199, 200, 202-3, 206-7, 218-19,
231-2, 253-4, 296, 323, 390

and Borrowing, 207-9

and Death, 255, 453

and healing, 221-2, 227, 285

and phoenix, 179, 181

and shape-changing, 210-11, 213, 214

and unicorn, 183-5

attitude to magic, 213, 219-20, 224, 228, 286

on elves, 84

Weatherwax, Lily, _see_ Lilith

Wee Free Men, _see_ Nac Mac Feegle

werewolves, 133, 148-54

in classical tradition, 149

in European folklore, 149-50

monthly cycle of, 151-2

on Discworld, 150-4

unpopularity of, 150

yennorks, 153-4

_see also_ wolfmen

Wheelbrace, Eric, 239-40, 241, 245

Whitlow, Mrs, 390

Wicca, 217, 219

Wild Hunt, 40

William of Malmesbury: _Gesta Regum Anglorum_, 291

William the gonnagle, 109-10

Wintersmith, 321-8

wise women, _see_ witches

witches

and familiars, 230, 275, 291,

and summoning of demons, 53-4, 221

as healers, 221-2, 227

Borrowing, 207-9, 287, 289

covens and sabbats, 216-18, 226, 286

hostility to, 216, 229, 275-9, 394

in Lancre, 193-234

in the Chalk country, 275-82

shape-changing by, 209-16

swimming of, 278-80

training, 217, 282-7

wicked, 231-4

Witch Trials, 217

_see also entries for individuals_

wizards, 230, 386-94

and books, 386-90

and folklore, 386-7

Black School for, 393-4

_see also_ Unseen University

wolfmen, 152

women

restrictions on, 72-3

soldiers, 412-13

thought to bring bad luck, 72-3

wren, hunted at

Christmas/Hogswatch, 438-40

Xeno, 177

yennorks, 153-4

Yog-Sothoth, 58

Zeus, 28, 30, 32, 324, 326, 335-6, 345; Lycean Zeus, 149

zombies, 156-8, 312, 464

in Haiti, 157-8

on Discworld, 157-8


About the Author

Terry Pratchett is the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. His novels have been widely adapted for stage and
screen, and he is the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
Worldwide sales of his books now stand at 70 million, and they have been
translated into thirty-seven languages.

For more information about Terry Pratchett and his books, please visit
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

_Also by Terry Pratchett_

THE DISCWORLD ® SERIES

1. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

2. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

3. EQUAL RITES

4. MORT

5. SOURCERY

6. WYRD SISTERS

7. PYRAMIDS

8. GUARDS! GUARDS!

9. ERIC (illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. MOVING PICTURES

11. REAPER MAN

12. WITCHES ABROAD

13. SMALL GODS

14. LORDS AND LADIES

15. MEN AT ARMS

16. SOUL MUSIC

17. INTERESTING TIMES

18. MASKERADE

19. FEET OF CLAY

20. HOGFATHER

21. JINGO

22. THE LAST CONTINENT

23. CARPE JUGULUM

24. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

25. THE TRUTH

26. THIEF OF TIME

27. THE LAST HERO (illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. THE AMAZING MAURICE & HIS EDUCATED RODENTS (for younger readers)

29. NIGHT WATCH

30. THE WEE FREE MEN (for younger readers)

31. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

32. A HAT FULL OF SKY (for younger readers)

33. GOING POSTAL

34. THUD!

35. WINTERSMITH (for younger readers)

36. MAKING MONEY

37. UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

38. I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT (for younger readers)

39. SNUFF

OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III: DARWIN’S WATCH (with Ian Stewart and Jack
Cohen)

THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION (with Stephen Briggs)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK (with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO (with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK (with Bernard Pearson)

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK (with Alan Batley and Bernard
Pearson)

WHERE’S MY COW? (illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD (with Paul Kidby)

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD (compiled by Stephen Briggs)

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD (with Jacqueline Simpson)

DISCWORLD MAPS

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK (with Stephen Briggs)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP (with Stephen Briggs)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE – A DISCWORLD MAPP (with Stephen Briggs,
illustrated by Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN (with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of other books based on the Discworld series –
illustrated screenplays, graphic novels, comics and plays, can be found
on WWW.TERRYPRATCHETT.CO.UK.

NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS

GOOD OMENS (with Neil Gaiman)

STRATA

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

THE UNADULTERATED CAT (illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS FOR YOUNGER READERS

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND*

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

DODGER

*www.ifnotyouthenwho.com

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
A Random House Group Company
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

First published in Great Britain
in 2008 by Doubleday
an imprint of Transworld Publishers

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett and Jacqueline Simpson 2008

Illustrations © Paul Kidby 2008

Discworld ® is a trademark registered by Terry Pratchett

Terry Pratchett and Jacqueline Simpson have asserted their right under
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 to be identified as the
authors of this work.

‘The Ship of Death’ from _The Complete poems of D. H. Lawrence_
reproduced by permission of Pollinger Limited and the Estate of Frieda
Lawrence Ravagli. Permission to reprint lines from ‘East Coker II’ in
_Four Quartets_ by T. S. Eliot granted by Faber and Faber Ltd.

This book is a work of fiction and, except in the case of historical
fact, any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, is purely
coincidental.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

Version 1.0 Epub ISBN 9781407034249
ISBN 9780385611008

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Addresses for Random House Group Ltd companies outside the UK can be
found at:
www.randomhouse.co.uk
The Random House Group Ltd Reg. No. 954009

2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 ß1
