
GOOD
OMENS

THE
NICE AND ACCURATE
PROPHECIES OF
AGNES NUTTER,
WITCH

Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett

[logo]


Dedication

The authors would like to join the demon Crowley
in dedicating this book to the memory of
G. K. CHESTERTON
A man who knew what was going on.


Contents

Cover

Title Page

Dedication

Foreword

In the beginning

Good Omens

Eleven Years Ago

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

Saturday

Sunday

About the Authors

Praise

Facts

Neil Gaiman on Terry Pratchett

Terry Pratchett on Neil Gaiman

Also by Terry Pratchett

Also by Neil Gaiman

Copyright

About the Publisher


Foreword

People say: What was it like writing Good Omens?

And we say: We were just a couple of guys, okay? We still are. It was a
summer job. We had a great time doing it, we split the money in half,
and we swore never to do it again. We didn’t think it was important.

And, in a way, it still isn’t. Good Omens was written by two people who
at the time were not at all well known except by the people who already
knew them. They weren’t even certain it would sell. They certainly
didn’t know they were going to write the most repaired book in the
world. (Believe us: We have signed a delightfully large number of
paperbacks that have been dropped in the bath, gone a worrying brown
color, got repaired with sticky tape and string, and, in one case,
consisted entirely of loose pages in a plastic bag. On the other hand,
there was the guy who’d had a special box made up of walnut and silver
filigree, with the paperback nestling inside on black velvet. There were
silver runes on the lid. We didn’t ask.) Etiquette tip: It’s okay, more
or less, to ask an author to sign your arm, but not good manners to then
nip around to the tattoo parlor next door and return half an hour later
to show them the inflamed result.

We didn’t know we’d do some signing tours that would be weird even by
our generous standards, talking about humor in fifteen-second bursts in
between newsflashes about the horrific hostage situation down at the
local Burger King, being interviewed by an ill-prepared New York radio
presenter who hadn’t got the message that Good Omens was a work of what
we in the trade call “fiction,” and getting a stern pre-interview
warning about swearing from the diminutive Director of Protocol of a
public-service radio station “because you English use bad language all
the time.”

In fact, neither of us swear much, especially not on the radio, but for
the next hour we found ourselves automatically speaking in very short,
carefully scanned sentences, while avoiding each other’s eyes.

And then there were the readers, Gawd bless them. We must have signed
hundreds of thousands of copies for them by now. The books are often
well read to the point of physical disintegration; if
we run across a shiny new copy, it’s usually because the owner’s
previous five have been stolen by friends, struck by lightning or eaten
by giant termites in Sumatra. You have been warned. Oh, and we
understand there’s a copy in the Vatican library. It’d be nice to think
so.

It’s been fun. And it continues.


In the beginning

IT WAS A NICE DAY.

All the days had been nice. There had been rather more than seven of
them so far, and rain hadn’t been invented yet. But clouds massing east
of Eden suggested that the first thunderstorm was on its way, and it was
going to be a big one.

The angel of the Eastern Gate put his wings over his head to shield
himself from the first drops.

“I’m sorry,” he said politely. “What was it you were saying?”

“I said, that one went down like a lead balloon,” said the serpent.

“Oh. Yes,” said the angel, whose name was Aziraphale.

“I think it was a bit of an overreaction, to be honest,” said the
serpent. “I mean, first offense and everything. I can’t see what’s so
bad about knowing the difference between good and evil, anyway.”

“It must be bad,” reasoned Aziraphale, in the slightly concerned tones
of one who can’t see it either, and is worrying about it, “otherwise you
wouldn’t have been involved.”

“They just said, Get up there and make some trouble,” said the serpent,
whose name was Crawly, although he was thinking of changing it now.
Crawly, he’d decided, was not him.

“Yes, but you’re a demon. I’m not sure if it’s actually possible for you
to do good,” said Aziraphale. “It’s down to your basic, you know,
nature. Nothing personal, you understand.”

“You’ve got to admit it’s a bit of a pantomime, though,” said Crawly. “I
mean, pointing out the Tree and saying ‘Don’t Touch’ in big letters. Not
very subtle, is it? I mean, why not put it on top of a high mountain or
a long way off? Makes you wonder what He’s really planning.”

“Best not to speculate, really,” said Aziraphale. “You can’t
second-guess ineffability, I always say. There’s Right, and there’s
Wrong. If you do Wrong when you’re told to do Right, you deserve to be
punished. Er.”

They sat in embarrassed silence, watching the raindrops bruise the first
flowers.

Eventually Crawly said, “Didn’t you have a flaming sword?”

“Er,” said the angel. A guilty expression passed across his face, and
then came back and camped there.

“You did, didn’t you?” said Crawly. “It flamed like anything.”

“Er, well—”

“It looked very impressive, I thought.”

“Yes, but, well—”

“Lost it, have you?”

“Oh no! No, not exactly lost, more—”

“Well?”

Aziraphale looked wretched. “If you must know,” he said, a trifle
testily, “I gave it away.”

Crawly stared up at him.

“Well, I had to,” said the angel, rubbing his hands distractedly. “They
looked so cold, poor things, and she’s expecting already, and what with
the vicious animals out there and the storm coming up I thought, well,
where’s the harm, so I just said, look, if you come back there’s going
to be an almighty row, but you might be needing this sword, so here it
is, don’t bother to thank me, just do everyone a big favor and don’t let
the sun go down on you here.”

He gave Crawly a worried grin.

“That was the best course, wasn’t it?”

“I’m not sure it’s actually possible for you to do evil,” said Crawly
sarcastically. Aziraphale didn’t notice the tone.

“Oh, I do hope so,” he said. “I really do hope so. It’s been worrying me
all afternoon.”

They watched the rain for a while.

“Funny thing is,” said Crawly, “I keep wondering whether the apple thing
wasn’t the right thing to do, as well. A demon can get into real
trouble, doing the right thing.” He nudged the angel. “Funny if we both
got it wrong, eh? Funny if I did the good thing and you did the bad one,
eh?”

“Not really,” said Aziraphale.

Crawly looked at the rain.

“No,” he said, sobering up. “I suppose not.”

Slate-black curtains tumbled over Eden. Thunder growled among the hills.
The animals, freshly named, cowered from the storm.

Far away, in the dripping woods, something bright and fiery flickered
among the trees.

It was going to be a dark and stormy night.


Good Omens

A Narrative of Certain Events occurring in the
last eleven years of human history, in strict accordance
as shall be shewn with:

The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter

Compiled and edited, with Footnotes of an
Educational Nature and Precepts for the Wise,

by Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

Supernatural Beings

God (God)

Metatron (The Voice of God)

Aziraphale (An angel, and part-time rare book dealer)

Satan (A Fallen Angel; the Adversary)

Beelzebub (A Likewise Fallen Angel and Prince of Hell)

Hastur (A Fallen Angel and Duke of Hell)

Ligur (Likewise a Fallen Angel and Duke of Hell)

Crowley (An Angel who did not so much Fall
as Saunter Vaguely Downwards)

Apocalyptic Horsepersons

DEATH (Death)

War (War)

Famine (Famine)

Pollution (Pollution)

Humans

Thou-Shalt-Not-Commit-Adultery Pulsifer (A Witchfinder)

Agnes Nutter (A Prophetess)

Newton Pulsifer (Wages Clerk and Witchfinder Private)

Anathema Device
(Practical Occultist and Professional Descendant)

Shadwell (Witchfinder Sergeant)

Madame Tracy
(Painted Jezebel [mornings only,
Thursdays by arrangement] and Medium)

Sister Mary Loquacious
(A Satanic Nun of the Chattering Order of St. Beryl)

Mr. Young (A Father)

Mr. Tyler (A Chairman of a Residents’ Association)

A Delivery Man

Them

ADAM (An Antichrist)

Pepper (A Girl)

Wensleydale (A Boy)

Brian (A Boy)

Full Chorus of Tibetans, Aliens, Americans, Atlanteans
and other rare and strange Creatures of the Last Days.

And:

Dog (Satanical hellhound and cat-worrier)


Eleven Years Ago

CURRENT THEORIES on the creation of the Universe state that, if it was
created at all and didn’t just start, as it were, unofficially, it came
into being between ten and twenty thousand million years ago. By the
same token the earth itself is generally supposed to be about four and a
half thousand million years old.

These dates are incorrect.

Medieval Jewish scholars put the date of the Creation at 3760 B.C. Greek
Orthodox theologians put Creation as far back as 5508 B.C.

These suggestions are also incorrect.

Archbishop James Usher (1580–1656) published _Annales Veteris et Novi
Testamenti_ in 1654, which suggested that the Heaven and the Earth were
created in 4004 B.C. One of his aides took the calculation further, and
was able to announce triumphantly that the Earth was created on Sunday
the 21st of October, 4004 B.C., at exactly 9:00 A.M., because God liked
to get work done early in the morning while he was feeling fresh.

This too was incorrect. By almost a quarter of an hour.

The whole business with the fossilized dinosaur skeletons was a joke the
paleontologists haven’t seen yet.

This proves two things:

Firstly, that God moves in extremely mysterious, not to say, circuitous
ways. God does not play dice with the universe; He plays an ineffable
game of His own devising, which might be compared, from the perspective
of any of the other players,¹ to being involved in an obscure and
complex version of poker in a pitch-dark room, with blank cards, for
infinite stakes, with a Dealer who won’t tell you the rules, and who
_smiles all the time_.

Secondly, the Earth’s a Libra.

The astrological prediction for Libra in the “Your Stars Today” column
of the Tadfield _Advertiser_, on the day this history begins, read as
follows:

[] LIBRA. September 24–October 23.

You may be feeling run down and always in the same old daily round. Home
and family matters are highlighted and are hanging fire. Avoid
unnecessary risks. A friend is important to you. Shelve major decisions
until the way ahead seems clear. You may be vulnerable to a stomach
upset today, so avoid salads. Help could come from an unexpected
quarter.

This was perfectly correct on every count except for the bit about the
salads.

IT WASN’T A DARK AND STORMY NIGHT.

It should have been, but that’s the weather for you. For every mad
scientist who’s had a convenient thunderstorm just on the night his
Great Work is finished and lying on the slab, there have been dozens
who’ve sat around aimlessly under the peaceful stars while Igor clocks
up the overtime.

But don’t let the fog (with rain later, temperatures dropping to around
forty-five degrees) give anyone a false sense of security. Just because
it’s a mild night doesn’t mean that dark forces aren’t abroad. They’re
abroad all the time. They’re _everywhere_.

They always are. That’s the whole point.

Two of them lurked in the ruined graveyard. Two shadowy figures, one
hunched and squat, the other lean and menacing, both of them
Olympic-grade lurkers. If Bruce Springsteen had ever recorded “Born to
Lurk,” these two would have been on the album cover. They had been
lurking in the fog for an hour now, but they had been pacing themselves
and could lurk for the rest of the night if necessary, with still enough
sullen menace left for a final burst of lurking around dawn.

Finally, after another twenty minutes, one of them said: “Bugger this
for a lark. He should of been here _hours_ ago.”

The speaker’s name was Hastur. He was a Duke of Hell.

MANY PHENOMENA—wars, plagues, sudden audits—have been advanced as
evidence for the hidden hand of Satan in the affairs of Man, but
whenever students of demonology get together the M25 London orbital
motorway is generally agreed to be among the top contenders for Exhibit
A.

Where they go wrong, of course, is in assuming that the wretched road is
evil simply because of the incredible carnage and frustration it
engenders every day.

In fact, very few people on the face of the planet know that the very
shape of the M25 forms the sigil _odegra_ in the language of the Black
Priesthood of Ancient Mu, and means “Hail the Great Beast, Devourer of
Worlds.” The thousands of motorists who daily fume their way around its
serpentine lengths have the same effect as water on a prayer wheel,
grinding out an endless fog of low-grade evil to pollute the
metaphysical atmosphere for scores of miles around.

It was one of Crowley’s better achievements. It had taken _years_ to
achieve, and had involved three computer hacks, two break-ins, one minor
bribery and, on one wet night when all else had failed, two hours in a
squelchy field shifting the marker pegs a few but occultly incredibly
significant meters. When Crowley had watched the first thirty-mile-long
tailback he’d experienced the lovely warm feeling of a bad job well
done.

It had earned him a commendation.

Crowley was currently doing 110 mph somewhere east of Slough. Nothing
about him looked particularly demonic, at least by classical standards.
No horns, no wings. Admittedly he was listening to a _Best of Queen_
tape, but no conclusions should be drawn from this because all tapes
left in a car for more than about a fortnight metamorphose into _Best of
Queen_ albums. No particularly demonic thoughts were going through his
head. In fact, he was currently wondering vaguely who Moey and Chandon
were.

Crowley had dark hair and good cheekbones and he was wearing snakeskin
shoes, or at least presumably he was wearing shoes, and he could do
really weird things with his tongue. And, whenever he forgot himself, he
had a tendency to hiss.

He also didn’t blink much.

The car he was driving was a 1926 black Bentley, one owner from new, and
that owner had been Crowley. He’d looked after it.

The reason he was late was that he was enjoying the twentieth century
immensely. It was much better than the seventeenth, and a _lot_ better
than the fourteenth. One of the nice things about Time, Crowley always
said, was that it was steadily taking him further away from the
fourteenth century, the most bloody boring hundred years on God’s,
excuse his French, Earth. The twentieth century was anything but boring.
In fact, a flashing blue light in his rearview mirror had been telling
Crowley, for the last fifty seconds, that he was being followed by two
men who would like to make it even more interesting for him.

He glanced at his watch, which was designed for the kind of rich
deep-sea diver who likes to know what the time is in twenty-one world
capitals while he’s down there.²

The Bentley thundered up the exit ramp, took the corner on two wheels,
and plunged down a leafy road. The blue light followed.

Crowley sighed, took one hand from the wheel, and, half turning, made a
complicated gesture over his shoulder.

The flashing light dimmed into the distance as the police car rolled to
a halt, much to the amazement of its occupants. But it would be nothing
to the amazement they’d experience when they opened the hood and found
out what the engine had turned into.

IN THE GRAVEYARD, Hastur, the tall demon, passed a dogend back to Ligur,
the shorter one and the more accomplished lurker.

“I can see a light,” he said. “Here he comes now, the flash bastard.”

“What’s that he’s drivin’?” said Ligur.

“It’s a car. A horseless carriage,” explained Hastur. “I expect they
didn’t have them last time you was here. Not for what you might call
general use.”

“They had a man at the front with a red flag,” said Ligur.

“They’ve come on a bit since then, I reckon.”

“What’s _this_ Crowley like?” said Ligur.

Hastur spat. “He’s been up here too long,” he said. “Right from the
Start. Gone native, if you ask me. Drives a car with a telephone in it.”

Ligur pondered this. Like most demons, he had a very limited grasp of
technology, and so he was just about to say something like, I bet it
needs a lot of wire, when the Bentley rolled to a halt at the cemetery
gate.

“And he wears sunglasses,” sneered Hastur, “even when he dunt need to.”
He raised his voice. “All hail Satan,” he said.

“All hail Satan,” Ligur echoed.

“Hi,” said Crowley, giving them a little wave. “Sorry I’m late, but you
know how it is on the A40 at Denham, and then I tried to cut up toward
Chorley Wood and then—”

_“Now_ we art all here,” said Hastur meaningfully, “we must recount the
Deeds of the Day.”

“Yeah. Deeds,” said Crowley, with the slightly guilty look of one who is
attending church for the first time in years and has forgotten which
bits you stand up for.

Hastur cleared his throat.

“I have tempted a priest,” he said. “As he walked down the street and
saw the pretty girls in the sun, I put Doubt into his mind. He would
have been a saint, but within a decade we shall have him.”

“Nice one,” said Crowley, helpfully.

“I have corrupted a politician,” said Ligur. “I let him think a tiny
bribe would not hurt. Within a year we shall have him.”

They both looked expectantly at Crowley, who gave them a big smile.

“You’ll like this,” he said.

His smile became even wider and more conspiratorial.

“I tied up _every_ portable telephone system in Central London for
forty-five minutes at lunchtime,” he said.

There was silence, except for the distant swishing of cars.

“Yes?” said Hastur. “And then what?”

“Look, it wasn’t easy,” said Crowley.

“That’s _all_?” said Ligur.

“Look, people—”

“And exactly what has that done to secure souls for our master?” said
Hastur.

Crowley pulled himself together.

What could he tell them? That twenty thousand people got bloody furious?
That you could hear the arteries clanging shut all across the city? And
that then _they_ went back and took it out on their secretaries or
traffic wardens or whatever, and they took it out on other people? In
all kinds of vindictive little ways which, and here was the good bit,
_they thought up themselves_. For the rest of the day. The pass-along
effects were incalculable. Thousands and thousands of souls all got a
faint patina of tarnish, and you hardly had to lift a finger.

But you couldn’t tell that to demons like Hastur and Ligur.
Fourteenth-century minds, the lot of them. Spending years picking away
at one soul. Admittedly it was _craftsmanship_, but you had to think
differently these days. Not big, but wide. With five billion people in
the world you couldn’t pick the buggers off one by one any more; you had
to spread your effort. But demons like Ligur and Hastur wouldn’t
understand. They’d never have thought up Welsh-language television, for
example. Or value-added tax. Or Manchester.

He’d been particularly pleased with Manchester.

“The Powers that Be seem to be satisfied,” he said. “Times are changing.
So what’s up?”

Hastur reached down behind a tombstone.

“This is,” he said.

Crowley stared at the basket.

“Oh,” he said. “No.”

“Yes,” said Hastur, grinning.

_“Already?”_

“_Yes_.”

“And, er, it’s up to _me_ to—?”

“Yes.” Hastur was enjoying this.

“Why me?” said Crowley desperately. “You know me, Hastur, this isn’t,
you know, my scene … ”

“Oh, it is, it is,” said Hastur. “Your scene. Your starring role. Take
it. Times are changing.”

“Yeah,” said Ligur, grinning. “They’re coming to an end, for a start.”

“Why me?”

“You are obviously highly favored,” said Hastur maliciously. “I imagine
Ligur here would give his right arm for a chance like this.”

“That’s right,” said Ligur. Someone’s right arm, anyway, he thought.
There were plenty of right arms around; no sense in wasting a good one.

Hastur produced a clipboard from the grubby recesses of his mack.

“Sign. Here,” he said, leaving a terrible pause between the words.

Crowley fumbled vaguely in an inside pocket and produced a pen. It was
sleek and matte black. It looked as though it could exceed the speed
limit.

“ ’S’nice pen,” said Ligur.

“It can write under water,” Crowley muttered.

“Whatever will they think of next?” mused Ligur.

“Whatever it is, they’d better think of it quickly,” said Hastur. _“No_.
Not A. J. Crowley. Your _real_ name.”

Crowley nodded mournfully, and drew a complex, wiggly sigil on the
paper. It glowed redly in the gloom, just for a moment, and then faded.

“What am I supposed to _do_ with it?” he said.

“You will receive instructions.” Hastur scowled. “Why so worried,
Crowley? The moment we have been working for all these centuries is at
hand!”

“Yeah. Right,” said Crowley. He did not look, now, like the lithe figure
that had sprung so lithely from the Bentley a few minutes ago. He had a
hunted expression.

“Our moment of eternal triumph awaits!”

“Eternal. Yeah,” said Crowley.

“And you will be a tool of that glorious destiny!”

“Tool. Yeah,” muttered Crowley. He picked up the basket as if it might
explode. Which, in a manner of speaking, it would shortly do.

“Er. Okay,” he said. “I’ll, er, be off then. Shall I? Get it over with.
Not that I _want_ to get it over with,” he added hurriedly, aware of the
things that could happen if Hastur turned in an unfavorable report. “But
you know me. Keen.”

The senior demons did not speak.

“So I’ll be popping along,” Crowley babbled. “See you guys ar—see you.
Er. Great. Fine. _Ciao_.”

As the Bentley skidded off into the darkness Ligur said, “Wossat mean?”

“It’s Italian,” said Hastur. “I think it means ‘food.’”

“Funny thing to say, then.” Ligur stared at the retreating taillights.
“You trust him?” he said.

“No,” said Hastur.

“Right,” said Ligur. It’d be a funny old world, he reflected, if demons
went round trusting one another.

CROWLEY, SOMEWHERE west of Amersham, hurtled through the night, snatched
a tape at random and tried to wrestle it out of its brittle plastic box
while staying on the road. The glare of a headlight proclaimed it to be
Vivaldi’s _Four Seasons_. Soothing music, that’s what he needed.

He rammed it into the Blaupunkt.

“_Ohshit_ohshitohshit. Why now? Why me?” he muttered, as the familiar
strains of Queen washed over him.

And suddenly, Freddie Mercury was speaking to him:
_BECAUSE YOU’VE EARNED IT, CROWLEY_.

Crowley blessed under his breath. Using electronics as a means of
communication had been his idea and Below had, for once, taken it up
and, as usual, got it dead wrong. He’d hoped they could be persuaded to
subscribe to Cellnet, but instead they just cut in to whatever it
happened to be that he was listening to at the time and twisted it.

Crowley gulped.

“Thank you very much, lord,” he said.
_WE HAVE GREAT FAITH IN YOU, CROWLEY_.

“Thank you, lord.”
_THIS IS IMPORTANT, CROWLEY_.

“I know, I know.”
_THIS IS THE BIG ONE, CROWLEY_.

“Leave it to me, lord.”

_THAT IS WHAT WE ARE DOING, CROWLEY. AND IF IT GOES WRONG, THEN THOSE
INVOLVED WILL SUFFER GREATLY. EVEN YOU, CROWLEY. ESPECIALLY YOU_.

“Understood, lord.”
_HERE ARE YOUR INSTRUCTIONS, CROWLEY_.

And suddenly he knew. He hated that. They could just as easily have told
him, they didn’t suddenly have to drop chilly knowledge straight into
his brain. He had to drive to a certain hospital.

_“I’ll be there in five minutes, lord, no problem.”
GOOD. I see a little silhouetto of a man scaramouche scaramouche will
you do the fandango_ …

Crowley thumped the wheel. Everything had been going so well, he’d had
it really under his thumb these few centuries. That’s how it goes, you
think you’re on top of the world, and suddenly they spring Armageddon on
you. The Great War, the Last Battle. Heaven versus Hell, three rounds,
one Fall, no submission. And that’d be that. No more world. That’s what
the end of the world _meant_. No more world. Just endless Heaven or,
depending who won, endless _Hell_. Crowley didn’t know which was worse.

Well, Hell was worse, of course, by definition. But Crowley remembered
what Heaven was like, and it had quite a few things in common with Hell.
You couldn’t get a decent drink in either of them, for a start. And the
boredom you got in Heaven was almost as bad as the excitement you got in
Hell.

But there was no getting out of it. You couldn’t be a demon and have
free will.

_. . . I will not let you go (let him go)_ …

Well, at least it wouldn’t be this year. He’d have time to do things.
Unload long-term stocks, for a start.

He wondered what would happen if he just stopped the car here, on this
dark and damp and empty road, and took the basket and swung it round and
round and let go and …

Something dreadful, that’s what.

He’d been an angel once. He hadn’t meant to Fall. He’d just hung around
with the wrong people.

The Bentley plunged on through the darkness, its fuel gauge pointing to
zero. It had pointed to zero for more than sixty years now. It wasn’t
all bad, being a demon. You didn’t have to buy petrol, for one thing.
The only time Crowley had bought petrol was once in 1967, to get the
free James Bond bullet-hole-in-the-windscreen transfers, which he rather
fancied at the time.

On the back seat the thing in the basket began to cry; the air-raid
siren wail of the newly born. High. Wordless. And _old_.

IT WAS QUITE A NICE HOSPITAL, thought Mr. Young. It would have been
quiet, too, if it wasn’t for the nuns.

He quite liked nuns. Not that he was a, you know, left-footer or
anything like that. No, when it came to avoiding going to church, the
church he stolidly avoided going to was St. Cecil and All Angels,
no-nonsense C. of E., and he wouldn’t have dreamed of avoiding going to
any other. All the others had the wrong smell—floor polish for the Low,
somewhat suspicious incense for the High. Deep in the leather armchair
of his soul, Mr. Young knew that God got embarrassed at that sort of
thing.

But he liked seeing nuns around, in the same way that he liked seeing
the Salvation Army. It made you feel that it was all _all right_, that
people somewhere were keeping the world on its axis.

This was his first experience of the Chattering Order of Saint Beryl,
however.³ Deirdre had run across them while being involved in one of her
causes, possibly the one involving lots of unpleasant South Americans
fighting other unpleasant South Americans and the priests egging them on
instead of getting on with proper priestly concerns, like organizing the
church cleaning rota.

The point was, nuns should be quiet. They were the right shape for it,
like those pointy things you got in those chambers Mr. Young was vaguely
aware your hi-fi got tested in. They shouldn’t be, well, chattering all
the time.

He filled his pipe with tobacco—well, they called it tobacco, it wasn’t
what he thought of as tobacco, it wasn’t the tobacco you used to get—and
wondered reflectively what would happen if you asked a nun where the
Gents was. Probably the Pope sent you a sharp note or something. He
shifted his position awkwardly, and glanced at his watch.

One thing, though: At least the nuns had put their foot down about him
being present at the birth. Deirdre had been all for it. She’d been
_reading_ things again. One kid already and suddenly she’s declaring
that this confinement was going to be the most joyous and sharing
experience two human beings could have. That’s what came of letting her
order her own newspapers. Mr. Young distrusted papers whose inner pages
had names like “Lifestyle” or “Options.”

Well, he hadn’t got anything against joyous sharing experiences. Joyous
sharing experiences were fine by him. The world probably needed more
joyous sharing experiences. But he had made it abundantly clear that
this was one joyous sharing experience Deirdre could have by herself.

And the nuns had agreed. They saw no reason for the father to be
involved in the proceedings. When you thought about it, Mr. Young mused,
they probably saw no reason why the father should be involved
_anywhere_.

He finished thumbing the so-called tobacco into the pipe and glared at
the little sign on the wall of the waiting room that said that, for his
own comfort, he would not smoke. For his own comfort, he decided, he’d
go and stand in the porch. If there was a discreet shrubbery for his own
comfort out there, so much the better.

He wandered down the empty corridors and found a doorway that led out
onto a rain-swept courtyard full of righteous dustbins.

He shivered, and cupped his hands to light his pipe.

It happened to them at a certain age, wives. Twenty-five blameless
years, then suddenly they were going off and doing these robotic
exercises in pink socks with the feet cut out and they started blaming
you for never having had to work for a living. It was hormones, or
something.

A large black car skidded to a halt by the dustbins. A young man in dark
glasses leaped out into the drizzle holding what looked like a carrycot
and snaked toward the entrance.

Mr. Young took his pipe out of his mouth. “You’ve left your lights on,”
he said helpfully.

The man gave him the blank look of someone to whom lights are the least
of his worries, and waved a hand vaguely toward the Bentley. The lights
went out.

“That’s handy,” said Mr. Young. “Infra-red, is it?”

He was mildly surprised to see that the man did not appear to be wet.
And that the carrycot appeared to be occupied.

“Has it started yet?” said the man.

Mr. Young felt vaguely proud to be so instantly recognizable as a
parent.

“Yes,” he said. “They made me go out,” he added thankfully.

“Already? Any idea how long we’ve got?”

We, Mr. Young noted. Obviously a doctor with views about co-parenting.

“I think we were, er, getting on with it,” said Mr. Young.

“What room is she in?” said the man hurriedly.

“We’re in Room Three,” said Mr. Young. He patted his pockets, and found
the battered packet which, in accord with tradition, he had brought with
him.

“Would we care to share a joyous cigar experience?” he said.

But the man had gone.

Mr. Young carefully replaced the packet and looked reflectively at his
pipe. Always in a rush, these doctors. Working all the hours God sent.

THERE’S A TRICK they do with one pea and three cups which is very hard
to follow, and something like it, for greater stakes than a handful of
loose change, is about to take place.

The text will be slowed down to allow the sleight of hand to be
followed.

Mrs. Deirdre Young is giving birth in Delivery Room Three. She is having
a golden-haired male baby we will call Baby A.

The wife of the American Cultural Attaché, Mrs. Harriet Dowling, is
giving birth in Delivery Room Four. She is having a golden-haired male
baby we will call Baby B.

Sister Mary Loquacious has been a devout Satanist since birth. She went
to Sabbat School as a child and won black stars for handwriting and
liver. When she was told to join the Chattering Order she went
obediently, having a natural talent in that direction and, in any case,
knowing that she would be among friends. She would be quite bright, if
she was ever put in a position to find out, but long ago found that
being a scatterbrain, as she’d put it, gave you an easier journey
through life. Currently she is being handed a golden-haired male baby we
will call the Adversary, Destroyer of Kings, Angel of the Bottomless
Pit, Great Beast that is called Dragon, Prince of This World, Father of
Lies, Spawn of Satan, and Lord of Darkness.

Watch carefully. Round and round they go. …

“Is that him?” said Sister Mary, staring at the baby. “Only I’d expected
funny eyes. Red, or green. Or teensy-weensy little hoofikins. Or a
widdle tail.” She turned him around as she spoke. No horns either. The
Devil’s child looked ominously normal.

“Yes, that’s him,” said Crowley.

“Fancy me holding the Antichrist,” said Sister Mary. “And bathing the
Antichrist. And counting his little toesy-wosies. … ”

She was now addressing the child directly, lost in some world of her
own. Crowley waved a hand in front of her wimple. “Hallo? Hallo? Sister
Mary?”

“Sorry, sir. He is a little sweetheart, though. Does he look like his
daddy? I bet he does. Does he look like his daddywaddykins … ”

“No,” said Crowley firmly. “And now I should get up to the delivery
rooms, if I were you.”

“Will he remember me when he grows up, do you think?” said Sister Mary
wistfully, sidling slowly down the corridor.

“Pray that he doesn’t,” said Crowley, and fled.

Sister Mary headed through the nighttime hospital with the Adversary,
Destroyer of Kings, Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Great Beast that is
called Dragon, Prince of This World, Father of Lies, Spawn of Satan, and
Lord of Darkness safely in her arms. She found a bassinet and laid him
down in it.

He gurgled. She gave him a tickle.

A matronly head appeared around a door. It said, “Sister Mary, what are
you doing here? Shouldn’t you be on duty in Room Four?”

“Master Crowley said—”

“Just glide along, there’s a good nun. Have you seen the husband
anywhere? He’s not in the waiting room.”

“I’ve only seen Master Crowley, and he told me—”

“I’m sure he did,” said Sister Grace Voluble firmly. “I suppose I’d
better go and look for the wretched man. Come in and keep an eye on her,
will you? She’s a bit woozy but the baby’s fine.” Sister Grace paused.
“Why are you winking? Is there something wrong with your eye?”

“You know!” Sister Mary hissed archly. “The babies. The exchange—”

“Of course, of course. In good time. But we can’t have the father
wandering around, can we?” said Sister Grace. “No telling what he might
see. So just wait here and mind the baby, there’s a dear.”

She sailed off down the polished corridor. Sister Mary, wheeling her
bassinet, entered the delivery room.

Mrs. Young was more than woozy. She was fast asleep, with the look of
determined self-satisfaction of someone who knows that other people are
going to have to do the running around for once. Baby A was asleep
beside her, weighed and nametagged. Sister Mary, who had been _brought
up_ to be helpful, removed the nametag, copied it out, and attached the
duplicate to the baby in her care.

The babies looked similar, both being small, blotchy, and looking sort
of, though not really, like Winston Churchill.

Now, thought Sister Mary, I could do with a nice cup of tea.

Most of the members of the convent were old-fashioned Satanists, like
their parents and grandparents before them. They’d been brought up to it
and weren’t, when you got right down to it, particularly evil. Human
beings mostly aren’t. They just get carried away by new ideas, like
dressing up in jackboots and shooting people, or dressing up in white
sheets and lynching people, or dressing up in tie-dye jeans and playing
guitars at people. Offer people a new creed with a costume and their
hearts and minds will follow. Anyway, being brought up as a Satanist
tended to take the edge off it. It was something you did on Saturday
nights. And the rest of the time you simply got on with life as best you
could, just like everyone else. Besides, Sister Mary was a nurse and
nurses, whatever their creed, are primarily nurses, which had a lot to
do with wearing your watch upside down, keeping calm in emergencies, and
dying for a cup of tea. She hoped someone would come soon; she’d done
the important bit, now she wanted her tea.

It may help to understand human affairs to be clear that most of the
great triumphs and tragedies of history are caused, not by people being
fundamentally good or fundamentally bad, but by people being
fundamentally people.

There was a knock at the door. She opened it.

“Has it happened yet?” asked Mr. Young. “I’m the father. The husband.
Whatever. Both.”

Sister Mary had expected the American Cultural Attaché to look like
Blake Carrington or J. R. Ewing. Mr. Young didn’t look like any American
she’d ever seen on television, except possibly for the avuncular sheriff
in the better class of murder mystery.⁴ He was something of a
disappointment. She didn’t think much of his cardigan, either.

She swallowed her disappointment. “Oooh, yes,” she said.
“Congratulations. Your lady wife’s asleep, poor pet.”

Mr. Young looked over her shoulder. _“Twins_?” he said. He reached for
his pipe. He stopped reaching for his pipe. He reached for it again.
“Twins? No one said anything about twins.”

“Oh, no!” said Sister Mary hurriedly. _“This_ one’s yours. The other
one’s … er … someone else’s. Just looking after him till Sister Grace
gets back. No,” she reiterated, pointing to the Adversary, Destroyer of
Kings, Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Great Beast that is called Dragon,
Prince of This World, Father of Lies, Spawn of Satan, and Lord of
Darkness, “this one’s definitely yours. From the top of his head to the
tips of his hoofywoofies—which he hasn’t got,” she added hastily.

Mr. Young peered down.

“Ah, yes,” he said doubtfully. “He looks like my side of the family.
All, er, present and correct, is he?”

“Oh, yes,” said Sister Mary. “He’s a very normal child,” she added.
“Very, very normal.”

There was a pause. They stared at the sleeping baby.

“You don’t _have_ much of an accent,” said Sister Mary. “Have you been
over here long?”

“About ten years,” said Mr. Young, mildly puzzled. “The job moved, you
see, and I had to move with it.”

“It must be a very exciting job, I’ve always thought,” said Sister Mary.
Mr. Young looked gratified. Not everyone appreciated the more
stimulating aspects of cost accountancy.

“I expect it was very different where you were before,” Sister Mary went
on.

“I suppose so,” said Mr. Young, who’d never really thought about it.
Luton, as far as he could remember, was pretty much like Tadfield. The
same sort of hedges between your house and the railway station. The same
sort of people.

“Taller buildings, for one thing,” said Sister Mary, desperately.

Mr. Young stared at her. The only one he could think of was the Alliance
and Leicester offices.

“And I expect you go to a lot of garden parties,” said the nun.

Ah. He was on firmer ground here. Deirdre was very keen on _that_ sort
of thing.

“Lots,” he said, with feeling. “Deirdre makes jam for them, you know.
And I normally have to help with the White Elephant.”

This was an aspect of Buckingham Palace society that had never occurred
to Sister Mary, although the pachyderm fitted right in.

“I expect they’re the tribute,” she said. “I read where these foreign
potentates give her all sorts of things.”

“I’m sorry?”

“I’m a big fan of the Royal Family, you know.”

“Oh, so am I,” said Mr. Young, leaping gratefully onto this new ice floe
in the bewildering stream of consciousness. Yes, you knew where you were
with the Royals. The proper ones, of course, who pulled their weight in
the hand-waving and bridge-opening department. Not the ones who went to
discos all night long and were sick all over the paparazzi.⁵

“That’s nice,” said Sister Mary. “I thought you people weren’t too keen
on them, what with revoluting and throwing all those tea-sets into the
river.”

She chattered on, encouraged by the Order’s instruction that members
should always say what was on their minds. Mr. Young was out of his
depth, and too tired now to worry about it very much. The religious life
probably made people a little odd. He wished Mrs. Young would wake up.
Then one of the words in Sister Mary’s wittering struck a hopeful chord
in his mind.

“Would there be any possibility of me possibly being able to have a cup
of tea, perhaps?” he ventured.

“Oh my,” said Sister Mary, her hand flying to her mouth, “whatever am I
thinking of?”

Mr. Young made no comment.

“I’ll see to it right away,” she said. “Are you sure you don’t want
coffee, though? There’s one of those vendible machines on the next
floor.”

“Tea, please,” said Mr. Young.

“My word, you really have gone native, haven’t you,” said Sister Mary
gaily, as she bustled out.

Mr. Young, left alone with one sleeping wife and two sleeping babies,
sagged onto a chair. Yes, it must be all that getting up early and
kneeling and so on. Good people, of course, but not entirely compost
mentis. He’d seen a Ken Russell film once. There had been nuns in it.
There didn’t seem to be any of that sort of thing going on, but no smoke
without fire and so on. …

He sighed.

It was then that Baby A awoke, and settled down to a really good wail.

Mr. Young hadn’t had to quiet a screaming baby for years. He’d never
been much good at it to start with. He’d always respected Sir Winston
Churchill, and patting small versions of him on the bottom had always
seemed ungracious.

“Welcome to the world,” he said wearily. “You get used to it after a
while.”

The baby shut its mouth and glared at him as if he were a recalcitrant
general.

Sister Mary chose that moment to come in with the tea. Satanist or not,
she’d also found a plate and arranged some iced biscuits on it. They
were the sort you only ever get at the bottom of certain teatime
assortments. Mr. Young’s was the same pink as a surgical appliance, and
had a snowman picked out on it in white icing.

“I don’t expect you normally have these,” she said. “They’re what you
call cookies. We call them _biscuits_.”

Mr. Young had just opened his mouth to explain that, yes, so did he, and
so did people even in Luton, when another nun rushed in, breathless.

She looked at Sister Mary, realized that Mr. Young had never seen the
inside of a pentagram, and confined herself to pointing at Baby A and
winking.

Sister Mary nodded and winked back.

The nun wheeled the baby out.

As methods of human communication go, a wink is quite versatile. You can
say a lot with a wink. For example, the new nun’s wink said:

_Where the Hell have you been? Baby B has been born, we’re ready to make
the switch, and here’s you in the wrong room with the Adversary,
Destroyer of Kings, Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Great Beast that is
called Dragon, Prince of This World, Father of Lies, Spawn of Satan, and
Lord of Darkness, drinking tea. Do you realize I’ve nearly been shot?_

And, as far as she was concerned, Sister Mary’s answering wink meant:
_Here’s the Adversary, Destroyer of Kings, Angel of the Bottomless Pit,
Great Beast that is called Dragon, Prince of This World, Father of Lies,
Spawn of Satan, and Lord of Darkness, and I can’t talk now because
there’s this outsider here_.

Whereas Sister Mary, on the other hand, had thought that the orderly’s
wink was more on the lines of:

_Well done, Sister Mary—switched over the babies all by herself. Now
indicate to me the superfluous child and I shall remove it and let you
get on with your tea with his Royal Excellency the American Culture_.

And therefore her own wink had meant:

_There you go, dearie; that’s Baby B, now take him away and leave me to
chat to his Excellency. I’ve always wanted to ask him why they have
those tall buildings with all the mirrors on them_.

The subtleties of all this were quite lost on Mr. Young, who was
extremely embarrassed at all this clandestine affection and was
thinking: That Mr. Russell, he knew what he was talking about, and no
mistake.

Sister Mary’s error might have been noticed by the other nun had not she
herself been severely rattled by the Secret Service men in Mrs.
Dowling’s room, who kept looking at her with growing unease. This was
because they had been trained to react in a certain way to people in
long flowing robes and long flowing headdresses, and were currently
suffering from a conflict of signals. Humans suffering from a conflict
of signals aren’t the best people to be holding guns, especially when
they’ve just witnessed a natural childbirth, which definitely looked an
un-American way of bringing new citizens into the world. Also, they’d
heard that there were missals in the building.

Mrs. Young stirred.

“Have you picked a name for him yet?” said Sister Mary archly.

“Hmm?” said Mr. Young. “Oh. No, not really. If it was a girl it would
have been Lucinda after my mother. Or Germaine. That was Deirdre’s
choice.”

“Wormwood’s a _nice_ name,” said the nun, remembering her classics. “Or
Damien. Damien’s very popular.”

ANATHEMA DEVICE—her mother, who was not a great student of religious
matters, happened to read the word one day and thought it was a lovely
name for a girl—was eight and a half years old, and she was reading The
Book, under the bedclothes, with a torch.

Other children learned to read on basic primers with colored pictures of
apples, balls, cockroaches, and so forth. Not the Device family.
Anathema had learned to read from The Book.

It didn’t have any apples and balls in it. It did have a rather good
eighteenth-century woodcut of Agnes Nutter being burned at the stake and
looking rather cheerful about it.

The first word she could recognize was _nice_. Very few people at the
age of eight and a half know that nice also means “scrupulously exact,”
but Anathema was one of them.

The second word was _accurate_.

The first sentence she had ever read out loud was:

“I tell ye thif, and I charge ye with my wordes. Four shalle ryde, and
Four shalle alfo ryde, and Three sharl ryde the Skye as twixt, and Wonne
shal ryde in flames; and theyr shall be no stopping themme: not fish,
nor rayne, nor rode, neither Deville nor Angel. And ye shalle be theyr
alfo, Anathema.”

Anathema liked to read about herself.

(There were books which caring parents who read the right Sunday papers
could purchase with their children’s names printed in as the heroine or
hero. This was meant to interest the child in the book. In Anathema’s
case, it wasn’t only her in The Book—and it had been spot on so far—but
her parents, and her grandparents, and everyone, back to the seventeenth
century. She was too young and too self-centered at this point to attach
any importance to the fact that there was no mention made of her
children, or indeed, any events in her future further away than eleven
years’ time. When you’re eight and a half, eleven years is a lifetime,
and of course, if you believed The Book, it would be.)

She was a bright child, with a pale face, and black eyes and hair. As a
rule she tended to make people feel uncomfortable, a family trait she
had inherited, along with being more psychic than was good for her, from
her great-great-great-great-great grandmother.

She was precocious, and self-possessed. The only thing about Anathema
her teachers ever had the nerve to upbraid her for was her spelling,
which was not so much appalling as 300 years too late.

THE NUNS TOOK BABY A and swapped it with Baby B under the noses of the
Attaché’s wife and the Secret Service men, by the cunning expedient of
wheeling one baby away (“to be weighed, love, got to do that, it’s the
law”) and wheeling another baby back, a little later.

The Cultural Attaché himself, Thaddeus J. Dowling, had been called back
to Washington in a hurry a few days earlier, but he had been on the
phone to Mrs. Dowling throughout the birth experience, helping her with
her breathing.

It didn’t help that he had been talking on the other line to his
investment counselor. At one point he’d been forced to put her on hold
for twenty minutes.

But that was okay.

Having a baby is the single most joyous co-experience that two human
beings can share, and he wasn’t going to miss a second of it.

He’d got one of the Secret Service men to videotape it for him.

EVIL IN GENERAL does not sleep, and therefore doesn’t see why anyone
else should. But Crowley liked sleep, it was one of the pleasures of the
world. Especially after a heavy meal. He’d slept right through most of
the nineteenth century, for example. Not because he needed to, simply
because he enjoyed it.⁶

One of the pleasures of the world. Well, he’d better start really
enjoying them now, while there was still time.

The Bentley roared through the night, heading east.

Of course, he was all in favor of Armageddon in general terms. If anyone
had asked him why he’d been spending centuries tinkering in the affairs
of mankind he’d have said, “Oh, in order to bring about Armageddon and
the triumph of Hell.” But it was one thing to work to bring it about,
and quite another for it to actually happen.

Crowley had always known that he would be around when the world ended,
because he was immortal and wouldn’t have any alternative. But he’d
hoped it would be a long way off.

Because he rather liked people. It was a major failing in a demon.

Oh, he did his best to make their short lives miserable, because that
was his job, but nothing he could think up was half as bad as the stuff
they thought up themselves. They seemed to have a talent for it. It was
built into the design, somehow. They were born into a world that was
against them in a thousand little ways, and then devoted most of their
energies to making it worse. Over the years Crowley had found it
increasingly difficult to find anything demonic to do which showed up
against the natural background of generalized nastiness. There had been
times, over the past millennium, when he’d felt like sending a message
back Below saying, Look, we may as well give up right now, we might as
well shut down Dis and Pandemonium and everywhere and move up here,
there’s nothing we can do to them that they don’t do themselves and they
do things we’ve never even thought of, often involving electrodes.
They’ve got what we lack. They’ve got _imagination_. And electricity, of
course.

One of them _had_ written it, hadn’t he … “Hell is empty, and all the
devils are here.”

Crowley had got a commendation for the Spanish Inquisition. He had been
in Spain then, mainly hanging around cantinas in the nicer parts, and
hadn’t even _known_ about it until the commendation arrived. He’d gone
to have a look, and had come back and got drunk for a week.

That Hieronymus Bosch. What a weirdo.

And just when you’d think they were more malignant than ever Hell could
be, they could occasionally show more grace than Heaven ever dreamed of.
Often the same individual was involved. It was this free-will thing, of
course. It was a bugger.

Aziraphale had tried to explain it to him once. The whole point, he’d
said—this was somewhere around 1020, when they’d first reached their
little Arrangement—the whole point was that when a human was good or bad
it was because they wanted to be. Whereas people like Crowley and, of
course, himself, were set in their ways right from the start. People
couldn’t become truly holy, he said, unless they also had the
opportunity to be definitively wicked.

Crowley had thought about this for some time and, around about 1023, had
said, Hang on, that only works, right, if you start everyone off equal,
okay? You can’t start someone off in a muddy shack in the middle of a
war zone and expect them to do as well as someone born in a castle.

Ah, Aziraphale had said, that’s the good bit. The lower you start, the
more opportunities you have.

Crowley had said, That’s lunatic.

No, said Aziraphale, it’s ineffable.

Aziraphale. The Enemy, of course. But an enemy for six thousand years
now, which made him a sort of friend.

Crowley reached down and picked up the car phone.

Being a demon, of course, was supposed to mean you had no free will. But
you couldn’t hang around humans for very long without learning a thing
or two.

MR. YOUNG HAD NOT BEEN _too_ keen on Damien, or Wormwood. Or any of
Sister Mary Loquacious’ other suggestions, which had covered half of
Hell, and most of the Golden Years of Hollywood.

“Well,” she said finally, a little hurt, “I don’t think there’s anything
wrong with Errol. Or Cary. Very nice American names, both of them.”

“I had fancied something more, well, traditional,” explained Mr. Young.
“We’ve always gone in for good simple names in our family.”

Sister Mary beamed. “That’s right. The old names are always the best, if
you ask me.”

“A decent English name, like people had in the Bible,” said Mr. Young.
“Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John,” he said, speculatively. Sister Mary
winced. “Only they’ve never struck me as very good Bible names, really,”
Mr. Young added. “They sound more like cowboys and footballers.”

“Saul’s nice,” said Sister Mary, making the best of it.

“I don’t want something too old-fashioned,” said Mr. Young.

“Or Cain. Very modern sound, Cain, really,” Sister Mary tried.

“Hmm.” Mr. Young looked doubtful.

“Or there’s always … well, there’s always Adam,” said Sister Mary. That
should be safe enough, she thought.

“Adam?” said Mr. Young.

IT WOULD BE NICE to think that the Satanist Nuns had the surplus
baby—Baby B—discreetly adopted. That he grew to be a normal, happy,
laughing child, active and exuberant; and after that, grew further to
become a normal, fairly contented adult.

And perhaps that’s what happened.

Let your mind dwell on his junior school prize for spelling; his
unremarkable although quite pleasant time at university; his job in the
payroll department of the Tadfield and Norton Building Society; his
lovely wife. Possibly you would like to imagine some children, and a
hobby—restoring vintage motorcycles, perhaps, or breeding tropical fish.

You don’t want to know what _could_ have happened to Baby B.

We like your version better, anyway.

He probably wins prizes for his tropical fish.

IN A SMALL HOUSE in Dorking, Surrey, a light was on in a bedroom window.

Newton Pulsifer was twelve, and thin, and bespectacled, and he should
have been in bed hours ago.

His mother, though, was convinced of her child’s genius, and let him
stay up past his bedtime to do his “experiments.”

His current experiment was changing a plug on an ancient Bakelite radio
his mother had given him to play with. He sat at what he proudly called
his “work-top,” a battered old table covered in curls of wire,
batteries, little light bulbs, and a homemade crystal set that had never
worked. He hadn’t managed to get the Bakelite radio working yet either,
but then again, he never seemed able to get that far.

Three slightly crooked model airplanes hung on cotton cords from his
bedroom ceiling. Even a casual observer could have seen that they were
made by someone who was both painstaking and very careful, and also no
good at making model airplanes. He was hopelessly proud of all of them,
even the Spitfire, where he’d made rather a mess of the wings.

He pushed his glasses back up the bridge of his nose, squinted down at
the plug, and put down the screwdriver.

He had high hopes for it this time; he had followed all the instructions
on plug-changing on page five of the _Boy’s Own Book Of Practical
Electronics, Including A Hundred and One Safe and Educational Things to
Do With Electricity_. He had attached the correct color-coded wires to
the correct pins; he’d checked that it was the right amperage fuse; he’d
screwed it all back together. So far, no problems.

He plugged it in to the socket. Then he switched the socket on.

Every light in the house went out.

Newton beamed with pride. He was getting better. Last time he’d done it
he’d blacked out the whole of Dorking, and a man from the Electric had
come over and had a word with his mum.

He had a burning and totally unrequited passion for things electrical.
They had a computer at school, and half a dozen studious children stayed
on after school doing things with punched cards. When the teacher in
charge of the computer had finally acceded to Newton’s pleas to be
allowed to join them, Newton had only ever got to feed one little card
into the machine. It had chewed it up and choked fatally on it.

Newton was certain that the future was in computers, and when the future
arrived he’d be ready, in the forefront of the new technology.

The future had its own ideas on this. It was all in The Book.

ADAM, THOUGHT MR. YOUNG. He tried saying it, to see how it sounded.
“Adam.” Hmm …

He stared down at the golden curls of the Adversary, Destroyer of Kings,
Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Great Beast that is called Dragon, Prince
of This World, Father of Lies, Spawn of Satan, and Lord of Darkness.

“You know,” he concluded, after a while, “I think he actually looks like
an Adam.”

IT HAD NOT BEEN A DARK AND STORMY NIGHT.

The dark and stormy night occurred two days later, about four hours
after both Mrs. Dowling and Mrs. Young and their respective babies had
left the building. It was a particularly dark and stormy night, and just
after midnight, as the storm reached its height, a bolt of lightning
struck the Convent of the Chattering Order, setting fire to the roof of
the vestry.

No one was badly hurt by the fire, but it went on for some hours, doing
a fair amount of damage in the process.

The instigator of the fire lurked on a nearby hilltop and watched the
blaze. He was tall, thin, and a Duke of Hell. It was the last thing that
needed to be done before his return to the nether regions, and he had
done it.

He could safely leave the rest to Crowley.

Hastur went home.

TECHNICALLY AZIRAPHALE was a Principality, but people made jokes about
that these days.

On the whole, neither he nor Crowley would have chosen each other’s
company, but they were both men, or at least men-shaped creatures, of
the world, and the Arrangement had worked to their advantage all this
time. Besides, you grew accustomed to the only other face that had been
around more or less consistently for six millennia.

The Arrangement was very simple, so simple in fact that it didn’t really
deserve the capital letter, which it had got for simply being in
existence for so long. It was the sort of sensible arrangement that many
isolated agents, working in awkward conditions a long way from their
superiors, reach with their opposite number when they realize that they
have more in common with their immediate opponents than their remote
allies. It meant a tacit non-interference in certain of each other’s
activities. It made certain that while neither really won, also neither
really lost, and both were able to demonstrate to their masters the
great strides they were making against a cunning and well-informed
adversary.

It meant that Crowley had been allowed to develop Manchester, while
Aziraphale had a free hand in the whole of Shropshire. Crowley took
Glasgow, Aziraphale had Edinburgh (neither claimed any responsibility
for Milton Keynes,⁷ but both reported it as a success).

And then, of course, it had seemed even natural that they should, as it
were, hold the fort for one another whenever common sense dictated. Both
were of angel stock, after all. If one was going to Hull for a quick
temptation, it made sense to nip across the city and carry out a
standard brief moment of divine ecstasy. It’d get done _anyway_, and
being sensible about it gave everyone more free time and cut down on
expenses.

Aziraphale felt the occasional pang of guilt about this, but centuries
of association with humanity was having the same effect on him as it was
on Crowley, except in the other direction.

Besides, the Authorities didn’t seem to care much who did anything, so
long as it got done.

Currently, what Aziraphale was doing was standing with Crowley by the
duck pond in St. James’ Park. They were feeding the ducks.

The ducks in St. James’ Park are so used to being fed bread by secret
agents meeting clandestinely that they have developed their own
Pavlovian reaction. Put a St. James’ Park duck in a laboratory cage and
show it a picture of two men—one usually wearing a coat with a fur
collar, the other something somber with a scarf—and it’ll look up
expectantly. The Russian cultural attaché’s black bread is particularly
sought after by the more discerning duck, while the head of MI9’s soggy
Hovis with Marmite is relished by the connoisseurs.

Aziraphale tossed a crust to a scruffy-looking drake, which caught it
and sank immediately.

The angel turned to Crowley.

“Really, my dear,” he murmured.

“Sorry,” said Crowley. “I was forgetting myself.” The duck bobbed
angrily to the surface.

“Of course, we knew something was going on,” Aziraphale said. “But one
somehow imagines this sort of thing happening in America. They go in for
that sort of thing over there.”

“It might yet do, at that,” said Crowley gloomily. He gazed thoughtfully
across the park to the Bentley, the back wheel of which was being
industriously clamped.

“Oh, yes. The American diplomat,” said the angel. “Rather _showy_, one
feels. As if Armageddon was some sort of cinematographic show that you
wish to sell in as many countries as possible.”

_“Every_ country,” said Crowley. “The Earth and all the kingdoms
thereof.”

Aziraphale tossed the last scrap of bread at the ducks, who went off to
pester the Bulgarian naval attaché and a furtive-looking man in a
Cambridge tie, and carefully disposed of the paper bag in a wastepaper
bin.

He turned and faced Crowley.

“We’ll win, of course,” he said.

_“You_ don’t want that,” said the demon.

“Why not, pray?”

_“Listen_,” said Crowley desperately, “how many musicians do you think
your side have got, eh? First grade, I mean.”

Aziraphale looked taken aback.

“Well, I should think—” he began.

“Two,” said Crowley. “Elgar and Liszt. That’s _all_. We’ve got the rest.
Beethoven, Brahms, all the Bachs, Mozart, the lot. Can you imagine
eternity with Elgar?”

Aziraphale shut his eyes. “All too easily,” he groaned.

“That’s it, then,” said Crowley, with a gleam of triumph. He knew
Aziraphale’s weak spot all right. “No more compact discs. No more Albert
Hall. No more Proms. No more Glyndbourne. Just celestial harmonies all
day long.”

“Ineffable,” Aziraphale murmured.

“Like eggs without salt, you said. Which reminds me. No salt, no eggs.
No gravlax with dill sauce. No fascinating little restaurants where they
know you. No _Daily Telegraph_ crossword. No small antique shops. No
bookshops, either. No interesting old editions. No”—Crowley scraped the
bottom of Aziraphale’s barrel of interests—“Regency silver snuffboxes …
”

“But after we win life will be better!” croaked the angel.

“But it won’t be as interesting. Look, you _know_ I’m right. You’d be as
happy with a harp as I’d be with a pitchfork.”

“You know we don’t play harps.”

“And we don’t use pitchforks. I was being rhetorical.”

They stared at one another.

Aziraphale spread his elegantly manicured hands.

“My people are more than happy for it to happen, you know. It’s what
it’s all about, you see. The great final test. Flaming swords, the Four
Horsemen, seas of blood, the whole tedious business.” He shrugged.

“And then Game Over, Insert Coin?” said Crowley.

“Sometimes I find your methods of expression a little difficult to
follow.”

“I like the seas as they are. It doesn’t have to happen. You don’t have
to test everything to destruction just to see if you made it right.”

Aziraphale shrugged again.

“That’s ineffable wisdom for you, I’m afraid.” The angel shuddered, and
pulled his coat around him. Gray clouds were piling up over the city.

“Let’s go somewhere warm,” he said.

“You’re asking me?” said Crowley glumly.

They walked in somber silence for a while.

“It’s not that I disagree with you,” said the angel, as they plodded
across the grass. “It’s just that I’m not allowed to disobey. You know
that.”

“Me too,” said Crowley.

Aziraphale gave him a sidelong glance. “Oh, come now,” he said, “you’re
a demon, after all.”

“Yeah. But my people are only in favor of disobedience in general terms.
It’s _specific_ disobedience they come down on heavily.”

“Such as disobedience to themselves?”

“You’ve got it. You’d be amazed. Or perhaps you wouldn’t be. How long do
you think we’ve got?” Crowley waved a hand at the Bentley, which
unlocked its doors.

“The prophecies differ,” said Aziraphale, sliding into the passenger
seat. “Certainly until the end of the century, although we may expect
certain phenomena before then. Most of the prophets of the past
millennium were more concerned with scansion than accuracy.”

Crowley pointed to the ignition key. It turned.

“What?” he said.

“You know,” said the angel helpfully, “‘And thee Worlde Unto An Ende
Shall Come, in tumpty-tumpty-tumpty One.’ Or Two, or Three, or whatever.
There aren’t many good rhymes for Six, so it’s probably a good year to
be in.”

“And what sort of phenomena?”

“Two-headed calves, signs in the sky, geese flying backwards, showers of
fish. That sort of thing. The presence of the Antichrist affects the
natural operation of causality.”

“Hmm.”

Crowley put the Bentley in gear. Then he remembered something. He
snapped his fingers.

The wheel clamps disappeared.

“Let’s have lunch,” he said. “I owe you one from, when was it … ”

“Paris, 1793,” said Aziraphale.

“Oh, yes. The Reign of Terror. Was that one of _your_s, or one of ours?”

“Wasn’t it yours?”

“Can’t recall. It was quite a good restaurant, though.”

As they drove past an astonished traffic warden his notebook
spontaneously combusted, to Crowley’s amazement.

“I’m pretty certain I didn’t mean to do that,” he said.

Aziraphale blushed.

“That was me,” he said. “I had always thought that your people invented
them.”

“Did you? _We_ thought they were yours.”

Crowley stared at the smoke in the rearview mirror.

“Come on,” he said. “Let’s do the Ritz.”

Crowley had _not_ bothered to book. In his world, table reservations
were things that happened to other people.

AZIRAPHALE COLLECTED BOOKS. If he were totally honest with himself he
would have to have admitted that his bookshop was simply somewhere to
store them. He was not unusual in this. In order to maintain his cover
as a typical second-hand bookseller, he used every means short of actual
physical violence to prevent customers from making a purchase.
Unpleasant damp smells, glowering looks, erratic opening hours—he was
incredibly good at it.

He had been collecting for a long time, and, like all collectors, he
specialized.

He had more than sixty books of predictions concerning developments in
the last handful of centuries of the second millennium. He had a
penchant for Wilde first editions. And he had a complete set of the
Infamous Bibles, individually named from errors in typesetting.

These Bibles included the Unrighteous Bible, so called from a printer’s
error which caused it to proclaim, in I Corinthians, “Know ye not that
the unrighteous shall inherit the Kingdom of God?”; and the Wicked
Bible, printed by Barker and Lucas in 1632, in which the word not was
omitted from the seventh commandment, making it “Thou shalt commit
Adultery.” There were the Discharge Bible, the Treacle Bible, the
Standing Fishes Bible, the Charing Cross Bible and the rest. Aziraphale
had them all. Even the very rarest, a Bible published in 1651 by the
London publishing firm of Bilton and Scaggs.

It had been the first of their three great publishing disasters.

The book was commonly known as the Buggre Alle This Bible. The lengthy
compositor’s error, if such it may be called, occurs in the book of
Ezekiel, chapter 48, verse five.

2. _And bye the border of Dan, fromme the east side to the west side, a
portion for Afher_.

3. _And bye the border of Afher, fromme the east side even untoe the
west side, a portion for Naphtali_.

4. _And bye the border of Naphtali, from the east side untoe the west
side, a portion for Manaffeh_.

5. _Buggre Alle this for a Larke. I amme sick to mye Hart of
typefettinge. Master Biltonn if no Gentelmann, and Master Scagges noe
more than a tighte fisted Southwarke Knobbefticke. I telle you, onne a
daye laike thif Ennywone with half an oz. of Sense should_e bee oute in
the Sunneshain, ane nott Stucke here alle the liuelong daie inn thif
mowldey olde By-Our-Lady Workefhoppe. @ *“Æ@;!*

6. _And bye the border of Ephraim, from the east fide even untoe the
west fide, a portion for Reuben_.⁸

Bilton and Scaggs’ second great publishing disaster occurred in 1653. By
a stroke of rare good fortune they had obtained one of the famed “Lost
Quartos”—the three Shakespeare plays never reissued in folio edition,
and now totally lost to scholars and playgoers. Only their names have
come down to us. This one was Shakespeare’s earliest play, _The Comedie
of Robin Hoode, or, The Forest of Sherwoode_.⁹

Master Bilton had paid almost six guineas for the quarto, and believed
he could make nearly twice that much back on the hardcover folio alone.

Then he lost it.

Bilton and Scaggs’ third great publishing disaster was never entirely
comprehensible to either of them. Everywhere you looked, books of
prophecy were selling like crazy. The English edition of Nostradamus’
_Centuries_ had just gone into its third printing, and five
Nostradamuses, all claiming to be the only genuine one, were on
triumphant signing tours. And Mother Shipton’s _Collection of
Prophecies_ was sprinting out of the shops.

Each of the great London publishers—there were eight of them—had at
least one Book of Prophecy on its list. Every single one of the books
was wildly inaccurate, but their air of vague and generalized
omnipotence made them immensely popular. They sold in the thousands, and
in the tens of thousands.

“It is a licence to printe monney!” said Master Bilton to Master
Scaggs.¹⁰ “The public are crying out for such rubbishe! We must
straightway printe a booke of prophecie by some hagge!”

The manuscript arrived at their door the next morning; the author’s
sense of timing, as always, was exact.

Although neither Master Bilton nor Master Scaggs realized it, the
manuscript they had been sent was the sole prophetic work in all of
human history to consist entirely of completely correct predictions
concerning the following three hundred and forty-odd years, being a
precise and accurate description of the events that would culminate in
Armageddon. It was on the money in every single detail.

It was published by Bilton and Scaggs in September 1655, in good time
for the Christmas trade,¹¹ and it was the first book printed in England
to be remaindered.

It didn’t sell.

Not even the copy in the tiny Lancashire shop with “Locale Author” on a
piece of cardboard next to it.

The author of the book, one Agnes Nutter, was not surprised by this, but
then, it would have taken an awful lot to surprise Agnes Nutter.

Anyway, she had not written it for the sales, or the royalties, or even
for the fame. She had written it for the single gratis copy of the book
that an author was entitled to.

No one knows what happened to the legions of unsold copies of her book.
Certainly none remain in any museums or private collections. Even
Aziraphale does not possess a copy, but would go weak at the knees at
the thought of actually getting his exquisitely manicured hands on one.

In fact, only one copy of Agnes Nutter’s prophecies remained in the
entire world.

It was on a bookshelf about forty miles away from where Crowley and
Aziraphale were enjoying a rather good lunch and, metaphorically, it had
just begun to tick.

AND NOW IT WAS THREE O’CLOCK. The Antichrist had been on Earth for
fifteen hours, and one angel and one demon had been drinking solidly for
three of them.

They sat opposite one another in the back room of Aziraphale’s dingy old
bookshop in Soho.

Most bookshops in Soho have back rooms, and most of the back rooms are
filled with rare, or at least very expensive, books. But Aziraphale’s
books didn’t have illustrations. They had old brown covers and crackling
pages. Occasionally, if he had no alternative, he’d sell one.

And, occasionally, serious men in dark suits would come calling and
suggest, very politely, that perhaps he’d like to sell the shop itself
so that it could be turned into the kind of retail outlet more suited to
the area. Sometimes they’d offer cash, in large rolls of grubby
fifty-pound notes. Or, sometimes, while they were talking, other men in
dark glasses would wander around the shop shaking their heads and
_saying_ how inflammable paper was, and what a firetrap he had here.

And Aziraphale would nod and smile and say that he’d think about _it_.
And then they’d go away. And they’d never come back.

Just because you’re an angel doesn’t mean you have to be a fool.

The table in front of the two of them was covered with bottles.

“The point is,” said Crowley, “the point is. The point is.” He tried to
focus on Aziraphale.

“The point _is_,” he said, and tried to think of a _point_.

“The point I’m trying to make,” he said, brightening, “is the dolphins.
That’s my point.”

“Kind of fish,” said Aziraphale.

“Nononono,” said Crowley, shaking a finger. “’S mammal. Your actual
mammal. Difference is—” Crowley waded through the swamp of his mind and
tried to remember the difference. “Difference is, they—”

“Mate out of water?” volunteered Aziraphale.

Crowley’s brow furrowed. “Don’t think so. Pretty sure that’s not it.
Something about their young. Whatever.” He pulled himself together. “The
point is. The point is. Their brains.”

He reached for a bottle.

“What about their brains?” said the angel.

“Big brains. That’s my point. Size of. Size of. Size of damn big brains.
And then there’s the whales. Brain city, take it from me. Whole damn sea
full of brains.”

“Kraken,” said Aziraphale, staring moodily into his glass.

Crowley gave him the long cool look of someone who has just had a girder
dropped in front of his train of thought.

“Uh?”

“Great big bugger,” said Aziraphale. “Sleepeth beneath the thunders of
the upper deep. Under loads of huge and unnumbered polypol—polipo—bloody
great seaweeds, you know. Supposed to rise to the surface right at the
end, when the sea boils.”

“Yeah?”

“Fact.”

“There you are, then,” said Crowley, sitting back. “Whole sea bubbling,
poor old dolphins so much seafood gumbo, no one giving a damn. Same with
gorillas. Whoops, they say, sky gone all red, stars crashing to ground,
what they putting in the bananas these days? And then—”

“They make nests, you know, gorillas,” said the angel, pouring another
drink and managing to hit the glass on the third go.

“Nah.”

“God’s truth. Saw a film. Nests.”

“That’s birds,” said Crowley.

“Nests,” insisted Aziraphale.

Crowley decided not to argue the point.

“There you are then,” he said. “All creatures great and smoke. I mean
small. Great and small. Lot of them with brains. And then, bazamm.”

“But _you’re_ part of it,” said Aziraphale. “You tempt people. You’re
good at it.”

Crowley thumped his glass on the table. “That’s different. They don’t
have to say yes. That’s the ineffable bit, right? Your side made it up.
You’ve got to keep testing people. But not to destruction.”

“All right. All right. I don’t like it any more than you, but I told
you. I can’t disod—disoy—not do what I’m told. ’M a’nangel.”

“There’s no theaters in Heaven,” said Crowley. “And very few films.”

“Don’t you try to tempt _me_,” said Aziraphale wretchedly. “I know you,
you old serpent.”

“Just you think about it,” said Crowley relentlessly. “You know what
eternity is? You know what eternity is? I mean, d’you know what eternity
is? There’s this big mountain, see, a mile high, at the end of the
universe, and once every thousand years there’s this little bird—”

“What little bird?” said Aziraphale suspiciously.

“This little bird I’m talking about. And every thousand years—”

“The same bird every thousand years?”

Crowley hesitated. “Yeah,” he said.

“Bloody ancient bird, then.”

“Okay. And every thousand years this bird _flies_—”

“—limps—”

“—flies all the way to this mountain and sharpens its beak—”

“Hold _on_. You can’t do that. Between here and the _end_ of the
universe there’s loads of—” The angel waved a hand expansively, if a
little unsteadily. “Loads of buggerall, dear boy.”

“But it gets there anyway,” Crowley persevered.

“How?”

“It doesn’t matter!”

“It could use a spaceship,” said the angel.

Crowley subsided a bit. “Yeah,” he said. “If you like. Anyway, this
bird—”

“Only it is the end of the universe we’re talking about,” said
Aziraphale. “So it’d have to be one of those spaceships where your
descendants are the ones who get out at the other end. You have to tell
your descendants, you say, When you get to the Mountain, you’ve got to—”
He hesitated. “What have they got to do?”

“Sharpen its beak on the mountain,” said Crowley. “And then it flies
back—”

“—in the spaceship—”

“And after a thousand years it goes and does it all again,” said Crowley
quickly.

There was a moment of drunken silence.

“Seems a lot of effort just to sharpen a beak,” mused Aziraphale.

“Listen,” said Crowley urgently, “the point is that when the bird has
worn the mountain down to nothing, right, then—”

Aziraphale opened his mouth. Crowley just _knew_ he was going to make
some point about the relative hardness of birds’ beaks and granite
mountains, and plunged on quickly.

“—then _you still won’t have finished watching_ The Sound of Music.”

Aziraphale froze.

“And you’ll _enjoy_ it,” Crowley said relentlessly. “You really will.”

“My dear boy—”

“You won’t have a choice.”

“Listen—”

“Heaven has no taste.”

“Now—”

“And not one single sushi restaurant.”

A look of pain crossed the angel’s suddenly very serious face.

“I can’t cope with this while ’m drunk,” he said. “I’m going to sober
up.”

“Me too.”

They both winced as the alcohol left their bloodstreams, and sat up a
bit more neatly. Aziraphale straightened his tie.

“I can’t interfere with divine plans,” he croaked.

Crowley looked speculatively into his glass, and then filled it again.

“What about diabolical ones?” he said.

“Pardon?”

“Well, it’s got to be a diabolical plan, hasn’t it? _We’re_ doing it. My
side.”

“Ah, but it’s all part of the overall _divine_ plan,” said Aziraphale.
“Your side can’t do anything without it being part of the ineffable
divine plan,” he added, with a trace of smugness.

“You wish!”

“No, that’s the—” Aziraphale snapped his fingers irritably. “The thing.
What d’you call it in your colorful idiom? The line at the bottom.”

“The bottom line.”

“Yes. It’s that.”

“Well … if you’re sure … ” said Crowley.

“No doubt about it.”

Crowley looked up slyly.

“Then you can’t be certain, correct me if I’m wrong, you can’t be
certain that thwarting it isn’t part of the divine plan too. I mean,
you’re supposed to thwart the wiles of the Evil One at every turn,
aren’t you?”

Aziraphale hesitated.

“There is that, yes.”

“You see a wile, you thwart. Am I right?”

“Broadly, broadly. Actually I encourage humans to do the actual
thwarting. Because of ineffability, you understand.”

“Right. Right. So all you’ve got to do is thwart. Because if I know
anything,” said Crowley urgently, “it’s that the birth is just the
start. It’s the upbringing that’s important. It’s the Influences.
Otherwise the child will never learn to use its powers.” He hesitated.
“At least, not necessarily as intended.”

“Certainly our side won’t mind me thwarting you,” said Aziraphale
thoughtfully. “They won’t mind that at all.”

“Right. It’d be a real feather in your wing.” Crowley gave the angel an
encouraging smile.

“What will happen to the child if it doesn’t get a Satanic upbringing,
though?” said Aziraphale.

“Probably nothing. It’ll never know.”

“But genetics—”

“Don’t tell me from genetics. What’ve they got to do with it?” said
Crowley. “Look at Satan. Created as an angel, grows up to be the Great
Adversary. Hey, if you’re going to go on about genetics, you might as
well say the kid will grow up to be an angel. After all, his father was
really big in Heaven in the old days. Saying he’ll grow up to be a demon
just because his dad _became_ one is like saying a mouse with its tail
cut off will give birth to tailless mice. No. Upbringing is everything.
Take it from me.”

“And without unopposed Satanic influences—”

“Well, at worst Hell will have to start all over again. And the Earth
gets at least another eleven years. That’s got to be worth something,
hasn’t it?”

Now Aziraphale was looking thoughtful again.

“You’re saying the child isn’t evil of itself?” he said slowly.

_“Potentially_ evil. Potentially good, too, I suppose. Just this huge
powerful _potentiality_, waiting to be shaped,” said Crowley. He
shrugged. “Anyway, why’re we talking about this _good_ and _evil_?
They’re just names for sides. _We_ know that.”

“I suppose it’s got to be worth a try,” said the angel. Crowley nodded
encouragingly.

“Agreed?” said the demon, holding out his hand.

The angel shook it, cautiously.

“It’ll certainly be more interesting than saints,” he said.

“And it’ll be for the child’s own good, in the long run,” said Crowley.
“We’ll be godfathers, sort of. Overseeing his religious upbringing, you
might say.”

Aziraphale beamed.

“You know, I’d never have thought of that,” he said. _“Godfathers_.
Well, I’ll be damned.”

“It’s not too bad,” said Crowley, “when you get used to it.”

SHE WAS KNOWN AS SCARLETT. At that time she was selling arms, although
it was beginning to lose its savor. She never stuck at one job for very
long. Three, four hundred years at the outside. You didn’t want to get
in a rut.

Her hair was true auburn, neither ginger nor brown, but a deep and
burnished copper-color, and it fell to her waist in tresses that men
would kill for, and indeed often had. Her eyes were a startling orange.
She looked twenty-five, and always had.

She had a dusty, brick-red truck full of assorted weaponry, and an
almost unbelievable skill at getting it across any border in the world.
She had been on her way to a small West African country, where a minor
civil war was in progress, to make a delivery which would, with any
luck, turn it into a major civil war. Unfortunately the truck had broken
down, far beyond even her ability to repair it.

And she was very good with machinery these days.

She was in the middle of a city¹² at the time. The city in question was
the capital of Kumbolaland, an African nation which had been at peace
for the last three thousand years. For about thirty years it was
Sir-Humphrey-Clarksonland, but since the country had absolutely no
mineral wealth and the strategic importance of a banana, it was
accelerated toward self-government with almost unseemly haste.
Kumbolaland was poor, perhaps, and undoubtedly boring, but peaceful. Its
various tribes, who got along with one another quite happily, had long
since beaten their swords into ploughshares; a fight had broken out in
the city square in 1952 between a drunken ox-drover and an equally
drunken ox-thief. People were still talking about it.

Scarlett yawned in the heat. She fanned her head with her broad-brimmed
hat, left the useless truck in the dusty street, and wandered into a
bar.

She bought a can of beer, drained it, then grinned at the barman. “I got
a truck needs repairing,” she said. “Anyone around I can talk to?”

The barman grinned white and huge and expansively. He’d been impressed
by the way she drank her beer. “Only Nathan, miss. But Nathan has gone
back to Kaounda to see his father-in-law’s farm.”

Scarlett bought another beer. “So, this Nathan. Any idea when he’ll be
back?”

“Perhaps next week. Perhaps two weeks’ time, dear lady. Ho, that Nathan,
he is a scamp, no?”

He leaned forward.

“You traveling alone, miss?” he said.

“Yes.”

“Could be dangerous. Some funny people on the roads these days. Bad men.
Not _local_ boys,” he added quickly.

Scarlett raised a perfect eyebrow.

Despite the heat, he shivered.

“Thanks for the warning,” Scarlett purred. Her voice sounded like
something that lurks in the long grass, visible only by the twitching of
its ears, until something young and tender wobbles by.

She tipped her hat to him, and strolled outside.

The hot African sun beat down on her; her truck sat in the street with a
cargo of guns and ammunition and land mines. It wasn’t going anywhere.

Scarlett stared at the truck.

A vulture was sitting on its roof. It had traveled three hundred miles
with Scarlett so far. It was belching quietly.

She looked around the street: a couple of women chatted on a street
corner; a bored market vendor sat in front of a heap of colored gourds,
fanning the flies; a few children played lazily in the dust.

“What the hell,” she said quietly. “I could do with a holiday anyway.”

That was Wednesday.

By Friday the city was a no-go area.

By the following Tuesday the economy of Kumbolaland was shattered,
twenty thousand people were dead (including the barman, shot by the
rebels while storming the market barricades), almost a hundred thousand
people were injured, all of Scarlett’s assorted weapons had fulfilled
the function for which they had been created, and the vulture had died
of Greasy Degeneration.

Scarlett was already on the last train out of the country. It was time
to move on, she felt. She’d been doing arms for too damn long. She
wanted a change. Something with openings. She quite fancied herself as a
newspaper journalist. A possibility. She fanned herself with her hat,
and crossed her long legs in front of her.

Farther down the train a fight broke out. Scarlett grinned. People were
always fighting, over her, and around her; it was rather sweet, really.

SABLE HAD BLACK HAIR, a trim black beard, and he had just decided to go
corporate.

He did drinks with his accountant.

“How we doing, Frannie?” he asked her.

“Twelve million copies sold so far. Can you believe that?”

They were doing drinks in a restaurant called Top of the Sixes, on the
top of 666 Fifth Avenue, New York. This was something that amused Sable
ever so slightly. From the restaurant windows you could see the whole of
New York; at night, the rest of New York could see the huge red 666s
that adorned all four sides of the building. Of course, it was just
another street number. If you started counting, you’d be bound to get to
it eventually. But you had to smile.

Sable and his accountant had just come from a small, expensive, and
particularly exclusive restaurant in Greenwich Village, where the
cuisine was entirely _nouvelle:_ a string bean, a pea, and a sliver of
chicken breast, aesthetically arranged on a square china plate.

Sable had invented it the last time he’d been in Paris.

His accountant had polished her meat and two veg off in under fifty
seconds, and had spent the rest of the meal staring at the plate, the
cutlery, and from time to time at her fellow diners, in a manner that
suggested that she was wondering what they’d taste like, which was in
fact the case. It had amused Sable enormously.

He toyed with his Perrier.

“Twelve million, huh? That’s pretty good.”

“That’s _great_.”

“So we’re going corporate. It’s time to blow the big one, am I right?
California, I think. I want factories, restaurants, the whole schmear.
We’ll keep the publishing arm, but it’s time to diversify. Yeah?”

Frannie nodded. “Sounds good, Sable. We’ll need—”

She was interrupted by a skeleton. A skeleton in a Dior dress, with
tanned skin stretched almost to snapping point over the delicate bones
of the skull. The skeleton had long blond hair and perfectly made-up
lips: she looked like the person mothers around the world would point
to, muttering, _“That_’s what’ll happen to you if you don’t eat your
greens”; she looked like a famine-relief poster with style.

She was New York’s top fashion model, and she was holding a book. She
said, “Uh, excuse me, Mr. Sable, I hope you don’t mind me intruding,
but, your book, it changed my life, I was wondering, would you mind
signing it for me?” She stared imploringly at him with eyes deep-sunk in
gloriously eyeshadowed sockets.

Sable nodded graciously, and took the book from her.

It was not surprising that she had recognized him, for his dark gray
eyes stared out from his photo on the foil-embossed cover. _Foodless
Dieting: Slim Yourself Beautiful_, the book was called; The Diet Book of
the Century!

“How do you spell your name?” he asked.

“_Sherryl_. Two Rs, one Y, one L.”

“You remind me of an old, old friend,” he told her, as he wrote swiftly
and carefully on the title page. “There you go. Glad you liked it.
Always good to meet a fan.”

What he’d written was this:

_Sherryl_,

_A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley_

_for a penny, and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine_.

_Rev. 6:6_.

_Dr. Raven Sable_.

“It’s from the Bible,” he told her.

She closed the book reverently and backed away from the table, thanking
Sable, he didn’t know how much this meant to her, he had changed her
life, truly he had. …

He had never actually earned the medical degree he claimed, since there
hadn’t been any universities in those days, but Sable could see she was
starving to death. He gave her a couple of months at the outside.
_Foodless_. Handle your weight problem, terminally.

Frannie was stabbing at her laptop computer hungrily, planning the next
phase in Sable’s transformation of the eating habits of the Western
World. Sable had bought her the machine as a personal present. It was
very, very expensive, very powerful, and ultra-slim. He liked slim
things.

“There’s a European outfit we can buy into for the initial
toehold—Holdings (Holdings) Incorporated. That’ll give us the
Liechtenstein tax base. Now, if we channel funds out through the
Caymans, into Luxembourg, and from there to Switzerland, we could pay
for the factories in … ”

But Sable was no longer listening. He was remembering the exclusive
little restaurant. It had occurred to him that he had never seen so many
rich people so hungry.

Sable grinned, the honest, open grin that goes with job satisfaction,
perfect and pure. He was just killing time until the main event, but he
was killing it in such exquisite ways. Time, and sometimes people.

SOMETIMES HE WAS called White, or Blanc, or Albus, or Chalky, or Weiss,
or Snowy, or any one of a hundred other names. His skin was pale, his
hair a faded blond, his eyes light gray. He was somewhere in his
twenties at a casual glance, and a casual glance was all anyone ever
gave him.

He was almost entirely unmemorable.

Unlike his two colleagues, he could never settle down in any one job for
very long.

He had had all manner of interesting jobs in lots of interesting places.

(He had worked at the Chernobyl Power Station, and at Windscale, and at
Three Mile Island, always in minor jobs that weren’t very important.)

He had been a minor but valued member of a number of scientific research
establishments.

(He had helped to design the petrol engine, and plastics, and the
ring-pull can.)

He could turn his hand to anything.

Nobody really noticed him. He was unobtrusive; his presence was
cumulative. If you thought about it carefully, you could figure out he
had to have been doing something, had to have been somewhere. Maybe he
even spoke to you. But he was easy to forget, was Mr. White.

At this time he was working as deckhand on an oil tanker, heading toward
Tokyo.

The captain was drunk in his cabin. The first mate was in the head. The
second mate was in the galley. That was pretty much it for the crew: the
ship was almost completely automated. There wasn’t much a person could
do.

However, if a person just happened to press the EMERGENCY CARGO RELEASE
switch on the bridge, the automatic systems would take care of releasing
huge quantities of black sludge into the sea, millions of tons of crude
oil, with devastating effect on the birds, fish, vegetation, animals,
and humans of the region. Of course, there were dozens of fail-safe
interlocks and foolproof safety backups but, what the hell, there always
were.

Afterwards, there was a huge amount of argument as to exactly whose
fault it was. In the end it was left unresolved: the blame was
apportioned equally. Neither the captain, the first mate, nor the second
mate ever worked again.

For some reason nobody gave much of a thought to Seaman White, who was
already halfway to Indonesia on a tramp steamer piled high with rusting
metal barrels of a particularly toxic weedkiller.

AND THERE WAS ANOTHER. He was in the square in Kumbolaland. And he was
in the restaurants. And he was in the fish, and in the air, and in the
barrels of weedkiller. He was on the roads, and in houses, and in
palaces, and in hovels.

There was nowhere that he was a stranger, and there was no getting away
from him. He was doing what he did best, and what he was doing was what
he was.

He was not waiting. He was working.

HARRIET DOWLING returned home with her baby, which, on the advice of
Sister Faith Prolix, who was more persuasive than Sister Mary, and with
the telephonic agreement of her husband, she had named Warlock.

The Cultural Attaché returned home a week later, and pronounced the baby
the spit of his side of the family. He also had his secretary advertise
in _The Lady_ for a nanny.

Crowley had seen _Mary Poppins_ on television one Christmas (indeed,
behind the scenes, Crowley had had a hand in most television; although
it was on the invention of the game show that he truly prided himself).
He toyed with the idea of a hurricane as an effective and incredibly
stylish way of disposing of the queue of nannies that would certainly
form, or possibly stack up in a holding pattern, outside the Cultural
Attaché’s Regent’s Park residence.

He contented himself with a wildcat tube strike, and when the day came,
only one _nanny_ turned up.

She wore a knit tweed suit and discreet pearl earrings. Something about
her might have said nanny, but it said it in an undertone of the sort
employed by British butlers in a certain type of American film. It also
coughed discreetly and muttered that she could well be the sort of nanny
who advertises unspecified but strangely explicit services in certain
magazines.

Her flat shoes crunched up the gravel drive, and a gray dog padded
silently by her side, white flecks of saliva dripping from its jaw. Its
eyes glinted scarlet, and it glanced from side to side hungrily.

She reached the heavy wooden door, smiled to herself, a brief satisfied
flicker, and rang the bell. It _donged_ gloomily.

The door was opened by a butler, as they say, of the old school.¹³

“I am Nanny Ashtoreth,” she told him. “And this,” she continued, while
the gray dog at her side eyed the butler carefully, working out,
perhaps, where it would bury the bones, “is Rover.”

She left the dog in the garden, and passed her interview with flying
colors, and Mrs. Dowling led the nanny to see her new charge.

She smiled unpleasantly. “What a delightful child,” she said. “He’ll be
wanting a little tricycle soon.”

By one of those coincidences, another new member of staff arrived the
same afternoon. He was the gardener, and as it turned out he was
amazingly good at his job. No one quite worked out why this should be
the case, since he never seemed to pick up a shovel and made no effort
to rid the garden of the sudden flocks of birds that filled it and
settled all over him at every opportunity. He just sat in the shade
while around him the residence gardens bloomed and bloomed.

Warlock used to come down to see him, when he was old enough to toddle
and Nanny was doing whatever it was she did on her afternoons off.

“This here’s Brother Slug,” the gardener would tell him, “and this tiny
little critter is Sister Potato Weevil. Remember, Warlock, as you walk
your way through the highways and byways of life’s rich and fulsome
path, to have love and reverence for all living things.”

“Nanny says that wivving fings is fit onwy to be gwound under my heels,
Mr. Fwancis,” said little Warlock, stroking Brother Slug, and then
wiping his hand conscientiously on his Kermit the Frog overall.

“You don’t listen to that woman,” Francis would say. “You listen to me.”

At night, Nanny Ashtoreth sang nursery rhymes to Warlock.

_Oh, the grand old Duke of York_

_He had Ten Thousand Men_

_He Marched them Up To The Top of The Hill_

_And Crushed all the nations of the world and brought them_
_under the rule of Satan our master_.

and

_This little piggy went to Hades_

_This little piggy stayed home_

_This little piggy ate raw and steaming human flesh_

_This little piggy violated virgins_

_And this little piggy clambered over a heap of dead bodies to_
_get to the top_.

“Bwuvver Fwancis the gardener says that I mus’ selfwesswy pwactice
virtue an’ wuv to all wivving fings,” said Warlock.

“You don’t listen to that _man_, darling,” the nanny would whisper, as
she tucked him into his little bed. “You listen to me.”

And so it went.

The Arrangement worked perfectly. A no-score win. Nanny Ashtoreth bought
the child a little tricycle, but could never persuade him to ride it
inside the house. And he was scared of Rover.

In the background Crowley and Aziraphale met on the tops of buses, and
in art galleries, and at concerts, compared notes, and smiled.

When Warlock was six, his nanny left, taking Rover with her; the
gardener handed in his resignation on the same day. Neither of them left
with quite the same spring in their step with which they’d arrived.

Warlock now found himself being educated by two tutors.

Mr. Harrison taught him about Attila the Hun, Vlad Drakul, and the
Darkness Intrinsicate in the Human Spirit.¹⁴ He tried to teach Warlock
how to make rabble-rousing political speeches to sway the hearts and
minds of multitudes.

Mr. Cortese taught him about Florence Nightingale,¹⁵ Abraham Lincoln,
and the appreciation of art. He tried to teach him about free will,
self-denial, and Doing unto Others as You Would Wish Them to Do to You.

They both read to the child extensively from the Book of Revelation.

Despite their best efforts Warlock showed a regrettable tendency to be
good at maths. Neither of his tutors was entirely satisfied with his
progress.

When Warlock was ten he liked baseball; he liked plastic toys that
transformed into other plastic toys indistinguishable from the first set
of plastic toys except to the trained eye; he liked his stamp
collection; he liked banana-flavor bubble gum; he liked comics and
cartoons and his B.M.X. bike.

Crowley was troubled.

They were in the cafeteria of the British Museum, another refuge for all
weary foot soldiers of the Cold War. At the table to their left two
ramrod-straight Americans in suits were surreptitiously handing over a
briefcase full of deniable dollars to a small dark woman in sunglasses;
at the table on their right the deputy head of MI7 and the local KGB
section officer argued over who got to keep the receipt for the tea and
buns.

Crowley finally said what he had not even dared to think for the last
decade.

“If you ask me,” Crowley said to his counterpart, “he’s too bloody
_normal_.”

Aziraphale popped another deviled egg into his mouth, and washed it down
with coffee. He dabbed his lips with a paper napkin.

“It’s my good influence,” he beamed. “Or rather, credit where credit’s
due, that of my little team.”

Crowley shook his head. “I’m taking that into account. Look—by now he
should be _trying_ to warp the world around him to his own desires,
shaping it in his own image, that kind of stuff. Well, not actually
trying. He’ll do it without even knowing it. Have you seen _any_
evidence of that happening?”

“Well, no, but … ”

“By now he should be a powerhouse of raw force. Is he?”

“Well, not as far as I’ve noticed, but … ”

“He’s too normal.” Crowley drummed his fingers on the table. “I don’t
like it. There’s something wrong. I just can’t put my finger on it.”

Aziraphale helped himself to Crowley’s slice of angel cake. “Well, he’s
a growing boy. And, of course, there’s been the heavenly influence in
his life.”

Crowley sighed. “I just hope he’ll know how to cope with the hell-hound,
that’s all.”

Aziraphale raised one eyebrow. “Hell-hound?”

“On his eleventh birthday. I received a message from Hell last night.”
The message had come during “The Golden Girls,” one of Crowley’s
favorite television programs. Rose had taken ten minutes to deliver what
could have been quite a brief communication, and by the time
non-infernal service was restored Crowley had quite lost the thread of
the plot. “They’re sending him a hell-hound, to pad by his side and
guard him from all harm. Biggest one they’ve got.”

“Won’t people remark on the sudden appearance of a huge black dog? His
parents, for a start.”

Crowley stood up suddenly, treading on the foot of a Bulgarian cultural
attaché, who was talking animatedly to the Keeper of Her Majesty’s
Antiques. “Nobody’s going to notice _anything_ out of the ordinary. It’s
reality, angel. And young Warlock can do what he wants to _that_,
whether he knows it or not.”

“When does it turn up, then? This dog? Does it have a name?”

“I told you. On his eleventh birthday. At three o’clock in the
afternoon. It’ll sort of home in on him. He’s supposed to name it
himself. It’s very important that he names it himself. It gives it its
purpose. It’ll be Killer, or Terror, or Stalks-by-Night, I expect.”

“Are you going to be there?” asked the angel, nonchalantly.

“Wouldn’t miss it for the worlds,” said Crowley. “I do hope there’s
nothing _too_ wrong with the child. We’ll see how he reacts to the dog,
anyway. That should tell us something. I _hope_ he’ll send it back, or
be frightened of it. If he _does_ name it, we’ve lost. He’ll have all
his powers and Armageddon is just around the corner.”

“I think,” said Aziraphale, sipping his wine (which had just ceased to
be a slightly vinegary Beaujolais, and had become a quite acceptable,
but rather surprised, Chateau Lafitte 1875), “I think I’ll see you
there.”


Wednesday

IT WAS A HOT, fume-filled August day in Central London.

Warlock’s eleventh birthday was very well attended.

There were twenty small boys and seventeen small girls. There were a lot
of men with identical blond crew cuts, dark blue suits, and shoulder
holsters. There was a crew of caterers, who had arrived bearing jellies,
cakes, and bowls of crisps. Their procession of vans was led by a
vintage Bentley.

The Amazing Harvey and Wanda, Children’s Parties a Specialty, had both
been struck down by an unexpected tummy bug, but by a providential turn
of fortune a replacement had turned up, practically out of the blue. A
stage magician.

Everyone has his little hobby. Despite Crowley’s urgent advice,
Aziraphale was intending to turn his to good use.

Aziraphale was particularly proud of his magical skills. He had attended
a class in the 1870s run by John Maskelyne, and had spent almost a year
practicing sleight of hand, palming coins, and taking rabbits out of
hats. He had got, he had felt at the time, quite good at it. The point
was that although Aziraphale was capable of doing things that could make
the entire Magic Circle hand in their wands, he never applied what might
be called his _intrinsic_ powers to the practice of sleight-of-hand
conjuring. Which was a major drawback. He was beginning to wish that
he’d continued practicing.

Still, he mused, it was like riding a velocipede. You never forgot how.
His magician’s coat had been a little dusty, but it felt good once it
was on. Even his old patter began to come back to him.

The children watched him in blank, disdainful incomprehension. Behind
the buffet Crowley, in his white waiter’s coat, cringed with contact
embarrassment.

“Now then, young masters and mistresses, do you see my battered old top
hat? What a shocking bad hat, as you young ’uns do say! And see, there’s
nothing in it. But bless my britches, who’s this rum customer? Why, it’s
our furry friend, Harry the rabbit!”

“It was in your pocket,” pointed out Warlock. The other children nodded
agreement. What did he think they were? Kids?

Aziraphale remembered what Maskelyne had told him about dealing with
hecklers. “Make a joke of it, you pudding-heads—and I do mean you, Mr.
Fell” (the name Aziraphale had adopted at that time). “Make ’em laugh,
and they’ll forgive you anything!”

“Ho, so you’ve rumbled my _hat trick,”_ he chuckled. The children stared
at him impassively.

“You’re rubbish,” said Warlock. “I wanted cartoons anyway.”

“He’s right, you know,” agreed a small girl with a ponytail. “You are
rubbish. And probably a faggot.”

Aziraphale stared desperately at Crowley. As far as he was concerned
young Warlock was obviously infernally tainted, and the sooner the Black
Dog turned up and they could get away from this place, the better.

“Now, do any of you young ’uns have such a thing as a thrup-penny bit
about your persons? No, young master? Then what’s this I see behind your
ear … ?”

“I got cartoons at _my_ birthday,” announced the little girl. “An I
gotter transformer anna mylittleponyer anna decepticonattacker anna
thundertank anna … ”

Crowley groaned. Children’s parties were obviously places where any
angel with an ounce of common sense should fear to tread. Piping infant
voices were raised in cynical merriment as Aziraphale dropped three
linked metal rings.

Crowley looked away, and his gaze fell on a table heaped high with
presents. From a tall plastic structure two beady little eyes stared
back at him.

Crowley scrutinized them for a glint of red fire. You could never be
certain when you were dealing with the bureaucrats of Hell. It was
always possible that they had sent a gerbil instead of a dog.

No, it was a perfectly normal gerbil. It appeared to be living in an
exciting construction of cylinders, spheres, and treadmills, such as the
Spanish Inquisition would have devised if they’d had access to a
plastics molding press.

He checked his watch. It had never occurred to Crowley to change its
battery, which had rotted away three years previously, but it still kept
perfect time. It was two minutes to three.

Aziraphale was getting more and more flustered.

“Do any of the company here assembled possess such a thing about their
persons as a pocket handkerchief? No?” In Victorian days it had been
unheard of for people not to carry handkerchiefs, and the trick, which
involved magically producing a dove who was even now pecking irritably
at Aziraphale’s wrist, could not proceed without one. The angel tried to
attract Crowley’s attention, failed, and, in desperation, pointed to one
of the security guards, who shifted uneasily.

“You, my fine jack-sauce. Come here. Now, if you inspect your breast
pocket, I _think_ you might find a fine silk handkerchief.”

“Nossir. ’Mafraidnotsir,” said the guard, staring straight ahead.

Aziraphale winked desperately. “No, go on, dear boy, take a look,
_please_.”

The guard reached a hand inside his inside pocket, looked surprised, and
pulled out a handkerchief, duck-egg-blue silk, with lace edging.
Aziraphale realized almost immediately that the lace had been a mistake,
as it caught on the guard’s holstered gun, and sent it spinning across
the room to land heavily in a bowl of jelly.

The children applauded spasmodically. “Hey, not bad!” said the
ponytailed girl.

Warlock had already run across the room, and grabbed the gun.

“Hands up, dogbreaths!” he shouted gleefully.

The security guards were in a quandary.

Some of them fumbled for their own weapons; others started edging their
way toward, or away from, the boy. The other children started
complaining that they wanted guns as well, and a few of the more forward
ones started trying to tug them from the guards who had been thoughtless
enough to take their weapons out.

Then someone threw some jelly at Warlock.

The boy squeaked, and pulled the trigger of the gun. It was a Magnum
.32, CIA issue, gray, mean, heavy, capable of blowing a man away at
thirty paces, and leaving nothing more than a red mist, a ghastly mess,
and a certain amount of paperwork.

Aziraphale blinked.

A thin stream of water squirted from the nozzle and soaked Crowley, who
had been looking out the window, trying to see if there was a huge black
dog in the garden.

Aziraphale looked embarrassed.

Then a cream cake hit him in the face.

It was almost five past three.

With a gesture, Aziraphale turned the rest of the guns into water
pistols as well, and walked out.

Crowley found him on the pavement outside, trying to extricate a rather
squishy dove from the arm of his frock coat.

“It’s late,” said Aziraphale.

“I can see that,” said Crowley. “Comes of sticking it up your sleeve.”
He reached out and pulled the limp bird from Aziraphale’s coat, and
breathed life back into it. The dove cooed appreciatively and flew off,
a trifle warily.

“Not the bird,” said the angel. “The dog. It’s late.”

Crowley shook his head, thoughtfully. “We’ll see.”

He opened the car door, flipped on the radio.
_“I-should-be-so-lucky-lucky-lucky-lucky-lucky, I-should-be-so-lucky-in-
HELLO CROWLEY.”_

“Hello. Um, who is this?”

“DAGON, LORD OF THE FILES, MASTER OF MADNESS, UNDER-DUKE OF THE SEVENTH
TORMENT. WHAT CAN I DO FOR YOU?”

“The hell-hound. I’m just, uh, just checking that it got off okay.”

_“RELEASED TEN MINUTES AGO. WHY? HASN’T IT ARRIVED? IS SOMETHING
WRONG?”_

“Oh no. Nothing’s wrong. Everything’s fine. Oops, I can see it now. Good
dog. _Nice_ dog. Everything’s terrific. You’re doing a great job down
there, people. Well, lovely talking to you, Dagon. Catch you soon, huh?”

He flipped off the radio.

They stared at each other. There was a loud bang from inside the house,
and a window shattered. “Oh dear,” muttered Aziraphale, not swearing
with the practiced ease of one who has spent six thousand years not
swearing, and who wasn’t going to start now. “I must have missed one.”

“No dog,” said Crowley.

“No dog,” said Aziraphale.

The demon sighed. “Get in the car,” he said. “We’ve got to talk about
this. Oh, and Aziraphale … ?”

“Yes.”

“Clean off that blasted cream cake before you get in.”

It was a hot, silent August day far from Central London. By the side of
the Tadfield road the dust weighed down the hogweed. Bees buzzed in the
hedges. The air had a leftover and reheated feel.

There was a sound like a thousand metal voices shouting “Hail!” cut off
abruptly.

And there was a black dog in the road.

It had to be a dog. It was dog-shaped.

There are some dogs which, when you meet them, remind you that, despite
thousands of years of man-made evolution, every dog is still only two
meals away from being a wolf. These dogs advance deliberately,
purposefully, the wilderness made flesh, their teeth yellow, their
breath a-stink, while in the distance their owners twitter, “He’s an old
soppy really, just poke him if he’s a nuisance,” and in the green of
their eyes the red campfires of the Pleistocene gleam and flicker. …

This dog would make even a dog like that slink nonchalantly behind the
sofa and pretend to be extremely preoccupied with its rubber bone.

It was already growling, and the growl was a low, rumbling snarl of
spring-coiled menace, the sort of growl that starts in the back of one
throat and ends up in someone else’s.

Saliva dripped from its jaws and sizzled on the tar.

It took a few steps forward, and sniffed the sullen air.

Its ears flicked up.

There were voices, a long way off. A voice. A boyish voice, but one it
had been created to obey, could not _help_ but obey. When that voice
said “Follow,” it would follow; when it said “Kill,” it would kill. His
master’s voice.

It leapt the hedge and padded across the field beyond. A grazing bull
eyed it for a moment, weighed its chances, then strolled hurriedly
toward the opposite hedge.

The voices were coming from a copse of straggly trees. The black hound
slunk closer, jaws streaming.

One of the other voices said: “He never will. You’re always saying he
will, and he never does. Catch your dad giving you a pet. An int’restin’
pet, anyway. It’ll prob’ly be stick insects. That’s your dad’s idea of
int’restin’.”

The hound gave the canine equivalent of a shrug, but immediately lost
interest because now the Master, the Center of its Universe, spoke.

“It’ll be a dog,” it said.

“Huh. You don’t _know_ it’s going to be a dog. No one’s _said_ it’s
going to be a dog. How d’you know it’s goin’ to be a dog if no one’s
_said_? Your dad’d be complaining about the food it eats the whole
time.”

“Privet.” This third voice was rather more prim than the first two. The
owner of a voice like that would be the sort of person who, before
making a plastic model kit, would not only separate and count all the
parts before commencing, as per the instructions, but also paint the
bits that needed painting first and leave them to dry properly prior to
construction. All that separated this voice from chartered accountancy
was a matter of time.

“They don’t eat privet, Wensley. You never saw a dog eatin’ privet.”

“Stick insects do, I mean. They’re jolly interesting, _actually_. They
eat each other when they’re mating.”

There was a thoughtful pause. The hound slunk closer, and realized that
the voices were coming from a hole in the ground.

The trees in fact concealed an ancient chalk quarry, now half overgrown
with thorn trees and vines. Ancient, but clearly not disused. Tracks
crisscrossed it; smooth areas of slope indicated regular use by
skateboards and Wall-of-Death, or at least
Wall-of-Seriously-Grazed-Knee, cyclists. Old bits of dangerously frayed
rope hung from some of the more accessible greenery. Here and there
sheets of corrugated iron and old wooden boards were wedged in branches.
A burnt-out, rusting Triumph Herald Estate was visible, half-submerged
in a drift of nettles.

In one corner a tangle of wheels and corroded wire marked the site of
the famous Lost Graveyard where the supermarket trolleys came to die.

If you were a child, it was paradise. The local adults called it The
Pit.

The hound peered through a clump of nettles, and spotted four figures
sitting in the center of the quarry on that indispensible prop to good
secret dens everywhere, the common milk crate.

“They don’t!”

“They do.”

“Bet you they don’t,” said the first speaker. It had a certain timbre to
it that identified it as young and female, and it was tinted with
horrified fascination.

“They do, actually. I had six before we went on holiday and I forgot to
change the privet and when I came back I had one big fat one.”

“Nah. That’s not stick insects, that’s praying mantises. I saw on the
television where this big female one ate this other one and it dint
hardly take any notice.”

There was another crowded pause.

“What’re they prayin’ about?” said his Master’s voice.

“Dunno. Prayin’ they don’t have to get married, I s’pect.”

The hound managed to get one huge eye against an empty knothole in the
quarry’s broken-down fence, and squinted downward.

“Anyway, it’s like with bikes,” said the first speaker authoritatively.
_“I_ thought I was going to get this bike with seven gears and one of
them razorblade saddles and purple paint and everything, and they gave
me this light blue one. With a basket. A _girl’s_ bike. ”

“Well. You’re a girl,” said one of the others.

“That’s _sexism_, that is. Going around giving people girly presents
just because they’re a girl.”

_“I’m_ going to get a dog,” said his Master’s voice, firmly. His Master
had his back to him; the hound couldn’t quite make out his features.

“Oh, yeah, one of those great big Rottenweilers, yeah?” said the girl,
with withering sarcasm.

“No, it’s going to be the kind of dog you can have fun with,” said his
Master’s voice. “Not a big dog—”

—the eye in the nettles vanished abruptly downwards—

“—but one of those dogs that’s brilliantly intelligent and can go down
rabbit holes and has one funny ear that always looks inside out. And a
proper mongrel, too. A _pedigree_ mongrel.”

Unheard by those within, there _was_ a tiny clap of thunder on the lip
of the quarry. It might have been caused by the sudden rushing of air
into the vacuum caused by a very large dog becoming, for example, a
small dog.

The tiny popping noise that followed might have been caused by one ear
turning itself inside out.

“And I’ll call him … ” said his Master’s voice. “I’ll call him … ”

“Yes?” said the girl. “What’re you goin’ to call it?”

The hound waited. This was the moment. The Naming. This would give it
its purpose, its function, its identity. Its eyes glowed a dull red,
even though they were a lot closer to the ground, and it dribbled into
the nettles.

“I’ll call him Dog,” said his Master, positively. “It saves a lot of
trouble, a name like that.”

The hell-hound paused. Deep in its diabolical canine brain it knew that
something was wrong, but it was nothing if not obedient and its great
sudden love of its Master overcame all misgivings. Who was it to say
what size it should be, anyway?

It trotted down the slope to meet its destiny.

Strange, though. It had always wanted to jump up at people but, now, it
realized that against all expectation it wanted to wag its tail at the
same time.

“YOU SAID IT WAS HIM!” moaned Aziraphale, abstractedly picking the final
lump of cream cake from his lapel. He licked his fingers clean.

“It was him,” said Crowley. “I mean, I should know, shouldn’t I?”

“Then someone else must be interfering.”

“There isn’t anyone else! There’s just us, right? Good and Evil. One
side or the other.”

He thumped the steering wheel.

“You’ll be amazed at the kind of things they can do to you, down there,”
he said.

“I imagine they’re very similar to the sort of things they can do to one
up there,” said Aziraphale.

“Come off it. Your lot get ineffable mercy,” said Crowley sourly.

“Yes? Did you ever visit Gomorrah?”

“Sure,” said the demon. “There was this great little tavern where you
could get these terrific fermented date-palm cocktails with nutmeg and
crushed lemongrass—”

“I meant afterwards.”

“Oh.”

Aziraphale said: “Something must have happened in the hospital.”

“It couldn’t have! It was full of our people!”

“Whose people?” said Aziraphale coldly.

“_My_ people,” corrected Crowley. “Well, not my people. Mmm, you know.
Satanists.”

He tried to say it dismissively. Apart from, of course, the fact that
the world _was_ an amazing interesting place which they both wanted to
enjoy for as long as possible, there were few things that the two of
them agreed on, but they did see eye to eye about some of those people
who, for one reason or another, were inclined to worship the Prince of
Darkness. Crowley always found them embarrassing. You couldn’t actually
be rude to them, but you couldn’t help feeling about them the same way
that, say, a Vietnam veteran would feel about someone who wears combat
gear to Neighborhood Watch meetings.

Besides, they were always so depressingly enthusiastic. Take all that
stuff with the inverted crosses and pentagrams and cockerels. It
mystified most demons. It wasn’t the least bit necessary. All you needed
to become a Satanist was an effort of will. You could be one all your
life without ever knowing what a pentagram was, without ever seeing a
dead cockerel other than as Chicken Marengo.

Besides, some of the old-style Satanists tended, in fact, to be quite
nice people. They mouthed the words and went through the motions, just
like the people they thought of as their opposite numbers, and _then_
went home and lived lives of mild unassuming mediocrity for the rest of
the week with never an unusually evil thought in their heads.

And as for the rest of it …

There were people who called themselves Satanists who made Crowley
squirm. It wasn’t just the things they did, it was the way they blamed
it all on Hell. They’d come up with some stomach-churning idea that no
demon could have thought of in a thousand years, some dark and mindless
unpleasantness that only a fully functioning human brain could conceive,
then shout _“_The Devil Made Me Do It” and get the sympathy of the court
when the whole point was that the Devil hardly ever made anyone do
anything. He didn’t have to. That was what some humans found hard to
understand. Hell wasn’t a major reservoir of evil, any more than Heaven,
in Crowley’s opinion, was a fountain of goodness; they were just sides
in the great cosmic chess game. Where you found the real McCoy, the real
grace and the real heart-stopping evil, was right inside the human mind.

“Huh,” said Aziraphale. “Satanists.”

“I don’t see how they could have messed it up,” said Crowley. “I mean,
two babies. It’s not exactly taxing, is it … ?” He stopped. Through the
mists of memory he pictured a small nun, who had struck him at the time
as being remarkably loose-headed even for a Satanist. And there had been
someone else. Crowley vaguely recalled a pipe, and a cardigan with the
kind of zigzag pattern that went out of style in 1938. A man with
“expectant father” written all over him.

There must have been a third baby.

He told Aziraphale.

“Not a lot to go on,” said the angel.

“We know the child must be alive,” said Crowley, “so—”

“How do we know?”

“If it had turned up Down There again, do you think I’d still be sitting
here?”

“Good point.”

“So all we’ve got to do is find it,” said Crowley. “Go through the
hospital records.” The Bentley’s engine coughed into life and the car
leapt forward, forcing Aziraphale back into the seat.

“And then what?” he said.

“And then we find the child.”

“And then what?” The angel shut his eyes as the car crabbed around a
corner.

“Don’t know.”

“Good grief.”

“I suppose—_get off the road you clown_—your people wouldn’t
consider—_and the scooter you rode in on_!—giving me asylum?”

“I was going to ask you the same thing—_Watch out for that pedestrian!”_

“It’s on the street, it knows the risks it’s taking!” said Crowley,
easing the accelerating car between a parked car and a taxi and leaving
a space which would have barely accepted even the best credit card.

“Watch the road! Watch the road! Where is this hospital, anyway?”

“Somewhere south of Oxford!”

Aziraphale grabbed the dashboard. “You can’t do ninety miles an hour in
Central London!”

Crowley peered at the dial. “Why not?” he said.

“You’ll get us killed!” Aziraphale hesitated. “Inconveniently
discorporated,” he corrected, lamely, relaxing a little. “Anyway, you
might kill other people.”

Crowley shrugged. The angel had never really come to grips with the
twentieth century, and didn’t realize that it is perfectly possible to
do ninety miles an hour down Oxford Street. You just arranged matters so
that no one was in the way. And since everyone knew that it was
impossible to do ninety miles an hour down Oxford Street, no one
noticed.

At least cars were better than horses. The internal combustion engine
had been a godse—a blessi—a windfall for Crowley. The only horses he
could be seen riding on business, in the old days, were big black jobs
with eyes like flame and hooves that struck sparks. That was _de
rigueur_ for a demon. Usually, Crowley fell off. He wasn’t much good
with animals.

Somewhere around Chiswick, Aziraphale scrabbled vaguely in the scree of
tapes in the glove compartment.

“What’s a Velvet Underground?” he said.

“You wouldn’t like it,” said Crowley.

“Oh,” said the angel dismissively. “Be-bop.”

“Do you know, Aziraphale, that probably if a million human beings were
asked to describe modern music, they wouldn’t use the term ‘be-bop’?”
said Crowley.

“Ah, this is more like it. Tchaikovsky,” said Aziraphale, opening a case
and slotting its cassette into the Blaupunkt.

“You won’t enjoy it,” sighed Crowley. “It’s been in the car for more
than a fortnight.”

A heavy bass beat began to thump through the Bentley as they sped past
Heathrow.

Aziraphale’s brow furrowed.

“I don’t recognize this,” he said. “What is it?”

“It’s Tchaikovsky’s ‘Another One Bites the Dust,’” said Crowley, closing
his eyes as they went through Slough.

To while away the time as they crossed the sleeping Chilterns, they also
listened to William Byrd’s “We Are the Champions” and Beethoven’s “I
Want To Break Free.” Neither were as good as Vaughan Williams’s
“Fat-Bottomed Girls.”

IT IS SAID THAT THE DEVIL HAS ALL THE BEST TUNES.

This is broadly true. But Heaven has the best choreographers.

THE OXFORDSHIRE plain stretched out to the west, with a scattering of
lights to mark the slumbering villages where honest yeomen were settling
down to sleep after a long day’s editorial direction, financial
consulting, or software engineering.

Up here on the hill a few glowworms were lighting up.

The surveyor’s theodolite is one of the more direful symbols of the
twentieth century. Set up anywhere in open countryside, it says: there
will come Road Widening, yea, and two-thousand-home estates in keeping
with the Essential Character of the Village. Executive Developments will
be manifest.

But not even the most conscientious surveyor surveys at midnight, and
yet here the thing was, tripod legs deep in the turf. Not many
theodolites have a hazel twig strapped to the top, either, or crystal
pendulums hanging from them and Celtic runes carved into the legs.

The soft breeze flapped the cloak of the slim figure who was adjusting
the knobs of the thing. It was quite a heavy cloak, sensibly waterproof,
with a warm lining.

Most books on witchcraft will tell you that witches work naked. This is
because most books on witchcraft are written by men.

The young woman’s name was Anathema Device. She was not astonishingly
beautiful. All her features, considered individually, were extremely
pretty, but the entirety of her face gave the impression that it had
been put together hurriedly from stock without reference to any plan.
Probably the most suitable word is “attractive,” although people who
knew what it meant and could spell it might add “vivacious,” although
there is something very Fifties about “vivacious,” so perhaps they
wouldn’t.

Young women should not go alone on dark nights, even in Oxfordshire. But
any prowling maniac would have had more than his work cut out if he had
accosted Anathema Device. She was a witch, after all. And precisely
because she was a witch, and therefore sensible, she put little faith in
protective amulets and spells; she saved it all for a foot-long bread
knife which she kept in her belt.

She sighted through the glass and made another adjustment.

She muttered under her breath.

Surveyors often mutter under their breath. They mutter things like “Soon
have a relief road through here faster than you can say Jack Robinson,”
or “That’s three point five meters, give or take a gnat’s whisker.”

This was an entirely different kind of muttering.

“Darksome night / And shining Moon,” muttered Anathema, “East by South /
By West by southwest … west-southwest … got you … ”

She picked up a folded Ordnance Survey map and held it in the
torchlight. Then she produced a transparent ruler and a pencil and
carefully drew a line across the map. It intersected another pencil
line.

She smiled, not because anything was particularly amusing, but because a
tricky job had been done well.

Then she collapsed the strange theodolite, strapped it onto the back of
a sit-up-and-beg black bicycle leaning against the hedge, made sure The
Book was in the basket, and wheeled everything out to the misty lane.

It was a very ancient bike, with a frame apparently made of drainpipes.
It had been built long before the invention of the three-speed gear, and
possibly only just after the invention of the wheel.

But it was nearly all downhill to the village. Hair streaming in the
wind, cloak ballooning behind her like a sheet anchor, she let the
two-wheeled juggernaut accelerate ponderously through the warm air. At
least there wasn’t any traffic at this time of night.

THE BENTLEY’S ENGINE went _pink, pink_ as it cooled. Crowley’s temper,
on the other hand, was heating up.

“You said you saw it signposted,” he said.

“Well, we flashed by so quickly. Anyway, I thought you’d been here
before.”

“Eleven years ago!”

Crowley hurled the map onto the back seat and started the engine again.

“Perhaps we should ask someone,” said Aziraphale.

“Oh, yes,” said Crowley. “We’ll stop and ask the first person we see
walking along a—a _track_ in the middle of the night, shall we?”

He jerked the car into gear and roared out into the beech-hung lane.

“There’s something odd about this area,” said Aziraphale. “Can’t you
feel it?”

“What?”

“Slow down a moment.”

The Bentley slowed again.

“Odd,” muttered the angel, “I keep getting these flashes of, of … ”

He raised his hands to his temples.

“What? What?” said Crowley.

Aziraphale stared at him.

“Love,” he said. “Someone really _loves_ this place.”

“Pardon?”

“There seems to be this great sense of love. I can’t put it any better
than that. Especially not to _you_.”

“Do you mean like—” Crowley began.

There was a whirr, a scream, and a clunk. The car stopped.

Aziraphale blinked, lowered his hands, and gingerly opened the door.

“You’ve hit someone,” he said.

“No I haven’t,” said Crowley. “Someone’s hit me.”

They got out. Behind the Bentley a bicycle lay in the road, its front
wheel bent into a creditable Mobius shape, its back wheel clicking
ominously to a standstill.

“Let there be light,” said Aziraphale. A pale blue glow filled the lane.

From the ditch beside them someone said, “How the hell did you do that?”

The light vanished.

“Do what?” said Aziraphale guiltily.

“Uh.” Now the voice sounded muzzy. “I think I hit _my_ head on
something … ”

Crowley glared at a long metallic streak on the Bentley’s glossy
paintwork and a dimple in the bumper. The dimple popped back into shape.
The paint healed.

“Up you get, young lady,” said the angel, hauling Anathema out of the
bracken. “No bones broken.” It was a statement, not a hope; there had
been a minor fracture, but Aziraphale couldn’t resist an opportunity to
do good.

“You didn’t have any lights,” she began.

“Nor did you,” said Crowley guiltily. “Fair’s fair.”

“Doing a spot of astronomy, were we?” said Aziraphale, setting the bike
upright. Various things clattered out of its front basket. He pointed to
the battered theodolite.

“No,” said Anathema, “I mean, yes. And look what you’ve done to poor old
Phaeton.”

“I’m sorry?” said Aziraphale.

“My bicycle. It’s bent all to—”

“Amazingly resilient, these old machines,” said the angel brightly,
handing it to her. The front wheel gleamed in the moonlight, as
perfectly round as one of the Circles of Hell.

She stared at it.

“Well, since that’s all sorted out,” said Crowley, “perhaps it’d be best
if we just all got on our, er. Er. You wouldn’t happen to know the way
to Lower Tadfield, would you?”

Anathema was still staring at her bicycle. She was almost certain that
it hadn’t had a little saddlebag with a puncture repair kit when she set
out.

“It’s just down the hill,” she said. “This is my bike, isn’t it?”

“Oh, certainly,” said Aziraphale, wondering if he’d overdone things.

“Only I’m _sure_ Phaeton never had a pump.”

The angel looked guilty again.

“But there’s a place for one,” he said, helplessly. “Two little hooks.”

“Just down the hill, you said?” said Crowley, nudging the angel.

“I think perhaps I must have knocked my head,” said the girl.

“We’d offer to give you a lift, of course,” said Crowley quickly, “but
there’s nowhere for the bike.”

“Except the luggage rack,” said Aziraphale.

“The Bentley hasn’t— Oh. Huh.”

The angel scrambled the spilled contents of the bike’s basket into the
back seat and helped the stunned girl in after them.

“One does not,” he said to Crowley, “pass by on the other side.”

“Your one might not. This one does. We have got _other things_ to do,
you know.” Crowley glared at the new luggage rack. It had tartan straps.

The bicycle lifted itself up and tied itself firmly _in_ place. Then
Crowley got in.

“Where do you live, my dear?” Aziraphale oozed.

“My bike didn’t have lights, either. Well, it did, but they’re the sort
you put those double batteries in and they went moldy and I took them
off,” said Anathema. She glared at Crowley. “I have a bread knife, you
know,” she said. “Somewhere.”

Aziraphale looked shocked at the implication.

“Madam, I assure you—”

Crowley switched on the lights. He didn’t need them to see by, but they
made the other humans on the road less nervous.

Then he put the car into gear and drove sedately down the hill. The road
came out from under the trees and, after a few hundred yards, reached
the outskirts of a middle-sized village.

It had a familiar feel to it. It had been eleven years, but this place
definitely rang a distant bell.

“Is there a hospital around here?” he said. “Run by nuns?”

Anathema shrugged. “Don’t think so,” she said. “The only large place is
Tadfield Manor. I don’t know what goes on there.”

“Divine planning,” muttered Crowley under his breath.

“And gears,” said Anathema. “My bike didn’t have gears. I’m sure my bike
didn’t have gears.”

Crowley leaned across to the angel.

“Oh lord, heal this bike,” he whispered sarcastically.

“I’m sorry, I just got carried away,” hissed Aziraphale.

“Tartan straps?”

“Tartan is stylish.”

Crowley growled. On those occasions when the angel managed to get his
mind into the twentieth century, it always gravitated to 1950.

“You can drop me off here,” said Anathema, from the back seat.

“Our pleasure,” beamed the angel. As soon as the car had stopped he had
the back door open and was bowing like an aged retainer welcoming the
young massa back to the old plantation.

Anathema gathered her things together and stepped out as haughtily as
possible.

She was quite sure neither of the two men had gone around to the back of
the car, but the bike was unstrapped and leaning against the gate.

There was definitely something very weird about them, she decided.

Aziraphale bowed again. “So glad to have been of assistance,” he said.

“Thank you,” said Anathema, icily.

“Can we get on?” said Crowley. “Goodnight, miss. Get in, angel.”

Ah. Well, that explained it. She had been perfectly safe after all.

She watched the car disappear toward the center of the village, and
wheeled the bike up the path to the cottage. She hadn’t bothered to lock
it. She was sure that Agnes would have mentioned it if she was going to
be burgled, she was always very good at personal things like that.

She’d rented the cottage furnished, which meant that the actual
furniture was the special sort you find in these circumstances and had
probably been left out for the dustmen by the local War on Want shop. It
didn’t matter. She didn’t expect to be here long.

If Agnes was right, she wouldn’t be _anywhere_ long. Nor would anyone
else.

She spread her maps and things out on the ancient table under the
kitchen’s solitary light bulb.

What had she learned? Nothing much, she decided. Probably IT was at the
north end of the village, but she’d suspected that anyway. If you got
too close the signal swamped you; if you were too far away you couldn’t
get an accurate fix.

It was infuriating. The answer must be in The Book somewhere. The
trouble was that in order to understand the Predictions you had to be
able to think like a half-crazed, highly intelligent seventeenth-century
witch with a mind like a crossword-puzzle dictionary. Other members of
the family had said that Agnes made things obscure to conceal them from
the understanding of outsiders; Anathema, who suspected she could
occasionally think like Agnes, had privately decided that it was because
Agnes was a bloody-minded old bitch with a mean sense of humor.

She’d not even—

_She didn’t have The Book_.

Anathema stared in horror at the things on the table. The maps. The
homemade divinatory theodolite. The thermos that had contained hot
Bovril. The torch.

The rectangle of empty air where the Prophecies should have been.

She’d lost it.

But that was ridiculous! One of the things Agnes was always very
specific about was what happened to The Book.

She snatched up the torch and ran from the house.

“A FEELING LIKE, OH, like the opposite of the feeling you’re having when
you say things like ‘this feels spooky,’” said Aziraphale. “That’s what
I mean.”

“I never say things like ‘this feels spooky,’” said Crowley. “I’m all
for spooky.”

“A _cherished_ feel,” said Aziraphale desperately.

“Nope. Can’t sense a thing,” said Crowley with forced jolliness. “You’re
just oversensitive.”

“It’s my _job_,” said Aziraphale. “Angels can’t be _over_sensitive.”

“I expect people round here like living here and you’re just picking it
up.”

“Never picked up anything like _this_ in London,” said Aziraphale.

“There you are, then. Proves my point,” said Crowley. “And this is the
place. I remember the stone lions on the gateposts.”

The Bentley’s headlights lit up the groves of overgrown rhododendrons
that lined the drive. The tires crunched over gravel.

“It’s a bit early in the morning to be calling on nuns,” said Aziraphale
doubtfully.

“Nonsense. Nuns are up and about at all hours,” said Crowley. “It’s
probably Compline, unless that’s a slimming aid.”

“Oh, cheap, very cheap,” said the angel. “There’s really no need for
that sort of thing.”

“Don’t get defensive. I told you, these were some of ours. Black nuns.
We needed a hospital close to the air base, you see.”

“You’ve lost me there.”

“You don’t think American diplomats’ wives usually give birth in little
religious hospitals in the middle of nowhere, do you? It all had to seem
to happen naturally. There’s an air base at Lower Tadfield, she went
there for the opening, things started to happen, base hospital not
ready, our man there said, ‘There’s a place just down the road,’ and
there we were. Rather good organization.”

“Except for one or two minor details,” said Aziraphale smugly.

“But it _nearly_ worked,” snapped Crowley, feeling _he_ should stick up
for the old firm.

“You see, evil always contains the seeds of its own destruction,” said
the angel. “It is ultimately negative, and therefore encompasses its
downfall even at its moments of apparent triumph. No matter how
grandiose, how well-planned, how apparently foolproof an evil plan, the
inherent sinfulness will by definition rebound upon its instigators. No
matter how apparently successful it may seem upon the way, at the end it
will wreck itself. It will founder upon the rocks of iniquity and sink
headfirst to vanish without trace into the seas of oblivion.”

Crowley considered this. “Nah,” he said, at last. “For my money, it was
just average incompetence. Hey—”

He whistled under his breath.

The graveled forecourt in front of the manor was crowded with cars, and
they weren’t nun cars. The Bentley was if anything outclassed. A lot of
the cars _had_ GT or Turbo in their names and phone aerials on their
roofs. They were nearly all less than a year old.

Crowley’s hands itched. Aziraphale healed bicycles and broken bones; he
longed to steal a few radios, let down some tires, that sort of thing.
He resisted it.

“Well, well,” he said. “In my day nuns were packed four to a Morris
Traveller.”

“This can’t be right,” said Aziraphale.

“Perhaps they’ve gone private?” said Crowley.

“Or you’ve got the wrong place.”

“It’s the right place, I tell you. Come on.”

They got out of the car. Thirty seconds later someone shot both of them.
With incredible accuracy.

IF THERE WAS ONE THING that Mary Hodges, formerly Loquacious, was good
at, it was attempting to obey orders. She liked orders. They made the
world a simpler place.

What she wasn’t good at was change. She’d really liked the Chattering
Order. She’d made friends for the first time. She’d had a room of her
own for the first time. Of course, she knew that it was engaged in
things which might, from certain viewpoints, be considered bad, but Mary
Hodges had seen quite a lot of life in thirty years and had no illusions
about what most of the human race had to do in order to make it from one
week to the next. Besides, the food was good and you got to meet
interesting people.

The Order, such as was left of it, had moved after the fire. After all,
their sole purpose in existing had been fulfilled. They went their
separate ways.

She hadn’t gone. She’d rather liked the Manor and, she said, someone
ought to stay and see it was properly repaired, because you couldn’t
trust workmen these days unless you were on top of them the whole time,
in a manner of speaking. This meant breaking her vows, but Mother
Superior said this was all right, nothing to worry about, breaking vows
was perfectly okay in a black sisterhood, and it would all be the same
in a hundred years’ time or, rather, eleven years’ time, so if it gave
her any pleasure here were the deeds and an address to forward any mail
unless it came in long brown envelopes with windows in the front.

Then something very strange had happened to her. Left alone in the
rambling building, working from one of the few undamaged rooms, arguing
with men with cigarette stubs behind their ears and plaster dust on
their trousers and the kind of pocket calculator that comes up with a
different answer if the sums involved are in used notes, she discovered
something she never knew existed.

She’d discovered, under layers of silliness and eagerness to please,
Mary Hodges.

She found it quite easy to interpret builders’ estimates and do VAT
calculations. She’d got some books from the library, and found finance
to be both interesting and uncomplicated. She’d stopped reading the kind
of women’s magazine that talks about romance and knitting and started
reading the kind of women’s magazine that talks about orgasms, but apart
from making a mental note to have one if ever the occasion presented
itself she dismissed them as only romance and knitting in a new form. So
she’d started reading the kind of magazine that talked about mergers.

After much thought, she’d bought a small home computer from an amused
and condescending young dealer in Norton. After a crowded weekend, she
took it back. Not, as he thought when she walked back into the shop, to
have a plug put on it, but because it didn’t have a 387 co-processor.
That bit he understood—he was a dealer, after all, and could understand
quite long words—but after that the conversation rapidly went downhill
from his point of view. Mary Hodges produced yet more magazines. Most of
them had the term “PC” somewhere in their title, and many of them had
articles and reviews that she had circled carefully in red ink.

She read about New Women. She hadn’t ever realized that she’d been an
Old Woman, but after some thought she decided that titles like that were
all one with the romance and the knitting and the orgasms, and the
really important thing to be was yourself, just as hard as you could.
She’d always been inclined to dress in black and white. All she needed
to do was raise the hemlines, raise the heels, and leave off the wimple.

It was while leafing through a magazine one day that she learned that,
around the country, there was an apparently insatiable demand for
commodious buildings in spacious grounds run by people who understood
the needs of the business community. The following day she went out and
ordered some stationery in the name of the Tadfield Manor Conference and
Management Training Center, reasoning that by the time it had been
printed she’d know all that was necessary to know about running such
places.

The ads went out the following week.

It had turned out to be an overwhelming success, because Mary Hodges
realized early in her new career as Herself that management training
didn’t have to mean sitting people down in front of unreliable slide
projectors. Firms expected far more than that these days.

She provided it.

CROWLEY SANK DOWN with his back against a statue. Aziraphale had already
toppled backward into a rhododendron bush, a dark stain spreading across
his coat.

Crowley felt dampness suffusing his own shirt.

This was ridiculous. The last thing he needed now was to be killed. It
would require all sorts of explanations. They didn’t hand out new bodies
just like that; they always wanted to know what you’d done with the old
one. It was like trying to get a new pen from a particularly
bloody-minded stationery department.

He looked at his hand in disbelief.

Demons have to be able to see in the dark. And he could see that his
hand was yellow. He was bleeding yellow.

Gingerly, he tasted a finger.

Then he crawled over to Aziraphale and checked the angel’s shirt. If the
stain on it was blood, something had gone very wrong with biology.

“Oo, that stung,” moaned the fallen angel. “Got me right under the
ribs.”

“Yes, but do you normally bleed blue?” said Crowley.

Aziraphale’s eyes opened. His right hand patted his chest. He sat up. He
went through the same crude forensic self-examination as Crowley.

“Paint?” he said.

Crowley nodded.

“What’re they playing at?” said Aziraphale.

“I don’t know,” said Crowley, “but I think it’s called silly buggers.”
His tone suggested that he could play, too. And do it better.

It was a game. It was tremendous fun. Nigel Tompkins, Assistant Head
(Purchasing), squirmed through the undergrowth, his mind aflame with
some of the more memorable scenes of some of the better Clint Eastwood
movies. And to think he’d believed that management training was going to
be boring, too. …

There had been a lecture, but it had been about the paint guns and all
the things you should never do with them, and Tompkins had looked at the
fresh young faces of his rival trainees as, to a man, they resolved to
do them all if there was half a chance of getting away with it. If
people told you business was a jungle and then put a gun in your hand,
then it was pretty obvious to Tompkins that they weren’t expecting you
to simply aim for the shirt; what it was all about was the corporate
head hanging over your fireplace.

Anyway, it was rumored that someone over in United Consolidated had done
his promotion prospects a considerable amount of good by the anonymous
application of a high-speed earful of paint to an immediate superior,
causing the latter to complain of little ringing noises in important
meetings and eventually to be replaced on medical grounds.

And there were his fellow trainees—fellow sperms, to switch metaphors,
all struggling forward in the knowledge that there could only ever be
one Chairman of Industrial Holdings (Holdings) PLC, and that the job
would probably go to the biggest prick.

Of course, some girl with a clipboard from Personnel had told them that
the courses they were going on were just to establish leadership
potential, group cooperation, initiative, and so on. The trainees had
tried to avoid one another’s faces.

It had worked quite well so far. The white-water canoeing had taken care
of Johnstone (punctured eardrum) and the mountain climbing in Wales had
done for Whittaker (groin strain).

Tompkins thumbed another paint pellet into the gun and muttered business
mantras to himself. Do Unto Others Before They Do Unto You. Kill or Be
Killed. Either Shit or Get Out of the Kitchen. Survival of the Fittest.
Make My Day.

He crawled a little nearer to the figures by the statue. They didn’t
seem to have noticed him.

When the available cover ran out, he took a deep breath and leapt to his
feet.

“Okay, douchebags, grab some sk—ohnoooeeeeee … ”

Where one of the figures had been there was something _dreadful_. He
blacked out.

Crowley restored himself to his favorite shape.

“I hate having to do that,” he murmured. “I’m always afraid _I’ll_
forget how to change back. And it can ruin a good suit.”

“I think the maggots were a bit over the top, myself,” said Aziraphale,
but without much rancor. Angels had certain moral standards to maintain
and so, unlike Crowley, he preferred to buy his clothes rather than wish
them into being from raw firmament. And the shirt had been quite
expensive.

“I mean, just look at it,” he said. “I’ll never get the stain out.”

“Miracle it away,” said Crowley, scanning the undergrowth for any more
management trainees.

“Yes, but I’ll always know the stain was there. You know. Deep down, I
mean,” said the angel. He picked up the gun and turned it over in his
hands. “I’ve never seen one of these before,” he said.

There was a pinging noise, and the statue beside them lost an ear.

“Let’s not hang around,” said Crowley. “He wasn’t alone.”

“This is a very odd gun, you know. Very strange.”

“I thought your side disapproved of guns,” said Crowley. He took the gun
from the angel’s plump hand and sighted along the stubby barrel.

“Current thinking favors them,” said Aziraphale. “They lend weight to
moral argument. In the right hands, of course.”

“Yeah?” Crowley snaked a hand over the metal. “That’s all right, then.
Come on.”

He dropped the gun onto the recumbent form of Tompkins and marched away
across the damp lawn.

The front door of the Manor was unlocked. The pair of them walked
through unheeded. Some plump young men in army fatigues spattered with
paint were drinking cocoa out of mugs in what had once been the sisters’
refectory, and one or two of them gave them a cheery wave.

Something like a hotel reception desk now occupied one end of the hall.
It had a quietly competent look. Aziraphale gazed at the board on an
aluminum easel beside it.

In little plastic letters let into the black fabric of the board were
the words: _August 20–21: United Holdings [Holdings] PLC Initiative
Combat Course_.

Meanwhile Crowley had picked up a pamphlet from the desk. It showed
glossy pictures of the Manor, with special references to its Jacuzzis
and indoor heated swimming pool, and on the back was the sort of map
that conference centers always have, which makes use of a careful
mis-scaling to suggest that it is handy for every motorway exit in the
nation while carefully leaving out the labyrinth of country lanes that
in fact surrounds it for miles on every side.

“Wrong place?” said Aziraphale.

“No.”

“Wrong time, then.”

“Yes.” Crowley leafed through the booklet, in the hope of any clue.
Perhaps it was too much to hope that the Chattering Order would still be
here. After all, they’d done their bit. He hissed softly. Probably
they’d gone to darkest America or somewhere, to convert the Christians,
but he read on anyway. Sometimes this sort of leaflet had a little
historical bit, because the kind of companies that hired places like
this for a weekend of Interactive Personnel Analysis or A Conference on
the Strategic Marketing Dynamic liked to feel that they were
strategically interacting in the very building—give or take a couple of
complete rebuildings, a civil war, and two major fires—that some
Elizabethan financier had endowed as a plague hospital.

Not that he was actually expecting a sentence like “until eleven years
ago the Manor was used as a convent by an order of Satanic nuns who
weren’t in fact all that good at it, really,” but you never knew.

A plump man wearing desert camouflage and holding a polystyrene cup of
coffee wandered up to them.

“Who’s winning?” he said chummily. “Young Evanson of Forward Planning
caught me a right zinger on the elbow, you know.”

“We’re all going to lose,” said Crowley absently.

There was a burst of firing from the grounds. Not the snap and zing of
pellets, but the full-throated crackle of aerodynamically shaped bits of
lead traveling extremely fast.

There was an answering stutter.

The redundant warriors stared one on another. A further burst took out a
rather ugly Victorian stained glass window beside the door and stitched
a row of holes in the plaster by Crowley’s head.

Aziraphale grabbed his arm.

“What the hell is it?” he said.

Crowley smiled like a snake.

NIGEL TOMPKINS had come to with a mild headache and a vaguely empty
space in his recent memory. He was not to know that the human brain,
when faced with a sight too terrible to contemplate, is remarkably good
at scabbing it over with forced forgetfulness, so he put it down to a
pellet strike on the head.

He was vaguely aware that his gun was somewhat heavier, but in his
mildly bemused state he did not realize why until some time after he’d
pointed it at trainee manager Norman Wethered from Internal Audit and
pulled the trigger.

“I DON’T SEE WHY YOU’re so shocked,” said Crowley. “He _wanted_ a real
gun. Every desire in his head was for a real gun.”

“But you’ve turned him loose on all those unprotected people!” said
Aziraphale.

“Oh, no,” said Crowley. “Not exactly. Fair’s fair.”

THE CONTINGENT from Financial Planning were lying flat on their faces in
what had once been the haha, although they weren’t very amused.

“I always said you couldn’t trust those people from Purchasing,” said
the Deputy Financial Manager. “The bastards.”

A shot pinged off the wall above him.

He crawled hurriedly over to the little group clustered around the
fallen Wethered.

“How does it look?” he said.

The assistant Head of Wages turned a haggard face toward him. “Pretty
bad,” he said. “The bullet went through nearly all of them. Access,
Barclaycard, Diners—the lot.”

“It was only the American Express Gold that stopped it,” said Wethered.

They looked in mute horror at the spectacle of a credit card wallet with
a bullet hole nearly all the way through it.

“Why’d they do it?” said a wages officer.

The head of Internal Audit opened his mouth to say something reasonable,
and didn’t. Everyone had a point where they crack, and his had just been
hit with a spoon. Twenty years in the job. He’d wanted to be a graphic
designer but the careers master hadn’t heard of that. Twenty years of
double-checking Form BF18. Twenty years of cranking the bloody hand
calculator, when even the people in Forward Planning had computers. And
now for reasons unknown, but possibly to do with reorganization and a
desire to do away with all the expense of early retirement, they were
shooting at him with bullets.

The armies of paranoia marched behind his eyes.

He looked down at his own gun. Through the mists of rage and
bewilderment he saw that it was bigger and blacker than it had been when
it was issued to him. It felt heavier, too.

He aimed it at a bush nearby and watched a stream of bullets blow the
bush into oblivion.

Oh. So that was their game. Well, _someone_ had to win.

He looked at his men.

“Okay, guys,” he said, “let’s get the bastards!”

“THE WAY I SEE IT,” said Crowley, “no one _has_ to pull the trigger.”

He gave Aziraphale a bright and brittle grin.

“Come on,” he said. “Let’s have a look around while everyone’s busy.”

BULLETS STREAKED ACROSS THE NIGHT.

Jonathan Parker, Purchasing Section, was wriggling through the bushes
when one of them put an arm around his neck.

Nigel Tompkins spat a cluster of rhododendron leaves out of his mouth.

“Down there it’s company law,” he hissed, through mud-encrusted
features, “but up here it’s me … ”

“THAT WAS A PRETTY LOW TRICK,” said Aziraphale, as they strolled along
the empty corridors.

“What’d I do? What’d I do?” said Crowley, pushing open doors at random.

“There are people out there shooting one another!”

“Well, that’s just it, isn’t it? They’re doing it themselves. It’s what
they _really_ want to do. I just assisted them. Think of it as a
microcosm of the universe. Free will for everyone. Ineffable, right?”

Aziraphale glared.

“Oh, all right,” said Crowley wretchedly. “No one’s actually going to
get killed. They’re all going to have miraculous escapes. It wouldn’t be
any fun otherwise.”

Aziraphale relaxed. “You know, Crowley,” he said, beaming, “I’ve always
said that, deep down inside, you’ ［re really quite a—”

“All right, all right,” Crowley snapped. “Tell the whole blessed world,
why don’t you?”

AFTER A WHILE, loose alliances began to emerge. Most of the financial
departments found they had interests in common, settled their
differences, and ganged up on Forward Planning.

When the first police car arrived, sixteen bullets from a variety of
directions had hit it in the radiator before it had got halfway up the
drive. Two more took out its radio antenna, but they were too late, too
late.

MARY HODGES WAS just putting down the phone when Crowley opened her
office door.

“It must be terrorists,” she snapped. “Or poachers.” She peered at the
pair of them. “You are the police, aren’t you?” she said.

Crowley saw her eyes begin to widen.

Like all demons, he had a good memory for faces, even after eleven
years, the loss of a wimple, and the addition of some rather severe
makeup. He snapped his fingers. She settled back in her chair, her face
becoming a blank and amiable mask.

“There was no need for that,” said Aziraphale.

“Good”—Crowley glanced at his watch—“morning, ma’am,” he said, in a
sing-song voice. “We’re just a couple of supernatural entities and we
were just wondering if you might help us with the whereabouts of the
notorious Son of Satan.” He smiled coldly at the angel. “I’ll wake her
up again, shall I? And you can say it.”

“Well. Since you put it like that … ” said the angel slowly.

“Sometimes the old ways are best,” said Crowley. He turned to the
impassive woman.

“Were you a nun here eleven years ago?” he said.

“Yes,” said Mary.

“There!” said Crowley to Aziraphale. “See? I knew I wasn’t wrong.”

“Luck of the devil,” muttered the angel.

“Your name then was Sister Talkative. Or something.”

“Loquacious,” said Mary Hodges in a hollow voice.

“And do you recall an incident involving the switching of newborn
babies?” said Crowley.

Mary Hodges hesitated. When she did speak, it was as though memories
that had been scabbed over were being disturbed for the first time in
years.

“Yes,” she said.

“Is there any possibility that the switch could have gone wrong in some
way?”

“I do not know.”

Crowley thought for a bit. “You must have had records,” he said. “There
are always records. Everyone has records these days.” He glanced proudly
at Aziraphale. “It was one of my better ideas.”

“Oh, yes,” said Mary Hodges.

“And where are they?” said Aziraphale sweetly.

“There was a fire just after the birth.”

Crowley groaned and threw his hands in the air. “That was Hastur,
probably,” he said. “It’s his style. Can you believe those guys? I bet
he thought he was being really clever.”

“Do you recall any details about the other child?” said Aziraphale.

“Yes.”

“Please tell me.”

“He had lovely little toesie-wosies.”

“Oh.”

“And he was very sweet,” said Mary Hodges wistfully.

There was the sound of a siren outside, abruptly broken off as a bullet
hit it. Aziraphale nudged Crowley.

“Get a move on,” he said. “We’re going to be knee-deep in police at any
moment and I will of course be morally obliged to assist them in their
enquiries.” He thought for a moment. “Perhaps she can remember if there
were any other women giving birth that night, and—”

There was the sound of running feet downstairs.

“Stop them,” said Crowley. “We need more time!”

“Any more miracles and we’ll really start getting noticed by Up There,”
said Aziraphale. “If you really want Gabriel or someone wondering why
forty policemen have gone to sleep—”

“Okay,” said Crowley. “That’s it. That’s it. It was worth a try. Let’s
get out of here.”

“In thirty seconds you will wake up,” said Aziraphale, to the entranced
ex-nun. “And you will have had a lovely dream about whatever you like
best, and—”

“Yes, yes, fine,” sighed Crowley. “Now can we go?”

NO ONE NOTICED THEM leaving. The police were too busy herding in forty
adrenaline-drunk, fighting-mad management trainees. Three police vans
had gouged tracks in the lawn, and Aziraphale made Crowley back up for
the first of the ambulances, but then the Bentley swished into the
night. Behind them the summerhouse and gazebo were already ablaze.

“We’ve really left that poor woman in a dreadful situation,” said the
angel.

“You think?” said Crowley, trying to hit a hedgehog and missing.
“Bookings will double, you mark my words. If she plays her cards right,
sorts out the waivers, ties up all the legal bits. Initiative training
with real guns? They’ll form queues.”

“Why are you always so cynical?”

“I said. Because it’s my _job_.”

They drove in silence for a while. Then Aziraphale said, “You’d think
he’d show up, wouldn’t you? You’d think we could detect him in some
way.”

“He won’t show up. Not to us. Protective camouflage. He won’t even know
it, but his powers will keep him hidden from prying occult forces.”

“Occult forces?”

“You and me,” explained Crowley.

_“I’m_ not occult,” said Aziraphale. “Angels aren’t occult. We’re
ethereal.”

“Whatever,” snapped Crowley, too worried to argue.

“Is there some other way of locating him?”

Crowley shrugged. “Search me,” he said. “How much experience do you
think I’ve got in these matters? Armageddon only happens once, you know.
They don’t let you go around again until you get _it_ right.”

The angel stared out at the rushing hedgerows.

“It all seems so peaceful,” he said. “How do you think it will happen?”

“Well, thermonuclear extinction has always been very popular. Although I
must say the big boys are being quite polite to each other at the
moment.”

“Asteroid strike?” said Aziraphale. “Quite the fashion these days, I
understand. Strike into the Indian Ocean, great big cloud of dust and
vapor, goodbye all higher life forms.”

“Wow,” said Crowley, taking care to exceed the speed limit. Every little
bit helped.

“Doesn’t bear thinking about it, does it,” said Aziraphale gloomily.

“All the higher life forms scythed away, just like that.”

“Terrible.”

“Nothing but dust and fundamentalists.”

“That was nasty.”

“Sorry. Couldn’t resist it.”

They stared at the road.

“Maybe some terrorist—?” Aziraphale began.

“Not one of ours,” said Crowley.

“Or ours,” said Aziraphale. “Although ours are freedom fighters, of
course.”

“I’ll tell you what,” said Crowley, scorching rubber on the Tadfield
bypass. “Cards on the table time. I’ll tell you ours if you tell me
yours.”

“All right. You first.”

“Oh, no. You first.”

“But you’re a demon.”

“Yes, but a demon of my word, I should hope.”

Aziraphale named five political leaders. Crowley named six. Three names
appeared on both lists.

“See?” said Crowley. “It’s just like I’ve always said. They’re cunning
buggers, humans. You can’t trust them an inch.”

“But I don’t think any of ours have any big plans afoot,” said
Aziraphale. “Just minor acts of ter— political protest,” he corrected.

“Ah,” said Crowley bitterly. “You mean none of this cheap, mass-produced
murder? Just personal service, every bullet individually fired by
skilled craftsmen?”

Aziraphale didn’t rise to it. “What are we going to do now?”

“Try and get some sleep.”

“You don’t need sleep. I don’t need sleep. Evil never sleeps, and Virtue
is ever-vigilant.”

“Evil in general, maybe. This specific part of it has got into the habit
of getting its head down occasionally.” He stared into the headlights.
The time would come soon enough when sleep would be right out of the
question. When those Below found out that he, personally, had lost the
Antichrist, they’d probably dig out all those reports he’d done on the
Spanish Inquisition and try them out on him, one at a time and then all
together.

He rummaged in the glove compartment, fumbled a tape at random, and
slotted it into the player. A little music would …

_. . . Bee-elzebub has a devil put aside for me, for me …_

“For me,” murmured Crowley. His expression went blank for a moment. Then
he gave a strangled scream and wrenched at the on-off knob.

“Of course, we might be able to get a human to find him,” said
Aziraphale thoughtfully.

“What?” said Crowley, distractedly.

“Humans are good at finding other humans. They’ve been doing it for
thousands of years. And the child is human. As well as … you know. He
would be hidden from us, but other humans might be able to … oh, sense
him, perhaps. Or spot things we wouldn’t think of.”

“It wouldn’t work. He’s the Antichrist! He’s got this … sort of
automatic defense, hasn’t he? Even if he _doesn’t_ know it. It won’t
even let people suspect him. Not yet. Not till it’s ready. Suspicion
will slide off him like, like … whatever it is water slides off of,” he
finished lamely.

“Got any better ideas? Got one _single_ better idea?” said Aziraphale.

“No.”

“Right, then. It could work. Don’t tell me you haven’t got any front
organizations you could use. I know I have. We could see if they can
pick up the trail.”

“What could they do that we couldn’t do?”

“Well, for a start, they wouldn’t get people to shoot one another, they
wouldn’t hypnotize respectable women, they—”

“Okay. Okay. But it hasn’t got a snowball’s chance in Hell. Believe me,
I know. But I can’t think of anything better.” Crowley turned onto the
motorway and headed for London.

“I have a—a certain network of agents,” said Aziraphale, after a while.
“Spread across the country. A disciplined force. I could set them
searching.”

“I, er, have something similar,” Crowley admitted. “You know how it is,
you never know when they might come in handy … ”

“We’d better alert them. Do you think they ought to work together?”

Crowley shook his head.

“I don’t think that would be a good idea,” he said. “They’re not very
sophisticated, politically speaking.”

“Then we’ll each contact our own people and see what they can manage.”

“Got to be worth a try, I suppose,” said Crowley. “It’s not as if I
haven’t got lots of other work to do, God knows.”

His forehead creased for a moment, and then he slapped the steering
wheel triumphantly.

“Ducks!” he shouted.

“What?”

“That’s what water slides off!”

Aziraphale took a deep breath.

“Just drive the car, please,” he said wearily.

They drove back through the dawn, while the cassette player played J. S.
Bach’s Mass in B Minor, vocals by F. Mercury.

Crowley liked the city in the early morning. Its population consisted
almost entirely of people who had proper jobs to do and real reasons for
being there, as opposed to the unnecessary millions who trailed in after
8 a.m., and the streets were more or less quiet. There were double
yellow no-parking lines in the narrow road outside Aziraphale’s
bookshop, but they obediently rolled back on themselves when the Bentley
pulled in to the curb.

“Well, okay,” he said, as Aziraphale got his coat from the back seat.
“We’ll keep in touch. Okay?”

“What’s this?” said Aziraphale, holding up a brown oblong.

Crowley squinted at it. “A book?” he said. “Not mine.”

Aziraphale turned a few of the yellowed pages. Tiny bibliophilic bells
rang in the back of his mind.

“It must have belonged to that young lady,” he said slowly. “We ought to
have got her address.”

“Look, I’m in enough trouble as it is, I don’t want it to get about that
I go around returning people’s property to them,” said Crowley.

Aziraphale reached the title page. It was probably a good job Crowley
couldn’t see his expression.

“I suppose you could always send it to the post office there,” said
Crowley, “if you really feel you must. Address it to the mad woman with
the bicycle. Never trust a woman who gives funny names to means of
transport—”

“Yes, yes, certainly,” said the angel. He fumbled for his keys, dropped
them on the pavement, picked them up, dropped them again, and hurried to
the shop door.

“We’ll be in touch then, shall we?” Crowley called after him.

Aziraphale paused in the act of turning the key.

“What?” he said. “Oh. Oh. Yes. Fine. Jolly good.” And he slammed the
door.

“Right,” mumbled Crowley, suddenly feeling very alone.

TORCHLIGHT FLICKED IN THE LANES.

The trouble with trying to find a brown-covered book among brown leaves
and brown water at the bottom of a ditch of brown earth in the brown,
well, grayish light of dawn, was that you couldn’t.

It wasn’t there.

Anathema tried every method of search she could think of. There was the
methodical quartering of the ground. There was the slapdash poking at
the bracken by the roadside. There was the nonchalant sidling up to it
and looking out of the side of her eye. She even tried the one which
every romantic nerve in her body insisted should work, which consisted
of theatrically giving up, sitting down, and letting her glance fall
naturally on a patch of earth which, if she had been in any decent
narrative, should have contained the book.

It didn’t.

Which meant, as she had feared all along, that it was probably in the
back of a car belonging to two consenting cycle repairmen.

She could feel generations of Agnes Nutter’s descendants laughing at
her.

Even if those two were honest enough to want to return it, they’d hardly
go to all the trouble of finding a cottage they’d barely seen in the
dark.

The only hope was that they wouldn’t know what it was they’d got.

AZIRAPHALE, LIKE MANY Soho merchants who specialized in hard-to-find
books for the discerning connoisseur, had a back room, but what was in
there was far more esoteric than anything normally found inside a
shrink-wrapped bag for the Customer Who Knows What He Wants.

He was particularly proud of his books of prophecy.

First editions, usually.

And every one was signed.

He’d got Robert Nixon,¹⁶ and Martha the Gypsy, and Ignatius Sybilla, and
Old Ottwell Binns. Nostradamus had signed, “To myne olde friend
Azerafel, with Beste wishes”; Mother Shipton had spilled drink on his
copy; and in a climate-controlled cabinet in one corner was the original
scroll in the shaky handwriting of St. John the Divine of Patmos, whose
“Revelation” had been the all-time best seller. Aziraphale had found him
a nice chap, if a bit too fond of odd mushrooms.

What the collection did not have was a copy of _The Nice and Accurate
Prophecies of Agnes Nutter_, and Aziraphale walked into the room holding
it as a keen philatelist might hold a Mauritius Blue that had just
turned up on a postcard from his aunt.

He’d never even seen a copy before, but he’d heard about it. Everyone in
the trade, which considering it was a highly specialized trade meant
about a dozen people, had heard of it. Its existence was a sort of
vacuum around which all sorts of strange stories had been orbiting for
hundreds of years. Aziraphale realized he wasn’t sure if you could orbit
a vacuum, and didn’t care; _The Nice and Accurate Prophecies_ made the
Hitler Diaries look like, well, a bunch of forgeries.

His hands hardly shook at all as he laid it down on a bench, pulled on a
pair of surgical rubber gloves, and opened it reverentially. Aziraphale
was an angel, but he also worshiped books.

The title page said:

THE NIFE AND ACCURATE PROPHEFIES
OF AGNES NUTTER

In slightly smaller type:

Being a Certaine and Prefice Hiftory from the Prefent Day
Unto the Endinge of this World.

In slightly larger type:

Containing therein Many Diuerse Wonders and
precepts for the Wife

In a different type:

More complete than ever yet before publifhed

In smaller type but in capitals:

CONCERNING THE STRANGE TIMES AHEADE

In slightly desperate italics:

_And events of a Wonderful Nature_

In larger type once more:

_‘Reminifent of Noftradamus at hif beft’—Ursula Shipton_

The prophecies were numbered, and there were more than four thousand of
them.

“Steady, steady,” Aziraphale muttered to himself. He went into the
little kitchenette and made himself some cocoa and took some deep
breaths.

Then he came back and read a prophecy at random.

Forty minutes later, the cocoa was still untouched.

THE RED-HAIRED WOMAN in the corner of the hotel bar was the most
successful war correspondent in the world. She now had a passport in the
name of Carmine Zuigiber; and she went where the wars were.

Well. More or less.

Actually she went where the wars weren’t. She’d already been where the
wars were.

She was not well known, except where it counted. Get half a dozen war
correspondents together in an airport bar, and the conversation will,
like a compass orienting to North, swing around to Murchison of _The New
York Times_, to Van Horne of _Newsweek_, to Anforth of I.T.N. News. The
war correspondents’ War Correspondents.

But when Murchison, and Van Horne, and Anforth ran into each other in a
burnt-out tin shack in Beirut, or Afghanistan, or the Sudan, after
they’d admired each other’s scars and had downed a few, they would
exchange awed anecdotes of “Red” Zuigiber, from the _National World
Weekly_.

“That dumb rag,” Murchison would say, “it doesn’t goddamn know what it’s
goddamn got.”

Actually the _National World Weekly_ did know just what it had got: it
had a War Correspondent. It just didn’t know why, or what to do with one
now it had her.

A typical _National World Weekly_ would tell the world how Jesus’ face
was seen on a Big Mac bun bought by someone from Des Moines, with an
artist’s impression of the bun; how Elvis Presley was recently sighted
working in a Burger Lord in Des Moines; how listening to Elvis records
cured a Des Moines housewife’s cancer; how the spate of werewolves
infesting the Midwest are the offspring of noble pioneer women raped by
Bigfoot; and that Elvis was taken by Space Aliens in 1976 because he was
too good for this world.¹⁷

That was the _National World Weekly_. They sold four million copies a
week, and they needed a War Correspondent like they needed an exclusive
interview with the General Secretary of the United Nations.¹⁸

So they paid Red Zuigiber a great deal of money to go and find wars, and
ignored the bulging, badly typed envelopes she sent them occasionally
from around the globe to justify her—generally fairly reasonable—expense
claims.

They felt justified in this because, as they saw it, she really wasn’t a
very good war correspondent although she was undoubtedly the most
attractive, which counted for a lot on the _National World Weekly_. Her
war reports were always about a bunch of guys shooting at each other,
with no real understanding of the wider political ramifications, and,
more importantly, no Human Interest.

Occasionally they would hand one of her stories over to a rewrite man to
fix up. (“Jesus appeared to nine-year-old Manuel Gonzalez during a
pitched battle on the Rio Concorsa, and told him to go home because his
mother worried about him. ‘I knew it was Jesus,’ said the brave little
child, ‘because he looked like he did when his picture miraculously
appeared on my sandwich box.”’)

Mostly the _National World Weekly_ left her alone, and carefully filed
her stories in the rubbish bin.

Murchison, and Van Horne, and Anforth didn’t care about this. All they
knew was that whenever a war broke out, Ms. Zuigiber was there first.
Practically _before_.

“How does she do it?” they would ask each other incredulously. “How the
hell does she do it?” And their eyes would meet, and silently say: if
she was a car she’d be made by Ferrari, she’s the kind of woman you’d
expect to see as the beautiful consort to the corrupt generalissimo of a
collapsing Third World country, and she hangs around with guys like us.
We’re the lucky guys, right?

Ms. Zuigiber just smiled and bought another round of drinks for
everybody, on the _National World Weekly_. And watched the fights break
out around her. And smiled.

She had been right. Journalism suited her.

Even so, everyone needs a holiday, and Red Zuigiber was on her first in
eleven years.

She was on a small Mediterranean island which made its money from the
tourist trade, and that in itself was odd. Red looked to be the kind of
woman who, if she took a holiday on any island smaller than Australia,
would be doing so because she was friends with the man who owned it. And
had you told any islander a month before that war was coming, he would
have laughed at you and tried to sell you a raffiawork wine holder or a
picture of the bay done in seashells; that was then.

This was now.

Now a deep religio-political divide, concerning which of four small
mainland countries they weren’t actually a part of, had split the
country into three factions, destroyed the statue of Santa Maria in the
town square, and done for the tourist trade.

Red Zuigiber sat in the bar of the Hotel de Palomar del Sol, drinking
what passed for a cocktail. In one corner a tired pianist played, and a
waiter in a toupee crooned into a microphone:

“AAAAAAAAAAAonce-pon-a-time-dere-was

LITTLE WHITE BOOOL

AAAAAAAAAAAvery-sad-because-e-was

LITTLE WHITE BOOL … ”

A man threw himself through the window, a knife between his teeth, a
Kalashnikov automatic rifle in one hand, a grenade in the other.

“I glaim gis oteg id der gaing og der—” he paused. He took the knife out
of his mouth and began again. “I claim this hotel in the name of the
pro-Turkish Liberation Faction!”

The last two holidaymakers remaining on the island¹⁹ climbed underneath
their table. Red unconcernedly withdrew the maraschino cherry from her
drink, put it to her scarlet lips, and sucked it slowly off its stick in
a way that made several men in the room break into a cold sweat.

The pianist stood up, reached into his piano, and pulled out a vintage
sub-machine gun. “This hotel has already been claimed by the pro-Greek
Territorial Brigade!” he screamed. “Make one false move, and I shoot out
your living daylight!”

There was a motion at the door. A huge, black-bearded individual with a
golden smile and a genuine antique Gatling gun stood there, with a
cohort of equally huge although less impressively armed men behind him.

“This strategically important hotel, for years a symbol of the fascist
imperialist Turko-Greek running dog tourist trade, is now the property
of the Italo-Maltese Freedom Fighters!” he boomed affably. “Now we kill
everybody!”

“Rubbish!” said the pianist. “Is not strategically important. Just has
extremely well-stocked wine cellar!”

“He’s right, Pedro,” said the man with the Kalashnikov, “That’s why my
lot wanted it. Il General Ernesto de Montoya said to me, he said,
Fernando, the war’ll be over by Saturday, and the lads’ll be wanting a
good time. Pop down to the Hotel de Palomar del Sol and claim it as
booty, will you?”

The bearded man turned red. “Is bloddy important strategically, Fernando
Chianti! I drew big map of the island and is right in the middle, which
makes it pretty bloddy strategically important, I can tell you.”

“Ha!” said Fernando. “You might as well say that just because Little
Diego’s house has a view of the decadent capitalist topless private
beach, that it’s strategically important!”

The pianist blushed a deep red. “Our lot got that this morning,” he
admitted.

There was silence.

In the silence was a faint, silken rasping. Red had uncrossed her legs.

The pianist’s Adam’s apple bobbed up and down. “Well, it’s pretty
strategically important,” he managed, trying to ignore the woman on the
bar stool. “I mean, if someone landed a submarine on it, you’d want to
be somewhere you could see it all.”

Silence.

“Well, it’s a lot more strategically important than this hotel anyway,”
he finished.

Pedro coughed, ominously. “The next person who says _anything_. Anything
_at all_. Is dead.” He grinned. Hefted his gun. “Right. Now—everyone
against far wall.”

Nobody moved. They weren’t listening to him any more. They were
listening to a low, indistinct murmuring from the hallway behind him,
quiet and monotonous.

There was some shuffling among the cohort in the doorway. They seemed to
be doing their best to stand firm, but they were being inexorably edged
out of the way by the muttering, which had begun to resolve itself into
audible phrases. “Don’t mind me, gents, what a night, eh? Three times
round the island, nearly didn’t find the place, someone doesn’t believe
in signposts, eh? Still, found it in the end, had to stop and ask four
times, finally asked at the post office, they always know at the post
office, had to draw me a map though, got it here somewhere … ”

Sliding serenely past the men with guns, like a pike through a trout
pond, came a small, bespectacled man in a blue uniform, carrying a long,
thin, brown paper-wrapped parcel, tied with string. His sole concession
to the climate were his open-toed brown plastic sandals, although the
green woolen socks he wore underneath them showed his deep and natural
distrust of foreign weather.

He had a peaked cap on, with _International Express_ written on it in
large white letters.

He was unarmed, but no one touched him. No one even pointed a gun at
him. They just stared.

The little man looked around the room, scanning the faces, and then
looking back down at his clipboard; then he walked straight over to Red,
still sitting on her bar stool. “Package for you, miss,” he said.

Red took it, and began to untie the string.

The International Express man coughed discreetly and presented the
journalist with a well-thumbed receipt pad and a yellow plastic
ballpoint pen attached to the clipboard by a piece of string. “You have
to sign for it, miss. Just there. Print your full name over here,
signature down there.”

“Of course.” Red signed the receipt pad, illegibly, then printed her
name. The name she wrote was not Carmine Zuigiber. It was a much shorter
name.

The man thanked her kindly, and made his way out, muttering lovely place
you’ve got here, gents, always meant to come out here on holiday, sorry
to trouble you, excuse me, sir … And he passed out of their lives as
serenely as he had come.

Red finished opening the parcel. People began to edge around to get a
better look. Inside the package was a large sword.

She examined it. It was a very straightforward sword, long and sharp; it
looked both old and unused; and it had nothing ornamental or impressive
about it. This was no magical sword, no mystic weapon of power and
might. It was very obviously a sword created to slice, chop, cut,
preferably kill, but, failing that, irreparably maim, a very large
number of people indeed. It had an indefinable aura of hatred and
menace.

Red clasped the hilt in her exquisitely manicured _right_ hand, and held
it up to eye level. The blade glinted.

“Awww_right_!” she said, stepping down from the stool. _“Fi_nally.”

She finished the drink, hefted the sword over one shoulder, and looked
around at the puzzled factions, who now encircled her completely. “Sorry
to run out on you, chaps,” she said. “Would love to stay and get to know
you better.”

The men in the room suddenly realized that they didn’t want to know her
better. She was beautiful, but she was beautiful in the way a forest
fire was beautiful: something to be admired from a distance, not up
close.

And she held her sword, and she smiled like a knife.

There were a number of guns in that room, and slowly, tremblingly, they
were focused on her chest, and her back, and head.

They encircled her completely.

“Don’t move!” croaked Pedro.

Everybody else nodded.

Red shrugged. She began to walk forward.

Every finger on every trigger tightened, almost of its own accord. Lead
and the smell of cordite filled the air. Red’s cocktail glass smashed in
her hand. The room’s remaining mirrors exploded in lethal shards. Part
of the ceiling fell down.

And then it was over.

Carmine Zuigiber turned and stared at the bodies surrounding her as if
she hadn’t the faintest idea of how they came to be there.

She licked a spatter of blood—someone else’s—from the back of her hand
with a scarlet, cat-like tongue. Then she smiled.

And she walked out of the bar, her heels clicking on the tiles like the
tapping of distant hammers.

The two holidaymakers climbed out from under the table and surveyed the
carnage.

“This wouldn’t of happened if we’d of gone to Torremolinos like we
usually do,” said one of them, plaintively.

“Foreigners,” sighed the other. “They’re just not like us, Patricia.”

“That settles it, then. Next year we go to Brighton,” said Mrs.
Threlfall, completely missing the significance of what had just
happened.

It meant there wouldn’t be any next year.

It rather lowered the odds on there being any next week to
speak of.


Thursday

THERE WAS A NEWCOMER IN THE VILLAGE.

New people were always a source of interest and speculation among the
Them,²⁰ but this time Pepper had impressive news.

“She’s moved into Jasmine Cottage and she’s a witch,” she said. “I know,
because Mrs. Henderson does the cleaning and she told my mother she gets
a witches’ newspaper. She gets loads of ordinary newspapers, too, but
she gets this special witches’ one.”

“My father says there’s no such thing as witches,” said Wensleydale, who
had fair, wavy hair, and peered seriously out at life through thick
black-rimmed spectacles. It was widely believed that he had once been
christened Jeremy, but no one ever used the name, not even his parents,
who called him Youngster. They did this in the subconscious hope that he
might take the hint; Wensleydale gave the impression of having been born
with a mental age of forty-seven.

“Don’t see why not,” said Brian, who had a wide, cheerful face, under an
apparently permanent layer of grime. “I don’t see why witches shouldn’t
have their own newspaper. With stories about all the latest spells and
that. My father gets _Anglers’ Mail_, and I bet there’s more witches
than anglers.”

“It’s called _Psychic News_,” volunteered Pepper.

“That’s not witches,” said Wensleydale. “_My_ aunt has that. That’s just
spoon-bending and fortune-telling and people thinking they were Queen
Elizabeth the First in another life. There’s no witches any more,
actually. People invented medicines and that and told ’em they didn’t
need ’em any more and started burning ’em.”

“It could have pictures of frogs and things,” said Brian, who was
reluctant to let a good idea go to waste. “An’—an’ road tests of
broomsticks. And a cats’ column.”

“Anyway, your aunt could be a witch,” said Pepper. “In secret. She could
be your aunt all day and go witching at night.”

“Not my aunt,” said Wensleydale darkly.

“An’ recipes,” said Brian. “New uses for leftover toad.”

“Oh, shut up,” said Pepper.

Brian snorted. If it had been Wensley who had said that, there’d have
been a half-hearted scuffle, as between friends. But the other Them had
long ago learned that Pepper did not consider herself bound by the
informal conventions of brotherly scuffles. She could kick and bite with
astonishing physiological accuracy for a girl of eleven. Besides, at
eleven years old the Them were beginning to be bothered by the dim
conception that laying hands on good ole Pep moved things into
blood-thumping categories they weren’t entirely at home with yet,
besides earning you a snake-fast blow that would have floored the Karate
Kid.

But she was good to have in your gang. They remembered with pride the
time when Greasy Johnson and _his_ gang had taunted them for playing
with a girl. Pepper had erupted with a fury that had caused Greasy’s
mother to come round that evening and complain.²¹

Pepper looked upon him, a giant male, as a natural enemy.

She herself had short red hair and a face which was not so much freckled
as one big freckle with occasional areas of skin.

Pepper’s given first names were Pippin Galadriel Moonchild. She had been
given them in a naming ceremony in a muddy valley field that contained
three sick sheep and a number of leaky polythene teepees. Her mother had
chosen the Welsh valley of Pant-y-Gyrdl as the ideal site to Return to
Nature. (Six months later, sick of the rain, the mosquitoes, the men,
the tent-trampling sheep who ate first the whole commune’s marijuana
crop and then its antique minibus, and by now beginning to glimpse why
almost the entire drive of human history has been an attempt to get as
far away from Nature as possible, Pepper’s mother returned to Pepper’s
surprised grandparents in Tadfield, bought a bra, and enrolled in a
sociology course with a deep sigh of relief.)

There are only two ways a child can go with a name like Pippin Galadriel
Moonchild, and Pepper had chosen the other one: the three male Them had
learned this on their first day of school, in the playground, at the age
of four.

They had asked her her name, and, all innocent, she had told them.

Subsequently a bucket of water had been needed to separate Pippin
Galadriel Moonchild’s teeth from Adam’s shoe. Wensleydale’s first pair
of spectacles had been broken, and Brian’s sweater needed five stitches.

The Them were together from then on, and Pepper was Pepper forever,
except to her mother, and (when they were feeling especially courageous,
and the Them were almost out of earshot) Greasy Johnson and the
Johnsonites, the village’s only other gang.

Adam drummed his heels on the edge of the milk crate that was doing the
office of a seat, listening to this bickering with the relaxed air of a
king listening to the idle chatter of his courtiers.

He chewed lazily on a straw. It was a Thursday morning. The holidays
stretched ahead, endless and unsullied. They needed filling up.

He let the conversation float around him like the buzzing of
grasshoppers or, more precisely, like a prospector watching the churning
gravel for a glint of useful gold.

“In our Sunday paper it said there was thousands of witches in the
country,” said Brian. “Worshiping Nature and eating health food an’
that. So I don’t see why we shouldn’t have one round here. They were
floodin’ the country with a Wave of Mindless Evil, it said.”

“What, by worshipin’ Nature and eatin’ health food?” said Wensleydale.

“That’s what it said.”

The Them gave this due consideration. They had once—at Adam’s
instigation—tried a health food diet for a whole afternoon. Their
verdict was that you could live very well on healthy food provided you
had a big cooked lunch beforehand.

Brian leaned forward conspiratorially.

“_And_ it said they dance round with no clothes on,” he added. “They go
up on hills and Stonehenge and stuff, and dance with no clothes on.”

This time the consideration was more thoughtful. The Them had reached
that position where, as it were, the roller coaster of Life had almost
completed the long haul to the top of the first big humpback of puberty
so that they could just look down into the precipitous ride ahead, full
of mystery, terror, and exciting curves.

“Huh,” said Pepper.

“Not my aunt,” said Wensleydale, breaking the spell. “Definitely not my
aunt. She just keeps trying to talk to my uncle.”

“Your uncle’s dead,” said Pepper.

“She says he still moves a glass about,” said Wensleydale defensively.
“My _fat_her says it was moving glasses about the whole time that made
him dead in the first place. Don’t know why she wants to talk to him,”
he added, “they never talked much when he was alive.”

“That’s necromancy, that is,” said Brian. “It’s in the Bible. She ought
to stop it. God’s dead against necromancy. And witches. You can go to
Hell for it.”

There was a lazy shifting of position on the milk crate throne. Adam was
going to speak.

The Them fell silent. Adam was always worth listening to. Deep in their
hearts, the Them knew that they weren’t a gang of four. They were a gang
of three, which belonged to Adam. But if you wanted excitement, and
interest, and crowded days, then every Them would prize a lowly position
in Adam’s gang above leadership of any other gang anywhere.

“Don’t see why everyone’s so down on witches,” Adam said.

The Them glanced at one another. This sounded promising.

“Well, they blight crops,” said Pepper. “And sink ships. And tell you if
you’re going to be king and stuff. And brew up stuff with herbs.”

“My mother uses herbs,” said Adam. “So does yours.”

“Oh, _those_ are all right,” said Brian, determined not to lose his
position as occult expert. “I expect God said it was all right to use
mint and sage and so on. Stands to reason there’s nothing wrong with
mint and sage.”

“And they can make you be ill just by looking at you,” said Pepper.
“It’s called the Evil Eye. They give you a look, and then you get ill
and no one knows why. And they make a model of you and stick it full of
pins and you get ill where all the pins are,” she added cheerfully.

“That sort of thing doesn’t happen any more,” reiterated Wensleydale,
the rational thinking person. “ ’Cos we invented Science and all the
vicars set fire to the witches for their own good. It was called the
Spanish Inquisition.”

“Then I reckon we should find out if her at Jasmine Cottage is a witch
and if she is we should tell Mr. Pickersgill,” said Brian. Mr.
Pickersgill was the vicar. Currently he was in dispute with the Them
over subjects ranging from climbing the yew tree in the churchyard to
ringing the bells and running away.

“I don’t reckon it’s allowed, going round setting fire to people,” said
Adam. “Otherwise people’d be doin’ it all the time.”

“It’s all right if you’re religious,” said Brian reassuringly. “And it
stops the witches from goin’ to Hell, so I expect they’d be quite
grateful if they understood it properly.”

“Can’t see Picky setting fire to anyone,” said Pepper.

“Oh, I dunno,” said Brian, meaningfully.

“Not actually setting them on actual fire,” sniffed Pepper. “He’s more
likely to tell their parents, and leave it up to them if anyone’s goin’
to be set on fire or not.”

The Them shook their heads in disgust at the current low standards of
ecclesiastical responsibility. Then the other three looked expectantly
at Adam.

They always looked expectantly at Adam. He was the one that had the
ideas.

“P’raps we ought to do it ourselves,” he said. “Someone ought to be
doing _something_ if there’s all these witches about. It’s—it’s like
that Neighborhood Watch scheme.”

“Neighborhood Witch,” said Pepper.

“No,” said Adam coldly.

“But we can’t be the Spanish Inquisition,” said Wensleydale. “We’re not
Spanish.”

“I bet you don’t have to be Spanish to be the Spanish Inquisition,” said
Adam. “I bet it’s like Scottish eggs or American hamburgers. It just has
to look Spanish. We’ve just got to make it look Spanish. Then everyone
would know it’s the Spanish Inquisition.”

There was silence.

It was broken by the crackling of one of the empty crisp packets that
accumulated wherever Brian was sitting. They looked at him.

“I’ve got a bullfight poster with my name on it,” said Brian, slowly.

LUNCHTIME CAME AND WENT. The new Spanish Inquisition reconvened.

The Head Inquisitor inspected it critically.

“What’re those?” he demanded.

“You click them together when you dance,” said Wensleydale, a shade
defensively. “My aunt brought them back from Spain years ago. They’re
called maracas, I think. They’ve got a picture of a Spanish dancer on
them, look.”

“What’s she dancing with a bull for?” said Adam.

“That’s to show it’s Spanish,” said Wensleydale. Adam let it pass.

The bullfight poster was everything Brian had promised.

Pepper had something rather like a gravy boat made out of raffia.

“It’s for putting wine in,” she said defiantly. “My mother brought it
back from Spain.”

“It hasn’t got a bull on it,” said Adam severely.

“It doesn’t have to,” Pepper countered, moving just ever so slightly
into a fighting stance.

Adam hesitated. His sister Sarah and her boyfriend had also been to
Spain. Sarah had returned with a very large purple toy donkey which,
while definitely Spanish, did not come up to what Adam instinctively
felt should be the tone of the Spanish Inquisition. The boyfriend, on
the other hand, had brought back a very ornate sword which, despite its
tendency to bend when picked up and go blunt when asked to cut paper,
proclaimed itself to be made of Toledo steel. Adam had spent an
instructive half-hour with the encyclopedia and felt that this was just
what the Inquisition needed. Subtle hints had not worked, however.

In the end Adam had taken a bunch of onions from the kitchen. They might
well have been Spanish. But even Adam had to concede that, as decor for
the Inquisitorial premises, they lacked that certain something. He was
in no position to argue too vehemently about raffia wine holders.

“Very good,” he said.

“You certain they’re _Spanish_ onions?” said Pepper, relaxing.

“ ’Course,” said Adam. “Spanish onions. Everyone knows that.”

“They could be French,” said Pepper doggedly. “France is famous for
onions.”

“It doesn’t matter,” said Adam, who was getting fed up with onions.
“France is _nearly_ Spanish, an’ I don’t expect witches know the
difference, what with spendin’ all their time flyin’ around at night. It
all looks like the Continong to witches. Anyway, if you don’t like it
you can jolly well go and start your own Inquisition, anyway.”

For once, Pepper didn’t push it. She’d been promised the post of Head
Torturer. No one doubted who was going to be Chief Inquisitor.
Wensleydale and Brian were less enthralled with their roles of
Inquisitorial Guards.

“Well, you don’t know any Spanish,” said Adam, whose lunch hour had
included ten minutes with a phrase book Sarah had bought in a haze of
romanticism in Alicanté.

“That doesn’t matter, because _actually_ you have to talk in Latin,”
said Wensleydale, who had also been doing some slightly more accurate
lunchtime reading.

“_And_ Spanish,” said Adam firmly. “That’s why it’s the Spanish
Inquisition.”

“I don’t see why it shouldn’t be a British Inquisition,” said Brian.
“Don’t see why we should of fought the Armada and everything, just to
have their smelly Inquisition.”

This had been slightly bothering Adam’s patriotic sensibilities as well.

“I reckon,” he said, “that we should sort of start Spanish, and then
make it the British Inquisition when we’ve got the hang of it. And now,”
he added, “the Inquisitorial Guard will go and fetch the first witch,
_por favor_.”

The new inhabitant of Jasmine Cottage would have to wait, they’d
decided. What they needed to do was start small and work their way up.

“ART THOU A WITCH, _oh lay_?” said the Chief Inquisitor.

“Yes,” said Pepper’s little sister, who was six and built like a small
golden-haired football.

“You mustn’t say yes, you’ve got to say no,” hissed the Head Torturer,
nudging the suspect.

“And then what?” demanded the suspect.

“And then we torture you to make you say yes,” said the Head Torturer.
“I _told_ you. It’s good fun, the torturin’. It doesn’t hurt. _Hastar
lar visa_,” she added quickly.

The little suspect gave the decor of the Inquisitorial headquarters a
disparaging look. There was a decided odor of onions.

“Huh,” she said. “I _want_ to be a witch, wiv a warty nose an’ a green
skin an’ a lovely cat an’ I’d call it Blackie, an’ lots of potions an’—”

The Head Torturer nodded to the Chief Inquisitor.

“Look,” said Pepper, desperately, “no one’s saying you _can’t_ be a
witch, you jus’ have to _say_ you’re _not_ a witch. No point in us
taking all this trouble,” she added severely, “if you’re going to go
round saying _yes_ the minute we ask you.”

The suspect considered this.

“But I _wants_ to be a witch,” she wailed. The male Them exchanged
exhausted glances. This was out of their league.

“If you just say _no_,” said Pepper, “you can _have_ my Sindy stable
set. I’ve never ever used it,” she added, glaring at the other Them and
daring them to make a comment.

“You have used it,” snapped her sister, “I’ve _seen_ it and it’s all
worn out and the bit where you put the hay is broke and—”

Adam gave a magisterial cough.

“Art thou a witch, _viva espana_?” he repeated.

The sister took a look at Pepper’s face, and decided not to chance it.

“No,” she decided.

IT WAS A VERY GOOD TORTURE, everyone agreed. The trouble was getting the
putative witch off it.

It was a hot afternoon and the Inquisitorial guards felt that they were
being put upon.

“Don’t see why me and Brother Brian should have to do all the work,”
said Brother Wensleydale, wiping the sweat off his brow. “I reckon it’s
about time she got off and we had a go. _Benedictine ina decanter_.”

“Why have we stopped?” demanded the suspect, water pouring out of her
shoes.

It had occurred to the Chief Inquisitor during his researches that the
British Inquisition was probably not yet ready for the reintroduction of
the Iron Maiden and the choke-pear. But an illustration of a medieval
ducking stool suggested that it was tailor-made for the purpose. All you
needed was a pond and some planks and a rope. It was the sort of
combination that always attracted the Them, who never had much
difficulty in finding all three.

The suspect was now green to the waist.

“It’s just like a seesaw,” she said. “Whee!”

“I’m going to go home unless I can have a go,” muttered Brother Brian.
“Don’t see why evil witches should have all the fun.”

“It’s not allowed for inquisitors to be tortured too,” said the Chief
Inquisitor sternly, but without much real feeling. It was a hot
afternoon, the Inquisitorial robes of old sacking were scratchy and
smelled of stale barley, and the pond looked astonishingly inviting.

“All right, all right,” he said, and turned to the suspect. “You’re a
witch, all right, don’t do it again, and now you get off and let someone
else have a turn. _Oh lay_,” he added.

“What happens now?” said Pepper’s sister.

Adam hesitated. Setting fire to her would probably cause no end of
trouble, he reasoned. Besides, she was too soggy to burn.

He was also distantly aware that at some future point there would be
questions asked about muddy shoes and duckweed-encrusted pink dresses.
But that was the future, and it lay at the other end of a long warm
afternoon that contained planks and ropes and ponds. The future could
wait.

THE FUTURE CAME AND WENT in the mildly discouraging way that futures do,
although Mr. Young had other things on his mind apart from muddy dresses
and merely banned Adam from watching television, which meant he had to
watch it on the old black and white set in his bedroom.

“I don’t see why we should have a hosepipe ban,” Adam heard Mr. Young
telling Mrs. Young. “I pay my rates like everyone else. The garden looks
like the Sahara desert. I’m surprised there was any water _left_ in the
pond. I blame it on the lack of nuclear testing, myself. You used to get
proper summers when I was a boy. It used to rain all the time.”

Now Adam slouched alone along the dusty lane. It was a good slouch. Adam
had a way of slouching along that offended all right-thinking people. It
wasn’t that he just allowed his body to droop. He could slouch with
_inflections_, and now the set of his shoulders reflected the hurt and
bewilderment of those unjustly thwarted in their selfless desire to help
their fellow men.

Dust hung heavy on the bushes.

“Serve everyone right if the witches took over the whole country and
made everyone eat health food and not go to church and dance around with
no clothes on,” he said, kicking a stone. He had to admit that, except
perhaps for the health food, the prospect wasn’t too worrying.

“I bet if they’d jus’ let us get started properly we could of found
_hundreds_ of witches,” he told himself, kicking a stone. “I bet ole
Torturemada dint have to give up jus’ when he was getting started just
because some stupid witch got her dress dirty.”

Dog slouched along dutifully behind his Master. This wasn’t, insofar as
the hell-hound had any expectations, what he had imagined life would be
like in the last days before Armageddon, but despite himself he was
beginning to enjoy it.

He heard his Master say: “Bet even the _Victorians_ didn’t force people
to have to watch black and white television.”

Form shapes nature. There are certain ways of behavior appropriate to
small scruffy dogs which are in fact welded into the genes. You can’t
just become small-dog-shaped and hope to stay the same person; a certain
intrinsic small-dogness begins to permeate your very Being.

He’d already chased a rat. It had been the most enjoyable experience of
his life.

“Serve ’em right if we’re all overcome by Evil Forces,” his Master
grumbled.

And then there were cats, thought Dog. He’d surprised the huge ginger
cat from next door and had attempted to reduce it to cowering jelly by
means of the usual glowing stare and deep-throated growl, which had
always worked on the damned in the past. This time they earned him a
whack on the nose that had made his eyes water. Cats, Dog considered,
were clearly a lot tougher than lost souls. He was looking forward to a
further cat experiment, which he’d planned would consist of jumping
around and yapping excitedly at it. It was a long shot, but it might
just work.

“They just better not come running to me when ole Picky is turned into a
frog, that’s all,” muttered Adam.

It was at this point that two facts dawned on him. One was that his
disconsolate footsteps had led him past Jasmine Cottage. The other was
that someone was crying.

Adam was a soft touch for tears. He hesitated a moment, and then
cautiously peered over the hedge.

To Anathema, sitting in a deck chair and halfway through a packet of
Kleenex, it looked like the rise of a small, disheveled sun.

Adam doubted that she was a witch. Adam had a very clear mental picture
of a witch. The Youngs restricted themselves to the only possible choice
amongst the better class of Sunday newspaper, and so a hundred years of
enlightened occultism had passed Adam by. She didn’t have a hooked nose
or warts, and she was young … well, _quite_ young. That was good enough
for him.

“Hallo,” he said, unslouching.

She blew her nose and stared at him.

What was looking over the hedge should be described at this point. What
Anathema saw was, she said later, something like a prepubescent Greek
god. Or maybe a Biblical illustration, one which showed muscular angels
doing some righteous smiting. It was a face that didn’t belong in the
twentieth century. It was thatched with golden curls which glowed.
Michelangelo should have sculpted it.

He probably would not have included the battered sneakers, frayed jeans,
or grubby T-shirt, though.

“Who’re you?” she said.

“I’m Adam Young,” said Adam. “I live just down the lane.”

“Oh. Yes. I’ve heard of you,” said Anathema, dabbing at her eyes. Adam
preened.

“Mrs. Henderson said I was to be sure to keep an eye out for you,” she
went on.

“I’m well known around here,” said Adam.

“She said you were born to hang,” said Anathema.

Adam grinned. Notoriety wasn’t as good as fame, but was heaps better
than obscurity.

“She said you were the worst of the lot of Them,” said Anathema, looking
a little more cheerful. Adam nodded.

“She said, ‘You watch out for Them, Miss, they’re nothing but a pack of
ringleaders. That young Adam’s full of the Old Adam,’ ” she said.

“What’ve you been cryin’ for?” said Adam bluntly.

“Oh? Oh, I’ve just lost something,” said Anathema. “A book.”

“I’ll help you look for it, if you like,” said Adam gallantly. “I know
quite a lot about books, actually. I wrote a book once. It was a triffic
book. It was nearly eight pages long. It was about this pirate who was a
famous detective. _And_ I drew the pictures.” And then, in a flash of
largess, he added, “If you like I’ll let you read it. I bet it was a lot
more excitin’ than any book you’ve lost. ’Specially the bit in the
spaceship where the dinosaur comes out and fights with the cowboys. I
bet it’d cheer you up, my book. It cheered up Brian no end. He said he’d
never been so cheered up.”

“Thank you, I’m sure your book is a very good book,” she said, endearing
herself to Adam forever. “But I don’t need you to help look for my
book—I think it’s too late now.”

She looked thoughtfully at Adam. “I expect you know this area very
well?” she said.

“For _miles_ an’ miles,” said Adam.

“You haven’t seen two men in a big black car?” said Anathema.

“Did they steal it?” said Adam, suddenly full of interest. Foiling a
gang of international book thieves would make a rewarding end to the
day.

“Not really. Sort of. I mean, they didn’t mean to. They were looking for
the Manor, but I went up there today and no one knows anything about
them. There was some sort of accident or something, I believe.”

She stared at Adam. There was something odd about him, but she couldn’t
put her finger on it. She just had an urgent feeling that he was
important and shouldn’t be allowed to drift away. Something about him …

“What’s the book called?” said Adam.

_“The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter, Witch,”_ said
Anathema.

“Which what?”

“No. Witch. Like in _Macbeth_,” said Anathema.

“I saw that,” said Adam. “_It_ was really interesting, the way them
kings carried on. Gosh. What’s nice about ’em?”

“Nice used to _me_an, well, precise. Or exact.” Definitely something
strange. A sort of laid-back intensity. You started to feel that if he
was around, then everyone else, even the landscape, was just background.

She’d been here a month. Except for Mrs. Henderson, who in theory looked
after the cottage and probably went through her things given half a
chance, she hadn’t exchanged more than a dozen real words with anyone.
She let them think she was an artist. This was the kind of countryside
that artists liked.

Actually, it was bloody beautiful. Just around this village it was
superb. If Turner and Landseer had met Samuel Palmer in a pub and worked
it all out, and then got Stubbs to do the horses, it couldn’t have been
better.

And that was depressing, because this was where it was going to happen.
According to Agnes, anyway. In a book which she, Anathema, had allowed
to be lost. She had the file cards, of course, but they just weren’t the
same.

If Anathema had been in full control of her own mind at that moment—and
no one around Adam was ever in full control of his or her own mind—she’d
have noticed that whenever she tried to think about him beyond a
superficial level her thoughts slipped away like a duck off water.

“Wicked!” said Adam, who had been turning over in his mind the
implications of a book of nice and accurate prophecies. “It tells you
who’s going to win the Grand National, does it?”

“No,” said Anathema.

“Any spaceships in it?”

“Not many,” said Anathema.

“Robots?” said Adam hopefully.

“Sorry.”

“Doesn’t sound very nice to me, then,” said Adam. “Don’t see what the
future’s got in it if there’s no robots and spaceships.”

_About three days_, thought Anathema glumly. _That’s what it’s got in
it_.

“Would you like a lemonade?” she said.

Adam hesitated. Then he decided to take the bull by the horns.

“Look, ’scuse me for askin’, if it’s not a personal question, but are
you a witch?” he said.

Anathema narrowed her eyes. So much for Mrs. Henderson poking around.

“Some people might say so,” she said. “Actually, I’m an occultist.”

“Oh. Well. That’s all right, then,” said Adam, cheering up.

She looked him up and down.

“You know what an occultist is, do you?” she said.

“Oh, yes,” said Adam confidently.

“Well, so long as you’re happier now,” said Anathema. “Come on in. I
could do with a drink myself. And … Adam Young?”

“Yes?”

“You were thinking ‘Nothin’ wrong with my eyes, they don’t need
examining,’ weren’t you?”

“Who, me?” said Adam guiltily.

DOG WAS THE PROBLEM. He wouldn’t go in the cottage. He crouched on the
doorstep, growling.

_“_Come on, you silly dog,” said Adam. “It’s only old Jasmine Cottage.”
He gave Anathema an embarrassed look. “Normally he does everything I
say, right off.”

“You can leave him in the garden,” said Anathema.

“No,” said Adam. “He’s got to do what he’s tole. I read it in a book.
Trainin’ is very important. Any dog can be trained, it said. My father
said I can only keep him if he’s prop’ly trained. Now, Dog. Go inside.”

Dog whined and gave him a pleading look. His stubby tail thumped on the
floor once or twice.

His Master’s voice.

With extreme reluctance, as if making progress in the teeth of a gale,
he slunk over the doorstep.

“There,” said Adam proudly. “Good boy.”

And a little bit more of Hell burned away …

Anathema shut the door.

There had always been a horseshoe over the door of Jasmine Cottage, ever
since its first tenant centuries before; the Black Death was all the
rage at the time and he’d considered that he could use all the
protection he could get.

It was corroded and half covered with the paint of centuries. So neither
Adam nor Anathema gave it a thought, or noticed how it was now cooling
from a white heat.

Aziraphale’s cocoa was stone cold.

The only sound in the room was the occasional turning of a page.

Every now and again there was a rattling at the door when prospective
customers of Intimate Books next door mistook the entrance. He ignored
it.

Occasionally he would very nearly swear.

ANATHEMA HADN’T REALLY made herself at home in the cottage. Most of her
implements were piled up on the table. It looked interesting. It looked,
in fact, as though a voodoo priest had just had the run of a scientific
equipment store.

“Brilliant!” said Adam, prodding at it. “What’s the thing with the three
legs?”

“It’s a theodolite,” said Anathema from the kitchen. “It’s for tracking
ley-lines.”

“What are they, then?” said Adam.

She told him.

“Cor,” he said. “Are they?”

“Yes.”

“All over the place?”

“Yes.”

“I’ve never seen ’em. Amazin’, there bein’ all these invisible lines of
force around and me not seeing ’em.”

Adam didn’t often listen, but he spent the most enthralling twenty
minutes of his life, or at least of his life that day. No one in the
Young household so much as touched wood or threw salt over their
shoulder. The only nod in the direction of the supernatural was a
half-hearted pretense, when Adam had been younger, that Father Christmas
came down the chimney.²²

He’d been starved of anything more occult than a Harvest Festival. Her
words poured into his mind like water into a quire of blotting paper.

Dog lay under the table and growled. He was beginning to have serious
doubts about himself.

Anathema didn’t only believe in ley-lines, but in seals, whales,
bicycles, rain forests, whole grain in loaves, recycled paper, white
South Africans out of South Africa, and Americans out of practically
everywhere down to and including Long Island. She didn’t
compartmentalize her beliefs. They were welded into one enormous,
seamless belief, compared with which that held by Joan of Arc seemed a
mere idle notion. On any scale of mountain moving it shifted at least
point five of an alp.²³

No one had even used the word _environment_ in Adam’s hearing before.
The South American rain forests were a closed book to Adam, and it
wasn’t even made of recycled paper.

The only time he interrupted her was to agree with her views on nuclear
power: “I’ve been to a nucular power station. It was _boring_. There was
no green smoke and bubbling stuff in tubes. Shouldn’t be allowed, not
having proper bubbling stuff when people have come all the way to see
it, and having just a lot of men standin’ around not even wearin’ space
suits.”

“They do all the bubbling after visitors have gone home,” said Anathema
grimly.

“Huh,” said Adam.

“They should be done away with this minute.”

“Serve them right for not bubblin’,” said Adam.

Anathema nodded. She was still trying to put her finger on what was so
odd about Adam, and then she realized what it was.

He had no aura.

She was quite an expert on auras. She could see them, if she stared hard
enough. They were a little glow of light around people’s heads, and
according to a book she’d read the color told you things about their
health and general well-being. Everyone had one. In mean-minded,
closed-in people they were a faint, trembling outline, whereas expansive
and creative people might have one extending several inches from the
body.

She’d never heard of anyone without one, but she couldn’t see one around
Adam at all. Yet he seemed cheerful, enthusiastic, and as well-balanced
as a gyroscope.

Maybe I’m just tired, she thought.

Anyway, she was pleased and gratified to find such a rewarding student,
and even loaned him some copies of _New Aquarian Digest_, a small
magazine edited by a friend of hers.

It changed his life. At least, it changed his life for that day.

To his parents’ astonishment he went to bed early, and then lay under
the blankets until after midnight with a torch, the magazines, and a bag
of lemon drops. The occasional “Brilliant!” emerged from his
ferocious-chewing mouth.

When the batteries ran out he emerged into the darkened room and lay
back with his head pillowed in his hands, apparently watching the
squadron of X-wing™ fighters that hung from the ceiling. They moved
gently in the night breeze.

But Adam wasn’t _really_ watching them. He was staring instead into the
brightly lit panorama of his own imagination, which was whirling like a
fairground.

This wasn’t Wensleydale’s aunt and a wineglass. This sort of occulting
was a lot more interesting.

Besides, he liked Anathema. Of course, she was very old, but when Adam
liked someone he wanted to make them happy.

He wondered how he could make Anathema happy.

It used to be thought that the events that changed the world
were things like big bombs, maniac politicians, huge earthquakes, or
vast population movements, but it has now been realized that this is a
very old-fashioned view held by people totally out of touch with modern
thought. The things that really change the world, according to Chaos
theory, are the tiny things. A butterfly flaps its wings in
the Amazonian jungle, and subsequently a storm ravages half of Europe.

Somewhere in Adam’s sleeping head, a butterfly had emerged.

It might, or might not, have helped Anathema get a clear view of things
if she’d been allowed to spot the very obvious reason why she couldn’t
see Adam’s aura.

It was for the same reason that people in Trafalgar Square can’t see
England.

Alarms went off.

Of course, there’s nothing special about alarms going off in the control
room of a nuclear power station. They do it all the time. It’s because
there are so many dials and meters and things that something important
might not get noticed if it doesn’t at least beep.

And the job of Shift Charge Engineer calls for a solid, capable,
unflappable kind of man, the kind you can depend upon not to make a
beeline for the car-park in an emergency. The kind of man, in fact, who
gives the impression of smoking a pipe even when he’s not.

It was 3:00 A.M. in the control room of Turning Point power station,
normally a nice quiet time when there is nothing much to do but fill in
the log and listen to the distant roar of the turbines.

Until now.

Horace Gander looked at the flashing red lights. Then he looked at some
dials. Then he looked at the faces of his fellow workers. Then he raised
his eyes to the big dial at the far end of the room. Four hundred and
twenty practically dependable and very nearly cheap megawatts were
leaving the station. According to the other dials, nothing was producing
them.

He _did_n’t say “That’s weird.” He wouldn’t have said “That’s weird” if
a flock of sheep had cycled past playing violins. It wasn’t the sort of
thing a responsible engineer said.

What he did say was: “Alf, you’d better ring the station manager.”

Three very crowded hours went past. They involved quite a lot of phone
calls, telexes, and faxes. Twenty-seven people were got out of bed in
quick succession and they got another fifty-three out of bed, because if
there is one thing a man wants to know when he’s woken up in a panic at
4:00 A.M., it’s that he’s not alone.

Anyway, you need all sorts of permissions before they let you unscrew
the lid of a nuclear reactor and look inside.

They got them. They unscrewed it. They had a look inside.

Horace Gander said, “There’s got to be a sensible reason for this. Five
hundred tons of uranium don’t just get up and walk away.”

A meter in his hand should have been screaming. Instead, it let out the
occasional halfhearted tick.

Where the reactor should have been was an empty space. You could have
had quite a nice game of squash in it.

Right at the bottom, all alone in the center of the bright cold floor,
was a lemon drop.

Outside in the cavernous turbine hall the machines roared on.

And, a hundred miles away, Adam Young turned over in his sleep.


Friday

RAVEN SABLE, slim and bearded and dressed all in black, sat in the back
of his slimline black limousine, talking on his slimline black telephone
to his West Coast base.

“How’s it going?” he asked.

“Looking good, chief,” said his marketing head. “I’m doing breakfast
with the buyers from all the leading supermarket chains tomorrow. No
problem. We’ll have MEALS™ in all the stores this time next month.”

“Good work, Nick.”

“No problem. No problem. It’s knowing you’re behind us, Rave. You give
great leadership, guy. Works for me every time.”

“Thank you,” said Sable, and he broke the connection.

He was particularly proud of MEALS™.

The Newtrition corporation had started small, eleven years ago. A small
team of food scientists, a huge team of marketing and public relations
personnel, and a neat logo.

Two years of Newtrition investment and research had produced CHOW™.
CHOW™ contained spun, plaited, and woven protein molecules, capped and
coded, carefully designed to be ignored by even the most ravenous
digestive tract enzymes; no-cal sweeteners; mineral oils replacing
vegetable oils; fibrous materials, colorings, and flavorings. The end
result was a foodstuff almost indistinguishable from any other except
for two things. Firstly, the price, which was slightly higher, and
secondly the nutritional content, which was roughly equivalent to that
of a Sony Walkman. It didn’t matter how much you ate, you lost weight.²⁴

Fat people had bought it. Thin people who didn’t want to get fat had
bought it. CHOW™ was the ultimate diet food—carefully spun, woven,
textured, and pounded to imitate anything, from potatoes to venison,
although the chicken sold best.

Sable sat back and watched the money roll in. He watched CHOW™ gradually
fill the ecological niche that used to be filled by the old,
untrademarked food.

He followed CHOW™ with SNACKS™—junk food made from real junk.

MEALS™ was Sable’s latest brainwave.

MEALS™ was CHOW™ with added sugar and fat. The theory was that if you
ate enough MEALS™ you would a) get very fat, and b) die of malnutrition.

The paradox delighted Sable.

MEALS™ were currently being tested all over America. Pizza MEALS, Fish
MEALS, Szechuan MEALS, macrobiotic rice MEALS. Even Hamburger MEALS.

Sable’s limousine was parked in the lot of a Des Moines, Iowa, Burger
Lord—a fast food franchise wholly owned by his organization. It was here
they’d been piloting Hamburger MEALS for the last six months. He wanted
to see what kind of results they’d been getting.

He leaned forward, tapped the chauffeur’s glass partition. The chauffeur
pressed a switch, and the glass slid open.

“Sir?”

“I’m going to take a look at our operation, Marlon. I’ll be ten minutes.
Then back to L.A.”

“Sir.”

Sable sauntered into the Burger Lord. It was exactly like every other
Burger Lord in America.²⁵ McLordy the Clown danced in the Kiddie Korner.
The serving staff had identical gleaming smiles that never reached their
eyes. And behind the counter a chubby, middle-aged man in a Burger Lord
uniform slapped burgers onto the griddle, whistling softly, happy in his
work.

Sable went up to the counter.

“Hello-my-name-is-Marie,” said the girl behind the counter.
“How-can-I-help-you?”

“A double blaster thunder biggun, extra fries, hold the mustard,” he
said.

“Anything-to-drink?”

“A special thick whippy chocobanana shake.”

She pressed the little pictogram squares on her till. (Literacy was no
longer a requirement for employment in these restaurants. Smiling was.)
Then she turned to the chubby man behind the counter.

“DBTB, E F, hold mustard,” she said. “Choc-shake.”

“Uhnnhuhn,” crooned the cook. He sorted the food into little paper
containers, pausing only to brush the graying cowlick from his eyes.

“Here y’are,” he said.

She took them without looking at him, and he returned cheerfully to his
griddle, singing quietly, “Loooove me tender, looooove me long, neeever
let me go … ”

The man’s humming, Sable noted, clashed with the Burger Lord background
music, a tinny tape loop of the Burger Lord commercial jingle, and he
made a mental note to have him fired.

Hello-my-name-is-Marie gave Sable his MEAL™ and told him to have a nice
day.

He found a small plastic table, sat down in the plastic seat, and
examined his food.

Artificial bread roll. Artificial burger. Fries that had never even seen
potatoes. Foodless sauces. Even (and Sable was especially pleased with
this) an artificial slice of dill pickle. He didn’t bother to examine
his milkshake. It had no actual food content, but then again, neither
did those sold by any of his rivals.

All around him people were eating their unfood with, if not actual
evidence of enjoyment, then with no more actual disgust than was to be
found in burger chains all over the planet.

He stood up, took his tray over to the please dispose of your refuse
with care receptacle, and dumped the whole thing. If you had told him
that there were children starving in Africa he would have been flattered
that you’d noticed.

There was a tug at his sleeve. “Party name of Sable?” asked a small,
bespectacled man in an International Express cap, holding a brown paper
parcel.

Sable nodded.

“Thought it was you. Looked around, thought, tall gent with a beard,
nice suit, can’t be that many of them here. Package for you, sir.”

Sable signed for it, his real name—one word, six letters. Sounds like
examine.

“Thank you kindly, sir,” said the delivery man. He paused. “Here,” he
said. “That bloke behind the counter. Does he remind you of anyone?”

“No,” said Sable. He gave the man a tip—five dollars—and opened the
package.

In it was a small pair of brass scales.

Sable smiled. It was a slim smile, and was gone almost instantly.

“About time,” he said. He thrust the scales into his pocket, unheeding
of the damage being done to the sleek line of his black suit, and went
back to the limo.

“Back to the office?” asked the chauffeur.

“The airport,” said Sable. “And call ahead. I want a ticket to England.”

“Yessir. Return ticket to England.”

Sable fingered the scales in his pocket. “Make that a single,” he said.
“I’ll be making my own way back. Oh, and call the office for me, cancel
all appointments.”

“How long for, sir?”

“The foreseeable future.”

And in the Burger Lord, behind the counter, the stout man with the
cowlick slid another half-dozen burgers onto the grill. He was the
happiest man in the whole world and he was singing, very softly.

“. . . y’ain’t never caught a rabbit,” he hummed to himself, “and
y’ain’t no friend of mine … ”

THE THEM LISTENED with interest. There was a light drizzle which was
barely kept at bay by the old iron sheets and frayed bits of lino that
roofed their den in the quarry, and they always looked to Adam to think
up things to do when it was raining. They weren’t disappointed. Adam’s
eyes were agleam with the joy of knowledge.

It had been 3:00 a.m. before he’d gone to sleep under a pile of _New
Aquarian_s.

“An’ then there was this man called Charles Fort,” he said. “He could
make it rain fish and frogs and stuff.”

“Huh,” said Pepper. “I _bet_. Alive frogs?”

“Oh, yes,” said Adam, warming to his subject. “Hopping around and
croaking and everything. People paid him money to go away in the end
an’, an’ … ” He racked his brains for something that would satisfy his
audience; he’d done, for Adam, a lot of reading in one go. “. . . And he
sailed off in the _Mary Celeste_ and founded the Bermuda Triangle. It’s
in Bermuda,” he added helpfully.

“No, he couldn’t of done that,” said Wensleydale sternly, “because I’ve
read about the _Mary Celeste_, and there was no one on it. It’s famous
for having no one on it. They _found_ it floating around all by itself
with no one on it.”

“I dint say he was on it when they found it, did I?” said Adam
scathingly. “Course he wasn’t on it. ’Cos of the UFOs landin’ and takin’
him off. I thought everyone _knew_ about that.”

The Them relaxed a bit. They were on firmer ground with UFOs. They
weren’t entirely certain about New Age UFOs, though; they’d listened
politely to Adam on the subject, but somehow modern UFOs lacked punch.

“If _I_ was an alien,” said Pepper, voicing the opinion of them all, “I
wouldn’t go round telling people all about mystic cosmic harmony. I’d
say,” her voice became hoarse and nasal, like someone hampered by an
evil black mask, “ ‘Thish ish a lasher blashter, sho you do what you’re
told, rebel swine.”’

They all nodded. A favorite game in quarry had been based on a highly
successful film series with lasers, robots, and a princess who wore her
hair like a pair of stereo headphones™. (It had been agreed without a
word being said that if anyone was going to play the part of any stupid
princesses, it wasn’t going to be Pepper.) But the game normally ended
in a fight to be the one who was allowed to wear the coal scuttle™ and
blow up planets. Adam was best at it—when he was the villain, he really
sounded as if he _could_ blow up the world. The Them were, anyway,
temperamentally on the side of planet destroyers, provided they could be
allowed to rescue princesses _at the same time_.

“I s’pect that’s what they _used_ to do,” said Adam. “But now it’s
different. They all have this bright blue light around ’em and go around
doing good. Sort of g’lactic policemen, going round tellin’ everyone to
live in universal harmony and stuff.”

There was a moment’s silence while they pondered this waste of perfectly
good UFOs.

“What I’ve always wondered,” said Brian, “is why they call ’em UFOs when
they know they’re flying saucers. I mean, they’re _Identified_ Flying
Objects then.”

“It’s ’cos the goverment hushes it all up,” said Adam. “Millions of
flying saucers landin’ all the time and the goverment keeps hushing it
up.”

“Why?” said Wensleydale.

Adam hesitated. His reading hadn’t provided a quick explanation for
this; _New Aquarian_ just took it as the foundation of belief, both of
itself and its readers, that the government hushed everything up.

“’Cos they’re the _goverment_,” said Adam simply. “_That_’s what
goverments do. They’ve got this great big building in London full of
books of _all_ the things they’ve hushed up. When the Prime Minister
gets in to work in the morning, the first thing he does is go through
the big list of everything that’s happened in the night and put this big
red stamp on them.”

“I bet he has a cup of tea first, and then reads the paper,” said
Wensleydale, who had on one memorable occasion during the holidays gone
unexpectedly into his father’s office, where he had formed certain
impressions. “And talks about what was on TV last night.”

“Well, orlright, but after that he gets out the book and the big stamp.”

“Which says ‘Hush It Up,’” said Pepper.

“It says Top Secret,” said Adam, resenting this attempt at bipartisan
creativity. “It’s like nucular power stations. They keep blowin’ up all
the time but no one ever finds out ’cos the goverment hushes it up.”

“They don’t keep blowing all the time,” said Wensleydale severely. “My
father says they’re dead safe and mean we don’t have to live in a
greenhouse. Anyway, there’s a big picture of one in my comic²⁶ and it
doesn’t say anything about it blowing up.”

“Yes,” said Brian, “but you lent me that comic afterwards and I know
what _type_ of picture it was.”

Wensleydale hesitated, and then said in a voice heavy with badly tried
patience, “Brian, just because it says Exploded Diagram—”

There was the usual brief scuffle.

“Look,” said Adam severely. “Do you want me to tell you about the
Aquarium Age, or not?”

The fight, never very serious amongst the siblinghood of the Them,
subsided.

“Right,” said Adam. He scratched his head. “Now you’ve made me forget
where I’ve got to,” he complained.

“Flyin’ saucers,” said Brian.

“Right. Right. Well, if you _do_ see a flying UFO, these goverment men
come and tell you off,” said Adam, getting back into his stride. “In a
big black car. It happens all the time in America.”

The Them nodded sagely. Of this at least they had no doubt. America was,
to them, the place that good people went to when they died. They were
prepared to believe that just about anything could happen in America.

“Prob’ly causes traffic jams,” said Adam, “all these men in black cars,
going about telling people off for seeing UFOs. They tell you that if
you go on seeing ’em, you’ll have a Nasty Accident.”

“Prob’ly get run over by a big black car,” said Brian, picking at a scab
on a dirty knee. He brightened up. “Do you know,” he said, “my cousin
said that in America there’s shops that sell thirty-nine different
flavors of ice cream?”

This even silenced Adam, briefly.

“There aren’t thirty-nine flavors of ice cream,” said Pepper. “There
aren’t thirty-nine flavors in the whole world.”

“There could be, if you mixed them up,” said Wensleydale, blinking
owlishly. “You know. Strawberry _and_ chocolate. Chocolate _and_
vanilla.” He sought for more English flavors. “Strawberry _and_ vanilla
_and_ chocolate,” he added, lamely.

“And then there’s Atlantis,” said Adam loudly.

He had their interest there. They enjoyed Atlantis. Cities that sank
under the sea were right up the Them’s street. They listened intently to
a jumbled account of pyramids, weird priesthoods, and ancient secrets.

“Did it just happen sudden, or slowly?” said Brian.

“Sort of sudden _an_’ slowly,” said Adam, “’cos a lot of ’em got away in
boats to all the other countries and taught ’em how to do maths _an_’
English an’ History an’ stuff.”

“Don’t see what’s so great about that,” said Pepper.

“Could of been good fun, when it was sinking,” said Brian wistfully,
recalling the one occasion when Lower Tadfield had been flooded. “People
deliverin’ the milk and newspapers by boat, no one having to go to
school.”

“If _I_ was an Atlantisan, I’d of stayed,” said Wensleydale. This was
greeted with disdainful laughter, but he pressed on. “You’d just have to
wear a diver’s helmet, that’s all. And nail all the windows shut and
fill the houses with air. It would be great.”

Adam greeted this with the chilly stare he reserved for any of Them who
came up with an idea he really wished he’d thought of first.

“They _could_ of done,” he conceded, somewhat weakly. “After they’d sent
all the teachers off in the boats. Maybe everyone else stayed on when it
went down.”

“You wouldn’t have to wash,” said Brian, whose parents forced him to
wash a great deal more than he thought could possibly be healthy. Not
that it did any good. There was something basically _ground in_ about
Brian. “Because everything would stay clean. An’, an’ you could grow
seaweed and stuff in the garden and shoot sharks. And have pet octopuses
and stuff. And there wouldn’t be any schools and stuff because they’d of
got rid of all the teachers.”

“They could still be down there now,” said Pepper.

They thought about the Atlanteans, clad in flowing mystic robes and
goldfish bowls, enjoying themselves deep under the choppy waters of the
ocean.

“Huh,” said Pepper, summing up their feelings.

“What shall we do now?” said Brian. “It’s brightened up a bit.”

In the end they played Charles Fort Discovering Things. This consisted
of one of the Them walking around with the ancient remains of an
umbrella, while the others treated him to a rain of frogs or, rather,
frog. They could only find one in the pond. It was an elderly frog, who
knew the Them of old, and tolerated their interest as the price it paid
for a pond otherwise free of moorhens and pike. It put up with things
good-naturedly for a while before hopping off to a secret and
so-far-undiscovered hideout in an old drainpipe.

Then they went home for lunch.

Adam felt very pleased about the morning’s work. He’d always _known_
that the world was an interesting place, and his imagination had peopled
it with pirates and bandits and spies and astronauts and similar. But
he’d also had a nagging suspicion that, when you seriously got right
down to it, they were all just things in books and didn’t properly exist
any more.

Whereas this Aquarium Age stuff was _really_ real. Grown-up people wrote
lots of books about it (_New Aquarian_ was full of adverts for them) and
Bigfoots and Mothmen and Yetis and sea monsters and Surrey pumas
_really_ existed. If Cortez, on his peak in Darien, had had slightly
damp feet from efforts at catching frogs, he’d have felt just like Adam
at that moment.

The world was bright and strange and he was in the middle of it.

He bolted his lunch and retired to his room. There were still quite a
few _New Aquarian_s he hadn’t read yet.

THE COCOA WAS A CONGEALED brown sludge half filling the cup.

Certain people had spent hundreds of years trying to make sense of the
prophecies of Agnes Nutter. They had been very intelligent, in the main.
Anathema Device, who was about as close to _being_ Agnes as genetic
drift would allow, was the best of the bunch. But none of them had been
angels.

Many people, meeting Aziraphale for the first time, formed three
impressions: that he was English, that he _was_ intelligent, and that he
was gayer than a tree full of monkeys on nitrous oxide. Two of these
were wrong; Heaven is not in England, whatever certain poets may have
thought, and angels are sexless unless they really want to make an
effort. But he was intelligent. And it was an angelic intelligence
which, while not being particularly higher than human intelligence, is
much broader and has the advantage of having thousands of years of
practice.

Aziraphale was the first angel ever to own a computer. It was a cheap,
slow, plasticky one, much touted as ideal for the small businessman.
Aziraphale used it religiously for doing his accounts, which were so
scrupulously accurate that the tax authorities had inspected him five
times in the deep belief that he was getting away with murder somewhere.

But these other calculations were of a kind no computer could ever do.
Sometimes he would scribble something on a sheet of paper by his side.
It was covered in symbols which only eight other people in the world
would have been able to comprehend; two of them had won Nobel prizes,
and one of the other six dribbled a lot and wasn’t allowed anything
sharp because of what he might do with it.

ANATHEMA LUNCHED on miso soup and pored over her maps. There was no
doubt the area around Tadfield was rich in ley-lines; even the famous
Rev. Watkins had identified some. But unless she was totally wrong, they
were beginning to shift position.

She’d spent the week taking soundings with theodolite and pendulum, and
the Ordnance Survey map of the Tadfield area was now covered with little
dots and arrows.

She stared at them for some time. Then she picked up a felt-tip pen and,
with occasional references to her notebook, began to join them up.

The radio was on. She wasn’t really listening. So quite a lot of the
main news item passed right by her unheeding ears, and it wasn’t until a
couple of key words filtered down into her consciousness that she began
to take notice.

Someone called A Spokesman sounded close to hysteria.

“. . . danger to employees or the public,” he was saying.

“And precisely how much nuclear material has escaped?” said the
interviewer.

There was a pause. “We wouldn’t say escaped,” said the spokesman. “Not
escaped. Temporarily mislaid.”

“You mean it is still on the premises?”

“We certainly cannot see how it could have been removed from them,” said
the spokesman.

“Surely you have considered terrorist activity?”

There was another pause. Then the spokesman said, in the quiet tones of
someone who has had enough and is going to quit after this and raise
chickens somewhere, “Yes, I suppose we must. All we need to do is find
some terrorists who are capable of taking an entire nuclear reactor out
of its can while it’s running and without anyone noticing. It weighs
about a thousand tons and is forty feet high. So they’ll be quite
_strong_ terrorists. Perhaps you’d like to ring them up, sir, and ask
them questions in that supercilious, accusatory way of yours.”

“But you said the power station is still producing electricity,” gasped
the interviewer.

“It is.”

“How can it still be doing that if it hasn’t got any reactors?”

You could see the spokesman’s mad grin, even on the radio. You could see
his pen, poised over the “Farms for Sale” column in _Poultry World_. “We
don’t know,” he said. “We were hoping you clever buggers at the BBC
would have an idea.”

Anathema looked down at her map.

What she had been drawing looked like a galaxy, or the type of carving
seen on the better class of Celtic monolith.

The ley-lines were shifting. They were forming a spiral.

It was centered—loosely, with some margin for error, but nevertheless
centered—on Lower Tadfield.

SEVERAL THOUSAND miles away, at almost the same moment as Anathema was
staring at her spirals, the pleasure cruiser _Morbilli_ was aground in
three hundred fathoms of water.

For Captain Vincent, this was just another problem. For example, he knew
he should contact the owners, but he never knew from day to day—or from
hour to hour, in this computerized world—actually who the current owners
were.

Computers, that was the bloody trouble. The ship’s papers were
computerized and it could switch to the most currently advantageous flag
of convenience in microseconds. Its navigation had been computerized as
well, constantly updating its position by satellites. Captain Vincent
had explained patiently to the owners, whoever they were, that several
hundred square meters of steel plating and a barrel of rivets would be a
better investment, and had been informed that his recommendation did not
accord with current cost / benefit flow predictions.

Captain Vincent strongly suspected that despite all its electronics the
ship was worth more sunk than afloat, and would probably go down as the
most perfectly pinpointed wreck in nautical history.

By inference, this also meant that he was more valuable dead than alive.

He sat at his desk quietly leafing through _International Maritime
Codes_, whose six hundred pages contained brief yet pregnant messages
designed to transmit the news of every conceivable nautical eventuality
across the world with the minimum of confusion and, above all, cost.

What he wanted to say was this: Was sailing SSW at position 33° N 47°
72’W. First Mate, who you may recall was appointed in New Guinea against
my wishes and is probably a headhunter, indicated by signs that
something was amiss. It appears that quite a vast expanse of seabed has
risen up in the night. It contains a large number of buildings, many of
which appeared pyramid-like in structure. We are aground in the
courtyard of one of these. There are some rather unpleasant statues.
Amiable old men in long robes and diving helmets have come aboard the
ship and are mingling happily with the passengers, who think we
organized this. Please advise.

His questing finger moved slowly down the page, and stopped. Good old
_International Codes_. They’d been devised eighty years before, but the
men in those days had really thought hard about the kind of perils that
might possibly be encountered on the deep.

He picked up his pen and wrote down: “XXXV QVVX.”

Translated, it meant: “Have found Lost Continent of Atlantis. High
Priest has just won quoits contest.”

“IT JOLLY WELL ISN’T!”

“It jolly well is!”

“It isn’t, you know!”

“It jolly well is!”

“It isn’t—all right, then, what about volcanoes?” Wensleydale sat back,
a look of triumph on his face.

“What about ’em?” said Adam.

“All that lather comes up from the center of the Earth, where it’s all
hot,” said Wensleydale. “I saw a program. It had David Attenborough, so
it’s true.”

The other Them looked at Adam. It was like watching a tennis match.

The Hollow Earth Theory was not going over well in the quarry. A
beguiling idea that had stood up to the probings of such remarkable
thinkers as Cyrus Read Teed, Bulwer-Lytton, and Adolf Hitler was bending
dangerously in the wind of Wensleydale’s searingly bespectacled logic.

“I dint say it was hollow _all_ the way through,” said Adam. “No one
said it was hollow all the way through. It prob’ly goes down miles and
miles to make room for all the lather and oil and coal and Tibetan
tunnels and suchlike. But then it’s hollow after that. That’s what
people think. And there’s a hole at the North Pole to let the air in.”

“Never seen it on an atlas,” sniffed Wensleydale.

“The Goverment won’t let them put it on a map in case people go and have
a look in,” said Adam. “The reason being, the people livin’ inside don’t
want people lookin’ down on ’em all the time.”

“What do you mean, Tibetan tunnels?” said Pepper. “You said Tibetan
tunnels.”

“Ah. Dint I tell you about them?”

Three heads shook.

“It’s amazing. You know Tibet?”

They nodded doubtfully. A series of images had risen in their minds:
yaks, Mount Everest, people called Grasshopper, little old men sitting
on mountains, other people learning kung fu in ancient temples, and
snow.

“_Well_, you know all those teachers that left Atlantis when it sunk?”

They nodded again.

“_Well_, some of them went to Tibet and now they run the world. They’re
called the Secret Masters. On account of being teachers, I suppose. An’
they’ve got this secret underground city called Shambala and tunnels
that go all over the world so’s they know everythin’ that goes on and
control everythin’. Some people reckon that they really live under the
Gobby Desert,” he added loftily, “but mos’ competent authorities reckon
it’s Tibet all right. Better for the tunneling, anyway.”

The Them instinctively looked down at the grubby, dirt-covered chalk
beneath their feet.

“How come they know everything?” said Pepper.

“They just have to listen, right?” hazarded Adam. “They just have to sit
in their tunnels and listen. You know what hearin’ teachers have. They
can hear a whisper right across the room.”

“My granny used to put a glass against the wall,” said Brian. “She said
it was disgustin’, the way she could hear everything that went on next
door.”

“And these tunnels go everywhere, do they?” said Pepper, still staring
at the ground.

“All over the world,” said Adam firmly.

“Must of took a long time,” said Pepper doubtfully. “You remember when
we tried digging that tunnel out in the field, we were at it all
afternoon, and you had to scrunch up to get all in.”

“Yes, but they’ve been doin’ it for millions of years. You can do really
good tunnels if you’ve got millions of years.”

“_I_ thought the Tibetans were conquered by the Chinese and the Daily
Llama had to go to India,” said Wensleydale, but without much
conviction. Wensleydale read his father’s newspaper every evening, but
the prosaic everydayness of the world always seemed to melt under the
powerhouse of Adam’s explanations.

“I bet they’re down there now,” said Adam, ignoring this. “They’d be all
over the place by now. Sitting underground and listenin’.”

They looked at one another.

“If we dug down quickly—” said Brian. Pepper, who was a lot quicker on
the uptake, groaned.

“What’d you have to go an’ say that for?” said Adam. “Fat lot of good us
trying to surprise them now, isn’t it, with you shoutin’ out something
like that. I was just thinkin’ we could dig down, an’ you jus’ have to
go an’ warn ’em!”

“I don’t think they’d dig all those tunnels,” said Wensleydale doggedly.
“It doesn’t make any _sense_. Tibet’s hundreds of miles away.”

“Oh, yes. Oh, yes. An’ I s’pose you know more about it than Madame
Blatvatatatsky?” sniffed Adam.

“Now, if _I_ was a Tibetan,” said Wensleydale, in a reasonable tone of
voice, “I’d just dig straight down to the hollow bit in the middle and
then run around the inside and dig straight up where I wanted to be.”

They gave this due consideration.

“You’ve got to admit that’s more sensible than tunnels,” said Pepper.

“Yes, well, I expect that’s what they do,” said Adam. “They’d be bound
to of thought of something as simple as that.”

Brian stared dreamily at the sky, while his finger probed the contents
of one ear.

“Funny, reely,” he said. “You spend your whole life goin’ to school and
learnin’ stuff, and they never tell you about stuff like the Bermuda
Triangle and UFOs and all these Old Masters running around the inside of
the Earth. Why do we have to learn boring stuff when there’s all this
brilliant stuff we could be learnin’, that’s what I want to know.”

There was a chorus of agreement.

Then they went out and played Charles Fort and the Atlantisans versus
the Ancient Masters of Tibet, but the Tibetters claimed that using
mystic ancient lasers was cheating.

THERE WAS A TIME when witchfinders were respected, although it didn’t
last very long.

Matthew Hopkins, for example, the Witchfinder General, found witches all
over the east of England in the middle of the seventeenth century,
charging each town and village nine pence a witch for every one he
discovered.

That was the trouble. Witchfinders didn’t get paid by the hour. Any
witchfinder who spent a week examining the local crones and then told
the mayor, “Well done, not a pointy hat among the lot of them,” would
get fulsome thanks, a bowl of soup and a meaningful goodbye.

So in order to turn a profit Hopkins had to find a remarkable number of
witches. This made him more than a little unpopular with the village
councils, and he was himself hanged as a witch by an East Anglian
village who had sensibly realized that they could cut their overheads by
eliminating the middleman.

It is thought by many that Hopkins was the last Witchfinder General.

In this they would, strictly speaking, be correct. Possibly not in the
way they imagine, however. The Witchfinder Army marched on, just
slightly more quietly.

There is no longer a real Witchfinder General.

Nor is there a Witchfinder Colonel, a Witchfinder Major, a Witchfinder
Captain, or even a Witchfinder Lieutenant (the last one was killed
falling out of a very tall tree in Caterham, in 1933, while attempting
to get a better view of something he believed was a satanic orgy of the
most degenerate persuasion, but was, in fact, the Caterham and
Whyteleafe Market Traders’ Association annual dinner and dance).

There is, however, a Witchfinder Sergeant.

There is also, now, a Witchfinder Private. His name is Newton Pulsifer.

It was the advertisement that got him, in the _Gazette_, between a
fridge for sale and a litter of not-exactly dalmatians:

JOIN THE PROFESSIONALS. PART TIME

ASSISTANT REQUIRED TO COMBAT THE FORCES OF
DARKNESS. UNIFORM, BASIC TRAINING PROVIDED.
FIELD PROMOTION CERTAIN. BE A MAN!

In his lunch hour he phoned the number at the bottom of the ad. A woman
answered.

“Hello,” he began, tentatively. “I saw your advert.”

“Which one, love?”

“Er, the one in the paper.”

“Right, love. Well, Madame Tracy Draws Aside the Veil every afternoon
except Thursdays. Parties welcome. When would you be wanting to Explore
the Mysteries, love?”

Newton hesitated. “The advert says ‘Join the Professionals,”’ he said.
“It didn’t mention Madame Tracy.”

“That’ll be Mister Shadwell you’ll be wanting, then. Just a sec, I’ll
see if he’s in.”

Later, when he was on nodding terms with Madame Tracy, Newt learned that
if he had mentioned the other ad, the one in the magazine, Madame Tracy
would have been available for strict discipline and intimate massage
every evening except Thursdays. There was yet another ad in a phone box
somewhere. When, much later, Newt asked her what this one involved, she
said “Thursdays.” Eventually there was the sound of feet in uncarpeted
hallways, a deep coughing, and a voice the color of an old raincoat
rumbled:

“Aye?”

“I read your advert. ‘Join the professionals.’ I wanted to know a bit
more about it.”

“Aye. There’s many as would like to know more about it, an’ there’s
many … ” the voice trailed off impressively, then crashed back to full
volume, “. . . there’s many as WOULDN’T.”

“Oh,” squeaked Newton.

“What’s your name, lad?”

“Newton. Newton Pulsifer.”

“_LUCIFER_? What’s that you say? Are ye of the Spawn of Darkness, a
tempting beguiling creature from the pit, wanton limbs steaming from the
fleshpots of Hades, in tortured and lubricious thrall to your Stygian
and hellish masters?”

“That’s Pulsifer,” explained Newton. “With a P. I don’t know about the
other stuff, but we come from Surrey.”

The voice on the phone sounded vaguely disappointed.

“Oh. Aye. Well, then. Pulsifer. _Pulsifer_. I’ve seen that name afore,
maybe?”

“I don’t know,” said Newton. “My uncle runs a toy shop in Hounslow,” he
added, in case this was any help.

“Is that sooo?” said Shadwell.

Mr. Shadwell’s accent was unplaceable. It careered around Britain like a
milk race. Here a mad Welsh drill sergeant, there a High Kirk elder
who’d just seen someone doing something on a Sunday, somewhere between
them a dour Daleland shepherd, or bitter Somerset miser. It didn’t
matter where the accent went; it didn’t get any nicer.

“Have ye all your own teeth?”

“Oh, yes. Except for fillings.”

“Are ye fit?”

“I suppose so,” Newt stuttered. “I mean, that was why I wanted to join
the territorials. Brian Potter in Accounting can bench-press almost a
hundred since he joined. And he paraded in front of the Queen Mother.”

“How many nipples?”

“Pardon?”

“Nipples, laddie, nipples,” said the voice testily. “How many nipples
hae ye got?”

“Er. Two?”

“Good. Have ye got your ane scissors?”

“What?”

“Scissors! _Scissors!_ Are ye deaf?”

“No. Yes. I mean, I’ve got some scissors. I’m not deaf.”

THE COCOA HAD NEARLY ALL SOLIDIFIED. Green fur was growing on the inside
of the mug.

There was a thin layer of dust on Aziraphale, too.

The stack of notes was building up beside him. _The Nice and Accurate
Prophecies_ was a mass of improvised bookmarks made of torn strips of
_Daily Telegraph_.

Aziraphale stirred, and pinched his nose.

He was nearly there.

He’d got the shape of it.

He’d never met Agnes. She was too bright, obviously. Normally Heaven or
Hell spotted the prophetic types and broadcast enough noises on the same
mental channel to prevent any undue accuracy. Actually that was rarely
necessary; they normally found ways of generating their own static in
self-defense against the images that echoed around their heads. Poor old
St. John had his mushrooms, for example. Mother Shipton had her ale.
Nostradamus had his collection of interesting oriental preparations. St.
Malachi had his still.

Good old Malachi. He’d been a nice old boy, sitting there, dreaming
about future popes. Complete piss artist, of course. Could have been a
real thinker, if it hadn’t been for the poteen.

A sad end. Sometimes you really had to hope that the ineffable plan had
been properly thought out.

Thought. There was something he had to do. Oh, yes. Phone his contact,
get things sorted out.

He stood up, stretched his limbs, and made a phone call.

Then he thought: why not? Worth a try.

He went back and shuffled through his sheaf of notes. Agnes really had
been good. And clever. No one was interested in accurate prophecies.

Paper in hand, he phoned Directory Enquiries.

“Hallo? Good afternoon. So kind. Yes. This will be a Tadfield number, I
think. Or Lower Tadfield … ah. Or possibly Norton, I’m not sure of the
precise code. Yes. Young. Name of Young. Sorry, no initial. Oh. Well,
can you give me all of them? Thank you.”

Back on the table, a pencil picked itself up and scribbled furiously.

At the third name it broke its point.

“Ah,” said Aziraphale, his mouth suddenly running on automatic while his
mind exploded. “I think that’s the one. Thank you. So kind. Good day to
you.”

He hung up almost reverentially, took a few deep breaths, and dialed
again. The last three digits gave him some trouble, because his hand was
shaking.

He listened to the ringing tone. Then a voice answered. It was a
middle-aged voice, not unfriendly, but probably it had been having a nap
and was not feeling at its best.

It said “Tadfield Six double-six.”

Aziraphale’s hand started to shake.

“Hallo?” said the receiver. “Hallo.”

Aziraphale got a grip on himself.

“Sorry,” he said, “right number.”

He replaced the receiver.

NEWT WASN’T DEAF. And he did have his own scissors.

He also had a huge pile of newspapers.

If he had known that army life consisted chiefly of applying the one to
the other, he used to muse, he would never have joined.

Witchfinder Sergeant Shadwell had made him a list, which was taped to
the wall in Shadwell’s tiny crowded flat situated over Rajit’s
Newsagents and Video Rental. The list read:

1.  Witches.
2.  Unexplainable
    Phenomenons. Phenomenatrices. Phenomenice. Things, ye ken well what
    I mean.

Newt was looking for either. He sighed and picked up another newspaper,
scanned the front page, opened it, ignored page two (never anything on
there) then blushed crimson as he performed the obligatory nipple count
on page three. Shadwell had been insistent about this. “Ye can’t trust
them, the cunning buggers,” he said. “It’d be just like them to come
right out in the open, like, defyin’ us.”

A couple in black turtleneck sweaters glowered at the camera on page
nine. They claimed to lead the largest coven in Saffron Walden, and to
restore sexual potency by the use of small and very phallic dolls. The
newspaper was offering ten of the dolls to readers who were prepared to
write “My Most Embarrassing Moment of Impotency” stories. Newt cut the
story out and stuck it into a scrapbook.

There was a muffled thumping on the door.

Newt opened it; a pile of newspapers stood there. “Shift yerself,
Private Pulsifer,” it barked, and it shuffled into the room. The
newspapers fell to the floor, revealing Witchfinder Sergeant Shadwell,
who coughed, painfully, and relit his cigarette, which had gone out.

“You want to watch him. He’s one o’ _them_,” he said.

“Who, sir?”

“Tak yer ease, Private. Him. That little brown feller. Mister so-called
Rajit. It’s them terrible forn arts. The ruby squinty eye of the little
yellow god. Women wi’ too many arms. Witches, the lot o’ them.”

“He does give us the newspapers free, though, Sergeant,” said Newt. “And
they’re not too old.”

“And voodoo. I bet he does voodoo. Sacrificing chickens to that Baron
Saturday. Ye know, tall darkie bugger in the top hat. Brings people back
from the dead, aye, and makes them work on the Sabbath day. Voodoo.”
Shadwell sniffed speculatively.

Newt tried to picture Shadwell’s landlord as an exponent of voodoo.
Certainly Mr. Rajit worked on the Sabbath. In fact, with his plump quiet
wife and plump cheerful children he worked around the clock, never mind
the calendar, diligently filling the area’s needs in the matter of soft
drinks, white bread, tobacco, sweets, newspapers, magazines, and the
type of top-shelf pornography that made Newt’s eyes water just to think
about. The worst you could imagine Mr. Rajit doing with a chicken was
selling it after the “Sell-By” date.

“But Mister Rajit’s from Bangladesh, or India, or somewhere,” he said.
“I thought voodoo came from the West Indies.”

“Ah,” said Witchfinder Sergeant Shadwell, and took another drag on his
cigarette. Or appeared to. Newt had never actually quite seen one of his
superior’s cigarettes—it was something to do with the way he cupped his
hands. He even made the ends disappear when he’d finished with them.
“Ah.”

“Well, doesn’t it?”

“Hidden wisdom, lad. Inner mili’try secrets of the Witchfinder army.
When you’re all initiated proper ye’ll know the secret truth. Some
voodoo _may_ come from the West Indies. I’ll grant ye that. Oh yes, I’ll
grant ye that. But the _worst_ kind. The darkest kind, that comes from,
um … ”

“Bangladesh?”

“Errrukh! Yes lad, that’s it. Words right out of me mouth. Bangladesh.
Exactly.”

Shadwell made the end of his cigarette vanish, and managed furtively to
roll another, never letting papers or tobacco be seen.

“So. Ye got anything, Witchfinder Private?”

“Well, there’s this.” Newton held out the clipping.

Shadwell squinted at it. “Oh _them_,” he said. “Load o’ rubbish. Call
themselves bloody witches? I checked them out last year. Went down with
me armory of righteousness and a packet of firelighters, jemmied the
place open, they were clean as a whistle. Mail order bee jelly business
they’re trying to pep up. Load o’ rubbish. Wouldn’t know a familiar
spirit if it chewed out the bottoms o’ their trousers. Rubbish. It’s not
like it used to be, laddie.”

He sat down and poured himself a cup of sweet tea from a filthy thermos.

“Did I ever tell you how I was recruited to the army?” he asked.

Newt took this as his cue to sit down. He shook his head. Shadwell lit
his roll-up with a battered Ronson lighter, and coughed appreciatively.

“My cellmate, he was. Witchfinder Captain Ffolkes. Ten years for arson.
Burning a coven in Wimbledon. Would have got them all too, if it wasn’t
the wrong day. Good fellow. Told me about the battle—the great war
between Heaven and Hell … It was him that told me the Inner Secrets of
the Witchfinder Army. Familiar spirits. Nipples. All that …

“Knew he was dying, you see. Got to have someone to carry on the
tradition. Like you is, now … ” He shook his head.

“That’s what we’m reduced to, lad,” he said. “A few hundred years ago,
see, we was powerful. We stood between the world and the darkness. We
was the thin red line. Thin red line o’ fire, ye see.”

“I thought the churches … ” Newt began.

“Pah!” said Shadwell. Newt had seen the word in print, but this was the
first time he’d ever heard anyone say it. “Churches? What good did they
ever do? They’m just as bad. Same line o’ business, nearly. You can’t
trust them to stamp out the Evil One, ’cos if they did, they’d be out o’
that line o’ business. If yer goin’ up against a tiger, ye don’t want
fellow travelers whose idea of huntin’ is tae throw meat at it. Nay,
lad. It’s up to us. Against the darkness.”

Everything went quiet for a moment.

Newt always tried to see the best in everyone, but it had occurred to
him shortly after joining the WA that his superior and only fellow
soldier was as well balanced as an upturned pyramid. “Shortly,” in this
case, meant under five seconds. The WA’s headquarters was a fetid room
with walls the color of nicotine, which was almost certainly what they
were coated with, and a floor the color of cigarette ash, which was
almost certainly what it was. There was a small square of carpet. Newt
avoided walking on it if possible, because it sucked at his shoes.

One of the walls had a yellowing map of the British Isles tacked to it,
with homemade flags sticking in it here and there; most of them were
within a Cheap Day Return fare of London.

But Newt had stuck with it the past few weeks because, well, horrified
fascination had turned into horrified pity and then a sort of horrified
affection. Shadwell had turned out to be about five feet high and wore
clothes which, no matter what they actually _were_, always turned up
even in your short-term memory as an old mackintosh. The old man may
have had all his own teeth, but only because no one else could possibly
have wanted them; just one of them, placed under the pillow, would have
made the Tooth Fairy hand in its wand.

He appeared to live entirely on sweet tea, condensed milk, hand-rolled
cigarettes, and a sort of sullen internal energy. Shadwell had a Cause,
which he followed with the full resources of his soul and his
Pensioner’s Concessionary Travel Pass. He believed in it. It powered him
like a turbine.

Newton Pulsifer had never had a cause in his life. Nor had he, as far as
he knew, ever believed in anything. It had been embarrassing, because he
quite _wanted_ to believe in something, since he recognized that belief
was the lifebelt that got most people through the choppy waters of Life.
He’d have liked to believe in a supreme God, although he’d have
preferred a half-hour’s chat with Him before committing himself, to
clear up one or two points. He’d sat in all sorts of churches, waiting
for that single flash of blue light, and it hadn’t come. And then he’d
tried to become an official Atheist and hadn’t got the rock-hard,
self-satisfied strength of belief even for that. And every single
political party had seemed to him equally dishonest. And he’d given up
on ecology when the ecology magazine he’d been subscribing to had shown
its readers a plan of a self-sufficient garden, and had drawn the
ecological goat tethered within three feet of the ecological beehive.
Newt had spent a lot of time at his grandmother’s house in the country
and thought he knew something about the habits of both goats and bees,
and concluded therefore that the magazine was run by a bunch of
bib-overalled maniacs. Besides, it used the word “community” too often;
Newt had always suspected that people who regularly used the word
“community” were using it in a very specific sense that excluded him and
everyone he knew.

Then he’d tried believing in the Universe, which seemed sound enough
until he’d innocently started reading new books with words like Chaos
and Time and Quantum in the titles. He’d found that even the people
whose job of work was, so to speak, the Universe, didn’t really believe
in it and were actually quite proud of not knowing what it really was or
even if it could theoretically exist.

To Newt’s straightforward mind this was intolerable.

Newt had not believed in the Cub Scouts and then, when he was old
enough, not in the Scouts either.

He was prepared to believe, though, that the job of wages clerk at
United Holdings [Holdings] PLC, was possibly the most boring in the
world.

This is how Newton Pulsifer looked as a man: if he went into a phone
booth and changed, he might manage to come out looking like Clark Kent.

But he found he rather liked Shadwell. People often did, much to
Shadwell’s annoyance. The Rajits liked him because he always eventually
paid his rent and didn’t cause any trouble, and was racist in such a
glowering, undirected way that it was quite inoffensive; it was simply
that Shadwell hated everyone in the world, regardless of caste, color,
or creed, and wasn’t going to make any exceptions for anyone.

Madame Tracy liked him. Newt had been amazed to find that the tenant of
the other flat was a middle-aged, motherly soul, whose gentlemen callers
called as much for a cup of tea and a nice chat as for what little
discipline she was still able to exact. Sometimes, when he’d nursed a
half pint of Guinness on a Saturday night, Shadwell would stand in the
corridor between their rooms and shout things like “Hoor of Babylon!”
but she told Newt privately that she’d always felt rather gratified
about this even though the closest she’d been to Babylon was
Torremolinos. It was like free advertising, she said.

She said she didn’t mind him banging on the wall and swearing during her
seance afternoons, either. Her knees had been giving her gyp and she
wasn’t always up to operating the table rapper, she said, so a bit of
muffled thumping came in useful.

On Sundays she’d leave him a bit of dinner on his doorstep, with another
plate over the top of it to keep it warm.

You couldn’t help liking Shadwell, she said. For all the good it did,
though, she might as well be flicking bread pellets into a black hole.

Newt remembered the other cuttings. He pushed them across the stained
desk.

“What are these?” said Shadwell, suspiciously.

“Phenomena,” said Newt. “You said to look for phenomena. There’s more
phenomena than witches these days, I’m afraid.”

“Anyone bin shootin’ hares wi’ a silver bullet and next day an old crone
in the village is walkin’ wi’ a limp?” Shadwell said hopefully.

“I’m afraid not.”

“Any cows droppin’ dead after some woman has looked at ’em?”

“No.”

“What is it, then?” said Shadwell. He shuffled across to the sticky
brown cupboard and pulled out a tin of condensed milk.

“Odd things happening,” said Newt.

He’d spent weeks on this. Shadwell had really let the papers pile up.
Some of them went back for years. Newt had quite a good memory, perhaps
because in his twenty-three years very little had happened to fill it
up, and he had become quite expert on some very esoteric subjects.

“Seems to be something new every day,” said Newt, flicking through the
rectangles of newsprint. “Something weird has been happening to nuclear
power stations, and no one seems to know what it is. And some people are
claiming that the Lost Continent of Atlantis has risen.” He looked proud
of his efforts.

Shadwell’s penknife punctured the condensed milk tin. There was the
distant sound of a telephone ringing. Both men instinctively ignored it.
All the calls were for Madame Tracy anyway and some of them were not
intended for the ear of man; Newt had conscientiously answered the phone
on his first day, listened carefully to the question, said “Marks and
Spencer’s 100% Cotton Y-fronts, actually,” and had been left with a dead
receiver.

Shadwell sucked deeply. “Ach, that’s no’ proper phenomena,” he said.
“Can’t see any witches doing that. They’re more for the sinking o’
things, ye ken.”

Newt’s mouth opened and shut a few times.

“If we’re strong in the fight against witchery we can’t afford to be
sidetracked by this style o’ thing,” Shadwell went on. “Haven’t ye got
anything more witchcrafty?”

“But American troops have landed on it to protect it from things,”
moaned Newt. “A nonexistent continent … ”

“Any witches on it?” said Shadwell, showing a spark of interest for the
first time.

“It doesn’t say,” said Newt.

“Ach, then it’s just politics and geography,” said Shadwell
dismissively.

Madame Tracy poked her head around the door. “Coo-ee, Mr. Shadwell,” she
said, giving Newt a friendly little wave. “A gentleman on the telephone
for you. Hallo, Mr. Newton.”

“Awa’ wi’ ye, harlot,” said Shadwell, automatically.

“He sounds ever so refined,” said Madame Tracy, taking no notice. “And
I’ll be getting us a nice bit of liver for Sunday.”

“I’d sooner sup wi’ the De’el, wumman.”

“So if you’d let me have the plates back from last week it’d be a help,
there’s a love,” said Madame Tracy, and tottered unsteadily back on
three-inch heels to her flat and whatever it was that had been
interrupted.

Newt looked despondently at his cuttings as Shadwell went out,
grumbling, to the phone. There was one about the stones of Stonehenge
moving out of position, as though they were iron filings in a magnetic
field.

He was vaguely aware of one side of a telephone conversation.

“Who? Ah. Aye. Aye. Ye say? Wha’ class o’ thing wud that be? Aye. Just
as you say, sor. And where is this place, then—?”

But mysteriously moving stones wasn’t Shadwell’s cup of tea or, rather,
tin of milk.

“Fine, fine,” Shadwell reassured the caller. “We’ll get onto it right
awa’. I’ll put my best squad on it and report success to ye any minute,
I ha’ no doubt. Goodbye to you, sor. And bless you too, sor.” There was
the ting of a receiver going back on the hook, and then Shadwell’s
voice, no longer metaphorically crouched in deference, said, “‘Dear
boy’! Ye great Southern pansy.”²⁷

He shuffled back into the room, and then stared at Newt as if he had
forgotten why he was there.

“What was it ye was goin’ on about?” he said.

“All these things that are happening—” Newt began.

“Aye.” Shadwell continued to look through him while thoughtfully tapping
the empty tin against his teeth.

“Well, there’s this little town which has been having some amazing
weather for the last few years,” Newt went on helplessly.

“What? Rainin’ frogs and similar?” said Shadwell, brightening up a bit.

“No. It just has normal weather for the time of year.”

“Call that a phenomena?” said Shadwell. “I’ve seen phenomenas that’d
make your hair curl, laddie.” He started tapping again.

“When do you remember normal weather for the time of year?” said Newt,
slightly annoyed. “Normal weather for the time of year isn’t normal,
Sergeant. It has snow at Christmas. When did you last see snow at
Christmas? And long hot Augusts? Every year? And crisp autumns? The kind
of weather you used to dream of as a kid? It never rained on November
the Fifth and always snowed on Christmas Eve?”

Shadwell’s eyes looked unfocused. He paused with the condensed milk tin
halfway to his lips.

“I never used to dream when I was a kid,” he said quietly.

Newt was aware of skidding around the lip of some deep, unpleasant pit.
He mentally backed away.

“It’s just very odd,” he said. “There’s a weatherman here talking about
averages and norms and microclimates and things like that.”

“What’s that mean?” said Shadwell.

“Means he doesn’t know why,” said Newt, who hadn’t spent years on the
littoral of business without picking up a thing or two. He looked
sidelong at the Witchfinder Sergeant.

“Witches are well known for affecting the weather,” he prompted. “I
looked it up in the _Discouverie_.”

Oh God, he thought, or other suitable entity, don’t let me spend another
evening cutting newspapers to bits in this ashtray of a room. Let me get
out in the fresh air. Let me do whatever is the WA’s equivalent of going
waterskiing in Germany.

“It’s only forty miles away,” he said tentatively. “I thought I could
just sort of nip over there tomorrow. And have a look around, you know.
I’ll pay my own petrol,” he added.

Shadwell wiped his upper lip thoughtfully.

“This place,” he said, “it wouldna be called Tadfield, would it?”

“That’s right, Mr. Shadwell,” said Newt. “How did you know that?”

“Wonder what the Southerners is playing at noo?” said Shadwell under his
breath.

“Weeell,” he said, out loud. “And why not?”

“Who’ll be playing, Sergeant?” said Newt.

Shadwell ignored him. “Aye. I suppose it can’t do any harm. Ye’ll pay
yer ane petrol, ye say?”

Newt nodded.

“Then ye’ll come here at nine o’ the clock in the morning,” he said,
“afore ye go.”

“What for?” said Newt.

“Yer armor o’ righteousness.”

JUST AFTER NEWT HAD LEFT the phone rang again. This time it was Crowley,
who gave approximately the same instructions as Aziraphale. Shadwell
took them down again for form’s sake, while Madame Tracy hovered
delightedly behind him.

“Two calls in one day, Mr. Shadwell,” she said. “Your little army must
be marching away like anything!”

“Ach, awa’ wi’ ye, ye murrain plashed berrizene,” muttered Shadwell, and
slammed the door. Tadfield, he thought. Och, weel. So long as they paid
up on time …

Neither Aziraphale or Crowley ran the _Witch_finder Army, but they both
approved of it, or at least knew that it would be approved of by their
superiors. So it appeared on the list of Aziraphale’s agencies because
it was, well, a Witchfinder Army, and you had to support anyone calling
themselves witchfinders in the same way that the U.S.A. had to support
anyone calling themselves anti-communist. And it appeared on Crowley’s
list for the slightly more sophisticated reason that people like
Shadwell did the cause of Hell no harm at all. Quite the reverse, it was
felt.

Strictly speaking, Shadwell didn’t run the WA either. According to
Shadwell’s pay ledgers it was run by Witchfinder General Smith. Under
him were Witchfinder Colonels Green and Jones, and Witchfinder Majors
Jackson, Robinson, and Smith (no relation). Then there were Witchfinder
Majors Saucepan, Tin, Milk, and Cupboard, because Shadwell’s limited
imagination had been beginning to struggle at this point. And
Witchfinder Captains Smith, Smith, Smith, and Smythe and Ditto. And five
hundred Witchfinder Privates and Corporals and Sergeants. Many of them
were called Smith, but this didn’t matter because neither Crowley nor
Aziraphale had ever bothered to read that far. They simply handed over
the pay.

After all, both lots put together only came to around £60 a year.

Shadwell didn’t consider this in any way criminal. The army was a sacred
trust, and a man had to do something. The old ninepences weren’t coming
in like they used to.


Saturday

IT WAS VERY EARLY on Saturday morning, on the last day of the world, and
the sky was redder than blood.

The International Express delivery man rounded the corner at a careful
thirty-five miles an hour, shifted down to second, and pulled up on the
grass verge.

He got out of the van, and immediately threw himself into a ditch to
avoid an oncoming lorry that had barreled around the bend at something
well in excess of eighty miles an hour.

He got up, picked up his glasses, put them back on, retrieved his parcel
and clipboard, brushed the grass and mud from his uniform, and, as an
afterthought, shook his fist at the rapidly diminishing lorry.

“Shouldn’t be allowed, bloody lorries, no respect for other road users,
what I always say, what I always say, is remember that without a car,
son, you’re just a pedestrian too … ”

He climbed down the grassy verge, clambered over a low fence, and found
himself beside the river Uck.

The International Express delivery man walked along the banks of the
river, holding the parcel.

Farther down the riverbank sat a young man dressed all in white. He was
the only person in sight. His hair was white, his skin chalk pale, and
he sat and stared up and down the river, as if he were admiring the
view. He looked like how Victorian Romantic poets looked just before the
consumption and drug abuse really started to cut it.

The International Express man couldn’t understand it. I mean, in the old
days, and it wasn’t that long ago really, there had been an angler every
dozen yards along the bank; children had played there; courting couples
had come to listen to the splish and gurgle of the river, and to hold
hands, and to get all lovey-dovey in the Sussex sunset. He’d done that
with Maud, his missus, before they were married. They’d come here to
spoon and, on one memorable occasion, fork.

Times changed, reflected the delivery man.

Now white and brown sculptures of foam and sludge drifted serenely down
the river, often covering it for yards at a stretch. And where the
surface of the water was visible it was covered with a molecules-thin
petrochemical sheen.

There was a loud whirring as a couple of geese, thankful to be back in
England again after the long, exhausting flight across the Northern
Atlantic, landed on the rainbow-slicked water, and sank without trace.

Funny old world, thought the delivery man. Here’s the Uck, used to be
the prettiest river in this part of the world, and now it’s just a
glorified industrial sewer. The swans sink to the bottom, and the fishes
float on the top.

Well, that’s progress for you. You can’t stop progress.

He had reached the man in white.

“’Scuse me, sir. Party name of Chalky?”

The man in white nodded, said nothing. He continued to gaze out at the
river, following an impressive sludge and foam sculpture with his eyes.

“So beautiful,” he whispered. “It’s all so damn beautiful.”

The delivery man found himself temporarily devoid of words. Then his
automatic systems cut in. “Funny old world isn’t it and no mistake I
mean you go all over the world delivering and then here you are
practically in your own home so to speak, I mean I was born and bred
’round here, sir, and I’ve been to the Mediterranean, and to Des O’
Moines, and that’s in America, sir, and now here I am, and here’s your
parcel, sir.”

Party name of Chalky took the parcel, and took the clipboard, and signed
for the parcel. The pen developed a leak as he did so, and his signature
obliterated itself as it was written. It was a long word, and it began
with a P, and then there was a splodge, and then it ended in something
that might have been—_ence_ and might have been—_ution_.

“Much obliged, sir,” said the delivery man.

He walked back along the river, back toward the busy road where he had
left his van, trying not to look at the river as he went.

Behind him the man in white opened the parcel. In it was a crown—a
circlet of white metal, set with diamonds. He gazed at it for some
seconds, with satisfaction, then put it on. It glinted in the light of
the rising sun. Then the tarnish, which had begun to suffuse its silver
surface when his fingers touched it, spread to cover it completely; and
the crown went black.

White stood up. There’s one thing you can say for air pollution, you get
utterly amazing sunrises. It looked like someone had set fire to the
sky.

And a careless match would have set fire to the river, but, alas, there
was no time for that now. In his mind he knew where the Four Of Them
would be meeting, and when, and he was going to have to hurry to be
there by this afternoon.

Perhaps we _will_ set fire to the sky, he thought. And he left that
place, almost imperceptibly.

It was nearly time.

The delivery man had left his van on the grass verge by the dual
carriageway. He walked around to the driver’s side (carefully, because
other cars and lorries were still rocketing around the bend), reached in
through the open window, and took the schedule from the dashboard.

Only one more delivery to make, then.

He read the instructions on the delivery voucher carefully.

He read them again, paying particular attention to the address, and the
message. The address was one word: Everywhere.

Then, with his leaking pen, he wrote a brief note to Maud, his wife. It
read simply, _I love you_.

Then he put the schedule back on the dashboard, looked left, looked
right, looked left again and began to walk purposefully across the road.
He was halfway across when a German juggernaut came around the corner,
its driver crazed on caffeine, little white pills, and EEC transport
regulations.

He watched its receding bulk.

Cor, he thought, that one nearly had me.

Then he looked down at the gutter.

Oh, he thought.

YES, agreed a voice from behind his left shoulder, or at least from
behind the memory of his left shoulder.

The delivery man turned, and looked, and saw. At first he couldn’t find
the words, couldn’t find anything, and then the habits of a working
lifetime took over and he said, “Message for you, sir.”

FOR ME?

“Yes, sir.” He wished he still had a throat. He could have swallowed, if
he still had a throat. “No package, I’m afraid, Mister … uh, sir. It’s a
message.”

DELIVER IT, THEN.

“It’s this, sir. Ahem. _Come and See_.”

FINALLY. There was a grin on its face, but then, given the face, there
couldn’t have been anything else.

THANK YOU, it continued. I MUST COMMEND YOUR DEVOTION TO DUTY.

“Sir?” The late delivery man was falling through a gray mist, and all he
could see were two spots of blue, that might have been eyes, and might
have been distant stars.

DON’T THINK OF IT AS DYING, said Death, JUST THINK OF IT AS LEAVING
EARLY TO AVOID THE RUSH.

The delivery man had a brief moment to wonder whether his new companion
was making a joke, and to decide that he wasn’t; and then there was
nothing.

Red sky in the morning. It was going to rain.

Yes.

WITCHFINDER SERGEANT Shadwell stood back with his head on one side.
“Right, then,” he said. “Ye’re all ready. Hae ye got it all?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Pendulum o’ discovery?”

“Pendulum of discovery, yes.”

“Thumbscrew?”

Newt swallowed, and patted a pocket.

“Thumbscrew,” he said.

_“Firelighters?”_

“I really think, Sergeant, that—”

“Firelighters?”

“Firelighters,”²⁸ said Newt sadly. “And matches.”

“Bell, book, and candle?”

Newt patted another pocket. It contained a paper bag inside which was a
small bell, of the sort that maddens budgerigars, a pink candle of the
birthday cake persuasion, and a tiny book called _Prayers for Little
Hands_. Shadwell had impressed upon him that, although witches were the
primary target, a good Witchfinder should never pass up the chance to do
a quick exorcism, and should have his field kit with him at all times.

“Bell, book, and candle,” said Newt.

“Pin?”

“Pin.”

“Good lad. Never forget yer pin. It’s the bayonet in yer artillery o’
light.”

Shadwell stood back. Newt noticed with amazement that the old man’s eyes
had misted over.

“I wish I was goin’ with ye,” he said. “O’ course, this won’t be
anything, but it’d be good to get out and about again. It’s a tryin’
life, ye ken, all this lyin’ in the wet bracken spying on their devilish
dancin’. It gets into yer bones somethin’ cruel.”

He straightened up, and saluted.

“Off ye go, then, Private Pulsifer. May the armies o’ glorification
march wi’ ye.”

After Newt had driven off Shadwell thought of something, something that
he’d never had the chance to do before. What he needed now was a pin.
Not a military issue pin, witches, for the use of. Just an ordinary pin,
such as you might stick in a map.

The map was on the wall. It was old. It didn’t show Milton Keynes. It
didn’t show Harlow. It barely showed Manchester and Birmingham. It had
been the army’s HQ map for three hundred years. There were a few pins in
it still, mainly in Yorkshire and Lancashire and a few in Essex, but
they were almost rusted through. Elsewhere, mere brown stubs indicated
the distant mission of a long-ago witchfinder.

Shadwell finally found a pin among the debris in an ashtray. He breathed
on it, polished it to a shine, squinted at the map until he located
Tadfield, and triumphantly rammed the pin home.

It gleamed.

Shadwell took a step backward, and saluted again. There were tears in
his eyes.

Then he did a smart about turn and saluted the display cabinet. It was
old and battered and the glass was broken but in a way it _was_ the WA.
It contained the Regimental silver (the Interbattalion Golf Trophy, not
competed for, alas, in seventy years); it contained the patent
muzzle-loading Thundergun of Witchfinder-Colonel
Ye-Shall-Not-Eat-Any-Living-Thing-With-The-Blood-Neither-Shall-Ye-Use-Enchantment-Nor-Observe-Times
Dalrymple; it contained a display of what were apparently walnuts but
were in reality a collection of shrunken headhunter heads donated by
Witchfinder CSM Horace “Get them afore they Get You” Narker, who’d
traveled widely in foreign parts; it contained memories.

Shadwell blew his nose, noisily, on his sleeve.

Then he opened a tin of condensed milk for breakfast.

IF THE ARMIES OF GLORIFICATION had tried to march with Newt, bits of
them would have dropped off. This is because, apart from Newt and
Shadwell, they had been dead for quite a long time.

It was a mistake to think of Shadwell (Newt never found out if he had a
first name) as a lone nut.

It was just that all the others were dead, in most cases for several
hundred years. Once the Army had been as big as it currently appeared in
Shadwell’s creatively edited bookkeeping. Newt had been surprised to
find that the Witchfinder Army had antecedents as long and almost as
bloody as its more mundane counterpart.

The rates of pay for witchfinders had last been set by Oliver Cromwell
and never reviewed. Officers got a crown, and the General got a
sovereign. It was just an honorarium, of course, because you got
ninepence per witch found and first pick of their property.

You really got to rely on those ninepences. And so times had been a bit
hard before Shadwell had gone on the payrolls of Heaven and Hell.

Newt’s pay was one old shilling per year.²⁹

In return for this, he was charged to keep “glimmer, firelock, firebox,
tinderbox or igniferous matches” about his person at all times, although
Shadwell indicated that a Ronson gas lighter would do very well.
Shadwell had accepted the invention of the patent cigarette lighter in
the same way that conventional soldiers welcomed the repeating rifle.

The way Newt looked at it, it was like being in one of those
organizations like the Sealed Knot or those people who kept on
refighting the American Civil War. It got you out at weekends, and meant
that you were keeping alive fine old traditions that had made Western
civilization what it was today.

AN HOUR AFTER LEAVING the headquarters, Newt pulled into a layby and
rummaged in the box on the passenger seat.

Then he opened the car window, using a pair of pliers for the purpose
since the handle had long since fallen off.

The packet of firelighters was sent winging over the hedge. A moment
later the thumbscrew followed it.

He debated about the rest of the stuff, and then put it back in the box.
The pin was Witchfinder military issue, with a good ebony knob on the
end like a ladies’ hat pin.

He knew what it was for. He’d done quite a lot of reading. Shadwell had
piled him up with pamphlets at their first meeting, but the Army had
also accumulated various books and documents which, Newt suspected,
would be worth a fortune if they ever hit the market.

The pin was to jab into suspects. If there was a spot on their body
where they didn’t feel anything, they were a witch. Simple. Some of the
fraudulent Witchfinders had used special retracting pins, but this one
was honest, solid steel. He wouldn’t be able to look old Shadwell in the
face if he threw away the pin. Besides, it was probably bad luck.

He started the engine and resumed his journey.

Newt’s car was a Wasabi. He called it Dick Turpin, in the hope that one
day someone would ask him why.

It would be a very accurate historian who could pinpoint the precise day
when the Japanese changed from being fiendish automatons who copied
everything from the West, to becoming skilled and cunning engineers who
would leave the West standing. But the Wasabi had been designed on that
one confused day, and combined the traditional bad points of most
Western cars with a host of innovative disasters the avoidance of which
had made firms like Honda and Toyota what they were today.

Newt had never actually seen another one on the road, despite his best
efforts. For years, and without much conviction, he’d enthused to his
friends about its economy and efficiency in the desperate hope that one
of them might buy one, because misery loves company.

In vain did he point out its 823cc engine, its three-speed gearbox, its
incredible safety devices like the balloons which inflated on dangerous
occasions such as when you were doing 45 mph on a straight dry road but
were about to crash because a huge safety balloon had just obscured the
view. He’d also wax slightly lyrical about the Korean-made radio, which
picked up Radio Pyongyang incredibly well, and the simulated electronic
voice which warned you about not wearing a seatbelt even when you were;
it had been programmed by someone who not only didn’t understand
English, but didn’t understand Japanese either. It was state of the art,
he said.

The art in this case was probably pottery.

His friends nodded and agreed and privately decided that if ever it came
to buying a Wasabi or walking, they’d invest in a pair of shoes; it came
to the same thing anyway, since one reason for the Wasabi’s incredible
m.p.g. was that fact that it spent a lot of time waiting in garages
while crankshafts and things were in the post from the world’s only
surviving Wasabi agent in Nigirizushi, Japan.

In that vague, zen-like trance in which most people drive, Newt found
himself wondering exactly how you used the pin. Did you say, “I’ve got a
pin, and I’m not afraid to use it”? _Have Pin, Will Travel … The
Pinslinger … The Man with the Golden Pin … The Pins of Navarone …_

It might have interested Newt to know that, of the thirty-nine thousand
women tested with the pin during the centuries of witch-hunting,
twenty-nine thousand said “ouch,” nine thousand, nine hundred and
ninety-nine didn’t feel anything because of the use of the aforesaid
retractable pins, and one witch declared that it had miraculously
cleared up the arthritis in her leg.

Her name was Agnes Nutter.

She was the Witchfinder Army’s great failure.

ONE OF THE EARLY ENTRIES in _The Nice and Accurate Prophecies_ concerned
Agnes Nutter’s own death.

The English, by and large, being a crass and indolent race, were not as
keen on burning women as other countries in Europe. In Germany the
bonfires were built and burned with regular Teutonic thoroughness. Even
the pious Scots, locked throughout history in a long-drawn-out battle
with their arch-enemies the Scots, managed a few burnings to while away
the long winter evenings. But the English never seemed to have the heart
for it.

One reason for this may have to do with the manner of Agnes Nutter’s
death, which more or less marked the end of the serious witch-hunting
craze in England. A howling mob, reduced to utter fury by her habit of
going around being intelligent and curing people, arrived at her house
one April evening to find her sitting with her coat on, waiting for
them.

“Ye’re tardie,” she said to them. “I shoulde have beene aflame ten
minutes since.”

Then she got up and hobbled slowly through the suddenly silent crowd,
out of the cottage, and to the bonfire that had been hastily thrown
together on the village green. Legend says that she climbed awkwardly
onto the pyre and thrust her arms around the stake behind her.

“Tye yt well,” she said to the astonished witchfinder. And then, as the
villagers sidled toward the pyre, she raised her handsome head in the
firelight and said, “Gather ye ryte close, goode people. Come close
untyl the fire near scorch ye, for I charge ye that alle must see how
thee last true wytch in England dies. For wytch I am, for soe I am
judgéd, yette I knoe not what my true Cryme may be. And therefore let
myne deathe be a messuage to the worlde. Gather ye ryte close, I saye,
and _marke well the fate of alle who meddle with suche as theye do notte
understande_.”

And, apparently, she smiled and looked up at the sky over the village
and added, “That goes for you as welle, yowe daft old foole.”

And after that strange blasphemy she said no more. She let them gag her,
and stood imperiously as the torches were put to the dry wood.

The crowd grew nearer, one or two of its members a little uncertain as
to whether they’d done the right thing, now they came to think about it.

Thirty seconds later an explosion took out the village green, scythed
the valley clean of every living thing, and was seen as far away as
Halifax.

There was much subsequent debate as to whether this had been sent by God
or by Satan, but a note later found in Agnes Nutter’s cottage indicated
that any divine or devilish intervention had been materially helped by
the contents of Agnes’s petticoats, wherein she had with some foresight
concealed eighty pounds of gunpowder and forty pounds of roofing nails.

What Agnes also left behind, on the kitchen table beside a note
canceling the milk, was a box and a book. There were specific
instructions as to what should be done with the box, and equally
specific instructions about what should be done with the book; it was to
be sent to Agnes’s son, John Device.

The people who found it—who were from the next village, and had been
woken up by the explosion—considered ignoring the instructions and just
burning the cottage, and then looked around at the twinkling fires and
nail-studded wreckage and decided not to. Besides, Agnes’s note included
painfully precise predictions about what would happen to people who did
not carry out her orders.

The man who put the torch to Agnes Nutter was a Witchfinder Major. They
found his hat in a tree two miles away.

His name, stitched inside on a fairly large piece of tape, was
Thou-Shalt-Not-Commit-Adultery Pulsifer, one of England’s most assiduous
witchfinders, and it might have afforded him some satisfaction to know
that his last surviving descendant was now, even if unawares, heading
toward Agnes Nutter’s last surviving descendant. He might have felt that
some ancient revenge was at last going to be discharged.

If he’d known what was actually going to happen when that descendant met
her he would have turned in his grave, except that he had never got one.

FIRSTLY, HOWEVER, Newt had to do something about the flying saucer.

It landed in the road ahead of him just as he was trying to find the
Lower Tadfield turning and had the map spread over the steering wheel.
He had to brake hard.

It looked like every cartoon of a flying saucer Newt had ever seen.

As he stared over the top of his map, a door in the saucer slid aside
with a satisfying whoosh, revealing a gleaming walkway which extended
automatically down to the road. Brilliant blue light shone out,
outlining three alien shapes. They walked down the ramp. At least, two
of them walked. The one that looked like a pepper pot just skidded down
it, and fell over at the bottom.

The other two ignored its frantic beeping and walked over to the car
quite slowly, in the worldwide approved manner of policemen already
compiling the charge sheet in their heads. The tallest one, a yellow
toad dressed in kitchen foil, rapped on Newt’s window. He wound it down.
The thing was wearing the kind of mirror-finished sunglasses that Newt
always thought of as Cool Hand Luke shades.

“Morning, sir or madam or neuter,” the thing said. “This your planet, is
it?”

The other alien, which was stubby and green, had wandered off into the
woods by the side of the road. Out of the corner of his eye Newt saw it
kick a tree, and then run a leaf through some complicated gadget on its
belt. It didn’t look very pleased.

“Well, yes. I suppose so,” he said.

The toad stared thoughtfully at the skyline.

“Had it long, have we, sir?” it said.

“Er. Not personally. I mean, as a species, about half a million years. I
think.”

The alien exchanged glances with its colleague. “Been letting the old
acid rain build up, haven’t we, sir?” it said. “Been letting ourselves
go a bit with the old hydrocarbons, perhaps?”

“I’m sorry?”

“Could you tell me your planet’s albedo, sir?” said the toad, still
staring levelly at the horizon as though it was doing something
interesting.

“Er. No.”

“Well, I’m sorry to have to tell you, sir, that your polar ice caps are
below regulation size for a planet of this category, sir.”

“Oh, dear,” said Newt. He was wondering who he could tell about this,
and realizing that there was absolutely no one who would believe him.

The toad bent closer. It seemed to be worried about something, insofar
as Newt was any judge of the expressions of an alien race he’d never
encountered before.

“We’ll overlook it on this occasion, sir.”

Newt gabbled. “Oh. Er. I’ll see to it—well, when I say _I_, I mean, I
think Antarctica or something belongs to every country, or something,
and—”

“The fact is, sir, that we have been asked to give you a message.”

“Oh?”

“Message runs ‘We give you a message of universal peace and cosmic
harmony an’ suchlike.’ Message ends,” said the toad.

“Oh.” Newt turned this over in his mind. “Oh. That’s very kind.”

“Have you got any idea why we have been asked to bring you this message,
sir?” said the toad.

Newt brightened. “Well, er, I suppose,” he flailed, “what with
Mankind’s, er, harnessing of the atom and—”

“Neither have we, sir.” The toad stood up. “One of them phenomena, I
expect. Well, we’d better be going.” It shook its head vaguely, turned
around and waddled back to the saucer without another word.

Newt stuck his head out of the window.

“Thank you!”

The small alien walked past the car.

“CO2 level up 0.5 percent,” it rasped, giving him a meaningful look.
“You do know you could find yourself charged with being a dominant
species while under the influence of impulse-driven consumerism, don’t
you?”

The two of them righted the third alien, dragged it back up the ramp,
and shut the door.

Newt waited for a while, in case there were any spectacular light
displays, but it just stood there. Eventually he drove up on the verge
and around it. When he looked in his rearview mirror it had gone.

I must be overdoing something, he thought guiltily. But what?

And I can’t even tell Shadwell, because he’d probably bawl me out for
not counting their nipples.

“ANYWAY,” SAID ADAM, “you’ve got it all wrong about witches.”

The Them were sitting on a field gate, watching Dog rolling in cowpats.
The little mongrel seemed to be enjoying himself immensely.

“I’ve been reading about them,” he said, in a slightly louder voice.
“Actually, they’ve been right all along and it’s wrong to persecute ’em
with British Inquisitions and stuff.”

“My mother said they were just intelligent women protesting in the only
way open to them against the stifling injustices of a male-dominated
social hierarchy,” said Pepper.

Pepper’s mother lectured at Norton Polytechnic.³⁰

“Yes, but your mother’s always saying things like that,” said Adam,
after a while.

Pepper nodded amiably. “And she said, at worst they were just
free-thinking worshipers of the progenerative principle.”

“Who’s the progenratty principle?” said Wensleydale.

“Dunno. Something to do with maypoles, I think,” said Pepper vaguely.

“Well, _I_ thought they worshipped the Devil,” said Brian, but without
automatic condemnation. The Them had an open mind on the whole subject
of devil worship. The Them had an open mind about _everything_. “Anyway,
the Devil’d be better than a stupid maypole.”

“That’s where you’re wrong,” said Adam. “It’s not the Devil. It’s
another god, or something. With horns.”

“The Devil,” said Brian.

“No,” said Adam patiently. “People just got ’em mixed up. He’s just got
horns similar. He’s called Pan. He’s half a goat.”

“Which half?” said Wensleydale.

Adam thought about it.

“The bottom half,” he said at length. “Fancy you not knowin’ that. I
should of thought everyone knew _that_.”

“Goats haven’t got a bottom half,” said Wensleydale. “They’ve got a
front half and a back half. Just like cows.”

They watched Dog some more, drumming their heels on the gate. It was too
hot to think.

Then Pepper said, “If he’s got goat legs, he shouldn’t have horns. They
belong to the front half.”

“I didn’t make him up, did I?” said Adam, aggrieved. “I was just telling
you. It’s news to me I made him up. No need to go on at _me_.”

“Anyway,” said Pepper. “This stupid Pot can’t go around complaining if
people think he’s the Devil. Not with having horns on. People are
_bound_ to say, oh, here comes the Devil.”

Dog started to dig up a rabbit hole.

Adam, who seemed to have a weight on his mind, took a deep breath.

“You don’t have to be so _lit’ral_ about everything,” he said. “That’s
the trouble these days. Grass materialism. ’S people like you who go
round choppin’ down rain forests and makin’ holes in the ozone layer.
There’s a great big hole in the ozone layer ’cos of grass materialism
people like you.”

“I can’t do anythin’ about it,” said Brian automatically. “I’m still
paying off on a stupid cucumber frame.”

“It’s in the magazine,” said Adam. “It takes millions of acres of rain
forest to make one beefburger. And all this ozone is leakin’ away
because of … ” he hesitated, “people sprayin’ the enviroment.”

“And there’s whales,” said Wensleydale. “We’ve got to save ’em.”

Adam looked blank. His plunder of _New Aquarian_’s back issues hadn’t
included anything about whales. Its editors had assumed that the readers
were all for saving whales in the same way they assumed that those
readers breathed and walked upright.

“There was this program about them,” explained Wensleydale.

“What’ve we got to save ’em for?” said Adam. He had confused visions of
saving up whales until you had enough for a badge.

Wensleydale paused and racked his memory. “Because they can sing. And
they’ve got big brains. There’s hardly any of them left. And we don’t
need to kill them anyway ’cos they only make pet food and stuff.”

“If they’re so clever,” said Brian, slowly, “what are they doin’ in the
sea?”

“Oh, I dunno,” said Adam, looking thoughtful. “Swimmin’ around all day,
just openin’ their mouths and eating stuff … sounds pretty clever to
me—”

A squeal of brakes and a long drawn-out crunch interrupted him. They
scrambled off the gate and ran up the lane to the crossroads, where a
small car lay on its roof at the end of a long skidmark.

A little further down the road was a hole. It looked as though the car
had tried to avoid it. As they looked at it, a small Oriental-looking
head darted out of sight.

The Them dragged the door open and pulled out the unconscious Newt.
Visions of medals for heroic rescue thronged Adam’s head. Practical
considerations of first aid thronged around that of Wensleydale.

“We shouldn’t move him,” he said. “Because of broken bones. We ought to
get someone.”

Adam cast around. There was a rooftop just visible in the trees down the
road. It was Jasmine Cottage.

And in Jasmine Cottage Anathema Device was sitting in front of a table
on which some bandages, aspirins, and assorted first-aid items had been
laid out for the past hour.

ANATHEMA HAD BEEN looking at the clock. He’ll be coming around any
moment now, she’d thought.

And then, when he got there, he wasn’t what she’d been expecting. More
precisely, he wasn’t what she’d been hoping for.

She had been hoping, rather self-consciously, for someone tall, dark,
and handsome.

Newt was tall, but with a rolled-out, thin look. And while his hair was
undoubtedly dark, it wasn’t any sort of fashion accessory; it was just a
lot of thin, black strands all growing together out of the top of his
head. This was not Newt’s fault; in his younger days he would go every
couple of months to the barber’s shop on the corner, clutching a
photograph he’d carefully torn from a magazine which showed someone with
an impressively cool haircut grinning at the camera, and he would show
the picture to the barber, and ask to be made to look like that, please.
And the barber, who knew his job, would take one look and then give Newt
the basic, all-purpose, short-back-and-sides. After a year of this, Newt
realized that he obviously didn’t have the face that went with haircuts.
The best Newton Pulsifer could hope for after a haircut was shorter
hair.

It was the same with suits. The clothing hadn’t been invented that would
make him look suave and sophisticated and comfortable. These days he had
learned to be satisfied with anything that would keep the rain off and
give him somewhere to keep his change.

And he wasn’t handsome. Not even when he took off his glasses.³¹ And,
she discovered when she took off his shoes to lay him on her bed, he
wore odd socks: one blue one, with a hole in the heel, and one gray one,
with holes around the toes.

I suppose I’m meant to feel a wave of warm, tender female
something-or-other about this, she thought. I just wish he’d wash them.

So … tall, dark, but not handsome. She shrugged. Okay. Two out of three
isn’t bad.

The figure on the bed began to stir. And Anathema, who in the very
nature of things always looked to the future, suppressed her
disappointment and said:

“How are we feeling now?”

Newt opened his eyes.

He was lying in a bedroom, and it wasn’t his. He knew this instantly
because of the ceiling. His bedroom ceiling still had the model aircraft
hanging from bits of cotton. He’d never got around to taking them down.

This ceiling just had cracked plaster. Newt had never been in a woman’s
bedroom before, but he sensed that this was one largely by a combination
of soft smells. There was a hint of talcum and lily-of-the-valley, and
no rank suggestion of old T-shirts that had forgotten what the inside of
a tumble-dryer looked like.

He tried to lift his head up, groaned, and let it sink back onto the
pillow. Pink, he couldn’t help noticing.

“You banged your head on the steering wheel,” said the voice that had
roused him. “Nothing broken, though. What happened?”

Newt opened his eyes again.

“Car all right?” he said.

“Apparently. A little voice inside it keeps repeating ‘Prease to frasten
sleat-bert.’”

“See?” said Newt, to an invisible audience. “They knew how to build them
in those days. That plastic finish hardly takes a dent.”

He blinked at Anathema.

“I swerved to avoid a Tibetan in the road,” he said. “At least, I think
I did. I think I’ve probably gone mad.”

The figure walked around into his line of sight. It had dark hair, and
red lips, and green eyes, and it was almost certainly female. Newt tried
not to stare. It said, “If you have, no one’s going to notice.” Then she
smiled. “Do you know, I’ve never met a witchfinder before?”

“Er—” Newt began. She held up his open wallet.

“I had to look inside,” she said.

Newt felt extremely embarrassed, a not unusual state of affairs.
Shadwell had given him an official witchfinder’s warrant card, which
among other things charged all beadles, magistrates, bishops, and
bailiffs to give him free passage and as much dry kindling as he
required. It was incredibly impressive, a masterpiece of calligraphy,
and probably quite old. He’d forgotten about it.

“It’s really just a hobby,” he said wretchedly. “I’m really a … a … ” he
wasn’t going to say wages clerk, not here, not now, not to a girl like
this, “a computer engineer,” he lied. _Want_ to be, _want_ to be; in my
_heart_ I’m a computer engineer, it’s only the brain that’s letting me
down. “Excuse me, could I know—”

“Anathema Device,” said Anathema. “I’m an occultist, but that’s just a
hobby. I’m really a witch. Well done. You’re half an hour late,” she
added, handing him a small sheet of cardboard, “so you’d better read
this. It’ll save a lot of time.”

NEWT DID IN FACT own a small home computer, despite his boyhood
experiences. In fact, he’d owned several. You always _knew_ which ones
he owned. They were desktop equivalents of the Wasabi. They were the
ones which, for example, dropped to half price just after he’d bought
them. Or were launched in a blaze of publicity and disappeared into
obscurity within a year. Or only worked at all if you stuck them in a
fridge. Or, if by some fluke they were basically good machines, Newt
always got the few that were sold with the early, bug-infested version
of the operating system. But he persevered, because he _believed_.

Adam also had a small computer. He used it for playing games, but never
for very long. He’d load a game, watch it intently for a few minutes,
and then proceed to play it until the High Score counter ran out of
zeroes.

When the other Them wondered about this strange skill, Adam professed
mild amazement that everyone didn’t play games like this.

“All you have to do is learn how to play it, and then it’s just easy,”
he said.

QUITE A LOT OF THE FRONT parlor in Jasmine Cottage was taken up, Newt
noticed with a sinking feeling, with piles of newspapers. Clippings were
stuck around the walls. Some of them had bits circled in red ink. He was
mildly gratified to spot several he had cut out for Shadwell.

Anathema owned very little in the way of furniture. The only thing she’d
bothered to bring with her had been her clock, one of the family
heirlooms. It wasn’t a full-cased grandfather clock, but a wall clock
with a free-swinging pendulum that E. A. Poe would cheerfully have
strapped someone under.

Newt kept finding his eye drawn to it.

“It was built by an ancestor of mine,” said Anathema, putting the coffee
cups down on the table. “Sir Joshua Device. You may have heard of him?
He invented the little rocking thing that made it possible to build
accurate clocks cheaply? They named it after him.”

“The Joshua?” said Newt guardedly.

“The device.”

In the last half hour Newt had heard some pretty unbelievable stuff and
was close to believing it, but you have to draw the line somewhere.

“The device is named after a real person?” he said.

“Oh, yes. Fine old Lancashire name. From the French, I believe. You’ll
be telling me next you’ve never heard of Sir Humphrey Gadget—”

“Oh, now come _on_—”

“—who devised a _gadget_ that made it possible to pump out flooded
mineshafts. Or Pietr Gizmo? Or Cyrus T. Doodad, America’s foremost black
inventor? Thomas Edison said that the only other contemporary practical
scientists he admired were Cyrus T. Doodad and Ella Reader Widget. And—”

She looked at Newt’s blank expression.

“I did my Ph.D. on them,” she said. “The people who invented things so
simple and universally useful that everyone forgot that they’d ever
actually needed to be invented. Sugar?”

“Er—”

“You normally have two,” said Anathema sweetly.

Newt stared back at the card she’d handed him.

She’d seemed to think it would explain everything.

It didn’t.

It had a ruled line down the middle. On the left-hand side was a short
piece of what seemed to be poetry, in black ink. On the right-hand side,
in red ink this time, were comments and annotations. The effect was as
follows:

3819: When Orient’s chariot inverted be, four wheles in the skye, a man
with bruises be upon Youre Bedde, achinge his hedd for willow fine, a
manne who testeth with a pyn yette his hart be clene, yette seed of myne
own undoing, take the means of flame from himme for to mayk ryght
certain, together ye sharle be, untyl the Ende that is to come.
[Japanese car? Upturned. Car smash … not serious injury?? . . . take
in … . . . willowfine = Aspirin (cf.3757) Pin = witchfinder (cf.102)
_Good_ witchfinder?? Refers to Pulsifer (cf.002) Search for matches,
etc. In the 1990s! . . .. … hmm … . . . less than a day (cf.712, 3803,
4004)]

Newt’s hand went automatically to his pocket. His cigarette lighter had
gone.

“What’s this mean?” he said hoarsely.

“Have you ever heard of Agnes Nutter?” said Anathema.

“No,” said Newt, taking a desperate defense in sarcasm. “You’re going to
tell me she invented mad people, I suppose.”

“Another fine old Lancashire name,” said Anathema coldly. “If you don’t
believe, read up on the witch trials of the early seventeenth century.
She was an ancestress of mine. As a matter of fact, one of your
ancestors burned her alive. Or tried to.”

Newt listened in fascinated horror to the story of Agnes Nutter’s death.

“Thou-Shalt-Not-Commit-Adultery Pulsifer?” he said, when she’d finished.

“That sort of name was quite common in those days,” said Anathema.
“Apparently there were ten children and they were a very religious
family. There was Covetousness Pulsifer, False-Witness Pulsifer—”

“I think I understand,” said Newt. “Gosh. I _thought_ Shadwell said he’d
heard the name before. It must be in the Army records. I suppose if I’d
gone around being called Adultery Pulsifer I’d want to hurt as many
people as possible.”

“I think he just didn’t like women very much.”

“Thanks for taking it so well,” said Newt. “I mean, he must have been an
ancestor. There aren’t many Pulsifers. Maybe … that’s why I sort of met
up with the Witchfinder Army? Could be Fate,” he said hopefully.

She shook her head. “No,” she said. “No such thing.”

“Anyway, witchfinding isn’t like it was in those days. I don’t even
think old Shadwell’s ever done more than kick over Doris Stokes’s
dustbins.”

“Between you and me, Agnes was a bit of a difficult character,” said
Anathema, vaguely. “She had no middle gears.”

Newt waved the bit of paper.

“But what’s it got to do with this?” he said.

“She wrote it. Well, the original. It’s No. 3819 of _The Nice and
Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter_, first published 1655.”

Newt stared at the prophecy again. His mouth opened and shut.

_“She knew I’d crash my car?”_ he said.

“Yes. No. Probably not. It’s hard to say. You see, Agnes was the worst
prophet that’s ever existed. Because she was always right. That’s why
the book never sold.”

MOST PSYCHIC ABILITIES are caused by a simple lack of temporal focus,
and the mind of Agnes Nutter was so far adrift in Time that she was
considered pretty mad even by the standards of seventeenth-century
Lancashire, where mad prophetesses were a growth industry.

But she was a treat to listen to, everyone agreed.

She used to go on about curing illnesses by using a sort of mold, and
the importance of washing your hands so that the tiny little animals who
caused diseases would be washed away, when every sensible person knew
that a good stink was the only defense against the demons of ill health.
She advocated running at a sort of gentle bouncing trot as an aid to
living longer, which was extremely suspicious and first put the
Witchfinders onto her, and stressed the importance of fiber in diet,
although here she was clearly ahead of her time since most people were
less bothered about the fiber in their diet than the gravel. And she
wouldn’t cure warts.

“Itt is alle in youre Minde,” she’d say, “fogett about Itte, ane it
wille goe Away.”

It was obvious that Agnes had a line to the Future, but it was an
unusually narrow and specific line. In other words, almost totally
useless.


“How do you mean?” said Newt.

“She managed to come up with the kind of predictions that you can only
understand after the thing has happened,” said Anathema. “Like ‘Do Notte
Buye Betamacks.’ That was a prediction for 1972.”

“You mean she _predicted_ videotape recorders?”

“No! She just picked up one little fragment of information,” said
Anathema. “That’s the point. Most of the time she comes up with such an
oblique reference that you can’t work it out until it’s gone past, and
then it all slots into place. And she didn’t know what was going to be
important or not, so it’s all a bit hit and miss. Her prediction for
November 22, 1963, was about a house falling down in King’s Lynn.”

“Oh?” Newt looked politely blank.

“President Kennedy was assassinated,” said Anathema helpfully. “But
Dallas didn’t exist then, you see. Whereas King’s Lynn was quite
important.”

“Oh.”

“She was generally very good if her descendants were involved.”

“Oh?”

“And she wouldn’t know anything about the internal combustion engine. To
her they were just funny chariots. Even my mother thought it referred to
an Emperor’s carriage overturning. You see, it’s not enough to know what
the future _is_. You have to know what it _means_. Agnes was like
someone looking at a huge picture down a tiny little tube. She wrote
down what seemed like good advice based on what she understood of the
tiny little glimpses.

“Sometimes you can be lucky,” Anathema went on. “My great-grandfather
worked out about the stock market crash of 1929, for example, two days
before it actually happened. Made a fortune. You could say we’re
professional descendants.”

She looked sharply at Newt. “You see, what no one ever realized until
about two hundred years ago is that _The Nice and Accurate Prophecies_
was Agnes’s idea of a family heirloom. Many of the prophecies relate to
her descendants and their well-being. She was sort of trying to look
after us after she’d gone. That’s the reason for the King’s Lynn
prophecy, we think. My father was visiting there at the time, so from
Agnes’s point of view, while he was unlikely to be struck by stray
rounds from Dallas, there was a good chance he might be hit by a brick.”

“What a nice person,” said Newt. “You could almost overlook her blowing
up an entire village.”

Anathema ignored this. “Anyway, that’s about it,” she said. “Ever since
then we’ve made it our job to interpret them. After all, it averages out
at about one prophecy a month—more now, in fact, as we get closer to the
end of the world.”

“And when is that going to be?” said Newt.

Anathema looked meaningfully at the clock.

He gave a horrible little laugh that he hoped sounded suave and worldly.
After the events so far today, he wasn’t feeling very sane. And he could
smell Anathema’s perfume, which made him uncomfortable.

“Think yourself lucky I don’t need a stopwatch,” said Anathema. “We’ve
got, oh, about five or six hours.”

Newt turned this over in his mind. Thus far in his life he’d never had
the urge to drink alcohol, but something told him there had to be a
first time.

“Do witches keep drink in the house?” he ventured.

“Oh, yes.” She smiled the sort of smile Agnes Nutter probably smiled
when unpacking the contents of her lingerie drawer. “Green bubbly stuff
with strange Things squirming on the congealing surface. _You_ should
know that.”

“Fine. Got any ice?”

It turned out to be gin. There was ice. Anathema, who had picked up
witchcraft as she went along, disapproved of liquor in general but
approved of it in her specific case.

“Did I tell you about the Tibetan coming out of a hole in the road?”
Newt said, relaxing a bit.

“Oh, I know about them,” she said, shuffling the papers on the table.
“The two of them came out of the front lawn yesterday. The poor things
were quite bewildered, so I gave them a cup of tea and then they
borrowed a spade and went down again. I don’t think they quite know what
they’re supposed to be doing.”

Newt felt slightly aggrieved. “How did _you_ know they were _Tibetan_?”
he said.

“If it comes to that, how did you know? Did he go ‘Ommm’ when you hit
him?”

“Well, he—he looked Tibetan,” said Newt. “Saffron robes, bald head … you
know … Tibetan.”

“One of mine spoke quite good English. It seems that one minute he was
repairing radios in Lhasa, next minute he was in a tunnel. He doesn’t
know how he’s going to get home.”

“If you’d sent him up the road, he could probably have got a lift on a
flying saucer,” said Newt gloomily.

“Three aliens? One of them a little tin robot?”

“They landed on your lawn too, did they?”

“It’s about the only place they didn’t land, according to the radio.
They keep coming down all over the world delivering a short trite
message of cosmic peace, and when people say ‘Yes, well?’ they give them
a blank look and take off again. Signs and portents, just like Agnes
said.”

“You’re going to tell me she predicted all this too, I suppose?”

Agnes leafed through a battered card index in front of her.

“I kept meaning to put it all on computer,” she said. “Word searches and
so forth. You know? It’d make it a lot simpler. The prophecies are
arranged in any old order but there are clues, handwriting and so.”

“She did it all in a card index?” said Newt.

“No. A book. But I’ve, er, mislaid it. We’ve always had copies, of
course.”

“Lost it, eh?” said Newt, trying to inject some humor into the
proceedings. “Bet she didn’t foresee that!”

Anathema glowered at him. If looks could kill, Newt would have been on a
slab.

Then she went on: “We’ve built up quite a concordance over the years,
though, and my grandfather came up with a useful cross-referencing
system … ah. Here we are.”

She pushed a sheet of paper in front of Newt.

3988. Whene menne of crocus come frome the Earth and green manne frome
thee Sky, yette ken not why, and Pluto’s barres quitte the lightning
castels, and sunken landes riseth, and Leviathan runneth free, and
Brazil is vert, then Three cometh together and Four arise, upon iron
horses ride; I tell you the ende draweth nigh. [. . . Crocus = saffron
(cf.2003) . . . Aliens … ?? . . . paratroops? . . . nuclear power
stations (see cuttings Nos. 798–806) Atlantis, cuttings 812–819 . . .
leviathan = whale (cf.1981)? South America is green? ? 3 = 4? Railways?
(‘iron road,’ cf.2675)]

“I didn’t get all of this one in advance,” Anathema admitted. “I filled
it in after listening to the news.”

“You must be incredibly good at crosswords in your family,” said Newt.

“I think Agnes is getting a bit out of her depth here, anyway. The bits
about leviathan and South America and threes and fours could mean
anything.” She sighed. “The problem is newspapers. You never know if
Agnes is referring to some tiny little incident that you might miss. Do
you know how long it takes to go through _every_ daily paper
_thoroughly_ every morning?”

“Three hours and ten minutes,” said Newt automatically.

“I EXPECT WE’LL GET a medal or something,” said Adam optimistically.
“Rescuing a man from a blazing wreck.”

“It wasn’t blazing,” said Pepper. “It wasn’t even very wrecked when we
put it back rightside up.”

“It _could_ of been,” Adam pointed out. “I don’t see why we shouldn’t
have a medal just because some old car doesn’t know when to catch fire.”

They stood looking down at the hole. Anathema had called the police, who
had put it down to subsidence and put some cones around it; it was dark,
and went down a long way.

“Could be good fun, going to Tibet,” said Brian. “We could learn marital
arts and stuff. I saw this old film where there’s this valley in Tibet
and everyone there lives for hundreds of years. It’s called Shangri-La.”

“My aunt’s bungalow’s called Shangri-La,” said Wensleydale.

Adam snorted.

“Not very clever, naming a valley after some ole bungalow,” he said.
“Might as well call it Dunroamin’, or, or The Laurels.”

“’S lot better than Shambles, anyway,” said Wensleydale mildly.

“Shambala,” corrected Adam.

“I expect it’s the same place. Prob’ly got both names,” said Pepper,
with unusual diplomacy. “Like our house. We changed the name from The
Lodge to Norton View when we moved in, but we still get letters
addressed to Theo C. Cupier, The Lodge. Perhaps they’ve named it
Shambala now but people still call it The Laurels.”

Adam flicked a pebble into the hole. He was becoming bored with
Tibetans.

“What shall we do now?” said Pepper. “They’re dipping sheep over at
Norton Bottom Farm. We could go and help.”

Adam threw a larger stone into the hole, and waited for the thump. It
didn’t come.

“Dunno,” he said distantly. “I reckon we should do something about
whales and forests and suchlike.”

“Like what?” said Brian, who enjoyed the diversions available at a good
sheep-dipping. He began to empty his pockets of crisp packets and drop
them, one by one, into the hole.

“We could go into Tadfield this afternoon and not have a hamburger,”
said Pepper. “If all four of us don’t have one, that’s millions of acres
of rainforest they won’t have to cut down.”

“They’ll be cutting ’em down anyway,” said Wensleydale.

“It’s grass materialism again,” said Adam. “Same with the whales. It’s
amazin’, the stuff that’s goin’ on.” He stared at Dog.

He was feeling very odd.

The little mongrel, noticing the attention, balanced expectantly on its
hind legs.

“’S people like you that’s eating all the whales,” said Adam severely.
“I bet you’ve used up nearly a whole whale already.”

Dog, one last tiny satanic spark of his soul hating himself for it, put
his head on one side and whined.

“’S gonna be a fine ole world to grow up in,” Adam said. “No whales, no
air, and everyone paddlin’ around because of the seas risin’.”

“Then the Atlantisans’d be the only ones well off,” said Pepper
cheerfully.

“Huh,” said Adam, not really listening.

Something was happening inside his head. It was aching. Thoughts were
arriving there without him having to think them. Something was saying,
_You can do something, Adam Young. You can make it all better. You can
do anything you want_. And what was saying this to him was … him. Part
of him, deep down. Part of him that had been attached to him all these
years and not really noticed, like a shadow. It was saying: yes, it’s a
rotten world. It could have been great. But now it’s rotten, and it’s
time to do something about it. That’s what you’re here for. To make it
all better.

“Because they’d be able to go everywhere,” Pepper went on, giving him a
worried look. “The Atlantisans, I mean. Because—”

“I’m fed up with the ole Atlantisans and Tibetans,” snapped Adam.

They stared at him. They’d never seen him like this before.

“It’s all very well for _them_,” said Adam. “Everyone’s goin’ around
usin’ up all the whales and coal and oil and ozone and rainforests and
that, and there’ll be none left for us. We should be goin’ to Mars and
stuff, instead of sittin’ around in the dark and wet with the air
spillin’ away.”

This wasn’t the old Adam the Them knew. The Them avoided one another’s
faces. With Adam in this mood, the world seemed a chillier place.

“Seems to me,” said Brian, pragmatically, “seems to _me_, the best thing
you could do about it is stop readin’ about it.”

“It’s like you said the other day,” said Adam. “You grow up readin’
about pirates and cowboys and spacemen and stuff, and jus’ when you
think the world’s all full of amazin’ things, they tell you it’s really
all dead whales and chopped-down forests and nucular waste hang-in’
about for millions of years. ’Snot worth growin’ up for, if you ask my
opinion.”

The Them exchanged glances.

There _was_ a shadow over the whole world. Storm clouds were building up
in the north, the sunlight glowing yellow off them as though the sky had
been painted by an enthusiastic amateur.

“Seems to me it ought to be rolled up and started all over again,” said
Adam.

That hadn’t sounded like Adam’s voice.

A bitter wind blew through the summer woods.

Adam looked at Dog, who tried to stand on his head. There was a distant
mutter of thunder. He reached down and patted the dog absentmindedly.

“Serve everyone right if all the nucular bombs went off and it all
started again, only prop’ly organized,” said Adam. “Sometimes I think
that’s what I’d like to happen. An’ then we could sort everythin’ out.”

The thunder growled again. Pepper shivered. This wasn’t the normal Them
mobius bickering, which passed many a slow hour. There was a look in
Adam’s eye that his friend couldn’t quite fathom—not devilment, because
that was more or less there all the time, but a sort of blank grayness
that was far worse.

“Well, I dunno about _we,”_ Pepper tried. “Dunno about the _we_,
because, if there’s all these bombs goin’ off, we all get blown up.
Speaking as a mother of unborn generations, I’m against it.”

They looked at her curiously. She shrugged.

“And then giant ants take over the world,” said Wensleydale nervously.
“I saw this film. Or you go around with sawn-off shotguns and everyone’s
got these cars with, you know, knives and guns stuck on—”

“I wouldn’t allow any giant ants or anything like that,” said Adam,
brightening up horribly. “And you’d all be all right. I’d see to that.
It’d be _wicked_, eh, to have all the world to ourselves. Wouldn’t it?
We could share it out. We could have amazing games. We could have War
with real armies an’ stuff.”

“But there wouldn’t be any _people,”_ said Pepper.

“Oh, I could make us some people,” said Adam airily. “Good enough for
armies, at any rate. We could all have a quarter of the world each.
Like, _you”_—he pointed to Pepper, who recoiled as though Adam’s finger
were a white-hot poker—”could have Russia because it’s red and you’ve
got red hair, right? And Wensley can have America, and Brian can have,
can have Africa and Europe, an’, an’—”

Even in their state of mounting terror the Them gave this the
consideration it deserved.

“H-huh,” stuttered Pepper, as the rising wind whipped at her T-shirt, “I
don’t s-see why Wensley’s got America an’ all I’ve g-got is just Russia.
Russia’s _boring_.”

“You can have China and Japan and India,” said Adam.

“That means I’ve got jus’ Africa and a lot of jus’ borin’ little
countries,” said Brian, negotiating even on the curl of the catastrophe
curve. “I wouldn’t mind Australia,” he added.

Pepper nudged him and shook her head urgently.

“Dog’s goin’ to have Australia,” said Adam, his eyes glowing with the
fires of creation, “on account of him needin’ a lot of space to run
about. An’ there’s all those rabbits and kangaroos for him to chase,
an’—”

The clouds spread forwards and sideways like ink poured into a bowl of
clear water, moving across the sky faster than the wind.

“But there won’t _be_ any rab—” Wensleydale shrieked.

Adam wasn’t listening, at least to any voices outside his own head.
“It’s all too much of a mess,” he said. “We should start again. Just
save the ones we want and start again. That’s the best way. It’d be
doing the Earth a favor, when you come to think about it. It makes me
_angry_, seeing the way those old loonies are messing it up … ”

“IT’S MEMORY, YOU SEE,” said Anathema. “It works backwards as well as
forwards. Racial memory, I mean.”

Newt gave her a polite but blank look.

“What I’m trying to say,” she said patiently, “is that Agnes didn’t
_see_ the future. That’s just a metaphor. She _remembered_ it. Not very
well, of course, and by the time it’d been filtered through her own
understanding it’s often a bit confused. We think she’s best at
remembering things that were going to happen to her descendants.”

“But if you’re going to places and doing things because of what she
wrote, and what she wrote is her recollection of the places you went to
and the things you did,” said Newt, “then—”

“I know. But there’s, er, some evidence that that’s how it works,” said
Anathema.

They looked at the map spread out between them. Beside them the radio
murmured. Newt was very aware that a woman was sitting next to him. Be
professional, he told himself. You’re a soldier, aren’t you? Well,
practically. Then act like a soldier. He thought hard for a fraction of
a second. Well, act like a respectable soldier on his best behavior,
then. He forced his attention back to the matter at hand.

“Why Lower Tadfield?” said Newt. _“I_ just got interested because of the
weather. Optimal microclimate, they call it. That means it’s a small
place with its own personal nice weather.”

He glanced at her notebooks. There was definitely something odd about
the place, even if you ignored Tibetans and UFOs, which seemed to be
infesting the whole world these days. The Tadfield area didn’t only have
the kind of weather you could set your calendar by, it was also
remarkably resistant to change. No one seemed to build new houses there.
The population didn’t seem to move much. There seemed to be more woods
and hedges than you’d normally expect these days. The only battery farm
to open in the area had failed after a year or two, and been replaced by
an old-fashioned pig farmer who let his pigs run loose in his apple
orchards and sold the pork at premium prices. The two local schools
seemed to soldier on in blissful immunity from the changing fashions of
education. A motorway which should have turned most of Lower Tadfield
into little more than the Junction 18 Happy Porker Rest Area changed
course five miles away, detoured in a great semicircle, and continued on
its way oblivious to the little island of rural changelessness it had
avoided. No one quite seemed to know why; one of the surveyors involved
had a nervous breakdown, a second had become a monk, and a third had
gone off to Bali to paint nude women.

It was as if a large part of the twentieth century had marked a few
square miles Out of Bounds.

Anathema pulled another a card out of her index and flicked it across
the table.

2315. Sum say It cometh in London Town, or New Yorke, butte they be
Wronge, for the plase is Taddes Fild, Stronge inne hys powr, he cometh
like a knight inne the fief, he divideth the Worlde into 4 partes, he
bringeth the storme. [. . . 4 years early [New Amsterdam till 1664] … .
. . Taddville, Norfolk … . . . Tardesfield, Devon … . . . Tadfield,
Oxon … < . . ! . . See Revelation, C6, v10]

“I had to go and look through a lot of county records,” said Anathema.

“Why’s this one 2315? It’s earlier than the others.”

“Agnes was a bit slapdash about timing. I don’t think she always knew
what went where. I told you, we’ve spent ages devising a sort of system
for chaining them together.”

Newt looked at a few cards. For example:

1111. An the Great Hound sharl coom, and the Two Powers sharl watch in
Vane, for it Goeth where is its Master, Where they Wot Notte, and he
sharl name it, True to Ittes Nature, and Hell sharl flee it. [? Is this
something to do with Bismark? [A F Device, June 8, 1888] . . . ? . . .
Schleswig-Holstein?]

“She’s being unusually obtuse for Agnes,” said Anathema.

3017. I see Four Riding, bringing the Ende, and the Angells of Hell ride
with them, And Three sharl Rise. And Four and Four Together be Four, an
the Dark Angel sharl Own Defeat, Yette the Manne sharl claim his Own.
[The Apocalyptic Horsemen The Man = Pan, The Devil (_The Witch Trials of
Lancashire_, Brewster, 1782). ?? I feel good Agnes had drunk well this
night, [Quincy Device, Octbr. 15, 1789] I concur. We are all human,
alas. [Miss O J Device, Janry. 5, 1854]]

“Why _Nice_ and Accurate?” said Newt.

“Nice as in exact, or precise,” said Anathema, in the weary tones of one
who’d explained this before. “That’s what it used to mean.”

“But _look_,” said Newt—

—he’d nearly convinced himself about the non-existence of the UFO, which
was clearly a figment of his imagination, and the Tibetan could have
been a, well, he was working on it, but whatever it was it wasn’t a
Tibetan, but what he _was_ more and more convinced of was that he was in
a room with a very attractive woman, who appeared actually to like him,
or at least not to dislike him, which was a definite first for Newt. And
admittedly there seemed to be a lot of strange stuff going on, but if he
really tried, poling the boat of common sense upstream against the
raging current of the evidence, he could pretend it was all, well,
weather balloons, or Venus, or mass hallucination.

In short, whatever Newt was now thinking with, it wasn’t his brain.

“But look,” he said, “the world isn’t _really_ going to end now, is it?
I mean, just look around. It’s not like there’s any international
tension … well, any more than there normally is. Why don’t we leave this
stuff for a while and just go and, oh, I don’t know, maybe we could just
go for a walk or something, I mean—”

“Don’t you understand? There’s something here! Something that affects
the area!” she said. “It’s twisted all the ley-lines. It’s protecting
the area against anything that might change it! It’s … it’s … ” There it
was again: the thought in her mind that she could not, was not allowed
to grasp, like a dream upon waking.

The windows rattled. Outside, a sprig of jasmine, driven by the wind,
started to bang insistently on the glass.

“But I can’t get a fix on it,” said Anathema, twisting her fingers
together. “I’ve tried everything.”

“Fix?” said Newt.

“I’ve tried the pendulum. I’ve tried the theodolite. I’m psychic, you
see. But it seems to move around.”

Newt was still in control of his own mind enough to do the proper
translation. When most people said “I’m psychic, you see,” they meant “I
have an overactive but unoriginal imagination / wear black nail varnish
/ talk to my budgie”; when Anathema said it, it sounded as though she
was admitting to a hereditary disease which she’d much prefer not to
have.

“Armageddon moves around?” said Newt.

“Various prophecies say the Antichrist has to arise first,” said
Anathema. “Agnes says _he_. I can’t spot him—”

“Or her,” said Newt.

“What?”

“Could be a her,” said Newt. “This is the twentieth century, after all.
Equal opportunities.”

“I don’t think you’re taking this entirely seriously,” she said
severely. “Anyway, there isn’t any _evil_ here. That’s what I don’t
understand. There’s just love.”

“Sorry?” said Newt.

She gave him a helpless look. “It’s hard to describe it,” she said.
“Something or someone loves this place. Loves every inch of it so
powerfully that it shields and protects it. A deep-down, huge, fierce
love. How can anything bad start here? How can the end of the world
start in a place like this? This is the kind of town you’d want to raise
your kids in. It’s a kids’ paradise.” She smiled weakly. “You should
_see_ the local kids. They’re unreal! Right out of the _Boys’ Own
Paper!_ All scabby knees and ‘brilliant!’ and bulls-eyes—”

She nearly had it. She could feel the shape of the thought, she was
gaining on it.

_“What_’s this place?” said Newt.

“What?” Anathema screamed, as her train of thought was derailed.

Newt’s finger tapped at the map.

“‘Disused aerodrome,’ it says. Just here, look, west of Tadfield
itself—”

Anathema snorted. “Disused? Don’t you believe it. Used to be a wartime
fighter base. It’s been Upper Tadfield Air Base for about ten years or
so. And before you say it, the answer’s no. I hate everything about the
bloody place, but the colonel’s saner than you are by a long way. His
wife does yoga, for God’s sake.”

Now. What was it she’d said before? The kids round here …

She felt her mental feet slipping away from under her, and she fell back
into the more personal thought waiting there to catch her. Newt was
okay, really. And the thing about spending the rest of your life with
him was, he wouldn’t be around long enough to get on your nerves.

The radio was talking about South American rainforests.

New ones.

It began to hail.

BULLETS OF ICE shredded the leaves around the Them as Adam led them down
into the quarry.

Dog slunk along with his tail between his legs, whining.

This wasn’t right, he was thinking. Just when I was getting the hang of
rats. Just when I’d nearly sorted out that bloody German Shepherd across
the road. Now He’s going to end it all and I’ll be back with the ole
glowin’ eyes and chasin’ lost souls. What’s the sense in that? They
don’t fight back, and there’s no taste to ’em …

Wensleydale, Brian, and Pepper were not thinking quite so coherently.
All that they were aware of was that they could no more not follow Adam
than fly; to try to resist the force marching them forward would simply
result in multiply broken legs, and they’d _still_ have to march.

Adam wasn’t thinking at all. Something had opened in his mind and was
aflame.

He sat them down on the crate.

“We’ll all be all right down here,” he said.

“Er,” said Wensleydale, “don’t you think our mothers and fathers—”

“Don’t you worry about them,” said Adam loftily. “I can make some new
ones. There won’t be any of this being in bed by half past nine, either.
You don’t ever have to go to bed ever, if you don’t want to. Or tidy
your room or anything. You just leave it all to me and it will be
great.” He gave them a manic smile. “I’ve got some new friends comin’,”
he confided. “You’ll like ’em.”

“But—” Wensleydale began.

“You jus’ think of all the amazin’ stuff afterwards,” said Adam
enthusiastically. “You can fill up America with all new cowboys an’
Indians an’ policemen an’ gangsters an’ cartoons an’ spacemen and stuff.
Won’t that be fantastic?”

Wensleydale looked miserably at the other two. They were sharing a
thought that none of them would be able to articulate very
satisfactorily even in normal times. Broadly, it was that there had once
been real cowboys and gangsters, and that was great. And there would
always be pretend cowboys and gangsters, and that was also great. But
_real_ pretend cowboys and gangsters, that were alive and not alive and
could be put back in their box when you were tired of them—this did not
seem great at all. The whole point about gangsters and cowboys and
aliens and pirates was that you could stop being them and go home.

“But before all that,” said Adam darkly, “we’re really goin’ to _show_
’em … ”

THERE WAS A TREE in the plaza. It wasn’t very big and the leaves were
yellow and the light it got through the excitingly dramatic smoked glass
was the wrong sort of light. And it was on more drugs than an Olympic
athlete, and loudspeakers nested in the branches. But it was a tree, and
if you half-closed your eyes and looked at it over the artificial
waterfall, you could almost believe that you were looking at a sick tree
through a fog of tears.

Jaime Hernez liked to have his lunch under it. The maintenance
supervisor would shout at him if he found out, but Jaime had grown up on
a farm and it had been quite a good farm and he had liked trees and he
didn’t want to have to come into the city, but what could you do? It
wasn’t a bad job and the money was the kind of money his father hadn’t
dreamed of. His grandfather hadn’t dreamed of any money at all. He
hadn’t even known what money was until he was fifteen. But there were
times when you needed trees, and the shame of it, Jaime thought, was
that his children were growing up thinking of trees as firewood and his
grandchildren would think of trees as history.

But what could you do? Where there were trees now there were big farms,
where there were small farms now there were plazas, and where there were
plazas there were still plazas, and that’s how it went.

He hid his trolley behind the newspaper stand, sat down furtively, and
opened his lunchbox.

It was then that he became aware of the rustling, and a movement of
shadows across the floor. He looked around.

The tree was moving. He watched it with interest. Jaime had never seen a
tree growing before.

The soil, which was nothing more than a scree of some sort of artificial
chippings, was actually crawling as the roots moved around under the
surface. Jaime saw a thin white shoot creep down the side of the raised
garden area and prod blindly at the concrete of the floor.

Without knowing why, without ever knowing why, he nudged it gently with
his foot until it was close to the crack between the slabs. It found it,
and bored down.

The branches were twisting into different shapes.

Jaime heard the screech of traffic outside the building, but didn’t pay
it any attention. Someone was yelling something, but someone was always
yelling in Jaime’s vicinity, often at him.

The questing root must have found the buried soil. It changed color and
thickened, like a fire hose when the water is turned on. The artificial
waterfall stopped running; Jaime visualized fractured pipes blocked with
sucking fibers.

Now he could see what was happening outside. The street surface was
heaving like a sea. Saplings were pushing up between the cracks.

Of course, he reasoned; they had sunlight. His tree didn’t. All it had
was the muted gray light that came through the dome four stories up.
Dead light.

But what could you do?

You could do this:

The elevators had stopped running because the power was off, but it was
only four flights of stairs. Jaime carefully shut his lunchbox and
padded back to his cart, where he selected his longest broom.

People were pouring out of the building, yelling. Jaime moved amiably
against the flow like a salmon going upstream.

A white framework of girders, which the architect had presumably thought
made a dynamic statement about something or other, held up the smoked
glass dome. In fact it was some sort of plastic, and it took Jaime,
perched on a convenient strip of girder, all his strength and the full
leverage of the broom’s length to crack it. A couple more swings brought
it down in lethal shards.

The light poured in, lighting up the dust in the plaza so that the air
looked as though it was full of fireflies.

Far below, the tree burst the walls of its brushed concrete prison and
rose like an express train. Jaime had never realized that trees made a
sound when they grew, and no one else had realized it either, because
the sound is made over hundreds of years in waves twenty-four hours from
peak to peak.

Speed it up, and the sound a tree makes is _vroooom_.

Jaime watched it come toward him like a green mushroom cloud. Steam was
billowing out from around its roots.

The girders never stood a chance. The remnant of the dome went up like a
ping-pong ball on a water spray.

It was the same over all the city, except that you couldn’t see the city
any more. All you could see was the canopy of green. It stretched from
horizon to horizon.

Jaime sat on his branch, clung to a liana, and laughed and laughed and
laughed.

Presently, it began to rain.

THE _KAPPAMAKI_, a whaling research ship, was currently researching the
question: How many whales can you catch in one week?

Except that, today, there weren’t any whales. The crew stared at the
screens, which by the application of ingenious technology could spot
anything larger than a sardine and calculate its net value on the
international oil market, and found them blank. The occasional fish that
did show up was barreling through the water as if in a great hurry to
get elsewhere.

The captain drummed his fingers on the console. He was afraid that he
might soon be conducting his own research project to find out what
happened to a statistically small sample of whaler captains who came
back without a factory ship full of research material. He wondered what
they did to you. Maybe they locked you in a room with a harpoon gun and
expected you to do the honorable thing.

This was unreal. There ought to be _something_.

The navigator punched up a chart and stared at it.

“Honorable sir?” he said.

“What is it?” said the captain testily.

“We seem to have a miserable instrument failure. Seabed in this area
should be two hundred meters.”

“What of it?”

“I’m reading 15,000 meters, honorable sir. And still falling.”

“That is foolish. There is no such depth.”

The captain glared at several million yen worth of cutting-edge
technology, and thumped it.

The navigator gave a nervous smile.

“Ah, sir,” he said, “it is shallower already.”

_Beneath the thunders of the upper deep_, as Aziraphale and Tennyson
both knew, _Far, far beneath in the abyssal sea / The kraken sleepeth_.

And now it was waking up.

Millions of tons of deep ocean ooze cascade off its flanks as it rises.

“See,” said the navigator. “Three thousand meters already.”

The kraken doesn’t have eyes. There has never been anything for it to
look at. But as it billows up through the icy waters it picks up the
microwave noise of the sea, the sorrowing beeps and whistles of the
whalesong.

“Er,” said the navigator, “one thousand meters?”

The kraken is not amused.

“Five hundred meters?”

The factory ship rocks on the sudden swell.

“A hundred meters?”

There is a tiny metal thing above it. The kraken stirs.

And ten billion sushi dinners cry out for vengeance.

The cottage windows burst inward. This wasn’t a storm, it was war.
Fragments of jasmine whirled across the room, mingled with the rain of
file cards.

Newt and Anathema clung to one another in the space between the
overturned table and the wall.

“Go on,” muttered Newt. “Tell me Agnes predicted this.”

“She did say he bringeth the storm,” said Anathema.

“This is a bloody hurricane. Did she say what’s supposed to happen
next?”

“2315 is cross-referenced to 3477,” said Anathema.

“You can remember details like that at a time like this?”

“Since you mention it, yes,” she said. She held out a card.

3477. Lette the wheel of Fate turne, let harts enjoin, there are othere
fyres than mine; when the wynd blowethe the blossoms, reach oute one to
anothere, for the calm cometh when Redde and Whyte and Blacke and Pale
approche to Peas is Our Professioune. [? Some mysticism here, one fears.
[A F Device, Octbr 17, 1889] Peas/blossoms? [OFD, 1929, Sept 4]
Revelations Ch 6 again, I presume. [Dr Thos. Device, 1835]]

Newt read it again. There was a sound outside like a sheet of corrugated
iron pinwheeling across the garden, which was exactly what it was.

“Is this supposed to mean,” he said slowly, “that we’re supposed to
become an, an _item_? That Agnes, what a joker.”

Courting is always difficult when the one being courted has an elderly
female relative in the house; they tend to mutter or cackle or bum
cigarettes or, in the worst cases, get out the family photograph album,
an act of aggression in the sex war which ought to be banned by a Geneva
Convention. It’s much worse when the relative has been dead for three
hundred years. Newt had indeed been harboring certain thoughts about
Anathema; not just harboring them, in fact, but dry-docking them,
refitting them, giving them a good coat of paint and scraping the
barnacles off their bottom. But the idea of Agnes’s second sight boring
into the back of his neck sloshed over his libido like a bucketful of
cold water.

He had even been entertaining the idea of inviting her out for a meal,
but he hated the idea of some Cromwellian witch sitting in her cottage
three centuries earlier and watching him eat.

He was in the mood in which people burned witches. His life was quite
complicated enough without it being manipulated across the centuries by
some crazed old woman.

A thump in the grate sounded like part of the chimney stack coming down.

And then he thought: my life isn’t complicated at all. I can see it as
clearly as Agnes might. It stretches all the way to early retirement, a
whip-round from the people in the office, a bright little neat flat
somewhere, a neat little empty death. Except now I’m going to die under
the ruins of a cottage during what might just possibly be the end of the
world.

The Recording Angel won’t have any trouble with me, my life must have
been dittoes on every page for years. I mean, what have I ever really
done? I’ve never robbed a bank. I’ve never had a parking ticket. I’ve
never eaten Thai food—

Somewhere another window caved in, with a merry tinkle of breaking
glass. Anathema put her arms around him, with a sigh which really didn’t
sound disappointed at all.

I’ve never been to America. Or France, because Calais doesn’t really
count. I’ve never learned to play a musical instrument.

The radio died as the power lines finally gave up.

He buried his face in her hair.

I’ve never—


There was a pinging sound.

Shadwell, who had been bringing the Army pay books up to date, looked up
in the middle of signing for Witchfinder Lance-Corporal Smith.

It took him a while to notice that the gleam of Newt’s pin was no longer
on the map.

He got down from his stool, muttering under his breath, and searched
around on the floor until he found it. He gave it another polish and put
it back in Tadfield.

He was just signing for Witchfinder Private Table, who got an extra
tuppence a year hay allowance, when there was another _ping_.

He retrieved the pin, glared at it suspiciously, and pushed it so hard
into the map that the plaster behind it gave way. Then he went back to
the ledgers.

There was a _ping_.

This time the pin was several feet from the wall. Shadwell picked it up,
examined its point, pushed it into the map, and watched it.

After about five seconds it shot past his ear.

He scrabbled for it on the floor, replaced it on the map, and held it
there.

It moved under his hand. He leaned his weight on it.

A tiny thread of smoke curled out of the map. Shadwell gave a whimper
and sucked his fingers as the red-hot pin ricocheted off the opposite
wall and smashed a window. It didn’t want to be in Tadfield.

Ten seconds later Shadwell was rummaging through the WA’s cash box,
which yielded a handful of copper, a ten-shilling note, and a small
counterfeit coin from the reign of James I. Regardless of personal
safety, he rummaged in his own pockets. The results of the trawl, even
with his pensioners’ concessionary travel pass taken into consideration,
were barely enough to get him out of the house, let alone to Tadfield.

The only other people he knew who had money were Mr. Rajit and Madame
Tracy. As far as the Rajits were concerned, the question of seven weeks’
rent would probably crop up in any financial discussion he instigated at
this point, and as for Madame Tracy, who’d only be too willing to lend
him a handful of used tenners …

“I’ll be swaggit if I’ll tak the Wages o’ Sin frae the painted jezebel,”
he said.

Which left no one else.

Save one.

The southern pansy.

They’d each been here, just once, spending as little time as possible in
the room and, in Aziraphale’s case, trying not to touch any flat
surface. The other one, the flash Southern bastard in the sunglasses,
was—Shadwell suspected—not someone he ought to offend. In Shadwell’s
simple world, anyone in sunglasses who wasn’t actually on a beach was
probably a criminal. He suspected that Crowley was from the Mafia, or
the underworld, although he would have been surprised how right he
nearly was. But the soft one in the camelhair coat was a different
matter, and he’d risked trailing him back to his base once, and he could
remember the way. He thought Aziraphale was a Russian spy. He could ask
him for money. Threaten him a bit.

It was terribly risky.

Shadwell pulled himself together. Even now young Newt might be suffering
unimaginable tortures at the hands of the daughters o’ night and he,
Shadwell, had sent him.

“We canna leave our people in there,” he said, and put on his thin
overcoat and shapeless hat and went out into the street.

The weather seemed to be blowing up a bit.

AZIRAPHALE WAS DITHERING. He’d been dithering for some twelve hours. His
nerves, he would have said, were all over the place. He walked around
the shop, picking up bits of paper and dropping them again, fiddling
with pens.

He ought to tell Crowley.

No, he didn’t. He _wanted_ to tell Crowley. He _ought_ to tell Heaven.

He was an angel, after all. You had to do the right thing. It was built
in. You see a wile, you thwart. Crowley had put his finger on it, right
enough. He ought to have told Heaven right from the start.

But he’d known him for thousands of years. They got along. They nearly
understood one another. He sometimes suspected they had far more in
common with one another than with their respective superiors. They both
liked the world, for one thing, rather than viewing it simply as the
board on which the cosmic game of chess was being played.

Well, of course, that was it. That was the answer, staring him in the
face. It’d be true to the _spirit_ of his pact with Crowley if he tipped
Heaven the wink, and then they could quietly do something about the
child, although nothing too bad of course because we were all God’s
creatures when you got down to it, even people like Crowley and the
Antichrist, and the world would be saved and there wouldn’t have to be
all that Armageddon business, which would do nobody any good anyway,
because everyone _knew_ Heaven would win in the end, and Crowley would
be bound to understand.

Yes. And then everything would be all right.

There was a knock at the shop door, despite the closed sign. He ignored
it.

Getting in touch with Heaven for two-way communications was far more
difficult for Aziraphale than it is for humans, who don’t expect an
answer and in nearly all cases would be rather surprised to get one.

He pushed aside the paper-laden desk and rolled up the threadbare
bookshop carpet. There was a small circle chalked on the floorboards
underneath, surrounded by suitable passages from the Cabala. The angel
lit seven candles, which he placed ritually at certain points around the
circle. Then he lit some incense, which was not necessary but did make
the place smell nice.

And then he stood in the circle and said the Words.

Nothing happened.

He said the Words again.

Eventually a bright blue shaft of light shot down from the ceiling and
filled the circle.

A well-educated voice said, “Well?”

“It’s me, Aziraphale.”

“We know,” said the voice.

“I’ve got great news! I’ve located the Antichrist! I can give you his
address and everything!”

There was a pause. The blue light flickered.

“Well?” it said again.

“But, d’you see, you can ki—can stop it all happening! In the nick of
time! You’ve only got a few hours! You can stop it all and there needn’t
be the war and everyone will be saved!”

He beamed madly into the light.

“Yes?” said the voice.

“Yes, he’s in a place called Lower Tadfield, and the address—”

“Well done,” said the voice, in flat, dead tones.

“There doesn’t have to be any of that business with one third of the
seas turning to blood or anything,” said Aziraphale happily.

When it came, the voice sounded slightly annoyed.

“Why not?” it said.

Aziraphale felt an icy pit opening under his enthusiasm, and tried to
pretend it wasn’t happening.

He plunged on: “Well, you can simply make sure that—”

“We will _win_, Aziraphale.”

“Yes, but—”

“The forces of darkness must be _beaten_. You seem to be under a
misapprehension. The point is not to _avoid_ the war, it is to _win_ it.
We have been waiting a long time, Aziraphale.”

Aziraphale felt the coldness envelop his mind. He opened his mouth to
say, “Do you think perhaps it would be a good idea not to hold the war
on Earth?” and changed his mind.

“I see,” he said grimly. There was a scraping near the door, and if
Aziraphale had been looking in that direction he would have seen a
battered felt hat trying to peer over the fanlight.

“This is not to say you have not performed well,” said the voice. “You
will receive a commendation. Well done.”

“Thank you,” said Aziraphale. The bitterness in his voice would have
soured milk. “I’d forgotten about ineffability, obviously.”

“We thought you had.”

“May I ask,” said the angel, “to whom have I been speaking?”

The voice said, “We are the Metatron.”³²

“Oh, yes. Of course. Oh. Well. Thank you very much. Thank you.”

Behind him the letterbox tilted open, revealing a pair of eyes.

“One other thing,” said the voice. “You will of course be joining us,
won’t you?”

“Well, er, of course it has been simply ages since I’ve held a flaming
sword—” Aziraphale began.

“Yes, we recall,” said the voice. “You will have a lot of opportunity to
relearn.”

“Ah. Hmm. What sort of initiating event will precipitate the war?” said
Aziraphale.

“We thought a multination nuclear exchange would be a nice start.”

“Oh. Yes. Very imaginative.” Aziraphale’s voice was flat and hopeless.

“Good. We will expect you directly, then,” said the voice.

“Ah. Well. I’ll just clear up a few business matters, shall I?” said
Aziraphale desperately.

“There hardly seems to be any necessity,” said the Metatron.

Aziraphale drew himself up. “I really feel that probity, not to say
morality, demands that as a reputable businessman I should—”

“Yes, yes,” said the Metatron, a shade testily. “Point taken. We shall
await you, then.”

The light faded, but did not quite vanish. They’re leaving the line
open, Aziraphale thought. I’m not getting out of this one.

“Hallo?” he said softly, “Anyone still there?”

There was silence.

Very carefully, he stepped over the circle and crept to the telephone.
He opened his notebook and dialed another number.

After four rings it gave a little cough, followed by a pause, and then a
voice which sounded so laid back you could put a carpet on it said, “Hi.
This is Anthony Crowley. Uh. I—”

“Crowley!” Aziraphale tried to hiss and shout at the same time, “Listen!
I haven’t got much time! The—”

“—probably not in right now, or asleep, and busy, or something, but—”

“Shutup! Listen! It was in Tadfield! It’s all in that book! You’ve got
to stop—”

“—after the tone and I’ll get right back to you. Chow.”

“I want to talk to you now—”

_BeeeEEeeeEEeee_

“Stop making noises! It’s in Tadfield! That was what I was sensing! You
must go there and—”

He took the phone away from his mouth.

“Bugger!” he said. It was the first time he’d sworn in more than six
thousand years.

Hold on. The demon had another line, didn’t he? He was that kind of
person. Aziraphale fumbled in the book, nearly dropping it on the floor.
They would be getting impatient soon.

He found the other number. He dialed it. It was answered almost
immediately, at the same time as the shop’s bell tingled gently.

Crowley’s voice, getting louder as it neared the mouthpiece, said,
“—really mean it. Hallo?”

“Crowley, it’s me!”

“Ngh.” The voice was horribly noncommittal. Even in his present state,
Aziraphale sensed trouble.

“Are you alone?” he said cautiously.

“Nuh. Got an old friend here.”

“Listen—!”

_“Awa’ we ye, ye spawn o’ hell!”_

Very slowly, Aziraphale turned around.

SHADWELL WAS TREMBLING with excitement. He’d seen it all. He’d heard it
all. He hadn’t understood any of it, but he knew what people did with
circles and candlesticks and incense. He knew that all right. He’d seen
_The Devil Rides Out_ fifteen times, sixteen times if you included the
time he’d been thrown out of the cinema for shouting his unflattering
opinions of amateur witchfinder Christopher Lee.

The buggers were using him. They’d been making fools out o’ the glorious
traditions o’ the Army.

“I’ll have ye, ye evil bastard!” he shouted, advancing like a moth-eaten
avenging angel. “I ken what ye be about, comin’ up here and seducin’
wimmen to do yer evil will!”

“I think perhaps you’ve got the wrong shop,” said Aziraphale. “I’ll call
back later,” he told the receiver, and hung up.

“I could see what yer were aboot,” snarled Shadwell. There were flecks
of foam around his mouth. He was more angry than he could ever remember.

“Er, things are not what they seem—” Aziraphale began, aware even as he
said it that as conversational gambits went it lacked a certain polish.

“I bet they ain’t!” said Shadwell triumphantly.

“No, I mean—”

Without taking his eyes off the angel, Shadwell shuffled backwards and
grabbed the shop door, slamming it hard so that the bell jangled.

_“Bell_,” he said.

He grabbed _The Nice and Accurate Prophecies_ and thumped it down
heavily on the table.

_“Book_,” he snarled.

He fumbled in his pocket and produced his trusty Ronson.

_“Practically candle!”_ he shouted, and began to advance.

In his path, the circle glowed with a faint blue light.

“Er,” said Aziraphale, “I think it might not be a very good idea to—”

Shadwell wasn’t listening. “By the powers invested in me by virtue o’ my
office o’ Witchfinder,” he intoned, “I charge ye to quit from this
place—”

“You see, the circle—”

“—and return henceforth to the place from which ye came, pausin’ not
to—”

“—it would really be unwise for a human to set foot in it without—”

“—and deliver us frae evil—”

“Keep out of the circle, you stupid man!”

“—never to come again to vex—”

“Yes, yes, but _please_ keep out of—”

Aziraphale ran toward Shadwell, waving his hands urgently.

“—returning NAE MORE!” Shadwell finished. He pointed a vengeful,
black-nailed finger.

Aziraphale looked down at his feet, and swore for the second time in
five minutes. He’d stepped into the circle.

“Oh, _fuck_,” he said.

There was a melodious twang, and the blue glow vanished. So did
Aziraphale.

Thirty seconds went by. Shadwell didn’t move. Then, with a trembling
left hand, he reached up and carefully lowered his right hand.

“Hallo?” he said. “Hallo?”

No one answered.

Shadwell shivered. Then, with his hand held out in front of him like a
gun that he didn’t dare fire and didn’t know how to unload, he stepped
out into the street, letting the door slam behind him.

It shook the floor. One of Aziraphale’s candles fell over, spilling
burning wax across the old, dry wood.

CROWLEY’S LONDON FLAT was the epitome of style. It was everything that a
flat should be: spacious, white, elegantly furnished, and with that
designer unlived-in look that only comes from not being lived in.

This is because Crowley did not live there.

It was simply the place he went back to, at the end of the day, when he
was in London. The beds were always made; the fridge was always stocked
with gourmet food that never went off (that was why Crowley had a
fridge, after all), and for that matter the fridge never needed to be
defrosted, or even plugged in.

The lounge contained a huge television, a white leather sofa, a video
and a laserdisc player, an ansaphone, two telephones—the ansaphone line,
and the private line (a number so far undiscovered by the legions of
telephone salesmen who persisted in trying to sell Crowley double
glazing, which he already had, or life insurance, which he didn’t
need)—and a square matte black sound system, the kind so exquisitely
engineered that it just has the on-off switch and the volume control.
The only sound equipment Crowley had overlooked was speakers; he’d
forgotten about them. Not that it made any difference. The sound
reproduction was quite perfect anyway.

There was an unconnected fax machine with the intelligence of a computer
and a computer with the intelligence of a retarded ant. Nevertheless,
Crowley upgraded it every few months, because a sleek computer was the
sort of thing Crowley felt that the sort of human he tried to be would
have. This one was like a Porsche with a screen. The manuals were still
in their transparent wrapping.³³

In fact the only things in the flat Crowley devoted any personal
attention to were the houseplants. They were huge and green and
glorious, with shiny, healthy, lustrous leaves.

This was because, once a week, Crowley went around the flat with a green
plastic plant mister, spraying the leaves, and talking to the plants.

He had heard about talking to plants in the early seventies, on Radio
Four, and thought it an excellent idea. Although _talking_ is perhaps
the wrong word for what Crowley did.

What he did was put the fear of God into them.

More precisely, the fear of Crowley.

In addition to which, every couple of months Crowley would pick out a
plant that was growing too slowly, or succumbing to leaf-wilt or
browning, or just didn’t look quite as good as the others, and he would
carry it around to all the other plants. “Say goodbye to your friend,”
he’d say to them. “He just couldn’t cut it … ”

Then he would leave the flat with the offending plant, and return an
hour or so later with a large, empty flower pot, which he would leave
somewhere conspicuously around the flat.

The plants were the most luxurious, verdant, and beautiful in London.
Also the most terrified.

The lounge was lit by spotlights and white neon tubes, of the kind one
casually props against a chair or a corner.

The only wall decoration was a framed drawing—the cartoon for the _Mona
Lisa_, Leonardo da Vinci’s original sketch. Crowley had bought it from
the artist one hot afternoon in Florence, and felt it was superior to
the final painting.³⁴

Crowley had a bedroom, and a kitchen, and an office, and a lounge, and a
toilet: each room forever clean and perfect.

He had spent an uncomfortable time in each of these rooms, during the
long wait for the End of the world.

He had phoned his operatives in the Witchfinder Army again, to try to
get news, but his contact, Sergeant Shadwell, had just gone out, and the
dimwitted receptionist seemed unable to grasp that he was willing to
talk to any of the others.

“Mr. Pulsifer is out too, love,” she told him. “He went down to Tadfield
this morning. On a mission.”

“I’ll speak to anyone,” Crowley had explained.

“I’ll tell Mr. Shadwell that,” she had said, “when he gets back. Now if
you don’t mind, it’s one of my mornings, and I can’t leave my gentleman
like that for long or he’ll catch his death. And at two I’ve got Mrs.
Ormerod and Mr. Scroggie and young Julia coming over for a sitting, and
there’s the place to clean and all beforehand. But I’ll give Mr.
Shadwell your message.”

Crowley gave up. He tried to read a novel, but couldn’t concentrate. He
tried to sort his CDs into alphabetical order, but gave up when he
discovered they already were in alphabetical order, as was his bookcase,
and his collection of Soul Music.³⁵

Eventually he settled down on the white leather sofa and gestured on the
television.

“Reports are coming in,” said a worried newscaster, “uh, reports are,
well, nobody seems to know what’s going on, but reports available to us
would seem to, uh, indicate an increase in international tensions that
would have undoubtedly been viewed as impossible this time last week
when, er, everyone seemed to be getting on so nicely. Er.

“This would seem at least partly due to the spate of unusual events
which have occurred over the last few days.

“Off the coast of Japan—” _CROWLEY?_

“Yes,” admitted Crowley.

_WHAT THE HELL IS GOING ON, CROWLEY? WHAT EXACTLY HAVE YOU BEEN DOING?_

“How do you mean?” Crowley asked, although he already knew.

_THE BOY CALLED WARLOCK. WE HAVE BROUGHT HIM TO THE FIELDS OF MEGGIDO.
THE DOG IS NOT WITH HIM. THE CHILD KNOWS NOTHING OF THE GREAT WAR. HE IS
NOT OUR MASTER’S SON_.

“Ah,” said Crowley.

_IS THAT ALL YOU CAN SAY, CROWLEY? OUR TROOPS ARE ASSEMBLED, THE FOUR
BEASTS HAVE BEGUN TO RIDE—BUT WHERE ARE THEY RIDING TO? SOMETHING HAS
GONE WRONG, CROWLEY. AND IT IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY. AND, IN ALL
PROBABILITY, YOUR FAULT. WE TRUST YOU HAVE A PERFECTLY REASONABLE
EXPLANATION FOR ALL THIS …_

“Oh, yes,” agreed Crowley, readily. “Perfectly reasonable.”

. . . _BECAUSE YOU ARE GOING TO HAVE YOUR CHANCE TO EXPLAIN IT ALL TO
US. YOU ARE GOING TO HAVE ALL THE TIME THERE IS TO EXPLAIN. AND WE WILL
LISTEN WITH GREAT INTEREST TO EVERYTHING YOU HAVE TO SAY. AND YOUR
CONVERSATION, AND THE CIRCUMSTANCES THAT WILL ACCOMPANY IT, WILL PROVIDE
A SOURCE OF ENTERTAINMENT AND PLEASURE FOR ALL THE DAMNED OF HELL,
CROWLEY. BECAUSE NO MATTER HOW RACKED WITH TORMENT, NO MATTER WHAT
AGONIES THE LOWEST OF THE DAMNED ARE SUFFERING, CROWLEY, YOU WILL HAVE
IT WORSE—_

With a gesture, Crowley turned the set off.

The dull gray-green screen continued enunciating; the silence formed
itself into words.

_DO NOT EVEN THINK ABOUT TRYING TO ESCAPE US, CROWLEY. THERE IS NO
ESCAPE. STAY WHERE YOU ARE. YOU WILL BE … COLLECTED …_

Crowley went to the window and looked out. Something black and
car-shaped was moving slowly down the street toward him. It was
car-shaped enough to fool the casual observer. Crowley, who was
observing very carefully, noticed that not only were the wheels not
going round, but they weren’t even attached to the car. It was slowing
down as it passed each house; Crowley assumed that the car’s passengers
(neither of them would be driving; neither of them knew how) were
peering out at the house numbers.

He had a little time. Crowley went into the kitchen, and got a plastic
bucket from under the sink. Then he went back into the lounge.

The Infernal Authorities had ceased communicating. Crowley turned the
television to the wall, just in case.

He walked over to the _Mona Lisa_.

Crowley lifted the picture down from the wall, revealing a safe. It was
not a wall safe; it had been bought from a company that specialized in
servicing the nuclear industry.

He unlocked it, revealing an inner door with a dial tumble lock. He spun
the dial (4-0-0-4 was the code, easy to remember, the year he had
slithered onto this stupid, marvelous planet, back when it was gleaming
and new).

Inside the safe were a thermos flask, two heavy PVC gloves, of the kind
that covered one’s entire arms, and some tongs.

Crowley paused. He eyed the flask nervously.

(There was a crash from downstairs. That had been the front door … )

He pulled on the gloves and gingerly took the flask, and the tongs, and
the bucket—and, as an afterthought, he grabbed the plant mister from
beside a luxuriant rubber plant—and headed for his office, walking like
a man carrying a thermos flask full of something that might cause, if he
dropped it or even thought about dropping it, the sort of explosion that
impels graybeards to make statements like “And where this crater is now,
once stood the City of Wah-Shing-Ton,” in SF B-movies.

He reached his office, nudged open the door with his shoulder. Then he
bent his legs, and slowly put things down on the floor. Bucket … tongs …
plant mister … and finally, deliberately, the flask.

A bead of sweat began to form on Crowley’s forehead, and trickled down
into one eye. He flicked it away.

Then, with care and deliberation, he used the tongs to unscrew the top
of the flask … carefully … carefully … that was it …

(A pounding on the stairs below him, and a muffled scream. That would
have been the little old lady on the floor below.)

He could not afford to rush.

He gripped the flask with the tongs, and taking care not to spill the
tiniest drop, he poured the contents into the plastic bucket. One false
move was all it would take.

There.

Then he opened the office door about six inches, and placed the bucket
on top.

He used the tongs to replace the top of the flask, then (—a crash from
his outer hallway—) pulled off the PVC gloves, picked up the plant
mister, and settled himself behind his desk.

“Crawlee … ?” called a guttural voice. Hastur.

“He’s through there,” hissed another voice. “I can feel the slimy little
creep.” Ligur.

Hastur and Ligur.

Now, as Crowley would be the first to protest, most demons weren’t _deep
down_ evil. In the great cosmic game they felt they occupied the same
position as tax inspectors—doing an unpopular job, maybe, but essential
to the overall operation of the whole thing. If it came to that, some
angels weren’t paragons of virtue; Crowley had met one or two who, when
it came to righteously smiting the ungodly, smote a good deal harder
than was strictly necessary. On the whole, everyone had a job to do, and
just did it.

And on the other hand, you got people like Ligur and Hastur, who took
such a dark delight in unpleasantness you might even have mistaken them
for human.

Crowley leaned back in his executive chair. He forced himself to relax
and failed appallingly.

“In here, people,” he called.

“We want a word with you,” said Ligur (in a tone of voice intended to
imply that “word” was synonymous with “horrifically painful eternity”),
and the squat demon pushed open the office door.

The bucket teetered, then fell neatly on Ligur’s head.

Drop a lump of sodium in water. Watch it flame and burn and spin around
crazily, flaring and sputtering. This was like that; just nastier.

The demon peeled and flared and flickered. Oily brown smoke oozed from
it, and it screamed and it screamed and it screamed. Then it crumpled,
folded in on itself, and what was left lay glistening on the burnt and
blackened circle of carpet, looking like a handful of mashed slugs.

“Hi,” said Crowley to Hastur, who had been walking behind Ligur, and had
unfortunately not been so much as splashed.

There are some things that are unthinkable: there are some depths that
not even demons would believe other demons would stoop to.

“. . . Holy water. You bastard,” said Hastur. “You complete _bastard_.
He hadn’t never done nothing to _you_.”

“Yet,” corrected Crowley, who felt a little more comfortable, now the
odds were closer to even. Closer, but not yet even, not by a long shot.
Hastur was a Duke of Hell. Crowley wasn’t even a local councilor.

“Your fate will be whispered by mothers in dark places to frighten their
young,” said Hastur, and then felt that the language of Hell wasn’t up
to the job. “You’re going to get taken to the bloody _cleaners_, pal,”
he added.

Crowley raised the green plastic plant mister, and sloshed it around
threateningly. “Go away,” he said. He heard the phone downstairs
ringing. Four times, and then the ansaphone caught it. He wondered
vaguely who it was.

“You don’t frighten me,” said Hastur. He watched a drip of water leak
from the nozzle and slide slowly down the side of the plastic container,
toward Crowley’s hand.

“Do you know what this is?” asked Crowley. “This is a Sainsbury’s plant
mister, cheapest and most efficient plant mister in the world. It can
squirt a fine spray of water into the air. Do I need to tell you what’s
in it? It can turn _you_ into _that_,” he pointed to the mess on the
carpet. “Now, go away.”

Then the drip on the side of the plant mister reached Crowley’s curled
fingers, and stopped. “You’re bluffing,” said Hastur.

“Maybe I am,” said Crowley, in a tone of voice which he hoped made it
quite clear that bluffing was the last thing on his mind. “And maybe I’m
not. Do you feel lucky?”

Hastur gestured, and the plastic bulb dissolved like rice paper,
spilling water all over Crowley’s desk, and all over Crowley’s suit.

“Yes,” said Hastur. And then he smiled. His teeth were too sharp, and
his tongue flickered between them. “Do you?”

Crowley said nothing. Plan A had worked. Plan B had failed. Everything
depended on Plan C, and there was one drawback to this: he had only ever
planned as far as B.

“So,” hissed Hastur, “time to go, Crowley.”

“I think there’s something you ought to know,” said Crowley, stalling
for time.

“And that is?” smiled Hastur.

Then the phone on Crowley’s desk rang.

He picked it up, and warned Hastur, “Don’t move. There’s something very
important you should know, and I really mean it. Hallo?

“Ngh,” said Crowley. Then he said, “Nuh. Got an old friend here.”

Aziraphale hung up on him. Crowley wondered what he had wanted.

And suddenly Plan C was there, in his head. He didn’t replace the
handset on the receiver. Instead he said, “Okay, Hastur. You’ve passed
the test. You’re ready to start playing with the big boys.”

“Have you gone mad?”

“Nope. Don’t you understand? This was a test. The Lords of Hell had to
know that you were trustworthy before we gave you command of the Legions
of the Damned, in the War ahead.”

“Crowley, you are lying, or you are insane, or possibly you are both,”
said Hastur, but his certainty was shaken.

Just for a moment he had entertained the possibility; that was where
Crowley had got him. It _was_ just possible that Hell was testing him.
That Crowley _was_ more than he seemed. Hastur was paranoid, which was
simply a sensible and well-adjusted reaction to living in Hell, where
they really were all out to get you.

Crowley began to dial a number. “’S’ okay, Duke Hastur. I wouldn’t
expect you to believe it from _me_,” he admitted. “But why don’t we talk
to the Dark Council—I am sure that they can convince you.”

The number he had dialed clicked and started to ring.

“So long, sucker,” he said.

And vanished.

In a tiny fraction of a second, Hastur was gone as well.

OVER THE YEARS a huge number of theological man-hours have been spent
debating the famous question:

_How Many Angels Can Dance on the Head of a Pin?_

In order to arrive at an answer, the following facts must be taken into
consideration:

Firstly, angels simply don’t dance. It’s one of the distinguishing
characteristics that mark an angel. They may listen appreciatively to
the Music of the Spheres, but they don’t feel the urge to get down and
boogie to it. So, _none_.

At least, nearly none. Aziraphale had learned to gavotte in a discreet
gentlemen’s club in Portland Place, in the late 1880s, and while he had
initially taken to it like a duck to merchant banking, after a while he
had become quite good at it, and was quite put out when, some decades
later, the gavotte went out of style for good.

So providing the dance was a gavotte, and providing that he had a
suitable partner (also able, for the sake of argument, both to gavotte,
and to dance it on the head of a pin), the answer is a straightforward
_one_.

Then again, you might just as well ask how many demons can dance on the
head of a pin. They’re of the same original stock, after all. And at
least they dance.³⁶

And if you put it that way, the answer is, quite a lot actually,
providing they abandon their physical bodies, which is a picnic for a
demon. Demons aren’t bound by physics. If you take the long view, the
universe is just something small and round, like those water-filled
balls which produce a miniature snowstorm when you shake them.³⁷ But if
you look from really close up, the only problem about dancing on the
head of a pin is all those big gaps between electrons.

For those of angel stock or demon breed, size, and shape, and
composition, are simply options.

Crowley is currently traveling incredibly fast down a telephone line.

RING.

Crowley went through two telephone exchanges at a very respectable
fraction of light-speed. Hastur was a little way behind him: four or
five inches, but at that size it gave Crowley a very comfortable lead.
One that would vanish, of course, when he came out the other end.

They were too small for sound, but demons don’t necessarily need sound
to communicate. He could hear Hastur screaming behind him, “You bastard!
I’ll get you. You can’t escape me!”

RING.

“Wherever you come out, I’ll come out too! You won’t get away!”

Crowley had traveled through over twenty miles of cable in less than a
second.

Hastur was close behind him. Crowley was going to have to time this
whole thing very, very carefully.

RING.

That was the third ring. Well, thought Crowley, here goes nothing.

He stopped, suddenly, and watched Hastur shoot past him. Hastur turned
and—

RING.

Crowley shot out through the phone line, zapped through the plastic
sheathing, and materialized, full-size and out of breath, in his lounge.

_click_.

The outgoing message tape began to turn on his ansaphone. Then there was
a beep, and, as the incoming message tape turned, a voice from the
speaker screamed, after the beep, “Right! What? … _You bloody snake!”_

The little red message light began to flash.

On and off and on and off, like a tiny, red, angry eye.

Crowley really wished he had some more holy water and the time to hold
the cassette in it until it dissolved. But getting hold of Ligur’s
terminal bath had been dangerous enough, he’d had it for years just in
case, and even its presence in the room made him uneasy. Or … or maybe …
yes, what _would_ happen if he put the cassette in the car? He could
play Hastur over and over again, until he turned into Freddie Mercury.
No. He might be a bastard, but you could only go so far.

There was a rumble of distant thunder.

He had no time to spare.

He had nowhere to go.

He went anyway. He ran down to his Bentley and drove toward the West End
as if all the demons of hell were after him. Which was more or less the
case.

MADAME TRACY HEARD Mr. Shadwell’s slow tread come up the stairs. It was
slower than usual, and paused every few steps. Normally he came up the
stairs as if he hated every one of them.

She opened her door. He was leaning against the landing wall.

“Why, Mr. Shadwell,” she said, “whatever have you done to your hand?”

“Get away frae me, wumman,” Shadwell groaned. “I dinna know my ane
powers!”

“Why are you holding it out like that?”

Shadwell tried to back into the wall.

“Stand back, I tell ye! I canna be responsible!”

“What on earth has happened to you, Mr. Shadwell?” said Madame Tracy,
trying to take his hand.

“Nothing on earth! Nothing on earth!”

She managed to grab his arm. He, Shadwell, scourge of evil, was
powerless to resist being drawn into her flat.

He’d never been in it before, at least in his waking moments. His dreams
had furnished it in silks, rich hangings, and what he thought of as
scented ungulants. Admittedly, it did have a bead curtain in the
entrance to the kitchenette and a lamp made rather inexpertly from a
Chianti bottle, because Madame Tracy’s apprehension of what was chic,
like Aziraphale’s, had grounded around 1953. And there was a table in
the middle of the room with a velvet cloth on it and, on the cloth, the
crystal ball which increasingly was Madame Tracy’s means of earning a
living.

“I think you could do with a good lie-down, Mr. Shadwell,” she said, in
a voice that brooked no argument, and led him on into the bedroom. He
was too bewildered to protest.

“But young Newt is out there,” Shadwell muttered, “in thrall to heathen
passions and occult wiles.”

“Then I’m sure he’ll know what to do about them,” said Madame Tracy
briskly, whose mental picture of what Newt was going through was
probably much closer to reality than was Shadwell’s. “And I’m sure he
wouldn’t like to think of you getting yourself worked up into a state
here. Just you lie down, and I’ll make us both a nice cup of tea.”

She disappeared in a clacking of bead curtains.

Suddenly Shadwell was alone on what he was just capable of recalling,
through the wreckage of his shattered nerves, was a bed of sin, and
right at this moment was incapable of deciding whether that was in fact
better or worse than _not_ being alone on a bed of sin. He turned his
head to take in his surroundings.

Madame Tracy’s concepts of what was erotic stemmed from the days when
young men grew up thinking that women had beach balls affixed firmly in
front of their anatomy, Brigitte Bardot could be called a sex kitten
without anyone bursting out laughing, and there really were magazines
with names like _Girls, Giggles and Garters_. Somewhere in this cauldron
of permissiveness she had picked up the idea that soft toys in the
bedroom created an intimate, coquettish air.

Shadwell stared for some time at a large, threadbare teddy bear, which
had one eye missing and a torn ear. It probably had a name like Mr.
Buggins.

He turned his head the other way. His gaze was blocked by a pajama case
shaped like an animal that may have been a dog but, there again, might
have been a skunk. It had a cheery grin.

“Urg,” he said.

But recollection kept storming back. He really had done it. No one else
in the Army had ever exorcised a demon, as far as he knew. Not Hopkins,
not Siftings, not Diceman. Probably not even Witchfinder Company
Sergeant Major Narker,³⁸ who held the all-time record for most witches
found. Sooner or later every Army runs across its ultimate weapon and
now it existed, Shadwell reflected, on the end of his arm.

Well, screw No First Use. He’d have a bit of a rest, seeing as he was
here, and then the Powers of Darkness had met their match at last …

When Madame Tracy brought the tea in he was snoring. She tactfully
closed the door, and rather thankfully as well, because she had a seance
due in twenty minutes and it was no good turning down money these days.

Although Madame Tracy was by many yardsticks quite stupid, she had an
instinct in certain matters, and when it came to dabbling in the occult
her reasoning was faultless. Dabbling, she’d realized, was exactly what
her customers wanted. They didn’t want to be shoved in it up to their
necks. They didn’t want the multi-planular mysteries of Time and Space,
they just wanted to be reassured that Mother was getting along fine now
she was dead. They wanted just enough Occult to season the simple fare
of their lives, and preferably in portions no longer than forty-five
minutes, followed by tea and biscuits.

They certainly didn’t want odd candles, scents, chants, or mystic runes.
Madame Tracy had even removed most of the Major Arcana from her Tarot
card pack, because their appearance tended to upset people.

And she made sure that she had always put sprouts on to boil just before
a seance. Nothing is more reassuring, nothing is more true to the
comfortable spirit of English occultism, than the smell of Brussels
sprouts cooking in the next room.

IT WAS EARLY AFTERNOON, and the heavy storm clouds had turned the sky
the color of old lead. It would rain soon, heavily, blindingly. The
firemen hoped the rain would come soon. The sooner the better.

They had arrived fairly promptly, and the younger firemen were dashing
around excitedly, unrolling their hosepipe and flexing their axes; the
older firemen knew at a glance that the building was a dead loss, and
weren’t even sure that the rain would stop it spreading to neighboring
buildings, when a black Bentley skidded around the corner and drove up
onto the pavement at a speed somewhere in excess of sixty miles per
hour, and stopped with a screech of brakes half an inch away from the
wall of the bookshop. An extremely agitated young man in dark glasses
got out and ran toward the door of the blazing bookshop.

He was intercepted by a fireman.

“Are you the owner of this establishment?” asked the fireman.

“Don’t be stupid! Do I _look_ like I run a bookshop?”

“I really wouldn’t know about that, sir. Appearances can be very
deceptive. For example, I am a fireman. However, upon meeting me
socially, people unaware of my occupation often suppose that I am, in
fact, a chartered accountant or company director. Imagine me out of
uniform, sir, and what kind of man would you see before you? Honestly?”

“A prat,” said Crowley, and he ran into the bookshop.

This sounds easier than it actually was, since in order to manage it
Crowley needed to avoid half a dozen firemen, two policemen, and a
number of interesting Soho night people,³⁹ out early, and arguing
heatedly amongst themselves about which particular section of society
had brightened up the afternoon, and why.

Crowley pushed straight through them. They scarcely spared him a glance.

Then he pushed open the door, and stepped into an inferno.

The whole bookshop was ablaze. “Aziraphale!” he called. “Aziraphale,
you—you _stupid_—_Aziraphale?_ Are you here?”

No answer. Just the crackle of burning paper, the splintering of glass
as the fire reached the upstairs rooms, the crash of collapsing timbers.

He scanned the shop urgently, desperately, looking for the angel,
looking for _help_.

In the far corner a bookshelf toppled over, cascading flaming books
across the floor. The fire was all around him, and Crowley ignored it.
His left trouser leg began to smolder; he stopped it with a glance.

“Hello? Aziraphale! For Go—, for Sa—, for _somebody’s_ sake!
Aziraphale!”

The shop window was smashed from outside. Crowley turned, startled, and
an unexpected jet of water struck him full in the chest, knocking him to
the ground.

His shades flew to a far corner of the room, and became a puddle of
burning plastic. Yellow eyes with slitted vertical pupils were revealed.
Wet and steaming, face ash-blackened, as far from cool as it was
possible for him to be, on all fours in the blazing bookshop, Crowley
cursed Aziraphale, and the ineffable plan, and Above, and Below.

Then he looked down, and saw it. The book. The book that the girl had
left in the car in Tadfield, on Wednesday night. It was slightly
scorched around the cover, but miraculously unharmed. He picked it up,
stuffed it into his jacket pocket, stood up, unsteadily, and brushed
himself off.

The floor above him collapsed. With a roar and gargantuan shrug the
building fell in on itself, in a rain of brick and timber and flaming
debris.

Outside, the passersby were being herded back by the police, and a
fireman was explaining to anyone who would listen, “I couldn’t stop him.
He must have been mad. Or drunk. Just ran in. I couldn’t stop him. Mad.
Ran straight in. Horrible way to die. Horrible, horrible. Just ran
straight in … ”

Then Crowley came out of the flames.

The police and the firemen looked at him, saw the expression on his
face, and stayed exactly where they were.

He climbed into the Bentley and reversed back into the road, swung
around a fire truck, into Wardour Street, and into the darkened
afternoon.

They stared at the car as it sped away. Finally one policeman spoke.
“Weather like this, he ought to of put his lights on,” he said, numbly.

“Especially driving like that. Could be dangerous,” agreed another, in
flat, dead tones, and they all stood there in the light and the heat of
the burning bookshop, wondering what was happening to a world they had
thought they understood.

There was a flash of lightning, blue-white, strobing across the
cloud-black sky, a crack of thunder so loud it hurt, and a hard rain
began to fall.

SHE RODE A RED MOTORBIKE. Not a friendly Honda red; a deep, bloody red,
rich and dark and hateful. The bike was apparently, in every other
respect, ordinary except for the sword, resting in its scabbard, set
onto the side of the bike.

Her helmet was crimson, and her leather jacket was the color of old
wine. In ruby studs on the back were picked out the words HELL’S ANGELS.

It was ten past one in the afternoon and it was dark and humid and wet.
The motorway was almost deserted, and the woman in red roared down the
road on her red motorbike, smiling lazily.

It had been a good day so far. There was something about the sight of a
beautiful woman on a powerful motorbike with a sword stuck on the back
that had a powerful effect on a certain type of man. So far four
traveling salesmen had tried to race her, and bits of Ford Sierra now
decorated the crash barriers and bridge supports along forty miles of
motorway.

She pulled up at a service area, and went into the Happy Porker Café. It
was almost empty. A bored waitress was darning a sock behind the
counter, and a knot of black-leathered bikers, hard, hairy, filthy, and
huge, were clustered around an even taller individual in a black coat.
He was resolutely playing something that in bygone years would have been
a fruit machine, but now had a video screen, and advertised itself as
TRIVIA SCRABBLE.

The audience were saying things like:

“It’s ‘D’! Press ‘D’—_The Godfather must_’ve got more Oscars than _Gone
with the Wind!_”

“Puppet on a String! Sandie Shaw! Honest. I’m bleeding positive!”

“1666!”

“No, you great pillock! That was the fire! The Plague was 1665!”

“It’s ‘B’—the Great Wall of China _wasn’t_ one of the Seven Wonders of
the world!”

There were four options: Pop Music, Sport, Current Events, and General
Knowledge. The tall biker, who had kept his helmet on, was pressing the
buttons, to all intents and purposes oblivious of his supporters. At any
rate, he was consistently winning.

The red rider went over to the counter.

“A cup of tea, please. And a cheese sandwich,” she said.

“You on your own, then, dear?” asked the waitress, passing the tea, and
something white and dry and hard, across the counter.

“Waiting for friends.”

“Ah,” she said, biting through some wool. “Well, you’re better off
waiting in here. It’s hell out there.”

“No,” she told her. “Not yet.”

She picked a window table, with a good view of the parking lot, and she
waited.

She could hear the Trivia Scrabblers in the background.

“Thass a new one, ‘How many times has England been officially at war
with France since 1066?”’

“Twenty? Nah, s’ never twenty … Oh. It was. Well, I never.”

“American war with Mexico? I know that. It’s June 1845. ‘D’—see! I tol’
you!”

The second-shortest biker, Pigbog (6' 3"), whispered to the shortest,
Greaser (6' 2"):

“What happened to ‘Sport,’ then?” He had LOVE tattooed on one set of
knuckles, HATE on the other.

“It’s random wossit, selection, innit. I mean they do it with
microchips. It’s probably got, like, millions of different subjects in
there, in its RAM.” He had FISH across his right-hand knuckle, and CHIP
on the left.

“Pop Music, Current Events, General Knowledge, and War. It’s just I’ve
never seen ‘War’ before. That’s why I mentioned it.” Pigbog cracked his
knuckles, loudly, and pulled the ring tab on a can of beer. He swigged
back half a can, belched carelessly, then sighed. “I just wish they’d do
more bleeding Bible questions.”

“Why?” Greaser had never thought of Pigbog as being a Bible trivia
freak.

“’Cos, well, you remember that bit of bother in Brighton?”

“Oh, yeah. You was on _Crimewatch,”_ said Greaser, with a trace of envy.

“Well, I had to hang out in that hotel where me mam worked, dinni? Free
months. And nothin’ to read, only this bugger Gideon had left his Bible
behind. It kind of sticks in your mind.”

Another motorbike, jet black and gleaming, drew up in the car-park
outside.

The door to the café opened. A blast of cold wind blew through the room;
a man dressed all in black leather, with a short black beard, walked
over to the table, sat next to the woman in red, and the bikers around
the video scrabble machine suddenly noticed how hungry they all were,
and deputed Skuzz to go and get them something to eat. All of them
except the player, who said nothing, just pressed the buttons for the
right answers and let his winnings accumulate in the tray at the bottom
of the machine.

“I haven’t seen you since Mafeking,” said Red. “How’s it been going?”

“I’ve been keeping pretty busy,” said Black. “Spent a lot of time in
America. Brief world tours. Just killing time, really.”

(“What do you mean, you’ve got no steak and kidney pies?” asked Skuzz,
affronted.

“I thought we had some, but we don’t,” said the woman.)

“Feels funny, all of us finally getting together like this,” said Red.

“Funny?”

“Well, you know. When you’ve spent all these thousands of years waiting
for the big day, and it finally comes. Like waiting for Christmas. Or
birthdays.”

“We don’t have birthdays.”

“I didn’t say we do. I just said that was what it was like.”

(“Actually,” admitted the woman,“it doesn’t look like we’ve got anything
left at all. Except that slice of pizza.”

“Has it got anchovies on it?” asked Skuzz gloomily. None of the chapter
liked anchovies. Or olives.

“Yes, dear. It’s anchovy and olives. Would you like it?”

Skuzz shook his head sadly. Stomach rumbling, he made his way back to
the game. Big Ted got irritable when he got hungry, and when Big Ted got
irritable everyone got a slice.)

A new category had come up on the video screen. You could now answer
questions about Pop Music, Current Events, Famine, or War. The bikers
seemed marginally less informed about the Irish Potato Famine of 1846,
the English everything famine of 1315, and the 1969 dope famine in San
Francisco than they had been about War, but the player was still racking
up a perfect score, punctuated occasionally by a whir, ratchet, and
chink as the machine disgorged pound coins into its tray.

“Weather looks a bit tricky down south,” said Red.

Black squinted at the darkening clouds. “No. Looks fine to me. We’ll
have a thunderstorm along any minute.”

Red looked at her nails. “That’s good. It wouldn’t be the same if we
didn’t have a good thunderstorm. Any idea how far we’ve got to ride?”

Black shrugged. “A few hundred miles.”

“I thought it’d be longer, somehow. All that waiting, just for a few
hundred miles.”

“It’s not the traveling,” said Black. “It’s the arriving that matters.”

There was a roar outside. It was the roar of a motorbike with a
defective exhaust, untuned engine, leaky carburetor. You didn’t have to
see the bike to imagine the clouds of black smoke it traveled in, the
oil slicks it left in its wake, the trail of small motorbike parts and
fittings that littered the roads behind it.

Black went up to the counter.

“Four teas, please,” he said. “One black.”

The café door opened. A young man in dusty white leathers entered, and
the wind blew empty crisp packets and newspapers and ice cream wrappers
in with him. They danced around his feet like excited children, then
fell exhausted to the floor.

“Four of you, are there, dear?” asked the woman. She was trying to find
some clean cups and tea spoons—the entire rack seemed suddenly to have
been coated in a light film of motor oil and dried egg.

“There will be,” said the man in black, and he took the teas and went
back to the table, where his two comrades waited.

“Any sign of him?” said the boy in white.

They shook their heads.

An argument had broken out around the video screen (current categories
showing on the screen were War, Famine, Pollution, and Pop Trivia
1962–1979).

“Elvis Presley? ’Sgotta be ‘C’—it was 1977 he snuffed it, wasn’t it?”

“Nah. ‘D.’ 1976. I’m positive.”

“Yeah. Same year as Bing Crosby.”

“And Marc Bolan. He was dead good. Press ‘D,’ then. Go on.”

The tall figure made no motion to press any of the buttons.

“Woss the matter with you?” asked Big Ted, irritably. “Go on. Press ‘D.’
Elvis Presley died in 1976.”

I DON’T CARE WHAT IT SAYS, said the tall biker in the helmet, I NEVER
LAID A FINGER ON HIM.

The three people at the table turned as one. Red spoke. “When did you
get here?” she asked.

The tall man walked over to the table, leaving the astonished bikers,
and his winnings, behind him. I NEVER WENT AWAY, he said, and his voice
was a dark echo from the night places, a cold slab of sound, gray, and
dead. If that voice was a stone it would have had words chiseled on it a
long time ago: a name, and two dates.

“Your tea’s getting cold, lord,” said Famine.

“It’s been a long time,” said War.

There was a flash of lightning, almost immediately followed by a low
rumble of thunder.

“Lovely weather for it,” said Pollution.

YES.

The bikers around the game were getting progressively baffled by this
exchange. Led by Big Ted, they shambled over to the table and stared at
the four strangers.

It did not escape their notice that _all_ four strangers had HELL’S
ANGELS on their jackets. And they looked dead dodgy as far as the Angels
were concerned: too clean for a start; and none of the four looked like
they’d ever broken anyone’s arm just because it was Sunday afternoon and
there wasn’t anything good on the telly. And one was a woman, too, only
not ridin’ around on the back of someone’s bike but actually allowed one
of her own, like she had any right to it.

“You’re Hell’s Angels, then?” asked Big Ted, sarcastically. If there’s
one thing real Hell’s Angels can’t abide, it’s weekend bikers.⁴⁰

The four strangers nodded.

“What chapter are you from, then?”

The Tall Stranger looked at Big Ted. Then he stood up. It was a
complicated motion; if the shores of the seas of night had deck chairs,
they’d open up something like that.

He seemed to be unfolding himself forever.

He wore a dark helmet, completely hiding his features. And it was made
of that weird plastic, Big Ted noted. Like, you looked in it, and all
you could see was your own face.

REVELATIONS, he said. CHAPTER SIX.

“Verses two to eight,” added the boy in white, helpfully.

Big Ted glared at the four of them. His lower jaw began to protrude, and
a little blue vein in his temple started to throb. “Wossat mean then?”
he demanded.

There was a tug at his sleeve. It was Pigbog. He had gone a peculiar
shade of gray, under the dirt.

“It means we’re in trouble,” said Pigbog.

And then the tall stranger reached up a pale motorbike gauntlet, and
raised the visor of his helmet, and Big Ted found himself wishing, for
the first time in his existence, that he’d lived a better life.

“Jesus Christ!” he moaned.

“I think He may be along in a minute,” said Pigbog urgently. “He’s
probably looking for somewhere to park his bike. Let’s go and, and join
a youf club or somethin’ … ”

But Big Ted’s invincible ignorance was his shield and armor. He didn’t
move.

“Cor,” he said. “Hell’s Angels.”

War flipped him a lazy salute.

“That’s us, Big Ted,” she said. “The real McCoy.”

Famine nodded. “The Old Firm,” he said.

Pollution removed his helmet and shook out his long white hair. He had
taken over when Pestilence, muttering about penicillin, had retired in
1936. If only the old boy had known what opportunities the future had
held …

“Others promise,” he said, “we deliver.”

Big Ted looked at the fourth Horseman. “’Ere, I seen you before,” he
said. “You was on the cover of that Blue Oyster Cult album. An’ I got a
ring wif your … your … your head on it.”

I GET EVERYWHERE.

“Cor.” Big Ted’s big face screwed up with the effort of thought.

“Wot kind of bike you ridin’?” he said.

THE STORM RAGED around the quarry. The rope with the old car tire on it
danced in the gale. Sometimes a sheet of iron, relic of an attempt at a
tree house, would shake loose from its insubstantial moorings and sail
away.

The Them huddled together, staring at Adam. He seemed bigger, somehow.
Dog sat and growled. He was thinking of all the smells he would lose.
There were no smells in Hell, apart from the sulphur. While some of them
here, were, were … well, the fact was, there were no bitches in Hell
either.

Adam was marching about excitedly, waving his hands in the air.

“There’ll be no end to the fun we can have,” he said. “There’ll be
exploring and everything. I ’spect I can soon get the ole jungles to
grow again.”

“But—but who—who’ll do the, you know, all the cooking and washing and
suchlike?” quavered Brian.

“No one’ll have to do any of that stuff,” said Adam. “You can have all
the food you like, loads of chips, fried onion rings, anything you like.
An’ never have to wear any new clothes or have a bath if you don’t want
to or anything. Or go to school or anything. Or do anything you don’t
want to do, ever again. It’ll be _wicked!”_

THE MOON CAME UP over the Kookamundi Hills. It was very bright tonight.

Johnny Two Bones sat in the red basin of the desert. It was a sacred
place, where two ancestral rocks, formed in the Dreamtime, lay as they
had since the beginning. Johnny Two Bones’ walkabout was coming to an
end. His cheeks and chest were smeared with red ochre, and he was
singing an old song, a sort of singing map of the hills, and he was
drawing patterns in the dust with his spear.

He had not eaten for two days; he had not slept. He was approaching a
trance state, making him one with the Bush, putting him into communion
with his ancestors.

He was nearly there.

Nearly …

He blinked. Looked around wonderingly.

“Excuse me, dear boy,” he said to himself, out loud, in precise,
enunciated tones. “But have you any idea where I am?”

“Who said that?” said Johnny Two Bones.

His mouth opened. “I did.”

Johnny scratched, thoughtfully. “I take it you’re one of me ancestors,
then, mate?”

“Oh. Indubitably, dear boy. Quite indubitably. In a manner of speaking.
Now, to get back to my original question. Where am I?”

“Only if you’re one of my ancestors,” continued Johnny Two Bones, “why
are you talking like a poofter?”

“Ah. Australia,” said Johnny Two Bones’ mouth, pronouncing the word as
though it would have to be properly disinfected before he said it again.
“Oh dear. Well, thank you anyway.”

“Hello? Hello?” said Johnny Two Bones.

He sat in the sand, and he waited, and he waited, but he didn’t reply.

Aziraphale had moved on.

CITRON DEUX-CHEVAUX was tonton macoute, a traveling houngan:⁴¹ he had a
satchel over his shoulder, containing magical plants, medicinal plants,
bits of wild cat, black candles, a powder derived chiefly from the skin
of a certain dried fish, a dead centipede, a half-bottle of Chivas
Regal, ten Rothmans, and a copy of What’s On In Haiti.

He hefted the knife, and, with an experienced slicing motion, cut the
head from a black cockerel. Blood washed over his right hand.

“Loa ride me,” he intoned. “Gros Bon Ange come to me.”

“Where am I?” he said.

“Is that my Gros Bon Ange?” he asked himself.

“I think that’s a rather personal question,” he replied. “I mean, as
these things go. But one tries, as it were. One does one’s best.”

Citron found one of his hands reaching for the cockerel.

“Rather unsanitary place to do your cooking, don’t you think? Out here
in the jungle. Having a barbecue, are we? What kind of place is this?”

“Haitian,” he answered.

“Damn! Nowhere near. Still, could be worse. Ah, I must be on my way. Be
good.”

And Citron Deux-Chevaux was alone in his head.

“Loas be buggered,” he muttered to himself. He stared into nothing for a
while, and then reached for the satchel and its bottle of Chivas Regal.
There are at least two ways to turn someone into a zombie. He was going
to take the easiest.

The surf was loud on the beaches. The palms shook.

A storm was coming.

THE LIGHTS WENT UP. The Power Cable (Nebraska) Evangelical Choir
launched into “Jesus Is the Telephone Repairman on the Switchboard of My
Life,” and almost drowned out the sound of the rising wind.

Marvin O. Bagman adjusted his tie, checked his grin in the mirror,
patted the bottom of his personal assistant (Miss Cindi Kellerhals,
Penthouse Pet of the Month three years ago last July; but she had put
that all behind her when she got Career), and he walked out onto the
studio floor.

_Jesus won’t cut you off before you’re through_

_With him you won’t never get a crossed line,_

_And when your bill comes it’ll all be properly itemized_

_He’s the telephone repairman on the switchboard of my life,_

the choir sang. Marvin was fond of that song. He had written it himself.

Other songs he had written included: “Happy Mister Jesus,” “Jesus, Can I
Come and Stay at Your Place?” “That Ol’ Fiery Cross,” “Jesus Is the
Sticker on the Bumper of My Soul,” and “When I’m Swept Up by the Rapture
Grab the Wheel of My Pick-Up.” They were available on Jesus Is My Buddy
(LP, cassette, and CD), and were advertised every four minutes on
Bagman’s evangelical network.⁴²

Despite the fact that the lyrics didn’t rhyme, or, as a rule, make any
sense, and that Marvin, who was not particularly musical, had stolen all
the tunes from old country songs, Jesus Is My Buddy had sold over four
million copies.

Marvin had started off as a country singer, singing old Conway Twitty
and Johnny Cash songs.

He had done regular live concerts from San Quentin jail until the civil
rights people got him under the Cruel and Unusual Punishment clause.

It was then that Marvin got religion. Not the quiet, personal kind, that
involves doing good deeds and living a better life; not even the kind
that involves putting on a suit and ringing people’s doorbells; but the
kind that involves having your own TV network and getting people to send
you money.

He had found the perfect TV mix, on Marvin’s Hour of Power (“The show
that put the fun back into Fundamentalist!”). Four three-minute songs
from the LP, twenty minutes of Hellfire, and five minutes of healing
people. (The remaining twenty-three minutes were spent alternately
cajoling, pleading, threatening, begging, and occasionally simply asking
for money.) In the early days he had actually brought people into the
studio to heal, but had found that too complicated, so these days he
simply proclaimed visions vouchsafed to him of viewers all across
America getting magically cured as they watched. This was much
simpler—he no longer needed to hire actors, and there was no way anyone
could check on his success rate.⁴³

The world is a lot more complicated than most people believe. Many
people believed, for example, that Marvin was not a true Believer
because he made so much money out of it. They were wrong. He believed
with all his heart. He believed utterly, and spent a lot of the money
that flooded in on what he really thought was the Lord’s work.

_The phone line to the savior’s always free of interference_

_He’s in at any hour, day or night_

_And when you call J-E-S-U-S you always call toll free_

_He’s the telephone repairman on the switchboard of my life._

The first song concluded, and Marvin walked in front of the cameras and
raised his arms modestly for silence. In the control booth, the engineer
turned down the Applause track.

“Brothers and sisters, thank you, thank you, wasn’t that beautiful? And
remember, you can hear that song and others just as edifyin’ on Jesus Is
My Buddy, just phone 1-800-CASH and pledge your donation now.”

He became more serious.

“Brothers and sisters, I’ve got a message for you all, an urgent message
from our Lord, for you all, man and woman and little babes, friends, let
me tell you about the Apocalypse. It’s all there in your Bible, in the
Revelation our Lord gave Saint John on Patmos, and in the Book of
Daniel. The Lord always gives it to you straight, friends—your future.
So what’s goin’ to happen?

“War. Plague. Famine. Death. Rivers urv blurd. Great earthquakes.
Nukyeler missiles. Horrible times are comin’, brothers and sisters. And
there’s only one way to avoid ’em.

“Before the Destruction comes—before the four horsemen of the apocalypse
ride out—before the nukerler missles rain down on the unbelievers—there
will come The Rapture.

“What’s the Rapture? I hear you cry.

“When the Rapture comes, brothers and sisters, all the True Believers
will be swept up in the air—it don’t mind what you’re doin’, you could
be in the bath, you could be at work, you could be drivin’ your car, or
just sittin’ at home readin’ your Bible. Suddenly you’ll be up there in
the air, in perfect and incorruptible bodies. And you’ll be up in the
air, lookin’ down at the world as the years of destruction arrive. Only
the faithful will be saved, only those of you who have been born again
will avoid the pain and the death and the horror and the burnin’. Then
will come the great war between Heaven and Hell, and Heaven will destroy
the forces of Hell, and God shall wipe away the tears of the sufferin’,
and there shall be no more death, or sorrow, or cryin’, or pain, and he
shall rayon in glory for ever and ever—”

He stopped, suddenly.

_“Well, nice try,” he said, in a completely different voice, “only it
won’t be like that at all. Not really._

_“I mean, you’re right about the fire and war, all that. But that
Rapture stuff—well, if you could see them all in Heaven—serried ranks of
them as far as the mind can follow and beyond, league after league of
us, flaming swords, all that, well, what I’m trying to say is who has
time to go round picking people out and popping them up in the air to
sneer at the people dying of radiation sickness on the parched and
burning earth below them? If that’s your idea of a morally acceptable
time, I might add._

_“And as for that stuff about Heaven inevitably winning … Well, to be
honest, if it were that cut and dried, there wouldn’t be a Celestial War
in the first place, would there? It’s propaganda. Pure and simple. We’ve
got no more than a fifty percent chance of coming out on top. You might
just as well send money to a Satanist hotline to cover your bets,
although to be frank when the fire falls and the seas of blood rise you
lot are all going to be civilian casualties either way. Between our war
and your war, they’re going to kill everyone and let God sort it
out—right?_

_“Anyway, sorry to stand here wittering, I’ve just a quick
question—where am I?”_

Marvin O. Bagman was gradually going purple.

“It’s the devil! Lord protect me! The devil is speakin’ through me!” he
erupted, and interrupted himself, “Oh no, quite the opposite in fact.
I’m an angel. Ah. This has to be America, doesn’t it? So sorry, can’t
stay … ”

There was a pause. Marvin tried to open his mouth, but nothing happened.
Whatever was in his head looked around. He looked at the studio crew,
those who weren’t phoning the police, or sobbing in corners. He looked
at the gray-faced cameramen.

_“Gosh,” he said, “am I on television?”_

CROWLEY WAS DOING a hundred and twenty miles an hour down Oxford Street.

He reached into the glove compartment for his spare pair of sunglasses,
and found only cassettes. Irritably he grabbed one at random and pushed
it into the slot.

He wanted Bach, but he would settle for The Traveling Wilburys.

_All we need is_, _Radio Gaga_, sang Freddie Mercury.

All I need is out, thought Crowley.

He swung around the Marble Arch Roundabout the wrong way, doing ninety.
Lightning made the London skies flicker like a malfunctioning
fluorescent tube.

_A livid sky on London, Crowley thought_, And I knew the end was near.
Who had written that? Chesterton, wasn’t it? The only poet in the
twentieth century to even come close to the Truth.

The Bentley headed out of London while Crowley sat back in the driver’s
seat and thumbed through the singed copy of The Nice and _Accurate
Prophecies of Agnes Nutter._

Near the end of the book he found a folded sheet of paper covered in
Aziraphale’s neat copperplate handwriting. He unfolded it (while the
Bentley’s gearstick shifted itself down to third and the car accelerated
around a fruit lorry, which had unexpectedly backed out of a side
street), and then he read it again.

Then he read it one more time, with a slow sinking feeling at the base
of his stomach.

The car changed direction suddenly. It was now heading for the village
of Tadfield, in Oxfordshire. He could be there in an hour if he hurried.

Anyway, there wasn’t really anywhere else to go.

The cassette finished, activating the car radio.

_“. . . Gardeners’ Question Time coming to you from Tadfield Gardening
Club. We were last here in 1953, a very nice summer, and as the team
will remember it’s a rich Oxfordshire loam in the East of the parish,
rising to chalk in the West, the kind of place oi say, don’t matter what
you plant here, it’ll come up beautiful. Isn’t that right, Fred?”_

_“Yep,” said Professor Fred Windbright, Royal Botanical Gardens,
“couldn’t of put it better meself.”_

_“Right—First question for the team, and this comes from Mr. R.P. Tyler,
chairman of the local Residents Association, I do believe.”_

_“’hem. That’s right. Well, I’m a keen rose grower, but my prize-winning
Molly McGuire lost a couple of blossoms yesterday in a rain of what were
apparently fish. What does the team recommend for this, other than place
netting over the garden? I mean, I’ve written to the council … ”_

_“Not a common problem, I’d say. Harry?”_

_“Mr. Tyler, let me ask you a question—were these fresh fish, or
preserved?”_

_“Fresh, I believe.”_

_“Well, you’ve got no problems, my friend. I hear you’ve also been
having rains of blood in these parts—and I wish we had these up in the
Dales, where my garden is. Save me a fortune in fertilizers. Now, what
you do is, you dig them in to your … ” CROWLEY?_

Crowley said nothing.

_CROWLEY. THE WAR HAS BEGUN, CROWLEY. WE NOTE WITH INTEREST THAT YOU
AVOIDED THE FORCES WE EMPOWERED TO COLLECT YOU._

“Mm,” Crowley agreed.

_CROWLEY … WE WILL WIN THIS WAR. BUT EVEN IF WE LOSE, AT LEAST AS FAR AS
YOU ARE CONCERNED, IT WILL MAKE NO DIFFERENCE AT ALL. FOR AS LONG AS
THERE IS ONE DEMON LEFT IN HELL, CROWLEY, YOU WILL WISH YOU HAD BEEN
CREATED MORTAL._

Crowley was silent.

_MORTALS CAN HOPE FOR DEATH, OR FOR REDEMPTION. YOU CAN HOPE FOR
NOTHING._

_ALL YOU CAN HOPE FOR IS THE MERCY OF HELL._

“Yeah?”

_JUST OUR LITTLE JOKE._

“Ngk,” said Crowley.

_“. . . now as keen gardeners know, it goes without sayin’ that he’s a
cunnin’ little devil, your Tibetan. Tunnelin’ straight through your
begonias like it was nobody’s business. A cup of tea’ll shift him, with
rancid yak butter for preference—you should be able to get some at any
good gard … ”_

Wheee. Whizz. Pop. Static drowned out the rest of the program.

Crowley turned off the radio and bit his lower lip. Beneath the ash and
soot that flaked his face, he looked very tired, and very pale, and very
scared.

And, suddenly, very angry. It was the way they talked to you. As if you
were a houseplant who had started shedding leaves on the carpet.

And then he turned a corner, which was meant to take him onto the slip
road to the M25, from which he’d swing off onto the M40 up to
Oxfordshire.

But something had happened to the M25. Something that hurt your eyes, if
you looked directly at it.

From what had been the M25 London Orbital Motorway came a low chanting,
a noise formed of many strands: car horns, and engines, and sirens, and
the bleep of cellular telephones, and the screaming
of small children trapped by back-seat seat belts for ever. “Hail the
Great Beast, Devourer of Worlds,” came the chanting, over and over
again, in the secret tongue of the Black priesthood of ancient Mu.

_The dreaded sigil Odegra, thought Crowley, as he swung the car around,
heading for the North Circular. I did that—that’s my fault. It could
have been just another motorway. A good job, I’ll grant you, but was it
really worthwhile? It’s all out of control. Heaven and Hell aren’t
running things any more, it’s like the whole planet is a Third World
country that’s finally got the Bomb …_

Then he began to smile. He snapped his fingers. A pair of dark glasses
materialized out of his eyes. The ash vanished from his suit and his
skin.

What the hell. If you had to go, why not go with style?

Whistling softly, he drove.

THEY CAME DOWN the outside lane of the motorway like destroying angels,
which was fair enough.

They weren’t going that fast, all things considered. The four of them
were holding a steady 105 mph, as if they were confident that the show
could not start before they got there. It couldn’t. They had all the
time in the world, such as it was.

Just behind them came four other riders: Big Ted, Greaser, Pigbog, and
Skuzz.

They were elated. They were real Hell’s Angels now, and they rode the
silence.

Around them, they knew, was the roar of the thunderstorm, the thunder of
traffic, the whipping of the wind and the rain. But in the wake of the
Horsemen there was silence, pure and dead. Almost pure, anyway.
Certainly dead.

It was broken by Pigbog, shouting to Big Ted.

“What you going to be, then?” he asked, hoarsely.

“What?”

“I said, what you—”

“I heard what you said. It’s not what you said. Everyone heard what you
said. What did you mean, tha’s what I wanter know?”

Pigbog wished he’d paid more attention to the Book of Revelation. If
he’d known he was going to be in it, he’d have read it more carefully.
“What I mean is, they’re the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, right?”

“Bikers,” said Greaser.

“Right. Four Bikers of the Apocalypse. War, Famine, Death, and—and the
other one. P’lution.”

“Yeah? So?”

“So they said it was all right if we came with them, right?”

“So?”

“So we’re the other Four Horse—, um, Bikers of the Apocalypse. So which
ones are we?”

There was a pause. The lights of passing cars shot past them in the
opposite lane, lightning after-imaged the clouds, and the silence was
close to absolute.

“Can I be War as well?” asked Big Ted.

“Course you can’t be War. How can you be War? She’s War. You’ve got to
be something else.”

Big Ted screwed up his face with the effort of thought. “G.B.H.,” he
said, eventually. “I’m Grievous Bodily Harm. That’s me. There. Wott’re
you going to be?”

“Can I be Rubbish?” asked Skuzz. “Or Embarrassing Personal Problems?”

“Can’t be Rubbish,” said Grievous Bodily Harm. “He’s got that one sewn
up, Pollution. You can be the other, though.”

They rode on in the silence and the dark, the rear red lights of the
Four a few hundred yards in front of them.

Grievous Bodily Harm, Embarrassing Personal Problems, Pigbog, and
Greaser.

“I wonter be Cruelty to Animals,” said Greaser. Pigbog wondered if he
was for or against it. Not that it really mattered.

And then it was Pigbog’s turn.

“I, uh … I think I’ll be them answer phones. They’re pretty bad,” he
said.

“You can’t be ansaphones. What kind of a Biker of the Repocalypse is
ansaphones? That’s stupid, that is.”

“S’not!” said Pigbog, nettled. “It’s like War, and Famine, and that.
It’s a problem of life, isn’t it? Answer phones. I hate bloody answer
phones.”

“I hate ansaphones, too,” said Cruelty to Animals.

“You can shut up,” said G.B.H.

“Can I change mine?” asked Embarrassing Personal Problems, who had been
thinking intently since he last spoke. “I want to be Things Not Working
Properly Even After You’ve Thumped Them.”

“All right, you can change. But you can’t be ansaphones, Pigbog. Pick
something else.”

Pigbog pondered. He wished he’d never broached the subject. It was like
the careers interviews he had had as a schoolboy. He deliberated.

“Really cool people,” he said at last. “I hate them.”

“Really cool people?” said Things Not Working Properly Even After You’ve
Given Them A Good Thumping.

“Yeah. You know. The kind you see on telly, with stupid haircuts, only
on them it dunt look stupid ’cos it’s them. They wear baggy suits, an’
you’re not allowed to say they’re a bunch of wankers. I mean, speaking
for me, what I always want to do when I see one of them is push their
faces very slowly through a barbed-wire fence. An’ what I think is
this.” He took a deep breath. He was sure this was the longest speech he
had ever made in his life.⁴⁴ “What I think is this. If they get up my
nose like that, they pro’lly get up everyone else’s.”

“Yeah,” said Cruelty to Animals. “An’ they all wear sunglasses even when
they dunt need ’em.”

“Eatin’ runny cheese, and that stupid bloody No Alcohol Lager,” said
Things Not Working Properly Even After You’ve Given Them A Good
Thumping. “I hate that stuff. What’s the point of drinking the stuff if
it dunt leave you puking? Here, I just thought. Can I change again, so
I’m No Alcohol Lager?”

“No you bloody can’t,” said Grievous Bodily Harm. “You’ve changed once
already.”

“Anyway,” said Pigbog. “That’s why I wonter be Really Cool People.”

“All right,” said his leader.

“Don’t see why I can’t be No bloody Alcohol Lager if I want.”

“Shut your face.”

Death and Famine and War and Pollution continued biking toward Tadfield.

And Grievous Bodily Harm, Cruelty to Animals, Things Not Working
Properly Even After You’ve Given Them A Good Thumping But Secretly No
Alcohol Lager, and Really Cool People traveled with them.

IT WAS A WET AND BLUSTERY Saturday afternoon, and Madame Tracy was
feeling very occult.

She had her flowing dress on, and a saucepan full of sprouts on the
stove. The room was lit by candlelight, each candle carefully placed in
a wax-encrusted wine bottle at the four corners of her sitting room.

There were three other people at her sitting. Mrs. Ormerod from Belsize
Park, in a dark green hat that might have been a flowerpot in a previous
life; Mr. Scroggie, thin and pallid, with bulging colorless eyes; and
Julia Petley from Hair Today,⁴⁵ the hairdressers’ on the High Street,
fresh out of school and convinced that she herself had unplumbed occult
depths. In order to enhance the occult aspects of herself, Julia had
begun to wear far too much handbeaten silver jewelry and green
eyeshadow. She felt she looked haunted and gaunt and romantic, and she
would have, if she had lost another thirty pounds. She was convinced
that she was anorexic, because every time she looked in the mirror she
did indeed see a fat person.

“Can you link hands?” asked Madame Tracy. “And we must have complete
silence. The spirit world is very sensitive to vibration.”

“Ask if my Ron is there,” said Mrs. Ormerod. She had a jaw like a brick.

“I will, love, but you’ve got to be quiet while I make contact.”

There was silence, broken only by Mr. Scroggie’s stomach rumbling.
“Pardon, ladies,” he mumbled.

Madame Tracy had found, through years of Drawing Aside the Veil and
Exploring the Mysteries, that two minutes was the right length of time
to sit in silence, waiting for the Spirit World to make contact. More
than that and they got restive, less than that and they felt they
weren’t getting their money’s worth.

She did her shopping list in her head.

Eggs. Lettuce. Ounce of cooking cheese. Four tomatoes. Butter. Roll of
toilet paper. Mustn’t forget that, we’re nearly out. And a really nice
piece of liver for Mr. Shadwell, poor old soul, it’s a shame …

Time.

Madame Tracy threw back her head, let it loll on one shoulder, then
slowly lifted it again. Her eyes were almost shut.

“She’s going under now, dear,” she heard Mrs. Ormerod whisper to Julia
Petley. “Nothing to be alarmed about. She’s just making herself a Bridge
to the Other Side. Her spirit guide will be along soon.”

Madame Tracy found herself rather irritated at being upstaged, and she
let out a low moan. “Oooooooooh.”

Then, in a high-pitched, quavery voice, “Are you there, my Spirit
Guide?”

She waited a little, to build up the suspense. Washing-up liquid. Two
cans of baked beans. Oh, and potatoes.

“How?” she said, in a dark brown voice.

“Is that you, Geronimo?” she asked herself.

“Is um me, how,” she replied.

“We have a new member of the circle with us this afternoon,” she said.

“How, Miss Petley?” she said, as Geronimo. She had always understood
that Red Indian spirit guides were an essential prop, and she rather
liked the name. She had explained this to Newt. She didn’t know anything
about Geronimo, he realized, and he didn’t have the heart to tell her.

“Oh,” squeaked Julia. “Charmed to make your acquaintance.”

“Is my Ron there, Geronimo?” asked Mrs. Ormerod.

“How, squaw Beryl,” said Madame Tracy. “Oh there are so many um of the
poor lost souls um lined up against um door to my teepee. Perhaps your
Ron is amongst them. How.”

Madame Tracy had learned her lesson years earlier, and now never brought
Ron through until near the end. If she didn’t, Beryl Ormerod would
occupy the rest of the seance telling the late Ron Ormerod everything
that had happened to her since their last little chat. (“. . . now Ron,
you remember, our Eric’s littlest, Sybilla, well you wouldn’t recognize
her now, she’s taken up macramé, and our Letitia, you know, our Karen’s
oldest, she’s become a lesbian but that’s all right these days and is
doing a dissertation on the films of Sergio Leone as seen from a
feminist perspective, and our Stan, you know, our Sandra’s twin, I told
you about him last time, well, he won the darts tournament, which is
nice because we all thought he was a bit of a mother’s boy, while the
guttering over the shed’s come loose, but I spoke to our Cindi’s latest,
who’s a jobbing builder, and he’ll be over to see to it on Sunday, and
ohh, that reminds me … ”)

No, Beryl Ormerod could wait. There was a flash of lightning, followed
almost immediately by a rumble of distant thunder. Madame Tracy felt
rather proud, as if she had done it herself. It was even better than the
candles at creating ambulance. Ambulance was what mediuming was all
about.

“Now,” said Madame Tracy in her own voice. “Mr. Geronimo would like to
know, is there anyone named Mr. Scroggie here?”

Scroggie’s watery eyes gleamed. “Erm, actually that’s my name,” he said,
hopefully.

“Right, well there’s somebody here for you.” Mr. Scroggie had been
coming for a month now, and she hadn’t been able to think of a message
for him. His time had come. “Do you know anyone named, um, John?”

“No,” said Mr. Scroggie.

“Well, there’s some celestial interference here. The name could be Tom.
Or Jim. Or, um, Dave.”

“I knew a Dave when I was in Hemel Hempstead,” said Mr. Scroggie, a
trifle doubtfully.

“Yes, he’s saying, Hemel Hempstead, that’s what he’s saying,” said
Madame Tracy.

“But I ran into him last week, walking his dog, and he looked perfectly
healthy,” said Mr. Scroggie, slightly puzzled.

“He says not to worry, and he’s happier beyond the veil,” soldiered on
Madame Tracy, who felt it was always better to give her clients good
news.

“Tell my Ron I’ve got to tell him about our Krystal’s wedding,” said
Mrs. Ormerod.

“I will, love. Now, hold on a mo’, there’s something coming through … ”

And then something came through. It sat in Madame Tracy’s head and
peered out.

“Sprechen sie Deutsch?” it said, using Madame Tracy’s mouth.
“Parlez-vous français? Wo bu hui jiang zhongwen?”

“Is that you, Ron?” asked Mrs. Ormerod. The reply, when it came, was
rather testy.

“No. Definitely not. However, a question so manifestly dim can only have
been put in one country on this benighted planet—most of which,
incidentally, I have seen during the last few hours. Dear lady, this is
not Ron.”

“Well, I want to speak to Ron Ormerod,” said Mrs. Ormerod, a little
testily. “He’s rather short, balding on top. Can you put him on,
please?”

There was a pause. “Actually there does appear to be a spirit of that
description hovering over here. Very well. I’ll hand you over, but you
must make it quick. I am attempting to avert the apocalypse.”

Mrs. Ormerod and Mr. Scroggie gave each other looks. Nothing like this
had happened at Madame Tracy’s previous sittings. Julia Petley was rapt.
This was more like it. She hoped Madame Tracy was going to start
manifesting ectoplasm next.

“H-hello?” said Madame Tracy in another voice. Mrs. Ormerod started. It
sounded exactly like Ron. On previous occasions Ron had sounded like
Madame Tracy.

“Ron, is that you?”

“Yes, Buh-Beryl.”

“Right. Now I’ve quite a bit to tell you. For a start I went to our
Krystal’s wedding, last Saturday, our Marilyn’s eldest … ”

“Buh-Beryl. You-you nuh-never let me guh-get a wuh-word in edgewise
wuh-while I was alive. Nuh-now I’m duh-dead, there’s juh-just one thing
to suh-say … ”

Beryl Ormerod was a little disgruntled by all this. Previously when Ron
had manifested, he had told her that he was happier beyond the veil, and
living somewhere that sounded more than a little like a celestial
bungalow. Now he sounded like Ron, and she wasn’t sure that was what she
wanted. And she said what she had always said to her husband when he
began to speak to her in that tone of voice.

“Ron, remember your heart condition.”

“I duh-don’t have a huh-heart any longer. Remuhmember? Anyway,
Buh-Beryl … ?”

“Yes, Ron.”

“Shut up,” and the spirit was gone. “Wasn’t that touching? Right, now,
thank you very much, ladies and gentleman, I’m afraid I shall have to be
getting on.”

Madame Tracy stood up, went over to the door, and turned on the lights.

“Out!” she said.

Her sitters stood up, more than a little puzzled, and, in Mrs. Ormerod’s
case, outraged, and they walked out into the hall.

“You haven’t heard the last of this, Marjorie Potts,” hissed Mrs.
Ormerod, clutching her handbag to her breast, and she slammed the door.

Then her muffled voice echoed from the hallway, “And you can tell our
Ron that he hasn’t heard the last of this either!”

Madame Tracy (and the name on her scooters-only driving license was
indeed Marjorie Potts) went into the kitchen and turned off the sprouts.

She put on the kettle. She made herself a pot of tea. She sat down at
the kitchen table, got out two cups, filled both of them. She added two
sugars to one of them. Then she paused.

“No sugar for me, please,” said Madame Tracy.

She lined up the cups on the table in front of her, and took a long sip
from the tea-with-sugar.

“Now,” she said, in a voice that anyone who knew her would have
recognized as her own, although they might not have recognized her tone
of voice, which was cold with rage. “Suppose you tell me what this is
about. And it had better be good.”

A LORRY HAD SHED its load all over the M6. According to its manifest the
lorry had been filled with sheets of corrugated iron, although the two
police patrolmen were having difficulty in accepting this.

“So what I want to know is, where did all the fish come from?” asked the
sergeant.

“I told you. They fell from the sky. One minute I’m driving along at
sixty, next second, whap! a twelve-pound salmon smashes through the
windscreen. So I pulls the wheel over, and I skidded on that,” he
pointed to the remains of a hammerhead shark under the lorry, “and ran
into that.” That was a thirty-foot-high heap of fish, of different
shapes and sizes.

“Have you been drinking, sir?” asked the sergeant, less than hopefully.

“Course I haven’t been drinking, you great wazzock. You can see the
fish, can’t you?”

On the top of the pile a rather large octopus waved a languid tentacle
at them. The sergeant resisted the temptation to wave back.

The police constable was leaning into the police car, talking on the
radio. “. . . corrugated iron and fish, blocking off the southbound M6
about half a mile north of junction ten. We’re going to have to close
off the whole southbound carriageway. Yeah.”

The rain redoubled. A small trout, which had miraculously survived the
fall, gamely began to swim toward Birmingham.

“THAT WAS WONDERFUL,” SAID NEWT.

“Good,” said Anathema. “The earth moved for everybody.” She got up off
the floor, leaving her clothes scattered across the carpet, and went
into the bathroom.

Newt raised his voice. “I mean, it was really wonderful. Really really
wonderful. I always hoped it was going to be, and it was.”

There was the sound of running water.

“What are you doing?” he asked.

“Taking a shower.”

“Ah.” He wondered vaguely if everyone had to shower afterwards, or if it
was just women. And he had a suspicion that bidets came into it
somewhere.

“Tell you what,” said Newt, as Anathema came out of the bathroom swathed
in a fluffy pink towel. “We could do it again.”

“Nope,” she said, “not now.” She finished drying herself, and started
picking up clothes from the floor, and, unself-consciously, pulling them
on. Newt, a man who was prepared to wait half an hour for a free
changing cubicle at the swimming baths, rather than face the possibility
of having to disrobe in front of another human being, found himself
vaguely shocked, and deeply thrilled.

Bits of her kept appearing and disappearing, like a conjurer’s hands;
Newt kept trying to count her nipples and failing, although he didn’t
mind.

“Why not?” said Newt. He was about to point out that it might not take
long, but an inner voice counseled him against it. He was growing up
quite quickly in a short time.

Anathema shrugged, not an easy move when you’re pulling on a sensible
black skirt. “She said we only did it this once.”

Newt opened his mouth two or three times, then said, “She didn’t. She
bloody didn’t. She couldn’t predict that. I don’t believe it.”

Anathema, fully dressed, walked over to her card index, pulled one out,
and passed it to him.

Newt read it and blushed and gave it back, tight-lipped.

It wasn’t simply the fact that Agnes had known, and had expressed
herself in the most transparent of codes. It was that, down the ages,
various Devices had scrawled encouraging little comments in the margin.

She passed him the damp towel. “Here,” she said. “Hurry up. I’ve got to
make the sandwiches, and we’ve got to get ready.”

He looked at the towel. “What’s this for?”

“Your shower.”

Ah. So it was something men and women both did. He was pleased he’d got
that sorted out.

“But you’ll have to make it quick,” she said.

“Why? Have we got to get out of here in the next ten minutes before the
building explodes?”

“Oh no. We’ve got a couple of hours. It’s just that I’ve used up most of
the hot water. You’ve got a lot of plaster in your hair.”

The storm blew a dying gust around Jasmine Cottage, and holding the damp
pink towel, no longer fluffy, in front of him, strategically, Newt edged
off to take a cold shower.

_IN SHADWELL’S DREAM, he is floating high above a village green. In the
center of the green is a huge pile of kindling wood and dry branches. In
the center of the pile is a wooden stake. Men and women and children
stand around on the grass, eyes bright, cheeks pink, expectant,
excited._

_A sudden commotion: ten men walk across the green, leading a handsome,
middle-aged woman; she must have been quite striking in her youth, and
the word “vivacious” creeps into Shadwell’s dreaming mind. In front of
her walks Witchfinder Private Newton Pulsifer. No, it isn’t Newt. The
man is older, and dressed in black leather. Shadwell recognizes
approvingly the ancient uniform of a Witchfinder Major._

_The woman climbs onto the pyre, thrusts her hands behind her, and is
tied to the stake. The pyre is lit. She speaks to the crowd, says
something, but Shadwell is too high to hear what it is. The crowd
gathers around her._

_A witch, thinks Shadwell. They’re burning a witch. It gives him a warm
feeling. That was the right and proper way of things. That’s how things
were meant to be._

_Only …_

_She looks directly up at him now, and says “That goes for yowe as
welle, yowe daft old foole.”_

_Only she is going to die. She is going to burn to death. And, Shadwell
realizes in his dream, it is a horrible way to die._

_The flames lick higher._

_And the woman looks up. She is staring straight at him, invisible
though he is. And she is smiling._

_And then it all goes boom._

A crash of thunder.

That was thunder, thought Shadwell, as he woke up, with the unshakable
feeling that someone was still staring at him.

He opened his eyes, and thirteen glass eyes watched from the various
shelves of Madame Tracy’s boudoir, staring out from a variety of fuzzy
faces.

He looked away, and into the eyes of someone staring intently at him. It
was him.

Och, he thought in terror, I’m havin’ one o’ them out-o’-yer-body
experiences, I can see mah ane self, I’m a goner this time right
enough …

He made frantic swimming motions in an effort to reach his own body and
then, as these things do, the perspectives clicked into place.

Shadwell relaxed, and wondered why anyone would want to put a mirror on
his bedroom ceiling. He shook his head, baffled.

He climbed out of the bed, pulled on his boots, and stood up, warily.
Something was missing. A cigarette. He thrust his hands deep into his
pockets, pulled out a tin, and began to roll a cigarette.

He’d been dreaming, he knew. Shadwell didn’t remember the dream, but it
made him feel uncomfortable, whatever it was.

He lit the cigarette. And he saw his right hand: the ultimate weapon.
The doomsday device. He pointed one finger at the one-eyed teddy bear on
the mantelpiece.

“Bang,” he said, and chuckled, dustily. He wasn’t used to chuckling, and
he began to cough, which meant he was back on familiar territory. He
wanted something to drink. A sweet can of condensed milk.

Madame Tracy would have some.

He stomped out of her boudoir, heading toward the kitchen.

Outside the little kitchen he paused. She was talking to someone. A man.

“So what exactly do you want me to do about this?” she was asking.

“Ach, ye beldame,” muttered Shadwell. She had one of her gentlemen
callers in there, obviously.

_“To be frank, dear lady, my plans at this point are perforce somewhat
fluid.”_

Shadwell’s blood ran cold. He marched through the bead curtain,
shouting, “The sins of Sodom an’ Gomorrah! Takin’ advantage of a
defenseless hoor! Over my dead body!”

Madame Tracy looked up, and smiled at him. There wasn’t anyone else in
the room.

“Whurrizee?” asked Shadwell.

“Whom?” asked Madame Tracy.

“Some Southern pansy,” he said, “I heard him. He was in here, suggestin’
things to yer. I heard him.”

Madame Tracy’s mouth opened, and a voice said, “Not just A Southern
Pansy, Sergeant Shadwell. THE Southern Pansy.”

Shadwell dropped his cigarette. He stretched out his arm, shaking
slightly, and pointed his hand at Madame Tracy.

“Demon,” he croaked.

“_No_,” said Madame Tracy, in the _voice_ of the demon. _“Now, I know
what you’re thinking, Sergeant Shadwell. You’re thinking that any second
now this head is going to go round and round, and I’m going to start
vomiting pea soup. Well, I’m not. I’m not a demon. And I’d like you to
listen to what I have to say.”_

“Daemonspawn, be silent,” ordered Shadwell. “I’ll no listen to yer
wicked lies. Do yer know what _this_ is? It’s a hand. Four fingers. One
thumb. It’s already exorcised one of yer number this morning. Now get ye
out of this gud wimmin’s head, or I’ll blast ye to kingdom come.”

“That’s the problem, Mr. Shadwell,” said Madame Tracy in her own voice.
“Kingdom come. It’s going to. That’s the problem. Mr. Aziraphale has
been telling me all about it. Now stop being an old silly, Mr. Shadwell,
sit down, and have some tea, and he’ll explain it to you as well.”

“I’ll ne’r listen tae his hellish blandishments, woman,” said Shadwell.

Madame Tracy smiled at him. “You old _silly,”_ she said.

He could have handled anything else.

He sat down.

But he didn’t lower his hand.

THE SWINGING OVERHEAD SIGNS proclaimed that the southbound carriageway
was closed, and a small forest of orange cones had sprung up,
redirecting motorists onto a co-opted lane of the northbound
carriageway. Other signs directed motorists to slow down to thirty miles
per hour. Police cars herded the drivers around like red-striped
sheepdogs.

The four bikers ignored all the signs, and cones, and police cars, and
continued down the empty southbound carriageway of the M6. The _other_
four bikers, just behind them, slowed a little.

“Shouldn’t we, uh, stop or something?” asked Really Cool People.

“Yeah. Could be a pileup,” said Treading in Dogshit (formerly All
Foreigners Especially The French, formerly Things Not Working Properly
Even When You’ve Given Them a Good Thumping, never actually No Alcohol
Lager, briefly Embarrassing Personal Problems, formerly known as Skuzz).

“We’re the _other_ Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse,” said G.B.H. “We do
what they do. We follow them.”

They rode south.

“IT’LL BE A WORLD JUST FOR US,” said Adam. “Everything’s always been
messed up by other people but we can get rid of it all an’ start again.
Won’t that be _great_?”

“YOU ARE, I TRUST, _familiar with the Book of Revelation?”_ said Madame
Tracy with Aziraphale’s voice.

“Aye,” said Shadwell, who wasn’t. His biblical expertise began and ended
with Exodus, chapter twenty-two, verse eighteen, which concerned
Witches, the suffering to live of, and why you shouldn’t. He had once
glanced at verse nineteen, which was about putting to death people who
lay down with beasts, but he had felt that this was rather outside his
jurisdiction.

_“Then you have heard of the Antichrist?”_

“Aye,” said Shadwell, who had seen a film once which explained it all.
Something about sheets of glass falling off lorries and slicing people’s
heads off, as he recalled. No proper witches to speak of. He’d gone to
sleep halfway through.

_“The Antichrist is alive on earth at this moment, Sergeant. He is
bringing about Armageddon, the Day of Judgment, even if he himself does
not know it. Heaven and Hell are both preparing for war, and it’s all
going to be very messy.”_

Shadwell merely grunted.

_“I am not actually permitted to act directly in this matter, Sergeant.
But I am sure that you can see that the imminent destruction of the
world is not something any reasonable man would permit. Am I correct?”_

“Aye. S’pose,” said Shadwell, sipping condensed milk from a rusting can
Madame Tracy had discovered under the sink.

_“Then there is only one thing to be done. And you are the only man I
can rely on. The Antichrist must be killed, Sergeant Shadwell. And you
must do it.”_

Shadwell frowned. “I wouldna know about that,” he said. “The witchfinder
army only kills witches. ’Tis one of the rules. And demons and imps, o’
course.”

_“But, but the Antichrist is more than just a witch. He—he’s THE witch.
He’s just about as witchy as you can get.”_

“Wud he be harder to get rid of than, say, a demon?” asked Shadwell, who
had begun to brighten.

_“Not much more,”_ said Aziraphale, who had never done other to get rid
of demons than to hint to them very strongly that he, Aziraphale, had
some work to be getting on with, and wasn’t it getting late? And Crowley
had always got the hint.

Shadwell looked down at his right hand, and smiled. Then he hesitated.

“This Antichrist—how many nipples has he?”

The end justifies the means, thought Aziraphale. And the road to Hell is
paved with good intentions.⁴⁶ And he lied cheerfully and convincingly:
_“Oodles. Pots of them. His chest is covered with them—he makes Diana of
the Ephesians look positively nippleless.”_

“I wouldna know about this Diana of yours,” said Shadwell, “but if he’s
a witch, and it sounds tae me like he is, then, speaking as a sergeant
in the WA, I’m yer man.”

_“Good,”_ said Aziraphale through Madame Tracy.

“I’m not sure about this killing business,” said Madame Tracy herself.
“But if it’s this man, this Antichrist, or everybody else, then I
suppose we don’t really have any choice.”

_“Exactly, dear lady,”_ she replied. _“Now, Sergeant Shadwell. Have you
a weapon?”_

Shadwell rubbed his right hand with his left, clenching and unclenching
the fist. “Aye,” he said. “I have that.” And he raised two fingers to
his lips and blew on them gently.

There was a pause. “_Your hand?_” asked Aziraphale.

“Aye. ’Tis a turrible weapon. It did for ye, daemonspawn, did it not?”

_“Have you anything more, uh, substantial? How about the Golden Dagger
of Meggido? Or the Shiv of Kali?”_

Shadwell shook his head. “I’ve got some pins,” he suggested. “And the
Thundergun of Witchfinder-Colonel
Ye-Shall-Not-Eat-Any-Living-Thing-With-The-Blood-Neither-Shall-Ye-Use-Enchantment-Nor-Observe-Times
Dalrymple … I could load it with silver bullets.”

_“That’s werewolves, I believe_,” said Aziraphale.

“Garlic?”

_“Vampires.”_

Shadwell shrugged. “Aye, weel, I dinna have any fancy bullets anyway.
But the Thundergun will fire anything. I’ll go and fetch it.”

He shuffled out, thinking, why do I need another weapon? I’m a man with
a hand.

_“Now, dear lady,”_ said Aziraphale. _“I trust you have a reliable mode
of transportation at your disposal_.”

“Oh, yes,” said Madame Tracy. She went over to the corner of the kitchen
and picked up a pink motorbike helmet, with a yellow sunflower painted
on it, and put it on, strapping it under her chin. Then she rummaged in
a cupboard, pulled out three or four hundred plastic shopping bags and a
heap of yellowing local newspapers, then a dusty day-glo green helmet
with EASY RIDER written across the top, a present from her niece Petula
twenty years before.

Shadwell, returning with the Thundergun over his shoulder, stared at her
unbelieving.

“I don’t know what you’re staring at, Mr. Shadwell,” she told him. “It’s
parked in the road downstairs.” She passed him the helmet. “You’ve got
to put it on. It’s the law. I don’t think you’re really allowed to have
three people on a scooter, even if two of them are, er, sharing. But
it’s an emergency. And I’m sure you’ll be quite safe, if you hold on to
me nice and tight.” And she smiled. “Won’t that be fun?”

Shadwell paled, muttered something inaudible, and put on the green
helmet.

“What was that, Mr. Shadwell?” Madame Tracy looked at him sharply.

“I said, De’il ding a divot aff yer wame wi’ a flaughter spade,” said
Shadwell.

“That’ll be quite enough of that kind of language, Mr. Shadwell,” said
Madame Tracy, and she marched him out of the hall and down the stairs to
Crouch End High Street, where an elderly scooter waited to take the two,
well, call it three of them away.

THE LORRY BLOCKED THE ROAD. And the corrugated iron blocked the road.
And a thirty-foot-high pile of fish blocked the road. It was one of the
most effectively blocked roads the sergeant had ever seen.

The rain wasn’t helping.

“Any idea when the bulldozers are likely to get here?” he shouted into
his radio.

“We’re _crrrrk_ doing the best we _crrrrk,”_ came the reply.

He felt something tugging at his trouser cuff, and looked down.

“Lobsters?” He gave a little skip, and a jump, and wound up on the top
of the police car. “Lobsters,” he repeated. There were about thirty of
them—some over two feet long. Most of them were on their way up the
motorway; half a dozen had stopped to check out the police car.

“Something wrong, Sarge?” asked the police constable, who was taking
down the lorry driver’s details on the hard shoulder.

“I just don’t like lobsters,” said the sergeant, grimly, shutting his
eyes. “Bring me out in a rash. Too many legs. I’ll just sit up here a
bit, and you can tell me when they’ve all gone.”

He sat on the top of the car, in the rain, and felt the water seeping
into the bottom of his trousers.

There was a low roar. Thunder? No. It was continuous, and getting
closer. Motorbikes. The sergeant opened one eye.

_Jesus Christ!_

There were four of them, and they had to be doing over a hundred. He was
about to climb down, to wave at them, to shout, but they were past him,
heading straight for the upturned lorry.

There was nothing the sergeant could do. He closed his eyes again, and
listened for the collision. He could hear them coming closer. Then:

Whoosh.

Whoosh.

Whoosh.

And a voice in his head that said, I’LL CATCH UP WITH THE REST OF YOU.

(“Did you see that?” asked Really Cool People. “They flew right over
it!”

“’kin’ell!” said G.B.H. “If they can do it, we can too!”)

The sergeant opened his eyes. He turned to the police constable and
opened his mouth.

The police constable said, “They. They actually. They flew righ … ”

_Thud. Thud. Thud_.

_Splat_.

There was another rain of fish, although of shorter duration, and more
easily explicable. A leather-jacketed arm waved feebly from the large
pile of fish. A motorbike wheel spun hopelessly.

That was Skuzz, semi-conscious, deciding that if there was one thing he
hated even more than the French it was being up to his neck in fish with
what felt like a broken leg. He truly hated that.

He wanted to tell G.B.H. about his new role; but he couldn’t move.
Something wet and slippery slithered up one sleeve.

Later, when they’d dragged him out of the fish pile, and he’d seen the
other three bikers, with the blankets over their heads, he realized it
was too late to tell them anything.

That was why they hadn’t been in that Book of Revelations Pigbog had
been going on about. They’d never made it that far down the motorway.

Skuzz muttered something. The police sergeant leaned over. “Don’t try to
speak, son,” he said. “The ambulance’ll be here soon.”

“Listen,” croaked Skuzz. “Got something important to tell you. The Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse … they’re right bastards, all four of them.”

“He’s delirious,” announced the sergeant.

“I’m sodding not. I’m People Covered In Fish,” croaked Skuzz, and passed
out.

THE LONDON TRAFFIC SYSTEM is many hundreds of times more complex than
anyone imagines.

This has nothing to do with influences, demonic or angelic. It’s more to
do with geography, and history, and architecture.

Mostly this works to people’s advantage, although they’d never believe
it.

London was not designed for cars. Come to that, it wasn’t designed for
people. It just sort of happened. This created problems, and the
solutions that were implemented became the next problems, five or ten or
a hundred years down the line.

The latest solution had been the M25: a motorway that formed a rough
circle around the city. Up until now the problems had been fairly
basic—things like it being obsolete before they had finished building
it, Einsteinian tailbacks that eventually became tailforwards, that kind
of thing.

The current problem was that it didn’t exist; not in normal human
spatial terms, anyway. The tailback of cars unaware of this, or trying
to find alternate routes out of London, stretched into the city center,
from every direction. For the first time ever, London was completely
gridlocked. The city was one huge traffic jam.

Cars, in theory, give you a terrifically fast method of traveling from
place to place. Traffic jams, on the other hand, give you a terrific
opportunity to stay still. In the rain, and the gloom, while around you
the cacophonous symphony of horns grew ever louder and more exasperated.

Crowley was getting sick of it.

He’d taken the opportunity to reread Aziraphale’s notes, and to thumb
through Agnes Nutter’s prophecies, and to do some serious thinking.

His conclusions could be summarized as follows:

1.  Armageddon was under way.
2.  There was nothing Crowley could do about this.
3.  It was going to happen in Tadfield. Or to begin there, at any rate.
    After that it was going to happen _everywhere_.
4.  Crowley was in Hell’s bad books.⁴⁷
5.  Aziraphale was—as far as could be estimated—out of the equation.
6.  All was black, gloomy and awful. There was no light at the end of
    the tunnel—or if there was, it was an oncoming train.
7.  He might just as well find a nice little restaurant and get
    completely and utterly pissed out of his mind while he waited for
    the world to end.
8.  And yet …

And that was where it all fell apart.

Because, underneath it all, Crowley was an optimist. If there was one
rock-hard certainty that had sustained him through the bad times—he
thought briefly of the fourteenth century—then it was utter surety that
he would come out on top; that the universe would look after him.

Okay, so Hell was down on him. So the world was ending. So the Cold War
was over and the Great War was starting for real. So the odds against
him were higher than a vanload of hippies on a blotterful of Owlsley’s
Old Original. There was still a chance.

It was all a matter of being in the right place at the right time.

The right place was Tadfield. He was certain of that; partly from the
book, partly from some other sense: in Crowley’s mental map of the
world, Tadfield was throbbing like a migraine.

The right time was getting there before the end of the world. He checked
his watch. He had two hours to get to Tadfield, although probably even
the normal passage of Time was pretty shaky by now.

Crowley tossed the book into the passenger seat. Desperate times,
desperate measures: he had maintained the Bentley without a scratch for
sixty years.

What the hell.

He reversed suddenly, causing severe damage to the front of the red
Renault 5 behind him, and drove up onto the pavement.

He turned on his lights, and sounded his horn.

That should give any pedestrians sufficient warning that he was coming.
And if they couldn’t get out of the way … well, it’d all be the same in
a couple of hours. Maybe. Probably.

“Heigh ho,” said Anthony Crowley, and just drove anyway.

THERE WERE SIX WOMEN and four men, and each of them had a telephone and
a thick wodge of computer printout, covered with names and telephone
numbers. By each of the numbers was a penned notation saying whether the
person dialed was in or out, whether the number was currently connected,
and, most importantly, whether or not anybody who answered the phone was
avid for cavity-wall insulation to enter their lives.

Most of them weren’t.

The ten people sat there, hour after hour, cajoling, pleading, promising
through plastic smiles. Between calls they made notations, sipped
coffee, and marveled at the rain flooding down the windows. They were
staying at their posts like the band on the _Titanic_. If you couldn’t
sell double glazing in weather like this, you couldn’t sell it at all.

Lisa Morrow was saying, “. . . Now, if you’ll only let me finish, sir,
and yes, I understand that, sir, but if you’ll only … ,” and then,
seeing that he’d just hung up on her, she said, “Well, up yours,
snot-face.”

She put down the phone.

“I got another bath,” she announced to her fellow telephone
salespersons. She was well in the lead in the office daily Getting
People Out of the Bath stakes, and only needed two more points to win
the weekly Coitus Interruptus award.

She dialed the next number on the list.

Lisa had never intended to be a telephone salesperson. What she really
wanted to be was an internationally glamorous jet-setter, but she didn’t
have the O-levels.

Had she been studious enough to be accepted as an internationally
glamorous jet-setter, or a dental assistant (her second choice of
profession), or indeed, anything other than a telephone salesperson in
that particular office, she would have had a longer, and probably more
fulfilled, life.

Perhaps not a very much longer life, all things considered, it being the
Day of Armageddon, but several hours anyway.

For that matter, all she really needed to do for a longer life was not
ring the number she had just dialed, listed on her sheet as the Mayfair
home of, in the best traditions of tenth-hand mail-order lists, Mr. A.
J. Cowlley.

But she had dialed. And she had waited while it rang four times. And she
had said, “Oh, poot, another ansaphone,” and started to put down the
handset.

But then something climbed out of the earpiece. Something very big, and
very angry.

It looked a little like a maggot. A huge, angry maggot made out of
thousands and thousands of tiny little maggots, all writhing and
screaming, millions of little maggot mouths opening and shutting in
fury, and every one of them was screaming “Crowley.”

It stopped screaming. Swayed blindly, seemed to be taking stock of where
it was.

Then it went to pieces.

The thing split into thousands of thousands of writhing gray maggots.
They flowed over the carpet, up over the desks, over Lisa Morrow and her
nine colleagues; they flowed into their mouths, up their nostrils, into
their lungs; they burrowed into flesh and eyes and brains and lights,
reproducing wildly as they went, filling the room with a towering mess
of writhing flesh and gunk. The whole began to flow together, to
coagulate into one huge entity that filled the room from floor to
ceiling, pulsing gently.

A mouth opened in the mass of flesh, strands of something wet and sticky
adhering to each of the not-exactly lips, and Hastur said:

“I needed that.”

Spending half an hour trapped on an ansaphone with only Aziraphale’s
message for company had not improved his temper.

Neither did the prospect of having to report back to Hell, and having to
explain why he hadn’t returned half an hour earlier, and, more
importantly, why he was not accompanied by Crowley.

Hell did not go a bundle on failures.

On the plus side, however, he at least knew what Aziraphale’s message
_was_. The knowledge could probably buy him his continued existence.

And anyway, he reflected, if he were going to have to face the possible
wrath of the Dark Council, at least it wouldn’t be on an empty stomach.

The room filled with thick, sulphurous smoke. When it cleared, Hastur
was gone. There was nothing left in the room but ten skeletons, picked
quite clean of meat, and some puddles of melted plastic with, here and
there, a gleaming fragment of metal that might once have been part of a
telephone. Much better to have been a dental assistant.

But, to look on the bright side, all this only went to prove that evil
contains the seeds of its own destruction. Right now, across the
country, people who would otherwise have been made just that little bit
more tense and angry by being summoned from a nice bath, or having their
names mispronounced at them, were instead feeling quite untroubled and
at peace with the world. As a result of Hastur’s action a wave of
low-grade goodness started to spread exponentially through the
population, and millions of people who ultimately would have suffered
minor bruises of the soul did not in fact do so. So that was all right.

YOU WOULDN’T HAVE KNOWN it as the same car. There was scarcely an inch
of it undented. Both front lights were smashed. The hubcaps were long
gone. It looked like the veteran of a hundred demolition derbies.

The pavements had been bad. The pedestrian underpass had been worse. The
worst bit had been crossing the River Thames. At least he’d had the
foresight to roll up all the windows.

Still, he was here, now.

In a few hundred yards he’d be on the M40; a fairly clear run up to
Oxfordshire. There was only one snag: once more between Crowley and the
open road was the M25. A screaming, glowing ribbon of pain and dark
light.⁴⁸ _Odegra_. Nothing could cross it and survive.

Nothing mortal, anyway. And he wasn’t sure what it would do to a demon.
It couldn’t kill him, but it wouldn’t be pleasant.

There was a police roadblock in front of the flyover before him.
Burnt-out wrecks—some still burning—testified to the fate of previous
cars that had to drive across the flyover above the dark road.

The police did not look happy.

Crowley shifted down into second gear, and gunned the accelerator.

He went through the roadblock at sixty. That was the easy bit.

Cases of spontaneous human combustion are on record all over the world.
One minute someone’s quite happily chugging along with their life; the
next there’s a sad photograph of a pile of ashes and a lonely and
mysteriously uncharred foot or hand. Cases of spontaneous vehicular
combustion are less well documented.

Whatever the statistics were, they had just gone up by one.

The leather seatcovers began to smoke. Staring ahead of him, Crowley
fumbled left-handedly on the passenger seat for Agnes Nutter’s _Nice and
Accurate Prophecies_, moved it to the safety of his lap. He wished she’d
prophecied _this_.⁴⁹

Then the flames engulfed the car.

He had to keep driving.

On the other side of the flyover was a further police roadblock, to
prevent the passage of cars trying to come into London. They were
laughing about a story that had just come over the radio, that a
motorbike cop on the M6 had flagged down a stolen police car, only to
discover the driver to be a large octopus.

Some police forces would believe anything. Not the Metropolitan police,
though. The Met was the hardest, most cynically pragmatic, most
stubbornly down-to-earth police force in Britain.

It would take a lot to faze a copper from the Met.

It would take, for example, a huge, battered car that was nothing more
nor less than a fireball, a blazing, roaring, twisted metal lemon from
Hell, driven by a grinning lunatic in sunglasses, sitting amid the
flames, trailing thick black smoke, coming straight at them through the
lashing rain and the wind at eighty miles per hour.

That would do it every time.

THE QUARRY WAS THE CALM center of a stormy world.

Thunder didn’t just rumble overhead, it tore the air in half.

“I’ve got some more friends coming,” Adam repeated. “They’ll be here
soon, and then we can really get started.”

Dog started to howl. It was no longer the siren howl of a lone wolf, but
the weird oscillations of a small dog in deep trouble.

Pepper had been sitting staring at her knees.

There seemed to be something on her mind.

Finally she looked up and stared Adam in the blank gray eyes.

“What bit ’re you going to have, Adam?” she said.

The storm was replaced by a sudden, ringing silence.

“What?” said Adam.

“Well, you divided up the world, right, and we’ve all of us got to have
a bit—what bit’re you going to have?”

The silence sang like a harp, high and thin.

“Yeah,” said Brian. “You never told us what bit _you’re_ having.”

“Pepper’s right,” said Wensleydale. “Don’t seem to _me_ there’s much
left, if we’ve got to have all these countries.”

Adam’s mouth opened and shut.

“What?” he said.

“What bit’s yours, Adam?” said Pepper.

Adam stared at her. Dog had stopped howling and had fixed his master
with an intent, thoughtful mongrel stare.

“M-me?” he said.

The silence went on and on, one note that could drown out the noises of
the world.

“But I’ll have Tadfield,” said Adam.

They stared at him.

“An’, an’ Lower Tadfield, and Norton, and Norton Woods—”

They still stared.

Adam’s gaze dragged itself across their faces.

“They’re all I’ve ever wanted,” he said.

They shook their heads.

“I can have ’em if I want,” said Adam, his voice tinged with sullen
defiance and his defiance edged with sudden doubt. “I can make them
better, too. Better trees to climb, better ponds, better … ”

His voice trailed off.

“You can’t,” said Wensleydale flatly. “They’re not like America and
those places. They’re really _real_. Anyway, they belong to all of us.
They’re ours.”

“And you couldn’t make ’em better,” said Brian.

“Anyway, even if you did we’d all know,” said Pepper.

“Oh, if _that_’s all that’s worryin’ you, don’t you worry,” said Adam
airily, “ ’cos I could make you all just do whatever I wanted—”

He stopped, his ears listening in horror to the words his mouth was
speaking. The Them were backing away.

Dog put his paws over his head.

Adam’s face looked like an impersonation of the collapse of empire.

“No,” he said hoarsely. “No. Come back! _I command you!_”

They froze in mid-dash.

Adam stared.

“No, I dint mean it—” he began. “You’re my friends—”

His body jerked. His head was thrown back. He raised his arms and
pounded the sky with his fists.

His face twisted. The chalk floor cracked under his sneakers.

Adam opened his mouth and screamed. It was a sound that a merely mortal
throat should not have been able to utter; it wound out of the quarry,
mingled with the storm, caused the clouds to curdle into new and
unpleasant shapes.

It went on and on.

It resounded around the universe, which is a good deal smaller than
physicists would believe. It rattled the celestial spheres.

It spoke of loss, and it did not stop for a very long time.

And then it did.

Something drained away.

Adam’s head tilted down again. His eyes opened.

Whatever had been standing in the old quarry before, Adam Young was
standing there now. A more knowledgeable Adam Young, but Adam Young
nevertheless. Possibly more of Adam Young than there had ever been
before.

The ghastly silence in the quarry was replaced by a more familiar,
comfortable silence, the mere and simple absence of noise.

The freed Them cowered against the chalk cliff, their eyes fixed on him.

“It’s all right,” said Adam quietly. “Pepper? Wensley? Brian? Come back
here. It’s all right. It’s all right. I know everything now. And you’ve
got to help me. Otherwise it’s all goin’ to happen. It’s really all
goin’ to happen. It’s all goin’ to happen, if we don’t do somethin’.”

THE PLUMBING IN Jasmine Cottage heaved and rattled and showered Newt
with water that was slightly khaki in color. But it was cold. It was
probably the coldest cold shower Newt had ever had in his life.

It didn’t do any good.

“There’s a red sky,” he said, when he came back. He was feeling slightly
manic. “At half past four in the afternoon. In _August_. What does that
mean? In terms of delighted nautical operatives, would you say? I mean,
if it takes a red sky at night to delight a sailor, what does it take to
amuse the man who operates the computers on a supertanker? Or is it
shepherds who are delighted at night? I can never remember.”

Anathema eyed the plaster in his hair. The shower hadn’t got rid of it;
it had merely dampened it down and spread it out, so that Newt looked as
though he was wearing a white hat with hair in it.

“You must have got quite a bump,” she said.

“No, that was when I hit my head on the wall. You know, when you—”

“Yes.” Anathema looked quizzically out of the broken window. “Would you
say it’s blood-colored?” she said. “It’s very important.”

“I wouldn’t say that,” said Newt, his train of thought temporarily
derailed. “Not actual blood. More pinkish. Probably the storm put a lot
of dust in the air.”

Anathema was rummaging through _The Nice and Accurate Prophecies_.

“What are you doing?” he said.

“Trying to cross-reference. I still can’t be—”

“I don’t think you need to bother,” said Newt. “I know what the rest of
3477 means. It came to me when I—”

“What do you mean, you know what it means?”

“I saw it on my way down here. And don’t snap like that. My head aches.
I mean I saw it. They’ve got it written down outside that air base of
yours. It’s got nothing to do with peas. It’s ‘Peace Is Our Profession.’
It’s the kind of thing they put up on boards outside air bases. You
know: SAC 8657745th Wing, The Screaming Blue Demons, Peace Is Our
Profession. That sort of thing.” Newt clutched his head. The euphoria
was definitely fading. “If Agnes is right, then there’s probably some
madman in there right now winding up all the missiles and cranking open
the launch windows. Or whatever they are.”

“No, there isn’t,” said Anathema firmly.

“Oh, yes? I’ve seen films! Name me one good reason why you can be so
sure.”

“There aren’t any bombs there. Or missiles. Everyone round here knows
that.”

“But it’s an air base! It’s got runways!”

“That’s just for transport planes and things. All they’ve got up there
is communications gear. Radios and stuff. Nothing explosive at all.”

Newt stared at her.

LOOK AT CROWLEY, doing 110 mph on the M40 heading toward Oxfordshire.
Even the most resolutely casual observer would notice a number of
strange things about him. The clenched teeth, for example, or the dull
red glow coming from behind his sunglasses. And the car. The car was a
definite hint.

Crowley had started the journey in his Bentley, and he was damned if he
wasn’t going to finish it in the Bentley as well. Not that even the kind
of car buff who owns his own pair of motoring goggles would have been
able to tell it was a vintage Bentley. Not any more. They wouldn’t have
been able to tell that it was a Bentley. They would only offer
fifty-fifty that it had ever even been a car.

There was no paint left on it, for a start. It might still have been
black, where it wasn’t a rusty, smudged reddish-brown, but this was a
dull charcoal black. It traveled in its own ball of flame, like a space
capsule making a particularly difficult re-entry.

There was a thin skin of crusted, melted rubber left around the metal
wheel rims, but seeing that the wheel rims were still somehow riding an
inch above the road surface this didn’t seem to make an awful lot of
difference to the suspension.

It should have fallen apart miles back.

It was the effort of holding it together that was causing Crowley to
grit his teeth, and the biospatial feedback that was causing the bright
red eyes. That and the effort of having to remember not to start
breathing.

He hadn’t felt like this since the fourteenth century.

THE ATMOSPHERE in the quarry was friendlier now, but still intense.

“You’ve got to help me sort it out,” said Adam. “People’ve been tryin’
to sort it out for thousands of years, but we’ve got to sort it out
now.”

They nodded helpfully.

“You see, the thing is,” said Adam, “this thing is, it’s like—well, you
know Greasy Johnson.”

The Them nodded. They all knew Greasy Johnson and the members of the
other gang in Lower Tadfield. They were older and not very pleasant.
Hardly a week went by without a skirmish.

_“Well_,” said Adam, “we always win, right?”

“Nearly always,” said Wensleydale.

“Nearly always,” said Adam, “an’—”

“More than half, anyway,” said Pepper. “’Cos, you remember, when there
was all that fuss over the ole folks’ party in the village hall when
we—”

“That doesn’t count,” said Adam. “They got told off just as much as us.
Anyway, old folks are s’pposed to _like_ listenin’ to the sound of
children playin’, I read that somewhere, I don’t see why we should get
told off ’cos we’ve got the wrong kind of old folks—” He paused.
“Anyway … we’re better’n them.”

“Oh, we’re better’n them,” said Pepper. “You’re right about that. We’re
_better’n_ them all right. We jus’ don’t always win.”

“Just suppose,” said Adam, slowly, “that we could beat ’em properly.
Get—get them sent away or somethin’. Jus’ make sure there’s no more ole
gangs in Lower Tadfield apart from us. What do you think about that?”

“What, you mean he’d be … dead?” said Brian.

“No. Jus’—jus’ gone away.”

The Them thought about this. Greasy Johnson had been a fact of life ever
since they’d been old enough to hit one another with a toy railway
engine. They tried to get their minds around the concept of a world with
a Johnson-shaped hole in it.

Brian scratched his nose. “I reckon it’d be brilliant without Greasy
Johnson,” he said. “Remember what he did at my birthday party? _And_ I
got into trouble about it.”

“I dunno,” said Pepper. “I mean, it wouldn’t be so interesting without
ole Greasy Johnson and his gang. When you think about it. We’ve had a
lot of fun with ole Greasy Johnson and the Johnsonites. We’d probably
have to find some other gang or something.”

“Seems to _me,”_ said Wensleydale, “that if you asked people in Lower
Tadfield, they’d say they’d be better off without the Johnsonites _or_
the Them.”

Even Adam looked shocked at this. Wensleydale went on stoically: “The
old folks’ club would. An’ Picky. An’—”

“But we’re the good ones … ” Brian began. He hesitated. “Well, all
right,” he said, “but I bet they’d think it’d be a jolly sight less
interestin’ if we all weren’t here.”

“Yes,” said Wensleydale. “That’s what I mean.

“People round here don’t want us _or_ the Johnsonites,” he went on
morosely, “the way they’re always goin’ on about us just riding our
bikes or skateboarding on their pavements and making too much noise and
stuff. It’s like the man said in the history books. A plaque on both
your houses.”

This met with silence.

“One of those blue ones,” said Brian, eventually, “saying ‘Adam Young
Lived Here,’ or somethin’?”

Normally an opening like this could lead to five minutes’ rambling
discussion when the Them were in the mood, but Adam felt that this was
not the time.

“What you’re all sayin’,” he summed up, in his best chairman tones, “is
that it wouldn’t be any good at all if the Greasy Johnsonites beat the
Them or the other way round?”

“That’s right,” said Pepper. “Because,” she added, “if we beat them,
we’d have to be our own deadly enemies. It’d be me an’ Adam against
Brian an’ Wensley.” She sat back. “Everyone needs a Greasy Johnson,” she
said.

“Yeah,” said Adam. “That’s what I thought. It’s no good anyone winning.
That’s what I thought.” He stared at Dog, or through Dog.

“Seems simple enough to me,” said Wensleydale, sitting back. “I don’t
see why it’s taken thousands of years to sort out.”

“That’s because the people trying to sort it out were men,” said Pepper,
meaningfully.

“Don’t see why you have to take sides,” said Wensleydale.

“Of course I have to take sides,” said Pepper. “Everyone has to take
sides in _something_.”

Adam appeared to reach a decision.

“Yes. But I reckon you can make your own side. I think you’d better go
and get your bikes,” he said quietly. “I think we’d better sort of go
and talk to some people.”

PUTPUTPUTPUTPUTPUT, went Madame Tracy’s motor scooter down Crouch End
High street. It was the only vehicle moving on a suburban London street
jammed with immobile cars and taxis and red London buses.

“I’ve never seen a traffic jam like it,” said Madame Tracy. “I wonder if
there’s been an accident.”

_“Quite possibly,”_ said Aziraphale. And then, “Mr. Shadwell, unless you
put your arms round me you’re going to fall off. This thing wasn’t built
for two people, you know.”

“Three,” muttered Shadwell, gripping the seat with one white-knuckled
hand, and his Thundergun with the other.

“Mr. Shadwell, I won’t tell you again.”

“Ye’ll have ter stop, then, so as I can adjust me weapon,” sighed
Shadwell.

Madame Tracy giggled dutifully, but she pulled over to the curb, and
stopped the motor scooter.

Shadwell sorted himself out, and put two grudging arms around Madame
Tracy, while the Thundergun stuck up between them like a chaperon.

They rode through the rain without talking for another ten minutes,
_putputputputput_, as Madame Tracy carefully negotiated her way around
the cars and the buses.

Madame Tracy found her eyes being moved down to the speedometer—rather
foolishly, she thought, since it hadn’t worked since 1974, and it hadn’t
worked very well before that.

_“Dear lady, how fast would you say we were going?_” asked Aziraphale.

“Why?”

_“Because it seems to me that we would go slightly faster walking.”_

“Well, with just me on, the top speed is about fifteen miles an hour,
but with Mr. Shadwell as well, it must be, ooh, about … ”

_“Four or five miles per hour,”_ she interrupted.

“I suppose so,” she agreed.

There was a cough from behind her. “Can ye no slow down this hellish
machine, wumman?” asked an ashen voice. In the infernal pantheon, which
it goes without saying Shadwell hated uniformly and correctly, Shadwell
reserved a special loathing for speed demons.

_“In which case,”_ said Aziraphale, _“we will get to Tadfield in
something less than ten hours_.”

There was a pause from Madame Tracy, then, “How far away _is_ this
Tadfield, anyway?”

_“About forty miles.”_

“Um,” said Madame Tracy, who had once driven the scooter the few miles
to nearby Finchley to visit her niece, but had taken the bus since,
because of the funny noises the scooter had started making on the way
back.

_“. . . we should really be going at about seventy, if we’re going to
get there in time,”_ said Aziraphale. “Hmm. _Sergeant Shadwell? Hold on
very tightly now.”_

_Putputputputput_ and a blue nimbus began to outline the scooter and its
occupants with a gentle sort of a glow, like an afterimage, all around
them.

_Putputputputputput_ and the scooter lifted awkwardly off the ground
with no visible means of support, jerking slightly, until it reached a
height of five feet, more or less.

_“Don’t look down, Sergeant Shadwell_,” advised Aziraphale.

“. . .” said Shadwell, eyes screwed tightly shut, gray forehead beaded
with sweat, not looking down, not looking anywhere.

_“And off we go, then.”_

In every big-budget science fiction movie there’s the moment when a
spaceship as large as New York suddenly goes to light speed. A twanging
noise like a wooden ruler being plucked over the edge of a desk, a
dazzling refraction of light, and suddenly the stars have all been
stretched out thin and it’s gone. This was exactly like that, except
that instead of a gleaming twelve-mile-long spaceship, it was an
off-white twenty-year-old motor scooter. And you didn’t have the special
rainbow effects. And it probably wasn’t going at more than two hundred
miles an hour. And instead of a pulsing whine sliding up the octaves, it
just went _putputputputput …_

_VROOOOSH_.

But it was exactly like that anyway.

WHERE THE M25, NOW a screaming frozen circle, intersects with the M40 to
Oxfordshire, police were clustered around in ever-increasing quantities.
Since Crowley crossed the divide, half an hour earlier, their number had
doubled. On the M40 side, anyway. No one in London was getting out.

In addition to the police there were also approximately two hundred
others standing around, and inspecting the M25 through binoculars. They
included representatives from Her Majesty’s Army, the Bomb Disposal
Squad, MI5, MI6, the Special Branch, and the CIA. There was also a man
selling hot dogs.

Everybody was cold and wet, and puzzled, and irritable, with the
exception of one police officer, who was cold, wet, puzzled, irritable,
and exasperated.

“Look. I don’t care if you believe me or not,” he sighed, “all I’m
telling you is what I saw. It was an old car, a Rolls, or a Bentley, one
of those flash vintage jobs, and it made it over the bridge.”

One of the senior army technicians interrupted. “It can’t have done.
According to our instruments the temperature above the M25 is somewhere
in excess of seven hundred degrees centigrade.”

“Or a hundred and forty degrees below,” added his assistant.

“. . . or a hundred and forty degrees below zero,” agreed the senior
technician. “There does appear to be some confusion on that score,
although I think we can safely attribute it to mechanical error of some
kind,⁵⁰ but the fact remains that we can’t even get a helicopter
directly over the M25 without winding up with Helicopter McNuggets. How
on earth can you tell me that a vintage car drove over it unharmed?”

“I didn’t say it drove over it unharmed,” corrected the policeman, who
was thinking seriously about leaving the Metropolitan Police and going
into business with his brother, who was resigning his job with the
Electricity Board, and was going to start breeding chickens. “It burst
into flames. It just kept on going.”

“Do you seriously expect any of us to believe … ” began somebody.

A high-pitched keening noise, haunting and strange. Like a thousand
glass harmonicas being played in unison, all slightly off-key; like the
sound of the molecules of the air itself wailing in pain.

And _Vrooosh_.

Over their heads it sailed, forty feet in the air, engulfed in a deep
blue nimbus which faded to red at the edges: a little white motor
scooter, and riding it, a middle-aged woman in a pink helmet, and
holding tightly to her, a short man in a mackintosh and a day-glo green
crash helmet (the motor scooter was too far up for anyone to see that
his eyes were tightly shut, but they were).

The woman was screaming. What she was screaming was this:

“Gerrrronnnimooooo!”

ONE OF THE ADVANTAGES of the Wasabi, as Newt was always keen to point
out, was that when it was badly damaged it was very hard to tell. Newt
had to keep driving Dick Turpin onto the shoulder to avoid fallen
branches.

“You’ve made me drop all the cards on the floor!”

The car thumped back onto the road; a small voice from somewhere under
the glove compartment said, “Oil plessure arert.”

“I’ll never be able to sort them out now,” she moaned.

“You don’t have to,” said Newt manically. “Just pick one. Any one. It
won’t matter.”

“What do you mean?”

“Well, if Agnes is right, and we’re doing all this because she’s
predicted it, then any card _picked right now_ has got to be relevant.
That’s logic.”

“It’s nonsense.”

“Yeah? Look, you’re even _here_ because she predicted it. And have you
thought what we’re going to say to the colonel? If we get to see him,
which of course we won’t.”

“If we’re reasonable—”

“Listen, I know these kinds of places. They have huge guards made out of
teak guarding the gates, Anathema, and they have white helmets and real
guns, you understand, which fire real bullets made of real lead which
can go right into you and bounce around and come out of the same hole
before you can even say ‘Excuse me, we have reason to believe that World
War Three is due any moment and they’re going to do the show right
here,’ and then they have serious men in suits with bulging jackets who
take you into a little room without windows and ask you questions like
are you now, or have you ever been, a member of a pinko subversive
organization such as any British political party? And—”

“We’re nearly there.”

“Look, it’s got gates and wire fences and everything! And probably the
kind of dogs that eat people!”

“I think you’re getting rather overexcited,” said Anathema quietly,
picking the last of the file cards up from the floor of the car.

“Overexcited? No! I’m getting very calmly worried that someone might
shoot me!”

“I’m sure Agnes would have mentioned it if we were going to be shot.
She’s very good at that sort of thing.” She began absentmindedly to
shuffle the file cards.

“You know,” she said, carefully cutting the cards and riffling the two
piles together, “I read somewhere that there’s a sect that believes that
computers are the tools of the Devil. They say that Armageddon will come
about because of the Antichrist being good with computers. Apparently
it’s mentioned somewhere in Revelations. I think I must have read about
it in a newspaper recently … ”

_“Daily Mail_. ‘Letter From America.’ Um, August the third,” said Newt.
“Just after the story about the woman in Worms, Nebraska, who taught her
duck to play the accordion.”

“Mm,” said Anathema, spreading the cards facedown on her lap.

So computers are tools of the Devil? thought Newt. He had no problem
believing it. Computers had to be the tools of _somebody_, and all he
knew for certain was that it definitely wasn’t him.

The car jerked to a halt.

The air base looked battered. Several large trees had fallen down near
the entrance, and some men with a digger were trying to shift them. The
guard on duty was watching them disinterestedly, but he half turned and
looked coldly at the car.

“All right,” said Newt. “Pick a card.”

3001. behinde the eagle’s neste
a grate ash hath fellen.

“Is that all?”

“Yes. We always thought it was something to do with the Russian
Revolution. Keep going along this road and turn left.”

The turning led to a narrow lane, with the base’s perimeter fence on the
left-hand side.

“And now pull in here. There’s often cars here, and no one takes any
notice,” said Anathema.

“What is this place?”

“It’s the local Lovers’ Lane.”

“Is that why it appears to be paved with rubber?”

They walked along the hedge-shaded lane for a hundred yards until they
reached the ash tree. Agnes had been right. It was quite grate. It had
fallen right across the fence.

A guard was sitting on it, smoking a cigarette. He was black. Newt
always felt guilty in the presence of black Americans, in case they
blamed him for two hundred years of slave trading.

The man stood up when they approached, and then sagged into an easier
stance.

“Oh, hi, Anathema,” he said.

“Hi, George. Terrible storm, wasn’t it.”

“Sure was.”

They walked on. He watched them out of sight.

“You know him?” said Newt, with forced nonchalance.

“Oh, sure. Sometimes a few of them come down to the pub. Pleasant enough
in a well-scrubbed way.”

“Would he shoot us if we just walked in?” said Newt.

“He might well point a gun at us in a menacing way,” Anathema conceded.

“That’s good enough for me. What do you suggest we do, then?”

“Well, Agnes must have known something. So I suppose we just wait. It’s
not too bad now the wind’s gone down.”

“Oh. “ Newt looked at the clouds piling up on the horizon. “Good old
Agnes,” he said.

ADAM PEDALED STEADILY along the road, Dog running along behind and
occasionally trying to bite his back tire out of sheer excitement.

There was a clacking noise and Pepper swung out of her drive. You could
always tell Pepper’s bike. She thought it was improved by a piece of
cardboard cunningly held against the wheel by a clothes peg. Cats had
learned to take evasive action when she was two streets away.

“I reckon we can cut along Drovers Lane and then up through Roundhead
Woods,” said Pepper.

“’S all muddy,” said Adam.

“That’s right,” said Pepper nervously. “It gets all muddy up there. We
ort to go along by the chalk pit. ’S always dry because of the chalk.
An’ then up by the sewage farm.”

Brian and Wensleydale pulled in behind them. Wensleydale’s bicycle was
black, and shiny, and sensible. Brian’s might have been white, once, but
its color was lost beneath a thick layer of mud.

“It’s stupid calling it a milit’ry base,” said Pepper. “I went up there
when they had that open day and they had no guns or missiles or
anythin’. Just knobs and dials and brass bands playin’.”

“Yes,” said Adam.

“Not much milit’ry about knobs and dials,” said Pepper.

“I dunno, reely,” said Adam. “It’s amazin’ what you can do with knobs
and dials.”

“I got a kit for Christmas,” Wensleydale volunteered. “All electric
bits. There were a few knobs and dials in it. You could make a radio or
a thing that goes beep.”

“I dunno,” said Adam thoughtfully, “I’m thinkin’ more of certain people
patching into the worldwide milit’ry communications network and telling
all the computers and stuff to start fightin’.”

“Cor,” said Brian. “That’d be _wicked_.”

“Sort of,” said Adam.

IT IS A HIGH AND LONELY destiny to be Chairman of the Lower Tadfield
Residents’ Association.

R. P. Tyler, short, well-fed, satisfied, stomped down a country lane,
accompanied by his wife’s miniature poodle, Shutzi. R. P. Tyler knew the
difference between right and wrong; there were no moral grays of any
kind in his life. He was not, however, satisfied simply with being
vouchsafed the difference between right and wrong. He felt it his
bounden duty to tell the world.

Not for R. P. Tyler the soapbox, the polemic verse, the broadsheet. R.
P. Tyler’s chosen forum was the letter column of the Tadfield
_Advertiser_. If a neighbor’s tree was inconsiderate enough to shed
leaves into R. P. Tyler’s garden, R. P. Tyler would first carefully
sweep them all up, place them in boxes, and leave the boxes outside his
neighbor’s front door, with a stern note. Then he would write a letter
to the Tadfield _Advertiser_. If he sighted teenagers sitting on the
village green, their portable cassette players playing, and they were
enjoying themselves, he would take it upon himself to point out to them
the error of their ways. And after he had fled their jeering, he would
write to the Tadfield _Advertiser_ on the Decline of Morality and the
Youth of Today.

Since his retirement last year the letters had increased to the point
where not even the Tadfield _Advertiser_ was able to print all of them.
Indeed, the letter R. P. Tyler had completed before setting out on his
evening walk had begun:

_Sirs,_

_I note with distress that the newspapers of today no longer feel
obligated to their public, we, the people who pay your wages …_

He surveyed the fallen branches that littered the narrow country road. I
don’t suppose, he pondered, they think of the cleaning up bill when they
send us these storms. Parish Council has to foot the bill to clean it
all up. And we, the taxpayers, pay their wages …

The _they_ in this thought were the weather forecasters on Radio Four,⁵¹
whom R. P. Tyler blamed for the weather.

Shutzi stopped by a roadside beech tree to cock its leg.

R. P. Tyler looked away, embarrassed. It might be that the sole purpose
of his evening constitutional was to allow the dog to relieve itself,
but he was dashed if he’d admit that to himself. He stared up at the
storm clouds. They were banked up high, in towering piles of smudged
gray and black. It wasn’t just the flickering tongues of lightning that
forked through them like the opening sequence of a Frankenstein movie;
it was the way they stopped when they reached the borders of Lower
Tadfield. And in their center was a circular patch of daylight; but the
light had a stretched, yellow quality to it, like a forced smile.

It was so quiet.

There was a low roaring.

Down the narrow lane came four motorbikes. They shot past him, and
turned the corner, disturbing a cock pheasant who whirred across the
lane in a nervous arc of russet and green.

“Vandals!” called R. P. Tyler after them.

The countryside wasn’t made for people like them. It was made for people
like him.

He jerked Shutzi’s lead, and they marched along the road.

Five minutes later he turned the corner, to find three of the
motorcyclists standing around a fallen signpost, a victim of the storm.
The fourth, a tall man with a mirrored visor, remained on his bike.

R. P. Tyler observed the situation, and leaped effortlessly to a
conclusion. These vandals—he had, of course, been right—had come to the
countryside in order to desecrate the War Memorial and to overturn
signposts.

He was about to advance on them sternly, when it came to him that he was
outnumbered, four to one, and that they were taller
than he was, and that they were undoubtedly violent psychopaths. No one
but a violent psychopath rode motorbikes in R. P. Tyler’s world.

So he raised his chin and began to strut past them, without apparently
noticing they were there,⁵² all the while composing in his head a letter
(Sirs, this evening I noted with distress a large number of hooligans on
motorbicycles infesting Our Fair Village. Why, oh Why, does the
government do nothing about this plague of … ).

“Hi,” said one of the motorcyclists, raising his visor to reveal a thin
face and a trim black beard. “We’re kinda lost.”

“Ah,” said R. P. Tyler disapprovingly.

“The signpost musta blew down,” said the motorcyclist.

“Yes, I suppose it must,” agreed R. P. Tyler. He noticed with surprise
that he was getting hungry.

“Yeah. Well, we’re heading for Lower Tadfield.”

An officious eyebrow raised. “You’re Americans. With the air force base,
I suppose.” (Sirs, when I did national service I was a credit to my
country. I notice with horror and dismay that airmen from the Tadfield
Air Base are driving around our noble countryside dressed no better than
common thugs. While I appreciate their importance in defending the
freedom of the western world … )

Then his love of giving instructions took over. “You go back down that
road for half a mile, then first left, it’s in a deplorable state of
disrepair I’m afraid, I’ve written numerous letters to the council about
it, are you civil _servants_ or civil _masters_, that’s what I asked
them, after all, who pays your wages? then second right, only it’s not
exactly right, it’s on the left but you’ll find it bends round toward
the right eventually, it’s signposted Porrit’s Lane, but of course it
isn’t Porrit’s Lane, you look at the ordinance survey map, you’ll see,
it’s simply the eastern end of Forest Hill Lane, you’ll come out in the
village, now you go past the Bull and Fiddle—that’s a public house—then
when you get to the church (I have pointed out to the people who compile
the ordinance survey map that it’s a church with a _spire_, not a church
with a _tower_, indeed I have written to the Tadfield _Advertiser_,
suggesting they mount a local campaign to get the map corrected, and I
have every hope that once these people realize with whom they are
dealing you’ll see a hasty U-turn from them) then you’ll get to a
crossroads, now, you go straight across that crossroads and you’ll
immediately come to a second crossroads, now, you can take either the
left-hand fork or go straight on, either way you’ll arrive at the air
base (although the left-hand fork is almost a tenth of a mile shorter)
and you can’t miss it.”

Famine stared at him blankly. “I, uh, I’m not sure I got that … ” he
began.

I DID. LET US GO.

Shutzi gave a little yelp and darted behind R. P. Tyler, where it
remained, shivering.

The strangers climbed back onto their bikes. The one in white (a hippie,
by the look of him, thought R. P. Tyler) dropped an empty crisp packet
onto the grass shoulder.

“Excuse _me_,” barked Tyler. “Is that your crisp packet?”

“Oh, it’s not just mine,” said the boy. “It’s _everybody’s.”_

R. P. Tyler drew himself up to his full height.⁵³ “Young man,” he said,
“how would you feel if I came over to your house and dropped litter
everywhere?”

Pollution smiled, wistfully. “Very, very pleased,” he breathed. “Oh,
that would be _wonderful_.”

Beneath his bike an oil slick puddled a rainbow on the wet road.

Engines revved.

“I missed something,” said War. “Now, why are we meant to make a U-turn
by the church?”

JUST FOLLOW ME, said the tall one in front, and the four rode off
together.

R. P. Tyler stared after them, until his attention was distracted by the
sound of something going _clackclackclack_. He turned. Four figures on
bicycles shot past him, closely followed by the scampering figure of a
small dog.

“You! Stop!” shouted R. P. Tyler.

The Them braked to a halt and looked at him.

“I knew it was you, Adam Young, and your little, hmph, cabal. What,
might I enquire, are you children doing out at this time of night? Do
your fathers know you’re out?”

The leader of the cyclists turned. “I can’t see how you can say it’s
_late_,” he said, “seems to me, seems to _me_, that if the sun’s still
out then it’s not _late_.”

“It’s past your bedtime, anyway,” R. P. Tyler informed them, “and don’t
stick out your tongue at me, young lady,” this was to Pepper, “or I will
be writing a letter to your mother informing her of the lamentable and
unladylike state of her offspring’s manners.”

“Well ’scuse _us,”_ said Adam, aggrieved. “Pepper was just looking at
you. I didn’t know there was any lor against _looking_.”

There was a commotion on the grass. Shutzi, who was a particularly
refined toy French poodle, of the kind only possessed by people who were
never able to fit children into their household budgets, was being
menaced by Dog.

“Master Young,” ordered R. P. Tyler, “please get your—your _mutt_ away
from my Shutzi.” Tyler did not trust Dog. When he had first met the dog,
three days ago, it had snarled at him, and glowed its eyes red. This had
impelled Tyler to begin a letter pointing out that Dog was undoubtedly
rabid, certainly a danger to the community, and should be put down for
the General Good, until his wife had reminded him that glowing red eyes
weren’t a symptom of rabies, or, for that matter, anything seen outside
of the kind of film that neither of the Tylers would be caught dead at
but knew all they needed to know about, thank you very much.

Adam looked astounded. “Dog’s not a _mutt_. Dog’s a remarkable dog. He’s
clever. _Dog_, you get off Mr. Tyler’s horrible ol’ poodle.”

Dog ignored him. He’d got a lot of dog catching-up still to do.

_“Dog_,” said Adam, ominously. His dog slunk back to his master’s
bicycle.

“I don’t believe you have answered my question. Where are you four off
to?”

“To the air base,” said Brian.

_“If_ that’s all right with you,” said Adam, with what he hoped was
bitter and scathing sarcasm. “I mean, we wun’t want to go there if it
wasn’t all right with you.”

“You cheeky little monkey,” said R. P. Tyler. “When I see your father,
Adam Young, I will inform him in no uncertain terms that … ”

But the Them were already pedaling off down the road, in the direction
of Lower Tadfield Air Base—traveling by the Them’s route, which was
shorter and simpler and more scenic than the route suggested by Mr.
Tyler.

R. P. TYLER HAD COMPOSED a lengthy mental letter on the failings of the
youth of today. It covered falling educational standards, the lack of
respect given to their elders and betters, the way they always seemed to
slouch these days instead of walking with a proper upright bearing,
juvenile delinquency, the return of compulsory National Service,
birching, flogging, and dog licenses.

He was very satisfied with it. He had a sneaking suspicion that it would
be too good for the Tadfield _Advertiser_, and had decided to send it to
the _Times_.

_Putputput putputput_

“Excuse me, love,” said a warm female voice. “I think we’re lost.”

It was an aging motor scooter, and it was being ridden by a middle-aged
woman. Clutching her tightly, his eyes screwed shut, was a raincoated
little man with a bright green crash helmet on. Sticking up between them
was what appeared to be an antique gun with a funnel-shaped muzzle.

“Oh. Where are you going?”

“Lower Tadfield. I’m not sure of the exact address, but we’re looking
for someone,” said the woman, then, in a totally different voice she
said, _“His name is Adam Young_.”

R. P. Tyler boggled. “You _want_ that boy?” he asked. “What’s he done
_now_—no, no, don’t tell me. I don’t want to know.”

“Boy?” said the woman. “You didn’t tell me he was a boy. How old is he?”
Then she said, _“He’s eleven_. Well, I do wish you’d mentioned this
before. It puts a completely different complexion on things.”

R. P. Tyler just stared. Then he realized what was going on. The woman
was a ventriloquist. What he had taken for a man in a green crash
helmet, he now saw, was a ventriloquist’s dummy. He wondered how he
could ever have assumed it was human. He felt the whole thing was in
vaguely bad taste.

“I saw Adam Young not five minutes ago,” he told the woman. “He and his
little cronies were on their way to the American air base.”

“Oh dear,” said the woman, paling slightly. “I’ve never really liked the
Yanks. _They’re really very nice people, you know_. Yes, but you can’t
trust people who pick up the ball all the time when they play football.”

“Ahh, excuse me,” said R. P. Tyler, “I think it’s very good. Very
impressive. I’m deputy chairman of the local Rotary club, and I was
wondering, do you do private functions?”

“Only on Thursdays,” said Madame Tracy, disapprovingly. “And I charge
extra. And I wonder if you could direct us to—?”

Mr. Tyler had been here before. He wordlessly extended a finger.

And the little scooter went _putputputputputput_ down the narrow country
lane.

As it did so, the gray dummy in the green helmet turned around and
opened one eye. “Ye great southern pillock,” it croaked.

R. P. Tyler was offended, but also disappointed. He’d hoped it would be
more lifelike.

R. P. TYLER, ONLY TEN MINUTES away from the village, paused, while
Shutzi attempted another of its wide range of eliminatory functions. He
gazed over the fence.

His knowledge of country lore was a little hazy, but he felt fairly sure
that if the cows lay down, it meant rain. If they were standing it would
probably be fine. These cows were taking it in turns to execute slow and
solemn somersaults; and Tyler wondered what it presaged for the weather.

He sniffed. Something was burning—there was an unpleasant smell of
scorched metal and rubber and leather.

“Excuse me,” said a voice from behind him. R. P. Tyler turned around.

There was a large once-black car on fire in the lane and a man in
sunglasses was leaning out of one window, saying through the smoke, “I’m
sorry, I’ve managed to get a little lost. Can you direct me to Lower
Tadfield Air Base? I know it’s around here somewhere.”

_Your car is on fire_.

No. Tyler just couldn’t bring himself to say it. I mean, the man had to
know that, didn’t he? He was sitting in the middle of it. Possibly it
was some kind of practical joke.

So instead he said, “I think you must have taken a wrong turn about a
mile back. A signpost has blown down.”

The stranger smiled, “That must be it, “ he said. The orange flames
flickering below him gave him an almost infernal appearance.

The wind blew towards Tyler, across the car, and he felt his eyebrows
frizzle.

_Excuse me, young man, but your car is on fire and you’re sitting in it
without burning and incidentally it’s red hot in places_.

No.

Should he ask the man if he wanted him to phone the A.A.?

Instead he explained the route carefully, trying not to stare.

“That’s terrific. Much obliged,” said Crowley, as he began to wind up
the window.

R. P. Tyler had to say something.

“Excuse me, young man,” he said.

“Yes?”

_I mean, it’s not the kind of thing you don’t notice, your car being on
fire_.

A tongue of flame licked across the charred dashboard.

“Funny weather we’re having, isn’t it?” he said, lamely.

“Is it?” said Crowley. “I honestly hadn’t noticed.” And he reversed back
down the country lane in his burning car.

“That’s probably because your car is on fire,” said R. P. Tyler sharply.
He jerked Shutzi’s lead, dragged the little dog to heel.

_To The Editor_

_Sir_,

_I would like to draw your attention to a recent tendency I have noticed
for today’s young people to ignore perfectly sensible safety precautions
while driving. This evening I was asked for directions by a gentleman
whose car was …_

No.

_    Driving a car that …_

No.

_It was on fire …_

His temper getting worse, R. P. Tyler stomped the final stretch back
into the village.

“HOY!” SHOUTED R. P. TYLER. “YOUNG!”

Mr. Young was in his front garden, sitting on his deck chair, smoking
his pipe.

This had more to do with Deirdre’s recent discovery of the menace of
passive smoking and banning of smoking in the house than he would care
to admit to his neighbors. It did not improve his temper. Neither did
being addressed as _Young_ by Mr. Tyler.

“Yes?”

“Your son, Adam.”

Mr. Young sighed. “What’s he done now?”

“Do you know where he is?”

Mr. Young checked his watch. “Getting ready for bed, I would assume.”

Tyler grinned, tightly, triumphantly. “I doubt it. I saw him and his
little fiends, and that appalling mongrel, not half an hour ago, cycling
towards the air base.”

Mr. Young puffed on his pipe.

“You know how strict they are up there,” said Mr. Tyler, in case Mr.
Young hadn’t got the message.

“You know what a one your son is for pressing buttons and things,” he
added.

Mr. Young took his pipe out of his mouth and examined the stem
thoughtfully.

“Hmp,” he said.

“I see,” he said.

“Right,” he said.

And he went inside.

AT EXACTLY THAT SAME MOMENT, four motorbikes swished to a halt a few
hundred yards from the main gate. The riders switched off their engines
and raised their helmet visors. Well, three of them did.

“I was rather hoping we could crash through the barriers,” said War
wistfully.

“That’d only cause trouble,” said Famine.

“Good.”

“Trouble for us, I mean. The power and phone lines must be down, but
they’re bound to have generators and they’ll certainly have radio. If
someone starts reporting that terrorists have invaded the base then
people’ll start acting logically and the whole Plan collapses.”

“Huh.”

WE GO IN, WE DO THE JOB, WE GO OUT, WE LET HUMAN NATURE TAKE ITS COURSE,
said Death.

“This isn’t how I imagined it, chaps,” said War. “I haven’t been waiting
for thousands of years just to fiddle around with bits of wire. It’s not
what you’d call _dramatic_. Albrecht Dürer didn’t waste his time doing
woodcuts of the Four Button-Pressers of the Apocalypse, I do know that.”

“I thought there’d be trumpets,” said Pollution.

“Look at it like this,” said Famine. “It’s just groundwork. We get to do
the riding forth afterwards. The proper riding forth. Wings of the storm
and so on. You’ve got to be flexible.”

“Weren’t we supposed to meet … someone?” said War.

There was no sound but the metallic noises of cooling motorbike engines.

Then Pollution said, slowly, “You know, I can’t say I imagined it’d be
somewhere like this, either. I thought it’d be, well, a big city. Or a
big country. New York, perhaps. Or Moscow. Or Armageddon itself.”

There was another pause.

Then War said, “Where _is_ Armageddon, anyway?”

“Funny you should ask,” said Famine. “I’ve always meant to look it up.”

“There’s an Armageddon, Pennsylvania,” said Pollution. “Or maybe it’s
Massachusetts, or one of them places. Lots of guys in heavy beards and
seriously black hats.”

“Nah,” said Famine. “It’s somewhere in Israel, I think.”

MOUNT CARMEL.

“I thought that was where they grow avocados.”

AND THE END OF THE WORLD.

“Is that right? That’s one big avocado.”

“I think I went there once,” said Pollution. “The old city of Megiddo.
Just before it fell down. Nice place. Interesting royal gateway.”

War looked at the greenness around them.

“Boy,” she said, “did _we_ take a wrong turning.”

THE GEOGRAPHY IS IMMATERIAL.

“Sorry, lord?”

IF ARMAGEDDON IS ANYWHERE, IT IS EVERYWHERE.

“That’s right,” said Famine, “we’re not talking about a few square miles
of scrub and goats any more.”

There was another pause.

LET US GO.

War coughed. “It’s just that I thought that … _he’_d be coming with us …
?”

Death adjusted his gauntlets.

THIS, he said firmly, IS A JOB FOR THE PROFESSIONALS.

AFTERWARDS, Sgt. Thomas A. Deisenburger recalled events at the gate as
having happened like this:

A large staff car drew up by the gate. It was sleek and official-looking
although, afterwards, he wasn’t entirely sure why he had thought this,
or why it sounded momentarily as though it were powered by motorbike
engines.

Four generals got out. Again, the sergeant was a little uncertain of why
he had thought this. They had proper identification. What kind of
identification, admittedly, he couldn’t quite recall, but it was proper.
He saluted.

And one of them said, “Surprise inspection, soldier.”

To which Sgt. Thomas A. Deisenburger replied, “Sir, I have not been
informated as to the incidence of a surprise inspection at this time,
sir.”

“Of course not,” said one of the generals. “That’s because it’s a
surprise.”

The sergeant saluted again.

“Sir, permission to confirmate this intelligence with base command,
sir,” he said, uneasily.

The tallest and thinnest of the generals strolled a little way from the
group, turned his back, and folded his arms.

One of the others put a friendly arm around the sergeant’s shoulders and
leaned forward in a conspiratorial way.

“Now see here—” he squinted at the sergeant’s name tag “—Deisenburger,
maybe I’ll give you a break. It’s a surprise inspection, got that?
Surprise. That means no getting on the horn the moment we’ve gone
through, understand? And no leaving your post. Career soldier like
you’ll understand, am I right?” he added. He winked. “Otherwise you’ll
find yourself busted so low you’ll have to say ‘sir’ to an imp.”

Sgt. Thomas A. Deisenburger stared at him.

_“Private,”_ hissed one of the other generals. According to her tag, her
name was Waugh. Sgt. Deisenburger had never seen a female general like
her before, but she was certainly an improvement.

“What?”

_“Private. Not imp.”_

“Yeah. That’s what I meant. Yeah. Private. Okay, soldier?”

The sergeant considered the very limited number of options at his
disposal.

“Sir, surprise inspection, sir?” he said.

“Provisionatedly classificisioned at this time,” said Famine, who had
spent years learning how to sell to the federal government and could
feel the language coming back to him.

“Sir, affirmative, sir,” said the sergeant.

“Good man,” said Famine, as the barrier was raised. “You’ll go a long
way.” He glanced at his watch. “Very shortly.”

:SOMETIMES HUMAN BEINGS are very much like bees. Bees are fiercely
protective of their hive, provided you are outside it. Once you’re in,
the workers sort of assume that it must have been cleared by management
and take no notice; various freeloading insects have evolved a
mellifluous existence because of this very fact. Humans act the same
way.

No one stopped the four as they purposefully made their way into one of
the long, low buildings under the forest of radio masts. No one paid any
attention to them. Perhaps they saw nothing at all. Perhaps they saw
what their minds were instructed to see, because the human brain is not
equipped to see War, Famine, Pollution, and Death when they don’t want
to be seen, and has got so good at not seeing that it often manages not
to see them even when they abound on every side.

The alarms were totally brainless and thought they saw four people where
people shouldn’t be, and went off like _anything_.

NEWT DID NOT SMOKE, because he did not allow nicotine to gain entry to
the temple of his body or, more accurately, the small Welsh Methodist
tin tabernacle of his body. If he had been a smoker, he would have
choked on the cigarette that he would have been smoking at this time in
order to steady his nerves.

Anathema stood up purposefully and smoothed the creases in her skirt.

“Don’t worry,” she said. “They don’t apply to us. Something’s probably
happening inside.”

She smiled at his pale face. “Come on,” she said, “It’s not the O.K.
Corral.”

“No. They’ve got better guns, for one thing,” said Newt.

She helped him up. “Never mind,” she said. “I’m sure you’ll think of a
way.”

IT WAS INEVITABLE that all four of them couldn’t contribute equally, War
thought. She’d been surprised at her natural affinity for modern weapons
systems, which were so much more efficient than bits of sharp metal, and
of course Pollution laughed at absolutely foolproof, fail-safe devices.
Even Famine at least knew what computers were. Whereas … well, _he_
didn’t do anything much except hang around, although he did it with a
certain style. It had occurred to War that there might one day be an end
to War, an end to Famine, possibly even an end to Pollution, and perhaps
this was why the fourth and greatest horseman was never exactly what you
might call one of the lads. It was like having a tax inspector in your
football team. Great to have him on your side, of course, but not the
kind of person you wanted to have a drink and a chat with in the bar
afterwards. You couldn’t be one hundred per cent at your ease.

A couple of soldiers ran through him as he looked over Pollution’s
skinny shoulder.

WHAT ARE THOSE GLITTERY THINGS? he said, in the tones of one who knows
he won’t be able to understand the answer but wants to be seen to be
taking an interest.

“Seven-segment LED displays,” said the boy. He laid loving hands on a
bank of relays, which fused under his touch, and then introduced a swath
of self-replicating viruses that whirred away on the electronic ether.

“I could really do without those bloody alarms,” muttered Famine.

Death absentmindedly snapped his fingers. A dozen klaxons gurgled and
died.

“I don’t know, I rather liked them,” said Pollution.

War reached inside another metal cabinet. This wasn’t the way she’d
expected things to be, she had to admit, but when she ran her fingers
over and sometimes through the electronics there was a familiar feel. It
was an echo of what you got when you held a sword, and she felt a thrill
of anticipation at the thought that this sword enclosed the whole world
and a certain amount of the sky above it, as well. It _loved_ her.

A flaming sword.

Mankind had not been very good at learning that swords are dangerous if
left lying around, although it _had_ done its limited best to make sure
that the chances of one this size being wielded accidentally were high.
A cheering thought, that. It was nice to think that mankind made a
distinction between blowing their planet to bits by accident and doing
it by design.

Pollution plunged his hands into another rack of expensive electronics.

THE GUARD ON THE HOLE in the fence looked puzzled. He was aware of
excitement back in the base, and his radio seemed to be picking up
nothing but static, and his eyes were being drawn again and again to the
card in front of him.

He’d seen many identity cards in his time—military, CIA, FBI, KGB
even—and, being a young soldier, had yet to grasp that the more
insignificant an organization is, the more impressive are its identity
cards.

This one was _hellishly_ impressive. His lips moved as he read it again,
all the way from “The Lord Protector of the Common Wealth of Britain
charges and demands,” through the bit about commandeering all kindling,
rope, and igniferous oils, right down to the signature of the WA’s first
Lord Adjutant, Praise-him-all-Ye-works-of-the-Lord-and-Flye-Fornication
Smith. Newt kept his thumb over the bit about Nine Pence Per Witch and
tried to look like James Bond.

Finally the guard’s probing intellect found a word he thought he
recognized.

“What’s this here,” he said suspiciously, “about us got to give you
faggots?”

“Oh, we have to have them,” said Newt. “We burn them.”

“Say what?”

“We burn them.”

The guard’s face broadened into a grin. And they’d told him England was
soft. “Right on!” he said.

Something pressed into the small of his back.

“Drop your gun,” said Anathema, behind him, “or I shall regret what I
shall have to do next.”

Well, it’s true, she thought as she saw the man stiffen in terror. If he
doesn’t drop the gun he’ll find out this is a stick, and I shall really
regret having to be shot.

AT THE MAIN GATE, Sgt. Thomas A. Deisenburger was also having problems.
A little man in a dirty mack kept pointing a finger at him and
muttering, while a lady who looked slightly like his mother talked to
him in urgent tones and kept interrupting herself in a different voice.

_“It really is vitally important that we are allowed to speak to whoever
is in charge,”_ said Aziraphale. _“I really must ask that_ he’s right,
you know, I’d be able to tell if he was lying _yes, thank you, I think
we’d really achieve something if you kindly allowed me to carry on_ all
right _thank you_ I was only trying to put in a good word _Yes! Er_. You
were asking him to _yes, all right … now—_”

“D’yer see my finger?” shouted Shadwell, whose sanity was still attached
to him but only on the end of a long and rather frayed string. “D’yer
see it? This finger, laddie, could send ye to meet yer Maker!”

Sgt. Deisenburger stared at the black and purple nail a few inches from
his face. As an offensive weapon it rated quite highly, especially if it
was ever used in the preparation of food.

The telephone gave him nothing but static. He’d been told not to leave
his post. His wound from Nam was starting to play up.⁵⁴ He wondered how
much trouble he could get into for shooting non-American civilians.

THE FOUR BICYCLES pulled up a little way from the base. Tire marks in
the dust, and a patch of oil, indicated that other travelers had briefly
rested there.

“What’re we stopping for?” said Pepper.

“I’m thinking,” said Adam.

It was hard. The bit of his mind that he knew as _himself_ was still
there, but it was trying to stay afloat on a fountain of tumultuous
darkness. What he was aware of, though, was that his three companions
were one hundred percent human. He’d got them into trouble before, in
the way of torn clothes, docked pocket money, and so on, but this one
was almost certainly going to involve a lot more than being confined to
the house and made to tidy up your room.

On the other hand, there wasn’t anyone else.

“All right,” he said. “We need some stuff, I think. We need a sword, a
crown, and some scales.”

They stared at him.

“What, just here?” said Brian. “There’s nothin’ like that here.”

“I dunno,” said Adam. “When you think about the games and that, you
know, we’ve played … ”

JUST TO MAKE SGT. DEISENBURGER’S day, a car pulled up and it was
floating several inches off the ground because it had no tires. Or
paintwork. What it did have was a trail of blue smoke, and when it
stopped it made the _pinging_ noises made by metal cooling down from a
very high temperature.

It looked as if it had smoked glass windows, although this was just an
effect caused by it having ordinary glass windows but a smoke-filled
interior.

The driver’s door opened, and a cloud of choking fumes got out. Then
Crowley followed it.

He waved the smoke away from his face, blinked, and then turned the
gesture into a friendly wave.

“Hi,” he said. “How’s it going? Has the world ended yet?”

_“He won’t let us in, Crowley_,” said Madame Tracy.

“Aziraphale? Is that you? Nice dress,” said Crowley vaguely. He wasn’t
feeling very well. For the last thirty miles he had been imagining that
a ton of burning metal, rubber, and leather was a fully functioning
automobile, and the Bentley had been resisting him fiercely. The hard
part had been to keep the whole thing rolling after the all-weather
radials had burned away. Beside him the remains of the Bentley dropped
suddenly onto its distorted wheel rims as he stopped imagining that it
had tires.

He patted a metal surface hot enough to fry eggs on.

“You wouldn’t get that sort of performance out of one of these modern
cars,” he said lovingly.

They stared at him.

There was a little electronic click.

The gate was rising. The housing that contained the electric motor gave
a mechanical groan, and then gave up in the face of the unstoppable
force acting on the barrier.

“Hey!” said Sgt. Deisenburger, “Which one of you yo-yos did that?”

_Zip. Zip. Zip. Zip_. And a small dog, its legs a blur.

They stared at the four ferociously pedaling figures that ducked under
the barrier and disappeared into the camp.

The sergeant pulled himself together.

“Hey,” he said, but much more weakly this time, “did any of them kids
have some space alien with a face like a friendly turd in a bike
basket?”

“Don’t think so,” said Crowley.

“Then,” said Sgt. Deisenburger, “they’re in real trouble.” He raised his
gun. Enough of this pussyfooting around; he kept thinking of soap. “And
so,” he said, “are you.”

“I warns ye—” Shadwell began.

_“This has gone on too long,”_ said Aziraphale. _“Sort it out, Crowley,
there’s a dear chap_.”

“Hmm?” said Crowley.

_“I’m the nice one,”_ said Aziraphale. _“You can’t expect me to—oh,
blast it. You try to do the decent thing, and where does it get you?_”
He snapped his fingers.

There was a pop like an old-fashioned flashbulb, and Sgt. Thomas A.
Deisenburger disappeared.

_“Er_,” said Aziraphale.

“See?” said Shadwell, who hadn’t quite got the hang of Madame Tracy’s
split personality. “Nothing to it. Ye stick by me, ye’ll be all right.”

“Well done,” said Crowley. “Never thought you had it in you.”

_“No,”_ said Aziraphale. _“Nor did I, in fact. I do hope I haven’t sent
him somewhere dreadful_.”

“You’d better get used to it right now,” said Crowley. “You just send
’em. Best not to worry about where they go.” He looked fascinated.
“Aren’t you going to introduce me to your new body?”

_“Oh? Yes. Yes, of course. Madame Tracy, this is Crowley. Crowley,
Madame Tracy_. Charmed, I’m sure.”

“Let’s get on in,” said Crowley. He looked sadly at the wreckage of the
Bentley, and then brightened. A jeep was heading purposefully towards
the gate, and it looked as though it was crowded with people who were
about to shout questions and fire guns and not worry about which order
they did this in.

He brightened up. This was more what you might call his area of
competence.

He took his hands out of his pockets and he raised them like Bruce Lee
and then he smiled like Lee van Cleef. “Ah,” he said, “here comes
transport.”

THEY PARKED THEIR BIKES outside one of the low buildings. Wensleydale
carefully locked his. He was that kind of boy.

“So what will these people look like?” said Pepper.

“They could look like all sorts,” said Adam doubtfully.

“They’re grownups, are they?” said Pepper.

“Yes,” said Adam. “More grown-up than you’ve ever seen before, I
reckon.”

“Fightin’ grownups is never any use,” said Wensleydale gloomily. “You
always get into trouble.”

“You don’t have to fight ’em,” said Adam. “You just do what I told you.”

The Them looked at the things they were carrying. As far as tools to
mend the world were concerned, they did not look incredibly efficient.

“How’ll we find ’em, then?” said Brian, doubtfully. “I remember when we
came to the Open Day, it’s all rooms and stuff. Lots of rooms and
flashing lights.”

Adam stared thoughtfully at the buildings. The alarms were still
yodeling.

“Well,” he said, “it seems to _me_—”

“Hey, what are you kids doing here?”

It wasn’t a one hundred percent threatening voice, but it was near the
end of its tether and it belonged to an officer who’d spent ten minutes
trying to make sense of a senseless world where alarms went off and
doors didn’t open. Two equally harassed soldiers stood behind him,
slightly at a loss as to how to deal with four short and clearly
Caucasian juveniles, one of them marginally female.

“Don’t you worry about us,” said Adam airily. “We’re jus’ lookin’
around.”

“Now you just—” the lieutenant began.

“Go to sleep,” said Adam. “You just go to sleep. All you soldiers here
go to sleep. Then you won’t get hurt. You all just go to sleep _now_.”

The lieutenant stared at him, his eyes trying to focus. Then he pitched
forward.

“Coo,” said Pepper, as the others collapsed, “how did you do that?”

“Well,” said Adam cautiously, “you know that bit about hypnotism in the
_Boy’s Own Book of 101 Things To Do_ that we could never make work?”

“Yes?”

“Well, it’s sort of like that, only now I’ve found how to do it.” He
turned back to the communications building.

He pulled himself together, his body unfolding from its habitual
comfortable slouch into an upright bearing Mr. Tyler would have been
proud of.

“Right,” he said.

He thought for a while.

Then he said, “Come and see.”

IF YOU TOOK THE WORLD away and just left the electricity, it would look
like the most exquisite filigree ever made—a ball of twinkling silver
lines with the occasional coruscating spike of a satellite beam. Even
the dark areas would glow with radar and commercial radio waves. It
could be the nervous system of a great beast.

Here and there cities make knots in the web but most of the electricity
is, as it were, mere musculature, concerned only with crude work. But
for fifty years or so people had been giving electricity brains.

And now it was alive, in the same way that fire is alive. Switches were
welding shut. Relays fused. In the heart of silicon chips whose
microscopic architecture looked like a street plan of Los Angeles fresh
pathways opened up, and hundreds of miles away bells rang in underground
rooms and men stared in horror at what certain screens were telling
them. Heavy steel doors shut firmly in secret hollow mountains, leaving
people on the other side to pound on them and wrestle with fuse boxes
which had melted. Bits of desert and tundra slid aside, letting fresh
air into air-conditioned tombs, and blunt shapes ground ponderously into
position.

And while it flowed where it should not, it ebbed from its normal beds.
In cities the traffic lights went, then the street lights, then all the
lights. Cooling fans slowed, flickered, and stopped. Heaters faded into
darkness. Lifts stuck. Radio stations choked off, their soothing music
silenced.

It has been said that civilization is twenty-four hours and two meals
away from barbarism.

Night was spreading slowly around the spinning Earth. It should have
been full of pinpricks of light. It was not.

There were five billion people down there. What was going to happen soon
would make barbarism look like a picnic—hot, nasty, and eventually given
over to the ants.

DEATH STRAIGHTENED UP. He appeared to be listening intently. It was
anyone’s guess what he listened with.

HE IS HERE, he said.

The other three looked up. There was a barely perceptible change in the
way they stood there. A moment before Death had spoken _they_, the part
of them that did not walk and talk like human beings, had been wrapped
around the world. Now they were back.

More or less.

There was a strangeness about them. It was as if, instead of ill-fitting
suits, they now had ill-fitting bodies. Famine looked as though he had
been tuned slightly off-station, so that the hitherto dominant signal—of
a pleasant, thrusting, successful businessman—was beginning to be
drowned out by the ancient, horrible static of his basic personality.
War’s skin glistened with sweat. Pollution’s skin just glistened.

“It’s all … taken care of,” said War, speaking with some effort.
“It’ll … take its course.”

“It’s not just the nuclear,” Pollution said. “It’s the chemical.
Thousands of gallons of stuff in … little tanks all over the world.
Beautiful liquids … with eighteen syllables in their names. And the …
old standbys. Say what you like. Plutonium may give you grief for
thousands of years, but arsenic is forever.”

“And then … winter,” said Famine. “I _like_ winter. There’s something …
_clean_ about winter.”

“Chickens coming … home to roost,” said War.

“No more chickens,” said Famine, flatly.

Only Death hadn’t changed. Some things don’t.

The Four left the building. It was noticeable that Pollution, while
still walking, nevertheless gave the impression of oozing.

And this was noticed by Anathema and Newton Pulsifer.

It had been the first building they’d come to. It had seemed much safer
inside than out, where there seemed to be a lot of excitement. Anathema
had pushed open a door covered in signs that suggested that this would
be a terminally dangerous thing to do. It had swung open at her touch.
When they’d gone inside, it had shut and locked itself.

There hadn’t been a lot of time to discuss this after the Four had
walked in.

“What were they?” said Newt. “Some kind of terrorists?”

“In a very nice and accurate sense,” said Anathema, “I think you’re
right.”

“What was all that weird talk about?”

“I think possibly the end of the world,” said Anathema. “Did you see
their auras?”

“I don’t think so,” said Newt.

“Not nice at all.”

“Oh.”

“Negative auras, in fact.”

“Oh?”

“Like black holes.”

“That’s bad, is it?”

“Yes.”

Anathema glared at the rows of metal cabinets. For once, just now,
because it wasn’t just for play but was for real, the machinery that was
going to bring about the end of the world, or at least that part of it
that occupied the layers between about two meters down and all the way
to the ozone layer, wasn’t operating according to the usual script.
There were no big red canisters with flashing lights. There were no
coiled wires with a “cut me” look about them. No suspiciously large
numeric displays were counting down toward a zero that could be averted
with seconds to spare. Instead, the metal cabinets looked solid and
heavy and very resistant to last-minute heroism.

“What takes its course?” said Anathema. “They’ve done something, haven’t
they?”

“Perhaps there’s an off switch?” said Newt helplessly. “I’m sure if we
looked around—”

“These sort of things are wired in. Don’t be silly. I thought you knew
about this sort of thing.”

Newt nodded desperately. This was a long way from the pages of _Easy
Electronics_. For the look of the thing, he peered into the back of one
of the cabinets.

“Worldwide communications,” he said indistinctly. “You could do
practically anything. Modulate the mains power, tap into satellites.
Absolutely anything. You could”—_zhip_—“argh, you could”—_zhap_—“ouch,
make things do”—_zipt_—“uh, just about”—_zzap_—“ooh.”

“How are you getting on in there?”

Newt sucked his fingers. So far he hadn’t found anything that resembled
a transistor. He wrapped his hand in his handkerchief and pulled a
couple of boards out of their sockets.

Once, one of the electronics magazines to which he subscribed had
published a joke circuit which was guaranteed not to work. At last,
they’d said in an amusing way, here’s something all you ham-fisted hams
out there can build in the certain knowledge that if it does nothing,
it’s working. It had diodes the wrong way round, transistors upside
down, and a flat battery. Newt had built it, and it picked up Radio
Moscow. He’d written them a letter of complaint, but they never replied.

“I really don’t know if I’m doing any good,” he said.

“James Bond just unscrews things,” said Anathema.

“Not just unscrews,” said Newt, his temper fraying. “And I’m
not”—_zhip_—“James Bond. If I was”—_whizzle_—“the bad guys would have
shown me all the megadeath levers and told me how they bloody well
worked, wouldn’t they?”—_Fwizzpt_—“Only it doesn’t happen like that in
real life! I don’t _know_ what’s happening and I _can’t_ stop it.”

CLOUDS CHURNED around the horizon. Overhead the sky was still clear, the
air torn by nothing more than a light breeze. But it wasn’t normal air.
It had a crystallized look to it, so that you might feel that if you
turned your head you might see new facets. It sparkled. If you had to
find a word to describe it, the word _thronged_ might slip insidiously
into your mind. Thronged with insubstantial beings awaiting only the
right moment to become very substantial.

Adam glanced up. In one sense there was just clear air overhead. In
another, stretching off to infinity, were the hosts of Heaven and Hell,
wingtip to wingtip. If you looked really closely, and had been specially
trained, you could tell the difference.

Silence held the bubble of the world in its grip.

The door of the building swung open and the Four stepped out. There was
no more than a hint of human about three of them now—they seemed to be
humanoid shapes made up of all the things they were or represented. They
made Death seem positively homely. His leather greatcoat and
dark-visored helmet had become a cowled robe, but these were mere
details. A skeleton, even a walking one, is at least human; Death of a
sort lurks inside every living creature.

“The thing is,” said Adam urgently, “they’re not really real. They’re
just like nightmares, really.”

“B-but we’re not asleep,” said Pepper.

Dog whined and tried to hide behind Adam.

“That one looks as if he’s meltin’,” said Brian, pointing at the
advancing figure, if such it could still be called, of Pollution.

“There you are, then,” said Adam, encouragingly. “It can’t be real, can
it? It’s common sense. Something like that can’t be _reelly_ real.”

The Four halted a few meters away.

IT HAS BEEN DONE, said Death. He leaned forward a little and stared
eyelessly at Adam. It was hard to tell if he was surprised.

“Yes, well,” said Adam. “The thing _is_, I don’t want it done. I never
_asked_ for it to be done.”

Death looked at the other three, and then back to Adam.

Behind them a jeep skewed to a halt. They ignored it.

I DO NOT UNDERSTAND, he said. SURELY YOUR VERY EXISTENCE REQUIRES THE
ENDING OF THE WORLD. IT IS WRITTEN.

“I dunt see why anyone has to go an’ write things like that,” said Adam
calmly. “The world is full of all sorts of brilliant stuff and I haven’t
found out all about it yet, so I don’t want anyone messing it about or
endin’ it before I’ve had a chance to find out about it. So you can all
just go away.”

(_“That’s the one, Mr. Shadwell,”_ said Aziraphale, his words trailing
into uncertainty even as he uttered them, _“the one with … the …
T-shirt … ”)_

Death stared at Adam.

_“You … are part … of us,” said War, between teeth like beautiful
bullets._

_“It is done. We make … the … world … anew,”_ said Pollution, his voice
as insidious as something leaking out of a corroded drum into a water
table.

“You … lead … us,” said Famine.

And Adam hesitated. Voices inside him still cried out that this was
true, and that the world was his as well, and all he had to do was turn
and lead them out across a bewildered planet. They were his kind of
people.

In tiers above, the hosts of the sky waited for the Word.

(“Ye canna want me to shoot him! He’s but a bairn!”

_“Er,”_ said Aziraphale. _“Er. Yes. Perhaps we’d just better wait a bit,
what do you think?”_

“Until he grows up, do you mean?” said Crowley.)

Dog began to growl.

Adam looked at the Them. _They_ were his kind of people, too.

You just had to decide who your friends really were.

He turned back to the Four.

“Get them,” said Adam, quietly.

The slouch and slur was gone from his voice. It had strange harmonics.
No one human could disobey a voice like that.

War laughed, and looked expectantly at the Them.

“Little boys,” she said, “playing with your toys. Think of all the toys
I can offer you … think of all the _games_. I can make you fall in love
with me, little boys. Little boys with your little guns.”

She laughed again, but the machine-gun stutter died away as Pepper
stepped forward and raised a trembling arm.

It wasn’t much of a sword, but it was about the best you could do with
two bits of wood and a piece of string. War stared at it.

“I _see_,” she said. _“Mano a mano, eh?_” She drew her own blade and
brought it up so that it made a noise like a finger being dragged around
a wineglass.

There was a flash as they connected.

Death stared into Adam’s eyes.

There was a pathetic jingling noise.

“Don’t touch it!” snapped Adam, without moving his head.

The Them stared at the sword rocking to a standstill on the concrete
path.

“‘Little boys,”’ muttered Pepper, disgustedly. Sooner or later everyone
has to decide which gang they belong to.

“But, but,” said Brian, “she sort of got sucked up the sword—”

The air between Adam and Death began to vibrate, as in a heatwave.

Wensleydale raised his head and looked Famine in the sunken eye. He held
up something that, with a bit of imagination, could be considered to be
a pair of scales made of more string and twigs. Then he whirled it
around his head.

Famine stuck out a protective arm.

There was another flash, and then the jingle of a pair of silver scales
bouncing on the ground.

“Don’t … touch … them,” said Adam.

Pollution had already started to run, or at least to flow quickly, but
Brian snatched the circle of grass stalks from his own head and flung
it. It shouldn’t have handled like one, but a force took it out of his
hands and it whirred like a discus.

This time the explosion was a red flame inside a billow of black smoke,
and it smelled of oil.

With a rolling, tinny little sound a blackened silver crown bowled out
of the smoke and then spun round with a noise like a settling penny.

At least they needed no warning about touching it. It glistened in a way
that metal should not.

“Where’d they go?” said Wensley.

WHERE THEY BELONG, said Death, still holding Adam’s gaze. WHERE THEY
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN. BACK IN THE MINDS OF MAN.

He grinned at Adam.

There was a tearing sound. Death’s robe split and his wings unfolded.
Angel’s wings. But not of feathers. They were wings of night, wings that
were shapes cut through the matter of creation into the darkness
underneath, in which a few distant lights glimmered, lights that may
have been stars or may have been something entirely else.

BUT I, he said, AM NOT LIKE THEM. I AM AZRAEL, CREATED TO BE CREATION’S
SHADOW. YOU CANNOT DESTROY ME. THAT WOULD DESTROY THE WORLD.

The heat of their stare faded. Adam scratched his nose.

“Oh, I don’t know,” he said. “There might be a way.” He grinned back.

“Anyway, it’s going to stop now,” he said. “All this stuff with the
machines. You’ve got to do what I say just for now, and I say it’s got
to stop.”

Death shrugged. IT IS STOPPING ALREADY, he said. WITHOUT THEM, he
indicated the pathetic remnants of the other three Horsepersons, IT
CANNOT PROCEED. NORMAL ENTROPY TRIUMPHS. Death raised a bony hand in
what might have been a salute.

THEY’LL BE BACK, he said. THEY’RE NEVER FAR AWAY.

The wings flapped, just once, like a thunderclap, and the angel of Death
vanished.

“Right, then,” said Adam, to the empty air. “All right. It’s not going
to happen. All the stuff they started—it must stop _now_.”

NEWT STARED desperately at the equipment racks.

“You’d think there’d be a manual or something,” he said.

“We could see if Agnes has anything to say,” volunteered Anathema.

“Oh, yes,” said Newt bitterly. “That makes sense, does it? Sabotaging
twentieth-century electronics with the aid of a seventeenth-century
workshop manual? What did Agnes Nutter know of the transistor?”

“Well, my grandfather interpreted prediction 3328 rather neatly in 1948
and made some very shrewd investments,” said Anathema. “She didn’t know
what it was going to be called, of course, and she wasn’t very sound
about electricity in general, but—”

“I was speaking rhetorically.”

“You don’t have to make it work, anyway. You have to stop it working.
You don’t need knowledge for that, you need ignorance.”

Newt groaned.

“All right,” he said wearily. “Let’s try it. Give me a prediction.”

Anathema pulled out a card at random.

“‘He is Not that Which He Says he Is,’” she read. “It’s number 1002.
Very simple. Any ideas?”

“Well, look,” said Newt, wretchedly, “this isn’t really the time to say
it but,”—he swallowed—“actually I’m not very good with electronics. Not
very good at all.”

“You said you were a computer engineer, I seem to remember.”

“That was an exaggeration. I mean, just about as much of an exaggeration
as you can possibly get, in fact, really, I suppose it was more what you
might call an overstatement. I might go so far as to say that what it
really was,” Newt closed his eyes, “was a prevarication.”

“A lie, you mean?” said Anathema sweetly.

“Oh, I wouldn’t go _that_ far,” said Newt. “Although,” he added, “I’m
not actually a computer engineer. At all. Quite the opposite.”

“What’s the opposite?”

“If you must know, every time I try and make anything electronic work,
it stops.”

Anathema gave him a bright little smile, and posed theatrically, like
that moment in every conjurer’s stage act when the lady in the sequins
steps back to reveal the trick.

“Tra-la,” she said.

“Repair it,” she said.

“What?”

“Make it work better,” she said.

“I don’t know,” said Newt. “I’m not sure I can.” He laid a hand on top
of the nearest cabinet.

There was the noise of something he hadn’t realized he’d been hearing
suddenly stopping, and the descending whine of a distant generator. The
lights on the panels flickered, and most of them went out.

All over the world, people who had been wrestling with switches found
that they switched. Circuit breakers opened. Computers stopped planning
World War III and went back to idly scanning the stratosphere. In
bunkers under Novya Zemla men found that the fuses they were frantically
trying to pull out came away in their hands at last; in bunkers under
Wyoming and Nebraska, men in fatigues stopped screaming and waving guns
at one another, and would have had a beer if alcohol had been allowed in
missile bases. It wasn’t, but they had one anyway.

The lights came on. Civilization stopped its slide into chaos, and
started writing letters to the newspapers about how people got
overexcited about the least little thing these days.

In Tadfield, the machines ceased radiating menace. Something that had
been in them was gone, quite apart from the electricity.

“Gosh,” said Newt.

“There you are,” said Anathema. “You fixed it _good_. You can trust old
Agnes, take it from me. Now let’s get out of here.”

“HE DIDN’T WANT TO DO IT!” said Aziraphale. _“Haven’t I always told you,
Crowley? If you take the trouble to look, deep down inside anyone,
you’ll find that at bottom they’re really quite—”_

“It’s not over,” said Crowley flatly.

Adam turned and appeared to notice them for the first time. Crowley was
not used to people identifying him so readily, but Adam stared at him as
though Crowley’s entire life history was pasted inside the back of his
skull and he, Adam, was reading it. For an instant he knew real terror.
He’d always thought the sort he’d felt before was the genuine article,
but that was mere abject fear beside this new sensation. Those Below
could make you cease to exist by, well, hurting you in unbearable
amounts, but this boy could not only make you cease to exist merely by
thinking about it, but probably could arrange matters so that you never
had existed at all.

Adam’s gaze swept to Aziraphale.

“’Scuse me, why’re you two people?” said Adam.

_“Well_,” said Aziraphale, _“it’s a long—_”

“It’s not right, being two people,” said Adam. “I reckon you’d better go
back to being two sep’rate people.”

There were no showy special effects. There was just Aziraphale, sitting
next to Madame Tracy.

“Ooh, that felt tingly,” she said. She looked Aziraphale up and down.
“Oh,” she said, in a slightly disappointed voice. “Somehow, I thought
you’d be younger.”

Shadwell glowered jealously at the angel and thumbed the Thundergun’s
hammer in a pointed sort of way.

Aziraphale looked down at his new body which was, unfortunately, very
much like his old body, although the overcoat was cleaner.

“Well, that’s over,” he said.

“No,” said Crowley. “No. It isn’t, you see. Not at all.”

Now there _were_ clouds overhead, curling like a pot of tagliatelli on
full boil.

“You see,” said Crowley, his voice leaden with fatalistic gloom, “it
doesn’t really work that simply. You think wars get started because some
old duke gets shot, or someone cuts off someone’s ear, or someone’s
sited their missiles in the wrong place. It’s not like that. That’s
just, well, just _reasons_, which haven’t got anything to do with it.
What really causes wars is two sides that can’t stand the sight of one
another and the pressure builds up and up and then anything will cause
it. Anything at all. What’s your name … er … boy?”

“That’s Adam Young,” said Anathema, as she strode up with Newt trailing
after her.

“That’s right. Adam Young,” said Adam.

“Good effort. You’ve saved the world. Have a half-holiday,” said
Crowley. “But it won’t really make any difference.”

“I think you’re right,” said Aziraphale. “I’m sure my people _want_
Armageddon. It’s very sad.”

“Would anyone mind telling us what’s going on?” said Anathema sternly,
folding her arms.

Aziraphale shrugged. “It’s a very long story,” he began.

Anathema stuck out her chin. “Go on, then,” she said.

“Well. In the Beginning—”

The lightning flashed, struck the ground a few meters from Adam, and
stayed there, a sizzling column that broadened at the base, as though
the wild electricity was filling an invisible mold. The humans pressed
back against the jeep.

The lightning vanished, and a young man made out of golden fire stood
there.

“Oh dear,” said Aziraphale. “It’s him.”

“Him who?” said Crowley.

“The Voice of God,” said the angel. “The Metatron.”

The Them stared.

Then Pepper said, “No, it isn’t. The Metatron’s made of plastic and it’s
got laser cannon and it can turn into a helicopter.”

“That’s the Cosmic Megatron,” said Wensleydale weakly. “I had one, but
the head fell off. I think this one is different.”

The beautiful blank gaze fell on Adam Young, and then turned sharply to
look at the concrete beside it, which was boiling.

A figure rose from the churning ground in the manner of the demon king
in a pantomime, but if this one was ever in a pantomime, it was one
where no one walked out alive and they had to get a priest to burn the
place down afterwards. It was not greatly different to the other figure,
except that its flames were blood-red.

“Er,” said Crowley, trying to shrink into his seat. “Hi … er.”

The red thing gave him the briefest of glances, as though marking him
for future consumption, and then stared at Adam. When it spoke, its
voice was like a million flies taking off in a hurry.

It buzzed a word that felt, to those humans who heard it, like a file
dragged down the spine.

It was talking to Adam, who said, “Huh? No. I said already. My name’s
Adam Young.” He looked the figure up and down. “What’s yours?”

“Beelzebub,” Crowley supplied. “He’s the Lord of—”

“Thank you, Crowzley,” said Beelzebub. “Later we muzzed have a seriouzz
talk. I am sure thou hazzt muzzch to tell me.”

“Er,” said Crowley, “well, you see, what happened was—”

“Silenzz!”

“Right. Right,” said Crowley hurriedly.

“Now then, Adam Young,” said the Metatron, “while we can of course
appreciate your assistance at this point, we must add that Armageddon
should take place _now_. There may be some temporary inconvenience, but
that should hardly stand in the way of the ultimate good.”

“Ah,” whispered Crowley to Aziraphale, “what he means is, we have to
destroy the world in order to save it.”

“Azz to what it standz in the way of, that hazz yet to be decided,”
buzzed Beelzebub. “But it muzzt be decided _now_, boy. That izz thy
deztiny. It is written.”

Adam took a deep breath. The human watchers held theirs. Crowley and
Aziraphale had forgotten to breathe some time ago.

“I just don’t see why everyone and everything has to be burned up and
everything,” Adam said. “Millions of fish an’ whales an’ trees an’, an’
sheep and stuff. An’ not even for anything important. Jus’ to see who’s
got the best gang. It’s like us an’ the Johnsonites. But even if you
win, you can’t really beat the other side, because you don’t really want
to. I mean, not for good. You’ll just start all over again. You’ll just
keep on sending people like these two,” he pointed to Crowley and
Aziraphale, “to mess people around. It’s hard enough bein’ people as it
is, without other people coming and messin’ you around.”

Crowley turned to Aziraphale.

“Johnsonites?” he whispered.

The angel shrugged. “Early breakaway sect, I think,” he said. “Sort of
Gnostics. Like the Ophites.” His forehead wrinkled. “Or were they the
Sethites? No, I’m thinking of the Collyridians. Oh dear. I’m sorry,
there were hundreds of them, it’s so hard to keep track.”

“People bein’ messed around,” murmured Crowley.

“It doesn’t matter!” snapped the Metatron. “The whole point of the
creation of the Earth and Good and Evil—”

“I don’t see what’s so triffic about creating people as people and then
gettin’ upset ’cos they act like people,” said Adam severely. “Anyway,
if you stopped tellin’ people it’s all sorted out after they’re dead,
they might try sorting it all out while they’re alive. If _I_ was in
charge, I’d try makin’ people live a lot longer, like ole Methuselah.
It’d be a lot more interestin’ and they might start thinkin’ about the
sort of things they’re doing to all the enviroment and ecology, because
they’ll still be around in a hundred years’ time.”

“Ah,” said Beelzebub, and he actually began to smile. “You wizzsh to
rule the world. That’z more like thy Fath—”

“I thought about all that an’ I don’t want to,” said Adam, half turning
and nodding encouragingly at the Them. “I mean, there’s some stuff could
do with alt’rin’, but then I expect people’d keep comin’ up to me and
gettin’ me to sort out everythin’ the whole time and get rid of all the
rubbish and make more trees for ’em, and where’s the good in all that?
It’s like havin’ to tidy up people’s bedrooms for them.”

“You never tidy up even _your_ bedroom,” said Pepper, behind him.

“I never said anythin’ about _my_ bedroom,” said Adam, referring to a
room whose carpet had been lost to view for several years. “It’s general
bedrooms I mean. I dint mean my personal bedroom. It’s an analoggy.
That’s jus’ what I’m sayin’.”

Beelzebub and the Metatron looked at one another.

“Anyway,” said Adam, “it’s bad enough having to think of things for
Pepper and Wensley and Brian to do all the time so they don’t get bored,
so I don’t want any more world than I’ve got. Thank you all the same.”

The Metatron’s face began to take on the look familiar to all those
subjected to Adam’s idiosyncratic line of reasoning.

“You _can’t_ refuse to be who you are,” it said eventually. “Listen.
Your birth and destiny are part of the Great Plan. Things _have_ to
happen like this. All the choices have been made.”

“Rebellion izz a fine thing,” said Beelzebub, “but some thingz are
beyond rebellion. You muzzt understand!”

“I’m not rebelling against anything,” said Adam in a reasonable tone of
voice. “I’m pointin’ out things. Seems to me you can’t blame people for
pointin’ out things. Seems to me it’d be a lot better not to start
fightin’ and jus’ see what people do. If you stop messin’ them about
they might start thinkin’ properly an’ they might stop messin’ the world
around. I’m not sayin’ they _would_,” he added conscientiously, “but
they might.”

“This makes no sense,” said the Metatron. “You can’t run counter to the
Great Plan. You must _think_. It’s in your genes. _Think_.”

Adam hesitated.

The dark undercurrent was always ready to flow back, its reedy whisper
saying yes, that was it, that was what it was all about, you have to
follow the Plan because you were part of it—

It had been a long day. He was tired. Saving the world took it out of an
eleven-year-old body.

Crowley stuck his head in his hands. “For a moment there, just for a
moment, I thought we had a chance,” he said. “He had them worried. Oh,
well, it was nice while—”

He was aware that Aziraphale had stood up.

“Excuse me,” said the angel.

The trio looked at him.

“This Great Plan,” he said, “this would be the _ineffable_ Plan, would
it?”

There was a moment’s silence.

“It’s the Great Plan,” said the Metatron flatly. “You are well aware.
There shall be a world lasting six thousand years and it will conclude
with—”

“Yes, yes, that’s the Great Plan all right,” said Aziraphale. He spoke
politely and respectfully, but with the air of one who has just asked an
unwelcome question at a political meeting and won’t go away until he
gets an answer. “I was just asking if it’s ineffable as well. I just
want to be clear on this point.”

“It doesn’t matter!” snapped the Metatron. “It’s the same thing,
surely!”

_Surely?_ thought Crowley. They don’t actually _know_. He started to
grin like an idiot.

“So you’re not one hundred percent clear on this?” said Aziraphale.

“It’s not given to us to understand the _ineffable_ Plan,” said the
Metatron, “but of course the Great Plan—”

“But the Great Plan can only be a tiny part of the overall
ineffability,” said Crowley. “You can’t be certain that what’s happening
right now isn’t exactly right, from an ineffable point of view.”

“It izz written!” bellowed Beelzebub.

“But it might be written differently somewhere else,” said Crowley.
“Where you can’t read it.”

“In bigger letters,” said Aziraphale.

“Underlined,” Crowley added.

“Twice,” suggested Aziraphale.

“Perhaps this isn’t just a test of the world,” said Crowley. “It might
be a test of you people, too. Hmm?”

“God does not play games with His loyal servants,” said the Metatron,
but in a worried tone of voice.

“Whooo-eee,” said Crowley. “Where have you _been_?”

Everyone found their eyes turning toward Adam. He seemed to be thinking
very carefully.

Then he said: “I don’t see why it matters what is written. Not when it’s
about people. It can always be crossed out.”

A breeze swept across the airfield. Overhead, the assembled hosts
rippled, like a mirage.

There was the kind of silence there might have been on the day before
Creation.

Adam stood smiling at the two of them, a small figure perfectly poised
exactly between Heaven and Hell.

Crowley grabbed Aziraphale’s arm. “You know what happened?” he hissed
excitedly. “He was left alone! He grew up human! He’s not Evil Incarnate
or Good Incarnate, he’s just … a _human_ incarnate—”

Then:

“I think,” said the Metatron, “that I shall need to seek further
instructions.”

“I alzzo,” said Beelzebub. His raging face turned to Crowley. “And I
shall report of your part in thizz, thou hast better believe it.” He
glared at Adam. “And I do not know what _thy Father_ will say … ”

There was a thundering explosion. Shadwell, who had been fidgeting with
horrified excitement for some minutes, had finally got enough control of
his trembling fingers to pull the trigger.

The pellets passed through the space where Beelzebub had been. Shadwell
never knew how lucky he had been that he’d missed.

The sky wavered, and then became just sky. Around the horizon, the
clouds began to unravel.

MADAME TRACY BROKE THE SILENCE.

“Weren’t they odd,” she said.

She didn’t mean “weren’t they odd”; what she did mean she probably could
never hope to express, except by screaming, but the human brain has
amazing recuperative powers and saying “weren’t they odd” was part of
the rapid healing process. Within half an hour, she’d be thinking she’d
just had too much to drink.

“Is it over, do you think?” said Aziraphale.

Crowley shrugged. “Not for us, I’m afraid.”

“I don’t think you need to go worryin’,” said Adam gnomically. “I know
all about you two. Don’t you worry.”

He looked at the rest of the Them, who tried not to back away. He seemed
to think for a while, and then he said, “There’s been too much messin’
around anyway. But it seems to me everyone’s goin’ to be a lot happier
if they forget about this. Not actually _forget_, just not remember
exactly. An’ then we can go home.”

“But you can’t just leave it at that!” said Anathema, pushing forward.
“Think of all the things you could do! _Good_ things.”

“Like what?” said Adam suspiciously.

“Well … you could bring all the whales back, to start with.”

He put his head on one side. “An’ that’d stop people killing them, would
it?”

She hesitated. It would have been nice to say yes.

“An’ if people _do_ start killing ’em, what would you ask me to do about
’em?” said Adam. “No. I reckon I’m getting the hang of this now. Once I
start messing around like that, there’d be no stoppin’ it. Seems to me,
the only sensible thing is for people to know if they kill a whale,
they’ve got a dead whale.”

“That shows a very responsible attitude,” said Newt.

Adam raised an eyebrow.

“It’s just sense,” he said.

Aziraphale patted Crowley on the back. “We seem to have survived,” he
said. “Just imagine how terrible it might have been if we’d been at all
competent.”

“Um,” said Crowley.

“Is your car operational?”

“I think it might need a bit of work,” Crowley admitted.

“I was thinking that we might take these good people into town,” said
Aziraphale. “I owe Madame Tracy a meal, I’m sure. And her young man, of
course.”

Shadwell looked over his shoulder, and then up at Madame Tracy.

“Who’s he talking aboot?” he asked her triumphant expression.

Adam rejoined the Them.

“I reckon we’ll just be gettin’ home,” he said.

“But what actually _happened_?” said Pepper. “I mean, there was all
this—”

“It doesn’t matter any more,” said Adam.

“But you could help so much—” Anathema began, as they wandered back to
their bikes. Newt took her gently by the arm.

“That’s not a good idea,” he said. “Tomorrow is the first day of the
rest of our lives.”

“Do you know,” she said, “of all the trite sayings I’ve ever really
hated, that comes top?”

“Amazing, isn’t it,” said Newt happily.

“Why’ve you got ‘Dick Turpin’ painted on the door of your car?”

“It’s a joke, really,” said Newt.

“Hmm?”

“Because everywhere I go, I hold up traffic,” he mumbled wretchedly.

Crowley looked glumly at the controls of the jeep.

“I’m sorry about the car,” Aziraphale was saying. “I know how much you
liked it. Perhaps if you concentrated really hard—”

“It wouldn’t be the same,” said Crowley.

“I suppose not.”

“I had it from new, you know. It wasn’t a car, it was more a sort of
whole body glove.”

He sniffed.

“What’s burning?” he said.

A breeze swept up the dust and dropped it again. The air became hot and
heavy, imprisoning those within it like flies in syrup.

He turned his head, and looked into Aziraphale’s horrified expression.

“But it’s _over,”_ he said. “It _can’t_ happen now! The—the thing, the
correct moment or whatever—it’s gone past! It’s _over_!”

The ground began to shake. The noise was like a subway train, but not
one passing under. It was more like the sound of one coming up.

Crowley fumbled madly with the gear shift.

“That’s not Beelzebub!” he shouted, above the noise of the wind. “That’s
_Him_. His Father! This isn’t Armageddon, this is _personal_. Start, you
bloody thing!”

The ground moved under Anathema and Newt, flinging them onto the dancing
concrete. Yellow smoke gushed from between the cracks.

“It feels like a volcano!” shouted Newt. “What is it?”

“Whatever it is, it’s pretty angry,” said Anathema.

In the jeep, Crowley was cursing. Aziraphale laid a hand on his
shoulder.

“There are humans here,” he said.

“Yes,” said Crowley. _“And_ me.”

“I mean we shouldn’t let this happen to them.”

“Well, what—” Crowley began, and stopped.

“I mean, when you think about it, we’ve got them into enough trouble as
it is. You and me. Over the years. What with one thing and another.”

“We were only doing our jobs,” muttered Crowley.

“Yes. So what? Lots of people in history have only done their jobs and
look at the trouble _they_ caused.”

“You don’t mean we should actually try to stop _Him_?”

“What have you got to lose?”

Crowley started to argue, and realized that he hadn’t anything. There
was nothing he could lose that he hadn’t lost already. They couldn’t do
anything worse to him than he had coming to him already. He felt free at
last.

He also felt under the seat and found a tire iron. It wouldn’t be any
good, but then, nothing would. In fact it’d be much more terrible facing
the Adversary with anything like a decent weapon. That way you might
have a bit of hope, which would make it worse.

Aziraphale picked up the sword lately dropped by War, and hefted its
weight thoughtfully.

“Gosh, it’s been years since I used this,” he murmured.

“About six thousand,” said Crowley.

“My word, yes,” said the angel. “What a day that was, and no mistake.
Good old days.”

“Not really,” said Crowley. The noise was growing.

“People knew the difference between right and wrong in those days,” said
Aziraphale dreamily.

“Well, _yes_. Think about it.”

“Ah. Yes. Too much messin’ about?”

_“Yes.”_

Aziraphale held up the sword. There was a _whoomph_ as it suddenly
flamed like a bar of magnesium.

“Once you’ve learned how to do it, you never forget,” he said.

He smiled at Crowley.

“I’d just like to say,” he said, “if we don’t get out of this, that …
I’ll have known, deep down inside, that there was a spark of goodness in
you.”

“That’s right,” said Crowley bitterly. “Make my day.”

Aziraphale held out his hand.

“Nice knowing you,” he said.

Crowley took it.

“Here’s to the next time,” he said. “And … Aziraphale?”

“Yes.”

“Just remember I’ll have known that, deep down inside, you were just
enough of a bastard to be worth liking.”

There was a scuffling noise, and they were pushed aside by the small but
dynamic shape of Shadwell, waving the Thundergun purposefully.

“I wouldna’ trust you two Southern nancy boys to kill a lame rat in a
barrel,” he said. “Who’re we fightin’ noo?”

“The Devil,” said Aziraphale, simply.

Shadwell nodded, as if this hadn’t come as a surprise, threw the gun
down, and took off his hat to expose a forehead known and feared
wherever street-fighting men were gathered together.

“Ah reckoned so,” he said. “In that case, I’m gonna use mah _haid_.”

Newt and Anathema watched the three of them walk unsteadily away from
the jeep. With Shadwell in the middle, they looked like a stylized W.

“What on earth are they going to do?” said Newt. “And what’s
happening—_what’s happening to them?”_

The coats of Aziraphale and Crowley split along the seams. If you were
going to go, you might as well go in your own true shape. Feathers
unfolded towards the sky.

Contrary to popular belief, the wings of demons are the same as the
wings of angels, although they’re often better groomed.

“Shadwell shouldn’t be going with them!” said Newt, staggering to his
feet.

“What’s a Shadwell?”

“He’s my serg—he’s this amazing old man, you’d never believe it … I’ve
got to help him!”

_“Help_ him?” said Anathema.

“I took an oath and everything.” Newt hesitated. “Well, sort of an oath.
And he gave me a month’s wages in advance!”

“Who’re those other two, then? Friends of yours—” Anathema began, and
stopped. Aziraphale had half turned, and the profile had finally clicked
into place.

“I know where I’ve seen him before!” she shouted, pulling herself
upright against Newt as the ground bounced up and down. “Come on!”

“But something dreadful’s going to happen!”

“If he’s damaged the book, you’re bloody well right!”

Newt fumbled in his lapel and found his official pin. He didn’t know
what they were going up against this time, but a pin was all he had.

They ran …

Adam looked around. He looked down.
His face took on an expression
of calculated innocence.

There was a moment of conflict.
But Adam was on his own ground.
Always, and ultimately, on his own ground.

He moved one hand around
in a blurred
half circle.

. . . Aziraphale and Crowley felt the world _change_.

There was no noise. There were no cracks. There was just that where
there had been the beginnings of a volcano of Satanic power, there was
just clearing smoke, and a car drawing slowly to a halt, its engine loud
in the evening hush.

It was an elderly car, but well preserved. Not using Crowley’s method,
though, where dents were simply wished away; this car looked like it
did, you knew instinctively, because its owner had spent every weekend
for two decades doing all the things the manual said should be done
every weekend. Before every journey he walked around it and checked the
lights and counted the wheels. Serious-minded men who smoked pipes and
wore mustaches had written serious instructions saying that this should
be done, and so he did it, because he was a serious-minded man who
smoked a pipe and wore a mustache and did not take such injunctions
lightly, because if you did, where would you be? He had exactly the
right amount of insurance. He drove three miles below the speed limit,
or forty miles per hour, whichever was the lower. He wore a tie, even on
Saturdays.

Archimedes said that with a long enough lever and a solid enough place
to stand, he could move the world.

He could have stood on Mr. Young.

The car door opened and Mr. Young emerged.

“What’s going on here?” he said. “Adam? Adam!”

But the Them were streaking towards the gate.

Mr. Young looked at the shocked assembly. At least Crowley and
Aziraphale had had enough self-control left to winch in their wings.

“What’s he been getting up to now?” he sighed, not really expecting an
answer.

“Where’s that boy got to? Adam! Come back here this instant!”

Adam seldom did what his father wanted.

SGT. THOMAS A. DEISENBURGER opened his eyes. The only thing strange
about his surroundings was how familiar they were. There was his high
school photograph on the wall, and his little Stars and Stripes flag in
the toothmug, next to his toothbrush, and even his little teddy bear,
still in its little uniform. The early afternoon sun flooded through his
bedroom window.

He could smell apple pie. That was one of the things he’d missed most
about spending his Saturday nights a long way from home.

He walked downstairs.

His mother was at the stove, taking a huge apple pie out of the oven to
cool.

“Hi, Tommy,” she said. “I thought you was in England.”

“Yes, Mom, I am normatively in England, Mom, protecting democratism,
Mom, sir,” said Sgt. Thomas A. Deisenburger.

“That’s nice, hon,” said his mother. “Your Poppa’s down in the Big
Field, with Chester and Ted. They’ll be pleased to see you.”

Sgt. Thomas A. Deisenburger nodded.

He took off his military-issue helmet and his military-issue jacket, and
he rolled up his military-issue shirtsleeves. For a moment he looked
more thoughtful than he had ever done in his life. Part of his thoughts
were occupied with apple pie.

“Mom, if any throughput eventuates premising to interface with Sgt.
Thomas A. Deisenburger telephonically, Mom, sir, this individual will
be—”

“Sorry, Tommy?”

Tom Deisenburger hung his gun on the wall, above his father’s battered
old rifle.

“I said, if anyone calls, Mom, I’ll be down in the Big Field, with Pop
and Chester and Ted.”

THE VAN DROVE SLOWLY up to the gates of the air base. It pulled over.
The guard on the midnight shift looked in the window, checked the
credentials of the driver, and waved him in.

The van meandered across the concrete.

It parked on the tarmac of the empty airstrip, near where two men sat,
sharing a bottle of wine. One of the men wore dark glasses.
Surprisingly, no one else seemed to be paying them the slightest
attention.

“Are you saying,” said Crowley, “that He planned it this way all along?
From the very beginning?”

Aziraphale conscientiously wiped the top of the bottle and passed it
back.

“Could have,” he said. “Could have. One could always ask Him, I
suppose.”

“From what I remember,” replied Crowley, thoughtfully, “—and we were
never actually on what you might call speaking terms—He wasn’t exactly
one for a straight answer. In fact, in fact, He’d never answer at all.
He’d just _smile_, as if He knew something that you didn’t.”

“And of course that’s true,” said the angel. “Otherwise, what’d be the
point?”

There was a pause, and both beings stared reflectively off into the
distance, as if they were remembering things that neither of them had
thought of for a long time.

The van driver got out of the van, carrying a cardboard box and a pair
of tongs.

Lying on the tarmac were a tarnished metal crown and a pair of scales.
The man picked them up with the tongs and placed them in the box.

Then he approached the couple with the bottle.

“Excuse me, gents,” he said, “but there’s meant to be a sword around
here somewhere as well, at least, that’s what it says here at any rate,
and I was wondering … ”

Aziraphale seemed embarrassed. He looked around himself, vaguely
puzzled, then stood up, to discover that he had been sitting on the
sword for the last hour or so. He reached down and picked it up.
“Sorry,” he said, and put the sword into the box.

The van driver, who wore an International Express cap, said not to
mention it, and really it was a godsend them both being there like this,
since someone was going to have to sign to say that he’d duly collected
what he’d been sent for, and this had certainly been a day to remember,
eh?

Aziraphale and Crowley both agreed with him that it had, and Aziraphale
signed the clipboard that the van driver gave him, witnessing that a
crown, a pair of balances, and a sword had been received in good order
and were to be delivered to a smudged address and charged to a blurred
account number.

The man began to walk back to his van. Then he stopped, and turned.

“If I was to tell my wife what happened to me today,” he told them, a
little sadly, “she’d never believe me. And I wouldn’t blame her, because
I don’t either.” And he climbed into his van, and he drove away.

Crowley stood up, a little unsteadily. He reached a hand down to
Aziraphale.

“Come on,” he said. “I’ll drive us back to London.”

He took a Jeep. No one stopped them.

It had a cassette player. This isn’t general issue, even for American
military vehicles, but Crowley automatically assumed that all vehicles
he drove would have cassette players and therefore this one did, within
seconds of his getting in.

The cassette that he put on as he drove was marked Handel’s _Water
Music_, and it stayed Handel’s _Water Music_ all the way home.


Sunday

(The first day of the rest of their lives.)

AT AROUND HALF PAST TEN the paper boy brought the Sunday papers to the
front door of Jasmine Cottage. He had to make three trips.

The series of thumps as they hit the mat woke up Newton Pulsifer.

He left Anathema asleep. She was pretty shattered, poor thing. She’d
been almost incoherent when he’d put her to bed. She’d run her life
according to the Prophecies and now there were no more Prophecies. She
must be feeling like a train which had reached the end of the line but
still had to keep going, somehow.

From now on she’d be able to go through life with everything coming as a
surprise, just like everyone else. What luck.

The telephone rang.

Newt dashed for the kitchen and picked up the receiver on the second
ring.

“Hello?” he said.

A voice of forced friendliness tinted with desperation gabbled at him.

“No,” he said, “I’m not. And it’s not Devissey, it’s Device. As in Nice.
And she’s asleep.”

“Well,” he said, “I’m pretty sure she doesn’t want any cavities
insulated. Or double glazing. I mean, she doesn’t own the cottage, you
know. She’s only renting it.”

“No, I’m _not_ going to wake her up and ask her,” he said. “And tell me,
Miss, uh … right, Miss Morrow, why don’t you lot take Sundays off, like
everybody else does?”

_“Sunday_,” he said. “Of course it’s not Saturday. Why would it be
Saturday? Saturday was yesterday. It’s honestly Sunday today, really.
What do you mean, you’ve lost a day? _I_ haven’t got it. Seems to me
you’ve got a bit carried away with selling … Hello?”

He growled, and replaced the receiver.

Telephone salespeople! Something dreadful ought to happen to them.

He was assailed by a moment of sudden doubt. Today _was_ Sunday, wasn’t
it? A glance at the Sunday papers reassured him. If the Sunday _Times_
said it was Sunday, you could be sure that they’d investigated the
matter. And yesterday was Saturday. Of course. Yesterday was Saturday,
and he’d never forget Saturday for as long as he lived, if only he could
remember what it was he wasn’t meant to forget.

Seeing that he was in the kitchen, Newt decided to make breakfast.

He moved around the kitchen as quietly as possible, to avoid waking the
rest of the household, and found every sound magnified. The antique
fridge had a door that shut like the crack of doom. The kitchen tap
dribbled like a diuretic gerbil but made a noise like Old Faithful. And
he couldn’t find where anything was. In the end, as every human being
who has ever breakfasted on their own in someone else’s kitchen has done
since nearly the dawn of time, he made do with unsweetened instant black
coffee.⁵⁵

On the kitchen table was a roughly rectangular, leather-bound cinder. He
could just make out the words ‘Ni e and Acc’ on the charred cover. What
a difference a day made, he thought. It turns you from the ultimate
reference book to a mere barbecue briquette.

Now, then. How, exactly, had they got it? He recalled a man who smelled
of smoke and wore sunglasses even in darkness. And there was other
stuff, all running together … boys on bikes … an unpleasant buzzing … a
small, grubby, staring face … It all hung around in his mind, not
exactly forgotten but forever hanging on the cusp of recollection, a
memory of things that hadn’t happened.⁵⁶ How could you have that?

He sat staring at the wall until a knock at the door brought him back to
earth.

There was a small dapper man in a black raincoat standing on the
doorstep. He was holding a cardboard box and he gave Newt a bright
smile.

“Mr.”—he consulted a piece of paper in one hand—”Pulzifer?”

“Pulsifer,” said Newt. “It’s a hard _ess_.”

“I’m ever so sorry,” said the man. “I’ve only ever seen it written down.
Er. Well, then. It would appear that this is for you and Mrs. Pulsifer.”

Newt gave him a blank look.

“There is no Mrs. Pulsifer,” he said coldly.

The man removed his bowler hat.

“Oh, I’m terribly sorry,” he said.

“I mean that … well, there’s my mother,” said Newt. “But she’s not dead,
she’s just in Dorking. I’m not married.”

“How odd. The letter is quite, er, specific.”

“Who _are_ you?” said Newt. He was wearing only his trousers, and it was
chilly on the doorstep.

The man balanced the box awkwardly and fished out a card from an inner
pocket. He handed it to Newt.

GILES BADDICOMBE

Robey, Robey, Redfearn and Bychance

_Solicitors_

13 Demdyke Chambers,

PRESTON

“Yes?” he said politely. “And what can I do for you, Mr. Baddicombe?”

“You could let me in,” said Mr. Baddicombe.

“You’re not serving a writ or anything, are you?” said Newt. The events
of last night hung in his memory like a cloud, constantly changing
whenever he thought he could make out a picture, but he was vaguely
aware of damaging things and had been expecting retribution in some
form.

“No,” said Mr. Baddicombe, looking slightly hurt. “We have people for
that sort of thing.”

He wandered past Newt and put the box down on the table.

“To be honest,” he said, “we’re all very interested in this. Mr.
Bychance nearly came down himself, but he doesn’t travel well these
days.”

“Look,” said Newt, “I really haven’t the faintest idea what you’re
talking about.”

“This,” said Mr. Baddicombe, proffering the box and beaming like
Aziraphale about to attempt a conjuring trick, “is yours. Someone wanted
you to have it. They were very specific.”

“A present?” said Newt. He eyed the taped cardboard cautiously, and then
rummaged in the kitchen drawer for a sharp knife.

“I think more a bequest,” said Mr. Baddicombe. “You see, we’ve had it
for three hundred years. Sorry. Was it something I said? Hold it under
the tap, I should.”

“What the hell is this all about?” said Newt, but a certain icy
suspicion was creeping over him. He sucked at the cut.

“It’s a funny story—do you mind if I sit down?—and of course I don’t
know the full details because I joined the firm only fifteen years ago,
but … ”

. . . It had been a very small legal firm when the box had been
cautiously delivered; Redfearn, Bychance and both the Robeys, let alone
Mr. Baddicombe, were a long way in the future. The struggling legal
clerk who had accepted delivery had been surprised to find, tied to the
top of the box with twine, a letter addressed to himself.

It had contained certain instructions and five interesting facts about
the history of the next ten years which, if put to good use by a keen
young man, would ensure enough finance to pursue a very successful legal
career.

All he had to do was see that the box was carefully looked after for
rather more than three hundred years, and then delivered to a certain
address …

“. . . although of course the firm had changed hands many times over the
centuries,” said Mr. Baddicombe. “But the box has always been part of
the chattels, as it were.”

“I didn’t even know they _made_ Heinz Baby Foods in the seventeenth
century,” said Newt.

“That was just to keep it undamaged in the car,” said Mr. Baddicombe.

“And no one’s opened it all these years?” said Newt.

“Twice, I believe,” said Mr. Baddicombe. “In 1757, by Mr. George Cranby,
and in 1928 by Mr. Arthur Bychance, father of the present Mr. Bychance.”
He coughed. “Apparently Mr. Cranby found a letter—”

“—addressed to himself,” said Newt.

Mr. Baddicombe sat back hurriedly. “My word. How did you guess that?”

“I think I recognize the style,” said Newt grimly. “What happened to
them?”

“Have you heard this before?” said Mr. Baddicombe suspiciously.

“Not in so many words. They weren’t blown up, were they?”

“Well … Mr. Cranby had a heart attack, it is believed. And Mr. Bychance
went very pale and put his letter back in its envelope, I understand,
and gave very strict instructions that the box wasn’t to be opened again
in his lifetime. He said anyone who opened the box would be sacked
without references.”

“A dire threat,” said Newt, sarcastically.

“It was, in 1928. Anyway, their letters are in the box.”

Newt pulled the cardboard aside.

There was a small ironbound chest inside. It had no lock.

“Go on, lift it out,” said Mr. Baddicombe excitedly. “I must say I’d
very much like to know what’s in there. We’ve had bets on it, in the
office … ”

“I’ll tell you what,” said Newt, generously, “I’ll make us some coffee,
and _you_ can open the box.”

“Me? Would that be proper?”

“I don’t see why not.” Newt eyed the saucepans hanging over the stove.
One of them was big enough for what he had in mind.

“Go on,” he said. “Be a devil. I don’t mind. You—you could have power of
attorney, or something.”

Mr. Baddicombe took off his overcoat. “Well,” he said, rubbing his hands
together, “since you put it like that … it’d be something to tell my
grandchildren.”

Newt picked up the saucepan and laid his hand gently on the door handle.
“I hope so,” he said.

“Here goes.”

Newt heard a faint creak.

“What can you see?” he said.

“There’s the two opened letters … oh, and a third one … addressed to … ”

Newt heard the snap of a wax seal and the clink of something on the
table. Then there was a gasp, the clatter of a chair, the sound of
running feet in the hallway, the slam of a door, and the sound of a car
engine being jerked into life and then redlined down the lane.

Newt took the saucepan off his head and came out from behind the door.

He picked up the letter and was not one hundred percent surprised to see
that it was addressed to Mr. G. Baddicombe. He unfolded it.

It read: “Here is A Florin, lawyer; nowe, runne faste, lest thee Worlde
knoe the Truth about yowe and Mistrefs Spiddon the Type Writinge Machine
slavey.”

Newt looked at the other letters. The crackling paper of the one
addressed to George Cranby said: “Remove thy thievinge Hande, Master
Cranby. I minde well how yowe swindled the Widdowe Plashkin this
Michelmas past, yowe skinnie owlde Snatch-pastry.”

Newt wondered what a snatch-pastry was. He would be prepared to bet that
it didn’t involve cookery.

The one that had awaited the inquisitive Mr. Bychance said: “Yowe left
them, yowe cowarde. Returne this letter to the bocks, lest the Worlde
knoe the true Events of June 7th, Nineteen Hundred and Sixteene.”

Under the letters was a manuscript. Newt stared at it.

“What’s that?” said Anathema.

He spun around. She was leaning against the doorframe, like an
attractive yawn on legs.

Newt backed against the table. “Oh, nothing. Wrong address. Nothing.
Just some old box. Junk mail. You know how—”

“On a Sunday?” she said, pushing him aside.

He shrugged as she put her hands around the yellowed manuscript and
lifted it out.

“Further Nife and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter,” she read slowly,
“Concerning the Worlde that Is To Com; Ye Saga Continuef! Oh, my … ”

She laid it reverentially on the table and prepared to turn the first
page.

Newt’s hand landed gently on hers.

“Think of it like this,” he said quietly. “Do you want to be a
descendant for the rest of your life?”

She looked up. Their eyes met.

IT WAS SUNDAY, the first day of the rest of the world, around
eleven-thirty.

St. James’ Park was comparatively quiet. The ducks, who were experts in
_realpolitik_ as seen from the bread end, put it down to a decrease in
world tension. There really had been a decrease in world tension, in
fact, but a lot of people were in offices trying to find out why, trying
to find where Atlantis had disappeared to with three international
fact-finding delegations on it, and trying to work out what had happened
to all their computers yesterday.

The park was deserted except for a member of MI9 trying to recruit
someone who, to their later mutual embarrassment, would turn out to be
also a member of MI9, and a tall man feeding the ducks.

And there were also Crowley and Aziraphale.

They strolled side by side across the grass.

“Same here,” said Aziraphale. “The shop’s all there. Not so much as a
soot mark.”

“I mean, you can’t just _make_ an old Bentley,” said Crowley. “You can’t
get the patina. But there it was, large as life. Right there in the
street. You can’t tell the difference.”

“Well, _I_ can tell the difference,” said Aziraphale. “I’m sure I didn’t
stock books with titles like _Biggles Goes To Mars_ and _Jack Cade,
Frontier Hero_ and _101 Things A Boy Can Do_ and _Blood Dogs of the
Skull Sea_.”

“Gosh, I’m sorry,” said Crowley, who knew how much the angel had
treasured his book collection.

“Don’t be,” said Aziraphale happily. “They’re all mint first editions
and I looked them up in Skindle’s Price Guide. I think the phrase you
use is _whoo-eee_.”

“I thought he _was_ putting the world back just as it was,” said
Crowley.

“Yes,” said Aziraphale. “More or less. As best he can. But he’s got a
sense of humor, too.”

Crowley gave him a sideways look.

“Your people been in touch?” he said.

“No. Yours?”

“No.”

“I think they’re pretending it _did_n’t happen.”

“Mine too, I suppose. That’s bureaucracy for you.”

“And I think mine are waiting to see what happens next,” said
Aziraphale.

Crowley nodded. “A breathing space,” he said. “A chance to morally
re-arm. Get the defenses up. Ready for the big one.”

They stood by the pond, watching the ducks scrabble for the bread.

“Sorry?” said Aziraphale. “I thought that was the big one.”

“I’m not sure,” said Crowley. “Think about it. For my money, the really
big one will be all of Us against all of Them.”

“What? You mean Heaven and Hell against humanity?”

Crowley shrugged. “Of course, if he did change everything, then maybe he
changed himself, too. Got rid of his powers, perhaps. Decided to stay
human.”

“Oh, I do hope so,” said Aziraphale. “Anyway, I’m sure the alternative
wouldn’t be allowed. Er. Would it?”

“I don’t know. You can never be certain about what’s really intended.
Plans within plans.”

“Sorry?” said Aziraphale.

“Well,” said Crowley, who’d been thinking about this until his head
ached, “haven’t you ever wondered about it all? You know—your people and
my people, Heaven and Hell, good and evil, all that sort of thing? I
mean, _why_?”

“As I recall,” said the angel, stiffly, “there was the rebellion and—”

“Ah, yes. And why did it _happen_, eh? I mean, it didn’t have to, did
it?” said Crowley, a manic look in his eye. “Anyone who could build a
universe in six days isn’t going to let a little thing like that happen.
Unless they want it to, of course.”

“Oh, come on. Be sensible,” said Aziraphale, doubtfully.

“That’s not good advice,” said Crowley. “That’s not good advice at all.
If you sit down and think about it _sensibly_, you come up with some
very funny ideas. Like: why make people inquisitive, and then put some
forbidden fruit where they can see it with a big neon finger flashing on
and off saying ‘THIS IS IT!’?”

“I don’t remember any neon.”

“Metaphorically, I mean. I mean, why do that if you really don’t _want_
them to eat it, eh? I mean, maybe you just want to see how it all turns
out. Maybe it’s all part of a great big ineffable plan. All of it. You,
me, him, everything. Some great big test to see if what you’ve built all
works properly, eh? You start thinking: it _can’t_ be a great cosmic
game of chess, it _has_ to be just very complicated Solitaire. And don’t
bother to answer. If we could understand, we wouldn’t be us. Because
it’s all—all—”

INEFFABLE, said the figure feeding the ducks.

“Yeah. Right. Thanks.”

They watched the tall stranger carefully dispose of the empty bag in a
litter bin, and stalk away across the grass. Then Crowley shook his
head.

“What was I saying?” he said.

“Don’t know,” said Aziraphale. “Nothing very important, I think.”

Crowley nodded gloomily. “Let me tempt you to some lunch,” he hissed.

They went to the Ritz again, where a table was mysteriously vacant. And
perhaps the recent exertions had had some fallout in the nature of
reality because, while they were eating, for the first time ever, a
nightingale sang in Berkeley Square.

No one heard it over the noise of the traffic, but it was there, right
enough.

IT WAS ONE O’CLOCK ON SUNDAY.

For the last decade Sunday lunch in Witchfinder Sergeant Shadwell’s
world had followed an invariable routine. He would sit at the rickety,
cigarette-burned table in his room, thumbing through an elderly copy of
one of the Witchfinder Army library’s⁵⁷ books on magic and
Demonology—the _Necrotelecomnicon_ or the _Liber Fulvarum Paginarum_, or
his old favorite, the _Malleus Malleficarum_.⁵⁸

Then there would be a knock on the door, and Madame Tracy would call
out, “Lunch, Mr. Shadwell,” and Shadwell would mutter, “Shameless
hussy,” and wait sixty seconds, to allow the shameless hussy time to get
back into her room; then he’d open the door, and pick up the plate of
liver, which was usually carefully covered by another plate to keep it
warm. And he’d take it in, and he’d eat it, taking moderate care not to
spill any gravy on the pages he was reading.⁵⁹

That was what always happened.

Except on that Sunday, it didn’t.

For a start, he wasn’t reading. He was just sitting.

And when the knock came on the door he got up immediately, and opened
it. He needn’t have hurried.

There was no plate. There was just Madame Tracy, wearing a cameo brooch,
and an unfamiliar shade of lipstick. She was also standing in the center
of a perfume zone.

“Aye, Jezebel?”

Madame Tracy’s voice was bright and fast and brittle with uncertainty.
“Hullo, _Mister S_, I was just thinking, after all we’ve been through in
the last two days, seems silly for me to leave a plate out for you, so
I’ve set a place for you. Come on … ”

_Mister S?_ Shadwell followed, warily.

He’d had another dream, last night. He didn’t remember it properly, just
one phrase, that still echoed in his head and disturbed him. The dream
had vanished into a haze, like the events of the previous night.

It was this. _“Nothin’ wrong with witchfinding. I’d like to be a
witchfinder. It’s just, well, you’ve got to take it in turns. Today
we’ll go out witchfinding, an’ tomorrow we could hide, an’ it’d be the
witches’ turn to find US … ”_

For the second time in twenty-four hours—for the second time in his
life—he entered Madame Tracy’s rooms.

“Sit down there,” she told him, pointing to an armchair. It had an
antimacassar on the headrest, a plumped-up pillow on the seat, and a
small footstool.

He sat down.

She placed a tray on his lap, and watched him eat, and removed his plate
when he had finished. Then she opened a bottle of Guinness, poured it
into a glass and gave it to him, then sipped her tea while he slurped
his stout. When she put her cup down, it tinkled nervously in the
saucer.

“I’ve got a tidy bit put away,” she said, apropos of nothing. “And you
know, I sometimes think it would be a nice thing to get a little
bungalow, in the country somewhere. Move out of London. I’d call it The
Laurels, or Dunroamin, or, or … ”

“Shangri-La,” suggested Shadwell, and for the life of him could not
think why.

“Exactly, Mister S. Exactly. Shangri-La.” She smiled at him. “Are you
comfy, love?”

Shadwell realized with dawning horror that he was comfortable. Horribly,
terrifyingly comfortable. “Aye,” he said, warily. He had never been so
comfortable.

Madame Tracy opened another bottle of Guinness and placed it in front of
him.

“Only trouble with having a little bungalow, called—what was your clever
idea, Mister S?”

“Uh. Shangri-La.”

“Shangri-La, exactly, is that it’s not right for _one_, is it? I mean,
two people, they say two can live as cheaply as one.”

(Or five hundred and eighteen, thought Shadwell, remembering the massed
ranks of the Witchfinder Army.)

She giggled. “I just wonder _where_ I could find someone to settle down
with … ”

Shadwell realized that she was talking about him.

He wasn’t sure about this. He had a distinct feeling that leaving
Witchfinder Private Pulsifer with the young lady in Tadfield had been a
bad move, as far as the Witchfinder Army _Booke of Rules and
Reggulations_ was concerned. And this seemed even more dangerous.

Still, at his age, when you’re getting too old to go crawling about in
the long grass, when the chill morning dew gets into your bones …

(_An’ tomorrow we could hide, an’ it’d be the witches’ turn to find
us …_ )

Madame Tracy opened another bottle of Guinness, and giggled. “Oh Mister
S,” she said, “you’ll be _think_ing I’m trying to get you tiddly.”

He grunted. There was a formality that had to be observed in all this.

Witchfinder Sergeant Shadwell took a long, deep drink of Guinness, and
he popped the question.

Madame Tracy giggled. “Honestly, you old silly,” she said, and she
blushed a deep red. “How many do you think?”

He popped it again.

“Two,” said Madame Tracy.

“Ah, weel. That’s all reet then,” said Witchfinder Sergeant Shadwell
(retired).

IT WAS SUNDAY AFTERNOON.

High over England a 747 droned westwards. In the first-class cabin a boy
called Warlock put down his comic and stared out of the window.

It had been a very strange couple of days. He still wasn’t certain why
his father had been called to the Middle East. He was pretty sure that
his father didn’t know, either. It was probably _something_ cultural.
All that had happened was a lot of funny-looking guys with towels on
their heads and very bad teeth had shown them around some old ruins. As
ruins went, Warlock had seen better. And then one of the old guys had
said to him, wasn’t there anything he wanted to do? And Warlock had said
he’d like to leave.

They’d looked very unhappy about that.

And now he was going back to the States. There had been some sort of
problem with tickets or flights or airport destination-boards or
something. It was weird; he was pretty sure his father had meant to go
back to England. Warlock liked England. It was a nice country to be an
American in.

The plane was at that point passing right above the Lower Tadfield
bedroom of Greasy Johnson, who was aimlessly leafing through a
photography magazine that he’d bought merely because it had a rather
good picture of a tropical fish on the cover.

A few pages below Greasy’s listless finger was a spread on American
football, and how it was really catching on in Europe. Which was
odd—because when the magazine had been printed, those pages had been
about photography in desert conditions.

It was about to change his life.

And Warlock flew on to America. He deserved something (after all, you
never forget the first friends you ever had, even if you were all a few
hours old at the time) and the power that was controlling the fate of
all mankind at that precise time was thinking: Well, he’s going to
_America_, isn’t he? Don’t see how you could have anythin’ better than
going to _America_.

They’ve got thirty-nine flavors of ice cream there. Maybe even more.

THERE WERE A MILLION exciting things a boy and his dog could be doing on
a Sunday afternoon. Adam could think of four or five hundred of them
without even trying. Thrilling things, stirring things, planets to be
conquered, lions to be tamed, lost South American worlds teeming with
dinosaurs to be discovered and befriended.

He sat in the garden, and scratched in the dirt with a pebble, looking
despondent.

His father had found Adam asleep on his return from the air
base—sleeping, to all intents and purposes, as if he had been in bed all
evening. Even snoring once in a while, for verisimilitude.

At breakfast the next morning, however, it was made clear that this had
not been enough. Mr. Young disliked gallivanting about of a Saturday
evening on a wild-goose chase. And if, by some unimaginable fluke, Adam
was not responsible for the night’s disturbances—whatever they had been,
since nobody had seemed very clear on the details, only that there had
been disturbances of some sort—then he was undoubtedly guilty of
_something_. This was Mr. Young’s attitude, and it had served him well
for the last eleven years.

Adam sat dispiritedly in the garden. The August sun hung high in an
August blue and cloudless sky, and behind the hedge a thrush sang, but
it seemed to Adam that this was simply making it all much worse.

Dog sat at Adam’s feet. He had tried to help, chiefly by exhuming a bone
he had buried four days earlier and dragging it to Adam’s feet, but all
Adam had done was stare at it gloomily, and eventually Dog had taken it
away and inhumed it once more. He had done all he could.

“Adam?”

Adam turned. Three faces stared over the garden fence.

“Hi,” said Adam, disconsolately.

“There’s a circus come to Norton,” said Pepper. “Wensley was down there,
and he saw them. They’re just setting up.”

“They’ve got tents, and elephants and jugglers and pratic’ly wild
animals and stuff and—and everything!” said Wensleydale.

“We thought maybe we’d all go down there an’ watch them setting up,”
said Brian.

For an instant Adam’s mind swam with visions of circuses. Circuses were
boring, once they were set up. You could see better stuff on television
any day. But the _setting up_ … Of course they’d all go down there, and
they’d help them put up the tents, and wash the elephants, and the
circus people would be so impressed with Adam’s natural _rappore_ with
animals such that, that night, Adam (and Dog, the World’s Most Famous
Performing Mongrel) would lead the elephants into the circus ring and …

It was no good.

He shook his head sadly. “Can’t go anywhere,” he said. _“They_ said so.”

There was a pause.

“Adam,” said Pepper, a trifle uneasily, “what _did_ happen last night?”

Adam shrugged. “Just stuff. Doesn’t matter,” he said. “’Salways the
same. All you do is try to help, and people would think you’d _murdered_
someone or something.”

There was another pause, while the Them stared at their fallen leader.

“When d’you think they’ll let you out, then?” asked Pepper.

“Not for years an’ years. Years an’ years an’ _years_. I’ll be an old
man by the time they let me out,” said Adam.

“How about tomorrow?” asked Wensleydale.

Adam brightened. “Oh, _tomorrow’ll_ be all right,” he pronounced.
“They’ll have forgotten about it by then. You’ll see. They always do.”
He looked up at them, a scruffy Napoleon with his laces trailing, exiled
to a rose-trellissed Elba. _“You_ all go,” he told them, with a brief,
hollow laugh. “Don’t you worry about _me_. I’ll be all right. I’ll see
you all tomorrow.”

The Them hesitated. Loyalty was a great thing, but no lieutenants should
be forced to choose between their leader and a circus with elephants.
They left.

The sun continued to shine. The thrush continued to sing. Dog gave up on
his master, and began to stalk a butterfly in the grass by the garden
hedge. This was a serious, solid, impassible hedge, of thick and
well-trimmed privet, and Adam knew it of old. Beyond it stretched open
fields, and wonderful muddy ditches, and unripe fruit, and irate but
slow-of-foot owners of fruit trees, and circuses, and streams to dam,
and walls and trees just made for climbing …

But there was no way through the hedge.

Adam looked thoughtful.

“Dog,” said Adam, sternly, “get away from that hedge, because if you
went through it, then I’d have to chase you to catch you, and I’d have
to go out of the garden, and I’m not allowed to do that. But I’d have
to … if you went an’ ran away.”

Dog jumped up and down excitedly, and stayed where he was.

Adam looked around, carefully. Then, even more carefully, he looked Up,
and Down. And then Inside.

Then …

And _now_ there was a large hole in the hedge—large enough for a dog to
run through, and for a boy to squeeze through after him. And it was a
hole that had always been there.

Adam winked at Dog.

Dog ran through the hole in the hedge. And, shouting clearly, loudly and
distinctly, “Dog, you bad dog! Stop! Come back here!” Adam squeezed
through after him.

Something told him that something was coming to an end. Not the world,
exactly. Just the summer. There would be other summers, but there would
never be one like this. Ever again.

Better make the most of it, then.

He stopped halfway across the field. Someone was burning something. He
looked at the plume of white smoke above the chimney of Jasmine Cottage,
and he paused. And he listened.

Adam could hear things that other people might miss.

He could hear laughter.

It wasn’t a witch’s cackle; it was the low and earthy guffaw of someone
who knew a great deal more than could possibly be good for them.

The white smoke writhed and curled above the cottage chimney. For a
fraction of an instant Adam saw, outlined in the smoke, a handsome,
female face. A face that hadn’t been seen on Earth for over three
hundred years.

Agnes Nutter winked at him.

The light summer breeze dispersed the smoke; and the face and the
laughter were gone.

Adam grinned, and began to run once more.

In a meadow a short distance away, across a stream, the boy caught up
with the wet and muddy dog. “Bad Dog,” said Adam, scratching Dog behind
the ears. Dog yapped ecstatically.

Adam looked up. Above him hung an old apple tree, gnarled and heavy. It
might have been there since the dawn of time. Its boughs were bent with
the weight of apples, small and green and unripe.

With the speed of a striking cobra the boy was up the tree. He returned
to the ground seconds later with his pockets bulging, munching noisily
on a tart and perfect apple.

_“Hey! You! Boy!_” came a gruff voice from behind him. “You’re that Adam
Young! I can see you! I’ll tell your father about you, you see if I
don’t!”

Parental retribution was now a certainty, thought Adam, as he bolted,
his dog by his side, his pockets stuffed with stolen fruit.

It always was. But it wouldn’t be till this evening.

And this evening was a long way off.

He threw the apple core back in the general direction of his pursuer,
and he reached into a pocket for another.

He couldn’t see why people made such a fuss about people eating their
silly old fruit anyway, but life would be a lot less _fun_ if they
didn’t. And there never was an apple, in Adam’s opinion, that wasn’t
worth the trouble you got into for eating it.

IF YOU WANT TO IMAGINE the future, imagine a boy and his dog and his
friends. And a summer that never ends.

And if you want to imagine the future, imagine a boot … no, imagine a
sneaker, laces trailing, kicking a pebble; imagine a stick, to poke at
interesting things, and throw for a dog that may or may not decide to
retrieve it; imagine a tuneless whistle, pounding some luckless popular
song into insensibility; imagine a figure, half angel, half devil, all
human …

Slouching hopefully towards Tadfield. …

. . . forever.


_About the Authors_

TERRY PRATCHETT is the internationally bestselling author of more than
thirty books, including his phenomenally successful Discworld series.
His young adult novel _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_ won
the Carnegie Medal, and _Where’s My Cow_?, his Discworld book for
“readers of all ages,” was a _New York Times_ bestseller. Named an
Officer of the British Empire “for services to literature,” Pratchett
lives in England. (He has drunk enough banana daiquiris, thank you. It’s
G & Ts from now on.)

_www.terrypratchettbooks.com_

NEIL GAIMAN is the critically acclaimed and award-winning creator of the
Sandman series of graphic novels and author of the novels _Anansi Boys,
American Gods, Neverwhere, Stardust_, and _Coraline_, the short fiction
collections _Fragile Things_ and _Smoke and Mirrors_, and the _New York
Times_ bestselling children’s books _The Day I Swapped My Dad for Two
Goldfish_ and _The Wolves in the Walls_. Originally from England, Gaiman
now lives in the United States. (He is still 5’11” tall and continues to
be partial to black T-shirts.)

_www.neilgaiman.com_

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.


HEAVENLY PRAISE FOR

_Good Omens_

“Full-bore contemporary lunacy. A steamroller of silliness that made me
giggle out loud.”

—_San Diego Union-Tribune_

“Something like what would have happened if Thomas Pynchon, Tom Robbins,
and Don DeLillo had collaborated on the screenplay of a remake of the
Jack Benny film _The Horn Blows at Midnight_. … It’s a wow. … It would
make one hell of a movie. Or a heavenly one. Take your pick.”

—_Washington Post_

“It reads like the Book of Revelation as penned by Monty Python’s Flying
Circus.”

—_Phoenix New Times_

“Terrifically entertaining.”

—_Dayton Daily News_

“A direct descendant of _The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy_.”

—_New York Times_

“Outrageous. … _Good Omens_ shouldn’t be pegged into a category. It
should just be enjoyed. … Read it for a riotous good laugh.”

—_Orlando Sentinel_

“The Apocalypse has never been funnier.”

—Clive Barker

“What’s so funny about Armageddon? More than you’d think. … _Good Omens_
has arrived just in time.”

—_Detroit Free Press_

DEVILISHLY GOOD REVIEWS FOR TERRY PRATCHETT …

“A master of laugh-out-loud fiction.”

—_Chicago Tribune_

“Terry Pratchett seems constitutionally unable to write a page without
at least a twitch of the grin muscles. … [But] the notions Pratchett
plays with are nae so narrow or nae so silly as your ordinary British
farce.”

—_San Diego Union-Tribune_

“Pratchett is well able to combine the hilarious with the topical,
acerbic, and incisive.”

—_Toronto Star_

“A top-notch satirist.”

—_Denver Post_

“Terry Pratchett may still be pegged as a comic novelist, but … he’s a
lot more. In his range of invented characters, his adroit storytelling,
and his clear-eyed acceptance of humankind’s foibles, he reminds me of
no one in English literature as much as Geoffrey Chaucer. No kidding.”

—_Washington Post Book World_

. . . AND NEIL GAIMAN

“A writer imbued with rich storytelling qualities and a boundless
imagination.”

—_St. Louis Post-Dispatch_

“Neil Gaiman is a writer to make readers rejoice.”

—_Minneapolis Star Tribune_

“Gaiman is fast becoming one of the most important of modern writers.”

—_Denver Rocky Mountain News_

“Gaiman is a trickster in the best sense of the word.”

—_Houston Chronicle_

“He is a treasure house of story and we are lucky to have him.”

—Stephen King

“When you take the free-fall plunge into a Neil Gaiman book, anything
can happen and anything invariably does.”

—_Entertainment Weekly_


Facts

GOOD OMENS, THE FACTS
(or, at least, lies that have been hallowed by time)

Once upon a time Neil Gaiman wrote half a short story. He didn’t know
how it ended. He sent it to Terry Pratchett, who didn’t know, either.
But it festered away in Terry’s mind and he rang Neil about a year later
and said: “I don’t know how it ends, but I do know what happens next.”
The first draft took about two months, the second draft took about six
months. Quite why, we don’t know, but it did include explaining the
jokes to the American publishers.

WHAT WAS IT LIKE WORKING WITH NEIL GAIMAN/TERRY PRATCHETT?

Ah. You have to remember, you see, that in those days Neil Gaiman was
barely Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett was only just Terry Pratchett.
They’d known one another for years, Neil having done an interview with
Terry in 1985, after the first Discworld book came out. Look, it wasn’t
a big deal, okay? At no point in the whole thing did either of them say
to the other, “Wow, I can’t believe I’m working with you!”

HOW DID YOU WRITE IT?

Mostly by shouting excitedly at one another down the phone a couple of
times a day for two months, and sending a disk off to the other guy
several times a week. There were attempts toward the end of the writing
process at machine-to-machine communication via 300 / 75 baud modems,
but as a means of communication this turned out to be slightly less
efficient than underwater yodeling.

Neil was mostly nocturnal back then, so he’d get up in the early
afternoon and see the flashing red light on his ansaphone, which would
mean there would be a message from Terry that would usually begin “Get
up, get up, you bastard, I’ve just written a good bit!” And then the
first phone call of the day would happen, when Terry would read Neil
what he’d written that morning, and Neil would read Terry what he’d
written much earlier that morning. Then they’d talk excitedly at each
other, and it would be a race to get to the next good bit before the
other guy.

IS THAT WHY THERE’S AN ANSAPHONE IN THE STORY?

Probably. It was a long time ago, you know.

WHO WROTE WHAT BIT?

Ah. Another tricky one. As the official Keeper of the One True Copy,
Terry physically wrote more of Draft 1 than Neil. But if 2,000 words are
written down after a lot of excited shouting, it’s a moot point whose
words they are. And, in any case, as a matter of honor both of them
rewrote and footnoted the other guy’s stuff, and both can write passably
in the other one’s style. The Agnes Nutter scenes and the kids mostly
originated with Terry, the Four Horsemen and anything that involved
maggots started with Neil. Neil had most influence on the opening, Terry
on the ending. Apart from that, they just shouted excitedly a lot.

The point they both realized the text had wandered into its own world
was in the basement of the old Gollancz books, where they’d got together
to proofread the final copy, and Neil congratulated Terry on a line that
Terry knew he hadn’t written, and Neil was certain he hadn’t written
either. They both privately suspect that at some point the book had
started to generate text on its own, but neither of them will actually
admit this publicly for fear of being thought odd.

WHY DID YOU WRITE IT?

It seemed a shame not to. Besides, not writing it would mean that
generations of readers would not have a book that could be dropped
regularly in the bath.

WHY ISN’T THERE A SEQUEL?

We played around with ideas, but we could never work up the enthusiasm.
Besides, we wanted to do other things (and some of those ideas probably
ended up, bent to a different shape, in the works of both of us).
Recently, though, we’ve both been wondering if “never again” is set in
stone. So there might be a sequel one day. Maybe. Perhaps. Who knows? We
don’t.

DID YOU KNOW IT WOULD BE A “CULT CLASSIC” WHEN YOU WROTE IT?

If by “cult classic” you mean that all over the world there are people
with their own copies of _Good Omens_, which they’ve read over and over
and over, books they’ve dropped in baths and in puddles and in bowls of
parsnip soup, books held together with duct tape and putty and string,
books that are no longer lent out because no one in their right mind
would actually borrow something like that without having it clinically
sterilized first, then no, we didn’t.

Whereas if by “cult classic” you mean a book that’s sold millions and
millions of copies around the world, many of them to the same people,
because they buy them and then lend them out to their friends and never
see them again so buy more copies, then no, we didn’t.

Actually it doesn’t really matter what definition of cult classic you
use, we didn’t think we were writing one. We were writing a book we
thought was funny and we were trying to make each other laugh. We
weren’t even sure that anyone would actually want to publish it.

OH, COME ON, YOU’RE NEIL GAIMAN AND TERRY PRATCHETT.

Yes, but we weren’t then (see _What was it like working with Neil Gaiman
/ Terry Pratchett_? above). We were these two blokes with an idea, who
were telling each other a story.

WILL THERE BE A MOVIE, THEN?

Neil likes to think that one day maybe there will, and Terry is certain
that it will never happen. In either case, neither of them will believe
it until they’re actually eating popcorn at the premiere. And even then,
probably not.


NEIL GAIMAN ON TERRY PRATCHETT

Right.

So it’s February of 1985, and it’s a Chinese restaurant in London, and
it’s the author’s first interview. His publicist had been pleasantly
surprised that anyone would want to talk to him (the author has just
written a funny fantasy book called _The Colour of Magic_), but she’s
set up this lunch with a young journalist anyway. The author, a former
journalist, has a hat, but it’s a small, black leathery cap, not a
Proper Author Hat. Not yet. The journalist has a hat too. It’s a grayish
thing, sort of like the ones Humphrey Bogart wears in movies, only when
the journalist wears it he doesn’t look like Humphrey Bogart: he looks
like someone wearing a grown-up’s hat. The journalist is slowly
discovering that, no matter how hard he tries, he cannot become a hat
person: it’s not just that it itches, or blows off at inconvenient
moments, it’s that he forgets, and leaves it in restaurants, and is now
getting very used to knocking on the doors of restaurants about 11:00
a.m. and asking if they found a hat. One day, very soon now, the
journalist will stop bothering with hats, and decide to buy a black
leather jacket instead.

So they have lunch, and the interview gets printed in _Space Voyager_
magazine, along with a photo of the author browsing the shelves in
Forbidden Planet, and most important, they make each other laugh, and
like the way the other one thinks.

And the author is Terry Pratchett, and the journalist is me, and it’s
been two decades since I left a hat in a restaurant, and one and a half
decades since Terry discovered his inner
Bestselling-Author-with-a-Proper-Author-Hat.

We don’t see each other much these days, what with living on different
continents, and, when we’re on each other’s continent, spending all our
time signing books for other people. The last time we ate together was
at a sushi counter in Minneapolis, after a signing. It was an
all-you-can-eat night, where they put your sushi on little boats and
floated it over to you. After a while, obviously feeling we were taking
unfair advantage of the whole all-you-can-eat thing, the sushi chef gave
up on the putting sushi on little boats, produced something that looked
like the Leaning Tower of Yellowtail, handed it to us, and announced
that he was going home.

Nothing much had changed, except everything.

These are the things I realized back in 1985:

Terry knew a lot. He had the kind of head that people get when they’re
interested in things, and go and ask questions and listen and read. He
knew genre, enough to know the territory, and he knew enough outside
genre to be interesting.

He was ferociously intelligent.

He was having fun. Then again, Terry is that rarity, the kind of author
who likes Writing, not Having Written, or Being a Writer, but the actual
sitting there and making things up in front of a screen. At the time we
met, he was still working as a press officer for the South Western
Electricity board. He wrote four hundred words a night, every night: it
was the only way for him to keep a real job and still write books. One
night, a year later, he finished a novel, with a hundred words still to
go, so he put a piece of paper into his typewriter, and wrote a hundred
words of the next novel.

(The day he retired to become a full-time writer, he phoned me up. “It’s
only been half an hour since I retired, and already I hate those
bastards,” he said cheerfully.)

There was something else that was obvious in 1985: Terry was a science
fiction writer. It was the way his mind worked: the urge to take it all
apart, and put it back together in different ways, to see how it all fit
together. It was the engine that drove Discworld—it’s not a “what if. .
.” or an “if only … ” or even an “if this goes on … ”; it was the far
more subtle and dangerous “If there was _really_ a … , what would that
mean? How would it work?”

In the Nicholls-Clute _Encyclopedia of Science Fiction_, there was an
ancient woodcut of a man pushing his head through the back of the world,
past the sky, and seeing the cogs and the wheels and the engines that
drove the universe machine. That’s what people do in Terry Pratchett
books, even if the people doing it are sometimes rats and sometimes
small girls. People learn things. They open their heads.

So we discovered we shared a similar sense of humor, and a similar set
of cultural referents; we’d read the same obscure books, took pleasure
in pointing each other to weird Victorian reference books.

A few years after we met, in 1988, Terry and I wrote a book together. It
began as a parody of Richmal Crompton’s _William_ books, which we called
_William the Antichrist_, but rapidly outgrew that conceit and became
about a number of other things instead, and we called it _Good Omens_.
It was a funny novel about the end of the world and how we’re all going
to die. Working with Terry, I felt like a journeyman alongside a master
craftsman in some medieval guild. He constructs novels like a
guildmaster might build a cathedral arch. There is art, of course, but
that’s the result of building it well. What there is more of is the
pleasure taken in constructing something that does what it’s meant to
do—to make people read the story, and laugh, and possibly even think.

(This is how we wrote a novel together. I’d write late at night. Terry
wrote early in the morning. In the afternoon we’d have very long phone
conversations where we’d read each other the best bits we’d written, and
talk about stuff that could happen next. The main objective was to make
the other one laugh. We posted floppy disks back and forth, because this
was before e-mail. There was one night when we tried using a modem to
send some text across the country, at 300 / 75 speeds, directly from
computer to computer because if
e-mail had been invented back then nobody had told us about it. We
managed it too. But the post was faster.)

Terry has been writing professionally for a very long time, honing his
craft, getting quietly better and better. The biggest problem he faces
is the problem of excellence: he makes it look easy. This can be a
problem. The public doesn’t know where the craft lies. It’s wiser to
make it look harder than it is, a lesson all jugglers learn.

In the early days the reviewers compared him to the late Douglas Adams,
but then Terry went on to write books as enthusiastically as Douglas
avoided writing them, and now, if there is any comparison to be made of
anything from the formal rules of a Pratchett novel to the sheer
prolific fecundity of the man, it might be to P. G. Wodehouse. But
mostly newspapers, magazines, and critics do not compare him to anyone.
He exists in a blind spot, with two strikes against him: he writes funny
books, in a world in which funny is synonymous with trivial, and they
are fantasies—or more precisely, they are set on the Discworld, a flat
world, which rests on the back of four elephants, who in turn stand on
the back of a turtle, heading off through space. It’s a location in
which Terry Pratchett can write anything, from hard-bitten crime dramas
to vampiric political parodies, to children’s books. And those
children’s books have changed things. Terry won the prestigious Carnegie
Medal for his pied piper tale _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated
Rodents_, awarded by the librarians of the U.K., and the Carnegie is an
award that even newspapers have to respect. (Even so, the newspapers had
their revenge, cheerfully misunderstanding Terry’s acceptance speech and
accusing him of bashing J. K. Rowling and J. R. R. Tolkien and fantasy,
in a speech about the real magic of fantastic fiction.)

The most recent books have shown Terry in a new mode—books like _Night
Watch_ and _Monstrous Regiment_ are darker, deeper, more outraged at
what people can do to people, while prouder of what people can do for
each other. And yes, the books are still funny, but they no longer
follow the jokes: now the books follow the story and the people.
_Satire_ is a word that is often used to mean that there aren’t any
people in the fiction, and for that reason I’m uncomfortable calling
Terry a satirist. What he is, is A Writer, and there are few enough of
those around. There are lots of people who call themselves writers, mind
you. But it’s not the same thing at all.

In person, Terry is genial, driven, funny. Practical. He likes writing,
and he likes writing fiction. That he became a bestselling author is a
good thing: it allows him to write as much as he wishes. He wasn’t
joking about the Banana Daiquiris, although the last time I saw him we
drank ice wine together in his hotel room, while we set the world to
rights.


TERRY PRATCHETT ON NEIL GAIMAN

What can I say about Neil Gaiman that has not already been said in _The
Morbid Imagination: Five Case Studies_?

Well, he’s no genius. He’s better than that.

He’s not a wizard, in other words, but a conjurer.

Wizards don’t have to work. They wave their hands, and the magic
happens. But conjurers, now … conjurers work very hard. They spend a lot
of time in their youth watching, very carefully, the best conjurers of
their day. They seek out old books of trickery and, being natural
conjurers, read everything else as well, because history itself is just
a magic show. They observe the way people think, and the many ways in
which they don’t. They learn the subtle use of springs, and how to open
mighty temple doors at a touch, and how to make the trumpets sound.

And they take center stage and amaze you with flags of all nations and
smoke and mirrors, and you cry: “Amazing! How does he do it? What
happened to the elephant? Where’s the rabbit? Did he really smash my
watch?”

And in the back row we, the other conjurers, say quietly: “Well _done_.
Isn’t that a variant of the Prague Levitating Sock? Wasn’t that
Pasqual’s Spirit Mirror, where the girl isn’t really there? But where
the _hell_ did that flaming sword come from?”

And we wonder if there may be such a thing as wizardry, after
all. …

I met Neil in 1985, when _The Colour of Magic_ had just come out. It was
my first ever interview as an author. Neil was making a living as a
freelance journalist and had the pale features of someone who had sat
through the review showings of altogether too many bad movies in order
to live off the freebie cold chicken legs they served at the receptions
afterwards (and to build up his contacts book, which is now the size of
the Bible and contains rather more interesting people). He was doing
journalism in order to eat, which is a very good way of learning
journalism. Probably the only real way, come to think of it.

He also had a very bad hat. It was a gray homburg. He was not a hat
person. There was no natural unity between hat and man. That was the
first and last time I saw the hat. As if subconsciously aware of the bad
hatitude, he used to forget it and leave it behind in restaurants. One
day, he never went back for it. I put this in for the serious fans out
there: If you search really, really hard, you may find a small
restaurant somewhere in London with a dusty gray homburg at the back of
a shelf. Who knows what will happen if you try it on?

Anyway, we got on fine. Hard to say why, but at bottom was a shared
delight and amazement at the sheer strangeness of the universe, in
stories, in obscure details, in strange old books in unregarded
bookshops. We stayed in contact.

_[SFX: pages being ripped off a calendar. You know, you just don’t get
that in movies any more. … ]_

And one thing led to another, and he became big in graphic novels, and
Discworld took off, and one day he sent me about six pages of a short
story and said he didn’t know how it continued, and I didn’t either, and
about a year later I took it out of the drawer and _did_ see what
happened next, even if I couldn’t see how it all ended yet, and we wrote
it together and that was _Good Omens_. It was done by two guys who
didn’t have anything to lose by having fun. We didn’t do it for the
money. But, as it turned out, we got a lot of money.

. . . Hey, let me tell you about the weirdness, like when he was staying
with us for the editing and we heard a noise and went into his room and
two of our white doves had got in and couldn’t get out; they were
panicking around the room and Neil was waking up in a storm of snowy
white feathers saying “Wstfgl?,” which is his normal ante-meridian
vocabulary. Or the time when we were in a bar and he met the Spider
Women. Or the time on tour when we checked into our hotel and in the
morning it turned out that _his_ TV had been showing him strange
late-night seminaked bondage bisexual chat shows, and mine had picked up
nothing but reruns of “Mr. Ed.” And the moment, live on air, when we
realized that an underinformed New York radio interviewer with ten
minutes of chat still to go _thought_ Good Omens _was not a work of
fiction. …_

_[cut to a train, pounding along the tracks. That’s another scene they
never show in movies these days. … ]_

And there we were, ten years on, traveling across Sweden and talking
about the plot of _American Gods_ (him) and _The Amazing Maurice_ (me).
Probably both of us at the same time. It was just like the old days. One
of us says, “I don’t know how to deal with this tricky bit of plot”; the
other one listens and says, “The solution, Grasshopper, is in the way
you state the problem. Fancy a coffee?”

A lot had happened in those ten years. He’d left the comics world
shaken, and it’ll never be quite the same. The effect was akin to that
of Tolkien on the fantasy novel—everything afterwards is in some way
influenced. I remember on one U.S. _Good Omens_ tour walking round a
comics shop. We’d been signing for a lot of comics fans, some of whom
were clearly puzzled at the concept of “dis story wid no pitchers in
it,” and I wandered around the shelves looking at the opposition. That’s
when I realized he was _good_. There’s a delicacy of touch, a subtle
scalpel, which is the hallmark of his work.

And when I heard the premise of _American Gods_ I wanted to write it so
much I could taste it. …

When I read _Coraline_, I saw it as an exquisitely drawn animation; if I
close my eyes I can see how the house looks, or the special dolls’
picnic. No wonder he writes scripts now. When I read the book I
remembered that children’s stories are, indeed, where true horror lives.
My childhood nightmares would have been quite featureless without the
imaginings of Walt Disney, and there’s a few little details concerning
black button eyes in that book that make a small part of the adult brain
want to go and hide behind the sofa. But the purpose of the book is not
the horror, it is horror’s defeat.

It might come as a surprise to many to learn that Neil is either a very
nice, approachable guy or an incredible actor. He sometimes takes those
shades off. The leather jacket I’m not sure about; I think I once saw
him in a tux, or it may have been someone else.

He takes the view that mornings happen to other people. I think I once
saw him at breakfast, although possibly it was just someone who looked a
bit like him who was lying with his head in the plate of baked beans. He
likes good sushi and quite likes people, too, although not raw; he is
kind to fans who are not total jerks, and enjoys talking to people who
know how to talk. He doesn’t look as though he’s in his forties; that
may have happened to someone else, too. Or perhaps there’s a special
picture locked in his attic.

Have fun. We did. We never thought about the money until it went for
auction and the big numbers started to get phoned in. Guess which one of
us was amazingly cool about that. Hint: It wasn’t me.

P.S.: He really, really likes it if you ask him to sign your battered,
treasured copy of _Good Omens_ that has been dropped in the tub at least
once and is now held together with very old, yellowing transparent tape.
You know the one.

ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT

_The Carpet People • The Dark Side of the Sun • Strata •
The Bromeliad Trilogy: Truckers • Diggers • Wings •
Only You Can Save Mankind • Johnny and the Dead •
Johnny and the Bomb • The Unadulterated Cat_ (with Gray Jolliffe)
• _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents •
The Wee Free Men • A Hat Full of Sky_

THE DISCWORLD SERIES

_The Color of Magic • The Light Fantastic •
Equal Rites • Mort • Sourcery •
Wyrd Sisters • Pyramids • Guards! Guards! •
Eric_ (with Josh Kirby) _• Moving Pictures •
Reaper Man • Witches Abroad • Small Gods •
Lords and Ladies • Men at Arms • Soul Music •
Feet of Clay • Interesting Times • Maskerade •
Hogfather • Jingo • The Last Continent •
Carpe Jugulum • The Fifth Elephant •
The Truth • Thief of Time • Night Watch •
Monstrous Regiment • Going Postal • Thud! •
The Last Hero_ (with Paul Kidby) _• The Art of Discworld_
(with Paul Kidby) • _Mort: A Discworld Big Comic_
(with Graham Higgins) • _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_
(with Stephen Briggs) • _The Discworld Companion_
(with Stephen Briggs) • _The Discworld Mapp_
(with Stephen Briggs)

ALSO BY NEIL GAIMAN

NOVELS

_Anansi Boys • American Gods • Neverwhere • Stardust_

SHORT FICTION

_Fragile Things • Smoke and Mirrors_

FOR CHILDREN

_MirrorMask_ (with Dave McKean) •
_The Day I Swapped My Dad for Two Goldfish •
The Wolves in the Walls_ (both illustrated by Dave McKean) •
_Coraline_

GRAPHIC NOVELS
WITH DAVE MCKEAN

_Violent Cases • Signal to Noise • Mr. Punch_

SANDMAN

_Preludes & Nocturnes • The Doll’s House •
Dream Country • Season of Mists • A Game for You •
Fables and Reflections • Brief Lives • World’s End •
The Kindly Ones • The Wake_

DEATH

_The High Cost of Living • The Time of Your Life_

MISCELLANEOUS GRAPHIC NOVELS

_The Books of Magic • Miracleman: The Golden Age • Black Orchid_

NONFICTION

_MirrorMask: The Illustrated Film Script of the Motion Picture from
The Jim Henson Company_ (with Dave McKean) • _The Alchemy of
MirrorMask_ (by Dave McKean; commentary by Neil Gaiman) •
_Don’t Panic • Ghastly Beyond Belief_ (with Kim Newman)


Copyright

CAVEAT

BRINGING ABOUT ARMAGEDDON CAN BE DANGEROUS. DO NOT ATTEMPT IT IN YOUR
OWN HOME.

“Bohemian Rhapsody” by Freddie Mercury. © 1975 B. Feldman & Co. Ltd.
trading as Trident Music. All rights for U.S. and Canada controlled and
administered by Glenwood Music Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
International copyright secured. Used by permission.

This book is a work of fiction. The characters, incidents, and dialogue
are drawn from the authors’ imaginations and are not to be construed as
real. Any resemblance to actual events or persons, living or dead, is
entirely coincidental.

A hardcover edition of this book was published in 1990 by Workman
Publishing Company, Inc.; a trade paperback edition was published in
1992 by The Berkley Publishing Group; and a mass-market edition in 1996
and a trade paperback edition in 2001 were published by Ace Books, a
division of Penguin Putnam, Inc.

GOOD OMENS. Copyright © 1990 by Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett. All
rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.

First William Morrow edition published 2006.

First Harper paperback published 2007.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.

ISBN: 978-0-06-085396-9

ISBN-10: 0-06-085396-4

ISBN: 978-0-06-085397-6 (pbk.)

ISBN-10: 0-06-085397-2 (pbk.)

EPub Edition © JUNE 2011 ISBN:9780061991127

07 08 09 10 11

About the Publisher

AUSTRALIA

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

CANADA

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

NEW ZEALAND

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1 Auckland,

New Zealand

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz

UNITED KINGDOM

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

UNITED STATES

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

¹ i.e., everybody

² It was custom-made for Crowley. Getting just one chip custom-made is
incredibly expensive but he could afford it. This watch gave the time in
twenty world capitals and in a capital city in Another Place, where it
was always one time, and that was Too Late.

³ Saint Beryl Articulatus of Cracow, reputed to have been martyred in
the middle of the fifth century. According to legend, Beryl was a young
woman who was betrothed against her will to a pagan, Prince Casimir. On
their wedding night she prayed to the Lord to intercede, vaguely
expecting a miraculous beard to appear, and she had in fact already laid
in a small ivory-handled razor, suitable for ladies, against this very
eventuality; instead the Lord granted Beryl the miraculous ability to
chatter continually about whatever was on her mind, however
inconsequential, without pause for breath or food.

According to one version of the legend, Beryl was strangled by Prince
Casimir three weeks after the wedding, with their marriage still
unconsummated. She died a virgin and a martyr, chattering to the end.

According to another version of the legend, Casimir bought himself a set
of earplugs, and she died in bed, with him, at the age of sixty-two.

The Chattering Order of Saint Beryl is under a vow to emulate Saint
Beryl at all times, except on Tuesday afternoons, for half an hour, when
the nuns are permitted to shut up, and, if they wish, to play table
tennis.

⁴ With a little old lady as the sleuth, and no car chases unless they’re
done very slowly.

⁵ It is possibly worth mentioning at this point that Mr. Young thought
that paparazzi was a kind of Italian linoleum.

⁶ Although he did have to get up in 1832 to go to the lavatory.

⁷ Note for Americans and other aliens: Milton Keynes is a new city
approximately halfway between London and Birmingham. It was built to be
modern, efficient, healthy, and, all in all, a pleasant place to live.
Many Britons find this amusing.

⁸ The Buggre Alle This Bible was also noteworthy for having twenty-seven
verses in the third chapter of Genesis, instead of the more usual
twenty-four.

They followed verse 24, which in the King James version reads:

“So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of
Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the
way of the tree of life,” and read:

25 And the Lord spake unto the Angel that guarded the eastern gate,
saying Where is the flaming sword which was given unto thee?

26 And the Angel said, I had it here only a moment ago, I must have put
it down some where, forget my own head next.

27 And the Lord did not ask him again.

It appears that these verses were inserted during the proof stage. In
those days it was common practice for printers to hang proof sheets to
the wooden beams outside their shops, for the edification of the
populace and some free proofreading, and since the whole print run was
subsequently burned anyway, no one bothered to take up this matter with
the nice Mr. A. Ziraphale, who ran the bookshop two doors along and was
always so helpful with the translations, and whose handwriting was
instantly recognizable.

⁹ The other two are _The Trapping of the Mouse_, and _Golde Diggers of
1589_.

¹⁰ Who had already had a few thoughts in that direction, and spent the
last years of his life in Newgate Prison when he eventually put them
into practice.

¹¹ Another master stroke of publishing genius, because Oliver Cromwell’s
Puritan Parliament had made Christmas illegal in 1654.

¹² Nominally a city. It was the size of an English county town, or,
translated into American terms, a shopping mall.

¹³ A night school just off the Tottenham Court Road, run by an elderly
actor who had played butlers and gentlemen’s gentlemen in films and
television and on the stage since the 1920s.

¹⁴ He avoided mentioning that Attila was nice to his mother, or that
Vlad Drakul was punctilious about saying his prayers every day.

¹⁵ Except for the bits about syphilis.

¹⁶ A sixteenth-century half-wit, not related to any U.S. president.

¹⁷ Remarkably, one of these stories is indeed true.

¹⁸ The interview was done in 1983 and went as follows:

Q: You’re the Secretary of the United Nations, then?

A: _Si_.

Q: Ever sighted Elvis?

¹⁹ Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Threlfall, of 9, The Elms, Paignton. They always
maintained that one of the nice things about going on holiday was not
having to read the newspapers or listen to the news, just getting away
from it all really. And due to a tummy bug contracted by Mr. Threlfall,
and Mrs. Threlfall rather overdoing it in the sun their first day, this
was their first time out of their hotel room for a week and a half.

²⁰ It didn’t matter what the four had called their gang over the years,
the frequent name changes usually being prompted by whatever Adam had
happened to have read or viewed the previous day (the Adam Young Squad;
Adam and Co.; The Hole-in-the-Chalk Gang; The Really Well-Known Four;
The Legion of Really Super-Heroes; The Quarry Gang; The Secret Four; The
Justice Society of Tadfield; The Galaxatrons; The Four Just Persons; The
Rebels). Everyone else always referred to them darkly as Them, and
eventually they did too.

²¹ Greasy Johnson was a sad and oversized child. There’s one in every
school; not exactly fat, but simply huge and wearing almost the same
size clothes as his father. Paper tore under his tremendous fingers,
pens shattered in his grip. Children whom he tried to play with in
quiet, friendly games ended up getting under his huge feet, and Greasy
Johnson had become a bully almost in self-defense. After all, it was
better to be called a bully, which at least implied some sort of control
and desire, than to be called a big clumsy oaf. He was the despair of
the sports master, because if Greasy Johnson had taken the slightest
interest in sport, then the school could have been champions. But Greasy
Johnson had never found a sport that suited him. He was instead secretly
devoted to his collection of tropical fish, which won him prizes. Greasy
Johnson was the same age as Adam Young, to within a few hours, and his
parents had never told him he was adopted. See? You were _right_ about
the babies.

²² If Adam had been in full possession of his powers in those days, the
Youngs’ Christmas would have been spoiled by the discovery of a dead fat
man upside down in their central-heating duct.

²³ It may be worth noting here that most human beings can rarely raise
more than .3 of an alp (30 centi-alps). Adam believed things on a scale
ranging from 2 through to 15,640 Everests.

²⁴ And hair. And skin tone. And, if you ate enough of it long enough,
vital signs.

²⁵ But not like every other Burger Lord across the world. German Burger
Lords, for example, sold lager instead of root beer, while English
Burger Lords managed to take any American fast food virtues (the speed
with which your food was delivered, for example) and carefully remove
them; your food arrived after half an hour, at room temperature, and it
was only because of the strip of warm lettuce between them that you
could distinguish the burger from the bun. The Burger Lord pathfinder
salesmen had been shot twenty-five minutes after setting foot in France.

²⁶ Wensleydale’s alleged comic was a 94-week part-work called _Wonders
of Nature and Science_. He had every single one so far, and had asked
for a set of binders for his birthday. Brian’s weekly reading was
anything with a lot of exclamation marks in the title, like “WhiZZ!!” or
“Clang!!” So was Pepper’s, although even under the most refined of
tortures she still wouldn’t admit to the fact that she also bought _Just
Seventeen_ under plain covers. Adam didn’t read any comics at all. They
never lived up to the kind of things he could do in his head.

²⁷ Shadwell hated all Southerners and, by inference, was standing at the
North Pole.

²⁸ Note for Americans and other city-dwelling life-forms: the rural
British, having eschewed central heating as being far too complicated
and in any case weakening moral fiber, prefer a system of piling small
pieces of wood and lumps of coal, topped by large, wet logs, possibly
made of asbestos, into small, smoldering heaps, known as “There’s
nothing like a roaring open fire is there?” Since none of these
ingredients are naturally inclined to burn, underneath all this they
apply a small, rectangular, waxy white lump, which burns cheerfully
until the weight of the fire puts it out. These little white blocks are
called firelighters. No one knows why.

²⁹ NOTE FOR YOUNG PEOPLE AND AMERICANS: One shilling = Five Pee. It
helps to understand the antique finances of the Witchfinder Army if you
know the original British monetary system:

Two farthings = One Ha’penny. Two ha’pennies = One Penny. Three pennies
= A Thrupenny Bit. Two Thrupences = A Sixpence. Two Sixpences = One
Shilling, or Bob. Two Bob = A Florin. One Florin and One Sixpence = Half
a Crown. Four Half Crowns = Ten Bob Note. Two Ten Bob Notes = One Pound
(or 240 pennies). One Pound and One Shilling = One Guinea.

The British resisted decimalized currency for a long time because they
thought it was too complicated.

³⁰ During the day. In the evenings she gave Power tarot readings to
nervous executives, because old habits die hard.

³¹ Actually, less so when he took off his glasses, because then he
tripped over things and wore bandages a lot.

³² The Voice of God. But not the _voice_ of God. An entity in its own
right. Rather like a presidential spokesman.

³³ Along with the standard computer warranty agreement which said that
if the machine 1) didn’t work, 2) didn’t do what the expensive
advertisements said, 3) electrocuted the immediate neighborhood, 4) and
in fact failed entirely to be inside the expensive box when you opened
it, this was expressly, absolutely, implicitly and in no event the fault
or responsibility of the manufacturer, that the purchaser should
consider himself lucky to be allowed to give his money to the
manufacturer, and that any attempt to treat what had just been paid for
as the purchaser’s own property would result in the attentions of
serious men with menacing briefcases and very thin watches. Crowley had
been extremely impressed with the warranties offered by the computer
industry, and had in fact sent a bundle Below to the department that
drew up the Immortal Soul agreements, with a yellow memo form attached
just saying: “Learn, guys.”

³⁴ Leonardo had felt so too. “I got her bloody smile right in the
roughs,” he told Crowley, sipping cold wine in the lunchtime sun, “but
it went all over the place when I painted it. Her husband had a few
things to say about it when I delivered it, but, like I tell him, Signor
del Giocondo, apart from you, who’s going to see it? Anyway … explain
this helicopter thing again, will you?”

³⁵ He was very proud of his collection. It had taken him ages to put
together. This was _real_ Soul Music. James Brown wasn’t in it.

³⁶ Although it’s not what you and I would call _dancing_. Not good
dancing anyway. A demon moves like a white band on “Soul Train.”

³⁷ Although, unless the ineffable plan is a lot more ineffable than it’s
given credit for, it does not have a giant plastic snowman at the
bottom.

³⁸ The WA enjoyed a renaissance during the great days of Empire
expansionism. The British army’s endless skirmishes frequently brought
it up against witch doctors, bone-pointers, shamans, and other occult
adversaries. This was the cue for the deployment of the likes of WA CSM
Narker, whose striding, bellowing, six-foot-six, eighteen-stone figure,
clutching an armor-plated Book, eight-pound Bell, and specially
reinforced Candle, could clear the veldt of adversaries faster than a
Gatling gun. Cecil Rhodes wrote of him: “Some remote tribes consider him
to be a kind of god, and it is an extremely brave or foolhardy witch
doctor who will stand his ground with CSM Narker bearing down on him. I
would rather have this man on my side than two battalions of Gurkhas.”

³⁹  In any other place than Soho it is quite possible that spectators at
a fire might have been interest_ed_.

⁴⁰ There are a number of other things real Hell’s Angels can’t abide.
These include the police, soap, Ford Cortinas, and, in Big Ted’s case,
anchovies and olives.

⁴¹ Magician, or priest. Voodoun is a very interesting religion for the
whole family, even those members of it who are dead.

⁴² $12.95 per LP or cassette, $24.95 per CD, although you got a free
copy of the LP with every $500 you donated to Marvin Bagman’s mission.

⁴³ It might have surprised Marvin to know there actually was a success
rate. Some people would get better from _anything_.

⁴⁴ Except for one about ten years earlier, throwing himself on the mercy
of the court.

⁴⁵ Formerly _A Cut Above the Rest,_ formerly _Mane Attraction,_ formerly
_Curl Up And Dye,_ formerly _A Snip At the Price,_ formerly _Mister
Brian’s Art-de-Coiffeur,_ formerly _Robinson the Barber’s,_ formerly
_Fone-a-Car Taxis._

⁴⁶ This is not actually true. The road to Hell is paved with frozen
door-to-door salesmen. On weekends many of the younger demons go ice
skating down it.

⁴⁷ Not that Hell has any other kind.

⁴⁸ Not actually an oxymoron. It’s the color past ultra-violet. The
technical term for it is infra-black. It can be seen quite easily under
experimental conditions. To perform the experiment simply select a
healthy brick wall with a good runup, and, lowering your head, charge.

The color that flashes in bursts behind your eyes, behind the pain, just
before you die, is infra-black.

⁴⁹ She had. It read:

A street of light will screem, the black chariot of the Serpente will
flayme, and a Queene wille sing quickfilveres songes no moar.

Most of the family had gone along with Gelatly Device, who wrote a brief
monograph in the 1830s explaining it as a metaphor for the banishment of
Weishaupt’s Illuminati from Bavaria in 1785.

⁵⁰ This was true. There wasn’t a thermometer on earth that could have
been persuaded to register both 700°C and -140°C at the same time, which
was the correct temperature.

⁵¹ He did not have a television. Or as his wife put it, “Ronald wouldn’t
have one of those things in the house, would you Ronald?” and he always
agreed, although secretly he would have liked to have seen some of the
smut and filth and violence that the National Viewers and Listeners
Association complained of. Not because he wanted to see it, of course.
Just because he wanted to know what other people should be protected
from.

⁵² Although as a member (read, founder) of his local Neighborhood Watch
scheme he did attempt to memorize the motorbikes’ number plates.

⁵³ Five foot six.

⁵⁴ He’d slipped and fallen in a hotel shower when he took a holiday
there in 1983. Now the mere sight of a bar of yellow soap could send him
into near-fatal flashbacks.

⁵⁵ Except for Giovanni Jacopo Casanova (1725–1798), famed amourist and
litterateur, who revealed in volume 12 of his Memoirs that, as a matter
of course, he carried around with him at all times a small valise
containing “a loaf of bread, a pot of choice Seville marmalade, a knife,
fork, and small spoon for stirring, 2 fresh eggs packed with care in
unspun wool, a tomato or love-apple, a small frying pan, a small sauce
pan, a spirit burner, a chafing dish, a tin box of salted butter of the
Italian type, 2 bone china plates. Also a portion of honey comb, as a
sweetener, for my breath and for my coffee. Let my readers understand me
when I say to them all: A true gentleman should always be able to break
his fast in the manner of a gentleman, wheresoever he may find himself.”

⁵⁶ And there was the matter of Dick Turpin. It looked like the same car,
except that forever afterwards it seemed able to do 250 miles on a
gallon of petrol, ran so quietly that you practically had to put your
mouth over the exhaust pipe to see if the engine was firing, and issued
its voice-synthesized warnings in a series of exquisite and perfectly
phrased haikus, each one original and apt …

_Late frost burns the bloom_

_Would a fool not let the belt_

_Restrain the body?_

. . . it would say. And,

_The cherry blossom_

_Tumbles from the highest tree._

_One needs more petrol._

⁵⁷ Witchfinder Corporal Carpet, librarian, 11 pence per annum bonus.

⁵⁸ “A relentlefs blockbufter of a boke; heartily recommended”—Pope
Innocent VIII.

⁵⁹ To the right collector, the Witchfinder Army’s library would have
been worth millions. The right collector would have to have been very
rich, and not have minded gravy stains, cigarette burns, marginal
notations, or the late Witchfinder Lance Corporal Wotling’s passion for
drawing mustaches and spectacles on all woodcut illustrations of witches
and demons.
