About the Book

They say that the way to a man’s heart is through his stomach which just
goes to show they’re as confused about anatomy as they gen’rally are
about everything else, unless they’re talking about instructions on how
to stab him, in which case a better way is up and under the ribcage.
Anyway, we do not live in a perfect world and it is foresighted and
useful for a young woman to become proficient in those arts which will
keep a weak-willed man from straying. Learning to cook is also useful.’

Nanny Ogg, one of Discworld’s most famous witches, is passing on some of
her huge collection of tasty and above all interesting recipes, since
everyone else is doing it. But in addition to the delights of the
Strawberry Wobbler and Nobby’s Mum’s Distressed Pudding, Mrs Ogg imparts
her thoughts on life, death, etiquette (’If you go to other people’s
funerals they’ll be sure to come to yours’), courtship, children and
weddings, all in a refined style that should not offend the most
delicate of sensibilities. Well, not much.

Most of the recipes have been tried out on people who are still alive.

Nanny Ogg Gratefully Ackowledges the Assistance in this Literary Argosy
of: Mr Terry Pratchett, Mr Stephen Briggs, Mlle Tina Hannan and Master
Paul Kidby.

[image]

[image]

[image]

[image]

[image]

[image]

[image]

[image]

ALSO BY THIS AUTHOR

_The Joye of Snacks_ (banned)

_Mother Ogg’s Tales for Tiny Folk_ (withdrawn)

[image]

CONTENTS

Cover

About the Book

Memos

Also By This Author

Title Page

Preface by the Author

A Note from the Editors

Nanny Ogg’s Philosophy of Cookery

The Recipes incorporating Dwarf Cookery

Deep-Sea Blowfish

Bananana Soup Surprise

Celery Astonishment

Primal Soup

Bread and Water

Mrs Colon’s Genyooin Klatchian Curry

Sheep’s Eyes

Slumpie

Rincewind’s Potato Cakes

Lady Sybil Vimes’s Kedgeree

Fikkun Haddock

Genuine Howondaland Curry

Carrot and Oyster Pie

Mrs Whitlow’s Artery-Hardening Hogswatch Pie

Brodequin Rôti Façon Ombres

Sergeant Angua’s Vegetable Stew with Dumplings

Mrs Gogol’s Clairvoyant Gumbo

C.M.O.T. Dibbler’s Sausage Inna Bun

Nanny Ogg’s Special Nibbles with Special Party Dip, Made Specially

Leonard of Quirm’s Recipe for a Cheese Sandwich

Clooty Dumplings

Clammers Beefymite Spread

Wow-Wow Sauce

Knuckle Sandwich

Seldom Bucket’s Favourite Snack

Nobby’s Mum’s Distressed Pudding

Strawberry Wobbler

Bloody Stupid Johnson’s Individual Fruit Pie

Nanny Ogg’s Perfectly Innocent Porridge with Completely Inoffensive
Honey Mixture Which Shouldn’t Make Anyone’s Wife Laugh

Chocolate Delight with Special Secret Sauce

The Least Favourite Dessert of Verence II, King of Lancre

Nanny Ogg’s Maids of Honour

Gingerbread Men and Women

The Librarian’s Recipe for Bananas

Klatchian Delight

Englebert’s Enhancer

Lord Downey’s Mint Humbugs

Spicy Spotted Dick

Traveller’s Digestives

Jammy Devils

Dried Frog Pills

Pteppic’s Djelibeybis

Figgins

Dwarf Cookery

Dwarf Cake

Dwarf Bread

Dwarfish Drop Scones

Lancre Mint Cake

Sticky Toffee Rat Onna Stick

Quattro Rodenti

Rat Vindaloo

On Etiquette

Notes About Other Species

Rules of Precedence

Modes of Address

Etiquette at the Table

Smoking

Some Notes on Gardening

Births

Courtship

The Lancre Love Seat

Balls

The Language of Flowers

Old customs

Marriage

Death

Royal Occasions

Etiquette in the Bedroom

Afterword

Copyright

[image]

INCLUDING RECIPES, ITEMS of Antiquarian Lore, Improving Observations of
Life, Good Advice for Young People on the Threshold of the Adventure
That is Marriage, Notes on Etiquette & Many Other Helpful Observations
that will Not Offend the Most Delicate Sensibilities.

[image]

PREFACE

_by_

THE AUTHOR

NOT A DAY goes past but I’m glad I was born in Lancre. I know every inch
of the place and every one of the people an’ I look out over its
mountains, hills, woods and valleys and I think: ‘That young couple have
been in that spinney rather a long time, I shall have to have a word
with her mam.’

But a lot of the old ways I knew when I was a girl are passin’ now.
There’s six oil lamps in the kingdom to my knowledge, and up at the
castle they put in one of them privies that cleans ’emselves, so instead
of having to dig out the pit every week my lad Shawn, who does all the
jobs up there apart from kinging, now merely has to fill up the
200-gallon tank on top of the tower. That is Progress for you. Of course
it all ends up in the river so what you gains in convenience you loses
in compost.

All this means that these are changin’ times, and that’s when people go
around bewildered and full of uncertainty and they turn to me, because I
am a _grande dame_, or ‘big woman’ as we would say here, and ask me the
questions that is puzzling them, viz., if you are givin’ a dinner party,
what are the issues of etiquette involved in seatin’ the man who makes a
living putting weasels down his trousers at fairs, and who is therefore
quite respected in these parts, next to the daughter of a man who once
mugged the second son of an earl? Which is the kind of knotty problem a
society hostess has to face every day, and it takes Experience not only
to get it right but also to make sure there’s a really soft cushion on
the weasel juggler’s chair, since the poor man suffers for his Art.

They ask me things like: what is the right way to address a duke? An’
once again I have to point out that it is a matter of fine details, such
as, if there’s a gate needs holdin’ open and it looks like half a dollar
might be forthcoming, it’s ‘G’day, your graciousness,’ whereas if you’ve
just set fire to his ancestral piles and the mob is breakin’ the windows
it is more suitable to address him as ‘you bloated lying blutocat!’ It
is all a matter of _finesse_.

People are coming to me all the time to ask things like, what kind of
wedding anniversary d’you call it after ten years, or, is it lucky to
plant beans on a Thursday. Of course, it is nat’ral for people to ask
witches this sort of thing on account of us bein’ the suppositories of
tradition, but the younger girls I see around don’t seem very keen on
picking this sort of thing up, them being far too keen on candles and
lucky crystals and so on. I reckon if a crystal’s so lucky, how come
it’s ended up as a bit of rock? I don’t trust all this occult, you never
know who had it last.

Anyway, there’s a lot more writin’ around these days than there was when
I was young and I thought, I will write down some of those little hints
and tips which can smooth the lumpy bits on the pathway that is life.
I’ve gone heavy on the recipes, because so much in life revolves around
food. In fact good manners started to happen as soon as all the mammoths
were killed off and there was no piece of food big enough for everyone
to eat at the same time. A good meal is good manners.

_G. Ogg_

A NOTE

_from_

THE EDITORS

GYTHA ‘NANNY’ OGG, the author of these works, is a renowned practitioner
of that combination of practical psychology, common sense and occult
engineering known as witchcraft.

Her genius even extends to the written language, since it will be
obvious to our readers that she has an approach to grammar and spelling
that is all her very own. As far as punctuation goes she appears to have
no approach at all, but seems merely to throw it at the page from a
distance, like playing darts.

We have taken the liberty of smoothing out some of the more rumpled
sentences while leaving, we hope, some flavour of the original. And, on
that subject, we need to make a point about the weights and measures
used in the cookery recipes. We have, reluctantly, translated them into
metric terms because Nanny Ogg used throughout the very specialized unit
of measure known as the ‘some’ (as in ‘Take some flour and some sugar’).

This required some, hah, experiment, because the ‘some’ is a unit of
some, you see, complexity. Some flour is almost certainly more than some
salt, but there appears to be no such thing as half of some, although
there was the occasional mention of a ‘bit’ as in ‘a bit of pepper’.

Instinctively, one feels that a bit of flour is more than some pepper
but probably less than a bit of butter, and that a wodge of bread is
probably about a handful, but we have found no reliable way of measuring
a gnat’s.

Timing also presented a problem, because Mrs Ogg has a very vague
attitude to lengths except in humorously anatomical areas. We have not
been able to come up with a reliable length of time equivalent to a
‘while’, which is an exponential measurement – one editor considered on
empirical evidence that a ‘while’ in cookery was about 35 minutes, but
we found several usages elsewhere of ‘quite a while’ extending up to ten
years, which is a bit long for batter to stand. ‘As long as it takes to
sing “Where Has All The Custard Gone?”’ looked helpful, but we haven’t
been able to find the words, so we have had to resort to boring old
minutes.

Finally, there is the question of verisimilitude. In many of the recipes
we have had to tinker with ingredients to allow for the fact that the
Discworld equivalents are unavailable, inedible, or worse. Few authors
can make a long-term living out of poisoning their readers, at least
physically. Take the case of the various types of dwarf bread, for
example. Brick dust, in Great Britain, is not generally found even in
sausages. It’s hard on the teeth. Granite is seldom served to humans.
The biblical injunction that ‘Man must eat a peck¹ of dirt before he
dies’ did not suggest that this was supposed to happen on just one
plate. Also, most human food with the possible exception of the custard
pie has never been designed for offensive purposes.

So, we have to say, strict accuracy has been sacrificed in the interests
of having as many readers at the end of this book as we had at the
start. The aim has been to get the look and feel of the original
Discworld recipes while avoiding, as far as possible, the original
taste.

_Terry Pratchett_

_Stephen Briggs_

1 About nine litres dry measure, we’re afraid.

[image]

NANNY OGG’S

_PHILOSOPHY_

_of_

COOKERY

THEY SAY THAT the way to a man’s heart is through his stomach, which
just goes to show they’re as confused about anatomy as they gen’rally
are about everything else, unless they’re talking about instructions on
how to stab him, in which case a better way is up and under the ribcage.

Anyway, we do not live in a perfect world and it is foresighted and
useful for a young woman to become proficient at those arts which will
keep a weak-willed man from straying. Learning to cook is also useful
(just my little joke, no offence meant!).

People say that proper housewifery has died out. They say the skills
which once were taken for granted at all levels of society are being
neglected because these days all everyone thinks about is pleasure – the
theatre, reading, ball games, and, of course, making your own
entertainment, which we never had time for when I was young.

My own granny even knew how to make sparrow pie when times were hard (a
bit on the crunchy side, since you ask) but, nowadays, even if you gave
a whole pig to half the housewives in these parts there would be, when
they’d finished with it, _some bits left over_! My granny would have had
to go and lie down.

Somehow the idea crept in that housework was not _real_. Well, I
remember my mam’s kitchen, all full of things bubbling, rising,
pickling, soaking, salting and dripping. That smelled real, all right.
As she said, any fool could earn sixpence a week working for Mr
Poorchick, but it took real effort to make that stretch over nine
children. If you want to know why country men set such score by growing
fat pigs, huge pumpkins, giant marrows and parsnips you could use as
fence posts, it was because they were big enough to go round. Never mind
the vitamins and minerals, what you really wanted to get on your plate
was lots.

Now I’m hearing where people in Ankh-Morpork are talking about ‘the
correct diet’. But the people doing the talking are mostly men. I’ve got
nothing against men. Quite the contrary. But they can’t _cook_. Oh, they
can _cuisine_ like no one’s business. Put them in some huge kitchen with
dozens of chefs and skivvies to shout at and they can manage to fry an
egg and arrange it delicately on the plate with sprigs of this and that
on a bed of somethin’ vaguely sinister, but ask them to serve up meals
every day to a huge bunch of hungry kids on a budget of sixpence and
they’ll have a bit of a headache. I daresay there are men who can manage
it, but usually when I hear someone say that a husband cooks, I
generally reckon it means he’s got a recipe for something expensive and
he does it twice a year. And then leaves the pans in the sink ‘to soak’.

Now, I am an old wife, so when it comes to old wives’ tales I know what
I’m talking about. One of them is that good cookery only happens in the
houses of the rich and well-bred. This is silly. There’s more to good
food than measuring the distance between your knife and fork, carving
swans out of butter, and a salt cellar that looks like a scaled-down
model of the Battle of Pseudopolis in solid silver – it’s all in the
selection of good-quality ingredients and the fact that there should be
plenty of them. Don’t talk to me about gold plates – if you can see what
the plate is made of the portions are too small.

The time is ripe for a book with good, honest recipes for normal folk.
Mind you, it isn’t cookery books that are needed half so much as cooks
who know what they are doing and can make a meal out of anything. That’s
why Genuan and Agatean cookery is all the rage in the cities now –
_they_ started out in places where all the good grub was pinched by
other people and you had to find a way of eatin’ things you normally
wouldn’t even want to look at. No one is going to learn how to make
shark’s fin soup because they _want_ to.

But why should we turn our backs on good, honest Lancre and Sto Plains
cuisine? It’s just as good as food anywhere else on the Disc and I
should know coz I’ve been there and tried it. Even if there are better
cooking methods in foreign parts (and I don’t necessarily say that there
are) why should the good folk of Sto Helit, Scrote, Razorback and Bad
Ass put up with food that’s mostly boiled and the only herb you ever see
is sage?

The simple routines of food preparation, the smells of food cooking –
fryin’ onions, apple pie with cloves, roasting beef – are all a part of
the pleasure of eating. Of course, it’s all the better if you’re not
doing the actual work. I’ve got a lot of daughters and daughters-in-law
now, and they all live really close, and I’ve generally encouraged the
view that a good plateful should always be sent round to Nanny. No one
can say I’m not prepared to go that extra meal. And they’re all good
cooks, because I trained ’em well and I’d be sure to tell them if they
wasn’t.

One of the things that’s slowed the advancement of good cooking is that
cooks traditionally are very secretive about their recipes. They’re
handed down through families but guarded jealously against outsiders.
I’m very pleased that, with a lot of help, we’ve got recipes from all
over the Disc – from Mrs Colon, wife to Sergeant Fred Colon of the
Ankh-Morpork City Watch, from Mustrum Ridcully, Archchancellor of Unseen
University, from our own king, Verence II of Lancre. And many others.
It’s amazing what you can do with a little charm and a lot of blackmail.

It’s hard to know exactly what category these recipes fall in ’specially
since some of them barely count as food, but I’ve done my best to put
them in order as First Courses, Main Dishes, Misc. Savouries (and some
are very misc.), Pudding and Misc. Sweets. Dwarf cookery deserves a
place of its own, probably as a boat anchor.

Let’s start with the first course that could so easily become a last
course if it’s not done properly …

[image]

_Deep-Sea Blowfish_

(The Easy Version – not requiring years of training)

SERVES 2 AS A STARTER

_1 deep-sea blowfish_

_50g sea bream or other white fish, absolutely fresh, filleted_

_3–4 radishes_

_2–3 spring onions_

_a few sprigs of watercress_

_an eggcup full of light soy sauce_ to use as a dip, mixed with:

_1 teaspoon mustard or_

_2 teaspoons lemon juice or_

_1 clove garlic, crushed_

THE MOST IMPORTANT thing here is _not to use any of the blowfish
whatsoever_, since every single part of it is deadly in a very
unpleasant way. Basic’ly, they’d be able to bury you in an envelope. So,
after covering all work surfaces, dispose of the blowfish very
carefully. Better yet, get someone else, perhaps someone you don’t like
very much but who doesn’t owe you any money, to dispose of the blowfish.
An incinerator would be an ideal place, provided the smoke is blowing in
the direction of unnecessary people.

Of course, you might ask why bother to obtain a deep-sea blowfish at
all? Well, if you do not, the dish will still be very pleasant. But it
will not have that delicate _frisson_, as they call it, which lifts the
dish to gastronomic heaven. Connoisseurs claim they can tell by the
taste if a blowfish has been anywhere near the kitchen on the day of
preparation, and woe betide the chef who just couldn’t be bothered to go
out and buy one. They say the dish knows there’s been a blowfish nearby.

[image]

I heard where some wizards reckon that the blowfish business is a bit
like that idea that water _remembers what’s been in it_. That’s pretty
clever. But when you think of some of the things that people have put in
water, and then remember that water goes round and round again, maybe
it’s best to drink beer.

My feelin’ is that people know the dish is a genuine blowfish dish when
they’ve been charged $100 for it. If some food wasn’t so expensive, no
one would eat it.

Since blowfish are so very expensive, perhaps you’d just better settle
for the rest of the recipe:

Check the fish for any scales or bones and remove any you find. Place in
a colander and quickly pour boiling water over it, then immediately
plunge the fish into a bowl of cold water; the object is not to cook it
but to make sure it is clean.

Finely slice the radishes and spring onion (lengthways) and arrange into
pretty patterns on two plates, along with the watercress. Using a very
sharp knife, carefully slice the fish as thinly as possible. Serve
immediately, with the soy dip.

_Bananana Soup Surprise_

People say: ‘What’s so surprisin’ about bananana soup?’ And I say, it’s
got banananas in it. Of course, if you’ve ever read my book _The Joye of
Snacks_ you’ll spot that some of my _special_ ingredients have been left
out. People complained they made the soup a bit _too_ surprisin’.

SERVES 4

_4 large banananas, peeled_

_470ml vegetable stock_

_155ml dry sherry_

_1 heaped teaspoon ground nutmeg_

_1 heaped teaspoon brown sugar_

_2 heaped teaspoons chopped chervil_

_pinch of salt and pepper_

_1 teaspoon lemon juice_

CHOP TWO OF the banananas and put into a pan with the stock. Blend or
mash until the banananas are smooth and well, er, blended. Slowly bring
the liquid to simmering point, taking care not to let it boil, and add
the remaining ingredients. Stir gently for 2–3 minutes to ensure that
all the sugar has dissolved and leave to simmer for a further 5 minutes,
stirring frequently.

Take the remaining two banananas and chop them in half width-ways. Place
each half in a bowl, pointing upwards. Pour in some soup and serve.

Surprisin’, eh?

[image]

_Celery Astonishment_

All right, it’s not that astonishing. They wouldn’t let me add all the
interestin’ bits, especially the aubergine. They said someone’s wife
laughed. I just think mealtimes should be amusing. That’s my opinion.

SERVES 2

_1 large head of celery_

_300g cooked rice_

_1 green pepper, seeded and chopped_

_3 tomatoes, chopped_

_60g grated Parmesan cheese_

_1 teaspoon lemon juice_

_1 tablespoon chopped tarragon_

_1 egg, beaten_

_salt and pepper_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 200°C/Gas 6. Prepare the celery by carefully
removing the inner stalks, any leaves, mud, etc., to form a hollow. Mix
together all the remaining ingredients except the egg, and check
seasoning. Bind together with the egg.

Take a large piece of lightly oiled cooking foil and place it on a
baking tray. Place the celery on the foil and stuff it with the mixture.
Tie with string around the loose ends to prevent the stuffing falling
out, wrap in the foil, and bake in the oven for 1¼–2 hours until celery
is tender.

To serve, carefully unwrap and place on an oval serving platter with two
judiciously placed baked potatoes mayhap. Carve at the table.

_Primal Soup_

A popular dish at Unseen University and, it is rumoured, among the gods
themselves. It is said to be the soup from which all life evolved, and
if you leave this one long enough life will definitely evolve in it.¹

SERVES 4 AS A MAIN COURSE OR 6 AS A STARTER

_470ml fish stock_

_50g salmon, filleted and skinned_

_50g cod, filleted and skinned_

_12 mussels, shelled and cleaned_

_50g crab meat (prepared) or 4 crab sticks, roughly shredded_

_6–10 baby octopus tentacles, cleaned_

_230g tin chopped tomatoes_

_150ml dry white wine_

_2–3 cloves garlic, crushed_

_1 tablespoon roughly chopped parsley_

_1 tablespoon chopped dill_

_1 teaspoon paprika_

_2 vermicelli nests (approx. 25g each)_

_100g shrimps, shelled and cooked_

_a few drops gravy browning/green food dye (optional)_

_1 large egg, beaten_

_salt and pepper_

HEAT THE FISH stock in a large pan. Roughly chop the salmon and cod and
drop into the stock.

Simmer on a gentle heat until the fish is nearly cooked. Then remove
from the heat and stir until the fish chunks separate and break down.
Return to the heat and add the mussels, crab meat and tentacles. Bring
to a simmer. Add the tomatoes and wine and return to a low heat. Add the
herbs, garlic and seasonings, the vermicelli and shrimps, and simmer
until the pasta cooks. Add browning/food dye if required, and check
seasoning. Finally, add the egg and gently stir until cooked. Then
quickly bring the mixture to the boil for a few seconds and serve.

1 Technically (see _The Science of Discworld_), primal soup should be a
vivid turquoise. But no one who is anyone was there, so why worry?

_Bread and Water_

(Kindly donated by Lord Vetinari, Patrician of Ankh-Morpork)

_3 whole, freshly baked loaves_

_1 flagon freshly drawn water_

HOWEVER EFFICIENT A ruler may be, there is always someone, isn’t there,
who feels that his diet might be improved by some artificial additive,
such as arsenic. Many rulers have sought ways to avoid this. This is one
classical method:

Have sufficient dough made to make three loaves of bread. Bake the
resulting loaves in an oven. Both these operations should be supervised
by at least two reliable employees.

Select one of the three loaves (the other two must be eaten by the
baker). Slice it. Select slices at random and have these tested in your
presence by members of the Palace staff (or members of your family if
you are not fortunate enough to live in a palace). From the remaining
slices select one; place this on a plate selected at random from the
kitchens. Have the remaining plates licked by the kitchen staff; pause
to observe any negative reactions to this operation, or to the earlier
slice-testing.

In the meantime, have a bucket of water drawn from the well. Have this
boiled, poured into a flagon and cooled. From this flagon pour four
glasses of water. Select three at random and have them drunk by
different members of the Palace staff from those who are testing the
bread/plates.

You might now believe that you have a glass of water and some slices of
bread that are free of poison, in which case you have failed to grasp
the situation. There are such things as antidotes, which even a trainee
poisoner will have taken as a precautionary measure. And then of course
there was the case of Lord Samphire: the bread passed the test, and so
did the water. The problem came to light only if you ate the bread and
_then_ drank the water.

Here is my preferred method, which has stood me in good stead.

1.  Arrange the politics of the country over a period of years so that
    poisoning you will be more trouble than it is worth and interfere
    with the private ambitions of too many people just at the moment.
2.  Make sure that there are among the city’s civil service some
    unpredictable men who will consider your poisoning a personal insult
    against them, and generally cause a lot of fuss.
3.  Then eat what you please.

[image]

_Mrs Colon’s Genyooin Klatchian Curry_

_A note from the editors:_ Few recipes in these pages have caused so
much debate as this one. Anyone over the age of forty knows how the
classic recipe goes, because it has been invented and reinvented
thousands of times by ladies who have heard about foreign parts but have
no wish to bite into them.

Its mere existence is a telling argument for a liberal immigration
policy.

Like real curry, it includes any ingredients that are to hand. The
resemblance stops there, however. It _must_ use bright green peas, lumps
of swede and, for the connoisseur of gastronomic history, watery slivers
of turnip. For wateriness is the _key_ to this curry; its ‘sauce’ should
be very thin and of an unpleasant if familiar colour. And it must use a
very small amount of ‘curry powder’, a substance totally unknown in
those areas where curry grows naturally, as it were; sometimes it’s
enough just to take the unopened tin out of the pantry and wave it
vaguely over the pan. Oh, and remember that the sultanas must be yellow
and swollen. And soggy. And sort of gritty, too (ah, you remember …)

_Last-minute warning:_ This recipe has been changed slightly in order to
make it quite nice really. Well, better than the real thing, anyway. A
lot better, come to think of it. Foreigner-free curry is probably the
nearest most humans get to the philosophy behind dwarf bread; the mere
_thought_ of it makes you prepared to eat almost anything else.

SERVES 4

_2 tablespoons sunflower oil_

_1 large onion, roughly chopped_

_2 cloves garlic, chopped_

_225g peas (frozen will be fine)_

_1 red pepper, seeded and chopped_

_1 green pepper, seeded and chopped_

_1 teaspoon curry powder (optional, for old time’s sake)_

_½ teaspoon ground turmeric_

_175ml coconut milk_

_350g swede, chopped and boiled until just tender_

_225g broccoli florets_

_50g raisins or sultanas_

_1 teaspoon each of ground ginger, cumin and coriander_

_250ml vegetable stock_

_tomato purée to thicken, if needed_

_2 teaspoons brown mustard seeds_

_salt and black pepper_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 180°C/Gas 4. Heat the oil in a large frying pan. Add
the onion, garlic, broccoli, peppers and cook until the onion starts to
soften. Then add the part-cooked swede, the peas and raisins and cook
gently for a further 5 minutes. Add the spices (but not the mustard
seeds), the coconut milk and about half the vegetable stock. Cook for a
further 10 minutes or so, adding extra stock if the mixture needs it. If
it seems too runny, add a little tomato purée to thicken.

Transfer the mixture to a casserole dish, season, sprinkle with the
mustard seeds, cover and cook in the oven for about 45 minutes. Serve
with rice or nan bread. Run away.

[image]

Sergeant Fred Colon of Ankh-Morpork City Watch is a man known to be
against ‘anything foreign’ in all walks of life. This curry, devised by
his wife, is one of a range of special ‘morporkified’ Colon dishes that
include the Fish ’n’ Chip Pizza, Fried Sushi and smorgasbord with the
tops on.

_Sheep’s Eyes_

Everyone knows they eat sheep’s eyes in Klatch, but no one reports
actually seeing them doin’ it.¹ I call this suspicious. Oh, _yes_, they
offer them to _guests_. I bet if I lived in a desert I’d do anything for
a laugh, too. This recipe is, er, restored. That is, it’s a complete
fake. But it’s a lot more edible.

[image]

_eyeball-sized pickled onions (as many as you wish to make)_

_stuffed green olives_

_tube of cream cheese_

CAREFULLY REMOVE THE inside of each onion, taking care to leave the
outer skins intact except for a hole at either end. (_Note:_ one of the
holes must be big enough to have an olive pushed through it.) Half fill
the skin with cream cheese and then insert an olive, making sure that
the stuffing is visible … some of the cheese should squirt out of the
other end, making a ‘tail’. If it doesn’t, squirt in more until it does!

[image]

1 See _Jingo_ for the correct etiquette when offered sheep’s eyes.

_Slumpie_

Your classic Sto Plains Slumpie, one of Ankh-Morpork’s most famous
dishes, is one of your stick-to-the-ribs meals, ’cos there’s times when
it’s too cold for any of that fancy vitamin stuff. Technic’ly, Slumpie
should have vast amounts of mashed-up elderly potatoes and swedes, with
a big knob of butter to help ’em, but Slumpie is a bit like _chop suey_,
which is Agatean for ‘all the labels have fallen off the tins’, and you
can make it out of more or less anything so long as you call it Slumpie.
This one has got some actual flavour, and is designed as a main dish
rather than as something to stop the meat falling off the plate.

SERVES 3–4

_500g minced beef_

_1 tablespoon vegetable oil_

_3 cloves garlic, chopped_

_100g fresh mushrooms, sliced_

_470ml beef stock_

_470ml dark ale_

_375g frozen leaf spinach_

_1 tablespoon tomato purée_

_1 heaped teaspoon rubbed sage_

_1 heaped teaspoon English mustard_

_salt and pepper_

_60g butter and 60g flour, mixed to_

_a smooth paste (optional; use, if required, to thicken the sauce)_

BROWN THE MINCE in the oil with the garlic. Add the mushrooms, stock and
ale and bring to the boil. Add the spinach and the rest of the
ingredients and bring back to the boil. Simmer for about half an hour or
until the liquid has reduced by about a quarter.

Serve with clooty dumplings (see here), or with mash.

_Rincewind’s Potato Cakes_

_Note from the editors:_ We confess to some difficulty in getting a
recipe out of Rincewind, one of Unseen University’s best-known wizards.
It involved a considerable amount of travel, much of it at high speed,
since Rincewind’s major talent is to run away from anything that is
frightening and this, when you come to think of it, is a pretty good
definition of the universe. The original suggestion, shouted over his
shoulder, was ‘Potatoes! Lots of potatoes! In their jackets! In great
big baths of butter!’

This seemed to us to be too close to the Librarian’s recipe (see here),
although it uses a vegetable rather than a fruit (except that the potato
is technically a nut). However, we understand that Rincewind has been so
long away from the one thing that makes life worthwhile (potatoes) that
he will eat _anything_ if it has a potato in it.

[image]

MAKES 6–8

_1 onion, chopped_

_350g potatoes, cooked and mashed_

_1 teaspoon sage_

_1 or 2 eggs, beaten_

_100g white breadcrumbs, dried_

_sunflower oil_

Fry the onion in a little oil until softened. Stir into the mashed
potato with the sage and allow the mixture to cool. Then form the
mixture into patties, about the size and shape of small, thick
beef-burgers. Brush the patties with the beaten egg and then turn them
in a bowl containing the breadcrumbs. Heat some more oil in a frying pan
and fry the potato cakes until they are golden brown.

They are quite delicious and can be eaten on the run.

_Lady Sybil Vimes’s Kedgeree_

I have to tell you that this should have been a recipe from Commander
Vimes of Ankh-Morpork City Watch. He is a man who thinks that if it
isn’t fried it isn’t really food, and the recipe would have been Pork
Scratchings Cookies, which are a real treat for anyone whose favourite
food group is Burnt Crunchy Bits.

However, Lady Sybil feels that since he’s a Duke and a Sir and a couple
of other things as well her husband should have more nobby¹ tastes, and
there’s nothing more nobby than those breakfasts where you have to lift
three silver lids before you even find something you recognize. Even
though he feels a bit of a class traitor, Commander Vimes agrees that
there’s nothing like a bit of early-morning haddock to build an empire.

I always say that if you’ve got a good breakfast inside you you can face
anything the day has in store.

SERVES 4

_150g long-grain rice_

_125ml milk_

_125ml water_

_450g smoked haddock_

_50g butter_

_1 tablespoon mild curry powder_

_2 hardboiled eggs, chopped_

_salt and pepper_

ADD THE RICE to a saucepan of boiling salted water and cook until _al
dente_ (posh for one step away from being mushy) – about 15–20 minutes.
Drain and rinse it, and leave in the strainer.

In a frying pan heat the milk and water to simmering point, add the fish
and poach gently for about 5 minutes. Lift out the fish and carefully
remove the skin and bones; break up the flesh into medium-sized pieces.
Discard the cooking liquid.

Melt half the butter in the frying pan, blend in the curry powder, add
the flaked fish and warm the mixture through. Remove from the heat and
stir in the chopped eggs. Season with salt and pepper.

In a separate pan melt the remaining butter, add the rice and stir well
to coat the grains. Season, then add this mixture to the fish and eggs.
Mix well.

Serve on a warmed dish. Then go out and conquer a continent.

1 Which is not the same as the same tastes as Nobby Nobbs, and
_certainly_ not the same as the taste of Nobby. Sometimes even my mind
can boggle a bit.

_Fikkun Haddock_

As my dad used to say, if you’re goin’ to have a haddock you don’t want
a fin’un. By the time they got all the way up to Lancre, in the
mountains, the fish were high in more ways than one and a good cook
would try all sorts of ideas to disguise the flavour, such as serving it
in delicate sauces, often involving creosote, or, in the worst cases,
wrapping it in lead foil and throwing it over a cliff. This one is for
fish who aren’t so far gone!

SERVES 3–4

_30g butter_

_a dash of olive oil_

_1 medium onion, sliced_

_375g smoked haddock fillets (skins removed)_

_300ml fish stock_

_300ml dry cider_

_2–3 sprigs of tarragon, chopped_

_2–3 sprigs of chervil, chopped_

_1 tablespoon wholegrain mustard_

_salt and pepper_

MELT THE BUTTER in a large pan with the olive oil, add the onion and
sauté for around 5 minutes until softened, taking care not to burn it.
Add the fish and cook for a couple of minutes on each side, then pour in
the cider and enough of the stock to cover the fish. Add the remaining
ingredients and stir gently. Bring to the boil, cover the pan and leave
to simmer for a further 5 minutes. When the fillets start to break up,
season to taste. No creosote need be used.

_Genuine Howondaland Curry_

(Taken from the writings of Ponce da Quirm)

Ponce da Quirm spent his whole life exploring foreign parts, I heard,
and maybe it was because people laughed at his name.¹ Apparently he was
looking for the Fountain of Youth and the odd thing about this sort of
business is that it’s never, ever close to. You’d think, on average,
that _some_ of these lost fountains of youth, trees of life and cities
of gold would be really close, but they never are. And you never get
people from a long way off coming to _our_ part of the world lookin’
for, as it might be, the Cottage of Doom or the Lost Chicken Shed.

Ponce brought back fourteen different kinds of plant and seven
interestin’ sorts of animal to this part of the world, but he insisted
very firmly that none of them were named after him. That’s how everyone
remembers him.

This curry was one he made up durin’ a period when he was shipwrecked on
an island that had nothing but great big fat chickeny-birds that
couldn’t even fly. He did leave one, though, so’s not to upset the
balance of nature. Sometimes I reckon it would be better if there was a
Fountain of Growing Up.

SERVES 4

_4 chicken breasts, skinned and cut into cubes_

_small pot natural yoghurt_

_1cm piece of ginger root, grated_

_6–8 garlic cloves, crushed_

_2 tablespoons olive oil_

_1 400ml tin of coconut milk_

_water_

_1 large onion, chopped_

_4 fresh green chilli peppers, seeded and finely chopped_

_½ tablespoon ground cumin_

_½ tablespoon ground coriander_

_1 teaspoon turmeric_

_salt to taste_

_fresh coriander leaves, chopped_

_Note:_ You could use a tin of tomatoes instead of the coconut milk, or
liquidized cashew nuts.

MIX THE CHICKEN cubes in a bowl with the yoghurt, half the grated ginger
and half the crushed garlic. Leave for at least half an hour, or,
better, overnight.

Heat the oil in a large pan, and cook the chopped onion for about 10
minutes, stirring occasionally, until it is a definite brown. Some bits
might be even dark brown – this changes the taste and makes the curry
sweeter.

Stir in half the chillies, the remaining ginger and garlic, and the
powdered spices. You should have a paste. Tip in the coconut milk and
cook for about 8–10 minutes, or until the mixture starts to get really
dry and the oil starts to come out (this shouldn’t happen unless the
heat is too high).

When it all looks thoroughly cooked and a nice thick sauce consistency,
add the chicken and yoghurt mix, and a splash of water (about half a
mug) and some salt. You could add a bit of lemon juice and a pinch of
sugar if you want. Turn the heat down if it’s higher than mediumish, and
let it simmer away slowly for 15–30 minutes.

Just before the end (5 minutes) add chopped green chillies to taste. You
can put chopped fresh coriander leaves on the top, if you like, for that
authentic Howondaland restaurant look.

Eat with nan. In fact, invite all your relatives.

1 See _Eric_.

_Carrot and Oyster Pie_

Carrots so’s you can see in the dark and oysters so’s you’ve got
something to look at, as I always say. I used to make this for the first
Mr Ogg, and he never complained. Mind you, he never complained about
anything very much.

Oysters are said to make you frisky. However, take a look at an oyster
in a tank. Go back and look at it again a few hours later. Do you notice
any changes? No. That’s how full of beans oysters are. I’m told that the
process of makin’ oysters happens a long way from the oyster, and I
can’t see that catching on with humans.

_Note:_ You could use fresh oysters (about 12) but, well, tinned are so
much easier, and are available whenever there’s a vowel in the month.

SERVES 2

_85g tinned smoked oysters in oil_

_125g grated carrot_

_1 teaspoon chopped chervil_

_1 teaspoon chopped dill_

_155ml Chablis (or other dry white wine)_

_300ml fish stock_

_30g Stilton cheese_

_250g puff pastry_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 200°C/Gas 6. Mix the oysters and the carrot with the
herbs in a small pie dish. Pour in the wine and enough of the stock to
cover the ingredients. Crumble the Stilton over the mixture.

Roll out the pastry to about 1cm thickness and carefully cover the dish
with it. Trim any excess pastry, make a small hole in the top to let the
steam escape and bake in the top part of the oven for 25–30 minutes or
until the pastry is well risen and golden brown.

_Mrs Whitlow’s Artery-Hardening Hogswatch Pie_

This is the pie favoured by Mrs Whitlow, housekeeper at Unseen
University, as a handy snack for wizards around the dark time of year.
It may seem difficult to feed a lot of hungry wizards, but experience
has taught her, she says, to put something large in front of them. It
often doesn’t matter much what it is.

However, it is a matter of pride to her that it should be something
worthwhile. It is sometimes as long as two hours between meals at UU,
and a senior wizard will definitely feel rather peckish. This is a good
filler.

SERVES 8

FOR THE PASTRY

_450g plain flour_

_1 teaspoon salt_

_100g lard_

_150ml water_

_4 tablespoons milk_

FOR THE FILLING

_225g lean pork, minced_

_225g cooked ham, finely chopped_

_1 small onion, finely chopped_

_½ teaspoon ground allspice_

_½ teaspoon ground nutmeg_

_1 teaspoon dried rubbed sage_

_350g cooked pork cocktail sausages_

_beaten egg, to glaze_

_2 teaspoons powdered gelatine_

_150ml hot ham stock_

_150ml port_

_salt and pepper_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 200°C/Gas 6. Grease a raised pie mould, 18–20cm
round, or a 1kg loaf tin.

To make the pastry, sift the flour and salt into a mixing bowl. Put the
lard, water and milk in a saucepan, stir over a medium heat until the
lard is melted and then bring to the boil. Pour on to the flour and work
into a pliable dough. Knead lightly. Roll out three-quarters of the
pastry and use to line the greased pie mould or tin.

To make the filling, combine the pork, ham, onion, spices and sage in a
bowl and season well with salt and pepper. Put half of this mixture in
the base of the pie, cover with the whole cocktail sausages and then
with the remaining minced pork mixture.

Roll out the remaining pastry for a lid (saving a little for
decoration), and cut a small hole in the top. Dampen the pie’s pastry
edges, cover with the lid and press well together. Roll out the last
bits of pastry and make sausage or pig shapes; arrange these on the top,
finally brushing the whole with beaten egg. Bake in the oven for 30
minutes. Reduce the temperature and bake for a further 1¼–1½ hours,
covering the pie with greaseproof paper when it is sufficiently browned.

Dissolve the gelatine in the stock, season well and add the port. As the
pie cools, pour the stock into the pie through a funnel inserted in the
hole, tilting the pie to ensure that the stock is evenly distributed
inside the pie.

Cool, then chill overnight until firm, before removing from the tin.
Serve cut into slices.

_Brodequin Rôti Façon Ombres_

A bit of an odd one, this. It’s foreign for ‘Man’s boots in mud’. They
say that a posh restaurant in Ankh-Morpork ended up one day with nothing
in its larder but mud and old boots and a restaurant full of people.¹
Now, some people might call this a tragedy, or at least a bit of a
problem, but since the art of cuisine is to make something out of
nothing and charge a lot of money for doing it, the chefs got cracking
and produced such a range of delicacies that now old boots fetch quite a
high price in the city and rare, sun-dried muds are imported from
foreign parts.

This recipe has been adjusted to give the look but, I hope, not the
taste.

SERVES 3–4

_350g topside of beef, thinly sliced_

_3–4 tablespoons dark soy sauce_

_500g mushrooms, very finely chopped_

_300ml dark ale or stout_

_2 cloves garlic, crushed_

_2–3 teaspoons chopped dill_

_470ml beef stock_

_salt and pepper_

MARINATE THE BEEF in the soy sauce for 2–3 hours. Preheat the oven to
190°C/Gas 5–6. Put the beef in a casserole dish with the mushrooms and
add the ale. Add the garlic and dill and enough stock to cover. Season
to taste. Cover and cook in the oven for 1½ hours. Remove the lid and
cook for a further 20–30 minutes to allow the ‘mud’ to reduce a little.

_Note:_ The classic accompaniment, according to the Ankh-Morpork beggar,
man about town and street gastrognome Arnold Sideways, is a rusty tin
half filled with paint thinner. I would suggest something else.
Practically anything else, really.

1 See _Hogfather_.

_Sergeant Angua’s Vegetable Stew with Dumplings_

It’s obviously very difficult for a werewolf livin’ in a big city where
you can’t get what you’re used to at home, such as people. In fact
Sergeant Angua of the City Watch assures me she’s never ate very much of
anyone, and none of us can help the way we was brought up in any case.
Of course, it’s even harder if you’re a _vegetarian_ werewolf, because
while that’s okay by the human side there’s no way you are going to
persuade the wolf side to hunt down lentils. Cleaning your teeth in the
morning can’t be much fun when you’ve turned back into a human again,
either.

A vegetarian werewolf is always looking for something different, and
this is worth stayin’ human for:

SERVES 4

_1 tablespoon olive oil_

_450g leeks, sliced_

_1 green pepper, seeded and chopped_

_2 carrots, diced_

_3 cloves garlic, chopped_

_300g mushrooms, sliced_

_300ml vegetable stock_

_1 400g can chopped tomatoes_

_1 tablespoon paprika_

_1 400g can mixed beans_

_1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar_

_salt and pepper_

FOR THE DUMPLINGS

_125g self-raising flour_

_⅔ tablespoon mixed herbs_

_50g vegetable suet_

_4–5 tablespoons water_

_salt and pepper_

HEAT THE OIL in a large frying pan and cook the leeks, green pepper,
carrot and garlic for a few minutes. Add the mushrooms and cook for
another few minutes. Add the vegetable stock, the tomatoes and the
paprika. Bring to the boil and then simmer for 15–20 minutes.

Meanwhile, make the dumplings: mix together all the ingredients and then
divide the mixture into a dozen pieces, shaping each into a ball.

Add the beans and the balsamic vinegar to the stew, and season. Place
the dumplings on the surface, cover and simmer for 20–25 minutes. Good
at any phase of the moon.

_Mrs Gogol’s Clairvoyant Gumbo_

Gumbo is one of those dishes, like stew, where it’s ridiculous to have a
recipe. You just make it. And you can prob’ly make gumbo of a sort by
simply dredging a swamp and boilin’ up everything that tries to climb
out of the net. But it won’t be anything like Mrs Gogol’s gumbo. Mrs
Gogol¹ is a witch over in the swamps around Genua, where the magic’s
more into stickin’ pins in people and turnin’ people into zombies, and
there’s prob’ly some magic in the cookery, too.

Mrs Gogol says she can see the future in her gumbo. You need the knack.
But the future you’ll see in this one contains a good dinner at least.

SERVES 6

_3 tablespoons olive oil_

_3 heaped tablespoons flour (for the roux)_

_2 large (or 3 small) celery stalks, trimmed and finely chopped_

_1 small green pepper, seeded and chopped_

_1 tablespoon dried basil_

_1 tablespoon dried oregano_

_1 tablespoon dried parsley_

_salt_

_8–10 drops hot pepper sauce_

_½ tablespoon Worcestershire sauce_

_1 small red onion, chopped_

_2–3 heaped tablespoons Genuan spice mix (see here)_

_470ml fish stock (or chicken, or veg)_

_400g tin chopped tomatoes_

_10–12 pieces okra, chopped_

_100ml bourbon (or whisky will do)_

_meat from 1 large prepared crab (or 4 small whole ones)_

_600g ready-peeled prawns (or 650g in shells)_

HEAT THE OIL in a saucepan and stir in the flour. Cook for about 5
minutes (medium heat), stirring, until it turns golden brown. Add the
celery, pepper and onion and fry until softened. Add the Genuan spice
mix and stir for another minute. Pour in the stock, stir well to ensure
there are no lumps and then add the remaining ingredients except the
crab and prawns. Leave to simmer, stirring occasionally, for 20 minutes.
Add the crab meat and prawns, turn the heat up and bring to boiling
point, then turn back down to medium and cook for a further 8–10 minutes
(10–15 minutes if using crabs/prawns in shells).

Serve with rice.

_Note:_ The Genuan spice mix and hot pepper sauce will make a hot gumbo.
Use less if you’re not used to spicy food.

1 See _Witches Abroad_.

_C.M.O.T. Dibbler’s Sausage Inna Bun_

No visit to Ankh-Morpork is complete without a taste of one of Mr
Cut-Me-Own-Throat Dibbler’s famous pies or sausages-in-a-bun. Then it is
sometimes completed very, very quickly. The amazin’ thing is, though,
that people will go back and try them again. I suppose it’s because they
want to check that their memory isn’t playin’ tricks on them. Mr Dibbler
has kindly contributed this recipe.

MAKES ABOUT 30 SAUSAGES

_1.4kg top-quality pork, minced¹_

_450g breadcrumbs_

_1 teaspoon black pepper_

_3 tablespoons chopped fresh sage_

_½ teaspoon ground nutmeg_

_water_

_sausage skins_

_buns of your choice_

MIX ALL THE sausage ingredients in a bowl. Add enough water to achieve a
nice, squidgy texture and fill the sausage skins with the result. Twist
into links.

Grill or fry and serve hot in freshly baked buns.

1 _Note from Mr Dibbler:_ I always use good-quality pork, with about
two-thirds lean meat to one-third fat. I insist that any skin, gristle
or other dubious parts of the beast are excluded from the mixture.²

2 This is what he says, and I for one believe it. It is not good
etiquette to look at one of his sausages and say ‘woof woof!’ or
‘neighhh!’

_Nanny Ogg’s Special Nibbles with Special Party Dip, Made Specially_

They don’t have parties like they had when I was young … you know, with
jelly and ice cream and you were sick with excitement before you got
home.

I’ve been told I shouldn’t put too many suggestive recipes in this book,
although to my mind things are only suggestive if you’re open to
suggestions (for example, my friend Esmerelda Weatherwax thought the
maypole was just a nice country custom until someone explained symbolism
to her, and I just _don’t_ want to be there if anyone tells her about
broomsticks). Anyway, tomatoes is considered aphrodisiacal, and my
grandson Shane who is a sailor and has seen a thing or two says so is a
bananana. Surprisin’ly enough, it gives a nice flavour to the dip.

FOR THE DIP

_1 small onion_

_1 firm, just-ripe bananana_

_1 small cucumber (or half a large one)_

_1 400g can love apples (chopped tomatoes)_

_1 tablespoon chopped fresh coriander_

_2 teaspoons chopped fresh chilli or chilli powder_

_3 cloves garlic, crushed_

_salt and lemon juice, to taste_

FOR THE NIBBLES

_3 pitta breads_

_1 tablespoon Genuan spice mix (see opposite)_

_olive oil_

TO MAKE THE dip: finely chop the onion, bananana and cucumber and mix
with the remaining ingredients. Chill for at least an hour.

To make the nibbles: preheat the oven to 180°C/Gas 4. Mix the spice mix
with enough oil to make a runny paste. Slit the pitta breads in half
lengthways to form two thin pieces and cut (scissors are best) into a
variety of interesting and appealing shapes. Place on a baking tray (do
not overlap them) and brush lightly with the oil/spice mix. Bake for
8–10 minutes, or until golden brown and crispy.

_Genuan Spice Mix_

_1 tablespoon hot paprika_

_1 tablespoon onion powder_

_1 tablespoon garlic powder_

_1 teaspoon chilli powder_

_½ tablespoon salt_

_2 teaspoons dried mixed herbs_

Mix all the ingredients together and store in an airtight container. The
adventurous can also try this mix on banged grains.

[image]

_Leonard of Quirm’s Recipe for a Cheese Sandwich_

(Contributed by that remarkable if somewhat absent-minded genius)

DECIDE THAT SHAPE of common loaf is not suitable for the purpose. Design
new baking tin. Devise a new method of soldering tin. Design more
efficient oven.

Doodle in margins a war engine for overcoming all obstacles and firing
gouts of unquenchable fire on to enemy soldiers.

Design a new type of harrow. Convert war engine into a device for
hauling ploughs and other agricultural implements over any kind of
terrain no matter how rough. Since its traction is its key feature,
decide to call it a Machine for Pulling Heavy Loads.

Convert old design for an improved fighting machine into a better flail.
In the margin draw a small picture of a hand.

Design breadknife. Design machine for making breadknives. Design an
improved wheel bearing, using small balls of, e.g., steel. Design shot
tower for making steel balls of any size. Devise a small hand-cranked
machine by which bread of any size and thickness can be smoothly
buttered to any depth.

Consider designs of milk churns, and improve them. Hear that temperature
regulation in dairies is vitally important in the manufacture of good
cheese; design a device for regulating temperature by means of expanding
metal strips, coupled to pulleys. Call it the Device for Regulating
Temperature by Means of Metal Strips (Coupled to Pulleys).

Design instrument for waging war over a great distance by focusing the
rays of the sun, and then adapt this to the oven design. Adapt
inexplicably non-working machine for flying and turn into a novel device
for churning butter by means of a wind-mill. With a small adapter this
can, in times of war, easily become a device for hurling balls of
burning butter for up to half a mile.

Design a device by which the moon can be reached, powered by eggs.

Send out for pizza.

[image]

_Clooty Dumplings_

I’ve always been famous for my dumplings. Ask anyone. But the days of
the giant, family-sized dumpling boiled up in a ‘clooty’ or ‘motheaten
old vest’ seem to have passed. People just don’t seem to have time to
spend in sitting very still to digest their food any more, they want to
be up and walking around within a few hours of lunch. So these belong to
a different age, and recreating them is like bringing a dinosaur back to
life. But they’re much better than you might think; making a good
dumpling is a mark of a skilled cook. You’ll find that out if ever you
have to eat one made by a bad cook.

These have been adjusted a little to take account of the modern taste
for finicky food. Serve with Slumpie (see here).

MAKES 4 LARGE ONES

_100g wholemeal flour_

_50g chopped suet_

_1 heaped teaspoon wholegrain mustard_

_salt and pepper_

_3–4 tablespoons water_

_large pan of stock (vegetable, beef, chicken – whatever suits your
guests)_

MIX THE FLOUR and suet, making sure there are no lumps. Add the mustard
and a little salt and pepper and mix well. Add just enough water to make
a stiff paste. Break into four equal pieces and roll into balls.

Bring the stock to the boil. Carefully drop in the dumplings and simmer
for 10–15 minutes. They should slide off a knife pushed through their
centres when done. If the knife bends, you have done something wrong.

_Clammers Beefymite Spread_

My grandson Shane came across Clammers Beefymite Spread in a shop in
Ankh-Morpork and got a bit partial to it. I wrote to that Mr Clammer,
y’know, as one cook to another, offering to swap the recipe for my
special version of Strawberry Wobbler for his beefymite, but he wasn’t
having none of it. So I’ve had to produce my own, which Shane likes just
as much and it’s a) a lot cheaper than havin’ it shipped all the way
from Ankh-Morpork, b) nothing like the real thing, c) completely
different and d) tasty.

_340g corned beef_

_2 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce_

_3 tablespoons mushroom ketchup_

_¼ – ½ level teaspoon cayenne pepper_

_4–5 drops gravy browning (optional)_

MIX THE INGREDIENTS to a smooth paste in a blender – or use a potato
masher or fork. Transfer to clean jamjars or other sealable containers.
Best eaten within 3–4 days. Store in the fridge.

[image]

_Wow-Wow Sauce_

_A NOTE FROM the editors:_ We offer no apologies for including this; it
has proved very popular.

The recipe for Wow-Wow Sauce is a hereditary possession of the Ridcully
family. Archchancellor Ridcully, like most wizards, is a man who goes
for sauces; if you are the kind of person who takes a beefy patty
between two halves of a bun and then covers it with cheese, and a
pickle, and some green relish, and some red relish, and a different sort
of pickle, and then some dark mustard, not forgetting of course some
light mustard, and then some bits of green and other things until the
meat slides out unnoticed and falls onto the floor, then you are of a
magical inclination. A wizard will lick the top of a sauce bottle if he
thinks no one is watching.

This is of course not genuine Wow-Wow Sauce, which can be made only
under carefully controlled conditions and is at its best when on the
point of explosively disintegrating. Even shaking the bottle is inviting
catastrophe, and only a fool would risk smoking an after-dinner cigar if
Wow-Wow Sauce had been on the table. When a bottle of five-year-old
sauce was found in the pantry at UU, the entire wing was evacuated for
two days until it could be disposed of in a controlled dinner.

_butter, a lump about the size of an egg_

_1 tablespoon plain flour_

_300ml beef stock_

_1 teaspoon English mustard_

_1 dessertspoon white wine vinegar_

_1 tablespoon port_

_1 tablespoon mushroom concentrate¹_

_salt and black pepper_

_1 heaped tablespoon freeze-dried parsley_

_4 pickled walnuts, chopped_

[image]

MELT THE BUTTER in a saucepan. Stir in the flour and work in the beef
stock. Stir continuously on a moderate heat until you have a smooth,
thick sauce. Add the mustard, the wine vinegar, the port and the
mushroom concentrate, season with salt and pepper, and continue to cook
the mixture for about 10 minutes. Stir in the parsley and the walnuts,
warm through and serve.

This sauce, when added to roast beef, will make the steer glad it went
to all that trouble.

_Mushroom Concentrate_

_6 large button mushrooms_

_salt_

Put the mushrooms in a bowl and sprinkle with salt. Set aside for about
3 hours and then mash them. Cover the bowl and leave overnight. Next
day, drain off the liquid into a saucepan (energetically straining the
mushroom pulp through a sieve will extract more of the liquid). Boil,
stirring all the while, until the volume is reduced by about half. This
should produce about a tablespoon of the concentrate for your sauce.

1 You will need to make the mushroom concentrate the day before (see
here). If you don’t have time, Worcestershire sauce can be used as a
substitute for the concentrate and port, but some of the delicacy of the
flavour might be lost.

_Knuckle Sandwich_

It’s amazin’ what people will eat. No one who was hungry would want to
eat a plate of winkles – you could die before you worked out how to
twiddle the pin properly. And when you think of all the good bits there
are to eat on a pig, the feet wouldn’t probably be in the first ten. But
when Ankh-Morpork people are far from home, there are things – like
falling into an open sewer, or being eaten by cockroaches – that make
them think of home. A proper knuckle sandwich is one of them, too. It’s
poor man’s food, ’cos the rich man has eaten the rest of the pig. And
the motto is: always wangle a dinner invitation from the rich man.

MAKES 2 SANDWICHES

_2 pig’s trotters_

_1 bouquet garni_

_1 tablespoon mustard seeds_

_butter or olive oil (or garlic butter/garlic olive oil)_

_pain rustique¹ or other crusty rolls_

_fresh cress or thinly sliced cucumber_

PLACE THE TROTTERS in a pan with the bouquet garni and the mustard
seeds. Cover with water and bring to the boil. Simmer until the meat is
tender (35–45 minutes, depending on size). Remove from the pan and shake
off any excess water.

To make the sandwiches, remove the meat from the bone, brush lightly
with the butter or oil and grill until golden brown and crispy. Arrange
neatly in a split pain rustique with a little fresh cress or wafer-thin
sliced cucumber.

1 Er … just bread. It means ‘painfully rustic’, or stone-ground flour
with the rocks left in.

_Seldom Bucket’s Favourite Snack_

Mr Seldom Bucket, one of Ankh-Morpork’s leading businessmen and a power
to be reckoned with in the dairy products industry,¹ reckons that there
is nothing that cannot be improved by a bit of cheese, and he made sure
that his wife, who I can’t help feelin’ a bit sorry for, sent me a big
pile of fun-with-cheese recipes. I have to agree that cheese trifle and
cheese toffee are very novel indeed, but I reckon we’d all be happy with
cheese on toast. It’s one of those dishes you can’t beat, when it comes
to things made out of cheese and toast.

SERVES 2

_4 slices wholemeal bread_

_2 slices boiled ham (or 2 large sausages, cooked and sliced in half
lengthways)_

_2 slices farmhouse Cheddar cheese_

_butter for spreading and frying_

_wholegrain mustard (optional)_

THE SAUCE

_2 eggs, beaten_

_40g Emmental cheese, grated_

_knob of butter, softened_

_salt and pepper_

MAKE TWO SANDWICHES using the bread, ham and cheese, and mustard if you
want it. Heat a little butter in a frying pan and fry the sandwiches,
turning until both sides are crisp and golden brown. Put the sandwiches
on separate plates.

For the sauce, beat together in a pan the eggs, grated cheese, softened
butter, and salt and pepper. Heat gently, whisking continuously (to stop
the eggs curdling). Once the mixture is warmed through and runny, pour
it in even quantities over the sandwiches. Serve immediately.

1 See _Maskerade_ for more on this self-made man who is proud of his
handiwork.

_Nobby’s Mum’s Distressed Pudding_

I takes off my hat to Mrs Maisie Nobbs of Old Cobblers, Ankh-Morpork,
who is the mother of the famous or at any rate notorious Cpl Nobby Nobbs
of the City Watch. It’s a lot harder to be a good cook in a big
industrial city, because in the country there’s usually more stuff
available – as we say, you can bake it, fry it or boil it, but for
choice you poach it. In the city, what you eat is mainly sugar, starch
or stale. Mrs Nobbs is a mistress of all those dishes that make you
think of fog and coal smoke – like Wet Nellies, Tuppenny Uprights,
Treacle Billy, Jammy Devils and Distressed Pudding. They fill you up and
keep the cold out. That’s what they’re made for. You’ve got to be posh
to worry about healthy eatin’.

[image]

_4 slices white bread, crusts cut off_

_1 tablespoon black treacle mixed with 2 tablespoons golden syrup_

_20 stewed prunes, stoned_

_425g rice pudding_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 180°C/Gas 4. Grease a deep pie dish (roughly 20cm ×
12cm). Place two slices of bread in the bottom of the dish and drizzle
over a little of the treacle/syrup mix. Spoon over half the rice pudding
and top with half the prunes. Repeat the process with the remaining
bread, rice pudding and prunes, and top with another drizzle of
treacle/syrup. Bake in the top of the oven for 30 minutes or until
golden brown.

Once tasted, fondly remembered.

_Strawberry Wobbler_

How can I put this? It’s pink and it wobbles. A lot of laughs at
parties. You could try serving it in a bowl, but everyone will know
you’re not doin’ it right.

MAKES 4–6 WOBBLERS

(depending on the size of your flutes)

_2–3 sachets gelatine (or veggie equivalent)_

_300ml boiling water_

_250g strawberries_

_150ml extra-thick double cream_

_2 tablespoons caster sugar (or to taste)_

_strawberry ice cream, for serving_

_4 large champagne flutes_

_Editor’s Note:_ This dish is much easier with a blender! And we’ve
settled for the champagne flutes because the containers apparently
preferred by Mrs Ogg are … well, unavailable. Well, you don’t see them
in the shops. Well, not the shops on the High Street, certainly … Not
our High Street, anyway.

DISSOLVE THE GELATINE in the water following the instructions on the
packet and leave to cool for 10–15 minutes.

Meanwhile, rinse and ‘top’ the strawberries, chop in half and place in a
large bowl/blender. Add most of the cream – keep a little aside for
decoration – and the sugar. If using a blender, whizz it all up to a
milkshake consistency. Otherwise, use a potato masher and mash until
smooth.

When the gelatine has cooled, mix thoroughly with the strawberry mixture
and pour into the champagne flutes. Chill for two hours (or until set).

Gently ease the wobblers out of the glasses (using a palette knife or
similar) onto a plate, and serve upended with a couple of scoops of ice
cream, placed according to preference, and a drizzle of cream.

[image]

_Bloody Stupid Johnson’s Individual Fruit Pie_

(Quoted from _The Edible Architecture of Bergholt Stuttley Johnson_, by
Startup Nodder, FAMG, AitD, Ankh-Morpork Guild of Architects Press, $10
plus 3 site visits at $20 an hour)

People now recall Bergholt Stuttley Johnson, or ‘Bloody Stupid Johnson’
as he was known far and wide, as merely an architect and landscape
designer with an unfortunate blind spot in matters of size and a general
lack of grasp of the basic principles of, not to put too fine a point on
it, anything at all. In his way, and a very strange and confused way it
was, he was a genius. Only someone with a very special cast of mind
would have specified quicksand as a building material (the Collapsed
Tower of Quirm) ‘because it’s got to be done in a hurry’ or accidentally
built an entire house upside down (No. 1 Scoone Avenue, Ankh-Morpork –
the cellars, the only part above ground, are still in use).

In the words of Sir Joshua Ramkin: ‘Having anything designed by Bloody
Stupid Johnson is like a box of chocolates – you always get that
horrible strawberry one which someone else has already sucked and put
back in.’

Never were his peculiar talents more apparent than in his occasional
essays in cookery. Few survivors now recall these, but in most cases the
wreckage is there for everyone to see. For example, the top tier of a
wedding cake designed for a friend was until fairly recently used as a
bandstand in the Apothecary Gardens, and was a monument not only to
Johnson’s mercurial attitude to dimensions but also to his unique skill
in achieving with icing sugar a hardness not often found in cement.

Unfortunately, nothing now remains of the Great Fruit Pie except some
etchings made at the time, a rough copy of the original recipe and a few
scars on buildings quite a long way from the site. Records tell of the
teams of oxen needed to drag the enormous dish into position, the
bargeloads of apples brought down the River Ankh for the filling, the
catastrophe of the sinking of the _Queen of Quirm_ with her full load of
sugar. There are rather more accounts of the explosion that occurred on
the second Friday of the cooking process, which caused red-hot
shortcrust pastry to scythe across a large part of Ankh-Morpork and
accounted for the occasional shower of sultanas and deep-frozen baked
apple for some days afterwards.

[image]

Many of the more experienced workers were altogether too close when it
blew, but the recipe is believed to have been as follows:

SERVES: YOU RIGHT

_30,000 lb plain flour_

_30,000 teaspoons salt_

_15,000 lb butter/margarine_

_cold water_

_30 tons cooking apples, cored, peeled and sliced_

_1,000 lb sultanas_

_10,000 lb sugar_

_1 clove_

MAKE THE PASTRY by sifting the flour and salt into a container, then rub
in the butter or margarine until the mixture forms ‘breadcrumbs’. Then
add enough cold water to make it all into a stiff dough. Roll¹ out the
pastry on a floured surface² and use half to line the cooking
container³.

Peel, core and slice the apples⁴ and combine with the sultanas. Place
half in the container. Add the sugar and the clove. Add the rest of the
apples, and winch the remaining pastry into place over the top.

The cooking time is unknown, except that it was very clearly far too
long.

PS: It is believed that Johnson was vaguely aware of what every cook
knows, which is that when baking a big pie some provision must be made
to allow the venting of the steam generated. Certainly he had drawn up
plans for a 30-foot-high ‘whistling blackbird’, but this was not,
however, cast until a week after the explosion, owing to what would have
had to be called bad project management if in fact there had been any
project management at all. It is displayed in Hide Park, as a memorial
to those caught in the crust.

[image]

1 Some well-washed garden rollers were used here, after the specially
designed self-propelled rolling pin demolished several houses.

2 Edgeway Street was scrubbed and floured.

3 A dish was cast for this purpose, which now forms the roof of a house
in Mollymog Street.

4 Mr Johnson had designed a machine for doing this, but after it stapled
one of the foremen to a wall the job was subsequently done by three
shifts of men working around the clock.

_Nanny Ogg’s Perfectly Innocent Porridge with Completely Inoffensive
Honey Mixture Which Shouldn’t Make Anyone’s Wife Laugh_

… ’cos they made me take out a couple of what you might call the more
active ingredients. And this was the recipe that got my book _The Joye
of Snacks_ talked about, too. People always said my porridge with honey
mixture got the day off to a good start. Some people even had it for
supper. I mean, this version is all very well, quite nice really, pretty
good, in fact, but it’s not the whole nine … the full mon … the real mac
Feegle, if you see what I mean. People say the real thing was a rampant
aphrodisiac, but I say there’s not enough love in the world.

My gentleman friend Casanunda always said my porridge was worth waking
up to, although I can’t say he was a person who needed much porridge.
Keeping it away from him was the difficult bit.

SERVES 3–4

_600ml water_

_60g rolled oats_

_cream, to taste_

_Honey Mixture (see here)_

BRING THE WATER to the boil in a largish pan. Sprinkle in the oats,
stirring all the time. Continue to boil and stir for 5 minutes. Swirl in
cream and honey mixture to taste.

[Mr Albert Malich, inventor]

Mr Albert Malich, inventor and sole eater of fried porridge.

_Note:_ The honey mixture may also be used in a hot toddy, spooned over
ice cream, sorbet or the person of your choice.

[image]

_Honey Mixture_

_1 small jar clear honey (approx. 113g)_

_3–4 clean rose petals, finely chopped_

_a vanilla pod or three drops of vanilla essence_

_fingernail-sized piece of gold leaf (the sort used for cake decoration;
you don’t have to use this but it does give it that magical twinkle)_

Place the unopened jar of honey in a bowl of hot water for a couple of
minutes to warm slightly. Remove and dry the jar. Open it and carefully
stir in the remaining ingredients. Leave for at least a couple of hours
for the flavours to infuse, and always shake the jar well before use.

[image]

_Chocolate Delight with Special Secret Sauce_

It has to be said right away that this lacks a couple of ingredients
from the original Ogg recipe, because of the unfortunate – if you happen
to be in a public restaurant, at least – effects that they can have. For
one thing, you will have to pay for the broken crockery. Seekers after
forbidden knowledge will have to find a copy of _The Joye of Snacks_
that has not spontaneously combusted. People make a lot of fuss over
this sort of thing, I can’t think why.¹

FOR THE DELIGHT

_250g self-raising flour_

_60g cornflour_

_30g cocoa powder_

_155g caster sugar_

_155g unsalted butter_

_3 eggs, beaten_

_90ml milk_

_125g white choc chips_

_4–5 tablespoons dark chocolate syrup_

FOR THE SAUCE

_150ml double cream_

_6–7 cardamom pods_

_¼ teaspoon cinnamon_

_¼ teaspoon nutmeg_

_60g white or milk chocolate_

_20ml white rum_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 190°C/Gas 5–6. Mix all the dry ingredients for the
delight in a bowl and then rub in the butter. Add the eggs and milk and
beat thoroughly. Swirl in the white chocolate chips and syrup, making
sure not to overmix (the syrup should give a ripple effect). Divide
between two 20cm, deep, well-greased cake tins and bake in the top part
of the oven for 30 minutes, or until a skewer comes out clean when
testing.

_Note:_ This is a cross between a pudding and a cake and should be
moist. When baked, allow to cool for 5 minutes and, if not for immediate
consumption, transfer to an airtight container … hah, what am I saying,
you’ll scoff the lot.

Start preparing the sauce about 10 minutes before the delight is ready.
Warm the cream with the spices, taking care not to boil. Break up the
chocolate and stir into the cream. When it has melted, add the rum. Keep
stirring for a couple more minutes, then remove the cardamom pods. Serve
with the delight fresh from the oven.

[image]

1 See _Maskerade_ for reasons why the editors insisted on certain
ingredients being removed.

[image]

_The Least Favourite Dessert of Verence II, King of Lancre_

People say to me: ‘Why doesn’t our king like gooseberry fool?’ And the
reason is, after ten years at the Fools’ Guild you just never, ever want
to see anything that reminds you of it. He’s a decent king in most ways,
but no matter what anyone said to him he did pass a law outlawing
custard anywhere in the kingdom.

If you eat this dish in Lancre you’ll have to do it with someone on
guard, and it’s not unknown for packets of yellow powder to be sneaked
across the border at night.

I’m fond of a bit of custard every so often, but I can give it up any
time I like.

SERVES 4

_380g gooseberries_

_100g caster sugar_

_200ml whipping cream_

COOK THE GOOSEBERRIES and the sugar in a pan over a gentle heat for
about 15 minutes or until the skins begin to split. Transfer the mixture
to a bowl and set to one side to cool. Once cool, purée the gooseberries
by pressing them through a sieve (or in a food blender).

Whip the cream until it is stiff and firm. Fold it gently into the fruit
mixture. Spoon into individual bowls and chill well before serving, or
tip down the trousers of the nearest clown.

_Nanny Ogg’s Maids of Honour_

Take your eyes off ’em and they end up as tarts (just my little joke, no
offence meant).

MAKES ABOUT 6, DEPENDING ON SIZE OF MOULDS

_150g mascarpone cheese_

_1 tablespoon Cointreau_

_1 teaspoon mixed spice_

_sugar to taste (1–2 teaspoons)_

_1 large egg, beaten_

_200g rich shortcrust pastry_

_100g pink marzipan_

_glacé cherries and cocoa powder to decorate_

[image]

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 220°C/Gas 7. Lightly grease 6 barquette moulds (12cm
× 6cm approx). Mix together the mascarpone, Cointreau, mixed spice and
sugar, then beat in the egg.

Roll out the pastry to around 0.75cm thickness and line each tin,
leaving a little edge on each. Roll out the marzipan as thinly as
possible and line the pastry, making sure that you bring the marzipan
well up to the top so that it can be seen in the finished tarts.

Spoon the mascarpone mixture into the tins – not quite to the top – and
bake the tarts in the top of the oven for around 25 minutes, or until
golden brown. Once they are out of the oven, leave for 10 minutes or so,
until the filling is set a little, before removing from the tins to cool
on a wire rack.

Before serving, sprinkle a little cocoa powder around the edges and
place a quarter glacé cherry on each.

_Gingerbread Men and Women_

[image]

_The Librarian’s Recipe for Bananas_

It is always bad manners to pass comment on the species of anyone you
are talking to. So ‘You’re a gnome, then,’ or ‘How long have you been a
troll?’ are not guaranteed to break the ice. For sim’lar reasons, it is
best not to dwell on the fact that the Librarian at Unseen University is
an orang-utan, a BhangBhangduc word meanin’ ‘Certainly not a monkey’.

He most graciously spent some time going through his pers’nal collection
of recipes and came up with a well-tried favourite, as follows:

‘Ook.’

[Or, for non-simians]

OR, FOR NON-SIMIANS:

Take one banana.

_Klatchian Delight_

There’s nothin’ like a bit of Klatchian Delight or, failin’ that, some
sticky sweets. Pers’nally I don’t think you can ever make it as good as
the real thing. From what I’ve heard about Klatch they do things there
that are a lot more delightful than eatin’ sweets, but the name has
stuck, just like the sweets.

_rice paper (25g packet is ample)_

_300ml water_

_50g gelatine (2 sachets) or veggie alternative_

_450g caster sugar_

_¼ teaspoon lemon juice_

_¼ teaspoon pink food colouring_

_¼ teaspoon lemon flavouring_

_¼ teaspoon rum flavouring_

_(different colours and flavours may be used)_

LINE A DEEP baking tray (about 25cm × 35cm) with a double layer of rice
paper. Be careful to leave no gaps or your ‘delight’ will stick to the
tray!

Bring the water to the boil in a large pan, sprinkle in the gelatine and
whisk until dissolved (or follow manufacturer’s instructions). Add the
sugar and lemon juice and stir until dissolved. Carry on boiling and
stirring for 20 minutes, lowering the heat if necessary. Remove from the
heat and leave to stand without stirring for about 10 minutes. Add the
colouring and flavourings and mix.

Using a ladle or large spoon, transfer the liquid into the lined tray
(it should be a good centimetre deep). Leave to set in a cool, dry place
for 24 hours.

When ready, cut into 6cm × 3cm rectangular pieces and fold those over to
form squares so that the rice paper is on the outside. Alternatively,
cut into strips and use as fly paper.

Those looking for that genuine ‘as sold by Cut-Me-Own-Hand-Off Dblah’
look may care to sprinkle with small blackcurrants in lieu of flies. A
dusting of icing sugar could be a nice finishing touch, too.

_Englebert’s Enhancer_

This is very good if you’ve been drinking heavily the night before.
However, if the drink of your choice is made from re-annual grapes or
grain (which grow backwards in time, and so you get the hangover the day
before you drink heavily), then you should drink it the previous day.

An interestin’ thing about fizzy tablets, they say, is that trolls can’t
burp and if you give trolls a fizzy tablet they explode. In fact what
really happens is they hit you really hard. So don’t.

SERVES 1

_175ml raspberry drinking yoghurt_

_175ml cream soda_

_2 blackcurrant effervescent vitamin C tablets (follow dosage
instructions)_

MIX THE YOGHURT and cream soda in a pint mug or similar. Add the
tablets, stand back and watch. When it has settled, drink it. Then go
back to bed.

_Lord Downey’s Mint Humbugs_

The president of the Ankh-Morpork Guild of Assassins has provided us
with this recipe and he is a man who knows his sweets, having been
notoriously generous with them on occasion. These, he tells me, ‘are to
die for’. Or possibly ‘of’. His writing is a little unclear.

_400g sugar_

_5 tablespoons liquid glucose_

_250ml water_

_½ teaspoon cream of tartar_

_½ teaspoon peppermint oil_

_a few drops of green food colouring_

_oil for greasing_

_arsenic to taste_

_A note from the editors:_ Ah, we think we have spotted a problem with
this recipe. Arsenic has been used in times past as a food colouring
material (such a lovely green), but we suspect that this is not what
Lord Downey has in mind. The Guild of Lawyers would like us to point out
that putting arsenic in food can result in health problems, such as
death. Do bear in mind the name of the Guild Lord Downey belongs to, and
forget the arsenic. Over the years, many tests have found that not
putting arsenic in food is the best place for it. Arsenic is not found
in a little shaker alongside the salt and pepper. It is not there for a
reason. Forget the arsenic.

OIL TWO LARGE plates and set aside for later. Mix the sugar and glucose
together in a saucepan. Add the water and stir together over a gentle
heat until the sugar has dissolved, not adding arsenic at any point. Add
the cream of tartar, bring to the boil and continue to boil until the
sugar reaches 140°C (use a sugar thermometer). You can test it by
dropping a few drops into a bowl of iced water; the mixture should
become brittle.

Remove the pan from the heat and add the peppermint oil. Divide the
mixture between the two oiled plates (it will be very hot). Using an
oiled palette knife add the green food colouring to one half (this is a
good time not to add any arsenic), turning it well to distribute the
colour evenly. The mixture can now be left until it is cool enough to
handle.

Oil your hands, then mould each cooled half separately into a sausage
shape and lengthen this out to a thickish strand. You’ll need to work
quite quickly before any arsenic is added. Twine the two strands
together like a rope and then snip into small pieces with oiled
scissors, turning the ‘rope’ at each cut. When the humbugs are hardened,
wrap them individually in waxed or other non-stick food wrap and store
in an airtight tin, away from any arsenic.

[image]

_Spicy Spotted Dick_

The editors seemed to be very worried about including this. I don’t see
why anyone should be. It’s a perfectly traditional dish, with a few
little tweaks. Spotted dick: a long pudding, or dick, spotted with
currants. When you’ve said that, you’ve said it all. I mean, if people
are going to laugh about something like this we’d never get through a
mealtime. I know it was in _The Joye of Snacks_, but that was just
because I happen to like it. Ask anyone.

This is a good solid pudding, for people who wouldn’t be seen dead
eating a sorbet. A good helping of Spotted Dick is a meal in itself.

SERVES 4

_90g fresh breadcrumbs_

_90g self-raising flour_

_90g shredded suet_

_60g caster sugar_

_180g raisins or currants_

_1 teaspoon grated nutmeg_

_1 teaspoon cinnamon_

_4–5 tablespoons milk_

_flour for dusting_

_custard, to serve_

MIX TOGETHER IN a bowl all the ingredients except the milk. Gradually
stir in the milk until you achieve a soft dough consistency. Transfer to
a floured surface and roll the mixture out into a ‘sausage’ shape. Wrap
it loosely in a greaseproof paper (the mixture will expand while
cooking) and then wrap with cooking foil, tightly sealing the edges.

Steam over rapidly boiling water for 1½–2 hours, checking regularly to
make sure your pan doesn’t boil dry. When cooked, carefully unwrap your
pudding, transfer it to a warmed dish and serve with plenty of custard,
some well-worn doubles entendres and a few comments like ‘Oo-er,
missus!’

_Traveller’s Digestives_

A handy portable food introduced from the Counterweight Continent.¹ The
original version is really a human variety of dwarf bread (see here),
i.e., it keeps you alive but makes you wish you were dead and it keeps
really well because no one really wants to eat it. I’ve prettied it up a
bit to make it appealin’ to people who aren’t on a raft somewhere and
haven’t already eaten their clothes and the weakest person present.

MAKES ABOUT 15 BISCUITS

_100g plain wholemeal flour_

_100g porridge oats_

_100g ground almonds_

_1 heaped teaspoon sugar_

_½ teaspoon bicarbonate of soda_

_50g melted margarine/butter_

_1 teaspoon green food colouring (for that ‘authentic’ been-left-in-the-
depths-of-a-suitcase look)_

_4–5 tablespoons water_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 200°C/Gas 6. Mix all the dry ingredients together
thoroughly in a bowl. Add the margarine/butter and rub in until it is
absorbed.

Add food colour if desired.

Add the water, a spoonful at a time, until you get a marzipan-like
consistency. Roll out on a floured surface until 0.5cm thick and cut
into 6cm rounds. Place on a greased tray and bake at the top of the oven
for 20–25 minutes or until golden green.

1 See _The Colour of Magic_.

_Jammy Devils_

Another contribution from Mrs Maisie Nobbs, and another fine example of
an Ankh-Morpork delicacy – hot, sweet and cheap. Just the thing for a
snack in the middle of a night shift.

MAKES ABOUT 15

_100g unsalted butter_

_75g caster sugar_

_1 egg, beaten_

_200g plain flour_

_3–4 large tablespoons jam_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 180°C/Gas 4. Grease an individual tart/bun baking
tray.

Cream together the butter and sugar, then add the egg, a little at a
time, beating well after each addition.

Gradually stir in the flour until a soft dough is formed. Stir in a
generous tablespoon of the jam until you get a ripple effect.

Using about a dessertspoonful of the mixture for each devil, spoon the
mixture into the bun tin. Gently pat down and place a dollop – about
half a teaspoon – of jam on the centre of each one.

Bake in the top part of the oven for 25–30 minutes or until golden brown
on top.

_Dried Frog Pills_

According to the Bursar of Unseen University: ‘Spoon! Give it to
Royster! I do not take you up, sir, indeed I don’t, for there’s a thumb
under the girdle or my name’s not Trucklebed! I’ll have two slices, if I
may!’

Extrapolating from this, the Archchancellor of Unseen University, Dr
Mustrum Ridcully, tells us: ‘It was clear to me shortly after I joined
the University as Archchancellor that the Bursar was as mad as a goose,
and none of my efforts to jolly him out of it (by means of practical
jokes and so on) seemed to work. Then young Ponder Stibbons, our wizard
who is very much up on modern thinkin’, came across some old research
that suggested that the skin of some types of frog caused
hallucinations, and he reasoned that, if it was possible to isolate the
active ingredient and adjust it a little, it might be possible to cause
the Bursar to hallucinate that he was completely sane. A commendable
leap of imagination, that man. It seems to work, and provided he
remembers the pills, our dear Bursar certainly passes for sane by the
standards of universities.’

[image]

_Editors’ note:_ We have removed the frog-based ingredient from the
following recipe because its inclusion would result in a) cruelty to
frogs and b) outbreaks of homicidal sanity amongst the readers.

[image]

_0 frogs_

_1 small egg white_

_30g icing sugar (sifted)_

_1 heaped teaspoon ground cinnamon_

_1 teaspoon rum flavouring_

_1 teaspoon green food colouring_

CAREFULLY TAKE NO frogs, and do not dry them. Whisk the egg white until
stiff. Gradually beat in most of the sugar using a wooden spoon. Sift in
the cinnamon, add the rum flavouring and the colouring and stir until
well blended. Add enough of the remaining sugar to form a mixture that
doesn’t stick to the fingers when patted. Line a baking tray with
greaseproof paper, roll the mixture into pea-sized balls, place them on
the tray and leave to set for 8 hours.

[image]

Take one whenever the world gets too much, or when the voices tell you
to.

[image]

_Pteppic’s Djelibeybis_

It’s a funny thing, language. There’s a country on the river Djel, which
flows into the Circle Sea, called ‘Child of the Djel’ and, fancy, it
sounds just like our word for ‘rubbery sweets in the shapes of small
children’. But then, in Uberwald the city of ‘Ankh-Morpork’ sounds just
like their words for a ladies’ undergarment, which is just as well
because one of their main cities is pronounced Bonk.

Oddly enough, jelly babies are now very popular in Djelibeybi, having
been introduced by a former king, who was educated in Ankh-Morpork and
enjoyed a joke. They’re considered to be very good for fertility, but
once again I haven’t been allowed to include the special ingredient,
worse luck.

_175g stoned dates, finely chopped_

_1–3 tablespoons water_

_1 teaspoon cinnamon_

_½ teaspoon ground cardamom_

_60g walnuts, finely chopped_

_4 tablespoons clear honey, warmed_

_ground almonds for rolling_

BLEND THE DATES with a little water to make a paste. Pteppic’s servants
would use a pestle and mortar; you could use a wooden spoon and bowl if
you want to do it the hard way, or a food blender if you’re rich and
lazy. Stir in the spices and then mix in the chopped walnuts. Shape the
mixture into little bite-size balls, or into authentic ‘Djelibeybis’,
brush them with a little of the warmed honey and then roll them in a
plate of the ground almonds to cover. Alternatively, put some ground
almonds into a bag and then shake the Djelibeybis gently in the bag to
coat them.

_Figgins_

No one ever seems to know what a Figgin is or if they want theirs
toasted, but one meaning of the word is the handy snack described below.
To my mind, all the ingredients are optional except the brandy (most of
which vanishes in the cooking, but if you want to pay to have a drunk
oven, that’s fine by Yrs Truly).

MAKES APPROXIMATELY 18

(making it in two separate batches is easier in a small kitchen)

_155g ready-to-eat figs_

_155g stoned dates_

_85g currants_

_7–8 tablespoons brandy_

_1 heaped teaspoon mixed spice_

_750g shortcrust pastry_

_a little melted butter, milk and brown_

_sugar for sealing and glazing the pastry_

CHOP THE FIGS and dates finely and mix the fruit, brandy and spice
together in a bowl. Cover and leave overnight in a cool, dark place.

Next day, preheat the oven to 200°C/Gas 6–7. Roll out half the pastry
into a 25cm square. Cut into nine equal squares and spread a little
melted butter along two sides of each. Spoon about one large teaspoon of
the filling onto each square, fold along the diagonal to form a triangle
and press firmly along the buttered edges to seal. Repeat with the
remaining pastry and filling. Brush each with a little milk and sprinkle
with brown sugar. Gently pierce each with a fork, place them carefully
on a greased baking tray and bake for 20 minutes, or until golden brown.

DWARF COOKERY

GREAT TRADITIONS OF cookery, as I have pointed out, have their origins
in scarcity. Any idiot can make a good meal out of prime steak, but when
your raw material is cow hooves and sheep lips, well, that’s when you
really learn cookery. And the art of translation, of course, since many
people will put into their mouth something in a foreign language that
they wouldn’t even feed to a dog in their native tongue.

Dwarf cookery was created originally from what the dwarfs found
underground – rats, snails, worms (useful protein), bits of stone and so
on.

The common rat plays a major role in good old-fashioned, down-hole
dwarfish cookery, and most dwarfish families jealously guard their
recipes for the various relishes, chutneys, pickles and sauces (because
dwarfs are not stupid, and only some kind of half-wit would eat a rat
without something to take away the taste).

[image]

THE ‘ROLL’ OF DWARF BREAD

THE MAKING OF bread and its consumption play a pivotal role in dwarfish
history. Not for nothing is the Low King¹ crowned on the Scone of Stone,
which is more than fifteen hundred years old and, it can be said with
complete certainty, is as edible now as it was on the day it was baked.
_Defnit’ly_.

Dwarf bread can be used for buying and selling, for ceremonial purposes
– dwarf contracts are often sealed by the ‘breaking of bread’, and some
of the iron mallets used for the purpose are valuable antiques – and, of
course, and this is its main purpose, as a weapon.

A flat round dwarf loaf with a gravel crust, hurled like a frisbee, can
decapitate an enemy and can even, if thrown in the right way, return to
its owner afterwards. The rarer and longer loaves, known as _pain_, for
obvious reasons, were traditionally used for hand-to-hand combat. Drop
scones were used primarily by those defending, say, a high wall.

Dwarf bread can be eaten, at least by dwarfs. But then so can your
boots. It doesn’t _mean_ anything.

1 Not a king, exactly, since you’ll find a dwarf king in every dwarf
mine, but a sort of chief judge, law-interpreter and keeper of history.
And he’s called the Low King because, traditionally, the dwarfs with the
lowest (and usually richest) mines were at the top of the social scale.

_Dwarf Cake_

Classic dwarf cake is generally more edible than the bread, but of
course the world is full of things that are more edible than dwarf
bread. This recipe, if followed with care and artistry, can produce a
cake with the much-prized ‘granite’ effect.

_250g plain wholemeal flour_

_½ level teaspoon bicarbonate of soda_

_½ level teaspoon cream of tartar_

_50g desiccated coconut_

_50g poppyseeds_

_50g sugar_

_1 teaspoon pink food colouring_

_160ml water_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 210°C/Gas 7–8. Mix all the dry ingredients
thoroughly. Add the food colouring, and gradually stir in the water (you
may not need all of it), mixing well until it forms a firm dough. Knead
for a couple of minutes, beat into a 20cm disc, place on a greased
baking tray and cook in the top part of the oven for 25–30 minutes or
until crusty.

_Dwarf Bread_

Edible by humans and by dwarfs who’ve gone soft with Big City life and
prefer food that doesn’t fight back.

MAKES ONE LOAF

_250g strong plain wholemeal flour_

_30g wheatbran_

_½ level teaspoon salt_

_½ level teaspoon cream of tartar_

_½ level teaspoon bicarbonate of soda_

_100g poppyseeds_

_160ml water_

_¼ teaspoon black food colouring (not essential, but helpful to get that
‘just like Mother hammered’ look)_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 210°C/Gas 7–8). Combine all the dry ingredients in a
large bowl. Mix the food colouring with a little of the water to avoid
lumps. (Of course dwarfs would not do this but the rest of us should.)
Add the ‘black water’ and enough of the rest of the water to the flour
mixture until an even, slightly sticky consistency is obtained.

Now really give it a pounding; you don’t want it to rise too much. The
traditional dwarf recipe involves hammers and an anvil, but only the
keenest cooks need go that far. Beat into a roughly 23cm flat disc,
place on a greased tray and bake for 25 minutes.

Best when still warm, unlike the genuine article, which is best when not
eaten.

[image]

_Dwarfish Drop Scones_

The Drop Scone was one of the most feared of the battle breads – heavy
enough to do serious damage if dropped from a height of six inches, and
aerodynamic enough to stun an opponent at a distance if hurled from a
sling. A variant was designed to shatter on impact, scything the
surrounding area with razor-sharp crumbs.

The traditional scones, like all dwarf bread, were also edible if you
stretch the term far enough; folklore says the best way to turn them
into a meal is to soak them in a bucket of water for a week, and then
eat the bucket.

MAKES ABOUT 8, OR ENOUGH FOR A VERY SHORT SIEGE

_200g strong plain wholemeal flour_

_50g caster sugar_

_1 teaspoon bicarbonate of soda_

_50g margarine or butter_

_100g chopped mixed nuts_

_1 teaspoon black food colouring (optional)_

_150ml milk_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 230°C/Gas 8–9. Mix together the flour, sugar and
bicarb, and then rub in the margarine/butter. Add the nuts, stir well,
and add the food colouring if required. Gradually add the milk until a
firm dough is obtained (use only as much milk as you need). Divide the
dough into eight equal-sized pieces, roll into balls and place on a
lightly greased baking tray. Bake in the top part of the oven for 15–20
minutes. Cool on a wire rack.

Take to battlements and drop on enemies.

_Lancre Mint Cake_

The classic Lancre Mint Cake is extremely useful for mountain travellers
who may occasionally need to beat trolls to death. It also, if whirled
around the head on the end of a piece of string, emits a strange droning
noise that can attract rescuers or, of course, more trolls. This version
is for soft lowlanders who _like_ their teeth.

_250g wholemeal flour_

_½ level teaspoon cream of tartar_

_½ level teaspoon bicarbonate of soda_

_50g poppyseeds_

_50g chopped mixed nuts_

_50g sugar_

_2 teaspoons green food colouring_

_1 teaspoon peppermint essence_

_water_

USE THE SAME method as for dwarf bread, effectively (the products are
both, after all, made by dwarfs). Cooking time can be reduced by five
minutes if you bake it in four more easily portable loaves. Don’t overdo
the mint – a hint is all you need.

[image]

_Sticky Toffee Rat Onna Stick_

You really, really do not want the classic recipe. To give that to the
people would be the cruellest form of entertainment since ‘Bobbing for
Piranhas’ was a fairground attraction. This version has the look but not
the taste.

MAKES 4 RATS

_500g white marzipan_

_1 strawberry ‘bootlace’_

_1 small jar toffee spread_

_chocolate sprinkles_

_small amount of black icing_

_brown thread (non-edible whiskers; optional)_

_4 toffee-apple sticks_

_6 tablespoons white sugar_

_4 tablespoons water_

BREAK THE MARZIPAN into four equal pieces and shape into rats. Trim
bootlace to size and insert appropriately for tails. Coat the bodies
with a thin layer of toffee spread and roll them in the chocolate
sprinkles to give a fur effect. Use a small blob of icing for the eyes.
If doing whiskers, cut a few 5cm lengths of thread and ‘sew’ them
through the nose. Gently push a stick up each … er, rat, making sure it
is secure. It’s all a bit dreadful, isn’t it? But still much better than
using a real rat.

Now for the tricky bit. In a heavy-bottomed pan dissolve the sugar in
the water and cook over a medium heat until it is golden brown. Warning:
this gets very hot, so be careful! When it’s ready, turn off the heat
and quickly (before it sets or burns) coat the rats in it. NB: Do not
use a brush with nylon bristles as they will melt, giving the result a
flavour that only a dwarf could appreciate.

Place the rats in a cool, dry place to set.

[image]

_Quattro Rodenti_

Ankh-Morpork now has a greater population of dwarfs than the dwarf
cities deep in the Ramtops and, as all gourmets know, some of the best
food is created when two cultures meet and exchange recipes (who could
forget curried chips, or Black Pudding Strudel?)

This has sadly not been the case with dwarf cookery, which remains as
unpleasant as ever. Some dwarf restaurants do, however, provide
‘dwarf-like’ meals for other species, although these ‘themed’ places are
mostly despised by real dwarfs, who object to the fake rock wallpaper
and artificial hammering noises.

This is the ‘human’ version of one of the more successful cross-over
recipes.

MAKES ONE PIZZA

_pizza base_

_pizza (tomato) sauce_

_grated cheese (mozzarella is best) and any other desired toppings_

_four plump rats or 2 medium-sized tomatoes_

_2 large button mushrooms_

_4 thin slices of rare roast beef_

_12 black peppercorns_

_4 tail-length pieces of bigolli pasta (or thick spaghetti), cooked_

_8 rat-ear-sized sliced dried mushrooms_

_olive oil_

_dried dill (the herb, not the pickle)_

PREHEAT THE OVEN to 230°C/Gas 8. Cover the pizza base with sauce and
cheese. Cut the tomatoes in half and place cut side down on the pizza at
even spaces, towards the outside edge of the pizza. These will form the
bodies of your rats (it gets worse …).

Slice the button mushrooms in half and shape to a slight point. These
are the rats’ heads (see?) Place these on the hubwards edge of the
tomato pieces. Now trim the beef slices to a roughly ratty shape
(allowing enough to tuck under the bodies) and lay them carefully over
the tomato and mushroom ‘insides’ (we did warn you …).

[image]

Push the peppercorns in place to form eyes and noses and place the
cooked bigolli to form the tails. Make small incisions into the ‘heads’
and stick in the dried mushrooms to form ears.

Brush each rat lightly with olive oil and sprinkle with a little dill,
for a furry effect. Add any other desired toppings and cook in the oven
for around 12–15 minutes.

Run away and hide under the bed.

_Rat Vindaloo_

You don’t want to know about it. Besides, how would you tell?

[image]

[image]

SURE ENOUGH, ONCE you’ve got enough food, people will invent etiquette.

People say to me, what is this etiquette? And the answer is, it is what
people have to use if they don’t have good manners.

I was fortunate to be born with nat’ral good manners and am quite at
home in any company, but for a lot of people it is all a big mystery and
it is handy to have a guide. Then people say to me: ah, but isn’t it
just a way of making you look stupid if you don’t know the rules? And I
say: ah, but at least there are rules, and they’re all written down
where anyone can find ’em. A bit of study is all it takes.

The same thing applies to evening dress for men. Perhaps it makes you
look a bit like a penguin, but at least _everyone_ looks like a penguin.
A very democratic item, your basic evening dress. Once you’re in it,
there’s no difference between a clerk and a king. Well, there are some
_slight_ differences – a king’s will fit, while the clerk’s might have
been worn by three other people already that week – but at least the
_idea_ is there.

You see, posh society is easy. Etiquette is where you find it, though,
and there’s plenty of places where the rules are a lot more complicated
than in any palace and no one has written them down because no one who
knows them also knows how to write.

At least if you need to know if an admiral takes precedence over a field
marshal you can look it up, but it takes an unusual grasp of the special
etiquette of the wilder parts of town to rank _these_ in order:

A man who once forced another man to eat his own ear.

A man who can drink three pints of ale in seven seconds.

A man who can fart the National Anthem _while whistling his own
accompaniment_.

A man who can open beer bottles with his teeth.

A man who can open beer bottles with someone else’s teeth.

A man who is known to have killed nine people, not counting trolls.

And remember that the penalty for getting this wrong isn’t that someone
is going to be mortally offended. Someone will be offended, mortally.

I know inns up in the hills where people get _really_ intense if you
spit in the wrong part of the fireplace or wipe your chin with the wrong
sleeve, and these are the kind of people who punch you in the mouth and
then kick you in the bum while you’re looking for your teeth. Compared
to that, anyone would prefer to be sneered at by a duchess. As for
sitting in the wrong seat or accidentally drinking the wrong drink …
well, it doesn’t bear thinking about, but let’s just say you could be
looking at half a beer glass coming at you really, really fast. Whereas
use the wrong fork at a posh dinner, and the worst they are allowed to
do is not invite you again. You don’t even get your fingers broken.

ETIQUETTE WITH WITCHES

THIS IS REALLY quite straightforward. witches are very lucky people to
know, especially happy witches. When you meet a small dumpy witch, it is
good luck to offer her a drink.

If you happen to be baking and a witch comes calling – and it’s
amazin’ly occult, the way a witch turns up when you happen to be baking
– it’s good luck to give her a few scones, a bun or two, or maybe a
whole cake to take away.

If you want a cow who milks well, it’s good luck to have some of the
milk sent round reg’lar to the local witch. It’s _amazin_’ how rare it
is for that kind of cow to give trouble.

When brewing, a good beer will keep well if a jug or two is dispatched
to the local witch. She will be too polite to refuse.

Beware of bad luck caused by throwing away old clothes, which may be
used by occult forces to put an evil ’fluence on you. Have ’em sent
round to the local witch for disposal, especially if there’s any decent
lace or fine linen with a bit of wear left in it (you wouldn’t believe
the trouble occult forces can cause with that kind of stuff, it’s
amazin’.) It’s no trouble.

At Hogswatch, the keepin’ qualities of your bacon and ham can be
improved no end by sending a moderate portion round to the local witch.
She will accept this modest burden.

Witches are always helpful if approached properly, and never ask for
anything in return.

Incidentally, always remember that a proper witch has a string bag
somewhere about her person, so any object you ask her to take away won’t
be too big.

ETIQUETTE WITH GRANNY WEATHERWAX

ESMERELDA WEATHERWAX IS not a typical witch, being the best in the
business, and needs a whole section to herself. I can get away with this
because she does not read books. They make her angry.

Of course, like all witches she is very willing to take old clothes that
might be harbourin’ evil spirits, also any cream, butter, cakes and pies
that might otherwise come to the attention of occult forces. Bakin’ day
is one of those times when restless spirits gather round to play old hob
with the world of humans, and a witch standin’ by is a very good thing.

It’s _not_ good luck to accept any food _from_ Granny Weatherwax. People
livin’ by themselves get funny little ways, and Granny believes that she
is quite a good cook. Her biscuits are all right, but you wouldn’t want
to eat her jam. Eating her jam is actually quite hard, because getting
it off the spoon is a job in itself. Getting the spoon out of the jar is
a task and a half.

In fact the whole art of fancy cookery has passed her by. They say
there’s a bit of dwarf in all us Lancre people, and if that is so Esme
got the bit that does the bakin’. Her rock cakes are particularly good
if you want to build a rockery.

When talking to Granny Weatherwax, correct subjects for conversation
are: terrible things that have happened in foreign parts (plague,
volcanoes, swarms of squid), the quality of young people today, and how
the tea they make isn’t a patch on the sort you used to get. Do not
praise any other witch to her face, because her expression will go all
solid and a little muscle will twitch under one eye.

In fact, when talking to Granny Weatherwax the best thing to do is
listen. She thinks anyone who can sit and listen for half an hour is a
good conversationalist.

[image]

ETIQUETTE WITH WIZARDS

IT’S ALWAYS WISE to address a wizard as ‘your grace’, ‘your excellency’,
‘your huge wizardlyness’ and similar titles. It doesn’t matter which one
you choose, so long as you appear to be impressed.

Favourable comment on their clothes will be well received. Do not in any
circumstances refer to a wizard’s robe as a ‘dress’, even if it looks
like one.

When receiving visitors, wizards expect a present of cake. In return,
when wizards visit you, they bring an appetite.

Unlike witches (who never ask for anything in return) wizards require
payin’.

On no account take hold of a wizard’s staff unless he asks you to; there
are many bewildered amphibians and other crawlin’ things in the world
today who could have benefited from this advice.

Young ladies of ambition should bear in mind that wizards are not
allowed to get married. I have never seen the reason prop’ly explained,
but apparently it’s because nuptial arrangements affect their wizarding
power in some way. Maybe their magic staff gets bendy or something.
Therefore, if you invite them to dinner they gen’rally come alone but
make up for it by eatin’ enough for two.

[image]

_Notes About Other Species_

ONCE UPON A time most people in a large town might go through their life
without seeing anyone other than humans, but today it is different and
dwarfs and trolls, in particular, are familiar figures on our streets.
It would take another book, hint hint, to do justice to this subject,
but observance of these few helpful points should at least see that you
get home without your head caved in and your knees chopped off.

DWARFS

THE IMPORTANT THING to remember about dwarfs is that every dwarf you see
is ‘he’. Yes, I know. Of course, when the chips are down, or whatever, a
lot of them are _she_, but this is a subject dwarfs don’t like to talk
about. All dwarfs dress alike. They do the same sort of jobs. You have
to know a dwarf quite well before you pick up hints. I knew one over at
Copperhead who was as nippy a hand with the pick-axe as you’d find, and
held his beer like a real dwarf (i.e., got completely ratted on half a
pint), and if he hadn’t been taken queer near my house with a
stomachache which turned out to be young Olaf I’d never have guessed.
And I’m good at guessing, you may depend upon it. Dwarfs are _very_
close about these things. Not for nothing was Bashful a traditional
dwarf name.

These days things are freein’ up a bit and there are dwarfs around with
names like Gunilla Glodsdaughter, and things are getting a bit tense in
dwarf society as a result. Even so, it’s etiquette always to refer to a
dwarf as ‘he’ unless she tells you different. On the whole, those who
prefer ‘she’ tell you within three seconds.

Do not let the fact that every dwarf you see has a long beard fool you.
A forward-thinking young female dwarf might hammer out her breastplate
to a more fetchin’ shape and look for lingerie that isn’t made of
leather, or at least is made of a more _interestin_’ leather, but she
would never dream of shaving off her beard.

[image]

Dwarfs understand that human speech contains words like ‘small’, ‘short’
and ‘lawn ornament’, and mostly don’t take offence. However, don’t push
your luck.

DWARF TABLE MANNERS

… DO ACTUALLY EXIST, despite what you may think. they’re just
_different_.

Dwarfs spend a lot of their time in the dark, being polite and quiet,
eating moderately (because there is a limit to what you can carry in a
mine shaft) and not drinking. This is because a drunkard blundering
around in a narrow dark space full of pit props does not make friends
easily.

However, this way of life is not a natural way to behave and so, when
they get together socially, dwarfs tend to let their beards down.

Humans aren’t often invited to share their lives, but you may be invited
to a dwarf banquet. Do not wear your best clothes. Something lightweight
is advisable, since the heat is usually intense.

Expect to be served meat on the bone, with no cutlery other than a very
sharp knife. The correct way to consume your food is to cram as much as
possible into your mouth. That’s it, really. Meat bones are hurled away
from you with force, and it is considered good manners, or at least very
amusing, to hit another diner.

Do not look for a vegetarian option.

[image]

Beer is the only drink served at dwarf banquets. The correct method of
drinking is the ‘quaff’, whereby the beer is violently propelled towards
the mouth from horn or mug held some inches away. Do not worry if you
miss, because it is bound to hit someone else, who will be grateful for
it.

A proper banquet has only three courses:

1.  The bread and meat
2.  Carousing
3.  Fighting

The carousing is easy, since no one else will remember the words either,
and if it comes to that no one really knows what ‘carouse’ means. It’s
more or less like the way people behave around an all-night Klatchian
take-away after the pubs have shut.

Do not worry about the fighting. At this stage of the evening any human
still able to stand up is considered practically an honorary dwarf.
However, any woman with her hair in long pigtails would be advised to
steer clear of any dwarf with a throwing axe and a beer-soaked belief in
his marksmanship.

TROLLS

TROLLS HAVE A reputation for violence, and this is because they are
naturally violent or, I should say, extremely physical. Back in their
homelands it is considered good manners to beat another troll over the
head with a club when you meet him for the first time. This is the
equivalent of saying ‘How do you do?’

It is not good manners to extend a hand. In some troll dialects, where
body language is a major part of the conversation, this is a very bad
remark about his mother.

It is amazing how long it took for humans and trolls to work this out.

[image]

Most trolls you are likely to meet understand this now, but if upon
meeting a troll you can find it in you to hit him as hard as you can on
the chin, you will have a friend for life and also someone to carry you
to the nearest bonesetter.

If invited to dine with trolls, you must remember that there is very
little that trolls and humans can both eat. Trolls can enjoy some human
foods, merely for the flavour, but they can’t digest them properly and
they don’t have much food value for trolls. Thoughtful trolls will
provide food suitable for humans. I’d better warn you, though, that
trolls have only one word for vegetables and one word for meat. If
they’ve known humans for some time they’ll probably recognize that ‘oak
tree’ and ‘cabbage’ are different, and so are ‘cow’ and ‘frog’. What I’m
delicately alludin’ to here is that you’ll get something organic, and
probably heated. After that, you’re on your own.

Trolls in the wild generally wear just a loincloth in order to have
somewhere to hang knives and similar. In towns they’ve mostly adapted to
wearing clothes of a sort, although this causes a few difficulties
because male trolls find the sight of female trolls in large amounts of
clothing very … interesting. I hear where there are places in
Ankh-Morpork where lady trolls do a dance that _ends up_ with them
wearin’ seven very thick blankets, by which time the gentleman trolls
are breaking up the furniture and whistlin’.

If you invite trolls to dinner, settle for the loincloth.

PIXIES

AMONG THE CLANS of the pixies or, as they prefer, the pictsies, it’s
considered good etiquette to invite the whole of another clan to a huge
banquet and then slaughter them all when they’re drunk. Of course, this
plan never works, because _no_ pictsie is going to go to a banquet and
lay off the drink, even if his chieftain has told him to stand by for
some butchering later on, so what usually happens is that you get two
roaring drunk mobs trying to slaughter one another and missing. A
perfectly ordinary feast, in other words.

It is said that, if you leave a saucer of milk out for the pictsies,
they will break into your cottage and steal everything in your drinks
cabinet.

[image]

[image]

ETIQUETTE WITH SCARECROWS

THIS MAY BE a bit strange, and only applies in Lancre. in fact, it only
really applies to Unlucky Charlie.

Unlucky Charlie was made many years ago as a sort of target for use in
the Witch Trials¹, and has been blown up, blown apart, sent flying and
generally magically mangled for years.

What we did not realize in them days, of course, is that if you keep
throwin’ magic at something, some of it sticks.

There is something scary about scarecrows, in any case. I know that’s
their job, but I mean scarier even than that. They’re not exactly people
but they’re not exactly just … stuff. Or maybe it’s those cut-out eyes.

Unlucky Charlie moves about. No one has ever seen how he does it. He
might turn up in your garden, or right under the front of the window.
You might come down of a morning and there he is standin’ by the fire. I
once found him in my bedroom, still on his stake.

The important thing is not to make a fuss or rush about, and certainly
not to touch him. You can say things like ‘Good morning, Unlucky
Charlie,’ or ‘You’re looking very frightening today, Unlucky Charlie.’
If there’s a meal and he’s in the room, put out a portion for Unlucky
Charlie. He won’t eat any, but some people say that he rustles a bit,
which might mean he’s sayin’ thank you although it could be just mice.

It is quite all right to dry clothes on him, because Unlucky Charlie
likes to be useful. But remember to take them off him before you go to
bed, otherwise they’ll be gone in the morning and so will he.

People say that if Unlucky Charlie comes to your house and feels he’s
been well treated you’ll get a monster crop of pumpkins next year, _even
if you didn’t plant any seeds_.

Do not play tricks on him, or stay up to watch him leave. A few people
have tried it and they’ve been found very deeply asleep the next morning
and, for ever afterwards, a little bit quiet and very reticent on the
whole subject of straw.

[image]

1 A general get-together when witches from all the Ramtops come and meet
in a typical witchy atmosphere of sisterhood and goodwill (i.e., all
nice smiles over the top of a seethin’ mass of envy, scurrilous gossip
and general touchiness – I _like_ the Trials). The witches show off
tricks and spells developed during the year in a spirit of friendly
co-operation (har har) to see who is going to come second to Granny
Weatherwax, although of course this is all in fun and not a serious
contest (I can hardly keep a straight face even when writin’ this down).
And there’s a bonfire afterwards, and more gossip. In the bad old days,
my own granny told me, a real person was sometimes used instead of
Unlucky Charlie, but witches ain’t like that any more. Well, most of
them ain’t. Some of ’em, anyway. Me, at least.

_Rules of Precedence_

THESE CAN BE very tryin’ for even the most experienced hostess. Now, of
course, the way to start would be to tell you how to address dukes and
counts but, you know, you can go for _days_ without ever havin’ an earl
to dinner. Anyway, your _genuine_ aristocrat swears worse than my granny
and never bothers with a napkin if there’s a footman to wipe his hands
on. I used to work up the Palace when I was a girl when they used to
have visitin’ nobs of all kinds. I could tell you stories (but I won’t
because gossip is not in my nature). Let’s just say I could’ve been a
duchess … well, _technic’ly_ … if I hadn’t been quicker on my feet.

For your average party, the rules of precedence run like this:

Witches (this is automatic, and witches sit where they like).

Someone who has brought a whole bottle of whisky with a name you
recognize.

Someone who has brought a whole bottle of whisky with a name you
recognize, but which, on closer examination, is spelled wrong (this is
definitely a sign that you shouldn’t spill any on the carpet).

Someone who can play a musical instrument really well while drunk.

Someone who has brought any kind of bottle of drink (if it’s a
second-hand bottle with an old cork hammered in halfway, though, have a
care. Some of the very best drink comes out of the deep woods in
second-hand bottles. Have a sniff. If your eyes water, you have a new
friend).

Someone who can play a musical instrument really well while sober.

Anyone with any interestin’ gossip.¹

Anyone who can do interestin’ tricks, like makin’ faces through a toilet
seat or farting in tunes (people always remember my parties, often for
years).

Everyone else.

See how sensible this is? Even if you’re a duke, unless you brought a
bottle or know all the verses of the dirty version of ‘Where Has All The
Custard Gone?’ you’re _nobody_ at one of my _swaries_. I was once at a
posh do in Ankh-Morpork and there was one man there everyone was bowin’
and scrapin’ to and, you know, he didn’t sing a single comic song? He
didn’t even bring a bottle and even _trolls_ know to bring a bottle.
Some people have no idea how to behave, in my opinion.

1 I always say: if you haven’t got anything good to say about anyone,
say it to me.

_Modes of Address_

A LOT OF my old etiquette books make a big thing about this and really
it boils down to a few simple rules.

When you are dealin’ with armed men, or people who _employ_ armed men,
there is no time to wonder if you are dealing with the second son of a
viscount or whatever. No. What you are dealing with is _edged weapons_,
and edged weapons are always addressed as ‘sir’. Or even ‘my lord’. All
edged weapons care about is that you know what you are in the scheme of
things, i.e., something easily cut.

After that it’s all a lot simpler. Gen’rally speaking, how you address
other people depends on you. The kind of people who fret if they’re
called ‘your graciousness’ instead of ‘your sire-ness’ aren’t worth
knowing. I always find ‘Wotcha, how’s your belly off for spots?’ and a
good slap on the back works nine times out of ten.

Contrary to what you might believe, calling someone ‘friend’ or ‘pal’ is
not considered friendly or pally. Nor is an inquiry as to whether their
mother can sew.

_Etiquette at the Table_

SOONER OR LATER, as my advice helps you rise through society like a
bubble of marsh gas, you will find yourself lookin’ at a table covered
in glasses (if you’re looking at a table covered in glass, you have
probab’ly strayed into one of those bars I mentioned earlier and it is
time to call someone ‘sir’). There will also be more cutlery around your
plate than your mother owned.

The advice used to be to start with the eating irons that are on the
outside, but some butlers have got wise to this and have taken to movin’
them around for a laugh. However, you can use this to your advantage
’cos no one knows the right ones to choose. So pick anything that looks
useful and act with confidence. The chances are that the rest of the
table will meekly join you and they’ll be eating their soup with the
teaspoons as if they’d meant to all along. I have to say, though, that
the posher the dinner the fiddlier the food, and so you’ll be one up on
everybody if you learn to use the more difficult cutlery – asparagus
tongs, pea shooters, parsnip spears and the like. They’ll be useful for
these tricky foods.

ARTICHOKES:— The ideal slimming food, as the effort of fiddling with and
eating them uses up far more calories than they contain. You tear off
each leaf individually, dip the fleshy end in the sauce and then scrape
the soft part off with your teeth. Place the uneaten portion tidily on
the side of your plate, although it is permissible to flick it into the
lampshade. Artichokes were invented because rich people didn’t have
enough to do with their time.

ASPARAGUS:— Only ever eat these with your left hand, and never use a
knife and fork, otherwise bluebirds will fly out of your nose. You dip
the tip into the sauce, and then flip the end into your mouth using the
asparagus flipper. Eat only the soft part – it is very vulgar to polish
off every bit, however hungry you are. Since asparagus does some odd
things to the digestion I’m amazed it’s posh to eat, but it’s probably
because it’s hard to grow.

BREAD:— Again, use your left hand. Never bite pieces off your bread.
Instead tear off little bite-sized pieces and pop them in individually,
buttering them first, on a side plate, if preferred. If a fool or jester
is employed, it is in order to throw rolls at him underarm.

BUTTER:— This will be displayed in pats on a separate dish. Take one pat
and put it on your bread plate. Don’t spread straight from the butter
plate, because it will poison you.

CAVIAR:— The nobby way to eat caviar is from the little pad on the
outside of your left hand, between your forefinger and thumb. However,
since people also take snuff in a very similar way it is important not
to get confused. It is not the noseful of fish eggs that is the problem,
it is trying to pretend that you meant it.

The much less etiquette way is to eat the caviar with accompaniments
like chopped egg, onion and lemon juice.

But the real way to eat caviar is with a ladle and a glass of the sort
of drink that turns into vapour an inch from your lips.

CHEESE:— It is usual, when helping yourself from the cheeseboard, to
endeavour to leave the cheese in a tidy and usable state for the next
person. No one likes an untidy cheese. Use the cheese knife.

CORN ON THE COB:— In posh houses you’ll be given two forks to skewer
either end of the cob. Others will expect you to hold it with your
fingers. However you eat it you will get bits of corn stuck in your
teeth, which will provide oral exercise and a snack for later in the
evening. If you need to remove your false teeth during this meal, do it
politely behind a napkin. Do not do the ‘gottle o’ gear’ routine,
because no one ever laughs.

FISH:— It is now acceptable to eat fish with a knife and fork (instead
of two forks, as used to be the accepted method; the use of the fish
rammer has quite died out). Fillet as you go and never turn the fish
over. If you do find yourself with a fishbone in your mouth, this should
be spat into your left hand and placed on the side of your plate. Never
use your fingers. If you are choking to death, nod respectfully to your
host as you lose consciousness.

THE CHERRY PROBLEM:— People say to me, ‘Mrs Ogg, how do you eat cherries
and prunes and other things with stones when you’re in posh company?’
And I shall tell you.

Eat these whole, spitting the stones into your left hand and discreetly
depositing them on the side of your plate, even if an inviting target
presents itself somewhere else on the table. However, if the hostess has
had the foresight to provide cherrystone shooters, and indicates that
these may now be used by delicately pinging one off the head of a guest
at the other end of the table, much simple merriment may be enjoyed.

Most countries have some equivalent to ‘Tinker, Tailor, Soldier,
Sailor’, and it is in my opinion perfectly all right to swallow a few
stones in order to square yourself with whatever profession you wish.
What does a burst appendix matter if you get the job you want? It is not
etiquette to nick a couple off a neighbour’s plate in order to improve
your prospects, but it is allowable to sell him some if you have some to
spare.

Royalty are also allowed to count their stones publicly, although of
course the rhyme for them can only be ‘King, King, King, King, King,
King, King, King’ (or ‘Queen’), which does not make for much in the way
of dramatic tension over the custard.

OYSTERS:— These should only be eaten on a day with a ‘y’ in it. They’ll
be served raw in their shells. You squeeze lemon over ’em and then just
pour ’em down your throat. The sensation is a bit like having a bad cold
and no handkerchief. And that’s about it for oysters. They’re much
better if you cook them with a bit of bacon, because then they taste of
bacon.

PASTA:— Eat this with a fork, never a fork and spoon. Place the fork
vertically on the plate and twist around a small portion of spaghetti,
pulling to the side of your plate. Some big houses now boast a set of
clockwork spaghetti forks, which can reduce the effort required.

PEAS:— In polite circles in Ankh-Morpork (and these are pretty small
circles), peas are squashed onto the top side of the pea fork for
conveying into the educated mouth. In Quirm, it is acceptable to blow
them onto one side of the plate by means of a special straw.

SNAILS:— Most people rely on thrushes to dispose of these garden pests,
but they are still considered a delicacy in Quirm. Much of the Quirm
diet developed during a twenty-year siege, when the population scoffed
its way through the entire contents of the zoo and were then reduced to
turning over damp stones and hitting with a hammer anything that moved.
Snails are eaten directly from their shells. Apparently there’s
something called a snail fork, but I don’t see how they could hold one.

SOUP:— Always move the spoon away from you when picking up soup. You are
allowed to bring it towards your mouth once the spoon is full. The bowl,
too, should be tilted away from you when you are spooning up the last
drops. This is one of those bits of etiquette that makes sense. No one
likes a lapful of hot soup. Ask anyone.

TEA AND COFFEE:— What to do when the tea or coffee is too hot is one of
those little problems that crop up all the time. The correct way to deal
with it is to put it into the saucer and fan it gently with your hat,
while continuing to make polite conversation.

ALCOHOL:— It is scarcely necessary to remark that drinking too much wine
is very bad etiquette indeed, my word yes. At one time it was actually
fashionable to become intoxicated after dinner, but those days are gone,
I am thankful to say. The wineglass is never drained at a draught in
polite society (but see the section on Dwarf etiquette), nor should you
wipe your mouth with your hand. That tablecloth is there for a _reason_.

‘PORT AND CIGARS’

THERE IS A lot of misunderstanding about the whole business of ‘port and
cigars’. After a high-class meal in some societies it is considered
etiquette for the ladies to leave, but if you don’t go no one seems to
make you and you get some decent brandy and cigars plus perhaps a few
jokes you haven’t heard before.

Incidentally, when offered port you should say, ‘Ah, yes, I will have a
little port.’ Everyone says this. You have to say it even if what you
intend is a _lot_ of port.

The port wine is always passed round to the left (to port). The problem
is that if you miss the port as it passes you, on account of perhaps you
are lighting another cigar or trying to think up a new joke, it is very
bad form to ask for it to be passed back. The rules say you should pass
your empty glass to the left so that it can catch up with the decanter,
be filled by the person holding the decanter and passed back to you.

Now, this can cause difficulties, because by then everyone except you
has been drinking the port, and what with one thing or another you can
find that your glass moves around the table slower than the port and the
decanter gets back to you before you get your glass back. It’s not good
manners to hang on to it until your glass catches up, because people
downstream from you will be dying of thirst.

[image]

I find the best way is to run around the table until you’re ahead of the
decanter, pull the chair out from under some other diner, and be sitting
there ready when the port comes past. I’ve done this several times and
there’s been no complaints, so it’s probably good manners.

_Smoking_

BEFORE SMOKIN’ IN a strange house, I always feel it is a good idea to
ask people around you if they mind you doing so. Anything less than a
threat to kill you if you light up should be considered a ‘no’. After
all, the world is full of fools, and you are not allowed to object to
that, even though passive stupidity kills so many people.

If you are stayin’ in a house where they _will_ kill you if you smoke,
it is etiquette to smoke lying on your back in your room with your head
in the hearth and blowin’ the smoke up the chimney.

When smokin’ in company, it is very bad luck to light three cigarettes
with one match because the third smoker will be shot by a concealed
sniper. Some people make such a fuss about a little smoke.

Be very wary around creepy signs that say ‘Thank You For Not Smoking’,
because there’s magic afoot. Otherwise, how did they know you wouldn’t?

[image]

_Some Notes on Gardening_

PEOPLE SAY TO me: ‘Mrs Ogg, should we sow our parsnips when the moon is
waxing or when the moon is waning?’ They say: ‘If it rains on Soul Cake
Tuesday, should we plant our early beans?’ They say: ‘Is it true that
onion beds shouldn’t be weeded after the 1st of August?’

And I say: the hell with it. Witches knows about herbs, because that
makes sense, and the good thing about most herbs is that they grow all
by themselves. You just go for a walk with your eye to business and
there they are (the really useful ones, anyway; the ones you mostly see
growing in gardens are only useful for shoving up a chicken’s bottom).
But witches don’t garden. Gardening involves digging in cold weather.
Where’s the fun in that? And the rest of the time you’re mostly trying
to kill something.

What witches cultivate is _people_. It takes a lot less work to get
friendly with a few keen gardeners and then, from about July onwards,
you won’t be able to move for free runner beans, tomatoes, courgettes
the size of marrows and more rhubarb than was ever meant to happen. They
love givin’ the stuff away. It makes ’em feel proud. And it’s good
manners to respect other people’s feelings. That’s etiquette, that is.

_Births_

IN LANCRE WE don’t go in for announcements about birth because everyone
knows it’s going to happen, sometimes before the young lady concerned,
and in any case a lot of her mum’s friends will be hangin’ around the
house or just popping in for a cupful of gossip on the likely day and I
don’t have to tell you that by nightfall there _may_ be lonely shepherds
up on the hills who don’t know everything about the birth, but I
pers’nally doubt it.

However, these days young girls are findin’ out what it’s like outside
Lancre, so it seems nothing will do but they’ve got to have at least a
big sign on the door saying something like:

IT’S A BOY!

_or_

IT’S A GIRL!

or, in places like Slice and other parts of the Ramtops that are a bit
backward in many ways:

IT’S A BABY!

(because I could tell you a few stories, but it is not in my nature).

Other details may be added as required, viz., how much the baby weighs,
what time exactly it happened, when the wedding is, and so on. Of
course, in posher places with a town cryer and so on you can go further
and compose hum’rous announcements like:

‘We have an extra Peckweather! Bettina has bounced into the home of
Bertie and Claribelle Lusillon Ironpurse-Peckweather. Bettina arrived at
twenty-four minutes after three on the afternoon of 15 Grune. She
weighed 7lbs 2oz and was delivered by Goodie Rattle!’

But in my opinion this is a horrible start to give to any baby.

It is traditional to give a large bottle of rum to the midwife
afterwards, if she is me. Another bit of etiquette to remember is to
make sure the older female relatives are out of earshot, because the
last thing a young woman needs at a time like this is some old neighbour
rattlin’ on mournfully about the terrible time she had with her eldest,
who came out sideways playing a trombone, or something.

NAMING CEREMONIES, PRESENTS AND OTHER MATTERS

(including special considerations for those in a magical environment)

FIRSTLY, WISE PARENTS should make sure they’ve read any books of
folktales that might be around. Those stories weren’t just made up, you
know. They are there for your protection. Learn from history. Calling a
girl Beauty or Rose Red or Shining Eyes is just asking for trouble.
Don’t go boasting to any kings about how beautiful she is. Incident’ly,
if when she grows up she turns out to be able to spin flax into gold, my
advice is to _keep very quiet about it_. A good move is to buy an old
gold mine and then let on that you’ve struck lucky. A little forethought
is all it needs.

However, it is okay to let your daughter be a milkmaid and sing sweetly
where any kings can hear, and encouraging her not to complain about the
fit of any shoes she might be asked to put on by men in powdered wigs
may stand her in good stead in later life. Trust me on this one.

If you _are_ a king your daughter will be beautiful. People have tried
all kinds of aids to beauty, like washing in the morning dew, shoving
yoghurt on their faces, etc, but for my money the best way to be
beautiful is to have a dad with a lot of money and a bunch of armed men.
It’s just amazin’ how people will spontaneously see what a beautiful
princess you are in those circumstances.

There’s a lot of little kings along the Ramtops, and they’re always
sayin’ to me, ‘Mrs Ogg, how do you stand on golden balls?’

And, you know, this is a tricky one. You just _know_ what’s going to
happen if you give a princess a golden ball. She’ll lose it down the
nearest well, and then a talkin’ frog will turn up, and the next thing
you know is you’ve got a son-in-law who … well, yes, he’s a handsome
prince, and I’ll grant you that these are not to be sneezed at, but
frankly you wouldn’t want to see his family turn up at the wedding and
anyway if they did they’d probably be in a jar.

[image]

I gen’rally cut through the whole thing by pointing out that gold is a
very stupid thing to make a ball out of. They never bounce no matter how
hard you throw them.

Boys is easier, and if you have sons it’s worth trying for three. That
sets the third one up nicely to marry any spare princesses that are
around when he’s grown up. If he can get a job as a swineherd, so much
the better. It’d only be temp’ry. As Esmerelda Weatherwax always says,
the stories are out there and it’s up to you to leap on ’em as they go
past (however, you can’t bet on it. F’r’instance, when my boys was young
I was always sending ’em off to take cows to market, and usually by the
time they got back I’d always got a seed bed dug for any magical seeds
they might have accepted, but all they ever brought home was a big
handful of money. I must have slipped up somewhere).

Presents for the new baby need some thought. What Mum wants is a big bag
of nappies, someone to do the washing and a nice long holiday somewhere
far away from her husband. What she’d probably have to settle for is a
bunch of flowers and in posher households a silver teething ring for the
baby. Of course, it’s helpful to her if you remember to give something
to the other children in the family, who might be put out and gen’rally
whining about the new member, so what I give them is a thick ear unless
they promise to shut up right _now_.

On the subject of presents, in these rural areas where natural magic is
still pretty strong, I ort to mention the treatment of any witches or
godmothers in the area.

What everyone hopes for, certainly, is a few of the nicer sort of witch
or even a genuine godmother who’ll be free with the Health, Wealth and
Happiness business, but it is vit’ly important not to leave out any of
the touchier witches that might live in the vicinity, otherwise
someone’ll screech ‘Ahhahaha!’ in the middle of the ceremony and the
next thing you know is you’ll be up to your neck in poisoned spinnin’
wheels. After all, how hard is it to invite her along, give her plenty
to drink and a plate of ham rolls all to herself and keep her out of the
way of your posh auntie? Play your cards right and you could be ahead by
one extra good wish. She may be a bit whiffy on the nose, but it’s
better than waking up a hundred years later and findin’ trees have grown
up through the floor. A bit of forethought is all it takes.

[image]

[image]

_Courtship_

IT MAY COME as a surprise that anyone needs any instructions about this,
but even I was once a rather shy girl who had difficulty meeting young
men. But it wore off by mid-morning when I realized what I was doing
wrong.

The hardest part is striking up a conversation, but it is easy if you
take your time and look for the right opportunity. My first husband was
very good at this. We met because he was doing some digging for my dad,
sweating away with his shirt off, and I wouldn’t be givin’ away any
secrets if I said I found plenty of opportunity to nip up to the log
pile (which in these parts we always put right by the privy, so as to
kill two birds with one stone). It was a hot day, but I don’t reckon we
ever had such a good fire going. Anyway, he looked up at me as I went up
there for the tenth time and quick as a flash, I shall always remember,
he said, ‘Got the runs ’ave yer?’

There you have it – just the right comment at the right time. Also, it
made me laugh so much I dropped a log on my foot and he had to help me
indoors. After that, one thing led to another and _he_’s called Jason.

I never see the lad with his shirt off on a hot day without thinking of
his dad. Of course, we’ve all passed a lot of water since then.

ON PRESSING YOUR SUIT

YOUNG MEN SAY to me, ‘Mrs Ogg, when a young man has honourable
intentions towards a young lady, how should he go about pressing his
suit?’

And I think it is a good thing that a would-be swain thinks about this,
because it’s prob’ly the first time in his life he’s ever had to worry
where the ironing board is. It’s best to try it out on an old shirt or
two, unless going courting with brown arrow shapes all over your suit is
fashionable in your part of the world. Once you’ve got the temperature
right, it’s time to try pressing the suit itself. Oddly enough, it’s
often the trousers that give trouble. Sideways creases do not impress,
but I remember when our Jason first pressed _his_ suit he managed to get
four creases per leg, and the boxy look caught on around here for a
while.

That’s what I know about pressing your suit.

[image]

ON GIRLS MAKING ADVANCES

SOMETIMES GIRLS AND women plan events with a direct view to scraping an
acquaintance with young men. Dropping something is an obvious way,
although in public this is usually a parcel or sunshade.

It says in my old etiquette book: ‘It is scarcely necessary to say that
girls who stoop to this kind of manoeuvring are hardly ever gentlewomen.
It cannot be denied that girls of the lower middle classes are prone to
it. A gentleman should hesitate before choosing as a wife a girl who
shows so little discretion as to walk and talk with young men of whom
she knows nothing beyond what they choose to tell her.’

Well, in Lancre no lad looking for a wife who can help with the harvest
is going to have much interest in a girl who can’t pick up her own
sunshade. If a little parcel is going to give her much trouble, she’s
going to be no good with a couple of buckets of milk, either. In fact it
has been known for young men to drop a bale of hay in the road near the
young lady’s cottage to see if she’ll pick it up. Any girl who’ll pass
up the opportunity of free hay isn’t likely to be a provident wife, they
say.

We breed good men in Lancre, but I have to say sometimes they could do
with a good ding around the lughole.

OFFERING AN UMBRELLA

MY OLD ETIQUETTE book also says: ‘It is etiquette to offer an unknown
lady an umbrella in the street, supposing she stood in need of one. No
lady would accept the offer from a stranger; and the other sort of
female might never return the umbrella. In large towns women of breeding
soon learn to view casual attentions from well-dressed men with the
deepest distrust.’

However, my advice is: it’s better to make the acquaintance of a kind
man than die of pneumonia. Person’ly, I’ve always enjoyed casual
attentions. You might get a good dinner out of them. A lady is always
polite, appreciative, and carries a horseshoe in her handbag. This is
not for luck: the added weight can come in handy.

CHAPERONES

IN LANCRE IT is generally considered etiquette to have a responsible
female relative within two miles of the young couple at all times.

In remote areas, and they don’t get much more remote than up here, the
age-old practice of ‘bundling’ is still, er, practised. On long cold
winter nights, when the young man may have come a long way, he is
allowed to share a bed with the young lady, although both remain fully
clothed and a bolster is put down the middle. However, since love
traditionally laughs at locksmiths, it probably grins widely at a pillow
full of feathers.

A NOTE ABOUT LOVE LETTERS

ONCE AGAIN, THIS is an area where a bit of thought right now can save
some red faces later on. Women have this habit of saving up billets of
doux and tyin’ them up with a ribbon and keeping them in a drawer
somewhere and, sure enough, about ten years later you finds that the
kids have dug them out and are reading them to their friends for a penny
a time. Once again, a bit of foresight now can work wonders. With a bit
of co-operation between the writers it’s wise to begin the missives like
this:

‘My dearest love,

GET YOUR HANDS OFF OF THIS, YOU THIEVING DEVILS!

YES, WE KNOW IT’S YOU! PUT THEM BACK THIS MINUTE!’

Of course, it helps even more if you’ve discussed early on what names
you’re going to give your children when you have them. This will then
earn you an entire quiet afternoon while they try to work out how you
did it, and possibly also give them one of them complexes which will
benefit them in later life.

This is also a good time to mention:

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STAMPS

THIS GOES BACK to the days when any letter that arrived in the house was
read by _everyone_ and girls weren’t allowed to have private
correspondence until they were thirty-five.

When the stamp is in the centre at the top it signifies an affirmative
answer to the question (we won’t go into what the question might be),
and when it is at the bottom, it is a negative. Should the stamp be on
the right-hand corner, at an angle, it asks the question if the receiver
of the letter loves the sender; in the left-hand corner it means the
writer hates the other. If it is in the middle of the letter, it has
covered the address, so the letter will be delivered to the wrong house
but will make for interestin’ reading and you’ll get strange looks from
the neighbours.

If there is no stamp you’ll have to pay the postie. This means it is a
very bad start to a relationship.

_The Lancre Love Seat_

IN TIMES OF yore, when a young man wished to show his young lady that he
was of a mind to get serious and set up house with her, he would start
to work upon the site of their new home.

The first act, so that he and his fellow workers (usually his family and
friends) would have some facilities, would be to dig the privy. As time
went on, this act became more symbolic and the young man would carve for
his paramour an ornate privy seat. The carvings would include the name
of the young lady and her swain, along with the usual flurry of hearts,
cherubs and doves. Of course, this made them uncomfortable, but comfort
has never been a big consideration when it comes to the realms of Amour,
otherwise boned corsets would never have been invented.

The seats are now often carved in miniature, to be carried in a pocket
or bag. Really skilled beaux carve the seats (or have them carved by
dwarf craftsmen) so tiny that they can be used as pendants. These
miniature seats are highly prized even in the élite circles of
Ankh-Morpork, and an antique example made by skilled dwarf craftsmen can
fetch thousands of dollars. Less exalted versions are often used as
frames for mirrors, and are considered extremely risible.

_Balls_

(how to behave at them)

IT IS A truth self evident that a man in possession of his own teeth, a
decent pair of boots, a couple of acres of land and some pigs that need
feeding must be in want of a wife. Balls are a good way to meet one.
That’s why they’re held. The dancing is just a way of passing the time,
something for you to do while your mind is on other things. Even up in
the Ramtops there is the occasional big ball, and these require a level
of etiquette rather higher than your average village hop or hoe-down,
where the key thing is to remember to go outside if you need to throw
up.

Firstly you should, of course, reply to the invitation as soon as you
receive it. It will say RSVP, and you must reservup. Put some effort
into it. Your host or hostess has gone to the trouble of putting runny
writing and gold edging on the card, so a decently spelled letter is the
least you can do. Balls cost a lot to put on. Even if you’re royal, it’s
good manners to let people know you’re coming – in fact _especially_ if
you’re royal, because nothing flusters people so much as an unexpected
king.

The only exception to this rule, in the Ramtops, is witches. Witches
just turn up, or not. It’s accepted that they have all sorts of calls on
their time.

If it says 8 p.m. on the card, and you believe it, you’ll find yourself
the only guest. Even though you do get a good crack at the drink before
anyone else arrives, it’s still not good manners. A good hostess will
employ a few people to be ‘early guests’, so as the first real arrivals
won’t feel embarrassed (this is a good earner for anyone who can wear
evening dress and doesn’t have ears that stick out too much; you get
some free drinks, all the canapés you can stuff in your pocket and a
dollar for your trouble besides).

She will introduce you to other guests and, as a result, you may get
much of your dance card filled. I’ve always thought these things were a
bit pompous, but it’s etiquette once again. It’s considered good manners
to dance with the host or hostess, and also any maiden aunts or
surviving grandparents who will want to get out on the floor – and I’ve
known elderly ladies who’re still capable of dancing at 2 a.m. when a
succession of their young partners have been helped out onto the balcony
for some fresh air. The important thing is to keep your feet moving.
Some of the steps are bound to be right.

It’s also good manners to circulate and not just hang around the people
you came with. A good tip here, I find, is to keep your eye on the
people carrying trays of drinks and food. Keep up with them. The evening
will pass very happily.

To young men I would say: you’ve prob’ly been invited because you can
dance and are known to wash regular, so make yourself available to dance
with any plain neglected wallflower. She may be spotty, but what is a
sky without stars?

Incident’ly, in etiquettable circles it’s not done to dance with anyone
for more than two dances in succession unless you’re engaged to them.
Also, it’s a good idea to have some non-controversial smalltalk ready.
‘I don’t know about you, but I’m really sweaty,’ is not suitable,
whereas ‘Don’t you think it is a trifle warm in here?’ is fine and, of
course, invites agreement that perhaps a stroll on the verandah is in
order. What could be more enjoyable than to sit in some cool retreat
with a charming girl? Well, quite a lot, but some of it starts right
there, just my little joke.

If you play your cards right and are seen out on the dance floor
entering into the spirit of the thing, you will find yourself a
favourite with hostesses and, if you take care to fill your pockets with
loose nibbles, you might not have to buy any food for several months.

It is very bad manners to accept an invitation to a dance if you cannot
dance. If you do, you may take the place of another who is more
accomplished and your incompetence will make you a waste of space.
Learn. Take professional lessons. Most of the steps are pretty easy, and
the more understanding hostesses won’t mind you painting ‘L’ and ‘R’ on
your shoes.

We can’t leave the subject of courtship without mentioning:

_The Language of Flowers_

THIS IS SOMETHING that has died out in recent years, which is a shame,
but you can see why when you read about the scandal. It all seemed so
romantic until then.

Of course, these days all people remember is ‘rosemary for remembrance’
and a few odds and ends like that, but when the vogue was in its heyday
there were more than nine hundred different items of vegetation (trees
and even some vegetables as well as flowers) with their own meanings. In
a way they were very much like naval signal flags, which can either have
their own meaning (‘Ship invaded by strange creatures in a metal saucer,
am abandoning lunch’), or simply be a number or letter of the alphabet,
depending on how they’re used. To put it another way, you could use
vegetation to say _anything_.

Those of you with a freewheeling type of mind can see that here was an
accident just waiting to happen.

Down in Sto Lat, for example, there was old Mr Gladdybone, who was, how
can I put it, the sort of old gentleman who sniggers when he sees a
lady’s washing blowing in the wind. And down the lane lived Miss
Mellifera Buster, who was something of a folklorist, and who was the
first person ever to try to get the constables to prosecute someone for
having an obscene garden.

She said she particularly objected to the Creeping Shrillflower, but
planting it between the Love-Lies-Panting and the begonias was the last
straw. Also, when she complained, the old man had waved an artichoke at
her and talked about the hardy perennial Scarlet Bellweed, a flower she
had never expected ever to hear on the lips of a man old enough to be
her older brother.

[image]

She also considered the planting of peas and leeks in his back garden,
easily seen from her bedroom window if you knelt on top of the wardrobe,
was not as innocent as it seemed, considering the proximity of
Nettle-leaved Forthright and Toad Spurge.

Then the old tree stump at the front of his garden had put forth a crop
of Maiden’s Puzzle, an unusual fungus, and since the old man had planted
Old Maids Aplenty all round it she hoped she didn’t have to explain to
anyone what _that_ meant.

The case went on for a long time and caused a lot of interest,
especially since most people until then hadn’t had a clue about the
code. It turned out, for example, that the famous painting _Still Life
with Blue Flowers_ by Augustine Simnel, prints of which turn up
everywhere, was really a very unpleasant attack on his mother-in-law if
the blooms were read clockwise. As for the floral walk which Lord Ouida
had planted through his estate after he’d been forced to re-open an
ancient footpath, well, mothers used to cover their children’s eyes
after they got past the rhododendrons. Mind you, that man was a Creeping
Foxglove/Mouse Cress/Climbing Elderberry/Water Dropwort, and his father
was no better.

The madness died away after a while, although not before a particularly
obscene hedge was torn down, and I suppose it was because of that that
the whole language of flowers folklore was forgotten. There was also
some talk that Miss Buster had made up some of the dirtier ones,
particularly the one about the Ragged-leaved Trefoil, which I didn’t
even understand until I was thirty. And I still can’t see a dandelion
without grinnin’.

I did hear that some time afterwards Miss Buster married Mr Gladdybone,
but I expect life was no bed of roses.

Here are some pretty flowers and their meanings:

[image]

[image]

OLD CUSTOMS

FIRST FOOTING

ON THE STROKE of midnight on Hogswatch Eve, in the village of Razorback,
it is considered lucky if the first person to knock at your door and
kiss every young girl in the house is a plain man with a skin complaint.
I’m grateful to Mr Gerald Pustule for submitting this one, which I
hadn’t previously heard of. Where I come from it’s usually considered
lucky for the first-footer to be a comfortably built old lady carrying
an empty beer glass.

[image]

HOUSEHOLD HINTS

MAKING POTPOURRI

NOTHIN’ GIVES A home that etiquettable look so much as bowls of
potpourri. Now, traditionally, the way to make this is with lavender,
rosebuds, cloves and other such stuff, which has to be dried, and mostly
you end up with something grey that’s frankly a touch musty. And people
will look up their noses at you because it’s not the right colour and
smell.

The proper way is as follows.

YOU NEED

_anything dry – twigs, wood shavings, unlucky frogs, bits of old beetle_

_some brightly coloured paints_

_some cheap scent_

Paint the dry stuff and scatter scent on it. That’s all they do to make
the expensive stuff you see in shops, after all.

_Marriage_

ENGAGEMENTS

EVEN IN THESE modern times young people still do like to go through the
motions before marriage and sometimes they even get engaged (just my
little joke). As my old dad used to say: ‘If you think being engaged is
fun, just wait ’til you’re married. In fact, please wait until you’re
married’.¹ I always think our dad didn’t get out much, and it was a good
job he was a bit deaf.

People say to me, ‘Mrs Ogg, who should be the one to propose marriage?’
and generally I don’t see that it matters if it’s the boy or the girl,
but things have been let slide a little if it has to be the girl’s
father. Arranged marriages are still pretty common in these parts (and
now I come to think of it, what other kinds are there? It’s not as if
the boy and the girl and all their relatives and a new dress and the
priest of choice and a slap-up knife-and-fork tea for forty all turn up
in one place by accident, is it?). I’m talking about the kind where an
observant mum has a word with her daughter and then with the mum of the
boy, and then both dads get told, and it’s generally agreed that a
wedding within the next few months would be a good idea. I’ve known
plenty of good old marriages that began that way, and at least it
reduces the element of surprise all round.

But in a nutshell there’s a lot of agonizing about this and it doesn’t
matter at all. Marriage isn’t something someone does to someone else.
It’s perfectly all right if the woman asks, it ain’t like it’s begging.
The important thing is to know the answer in advance.

Whoever does the asking between the couple, the young man should then
ask the bride’s father, but this is okay because first the girl has an
informal word with her mum to make sure it’s sorted out all right. It’s
really more of a way to get the old man to shell out for new dresses all
round but he’ll probably hurrumph a bit and, as they say, seek
reassurance that the young man has the wherewithal to support his
daughter, because it’s v. embarrassing to rent out the attic bedroom and
then find she’s back on the doorstep two weeks later. The swain will
also get asked if he has any other ‘expectations’. It is not polite to
raise any points about the girl’s expectations at this point.

It is usual to have a bit of a party once an engagement’s been
announced. This used to be so that the two families could get the
measure of one another and see if any special weapons will need to be
brought to the wedding, but things are a bit more civilized now (see
Fights, later on). It is not a good idea to bring along any of the more
embarrassing relatives; save them until the wedding, by which time it’s
usually too late to run.

LENGTHS OF ENGAGEMENTS:— Mostly engagements last no longer than six or
seven months, but being engaged can become a habit. Take Yodel Lightly
and Miss Conception Weaver, who were engaged for sixty-five years.

I suppose neither of them was much taken with the passions of the flesh,
what with her being so skilled at lacemaking and, of course, he had his
pigeons, but, as she always pointed out, it meant that things were
sorted out. Most of the time, space being hard to come by, they were
waiting for people to die – his old dad, her old mum, his old mum, her
old dad – and then just waiting became a sort of habit. Then they died,
on the same day; he fell off his pigeon loft and she got blood poisoning
from a needle. Old Brother Perdore was a decent sort and had ’em buried
in the same grave, just to prove that poets don’t always know what
they’re talking about. I don’t know what they’re waiting for now.

THE RING:— This has got to be large and glittery, otherwise the girl
will have to walk round with her hand extended in an awkwardly
nonchalant fashion. They are usually non-returnable and it’s not good
manners to hand one over attached to a piece of elastic. My advice to a
young man is not to spend a lot, beause it’s the thought that counts.
You can always say you’re saving up for the new cottage or whatever, and
anyway you might have to buy some more one day. I used to know a lady
who had all her engagement rings made into a charm bracelet. This is not
a cultured thing to do.

WHEN TO MARRY:— By and large, it’s still best to try and get through the
ceremony before having a baby. On the more mundane topic of what time of
the year and of the day to hold your wedding, it’s good to aim for the
warmer weather (so do think about that when planning any events that may
require you to get married!) Also remember to avoid Octeday, which is
sacred to the followers of the church of Offler; on that day they are
not permitted to have any fun at all because the prophet Jeremanda once
spent a bad Octeday during his holidays in Llamedos. As to time of the
day, the meal after the ceremony is, of course, usually called the
wedding breakfast. Logically, the service should be held around 8 a.m.,
which then allows most of the rest of the day for serious feasting,
quaffing and falling down. Also, breakfast cereal is quite cheap.

THE WEDDING

THE BRIDE:— By right and ancient tradition, the bride is the focal point
of any wedding and her duties are largely to do with making sure that
she and her attendants look good on the big day. She appoints her
bridesmaids, pages and any other attendants that she may want (matrons
of honour, for example).

[image]

By tradition, the bridesmaids are dressed in outfits that under normal
circumstances they wouldn’t be seen dead in, often with little floral
headdresses, which they are then given as a present after the ceremony.
The dress is consigned to the back of the wardrobe and forgotten about
until ten years later, when her children need something to dress up in.

Invitations to be a bridesmaid should not be accepted lightly. Why does
the bride need to be surrounded by attractively dressed young women,
which might serve to remind the groom of what he’s leaving behind? It’s
because there’s safety in numbers. Any evil spirits hanging around to
cause bad luck for the bride will get confused, or so the belief goes.
If you pay careful attention to any wedding ceremony you’ll see that a
lot of those funny little extras, silver horseshoes and the like, are
really there to keep the bride safe. Dangerous times, weddings. That’s
why I always advise inviting any friendly witches along and making sure
they get plenty to drink. You’ll be thankful in the long run.

The Groom:— The bridegroom chooses his best man and the ushers, whose
job it is to keep the crowd quiet and confiscate the larger weapons. He
has to pay for all the flowers and all the costs of the service itself
(even if you’re just jumping over the broomstick, which used to be the
popular method in Lancre, it’s best to remember that a broomstick costs
money and also that the people holding it may become, through lack of
money, so confused that they lift it up quickly just as the groom is
going to jump).

[image]

The groom also has to buy presents for his and his wife-to-be’s
attendants. Most important of all, he has to provide everything for
their new home – including all linen, glass, plate, furniture, fixtures
and fittings. Under a Ramtops tradition he also has to conclude his stag
night by digging a new privy in the garden of his new home and throwing
up into it.

THE BRIDE’S PARENTS:— The bride’s parents have to pay for all food and
drink (including the wedding cake) and any other costs connected with
the ‘breakfast’ and the evening party (including floral displays). They
pay for the bride’s and bridesmaids’ dresses and any clothes for other
attendants. This can be expensive for a man blessed with many daughters,
and is the downside of having someone to look after him when he starts
to dribble. Traditionally, he also had to find the dowry. In the case of
kings and so on this was sometimes a whole duchy or something, and I
suppose for the really big royal families the happy couple would have to
make a list, otherwise they’d end up, it always happens, with three very
nearly identical baronies and no toast rack at all.

BEST MAN:— The best man has to marry the bride if the groom fails to
turn up. He may or may not therefore have strong incentive for his other
major task – making sure that the groom arrives looking smart and in
reasonably good condition, and is vertical, or alive, or at least
present.

This can be a challenging task, since he also has to organize the party
the night before, the sole purpose of which is to see that the groom
does not arrive looking smart, ekcetra, ekcetra. So apart from a good
head for strong drink, he also needs to know, to within a few minutes,
how long it’ll take the groom to wake up, escape from the handcuffs,
break out of the chickenhouse, remove all the boot polish (at least from
visible areas) and hop all the way to the nuptial venue with both legs
down one trouser.

THE BRIDESMAIDS:— Mainly there, as I said, to be occult decoys and, if
carefully chosen by the bride, to make her look good by comparison. They
carry posies provided by the groom, who also gives them each a small
present as a token of thanks. It used to be the case that the groom was
expected to actually chase and catch his bride on the big day. The
groom’s presents to the bridesmaids is a tradition dating back to when
the groom used to bribe the bridesmaids to lure the bride to a location
where he could catch her without too much effort. Personally, whenever I
hear anyone say this, I always ment’ly add, ‘That’s what he thought.’

HOW TO HAVE THE FIGHT:— A fight is traditional at all Ramtops weddings,
except those involving royalty, where the tradition is a small war.

Lots of people have asked me for advice about this. They say, ‘Mrs Ogg,
can you just rely on there bein’ a fight?’ And, yes, you gen’rally can.
My advice is to make sure the drink is strong enough and that people are
seated right to make it happen quite soon. That way you’ve got it over
with and can get on with things without that naggin’ feelin’ that
something’s wrong. Once it starts, though, it’s vital to see that it
goes properly, viz:

_Stage One:_ This is what some people call The Challenge. It starts as
soon as people have a few drinks inside them and start to chatter,
whereupon Man 1 will say, per’aps:

‘What was that you said about our Lil?’

(This is only an example, of course. Other suitable challenges include:
‘Hah, you wouldn’t talk like that if you knew what our grandad told us
about your mum,’ and, if all else fails, ‘That’s my pint you’re suppin’’
(although this is considered pretty poor and suggests not much thought
has gone into things).)

_This will take us to Stage Two:_ The Question. Again, this is fairly
formal, but Man 2 can choose between a number of inquiries, seekin’ to
ascertain as it might be whether Man 1 requires a faceful of
dandruff/knuckle sandwich/a nose that touches his ears on both sides.

The men will circle one another three or four times, which should not be
difficult by now since both parties will be findin’ it a lot easier to
walk in circles. The crowd at this point are permitted a number of
witticisms and shouts of encouragement, such as, ‘Kick him inna fork,
our Sam!’

At this point one bystander, known as the Shover, will push one of the
circling men towards the other (technic’ly this is _Stage Three_, which
does not last long). This will result in some aimless flailin’, but the
first decently landed blow will result in _Stage Four: the Wives_. At a
signal, the ladies associated with the men will each grab their partner
and shout variants on ‘You wait till I gets you ’ome, I can’t let you
out of my sight for five minutes!’ Hitting the man over the head with
handbags is ritual at this point or, if the reception has gone on for
some time, a bottle may be substituted.

Stage Five begins when one of the ladies says to the other something on
the lines of, ‘I’m surprised you’ve got the nerve to show your face
here, after what you did to Aunty Shipley!’ and they then fall to
fighting with rather more malign expertise than their menfolk, who bury
their differences to separate the couple before something expensive gets
broken.

The bride then cuts the cake.

1 This joke was dug out of a peat bog, and is prob’ly a thousand years
old.

WEDDING ANNIVERSARIES

I can never remember what each anniversary is signified by. I asked
around among my friends and people seem to agree on the following:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FIRST                             | soot or coal                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SECOND                            | lacy privy stationery holder      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| THIRD                             | musical model of Brindisian       |
|                                   | gondola                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FOURTH                            | cardigan or long combs            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FIFTH                             | colander or tea-strainer          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SIXTH                             | pottery carthorse                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SEVENTH                           | small box to put things in or     |
|                                   | things to go in a small box       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| EIGHTH                            | garden ornament                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| NINTH                             | nether garment or nightshirt      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| TENTH                             | bobbin or sock                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FIFTEENTH                         | Llamedosian spoon                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| TWENTIETH                         | stuffed donkey in straw hat       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| TWENTY-FIFTH                      | cooking apron with amusing        |
|                                   | anatomical design                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| THIRTIETH                         | lobster or crayfish               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| THIRTY-FIFTH                      | picture of sad green Agatean lady |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FORTIETH                          | rabbit made from sea-shells       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FORTY-FIFTH                       | teacosy                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FIFTIETH                          | gold                              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| FIFTY-FIFTH                       | four-poster bed                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SIXTIETH                          | troll’s tooth                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

_Death_

IT IS DEFINITELY very etiquette to mark the departure of some close
friend or relative. If you go to their funerals, as we say in Lancre,
they’ll come to yours.

An important first step, though, is to make sure they’re dead. It’s
amazin’ how often people overlook this simple job, which can lead to
much lack of etiquette and people havin’ to run all the way back home
from the graveyard to fetch a crowbar. But shouting ‘Are you awake,
Sid?’ in their ear is not enough. In the Ramtops we organize a wake.

For those who don’t know what a wake is, it’s a bit like a birthday
party only quite different. For one thing, no one is going to blow any
candles out. Also, the requirement for jelly is seriously reduced.
People can be quite cheerful at a wake, because it’s not their wake. If
the recently passed-away was popular, all their friends will come to pay
their respects and give ’em a good send off, and if they’re unpopular,
everyone will turn up anyway to make sure they’re dead. I advise lots of
beer, and you can’t go wrong with ham rolls. Some people like the coffin
to be upright and open, but I think it is more etiquette to have it
closed, especially if you are short of tables. Also, an open coffin can
be a problem if people have had too much to drink, and are helping one
another home and have got a bit short-sighted, because there’s nothing
more worrying to those tidyin’ up than to find that the dear departed
has really departed, and his old friends are halfway down the lane and
wondering why he won’t join in the singing.

[Death in his various]

Death in his various forms comes to everything and everyone. (PS: We
really meant that about the arsenic.)

An advantage to that, though, is that if the deceased is not dead, just
sleeping, they might join the party, as happened over in Creel Springs
when old Cable Volume woke up and asked for a pint and his friend Joe
keeled over. Still, they had the beer and grub and a coffin all ready,
hardly used, so it all turned out for the best, really.

In the big towns and cities things are a lot different.

I reckon that a long time ago, when people were walking around in skins
and living in caves, someone dropped dead and while everyone was having
a good cry someone shuffled up, presented his condolences, and said this
week there was a special offer on shallow graves topped with cave bear
skulls covered in ochre, and for only one big lump of mammoth extra
there was also the option of having the grave lined with seasonal
flowers. And so undertaking began. It is now very fashionable to be
embalmed after you’re dead, because the afterlife is uncertain and it
may be possible to take it with you.

‘GOING AWAY’ PARTIES

ONE OF THE advantages of being a witch or a wizard is that you learn the
time of your death in advance, and sometimes months before the big day.
No one seems to know how this happens. Old witches I’ve spoken to say
that one day you just wake up knowin’, just like you can remember your
birthday.

However it happens, it can be quite a saving in terms of buying new
suits or starting any long books, and it is generally regarded as a good
thing. After all, if you’ve lived a long time, and 100 is no age at all
for a wizard or a witch, you’re probably getting a bit bored and
int’rested in seeing what happens next.

Wizards used to have ‘going-away’ parties, although I understand they
don’t happen much these days. They were a bit like wakes but with the
principel guest still takin’ an int’rest. I’ve heard stories that one or
two wizards passed away from drinking or eating too much at their
going-away parties, which raises very puzzlin’ questions about Destiny,
Fate, and so on. Generally it was all very good-humoured, especially if
the wizard was really old, and a time for speeches and friendly
recollections of times gone by.

Since wizards (and witches) can see Death, they always left out a glass
of something and an extra plate of canapés in case he fancied a snack.
You cannot go wrong with a ham roll.

For witches the ‘knowledge’ means that they can get their cottage really
clean and an inventory done for the next occupier, because it’d be
terrible to be dead knowing that you’d left things unswept.
Traditionally they also dig their own graves and lie down in them
towards the end, leaving the next witch to fill it in, because it is
also not good manners to make more work than is necessary for other
people.

Witches do not hold parties, although they do sometimes take tea with
the other local witches to make sure that everything is handed over
smoothly (you cannot go wrong with a ham roll). Also, over the years
other witches will have had their eye on, as it might be, prized
washstands and interestin’ly patterned basins and other items the
soon-to-be-deceased might have accumulated, and it’s much better to get
this all sorted out beforehand. This prevents the other witches havin’
to find excuses to nonchalantly enter the cottage afterwards, which can
be particularly tricky if two do it at once. A true witch disdains any
amount of fame and money, but will black someone’s eye with the fender
for a candlestick she’s been coveting for thirty years. Many a spat
involvin’ quite serious magic has begun with the cry ‘She promised it to
me!’

As I have indicated, it is perfectly etiquettable to arrange your life
so that everything ends cleanly, and a witch who dies just as the last
log from the pile is smoulderin’ in the hearth will get a reputation for
being prudent as well as, of course, being dead.

What is not good manners is to tempt Fate. You might think that because
you’re not going to die for three months it might be fun to spend a few
weeks climbing mountains, since it won’t kill you, but there are no
guarantees against accidents and in any case there is such a thing as a
long and lingerin’ death. The point is to wrap up all the loose ends
neatly, which is as much as any person can hope for.

[image]

FLOWERS

MANY PEOPLE NOW specify ‘no flowers’ and ask instead for friends and
more distant family to send donations of cash to a good cause, and in
Lancre they ask for crockery for the wake, because a wake gets through a
lot of crockery. I person’ly think that is sad. Flowers are a good
tradition and one of the oldest there is. Of course they die off after a
while, but then so do we all. That’s the point, really.

PERIODS OF MOURNING

PEOPLE WORRY LESS about this sort of thing than they used tO when I was
young, when you bought a lot of black clothes around the age of forty
and that was your wardrobe until all you needed was a shroud, and then I
suppose at least the white made a change. I’m sorry to say that the
tradition these days seems to be to avoid the close relatives for a few
weeks out of embarrassment and then mumble something next time you can’t
avoid them.

That is the whole point about etiquette. It stops people having to flail
around not knowin’ what to do. It may be daft but at least there’s some
sort of rules which everyone understands.

When my fourth granddad died – my granny was a very good cook, and
people came for miles around for her lard dumplings – my granny kept her
curtains drawn for a week and it wasn’t because of the effects of the
wake. She also wore black for the rest of her life, but she’d been
wearing black since she was thirty-five so that didn’t make much
difference. It used to be like that in those days; once your kids were
grown up you got a sort of ment’l letter which said: You are an Old
Person, and that was it. For a woman that meant a shawl and a bonnet was
compuls’ry for the next sixty years, and the men would have to wear a
grubby waistcoat and concertina trousers and take up an allotment.

I pinched this list of ‘mourning periods’ out of my granny’s scrapbook.
She was very keen on doing the right thing. Of course, in those days
mourning and going to funerals and writin’ letters of condolence and so
on were quite a hobby for some people:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ONE MONTH                         | Friend’s relatives                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| THREE MONTHS                      | Distant relatives (second cousins |
|                                   | twice removed and so on)          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SIX MONTHS                        | Closer relatives (uncles,         |
|                                   | cousins, etc)                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ONE YEAR                          | In-laws, close friends            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| TWO YEARS                         | Very close relatives (immediate   |
|                                   | family)                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| THREE YEARS                       | Family pets (I see my granny has  |
|                                   | written in ‘no goldfish’)         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

No one seems to bother with these any more, but she also had rules for
what the widow is supposed to wear. It makes you think.

FIRST SIX MONTHS FOLLOWING DEATH OF HUSBAND:— Black only

NEXT THREE MONTHS:— Sombre grey may be added to the range

THREE MONTHS TO END OF YEAR ONE:— Grey can totally replace black

FIRST SIX MONTHS OF YEAR TWO:— Purple may be added to the range

SECOND SIX MONTHS OF YEAR TWO:— Lavender may be added to the range

YEAR THREE:— It is now permissible to wear white clothes, if trimmed
with black

I haven’t even gone into the particulars about crêpe and silk, but it’s
pretty obvious that mourning was a full-time job. It doesn’t actually
say when the black edging stops or when she can get married again, but
three years seems a long time to wait. If I’d waited three years I’d
never have got anywhere. Person’ly I think black underwear is sufficient
(provided it is meant to be black, of course; there are Standards, after
all).

Husbands, on the other hand, wear mourning for only a couple of months.
I find this very significant.

DEALING WITH THE UNDEAD

AT FIRST GLANCE this appears very simple. nearly everyone you meet is
‘undead’. That’s why they’re called ‘alive’.

But in fact we’re talkin’ about people who ought to be dead but ain’t.
They’re mainly:

[image]

_Vampires_: the most troublesome kind of undead. This whole area has got
a bit more difficult these days, what with vampires coming out of the
casket and being more in-your-throat about what they do. Obviously,
there’s no book of etiquette at mealtimes. Here, however, are some
sensible tips:

1.  Don’t go anywhere near a vampire’s castle, no matter how bad the
    weather.
2.  Having gone near the castle, don’t knock at the huge forbidding
    door.
3.  Having knocked at the huge forbidding door, don’t accept the
    invitation from the strange man in black clothes to go inside.
4.  Having gone inside, don’t go into the guest bedroom.
5.  Having gone into the guest bedroom, don’t – whatever you do – sleep
    with the window open.
6.  Having slept with the window open, don’t come runnin’ to me to
    complain.

_Werewolves_: and people say to me, werewolves aren’t undead. Well, if
you kill them without using fire or silver, you’ll find them turning up
again tomorrow. I can’t think of a better word than ‘undead’. Except
possibly ‘nuisance’.

[image]

Your pure-bred werewolf is gen’rally all right. When they’re human, they
act human, when they’re a wolf, they act like a wolf. Except for their
tendency to growl when they’re annoyed and piss up against trees, you’d
never know they was werewolves if you met ’em socially. Well … sometimes
they have a tendency to … you know … sniff, but none of us is perfect.

If you are invited to dine, expect a lot of meat. And sometimes
biscuits. Most of them love chocolate, so that is always a little gift
worth taking along. Expect to go for a long walk in the afternoon.

_Zombies_: they’re dead, but they won’t lie down. No matter what people
say, no one becomes a zombie unless they’ve got some very strong reason
for staying alive, like some important task they have to finish. The
proper etiquette is: since they’re humans, treat them as human. It is
not good manners to make cutting remarks like ‘Isn’t there something you
should be doing? Like lying down?’ and certainly not ‘Decompose
yourself.’ They do appreciate little gifts of scent, aftershave and
other strong-smelling items, and, believe me, you will want to give them
these things.

_Royal Occasions_

IN MY EXPERIENCE people can tend to behave in an unnatural way when they
find themselves in the presence of royalty. There is no need. Just
remember they’re only human; they all go to the toilet. Not when you go,
of course. There are still some around who can have you put to death as
soon as look at you, but mostly they just want to get through the day,
they’ve seen people like you before, their wavin’ hand is aching and if
you do something daft you’ll just get a tight little smile that’ll haunt
you for the rest of your life.

In Lancre we have what I suppose you’d call a constitutional monarchy if
we had a constitution. What this means is this: there is only one king
and more’n five hundred subjects, and they all work every day at jobs
which mostly involve sharp things. It’s one of those lessons that are so
obvious they don’t have to be taught.

It’s all very fashionable these days for royalty to be accessible and
busy itself with getting out and meetin’ people. I think this is a bad
idea. Politics is like chess, you need to know where the king and queen
are all the time. There’s nothing more annoying than doing a particul’y
difficult roof and suddenly there’s the Royal Family at the bottom of
the ladder shouting up things like ‘How long have you been a thatcher?
How fascinating!’ It’s all very well sayin’ royalty should do what the
people want, but they’ll want something different tomorrow.

MEETING ROYALTY

WHEN YOU ARE presented to royalty, never shake hands. Touching royalty
is considered to be a gross intrusion. This is because royalty is
contagious, and can rub off. That is why kings and queens wear gloves.
Of course, this is only my opinion, but if you marry royalty you become
royal and much more beautiful, if you’re a woman, or more handsome, if
you’re a man, so there must be some reason. There’s a magic to kings.

The King and Queen should be addressed, on first meeting, as ‘Your
Majesty’. Thereafter, they may be addressed either as ‘Your Majesty’ or
as ‘Sire’ (for the King) or ‘Ma’am’ for the Queen. ‘Ma’am’ is pronounced
to rhyme with ‘ham’, not with ‘harm’, These little touches make all the
difference.

When talking to them, it is a good idea to avoid controversial subjects
such as ‘What about this republicanism, then? Is it a good idea or
what?’ and stick to general, unremarkable comments on the lines of ‘If
the ham in these sandwiches was cut any thinner I could see right
through it.’

You should never refer to the King or Queen personally as ‘you’. You
should say, for example: ‘I trust Your Majesty is enjoying the banquet’.
Do not say ‘There’s plenty of meat left on that bone. Pass it here if
you don’t want it.’ Rather say, ‘If one does not wish to partake of
one’s gristle, one would be glad to take it off one’s hands.’

Everyone knows that royalty traditionally does not carry money. However,
it is not good etiquette to say, ‘I can lend one a bob or two if one is
short.’

TROOPING THE COLOUR

THIS IS A MAJOR ceremony in those kingdoms which still have an army and
when you see all the pomp and stamping it’s hard to remember that the
whole purpose is just to show your average common soldier what his flag
looks like.

Obviously you’d think they’d just know, but in the days when half your
army were either prison scrapings or ploughboys who’d never seen a pair
of trousers before, it was not always so easy. So ‘Trooping the Colour’
was invented to make sure everyone knew what their ‘colours’ looked
like, so that they could recognize it in battle and return to it if
commanded. There had been several embarrassing incidents where generals
had been halfway home after a battle when they realized they had taken
the wrong army, and this sort of thing can lead to bad feeling.

In Lancre, with an army of just one (Pte/Cpl/Sgt/C-in-C Ogg, S.), the
flag is simply kept in the soldier’s bunkhouse, so that, effectively, my
boy Shawn performs the ceremony each time he goes to bed. It also acts
as a handy extra blanket in cold weather. He knows it’s the genuine
Lancre flag when he sees it, because of the cocoa stains.

GARDEN PARTIES

KING VERENCE AND Queen Magrat like to honour local worthies and visiting
dignitaries by inviting them to garden parties held at Lancre Castle.
Invitations are sent out by the Lord Chamberlain (Mr S. Ogg). These are
fairly delicate affairs, where the strongest liquor available is tea and
food consists of sandwiches containing a variety of non-animal-based
products. Most Lancrastians try to ensure that they only attend one of
the affairs. This has led to a return of the traditional practice of
royal invitations being considered to be ‘commands’. By the royals,
anyway.

INVESTITURES

THIS IS THE ceremony where honoured citizens come to receive awards of
knighthoods or ironmongery for their services to the community. These
can rank all the way up to a large house and a dukedom for life.

In Lancre it’s all a bit more low key, but now we have the awards from
OLE (Order of the Lancrastian Empire) for services to the Kingdom of
Lancre (last presented to my son Shawn for his work in stopping draughts
at the castle), down to a new set of Morris bells for being Lancrastian
Dangerous Sports Personality of the Year.

We used to have knights and dames, but Lancre is a bit small for that
sort of thing. I person’ly think the office of Dame could be
reintroduced for any witches of a lit’rary inclination in the country,
especially since I’ve already got a pair of spotted drawers and could
always lay my hands on a goose if required.

What many people probably don’t know is that when the sovereign dubs a
knight by tapping him on the shoulders with a sword, it signifies that
this is the last occasion when he can honourably be struck with a sword
without returning the blow. There have been one or two occasions where
recipients have forgotten this and which has led to some nasty scuffles.

If I have not got this wrong, this means that if you succeed in hitting
a knight and running away quickly before he can fetch you a wallop, the
King has to take his knighthood away from him.

Etiquette in the Bedroom

[image]

[image]

[image]

AFTERWORD

IT IS MY hope, as I approach the twilight of my years, or at least the
afternoon tea, that some of this information will be of use to those
people who look on me as a beacon of rectitude an’ knowledge.

I have tested the recipes and hardly any of them make you throw up. As
for the etiquette, well, I have done my best. Life is full of little
tricks and if you’re allowed to go around again, well, they don’t let
you take the notes you made the first time. I hope my efforts will
provide you with a sketch map.

But really, etiquette is a state of mind. You never know what tomorrow
will bring. It might hold a problem no one has yet had to face. So
therefore you need to get your mind right for when you venture into
areas where no book is going to help you. Remember: someone had to be
the first person in the world to eat an oyster.

In that case, my advice is to try a nice open smile, although this
admittedly won’t get you far with shellfish. I do find it gets me out of
trouble with people nine times out of ten, and even if it does get me
into trouble it’s generally int’resting trouble and leads to warm
memories. You couldn’t buy them for money.

_Gytha Ogg_

‘_Tir Nani Ogg’, The Square, Lancre 175_

[image]

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
A Random House Group Company
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK
VERSION 1.0 EPUB ISBN 9781407034362
A CORGI BOOK: 978 0 552 14673 0

ISBN 9780552146739

Originally published in Great Britain by Doubleday, a division of
Transworld Publishers

PRINTING HISTORY
Doubleday edition published 1999
Corgi edition published 2001

15 17 19 20 18 16

Copyright © Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs 1999
Illustrations © Paul Kidby
Recipes © Tina Hannan and Stephen Briggs

The right of Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs to be identified as the
authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77
and 78 of the Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988.

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Addresses for Random House Group Ltd companies outside the UK can be
found at:
www.randomhouse.co.uk
The Random House Group Ltd Reg. No. 954009
