
CONTENTS

COVER

ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT, IAN STEWART & JACK COHEN

TITLE PAGE

EPIGRAPH

1 MESSAGE IN A BOTTLE

2 THE UMPTY-UMPTH ELEMENT

3 JOURNEY INTO L-SPACE

4 THE ADJACENT POSSIBLE

5 REMARKABLY LIKE ANKH-MORPORK

6 THE LENS-GRINDER’S PHILOSOPHY

7 CARGO CULT MAGIC

8 PLANET OF THE APES

9 THE ELVISH QUEEN

10 BLIND MAN WITH LANTERN

11 THE SHELLFISH SCENE

12 EDGE PEOPLE

13 STASIS QUO

14 POOH AND THE PROPHETS

15 TROUSER LEG OF TIME

16 FREE WON’T

17 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION

18 BIT FROM IT

19 LETTER FROM LANCRE

20 SMALL GODS

21 THE NEW SCIENTIST

22 THE NEW NARRATIVIUM

23 PARAGON OF ANIMALS

24 THE EXTENDED PRESENT

25 PARAGON OF VEGETABLES

26 LIES TO CHIMPANZEES

27 LACK OF WILL

28 WORLDS OF IF

29 ALL THE GLOBE’S A THEATRE

30 LIES TO HUMANS

31 A WOMAN ON STAGE?

32 MAY CONTAIN NUTS

INDEX

COPYRIGHT

BY THE SAME AUTHORS:

TERRY PRATCHETT

THE CARPET PEOPLE • THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN • STRATA

TRUCKERS • DIGGERS • WINGS • ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD • JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

THE UNADULTERATED CAT (with Gray Jolliffe)

GOOD OMENS (with Neil Gaiman)

THE DISCWORD COMPANION (with Stephen Briggs)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO (with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ® SERIES:

THE COLOUR OF MAGIC • THE LIGHT FANTASTIC • EQUAL RITES • MORT

SOURCERY • WYRD SISTERS • PYRAMIDS • GUARDS! GUARDS!

ERIC (with Josh Kirby) • MOVING PICTURES • REAPER MAN • WITCHES ABROAD

SMALL GODS • LORDS AND LADIES • MEN AT ARMS • SOUL MUSIC

INTERESTING TIMES • MASKERADE • FEET OF CLAY

HOGFATHER • JINGO • THE LAST CONTINENT • CARPE JUGULUM

THE FIFTH ELEPHANT • THE TRUTH • THIEF OF TIME

THE LAST HERO (with Paul Kidby)

THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS

THE COLOUR OF MAGIC (graphic novel) • THE LIGHT FANTASTIC (graphic novel)

MORT: A DISCWORLD BIG COMIC (with Graham Higgins)

SOUL MUSIC: The illustrated screenplay • WYRD SISTERS: The illustrated screenplay

MORT—THE PLAY (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

WYRD SISTERS (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

GUARDS! GUARDS! (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

MEN AT ARMS (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

THE FIFTH ELEPHANT (adapted by Stephen Briggs)

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK (with Stephen Briggs)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP (with Stephen Briggs)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE a Discworld Mapp (with Stephen Briggs and Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN (with Paul Kidby) • NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

IAN STEWART

CONCEPTS OF MODERN MATHEMATICS • GAME, SET, AND MATH

THE PROBLEMS OF MATHEMATICS • DOES GOD PLAY DICE?

ANOTHER FINE MATH YOU’VE GOT ME INTO

FEARFUL SYMMETRY • NATURE’S NUMBERS • FROM HERE TO INFINITY

THE MAGICAL MAZE • LIFE’S OTHER SECRET • FLATTERLAND

WHAT SHAPE IS A SNOWFLAKE? • THE ANNOTATED FLATLAND

JACK COHEN

LIVING EMBRYOS • REPRODUCTION • PARENTS MAKING PARENTS

SPERMS, ANTIBODIES AND INFERTILITY • THE PRIVILEGED APE

STOP WORKING AND START THINKING (with Graham Medley)

IAN STEWART AND JACK COHEN

THE COLLAPSE OF CHAOS • FIGMENTS OF REALITY

WHEELERS (science fiction) • EVOLVING THE ALIEN*

* in press



[TITLE]


_You spotted snakes with double tongue_,

_Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;_

_Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong_,

_Come not near our fairy Queen_.

_I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream, past the wit of man
to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about to expound
this dream. Methought I was—there is no man can tell what. Methought I
was, and methought I had, but man is but a patch’d fool, if he will
offer to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not heard, the
ear of man hath not seen, man’s hand is not able to taste, his tongue to
conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was_.

_This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard_.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

_A MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM_

_I’m nae listenin’ to them! They’ve got warts!_

ARTHUR J. NIGHTINGALE

_THE SHORT COMEDY OF MACBETH_

APOLOGY: this book is a true account of events in the life of William
Shakespeare, but only for a given value of ‘true’.

WARNING: _MAY CONTAIN NUTS_

ONE

MESSAGE IN A BOTTLE

[image] IN THE AIRY, CROWDED SILENCE of the forest, magic was hunting
magic on silent feet.

A wizard may be safely defined as a large ego which comes to a point at
the top. That is why wizards do not blend well. That would mean looking
like other people, and wizards do not wish to look like other people.
Wizards _aren’t_ other people.

And therefore, in these thick woods, full of dappled shade, new growth
and birdsong, the wizards who were in theory blending in, in fact
blended _out_. They’d understood the theory of camouflage – at least
they’d nodded when it was being explained – but had then got it wrong.

For example, take this tree. It was short, and it had big gnarly roots.
There were interesting holes in it. The leaves were a brilliant green.
Moss hung from its branches. One hairy loop of grey-green moss, in
particular, looked rather like a beard. Which was odd, because a lump in
the wood above it looked rather like a nose. And then there was a
blemish in the wood that could have been eyes …

But overall this was definitely a tree. In fact, it was a lot more like
a tree than a tree normally is. Practically no other tree in the forest
looked so tree-like as this tree. It projected a sensation of extreme
barkness, it exuded leafidity. Pigeons and squirrels were queuing up to
settle in the branches. There was even an owl. Other trees were just
sticks with greenery on compared to the sylvanic verdanity of this tree
…

… which raised a branch, and shot another tree. A spinning orange ball
spun through the air and went splat! on a small oak.

Something happened to the oak. Bits of twig and shadows and bark which
had clearly made up an image of a gnarled old tree now equally clearly
became the face of Archchancellor Mustrum Ridcully, Master of Unseen
University (for the extremely magical) and running with orange paint.

‘Gotcha!’ shouted the Dean, causing the owl to leap from his hat. This
was lucky for the owl, because a travelling glob of blue paint removed
the hat a moment later.

‘Ahah! Take that, Dean!’ shouted an ancient beech tree behind him as,
changing without actually changing, it became the figure of the Lecturer
in Recent Runes.

The Dean spun around, and a blob of orange paint hit him in the chest.

‘Eat permitted colourings!’ yelled an excited wizard.

The Dean glared across the clearing to a crabapple tree which was, now,
the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘What? I’m on _your_ side, you damn fool!’ he said.

‘You can’t be! You made such a good target!’¹

The Dean raised his staff. Instantly, half a dozen orange and blue blobs
exploded all over him as other hidden wizards let loose.

Archchancellor Ridcully wiped paint out of his eyes.

‘All right, you fellows,’ he sighed. ‘Enough’s enough for today. Time
for tea, eh?’

It was so hard, he reflected, to get wizards to understand the concept
of ‘team spirit’. It simply wasn’t part of wizardly thinking. A wizard
could grasp the idea of, say, wizards versus some other group, but they
lost their grip when it came to the idea of wizards against wizards.
_Wizard_ against wizards, yes, they had _no_ trouble with that.

They’d start out as two teams, but as soon as there was any engagement
they’d get all excited and twitchy and shoot other wizards
indiscriminately. If you were a wizard then, deep down, you knew that
every other wizard was your enemy. If their wands had been left
unfettered, rather than having been locked to produce only paint spells
– Ridcully had been very careful about that – then this forest would
have been on fire by now.

Still, the fresh air was doing them good. The University was far too
stuffy, Ridcully had always thought. Out here there was sun, and
bird-song, and a nice warm breeze—

—a cold breeze. The temperature was plunging.

Ridcully looked down at his staff. Ice crystals were forming on it.

‘Turned a bit nippy all of a sudden, hasn’t it?’ he said, his breath
tingling in the frigid air.

And then the world changed.

Rincewind, Egregious Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography, was
cataloguing his rock collection. This was, these days, the ground state
of his being. When he had nothing else to do, he sorted rocks. His
predecessors in the post had spent many years bringing back small
examples of cruel or unusual geography and had never had time to
catalogue them, so he saw this as his duty. Besides, it was wonderfully
dull. He felt that there was not enough dullness in the world.

Rincewind was the least senior member of the faculty. Indeed, the
Archchancellor had made it clear that in seniority terms he ranked
somewhat lower than the things that went ‘click’ in the woodwork. He got
no salary and had complete insecurity of tenure. On the other hand, he
got his laundry done free, a place at mealtimes and a bucket of coal a
day. He also had his own office, no one ever visited him and he was
strictly forbidden from attempting to teach anything to anyone. In
academic terms, therefore, he considered himself pretty lucky.

An additional reason for this was that he was in fact getting _seven_
buckets of coal a day and so much clean laundry that even his socks were
starched. This was because no one else had realised that Blunk, the coal
porter, who was far too surly to read, delivered the buckets strictly
according to the titles on the study doors.

The Dean, therefore, got one bucket. So did the Bursar.

Rincewind got seven because the Archchancellor had found him a useful
recipient of all the titles, chairs and posts which (because of ancient
bequests, covenants and, in one case at least, a curse) the University
was obliged to keep filled. In most instances no one knew what the hell
they were for or wanted anything to do with them, in case some clause
somewhere involved students, so they were given to Rincewind.

Every morning, therefore, Blunk stoically delivered seven buckets to the
joint door of the Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography, the Chair of
Experimental Serendipity, the Reader in Slood Dynamics, the Fretwork
Teacher,² the Chair for the Public Misunderstanding of Magic, the
Professor of Virtual Anthropology and the Lecturer in Approximate
Accuracy … who usually opened the door in his underpants – that is to
say, opened the door in the wall whilst wearing his underpants – and
took the coal happily, even if it was a sweltering day. At Unseen
University you had budgets, and if you didn’t use up everything you’d
been given you wouldn’t get as much next time. If this meant you roasted
all summer in order to be moderately warm during the winter, then that
was a small price to pay for proper fiscal procedures.

On this day, Rincewind carried the buckets inside and tipped the coal on
the heap in the corner.

Something behind him went ‘gloink’.

It was a small, subtle and yet curiously intrusive sound, and it
accompanied the appearance, on a shelf above Rincewind’s desk, of a beer
bottle _where no beer bottle had hitherto been_.

He took it down and stared at it. It had recently contained a pint of
Winkle’s Old Peculiar. There was absolutely nothing ethereal about it,
except that it was blue. The label was the wrong colour and full of
spelling mistakes but it was mostly there, right down to the warning in
tiny, tiny print: May Contain Nuts.³

Now it contained a note.

He removed this with some care, and unrolled it, and read it.

Then he stared at the thing _beside_ the beer bottle. It was a glass
globe, about a foot across, and contained, floating within it, a smaller
blue-and-fluffy-white globe.

The smaller globe was a world, and the space inside the globe was
infinitely large. The world and indeed the whole universe of which it
was part had been created by the wizards of Unseen University more or
less by accident, and the fact that it had ended up on a shelf in
Rincewind’s tiny study was an accurate indication of how interested they
were in it once the initial excitement had worn off.

Rincewind watched the world, sometimes, through an omniscope. It mostly
had ice ages, and was less engrossing than an ant farm. Sometimes he
shook it up to see if it would make it interesting, but this never
seemed to have much of an effect.

Now he looked back at the note.

It was extremely puzzling. And the university had someone to deal with
things like that.

Ponder Stibbons, like Rincewind, also had a number of jobs. However,
instead of aspiring to seven, he perspired at three. He had long been
the Reader in Invisible Writings, had drifted into the new post as Head
of Inadvisably Applied Magic and had walked in all innocence into the
office of Praelector, which is a university title meaning ‘person who
gets given the nuisance jobs’.

That meant that he was in charge in the absence of the senior members of
the faculty. And, currently, this being the spring break, they _were_
absent. And so were the students. The University was, therefore, running
at near peak efficiency.

Ponder smoothed out the beer-smelling paper and read:

TELL STIBBONS GET HERE AT ONCE. BRING LIBRARIAN. WAS IN FOREST, AM IN
ROUNDWORLD. FOOD GOOD, BEER AWFUL. WIZARDS USELESS. ELVES HERE TOO.
DIRTY DEEDS AFOOT.

RIDCULLY

He looked up at the humming, clicking, _busy_ bulk of Hex, the
University’s magical thinking engine, then, with great care, he placed
the message on a tray that was part of the machine’s rambling structure.

A mechanical eyeball about a foot across lowered itself carefully from
the ceiling. Ponder didn’t know how it worked, except that it contained
vast amounts of incredibly finely drawn tubing. Hex had drawn up the
plans one night and Ponder had taken them along to the gnome jewellers;
he’d long ago lost track of what Hex was doing. The machine changed
almost on a daily basis.

The write-out began to clatter and produced the message:

+++ Elves have entered Roundworld. This is to be expected. +++

‘Expected?’ said Ponder.

+++ Their world is a parasite universe. It needs a host +++

Ponder turned to Rincewind. ‘Do you understand any of this?’ he said.

‘No,’ said Rincewind. ‘But I’ve run into elves.’

‘And?’

‘And then I’ve run away from them. You don’t hang around elves. They’re
not my field, unless they’re doing fretwork. Anyway, there’s nothing
_on_ Roundworld at the moment.’

‘I thought you did a report on the various species that kept turning up
there?’

‘You _read_ that?’

‘I read all the papers that get circulated,’ said Ponder.

‘You _do?_’

‘You said that every so often some kind of intelligent life turns up,
hangs around for a few million years, and then dies out because the air
freezes or the continents explode or a giant rock smacks into the sea.’

‘That’s right,’ said Rincewind. ‘Currently the globe is a snowball
again.’

‘So what is the faculty doing there now?’

‘Drinking beer, apparently.’

‘When the whole world is frozen?’

‘Perhaps it’s lager.’

‘But they are supposed to be running around in the woods, pulling
together, solving problems and firing paint spells at one another,’ said
Ponder.

‘What for?’

‘Didn’t you read the memo he sent out?’

Rincewind shuddered. ‘Oh, I never read _those_,’ he said.

‘He took everyone off into the woods to build a dynamic team ethos,’
said Ponder. ‘It’s one of the Archchancellor’s Big Ideas. He says that
if the faculty gets to know one another better, they’ll be a happier,
more efficient team.’

‘But they _do_ know one another! They’ve known one another for ages!
That’s why they don’t like one another very much! They won’t stand for
being turned into a happy and efficient team!’

‘Especially on a ball of ice,’ said Ponder. ‘They’re supposed to be in
woods fifty miles away, not in a glass globe in your study! There is no
_way_ to get into Roundworld without using a _considerable_ amount of
magic, and the Archchancellor has banned me from running the thaumic
reactor at anything like full power.’

Rincewind looked again at the message from the bottle.

‘How did the bottle get out?’ he said.

Hex printed:

+++ I did that. I still maintain a watch on Roundworld. And I have been
developing interesting procedures. It is now quite easy for me to
reproduce an artefact in the real world +++

‘Why didn’t you tell us the Archchancellor needed help?’ sighed Ponder.

+++ They were having such fun trying to send the bottle +++

‘Can’t you just bring them out, then?’

+++ Yes +++

‘In that case—’

‘Hold on,’ said Rincewind, remembering the blue beerbottle and the
spelling mistakes. ‘Can you bring them out _alive?_’

Hex seemed affronted.

+++ Certainly. With a probability of 94.37 per cent +++

‘Not great odds,’ said Ponder, ‘But perhaps—’

‘Hold on again,’ said Rincewind, still thinking about that bottle.
‘Humans aren’t bottles. How about alive, with fully functioning brains
and all organs and limbs in the right place?’

Unusually, Hex paused before replying.

+++ There will be unavoidable minor changes +++

‘How minor, exactly.’

+++ I cannot guarantee reacquiring more than one of every organ+++

There was a long, chilly silence from the wizards.

+++ Is this a problem? +++

‘Maybe there’s another way?’ said Rincewind.

‘What makes you think that?’

‘The note asks for the Librarian.’

In the heat of the night, magic moved on silent feet.

One horizon was red with the setting sun. This world went around a
central star. The elves did not know this and, if they had done, it
would not have bothered them. They never bothered with detail of that
kind. The universe had given rise to life in many strange places, but
the elves were not interested in that, either.

This world had created lots of life. Up until now, none of it had ever
had what the elves considered to be potential. But this time, there was
definite promise.

Of course, it had iron, too. The elves hated iron. But this time, the
rewards were worth the risk. This time …

One of them signalled. The prey was close at hand. And now they saw it,
clustered in the trees around a clearing, dark blobs against the sunset.

The elves assembled. And then, at a pitch so strange that it entered the
brain without the need to use the ears, they began to sing.

¹ And in this short statement may be seen the very essence of wizardly.

² This one was apparently the result of a curse some 1,200 years ago by
a dying Archchancellor, which sounded very much like ‘May you always
teach fretwork!’

³ Lord Vetinari, the Patrician and supreme ruler of the city, took
proper food labelling very seriously. Unfortunately, he sought the
advice of the wizards of Unseen University on this one, and posed the
question thusly: ‘Can you, taking into account multi-dimensional phase
space, meta-statistical anomaly and the laws of probability, guarantee
that anything _with absolute certainty_ contains no nuts at all?’ After
several days, they had to conclude that the answer was ‘no’. Lord
Vetinari refused to accept ‘Probably does not contain nuts’ because he
considered it unhelpful.

TWO

THE UMPTY-UMPTH ELEMENT

[image] DISCWORLD RUNS ON MAGIC, Roundworld runs on rules, and even
though magic needs rules and some people think rules are magical, they
are quite different things. At least, in the absence of wizardly
interference. This was the main scientific message of our last book,
_The Science of Discworld_. There we charted the history of the universe
from the Big Bang through to the creation of the Earth and the evolution
of a not especially promising species of ape. The story ended with a
final fast-forward to the collapse of the space elevator by which a
mysterious race (which could not _possibly_ have been those apes, who
were only interested in sex and mucking about) had escaped from the
planet. They had left the Earth because a planet is altogether too
dangerous a place to live, and had headed out into the galaxy in search
of safety and a long-term chance of a decent pint.

The Discworld wizards never found out who the builders of the space
elevator on Roundworld were. _We_ know that they were _us_, the
descendants of those apes, who’d brought sex and mucking about to high
levels of sophistication. The wizards missed that bit, although, to be
fair, the Earth had been in existence for over four billion years, and
apes and humans were present only for a tiny percentage of that time. If
the entire history of the universe were compressed to one day, we would
have been present for the final 20 seconds.

Quite a lot of interesting things happened on Roundworld while the
wizards were skipping ahead, and now, in this present book, the wizards
are going to find out what those things were. And of course they’re
going to interfere, and inadvertently create the world we live in today,
just as their interference in the Roundworld Project inadvertently
created our entire universe. It has to work like that, doesn’t it?

That’s how the story goes.

Seen from outside, as it sits in Rincewind’s office, the entire human
universe is a small sphere. Large quantities of magic went into its
manufacture and, paradoxically, into maintaining its most interesting
feature. Which is this: Roundworld is the only place on Discworld where
magic does not work. A strong magical field protects it from the thaumic
energies that surge around it. Inside Roundworld, things don’t happen
because people want them to or because they make a good narrative: they
happen because the rules of the universe, the so-called ‘laws of
nature’, _make_ them happen.

At least, that was a reasonable way to describe things … until human
beings evolved. At that point, something very strange happened to
Roundworld. It began, in various ways, to resemble Discworld. The apes
acquired minds, and their minds started to interfere with the normal
running of the universe. Things started to happen _because_ human minds
wanted them to. Suddenly the laws of nature, which up to that point had
been blind, mindless rules, were infused with purpose and intention.
Things started to happen for a reason, and among these things that
happened was reasoning itself. Yet this dramatic change took place
without the slightest violation of the same rules that had, up to that
point, made the universe a place without purpose. Which, on the level of
the rules, it still is.

This seems like a paradox. The main content of our scientific
commentary, interleaved between successive episodes of a Discworld
story, will be to resolve that paradox: how did Mind (capital ‘M’ for
‘metaphysical’) come into being on this planet? How did a Mindless
universe ‘make up its own Mind’? How can we reconcile human free will
(or its semblance) with the inevitability of natural law? What is the
relation between the ‘inner world’ of the mind and the allegedly
objective ‘outer world’ of physical reality?

The philosopher René Descartes argued that the mind must be built from
some special kind of material – ‘mind-stuff’ that was different from
ordinary matter, indeed undetectable using ordinary matter. Mind was an
invisible spiritual essence that animated otherwise unthinking matter.
It was a nice idea, because it explained at a stroke why Mind is so
strange, and for a long time it was the conventional view. Nevertheless,
today this concept of ‘Cartesian duality’ has fallen out of favour.
Nowadays only cosmologists and particle physicists are allowed to invent
new kinds of matter when they want to explain why their theories totally
fail to match observed reality. When cosmologists find that galaxies are
rotating at the wrong speeds in the wrong places, they don’t throw away
their theories of gravitation. They invent ‘cold dark matter’ to fill in
the missing 90 per cent of the mass of the universe. If any other
scientists did that kind of thing, people would throw up their hands in
horror and condemn it as ‘theory saving’. But cosmologists seem to get
away with it.

One reason is that this idea has many advantages. Cold dark matter is
cold, dark and material. Cold means that you can’t detect it by the heat
radiation that it throws off, because it doesn’t. Dark means that you
can’t detect it by the light that it emits, because it doesn’t. Matter
means that it’s a perfectly ordinary material _thing_ (not some silly
invention like Descartes’ immaterial mind-stuff). Having said that, of
course, cold dark matter is totally invisible, and it’s definitely not
the same as conventional matter, which isn’t cold and isn’t dark …

To their credit, the cosmologists are trying very hard to find a way to
detect cold dark matter. So far, they’ve discovered that it does bend
light, so you can ‘see’ lumps of cold dark matter by the effect they
have on images of more distant galaxies. Cold dark matter creates
mirage-like distortions in the light from distant galaxies, smearing
them out into thin arcs, centred on the lump of missing mass. From those
distortions, astronomers can re-create the distribution of that
otherwise invisible cold dark matter. The first results are coming in
now, and within a few years it will be possible to survey the universe
and find out whether the missing 90 per cent of matter really is there,
cold and dark as expected, or whether the whole idea is nonsense.

Descartes’ similarly invisible, undetectable mind-stuff has had a very
different history. At first, its existence seemed obvious: minds simply
do not behave like the rest of the material world. Then, its existence
seemed obvious nonsense, because you can chop a brain into pieces,
preferably after ensuring that its owner has previously departed this
world, and look for its material constituents. And when you do, there’s
nothing unusual there. There’s lots of complicated proteins, arranged in
very elaborate ways, but you won’t find a single atom of mind-stuff.²

We can’t yet dissect a galaxy, so for now cosmologists can get away with
their absurd invention of a face-saving new material. Neuroscientists,
trying to explain the mind, have no such luxury. Brains are much easier
to pull apart than galaxies.

Despite the change in current conventional wisdom, there remain a few
diehard dualists who still believe in special mind-stuff. But today,
nearly all neuroscientists believe that the secret of Mind lies in the
structure of the brain, and even more importantly, in the processes that
the brain carries out. As you read these words, you experience a strong
sense of Self. There is a You that is doing the reading, and thinking
about the words and the ideas they express. No scientist has ever
dissected out the bit of the brain that contains this impression of You.
Most suspect that no such bit exists: instead, you feel like You because
of the overall activity of your entire brain, plus the nerve fibres that
are connected to it, bringing it sensations of the outside world and
allowing it to control the movement of your arms, legs and fingers. You
feel like you, in fact, because you are busily _being_ You.

Mind is a process carried out within a brain made of perfectly ordinary
matter, in accordance with the rules of physics. It is, however, a very
strange process. There is a kind of duality, but it is a duality of
interpretation rather than of physical material. When you think a
thought – about, let us say, the Fifth Elephant that slipped off the
back of Great A’Tuin, orbited in an arc of a circle and crashed on to
the surface of the Discworld – the same physical act of thinking that
thought has two distinct meanings.

One of them is straightforward physics. In your brain, various electrons
are surging to and fro in various nerve fibres. Chemical molecules are
combining together, or breaking up, to make new ones. Modern sensing
apparatus, such as the PET scanner,¹ can reconstruct a three-dimensional
image of your brain, showing which regions are active when you are
thinking about that elephant. Materially, your brain is buzzing in some
complicated way. Science can see how it is buzzing, but it can’t (yet)
extract the elephant.

That’s the second interpretation. From inside, so to speak, you have no
sensation of those buzzing electrons and reacting chemicals. Instead,
you have a very vivid impression of a large grey creature with flappy
ears and a trunk, sailing improbably through space and crashing
disastrously to the ground. Mind is what it feels like to _be_ a brain.
The same physical events acquire a totally different meaning when viewed
from the inside. One task of science is to try to bridge the gap between
those two interpretations. The first step is to figure out which bits of
the brain do what when you think a particular thought. To reconstruct,
in fact, the elephant from the electrons. That’s not yet possible, but
every day brings it a step closer. Even when science gets there, it will
probably not be able to explain why your impression of that elephant is
so vivid, or why it takes exactly the form that it does.

In the study of consciousness there is a technical term for what a
perception ‘feels like’. It is called a _quale_ (pronounced ‘kwah-lay’,
not ‘quail’), a figment that our minds paint on to their model of the
universe in the way that an artist adds pigment to a portrait. Such
qualia (plural) paint the world in vivid colours so that we can respond
more quickly to it, and, in particular, respond to signs of danger,
food, possible sexual partners … Science has no explanation of why
qualia feel like they do, and it’s not likely to get one. So science can
explain how a mind works, but not what it is like to be one. No shame in
that: after all, physicists can explain how an electron works, but not
what it is like to be one. Some questions are beyond science. And, we
suspect, beyond anything else: it is easy enough to _claim_ an
explanation of these metaphysical problems, but just as impossible to
prove you’re right. Science admits it can’t handle these things, so at
least it’s honest.

At any rate, the science of the mind (small ‘M’ now because we’re not
talking metaphysics) addresses how the mind works, and how it evolved,
but not what it’s like to be one. Even with this limitation, the science
of the brain is not the whole story. There is another important
dimension to the question of Mind. Not how the brain works and what it
does, but how it came to be like that.

How, on Roundworld, did Mind evolve from mindless creatures?

Much of the answer lies not inside the brain, but in its interactions
with the rest of the universe. Especially other brains. Human beings are
social animals, and they communicate with each other. The trick of
communication made a huge, qualitative change to the evolution of the
brain and its ability to house a mind. It accelerated the evolutionary
process, because the transfer of ideas happens much faster than the
transfer of genes.

How do we communicate? We tell stories. And that, we shall argue, is the
real secret of Mind. Which brings us back to Discworld, because on
Discworld things really do work the way human minds _think_ they do on
Roundworld. Especially when it comes to stories.

Discworld runs on magic, and magic is indissolubly linked to Narrative
Causality, the power of story. A spell is a story about what a person
wants to happen, and magic is what turns stories into reality. On
Discworld, things happen _because people expect them to_. The sun comes
up every day because that’s its job: it was set up to provide light for
the people to see by, and it comes up during the day when people need
it. That’s what suns do; that’s what they’re _for_. And it’s a proper,
_sensible_ sun, too: a smallish fire not very far away, which goes over
and under the Disc, incidentally but entirely logically causing one of
the elephants to lift a leg to let it pass. It’s not the ridiculous,
pathetic kind of sun that we have – absolutely gigantic, infernally hot,
and nearly a hundred million miles away because it’s too dangerous to be
near. And we go round it instead of it going round us, which is crazy,
especially since what every human being on the planet sees, other than
the visually impaired, is the latter. It’s a terrible waste of material
just to make daylight …

On Discworld, the eighth son of an eighth son _must_ become a wizard.
There’s no escaping the power of story: the outcome is inevitable. Even
if, as in _Equal Rites_, the eighth son of an eighth son is a girl.
Great A’Tuin the turtle must swim though space with four elephants on
its back and the entire Discworld on top of them, because that’s what a
world-bearing turtle has to do. The narrative structure demands it.
Moreover, on Discworld everything that there is³ exists as a _thing_. To
use the philosophers’ language, concepts are _reified_: made real. Death
is not just a process of cessation and decay: he is also a person, a
skeleton with a cloak and a scythe, and he TALKS LIKE THIS. On
Discworld, the narrative imperative is reified into a substance,
narrativium. Narrativium is an element, like sulphur or hydrogen or
uranium. Its symbol ought to be something like Na, but thanks to a bunch
of ancient Italians that’s already reserved for sodium (so much for So).
So it’s probably Nv, or maybe Zq given what they’ve done to sodium. Be
that as it may, narrativium is an element on Discworld, so it lives
somewhere in the Disc’s analogue of Dmitri Mendeleev’s periodic table.
Where? The Bursar of Unseen University, the only wizard insane enough to
understand imaginary numbers, would doubtless tell us that there is no
question: it is the umpty-umpth element.

Discworld narrativium is a substance. It takes care of narrative
imperatives, and ensures they are obeyed. On Roundworld, our world,
humans act as if narrativium exists here, too. We expect it not to rain
tomorrow _because_ the village fair is on, and it would be unfair (in
both senses) if rain spoiled the occasion.

Or, more often, given the pessimistic ways of our country folk, we
expect it to _rain_ tomorrow because the village fair is on. Most people
expect the universe to be mildly malevolent but hope it will be kindly
disposed, whereas scientists expect it to be indifferent. Drought-struck
farmers pray for rain, in the express hope that the universe or owner
thereof will hear their words and suspend the laws of meteorology for
their benefit. Some, of course, actually believe just that, and for all
anyone can prove, they could be right. This is a tricky question, and a
delicate one; let us just say that no reputable scientific observer has
yet caught God breaking the laws of physics (although of course He might
be too clever for them) and leave it at that for the moment.

And this is where Mind takes centre stage.

The curious thing about the human belief in narrativium is that once
humans evolved on the planet, their beliefs started to be true. We have,
in a way, created our own narrativium. It exists in our minds, and there
it is a process, not a thing. On the level of the material universe,
it’s just one more pattern of buzzing electrons. But on the level of
what it feels like to be a mind, it operates just like narrativium. Not
only that: it operates on the material world, not just the mental one:
its _effects_ are just like those of narrativium. Generally our minds
control our bodies – sometimes they don’t, and indeed sometimes it’s the
other way round, especially during adolescence – and our bodies make
things happen out there in the material world. Within each person there
is a ‘strange loop’, which confuses the mental and material levels of
existence.

This strange loop has a curious effect on causality. We get up in the
morning and leave the house at 7.15 _because_ we have to get to work by
9 o’clock. Scientifically, this is a very bizarre form of causality: the
future is affecting the past. That doesn’t normally occur in physics
(except in very esoteric Quantum things, but let’s not get distracted).
In this case, science has an explanation. What causes you to get up at
7.15 is _not_ actually your future arrival at work. If in fact you fall
under a bus and never make it to work, you still got up at 7.15. Instead
of backwards causality, you have a mental model, in your brain, which is
your best attempt to predict the day ahead. In that model, realised as
buzzing electrons, you _think_ that you ought to be at work by nine.
That model, and its expectation of the future, exists _now_, or more
accurately, a short time in the past. It is that expectation that causes
you to get up instead of lying in and having a well-deserved snooze. And
the causality is entirely normal: from past to future by way of actions
taking place in the present.

So that’s all right then. Except that when you think of it, the
causality is still very strange. A few electrons, buzzing in ways that
are meaningless from the outside of the brain in which they reside, lead
to a coherent action by a 70-kilogram lump of protein. Well, at that
time in the morning it’s not a _very_ coherent lump of protein, but you
understand what we mean. That’s why we call this very creative piece of
confusion a strange loop.

Those mental models are stories, simplified narratives that correspond
in a rough-hewn way to aspects of the world that we consider to be
important. Note that ‘we’: all mental models are infected with human
biases. Our minds tell us stories about the world, and we base a great
many of our actions on what those stories say. Here, the story is ‘the
person who arrived at work late and was fired from their job’. That
story alone will lever us out of bed at an unearthly hour, even if we
get on well with the boss and fondly imagine that the story doesn’t
apply to _us_. In other words, we make up our world according to the
stories that we tell ourselves, and each other, about it.

We build minds in our children that way, too. The Western child is
brought up on stories like the time Winnie the Pooh went to Rabbit’s
house, ate too much honey and got stuck in the entrance hole on the way
out.⁴ The story tells us not to be too greedy; that terrible things will
happen to us if we are. Even the child knows that Winnie the Pooh is
fiction, but they understand what the story is about. It doesn’t lead
them to avoid pigging out on honey, and it doesn’t make them worry about
getting stuck in the doorway when they try to leave the room after
having eaten too much dinner. The story isn’t about literal
interpretations. It’s a metaphor, and the mind is a metaphor machine.

The power of narrativium in Roundworld is immense. Things happen because
of it that you would never expect from the laws of nature. For example,
the laws of nature pretty much forbid an Earthbound object suddenly
leaping up into space and landing on the Moon. They don’t say it’s
impossible, but they do imply that you could wait a very long time
indeed before it happened. Despite this, there is a machine on the Moon.
Several. They all used to be down here. They are there because,
centuries ago, people told each other romantic tales about the Moon. She
was a goddess, who looked down on us. When full, she caused werewolves
to change from humans into animals. Even then, humans were quite good at
doublethink; the Moon was clearly a big silver disc, but, _at the same
time_, she was a goddess.

Slowly those tales changed. Now the Moon was another world, and by
harnessing the power of swans we could fly there in a chariot. Then
(Jules Verne suggested) we could get there in a hollowed-out cylinder
fired by a giant gun, located in Florida. Finally, in the 1960s, we
found the right kind of swan (liquid oxygen and hydrogen) and the right
kind of chariot (several million tons of metal) and we flew to the Moon.
In a hollowed-out cylinder, launched from Florida. It wasn’t exactly a
gun. Well, actually it was in a basic physical sense; the rocket was the
gun and it went along for the ride, firing burnt fuel in place of a
bullet.

If we’d not told ourselves stories about the Moon, there would have been
no point in going there at all. An interesting view, maybe … but we
‘knew’ about the view only because we had told ourselves scientific
stories about images sent back by space probes. Why did we go? Because
we’d been telling ourselves that we would, one day, for several hundred
years. Because we’d made it inevitable and introduced it into the
‘future story’ of a great many people. Because it satisfied our
curiosity, and because the Moon was waiting. The Moon was a story
waiting to be finished (‘First human lands on the Moon!’), and we went
there because the story demanded it.

When Mind evolved on Earth, a kind of narrativium evolved alongside it.
Unlike the Discworld variety of narrativium, which on the Disc is just
as real as iron or copper or praseodymium, our variety is purely mental.
It is an imperative, but the imperative has not been reified into a
thing. However, we have the sort of mind, that respond to imperatives,
and to many other non-things. And so it _feels_ to us as if our universe
runs on narrativium.

There is a curious resonance here, and ‘resonance’ is definitely the
word. Physicists tell a story about how carbon forms in the universe. In
certain stars there is a particular nuclear reaction, a ‘resonance’
between nearby energy levels, which gives nature a stepping-stone from
lighter elements to carbon. Without that resonance, so the story goes,
carbon could not have formed. Now, the laws of physics as we currently
understand them involve several ‘fundamental constants’, such as the
speed of light, Planck’s constant in quantum theory, and the charge on
an electron. These numbers determine the quantitative implications of
the physical laws, but any choice of constants sets up a potential
universe. The way that a universe behaves depends on the actual numbers
that are used in its laws. As it happens, carbon is an essential
constituent of all known life. All of which leads up to a clever little
story called the Anthropic Principle: that it’s silly for us to ask why
we live in a universe whose physical constants make that nuclear
resonance possible – because if we didn’t, there’d be no carbon, hence
no us to ask about it.

The story of the carbon resonance can be found in many science books,
because it creates a powerful impression of hidden order in the
universe, and it seems to explain so much. But if we look a little more
closely at this story, we find that it is a beautiful illustration of
the seductive power of a compelling but false narrative. When a story
seems to hang together, even consciously self-critical scientists can
fail to ask the question that makes it fall apart.

Here’s how the story goes. Carbon is created in red giant stars by a
rather delicate process of nuclear synthesis, called the triple-alpha
process. This involves the fusion of three helium nuclei.⁵ A helium
nucleus contains two protons and two neutrons. If you fuse three helium
nuclei together, you get six protons and six neutrons. That, as it
happens, is a carbon nucleus.

All very well, but the odds on such a triple collision occurring inside
a star are very small. Collisions of two helium nuclei are much more
common, though still relatively rare. It is extremely rare for a third
helium nucleus to crash into two that are just colliding. It’s like
paintballs and wizards. Every so often, a paintball will go _splat!_
against a wizard. But you wouldn’t bet a lot of money on a second
paintball hitting him at the exact same moment. This means that the
synthesis of carbon has to take place in a series of steps rather than
all at once, and the obvious way is for two helium nuclei to fuse, and
then for a third helium nucleus to fuse with the result.

The first step is easy, and the resulting nucleus has four protons and
four neutrons: this is one form of the element beryllium. However, the
lifetime of this particular form of beryllium is only 10-¹⁶ seconds,
which gives that third helium nucleus a very small target to aim at. The
chance of hitting this target is incredibly small, and it turns out that
the universe hasn’t existed long enough for even a tiny fraction of its
carbon to have been made in this way. So triple collisions are out, and
carbon remains a puzzle.

Unless … there is a loophole in the argument. And indeed there is. The
fusion of beryllium with helium, leading to carbon, would occur much
more rapidly, yielding a lot more carbon in a much shorter time, if the
energy of carbon just happens to be close to the combined energies of
beryllium and helium. This kind of near-equality of energies is called a
_resonance_. In the 1950s Fred Hoyle insisted that carbon has to come
from somewhere, and predicted that there must therefore exist a resonant
state of the carbon atom. It had to have a very specific energy, which
he calculated must be about 7.6 MeV.⁶

Within a decade, it was discovered that there is a state with energy
7.6549 MeV. Unfortunately, it turns out that the combined energies of
beryllium and helium are about 4 per cent higher than this. In nuclear
physics, that’s a huge error.

Oops.

Ah, but, miraculously, that apparent discrepancy is just what we want.
Why? Because the additional energy imparted by the temperatures found in
a red giant star is exactly what’s needed to change the combined energy
of beryllium and helium nuclei by that missing 4 per cent.

Wow.

It’s a wonderful story, and it rightly earned Hoyle huge numbers of
scientific brownie-points. And it makes our existence look rather
delicate. If the fundamental constants of the universe are changed, then
so is that vital 7.6549. So it is tempting to conclude that our
universe’s constants are fine-tuned for carbon, making it very special
indeed. And it is equally tempting to conclude that the reason for that
fine-tuning is to ensure that complex life turns up. Hoyle didn’t do
that, but many other scientists have given into these temptations.

Sounds good: what’s wrong? The physicist Victor Stenger calls this kind
of argument ‘cosmythology’. Another physicist, Craig Hogan, has put his
finger on one of the weak points. The argument treats the temperature of
the red giant and that 4 per cent discrepancy in energy levels as if
they were independent. That is, it assumes that you can change the
fundamental constants of physics without changing the way a red giant
works. However, that’s obvious nonsense. Hogan points out that ‘the
structure of stars includes a built-in thermostat that automatically
adjusts the temperature to just the value needed to make the reaction go
at the correct rate’. It’s rather like being amazed that the temperature
in a fire is just right to burn wood, when in fact that temperature is
caused by the chemical reaction that burns the wood. This kind of
failure to examine the interconnectedness of natural phenomena is a
typical, and quite common, error in anthropic reasoning.

In the human world, what counts is not carbon, but narrativium. And in
that context we wish to state a new kind of anthropic principle. It so
happens that we live in a universe whose physical constants are just
right for carbon-based brains to evolve to the point at which they
create narrativium, much as a star creates carbon. And the narrativium
does crazy things, like putting machines on the Moon. Indeed, if carbon
did not (yet) exist, then any narrativium-based lifeform could find some
way to manufacture it, by telling itself a really gripping story about
the need for carbon. So causality in this universe is irredeemably
weird. Physicists like to put it all down to the fundamental constants,
but it’s more likely an example of Murphy’s law.

But that’s another story.

The more we think about narrative in human affairs, the more we see that
our world revolves around the power of story. We build our minds by
telling stories. Newspapers select news according to its value as a
story, not according to how intrinsically important it is. ‘England
loses cricket match to Australia’ is a story (though not a very
surprising one) and it goes on the front page. ‘Doctors think that they
may have improved the diagnosis of liver disease by 1 per cent’ is not a
story, even though most science works like that (and in years to come,
depending on the state of your liver, you might think it’s a rather more
important story than a cricket match).

‘Scientist claims cure for cancer’ _is_ a story, though, even if the
supposed cure is nonsense. So are ‘spiritualist medium claims a cure for
cancer’, and ‘Secret code predictions hidden in the Bible’, more’s the
pity.

As we write, there is a furore over a small group of people who are
proposing to clone a human being. It’s a major story, but very few
newspapers are reporting the most likely result of this attempt, which
will be abject failure. It took 277 failures, many rather nasty, before
Dolly the Sheep was cloned, and she has now been found to have serious
genetic defects, poor lamb.

Trying to clone a human may indeed be unethical, but that’s not the best
reason for objecting to this misguided and foolish attempt. The best
reason is that it won’t work, because nobody yet knows how to overcome
numerous technical obstacles; moreover, if by some stroke of
(mis)fortune it _did_ happen to work, any child produced would have
serious defects. Producing such a child, now that _is_ unethical.

Making ‘carbon copies’ of human beings, which is the usual basis of the
newspapers’ _story_ about the ethics, is beside the point. That’s not
what cloning does, anyway. Dolly the Sheep was _not_ genetically
identical to her mother, though she came close. Even if she had been,
she would still have been a different sheep, moulded by different
experiences. For that matter, the same would be true even if she _was_
genetically identical to her mother. For the same reason, cloning a dead
child will not bring _that_ child back to life. Much of the media
discussion of the ethics of cloning, like much of the public
understanding of science, is vaguely stirred through with science
fiction. In this arena, as in so many, the power of the story outweighs
any questions about the real factual basis.

Human beings do not just tell stories, or just listen to them. They are
more like Granny Weatherwax, who is aware of the power of story on
Discworld, and refuses to be trapped by the story’s narrativium.
Instead, she _uses_ the power of story to mould events according to her
own wishes. Roundworld priests, politicians, scientists, teachers and
journalists have learned to use the power of story to get their messages
across to the public, and to manipulate or persuade people to behave in
particular ways. The ‘scientific method’ is a defence mechanism against
that kind of manipulation. It tells you not to believe things because
you want them to be true. The proper scientific response to any new
discovery or theory, especially your own, is to look for ways to
disprove it. That is, to try to find a different story that explains the
same things.

The anthropologists got it wrong when they named our species _Homo
sapiens_ (‘wise man’). In any case it’s an arrogant and bigheaded thing
to say, wisdom being one of our least evident features. In reality, we
are _Pan narrans_, the storytelling chimpanzee.

At this point, the structure of _The Science of Discworld 2: The Globe_
becomes very self-referential. You will need to bear that in mind as we
proceed. The book is itself a story – no – two intertwined stories. One,
the odd-numbered chapters, is a Discworld fantasy. The other, the
even-numbered chapters, is a story of the science of the Mind
(metaphysical again). The two are closely related, designed to fit
together like foot and glove;⁷ the science story is presented as a
series of Very Large Footnotes to the fantasy story.

So far, so good … but it gets more complicated. When you read a
Discworld story, you play a curious mental game. You react as if the
story is true, as if Discworld actually exists, as if Rincewind and the
Luggage are real, and Roundworld is but a fragment of a long-forgotten
dream. (Please stop interrupting, Rincewind, we know it’s different from
your point of view. Yes, of course we’re the ones that don’t exist,
we’re bundles of rules whose consequences take place only inside a small
globe on a dusty shelf in Unseen University. Yes, we do appreciate that,
and will you please _shut up?_) Sorry about that.

People have become very good at playing this game, and we will exploit
that by setting Earth and Discworld on the same narrative level, so that
each illuminates the other. In the first book, _The Science of
Discworld_, the Discworld defined what is real. That’s why reality makes
such good sense. Roundworld is a magical construct, designed to keep the
magic out, and that’s why it makes no sense at all (to wizards, at
least). In this sequel Earth acquires inhabitants, the inhabitants
acquire minds, and minds do strange things. They bring narrativium to a
story-less universe.

A computer can do a billion sums in the blink of a keystroke and get
them all right, but it couldn’t pretend to be a cowardly wizard if one
walked up to it and thumped it on the memory cache. In contrast, we can
think ourselves inside the mind of a cowardly wizard with ease, or
recognise someone else when they’re acting the part of one, but we’re
completely lost when it comes to doing several million simple sums a
second. Even though, to someone not of this universe, that might appear
to be a simpler task.

That’s because we run on narrativium, and computers don’t.

¹ PET = Positron Emission Tomography, meaning that the machine picks up
tiny particles emitted by the tissues of the brain and reconstructs a
map of what’s going on inside it.

² And you’d be in the position of the horrible Discworld ‘Auditors’, who
are anthropomorphic representations of the rules of the universe, who in
_Thief of Time_ reduce paintings and statues to their component atoms in
a fruitless search for ‘beauty’.

³ And many things that there aren’t, such as Dark.

⁴ It _would_ have been an exit hole, but he didn’t.

⁵ In the simplest picture of an atom, the nucleus is a relatively small
central region made from protons and neutrons. Electrons ‘orbit’ the
nucleus at a distance. The triple-alpha process takes place in a plasma,
where the atoms have been stripped of their electrons, so only their
nuclei are involved. Later, as the plasma cools, the nuclei can acquire
the necessary electrons.

⁶ 1 MeV is one million electron-volts. An electron-volt is a unit of
energy, obviously, and for our current purposes it doesn’t really matter
what that unit _is_. For the record, it’s the energy of an electron when
its potential is raised by one volt, and is equal to 1.6 × 10-12 ergs.
And the energy referred to here is the excess energy compared to the
lowest energy state of the atom, its ‘ground state’. What’s an erg? Look
it up if you really need to know.

⁷ Not hand and glove, the fit isn’t _that_ close.

THREE

JOURNEY INTO L-SPACE

[image] IT WAS THREE HOURS LATER, in the cool of Unseen University. Not
much had changed in the High Energy Magic building, except that a screen
had been set up to show the output of Ponder’s iconograph projector.

‘I don’t see why you need it,’ said Rincewind. ‘There’s only the two of
us.’

‘Ook,’ agreed the Librarian. He was annoyed at having been woken from a
doze in his library. It had been a very _gentle_ awakening, since no one
wakes up a 300lb orangutan roughly (twice, at least) but he was still
annoyed.

‘The Archchancellor says that we’ve got to be more organised about these
things,’ said Ponder. ‘He says it’s no use just shouting out “Hey, I’ve
got a great idea!” These things have got to be _presented_ properly. Are
you ready?’

The very small imp that ran the projector raised a tiny thumb.

‘Very well,’ said Ponder. ‘First slide. This is the Roundworld as it
currently—’

‘It’s the wrong way up,’ said Rincewind.

Ponder looked at the image.

‘It’s a _ball_,’ he snarled. ‘It’s _floating_ in _space_. How can it be
the wrong way up?’

‘That crinkly continent should be at the top.’

‘Very well!’ snapped Ponder. ‘Imp, turn it around. Right? Satisfied?’

‘It’s the right way up but now it’s the wrong way arou—’ Rincewind
began.

There was a thwack as Ponder’s pointer stick smacked into the screen.
‘This is the Roundworld!’ he snapped. ‘As it exists at present! A world
covered in ice! But time on Roundworld is subordinate to time in the
real world! All times in Roundworld are accessible to us, in the same
way that all pages in a book, though consecutive, are accessible to us!
I have ascertained that the Faculty _are_ on Roundworld but not in what
appears to be the present time! They are several hundred million years
in the past! Which is, from our point of view, perfectly capable of
_also_ being the present! I don’t know how they got there! It should not
be physically possible! Hex has located them! We have to assume that
they can’t get back the way they came! However – next slide please!’

Click!

‘It’s the same one,’ said Rincewind. ‘But now it’s sideways—’

‘A globe has no sideways!’ said Ponder. There was a tinkle of breaking
glass from the direction of the projector, and some very small cursing.

‘I just thought you wanted to do it properly,’ murmured Rincewind.
‘Anyway, this is going to be about L-space, isn’t it? I _know_ it is.
You know it is.’

‘Yes, but I don’t say that yet! I’ve got another dozen slides to come!’
gasped Ponder. ‘And a flow chart!’

‘But it is, isn’t it,’ said Rincewind wearily. ‘I mean, they say they’ve
found other wizards. That means libraries. That means you can get there
through L-space.’

‘I was going to say that’s how _we_ can get there,’ said Ponder.

‘Yes, I know,’ said Rincewind. ‘That’s why I thought I’d take the
opportunity of saying “you” at this early juncture.’

‘How can there be wizards on Roundworld?’ said Ponder. ‘When we _know_
magic doesn’t work there?’

‘Search me,’ said Rincewind. ‘Ridcully did say they’re useless.’

‘And why can’t the faculty come back by themselves? They were able to
send the bottle! That must have used magic, surely?’

‘Why not just go and ask them?’ said Rincewind.

‘You mean by homing in on the distinctive biothaumic signature of a
group of wizards?’

‘Well, I was thinking of waiting until something dreadful happened and
_you_ going to have a look in the wreckage,’ said Rincewind. ‘But the
other stuff would probably work.’

‘The omniscope locates them in approximately the 40,002,730,907th
century,’ said Ponder, staring at the globe. ‘I can’t get an image. But
if we can find a way to the nearest library—’

‘Ook!’ said the Librarian. And then he ooked some more. He ooked at
length, with an occasional eek. Once he thumped his fist on the table.
He didn’t need to thump the table a second time. There wasn’t, at that
point, much in the way of table left to thump.

‘He says only very senior librarians can use L-space,’ said Rincewind,
as the Librarian folded his arms. ‘He was quite emphatic. He says it’s
not to be treated like some kind of magic funfair ride.’

‘But it’s an order from the Archchancellor!’ said Ponder. ‘There isn’t
any other way to get there!’

The Librarian looked a little uncertain at that. Rincewind knew why. It
was hard to be an orangutan in Unseen University, and the only way the
Librarian had been able to deal with it was by acknowledging Mustrum
Ridcully as the alpha male, even though the Archchancellor seldom
climbed up to a high place on the rooftops and called mournfully over
the city at dawn. This meant that, unlike the other wizards, he found it
very hard to shrug off an archchancelloric command. It was a direct,
fang-revealing, chest-beating challenge.

Rincewind had an idea.

‘If we put the globe in the Library,’ he said to the ape, ‘then that
would mean that even though you are travelling in L-space you would not
be taking Mr Stibbons anywhere outside the Library. I mean, the globe
would be inside the library, so even though you’d wind up in the globe,
you really wouldn’t have travelled very far at all. A few feet, maybe.
The globe’s only infinite on the inside, after all.’

‘Well, Rincewind, I am _impressed_,’ said Ponder, while the Librarian
looked perplexed. ‘I’d always thought of you as rather stupid, but that
was a remarkable piece of verbal reasoning. If we put the globe down
right on the Librarian’s desk, say, then the whole journey would take
place _inside_ the library, right?’

‘Exactly,’ said Rincewind, who was prepared to overlook ‘rather stupid’
in view of this unexpected praise.

‘And it’s perfectly safe in the library, after all …’

‘Big thick walls. Very safe place,’ Rincewind agreed.

‘So, put like that, no harm will come to us,’ said Ponder.

‘There you go with the “us” again,’ said Rincewind, backing away.

‘We’ll find them and bring them back!’ said Ponder. ‘How hard can it
be?’

‘It can be incredibly hard! There’s _elves_ there! You know elves! They
are _dangerous!_ Drop your guard for a moment and they can control your
mind!’

‘They chased me through some woods once,’ said Ponder. ‘They are very
frightening. I remember writing that down in my diary.’

‘You _wrote down in your diary_ that you were scared?’

‘Yes. Why not? Don’t you?’

‘I haven’t got a big enough diary. But it makes no sense! There’s
nothing on the Roundworld that elves would be interested in! They like
to have … slaves. And we’ve never seen anything evolve that’s bright
enough to be a slave.’

‘You might have missed something,’ said Ponder.

‘No, _I_ say _you, you_ say we,’ said Rincewind.

They both stared at the globe.

‘Look, it’s like having a pot plant,’ said Ponder. ‘If it has greenfly,
you try to squash them.’

‘_I_ never do that,’ said Rincewind. ‘Greenfly may be small, but there’s
a lot of them …’

‘It was a metaphor, Rincewind,’ said Ponder, wearily.

‘… I mean, supposing they decide to gang up?’

‘Rincewind, you are the only other person here who knows anything at all
about Roundworld. You _will_ come with us or … or … I’ll tell the
Archchancellor about the seven buckets.’

‘How do you know about the seven buckets?’

‘_And_ I’ll explain to him how all of your jobs could easily be done by
a simple set of instructions for Hex, too. It’d take me about, oh,
thirty seconds. Let’s see …

# Rincewind

SUB WAIT

WAIT

RETURN

Or possibly

RUN RINCEWIND’

‘You wouldn’t do that!’ said Rincewind. ‘Would you?’

‘Certainly. Now, are you coming? Oh, and bring the Luggage.’

Knowledge = power = energy = matter = mass, and on that simple equation
rests the whole of L-space. It is via L-space that all books are
connected (quoting the ones before them, and influencing the ones that
come after). But there is no time in L-space. Nor is there, strictly
speaking, any space. Nevertheless, L-space is infinitely large and
connects all libraries, everywhere and everywhen. It’s never further
than the other side of the bookshelf, yet only the most senior and
respected librarians know the way in.

From inside, L-space looked to Rincewind like a library designed by
someone who did not have to worry about time, budget, strength of
materials or physics. There are some laws, though, that are coded into
the very nature of the universe, and one is: There Is Never Enough Shelf
Space.¹

He turned and looked back. They’d entered L-space by walking _through_
what had looked like a solid wall of books. He _knew_ it was a solid
wall, he’d taken books off those shelves before now. You had to be a
very senior Librarian indeed to know in what precise circumstances you
could step straight through it.

He could still see the library through the gap, but it faded from view
as he watched. What remained was books. Mountains of books. Hills and
valleys of books. Perilous precipices of books. Even in what passed for
the sky, which was a sort of blue grey, there was a distant suggestion
of books. There is never enough shelf space, anywhere.

Ponder was carrying a considerable amount of magical equipment.
Rincewind, being a more experienced traveller, was carrying as little
weight as possible. Everything else was being carried by the Luggage,
which looked like a sea chest but with a number of pink, human-like and
fully operational feet.

‘Under the rules of the Roundworld, magic can’t work,’ said Ponder, as
they followed the Librarian. ‘Won’t the Luggage stop existing?’

‘It’s worth a try,’ said Rincewind, who felt that owning a semi-sapient
and occasionally homicidal box on legs reduced his opportunities to make
live friends, ‘but it doesn’t usually worry about rules. They bend round
it. Anyway, it’s already been there before, for a very long time,
without any damage. To the Luggage, anyway.’

The walls of books shifted as the wizards approached; in fact, each step
radically changed the nature of the bookscape which was in any case,
said Ponder, a mere metaphorical depiction created by their brains to
allow them to deal with the unimaginable reality. The shifting
perspective would have given most people a serious headache at least,
but Unseen University had rooms where the gravity moved around during
the course of a day, one corridor of infinite length and several windows
that only existed on one side of their walls. Life at UU reduced your
capacity for surprise by quite a lot.

Occasionally the Librarian would stop, and sniff at the books nearest to
him. At last he said ‘ook’, quietly, and pointed to another stack of
books. There were, drawn gently on the spine of an old leather-bound
volume, some chalk marks.

‘Librarian-sign,’ said Rincewind. ‘He’s been here before. We’re close to
Roundworld book-space.’

‘How could he—’ Ponder began, and then said: ‘Oh. I see. Er … Roundworld
exists in L-space even before we created it? I mean _yes_, obviously I
know that’s true, but even so—’

Rincewind took a book from a pile near him. The cover was brightly
coloured and made of paper, suggesting an absence of cows on the
originating world, and had the title: _Sleep Well My Lovely Falcon_. The
words inside made even less sense.

‘It might not have been worth our trouble,’ he said.

The Librarian said ‘ook’, which Rincewind understood as ‘I’m going to
get into real trouble with the Secret Masters of the Library for this
day’s work’.

Then the ape appeared to triangulate on the bookscape around him, and
knuckled forward, and vanished.

Ponder looked at Rincewind. ‘Did you see how he did that?’ he said, and
then a hairy red arm appeared out of the air and jerked him off his
feet. A moment later the same thing happened to Rincewind.

It wasn’t _much_ of a library, but Rincewind knew how this worked. Two
books were a library – for a lot of people, two books were an _enormous_
library. But even one book could be a library, if it was a book that
made a big enough dimple in L-space. A book with a title like _100 Ways
with Broccoli_ was unlikely to be one such, whereas _The Relationship
Between Capital and Labour_ might be, especially if it had an appendix
on making explosives. The deeply magical and interminably ancient
volumes in the Library of UU strained the fabric of L-space like a baby
elephant on a worn-out trampoline, leaving it so thin that the Library
was a potent and easy portal.

Sometimes, though, even one book could do that. Even one line. Even one
word, in the right place and the right time.

The room was large, panelled and sparsely furnished. Quite a lot of
paperwork was strewn on a desk. Quill pens lay by an inkwell. A window
looked out on to broad gardens, where it was raining. A skull lent a
homely touch.

Rincewind leaned down and tapped it.

‘Hello?’ he said. He looked up at the others.

‘Well, the one in the Dean’s office can sing comic songs,’ he said
defensively. He stared at the paperwork on the desk. It was covered in
symbols which had a magical look, although he didn’t recognise any of
them. On the other side of the room, the Librarian was leafing through
one of the books. Strangely, they weren’t on shelves. Some were neatly
piled, others locked in boxes, or at least in boxes that were locked
until the Librarian tried to lift the lid.

Occasionally he pursed his lips and blew a disdainful raspberry.

‘Ook,’ he muttered.

‘Alchemy?’ said Rincewind. ‘Oh dear. That stuff never works.’ He lifted
up what looked like a small leather hatbox, and removed the lid. ‘This
is more like it!’ he said, and pulled out a ball of smoky quartz. ‘Our
man is definitely a wizard!’

‘This is very bad,’ said Ponder, staring at a device in his hand. ‘Very,
very bad indeed.’

‘What is?’ said Rincewind, turning around quickly.

‘I’m reading a very high glamour quotient,’ said Ponder.

‘There’s elves here?’

‘Here? The place is practically elvish!’ said Ponder. ‘The
Archchancellor was right.’

All three explorers stood quietly. The Librarian’s nostrils flared.
Rincewind sniffed, very cautiously.

‘Seems okay to me,’ he said, at last.

Then a man in black entered the room. He came in quickly, opening the
door no more than necessary, in a kind of aggressive sidle, and stopped
in astonishment. Then his hand flew to his belt and he drew a thin,
businesslike sword.

He saw the Librarian. He stopped. And then it was really all over,
because the Librarian could unfold his arm very fast and, importantly,
there was a fist like a sledgehammer on the end of it.

As the dark figure slid down the wall, the crystal sphere in Rincewind’s
hand said: ‘I believe I now have enough information. I advise departure
from this place at a convenient opportunity and in any case before this
gentleman awakes.’

‘Hex?’ said Ponder.

‘Yes. Let me repeat my advice. Lack of absence from this place will
undoubtedly result in metal entering the body.’

‘But you’re talking via a crystal ball! Magic doesn’t work here!’

‘Don’t argue with a voice saying “run away”!’ said Rincewind. ‘That’s
good advice! You don’t question it! Let’s get out of here!’

He looked at the Librarian, who was sniffing along the bookshelves with
a puzzled expression.

Rincewind had a sense for the universe’s tendency to go wrong. He didn’t
leap to conclusions, he plunged headlong towards them.

‘You’ve brought us out through a one-way door, haven’t you …’ he said.

‘Oook!’

‘Well, how long will it take to find the way in?’

The Librarian shrugged and returned his attention to the shelves.

‘Leave now,’ said the crystal Hex. ‘Return later. The owner of this
house will be useful. But leave before Sir Francis Walsingham wakes up,
because otherwise he will kill you. Steal his purse from him first. You
will need money. For one thing, you will need to pay someone to give the
Librarian a shave.’

‘_Oook_?’

¹ Others found by research wizards include Objects In The Rear View
Mirror Are Closer Than They Appear, No User Serviceable Parts Inside
and, of course, May Contain Nuts.

FOUR

THE ADJACENT POSSIBLE

[image] THE CONCEPT OF L-SPACE, short for ‘Library-space’, occurs in
several of the Discworld novels. An early example occurs in _Lords and
Ladies_, a story that is mostly about elvish evil. We are told that
Ponder Stibbons is Reader in Invisible Writings, and this phrase
deserves (and gets) an explanation:

The study of invisible writings was a new discipline made available by
the discovery of the bi-directional nature of Library-space. The thaumic
mathematics are complex, but boil down to the fact that all books,
everywhere, affect all other books. This is obvious: books inspire other
books written in the future, and cite books written in the past. But the
General Theory¹ of L-space suggests that, in that case, the contents of
books _as yet unwritten_ can be deduced from books now in existence.

L-space is a typical example of the Discworld habit of taking a
metaphorical concept and making it real. The concept here is known as
‘phase space’, and it was introduced by the French mathematician Henri
Poincaré about a hundred years ago to open up the possibility of
applying geometrical reasoning to dynamics. Poincaré’s metaphor has now
invaded the whole of science, if not beyond, and we will make good use
of it in our discussion of the role of narrativium in the evolution of
the mind.

Poincaré was the archetypal absent-minded academic – no, come to think
of it he was ‘present-minded somewhere else’, namely in his mathematics,
and it’s easy to understand why. He was probably the most naturally
gifted mathematician of the nineteenth century. If you had a mind like
his, you’d spend most of _your_ time somewhere else, too, revelling in
the beauty of the mathiverse.

Poincaré ranged over almost all of mathematics, and he wrote several
best-selling popular science books, too. In one piece of research, which
single-handedly created a new ‘qualitative’ way of thinking about
dynamics, he pointed out that when you are studying some physical system
that can exist in a variety of different states, then it may be a good
idea to consider the states that it _could_ be in, but isn’t, as well as
the particular state in which it _is_. By doing that, you set up a
context that lets you understand what the system is doing, and why. This
context is the ‘phase space’ of the system. Each possible state can be
thought of as a _point_ in that phase space. As time passes, the state
changes, so this representative point traces out a curve, the
_trajectory_ of the system. The rule that determines the successive
steps in the trajectory is the _dynamic_ of the system. In most areas of
physics, the dynamic is completely determined, once and for all, but we
can extend this terminology to cases where the rule involves possible
choices. A good example is a game. Now the phase space is the space of
possible positions, the dynamic is the rules of the game and a
trajectory is a legal sequence of moves by the players.

The formal setting and terminology for phase spaces is not as important,
for us, as the viewpoint that they encourage. For example, you might
wonder why the surface of a pool of water, in the absence of wind or
other disturbances, is flat. It just sits there, flat; it isn’t even
_doing_ anything. But you start to make progress immediately if you ask
the question ‘what would happen if it _wasn’t_ flat?’ For instance, why
can’t the water be piled up into a hump in the middle of the pond? Well,
imagine that it was. Imagine that you can control the position of every
molecule of water, and that you pile it up in this way, miraculously
keeping every molecule just where you’ve placed it. Then, you ‘let go’.
What would happen? The heap of water would collapse, and waves would
slosh across the pool until everything settled down to that nice, flat
surface that we’ve learned to expect. Again, suppose you arranged the
water so that there was a big dip in the middle. Then as soon as you let
go, water would move in from the sides to fill the dip.

Mathematically, this idea can be formalised in terms of the space of all
possible shapes for the water’s surface. ‘Possible’ here doesn’t mean
_physically_ possible: the only shape you’ll ever see in the real world,
barring disturbances, is a flat surface. ‘Possible’ means ‘conceptually
possible’. So we can set up this space of all possible shapes for the
surface as a simple mathematical construct, and this is the phase space
for the problem. Each ‘point’ – location – in phase space represents a
conceivable shape for the surface. Just one of those points, one state,
represents ‘flat’.

Having defined the appropriate phase space, the next step is to
understand the dynamic: the way that the natural flow of water under
gravity affects the possible surfaces of the pool. In this case, there
is a simple principle that solves the whole problem: the idea that water
flows so as to make its total energy as small as possible. If you put
the water into some particular state, like that piled-up hump, and then
let go, the surface will follow the ‘energy gradient’ downhill, until it
finds the lowest possible energy. Then (after some sloshing around which
slowly subsides because of friction) it will remain at rest in this
lowest-energy state.

The energy in this problem is ‘potential energy’, determined by gravity.
The potential energy of a mass of water is equal to its height above
some arbitrary reference level, multiplied by the mass concerned.
Suppose that the water is not flat. Then some parts are higher up than
others. So we can transfer some water from the high level to the lower
one, by flattening a hump and filling a dip. When we do that, the water
involved moves downwards, so the total energy decreases. Conclusion: if
the surface is not flat, then the energy is not as small as possible.
Or, to put it the other way round: the minimum energy configuration
occurs when the surface is flat.

The shape of a soap bubble is another example. Why is it round? The way
to answer that question is to compare the actual round shape with a
hypothetical non-round shape. What’s different? Yes, the alternative
isn’t round, but is there some less obvious difference? According to
Greek legend, Dido was offered as much land (in northern Africa) as she
could enclose with a bull’s hide. She cut it into a very long, thin
strip and enclosed a circle. There she founded the city of Carthage. Why
did she choose a circle? Because the circle is the shape with greatest
area, for a given perimeter. In the same way, a sphere is the shape with
greatest volume, for a given surface area; or, to put it another way, it
is the shape with the smallest surface area that contains a given
volume. A soap bubble contains a fixed volume of air, and its surface
area gives the energy of the soap film due to surface tension. In the
space of all possible shapes for bubbles, the one with the least energy
is a sphere. All other shapes have larger energy, and are therefore
ruled out.

You may not feel that bubbles are important. But the same principle
explains why Roundworld (the planet not the universe, but maybe that,
too) is round. When it was molten rock, it settled into a spherical
shape, because that had the least energy. For the same reason, the heavy
materials like iron sank into the core, and the lighter ones, like
continents and air, floated up to the top. Actually, Roundworld isn’t
exactly a sphere, because it rotates, so centrifugal forces cause it to
bulge at the equator. But the amount of bulge is only one-third of one
per cent. And that bulging shape is the minimum-energy configuration for
a mass of liquid spinning at the same speed as the Earth’s rotation when
it was just starting to solidify.

The physics here isn’t important for the message of this book. What is
important is the ‘Worlds of If’ point of view involved in the
application of phase spaces. When we discussed the shape of water in a
pond, we pretty much ignored the flat surface, the thing we were trying
to explain. The entire argument hinged upon non-flat surfaces, humps and
dips, and hypothetical transfers of water from one to the other. Almost
all of the explanation involved thinking about things that don’t
actually happen. Only at the end, having ruled out _all_ non-flat
surfaces, did we observe that the only possibility left was therefore
what the water would actually do. The same goes for the bubble.

At first sight, this might seem to be a very oblique way of doing
physics. It takes the stance that the way to understand the real world
is to ignore it, and focus instead on all the possible alternative
unreal worlds. Then we find some principle (in this case, minimum
energy) to rule out nearly all of the unreal worlds, and see what’s
left. Wouldn’t it be easier to start with the real world, and focus
solely on that? No, it wouldn’t. As we’ve just seen, the real world
alone is too limited to offer a convincing explanation. What you get
from the real world alone is ‘the world is like it is, and there’s
nothing more to be said’. However, if you take the imaginative leap of
considering unreal worlds, too, you can compare the real world with all
of those unreal worlds, and maybe find a principle that picks out the
real one from all the others. Then you have answered the question ‘_Why_
is the world the way it is, rather than something else?’

An excellent way to approach ‘why’ questions is to consider alternatives
and rule them out. ‘Why did you park the car round the corner down a
side-street?’ ‘Because if I’d parked outside the front door on the
double yellow lines, a traffic warden would have given me a parking
ticket.’ This particular ‘why’ question is a story, a piece of fiction:
a hypothetical discussion of the likely consequences of an action that
never occurred. Humans invented their own brand of narrativium as an aid
to the exploration of I-space, the space of ‘insteads’. Narrative
provides I-space with a geography: if I did this _instead_ of that, then
what would happen would be …

On Discworld, phase spaces are real. The fictitious alternatives to the
one actual state exist, too, and you can get inside the phase space and
roam over its landscape – provided you know the right spells, secret
entrances and other magical paraphernalia. L-space is a case in point.
On Roundworld, we can _pretend_ that phase space exists, and we can
imagine exploring its geography. This pretence has turned out to be
extraordinarily insightful.

Associated with any physical system, then, is a phase space, a space of
the possible. If you’re studying the solar system, then the phase space
comprises all possible ways to arrange one star, nine planets, a
considerable number of moons and a gigantic number of asteroids in
space. If you’re studying a sand-pile, then the phase space comprises
the number of possible ways to arrange several million grains of sand.
If you’re studying thermodynamics, then the phase space comprises all
possible positions and velocities for a large number of gas molecules.
Indeed, for each molecule there are three position coordinates and three
velocity coordinates, because the molecule lives in three-dimensional
space. So with _N_ molecules there are 6 _N_ coordinates altogether. If
you’re looking at games of chess, then the phase space consists of all
possible positions of the pieces on the board. If you’re thinking about
all possible books, then the phase space is L-space. And if you’re
thinking about all possible universes, you’re contemplating U-space.
Each ‘point’ of U-space is an entire universe (and you have to invent
the multiverse to hold them all …)

When cosmologists think about varying the natural constants, as we
described in Chapter 2 in connection with the carbon resonance in stars,
they are thinking about one tiny and rather obvious piece of U-space,
the part that can be derived from our universe by changing the
fundamental constants but otherwise keeping the laws the same. There are
infinitely many other ways to set up an alternative universe: they range
from having 101 dimensions and totally different laws to being identical
with our universe except for six atoms of dysprosium in the core of the
star Procyon that change into iodine on Thursdays.

As this example suggests, the first thing to appreciate about phase
spaces is that they are generally rather big. What the universe actually
does is a tiny proportion of all the things it could have done instead.
For instance, suppose that a car park has one hundred parking slots, and
that cars are either red, blue, green, white, or black. When the car
park is full, how many different patterns of colour are there? Ignore
the make of car, ignore how well or badly it is parked; focus solely on
the pattern of colours.

Mathematicians call this kind of question ‘combinatorics’, and they have
devised all sorts of clever ways to find answers. Roughly speaking,
combinatorics is the art of counting things without actually counting
them. Many years ago a mathematical acquaintance of ours came across a
university administrator counting light bulbs in the roof of a lecture
hall. The lights were arranged in a perfect rectangular grid, 10 by 20.
The administrator was staring at the ceiling, going ‘49, 50, 51 …’

‘Two hundred,’ said the mathematician.

‘How do you know that?’

‘Well, it’s a 10 by 20 grid, and 10 times 20 is 200.’

‘No, no,’ replied the administrator. ‘I want the _exact_ number.’²

Back to those cars. There are five colours, and each slot can be filled
by just one of them. So there are five ways to fill the first slot, five
ways to fill the second, and so on. Any way to fill the first slot can
be combined with any way to fill the second, so those two slots can be
filled in 5 × 5 = 25 ways. Each of those can be combined with any of the
five ways to fill the third slot, so now we have 25 × 5 = 125
possibilities. By the same reasoning, the total number of ways to fill
the whole car park is 5 × 5 × 5 … × 5, with a hundred fives. This is
5¹⁰⁰, which is rather big. To be precise, it is

78886090522101180541172856528278622

96732064351090230047702789306640625

(we’ve broken the number in two so that it fits the page width) which
has 70 digits. It took a computer algebra system about five seconds to
work that out, by the way, and about 4.999 of those seconds were taken
up with giving it the instructions. And most of the rest was used up
printing the result to the screen. Anyway, you now see why combinatorics
is the art of counting without actually _counting_; if you listed all
the possibilities and counted them ‘1, 2, 3, 4 …’ you’d never finish. So
it’s a good job that the university administrator wasn’t in charge of
car parking.

How big is L-space? The Librarian said it is infinite, which is true if
you used infinity to mean ‘a much larger number than I can envisage’ or
if you don’t place an upper limit on how big a book can be,³ or if you
allow all possible alphabets, syllabaries, and pictograms. If we stick
to ‘ordinary-sized’ English books, we can reduce the estimate.

A typical book is 100,000 words long, or about 600,000 characters
(letters and spaces, we’ll ignore punctuation marks). There are 26
letters in the English alphabet, plus a space, making 27 characters that
can go into each of the 600,000 possible positions. The counting
principle that we used to solve the car-parking problem now implies that
the maximum number of books of this length is 27600,000, which is
roughly 10860,000 (that is, an 860,000-digit number). Of course, most of
those ‘books’ make very little sense, because we’ve not yet insisted
that the letters make sensible words. If we assume that the words are
drawn from a list of 10,000 standard ones, and calculate the number of
ways to arrange 100,000 words in order, then the figure changes to
10,000100,000, equal to 10400,000, and this is quite a bit smaller … but
still enormous. Mind you, most of those books wouldn’t make much sense
either; they’d read something like ‘Cabbage patronymic forgotten
prohibit hostile quintessence’ continuing at book length.⁴ So maybe we
ought to work with sentences … At any rate, even if we cut the numbers
down in that manner, it turns out that the universe is not big enough to
contain that many physical books. So it’s a good job that L-space is
available, and now we know why there’s never enough shelf space. We like
to think that our major libraries, such as the British Library or the
Library of Congress, are pretty big. But, in fact, the space of those
books that actually exist is a tiny, tiny fraction of L-space, of all
the books that could have existed. In particular, we’re never going to
run out of new books to write.

Poincaré’s phase space viewpoint has proved to be so useful that
nowadays you’ll find it in every area of science – and in areas that
aren’t science at all. A major consumer of phase spaces is economics.
Suppose that a national economy involves a million different goods:
cheese, bicycles, rats-on-a-stick, and so on. Associated with each good
is a price, say £2.35 for a lump of cheese, £449.99 for a bicycle,
£15.00 for a rat-on-a-stick. So the state of the economy is a list of
one million numbers. The phase space consists of all possible lists of a
million numbers, including many lists that make no economic sense at
all, such as lists that include the £0.02 bicycle or the £999,999,999.95
rat. The economist’s job is to discover the principles that select, from
the space of all possible lists of numbers, the actual list that is
observed.

The classic principle of this kind is the Law of Supply and Demand,
which says that if goods are in short supply and you really, really want
them, then the price goes up. It sometimes works, but it often doesn’t.
Finding such laws is something of a black art, and the results are not
totally convincing, but that just tells us that economics is hard. Poor
results notwithstanding, the economist’s way of thinking is a phase
space point of view.

Here’s a little tale that shows just how far removed economic theory is
from reality. The basis of conventional economics is the idea of a
rational agent with perfect information, who maximises utility.
According to these assumptions, a taxi-driver, for example, will arrange
his activities to generate the most money for the least effort.

Now, the income of a taxi-driver depends on circumstances. On good days,
with lots of passengers around, he will do well; on bad days, he won’t.
A rational taxi-driver will therefore work longer on good days and give
up early on bad ones. However, a study of taxi-drivers in New York
carried out by Colin Camerer and others shows the exact opposite. The
taxi-drivers seem to set themselves a daily target, and stop working
once they reach it. So they work shorter hours on good days, and longer
hours on bad ones. They could increase their earnings by 8 per cent just
by working the same number of hours every day, for the same total
working time. If they worked longer on good days and shorter on bad
ones, they could increase their earnings by 15 per cent. But they don’t
have a good enough intuition for economic phase space to appreciate
this. They are adopting a common human trait of placing too much value
on what they have today, and too little on what they may gain tomorrow.

Biology, too, has been invaded by phase spaces. The first of these to
gain widespread currency was DNA-space. Associated with every living
organism is its genome, a string of chemical molecules called DNA. The
DNA molecule is a double helix, two spirals wrapped round a common core.
Each spiral is made up of a string of ‘bases’ or ‘nucleotides’, which
come in four varieties: cytosine, guanine, adenine, thymine, normally
abbreviated to their initials C, G, A, T. The sequences on the two
strings are ‘complementary’: wherever C appears on one string, you get G
on the other, and similarly for A and T. So the DNA contains two copies
of the sequence, one positive and one negative, so to speak. In the
abstract, then, the genome can be thought of as a single sequence of
these four letters, something like AATG-GCCTCAG … going on for rather a
long time. The human genome, for example, goes on for about three
billion letters.

The phase space for genomes, DNA-space, consists of all possible
sequences of a given length. If we’re thinking about human beings, the
relevant DNA-space comprises all possible sequences of three billion
code letters C, G, A, T. How big is that space? It’s the same problem as
the cars in the car park, mathematically speaking, so the answer is 4 ×
4 × 4 × … × 4 with three billion 4s. That is, 43,000,000,000. This
number is a lot bigger than the 70-digit number we got for the
car-parking problem. It’s a lot bigger than L-space for normal-sized
books, too. In fact, it has about 1,800,000,000 digits. If you wrote it
out with 3,000 digits per page, you’d need a 600,000-page book to hold
it.

The image of DNA-space is very useful for geneticists who are
considering possible changes to DNA sequences, such as ‘point mutations’
where one code letter is changed, say as the result of a copying error.
Or an incoming high-energy cosmic ray. Viruses, in particular, mutate so
rapidly that it makes little sense to talk of a viral species as a fixed
thing. Instead, biologists talk of quasi-species, and visualise these as
clusters of related sequences in DNA-space. The clusters slosh around as
time passes, but they stay together as one cluster, which allows the
virus to retain its identity.

In the whole of human history, the total number of people has been no
more than ten billion, a mere 11-digit number. This is an incredibly
tiny fraction of all those possibilities. So actual human beings have
explored the tiniest portion of DNA-space, just as actual books have
explored the tiniest portion of L-space. Of course, the interesting
questions are not as straightforward as that. Most sequences of letters
do not make up a sensible book; most DNA sequences do not correspond to
a viable organism, let alone a human being.

And now we come to the crunch for phase spaces. In physics, it is
reasonable to assume that the sensible phase space can be ‘pre-stated’
before tackling questions about the corresponding system. We can imagine
rearranging the bodies of the solar system into _any_ configuration in
that imaginary phase space. We lack the engineering capacity to do that,
but we have no difficulty imagining it done, and we see no physical
reason to remove any particular configuration from consideration.

When it comes to DNA-space, however, the important questions are not
about the whole of that vast space of all possible sequences. Nearly all
of those sequences correspond to no organism whatsoever, not even a dead
one. What we really need to consider is ‘viable-DNA-space’, the space of
all DNA sequences that could be realised within some viable organism.
This is some immensely complicated but very thin part of DNA-space, and
we don’t know what it is. We have no idea how to look at a hypothetical
DNA sequence and decide whether it can occur in a viable organism.

The same problem arises in connection with L-space, but there’s a twist.
A literate human can look at a sequence of letters and spaces and decide
whether it constitutes a story; they know how to ‘read’ the code and
work out its meaning, if it’s in a language they understand. They can
even make a stab at deciding whether it’s a good story or a bad one.
However, we do not know how to transfer this ability to a computer. The
rules that our minds use, to decide whether what we’re reading is a
story, are implicit in the networks of nerve cells in our brains. Nobody
has yet been able to make those rules explicit. We don’t know how to
_characterise_ the ‘readable books’ subset of L-space.

For DNA, the problem is compounded because there isn’t some kind of
fixed rule that ‘translates’ a DNA code into an organism. Biologists
used to think there would be, and had high hopes of learning the
‘language’ involved. Then the DNA for a genuine (potential) organism
would be a code sequence that told a coherent story of biological
development, and all other DNA sequences would be gibberish. In effect,
the biologists expected to be able to look at the DNA sequence of a
tiger and _see_ the bit that specified the stripes, the bit that
specified the claws, and so on.

This was a bit optimistic. The current state of the art is that we can
see the bit of DNA that specifies the protein from which claws are made,
or the bits that make the orange, black and white pigments of the fur
that show up as stripes, but that’s about as far as our understanding of
DNA narrative goes. It is now becoming clear that many non-genetic
factors go into the growth of an organism, too, so even in principle
there may not be a ‘language’ that translates DNA into living creatures.
For example, tiger DNA turns into a baby tiger only in the presence of
an egg, supplied by a mother tiger. The same DNA, in the presence of a
mongoose egg, would not make a tiger at all.

Now, it could be that this is just a technical problem: that for each
DNA code there is a unique kind of mother-organism that turns it into a
living creature, so that the form of that creature is still _implicit_
in the code. But theoretically, at least, the same DNA code could make
two totally different organisms. We give an example in _The Collapse of
Chaos_, where the developing organism first ‘looks’ to see what kind of
mother it is in, and then develops in different ways depending on what
it sees.

Complexity guru Stuart Kauffman has taken this difficulty a stage
further. He points out that while in physics we can expect to pre-state
the phase space of a system, the same is never true in biology.
Biological systems are more creative than physical ones: the
organisation of matter within living creatures is of a different
qualitative nature from the organisation we find in inorganic matter. In
particular organisms can evolve, and when they do that they often become
more complicated. The fish-like ancestor of humans was less complicated
than we are today, for example. (We’ve not specified a measure of
complexity here, but that statement will be reasonable for most sensible
measures of complexity, so let’s not worry about definitions.) Evolution
does not _necessarily_ increase complexity, but it’s at its most
puzzling when it does.

Kauffman contrasts two systems. One is the traditional thermodynamic
model in physics, of _N_ gas molecules (modelled as hard spheres)
bouncing around inside their 6_N_-dimensional phase space. Here we know
the phase space in advance, we can specify the dynamic precisely, and we
can deduce general laws. Among them is the Second Law of Thermodynamics,
which states that with overwhelming probability the system will become
more disordered as time passes, and the molecules will distribute
themselves uniformly throughout their container.

The second system is the ‘biosphere’, an evolving ecology. Here, it is
not at all clear which phase space to use. Potential choices are either
much too big, or much too limited. Suppose for a moment that the old
biologists’ dream of a DNA language for organisms was true. Then we
might hope to employ DNA-space as our phase space.

However, as we’ve just seen, only a tiny, intricate subset of that space
would really be of interest – but we can’t work out which subset. When
you add to that the probable non-existence of any such language, the
whole approach falls apart. On the other hand, if the phase space is too
small, entirely reasonable changes might take the organisms outside it
altogether. For example, tiger-space might be defined in terms of the
number of stripes on the big cat’s body. But if one day a big cat
evolves that has spots instead of stripes, there’s no place for it in
the tiger phase space. Sure, it’s not a tiger … but its mother was. We
can’t sensibly exclude this kind of innovation if we want to understand
real biology.

As organisms evolve, they change. Sometimes evolution can be seen as the
opening-up of a region of phase space that was sitting there waiting,
but was not occupied by organisms. If the colours and patterns on an
insect change a bit, all that we’re seeing is the exploration of new
regions of a fairly well-defined ‘insect-space’. But when an entirely
new trick, wings, appears, even the phase space seems to have changed.

It is very difficult to capture the phenomenon of innovation in a
mathematical model. Mathematicians like to pre-state the space of
possibilities, but the whole point about innovation is that it opens up
new possibilities that were previously not envisaged. So Kauffman
suggests that a key feature of the biosphere is the inability to
pre-state a phase space for it.

At risk of muddying the waters, it is worth observing that even in
physics, pre-stating the phase space is not as straightforward as it
might appear. What happens to the phase space of the solar system if we
allow bodies to break up, or merge? Supposedly⁵ the Moon was splashed
off the Earth when it collided with a body about the size of Mars.
Before that event, there was no Moon-coordinate in the phase space of
the solar system; afterwards, there was. So the phase space expanded
when the Moon came into being. The phase spaces of physics always assume
a fixed context. In physics, you can usually get away with that
assumption. In biology, you can’t.

There’s a second problem in physics, too. That 6_N_-dimensional phase
space of thermodynamics, for example, is too big. It includes
non-physical states. By a quirk of mathematics, the laws of motion for
elastic spheres do not prescribe what happens when three or more collide
simultaneously. So we must excise from that nice, simple
6_N-_dimensional space all configurations that experience a triple
collision somewhere in their past or future. We know four things about
these configurations. They are very rare. They can occur. They form an
extremely complicated cloud of points in phase space. And it is
impossible, in any practical sense, to determine whether a given
configuration should or should not be excised. If these unphysical
states were a bit more common, then the thermodynamic phase space would
be just as hard to pre-state as that for the biosphere. However, they
are a vanishingly small proportion of the whole, so we can just about
get away with ignoring them.

Nonetheless, it _is_ possible to go some way towards pre-stating a phase
space for the biosphere. While we cannot pre-state a space of _all_
possible organisms, we can look at any given organism and at least in
principle say what the potential immediate changes are. That is, we can
describe the space of the _adjacent_ possible, the local phase space.
Innovation then becomes the process of expanding into the adjacent
possible. This is a reasonable and fairly conventional idea. But, more
controversially, Kauffman suggests the exciting possibility that there
may be general laws that govern this kind of expansion, laws that have
exactly the opposite effect to the famous Second Law of Thermodynamics.
The Second Law in effect states that thermodynamic systems become
simpler as time passes; all of the interesting structure gets ‘smeared
out’ and disappears. In contrast, Kauffman’s suggestion is that the
biosphere expands into the space of the adjacent possible at the maximum
rate that it can, subject to hanging together as a biological system.
Innovation in biology happens _as rapidly as possible_.

More generally, Kauffman extends this idea to any system composed of
‘autonomous agents’. An autonomous agent is a generalised life-form,
defined by two properties: it can reproduce, and it can carry out at
least one thermodynamic work cycle. A work cycle occurs when a system
does work and returns to its original state, ready to do the same again.
That is, the system takes energy from its environment and transforms it
into work, and does so in such a manner that at the end of the cycle it
returns to its initial state.

A human being is an autonomous agent, and so is a tiger. A flame is not:
flames reproduce by spreading to inflammable material nearby, but they
do not carry out a work _cycle_. They turn chemical energy into fire,
but once something has been burnt, it can’t be burnt a second time.

This theory of autonomous agents is explicitly set in the context of
phase spaces. Without such a concept, it cannot even be described. And
in this theory we see the first possibility of obtaining a general
understanding of the principles whereby, and wherefore, organisms
complicate themselves. We are starting to pin down just what it is about
lifeforms that makes them behave so differently from the boring
prescription of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. We paint a picture of
the universe as a source of ever-increasing complexity and organisation,
instead of the exact opposite. We find out why we live in an interesting
universe, instead of a dull one.

¹ There’s a Special Theory as well, but no one bothers with it much
because it’s self-evidently a load of marsh-gas. [This footnote is a
footnote in the original quotation. So this is a metafootnote.]

² The bean-counters don’t even know how to count beans sensibly. Are we
surprised?

³ A tour of any airport bookshop will show that this is reasonable.

⁴ But Joycean scholars would be furious if we excluded _Finnegan’s
Wake_, which reads _exactly_ like that.

⁵ See _The Science of Discworld_, ‘A giant leap for moonkind’.

FIVE

REMARKABLY LIKE ANKH-MORPORK

[image] ‘HOW CAN YOU COMMUNICATE LIKE THIS?’ panted Ponder, as they
jogged along beside a broad river.

‘Since the physics of Roundworld are subordinate to the physics of the
real world, I can use anything considered to be a communication device,’
said the voice of Hex, slightly muffled in Rincewind’s pocket. ‘The
owner of this device believes it to be one such. Also, I can deduce much
information from this world’s footprint in L-space. And the
Archchancellor was right. There is much Elvish influence here.’

‘You can extract information from Roundworld books?’ said Ponder.

‘Yes. The phase space of books that relate to this world contains ten to
the power of 1,100 to the power of _n_ volumes,’ said Hex.

‘That’s enough books to fill the univ— hold on, what is _n_?’

‘The number of all possible universes.’

‘Then that’s enough books to fill all possible universes! Well … as
close as makes no difference, anyway.’

‘Correct. That is why there is never enough bookshelf space. However,
because of the subordinate temporal matrix of this world, I can use
virtual computing,’ said Hex. ‘Once you know what the answer is, the
process of calculation can be seriously reduced. Once the correct answer
is found, the fruitless channels of inquiry cease to exist. Besides, if
you deduct all the books that are about golf, cats, slood¹ and cookery
the number is really quite manageable.’

‘Oook,’ said the Librarian.

‘He says he’s not going to have a shave,’ said Rincewind.

‘It is essential,’ said Hex. ‘We are getting strange glances from people
in the fields. We do not wish to attract a mob. He must be shaved, and
given a robe and hat.’

Rincewind was doubtful. ‘I don’t think that’ll fool anyone,’ he said.

‘My readings tell me that it will if you say he’s Spanish.’

‘What’s Spanish?’

‘Spain is a country some five hundred miles from this one.’

‘And people there look like him?’

‘No. But people here would be quite prepared to believe so. This is a
credulous age. The elves have done a lot of damage. The greatest minds
spend half their time busying themselves with the study of magic,
astrology, alchemy and communion with spirits.’

‘Well? Sounds just like life at home,’ said Rincewind.

‘Yes,’ said Hex. ‘But there is no narrativium in this world. No magic.
None of those things work.’

‘Then why don’t they just stop trying it?’ said Ponder.

‘My inference is that they believe it should work if only they get it
right.’

‘Poor devils,’ said Rincewind.

‘They believe in those, too.’

‘There’s more houses ahead,’ said Ponder. ‘We’re coming to a city. Er …
and we’ve got the Luggage with us. Hex, we haven’t just got an orangutan
with us, we’ve got a box on legs!’

‘Yes. We must leave it in some bushes while we find a voluminous dress
and a wig,’ said Hex calmly. ‘Fortunately, this is the right period.’

‘A dress won’t work, believe me!’

‘It will if the Librarian sits on the Luggage,’ said Hex. ‘That will
bring him up to the right height and the dress will provide adequate
cover for the Luggage.’

‘Now hang on a moment,’ said Rincewind. ‘You saying that people here
will believe an ape in a dress and a wig is a woman?’

‘They will if you say she’s Spanish.’

Rincewind took another look at the Librarian.

‘Those elves really _must_ have done a lot of damage,’ he said.

The city was remarkably like Ankh-Morpork, although smaller and,
unbelievably, smellier. One reason for that was the large number of
animals in the streets. It was as if the place had been designed as a
village and simply scaled up.

The wizards hadn’t been hard to find. Hex located them easily, but in
any case the noise could be heard in the next street. There was a
tavern, with a courtyard, and in the courtyard a crowd of alcohol, which
contained people, was watching a man trying to beat Archchancellor
Ridcully with a very long and heavy staff.

He wasn’t succeeding. Ridcully, who was stripped to the waist, was
fighting back very effectively, putting his wizarding staff to the
unusual task of hitting someone. He was a lot better at it than his
opponent. Most wizards would die rather than take exercise, and did, but
Ridcully had the rude health of a bear and only marginally better
interpersonal skills. Despite his quite considerable if erratic
erudition, at heart he was a man who’d rather smack someone around the
ear than develop a complicated argument.

As the rescue party arrived, he hit the man across the head and then
swept his feet from under him on the back-swing. A cheer went up as the
man went down.

Ridcully helped his stunned adversary to his feet and propelled him to a
bench, where the man’s friends poured beer over him. Then he nodded to
Rincewind and company.

‘Got here, then,’ he said. ‘Bring the stuff, did you? Who’s the Spanish
lady?’

‘That’s the Librarian,’ said Rincewind. There wasn’t a great deal
visible between the ruff and the red wig except an impression of extreme
annoyance.

‘Is it?’ said Ridcully. ‘Oh, yes. Sorry. Been here too long. This place
gets to you. Good thinking, puttin’ him in disguise. Hex suggested that,
I expect.’

‘We came as quick as we could, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘How long have you
been here?’

‘Couple of weeks,’ said Ridcully. ‘Not a bad place. Come and meet
everyone.’

The rest of the wizards were sitting around a table. They were dressed
in their normal wizarding outfits which, Rincewind had noticed, fitted
in pretty well with the costumes in this town. But each man had equipped
himself with a ruff, just to be on the safe side.

They nodded cheerfully at the newcomers. A forest of empty mugs in front
of them went some way to explaining the cheer.

‘You’ve detected elves?’ said Ridcully, forcing enough wizards apart to
give them seats.

‘The place is lousy with glamour, sir,’ said Ponder, sitting down.

‘You’re telling me,’ said Ridcully. He glanced along the table. ‘Oh,
yes. We’ve found a friend. Dee, this is Mister Stibbons. Remember we
told you about him?’

It was then that Ponder realised there were a couple of non-wizards in
the party. It was quite hard to spot one, though, since for all
practical purposes he fitted in well. He even had the right kind of
beard.

‘Er … the noddlepate?’ said Dee.

‘No, that’s Rincewind,’ said Ridcully. ‘Ponder is the _clever_ one. And
this …’ he turned to the Librarian, and words failed even him, ‘is … a …
friend of theirs.’

‘From Spanish,’ said Rincewind, who didn’t know what noddlepate meant
but had formed a pretty good idea.

‘Dee here is a sort of local wizard,’ said Ridcully, in the loud voice
he thought was a confidential whisper. ‘Sharp as a tack, mind like a
razor, but spends all his spare time trying to do magic!’

‘Which doesn’t work here,’ said Ponder.

‘Right! But everyone believes it does, despite everything. Amazing!
That’s what elves can do to a place.’ Ridcully leaned forward,
conspiratorially. ‘They came straight through our world and straight on
into this one and we got caught up in the … what’s it you call it when
it’s all swirly and chilly as hell?’

‘Trans-dimensional flux, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Right. We’d have been totally lost if our friend Dee here hadn’t been
working a magic circle at the time.’

There was silence from Rincewind and Ponder. Then Rincewind said: ‘You
said magic doesn’t work here.’

‘As with this crystal sphere,’ said a voice from Rincewind’s pocket,
‘this world is quite capable of maintaining a passive receptor.’

Rincewind removed the scrying stone from his pocket.

‘But that is _mine_,’ said Dee, staring at it.

‘Sorry,’ said Rincewind. ‘We just sort of found it and sort of picked it
sort of up.’

‘But it _speaks_!’ gasped Dee. ‘An ethereal voice!’

‘No, it’s just from another world that is much bigger than this one and
can’t be seen,’ said Ridcully. ‘There’s nothing mysterious about it at
all.’

With trembling fingers, Dee took the sphere from Rincewind and held it
in front of his eyes.

‘Speak!’ he commanded.

‘Permission denied,’ said the crystal. ‘You do not have the rights to do
this.’

‘Where did you tell him you came from?’ Rincewind whispered to Ridcully,
as Dee tried to polish the ball with the sleeve of his robe.

‘I just said we’d dropped in from another sphere,’ said Ridcully. ‘After
all, this universe is full of spheres. He seemed to be quite happy about
that. I didn’t mention the Discworld at all, in case it confused him.’

Rincewind looked at Dee’s shaking hands and the manic glint in his eye.

‘I just want to be clear,’ he said slowly. ‘You appeared in a magic
circle, you told him you’re from another sphere, he’d just spoken to a
crystal ball, you’ve explained to him that magic doesn’t work and you
don’t want to confuse him?’

‘Make him any more confused than he is already, you mean,’ said the
Dean. ‘Confusion is the natural state of mind here, believe us. Do you
know they think numbers are magical? Doing sums can get a man into real
trouble in these parts.’

‘Well, some numbers _are_ magi—’ Ponder began.

‘Not here they’re not,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Here I am, out in the
open air, no magical protection and I’m going to say the number that
comes after seven. Here it comes: _eight_. There. Nothing happened.
Eight! Eighteen! Two fat ladies in very tight corsetry, eighty-eight!
Oh, someone pull Rincewind out from under the table, will you?’

While the Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography was having some of it
brushed off his robes, Ridcully continued: ‘It’s a mad world. No
narrativium. People makin’ up history as they go along. Brilliant men
spendin’ their time wondering how many angels can dance on the head of a
pin—’

‘Sixteen,’ said Ponder.

‘Yes, _we_ know that because _we_ can go and look, but here it’s just
another silly question,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’d make you cry. The history
of this place goes backwards half the time. It’s a mess. A parody of a
world.’

‘We made it,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘We didn’t make it _this_ badly,’ said the Dean. ‘We’ve seen the history
books here. There were some great civilisations thousands of years ago.
There was a place like Ephebe that was really beginning to find things
out. The wrong things, mostly, but at least they were making an effort.
Even had a decent pantheon of gods. All gone now. Our chum here and his
friends think everything worth knowing has been discovered and forgotten
and, frankly, they’re not totally wrong.’

‘What can we do about it?’ said Ponder.

‘You can talk to Hex on that thing?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Then Hex can do the magic back at UU and we’ll find out what the elves
did,’ said Ridcully.

‘Er,’ Rincewind began, ‘do we have the _right_ to interfere?’ They all
stared at him.

‘I mean, we never did it before,’ he went on. ‘Remember all those other
creatures that evolved here? The intelligent lizards? The intelligent
crabs? Those dog things? They all got completely wiped out by ice ages
and falling rocks and we never did anything to stop it.’²

They went on staring.

‘I mean, elves are just another problem, aren’t they?’ said Rincewind.
‘Maybe … maybe they’re just another form of big rock? Maybe … maybe they
always turn up when intelligence gets going? And the species is either
clever enough to survive them or it ends up buried in the bedrock like
all the others? I mean, perhaps it’s a kind of, a kind of test? I mean
…’

It dawned on Rincewind that he was not carrying the meeting. The wizards
were glaring at him.

‘Are you suggesting that someone somewhere is awarding _marks_,
Rincewind?’ said Ponder.

‘Well, obviously there is no—’

‘Good. Shut up,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now, lads, let’s get back to Mortlake
and get started.’

‘Mort Lake?’ said Rincewind. ‘But that’s in Ankh-Morpork!’

‘There’s one here, too,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, beaming.
‘Amazing, isn’t it? We never guessed. This world is a cheap parody of
our own. As Above, So Below and all that.’

‘But without magic,’ said Ridcully. ‘And with no narrativium. It doesn’t
know where it’s going.’

‘But _we_ do, sir,’ said Ponder, who had been scribbling in his
notebook.

‘Do we?’

‘Yes, sir. Remember? In about a thousand years’ time it’s going to be
hit by a really big rock. I keep looking at the numbers, sir, and that’s
what it means.’

‘But I thought we found there’d been a race that built huge structures
to get off the place?’

‘That’s right, sir.’

‘Can a new species turn up in a thousand years?’

‘I don’t think so, sir.’

‘You mean _these_ are the ones that leave?’

‘It seems like it, sir,’ said Ponder.

The wizards looked at the people in the courtyard. Of course, the
presence of beer always greases the rungs of the evolutionary ladder,
but even so …

At a nearby table, one man threw up on another one. There was general
applause.

‘I think,’ said Ridcully, summing up the general mood, ‘that we are
going to be here for some time.’

¹ An extremely common and versatile substance, unfortunately not
available in all universes.

² The sad histories of these hitherto unknown civilisations, along with
the tale of the two-mile limpet, can be found in _The Science of
Discworld_.

SIX

THE LENS-GRINDER’S PHILOSOPHY

[image] JOHN DEE, WHO LIVED from 1527 to 1608, was court astrologer to
Mary Tudor. At one point he was imprisoned for being a magician, but in
1555 they let him out again, presumably for not being one. Then he
became astrologer for Queen Elizabeth I. He devoted much of his life to
the occult, both alchemy and astrology. On the other hand, he was also
the author of the first English translation of Euclid’s _Elements_, the
renowned treatise on geometry. Actually, if you believe the printed
word, the book is attributed to Sir Henry Billingsley, but it was common
knowledge that Dee did all the work, and he even wrote a long and
erudite preface. Which may be _why_ it was common knowledge that Dee did
all the work.

To the modern mind, Dee’s interests seem contradictory: a mass of
superstitious pseudoscience mixed up with some good, solid science and
mathematics. But Dee didn’t have a modern mind, and he saw no particular
contradiction in the combination. In his day, many mathematicians made
their living by casting horoscopes. They could do the sums that foretold
in which of the twelve ‘houses’ – the regions of the sky determined by
the constellations corresponding to the signs of the zodiac – a planet
would be.

Dee stands at the threshold of modern ways of thinking about causality
in the world. We call his time The Renaissance, and the reference is to
the rebirth of the philosophy and politics of ancient Athens. But
perhaps this view of his times is mistaken, both because Greek society
was not then as ‘scientific’ or ‘intellectual’ as we’ve been led to
believe, and because there were other cultural currents that contributed
to the culture of his times. Our ideas of narrativium may derive from
the melding of these ideas into later philosophies, such as that of
Baruch Spinoza.

Stories encouraged the growth of occultism and mysticism. But they also
helped to ease the European world out of medieval superstition into a
more rational view of the universe.

Belief in the occult – magic, astrology, divination, witchcraft, alchemy
– is common to most human societies. The European tradition of
occultism, to which Dee belonged, is based on an ancient, secret
philosophy; it derives from two main sources, ancient Greek alchemy and
magic, and Jewish mysticism. Among the Greek sources is the _Emerald
Tablet_, a collection of writings associated with Hermes Trismegistos
(‘thrice master’), which was particularly revered by later Arab
alchemists; the Jewish source is the _Kabbala_, a secret, mystical
interpretation of a sacred book, the _Torah_.

Astrology, of course, is a form of divination based on the stars and the
visible planets. It may, perhaps, have contributed to the development of
science by supporting people who wanted to observe and understand the
heavens. Johannes Kepler, who discovered that planetary orbits are
ellipses, made his living as an astrologer. Astrology still survives in
watered-down form in the horoscope columns of tabloid newspapers. Ronald
Reagan consulted an astrologer during his time as American President.
That stuff certainly hangs around.

Alchemy is more interesting. It is often said to be an early forerunner
of chemistry, although the principles underlying chemistry largely
derive from other sources. The alchemists played around with apparatus
that led to useful chemists’ gadgets like retorts and flasks, and they
discovered that interesting things happen when you heat certain
substances or combine them together. The alchemists’ big discoveries
were sal ammoniac (ammonium chloride), which can be made to react with
metals, and the mineral acids – nitric, sulphuric and hydrochloric.

The big goal of alchemy would have been much bigger if they’d ever
achieved it: the Elixir of Life, the source of immortality. The Chinese
alchemists described this long-sought substance as ‘liquid gold’. The
narrative thread here is clear: gold is the noble metal, incorruptible,
ageless. So anyone who could somehow incorporate gold into his body
would also become incorruptible and ageless. The nobility shows up
differently: the noble metal is reserved for the ‘noble’ humans:
emperors, royalty, the people on top of the heap. Much good did this do
them. According to the Chinese scholar Joseph Needham, several Chinese
emperors probably died of elixir poisoning. Since arsenic and mercury
were common constituents of supposed elixirs, this is hardly a surprise.
And it is all too plausible that a mystic quest for immortality would
shorten life, not prolong it.

In Europe, from about 1300 onwards, alchemy had three main objectives.
The Elixir of Life was still one, and a second was finding cures for
various diseases. The alchemical search for medicines eventually led
somewhere useful. The key figure here is Phillipus Aureolus Theophrastus
Bombastus¹ von Hohenheim, mercifully known as ‘Paracelsus’, who lived
from 1493 to 1541.

Paracelsus was a Swiss physician whose interest in alchemy led him to
invent chemotherapy. He placed great store in the occult. As a student
aged 14 he wandered from one European university to another, in search
of great teachers, but we can deduce from what he wrote about the
experience, somewhat later, that he was disappointed. He wondered why
‘The high colleges managed to produce so many high asses’, and clearly
wasn’t the kind of student to endear himself to his teachers. ‘The
universities,’ he wrote, ‘do not teach all things. So a doctor must seek
out old wives, gypsies, sorcerers, wandering tribes, old robbers, and
such outlaws and take lessons from them.’ He would have had a high old
time on Discworld, but would have learned a lot.

After ten years’ wandering, he returned home in 1524 and became lecturer
in medicine at the university of Basel. In 1527 he publicly burned the
classic books of earlier physicians, the Arab Avicenna and the Greek
Galen. Paracelsus cared not a whit for authority. Indeed his assumed
name, ‘para-Celsus’, means ‘above Celsus’, and Celsus was a leading
Roman doctor of the first century.

He was arrogant and mystical. His saving grace was that he was also very
bright. He placed great importance on using nature’s own powers of
healing. For example, letting wounds drain instead of padding them with
moss or dried dung. He discovered that mercury was an effective
treatment for syphilis, and his clinical description of that sexually
transmitted disease was the best available.

The main objective for most alchemists was far more selfish. Their
sights were set on just one thing: transmuting base metals like lead
into gold. Again, their belief that this was possible rested on a story.
They knew from their experiments that sal ammoniac and other substances
could change the colour of metals, so the story ‘Metals can be
transmuted’ gained ground. Why, then, should it not be possible to start
with lead, add the right substance, and end up with gold? The story
seemed compelling; all that they lacked was the right substance. They
called it the Philosopher’s Stone.

The search for the Philosopher’s Stone, or rumours that it had been
found, got several alchemists into trouble. Noble gold was the
prerogative of the nobility. While the various kings and princes
wouldn’t have minded getting their hands on an inexhaustible supply of
gold, they didn’t want their rivals to beat them to it. Even _searching_
for the Philosopher’s Stone could be considered subversive, just as
searching for a cheap source of renewable energy now is apparently
considered subversive by oil corporations and nuclear energy companies.
In 1595 Dee’s companion Edward Kelley was imprisoned by Rudolf II and
died trying to escape, and in 1603 Christian II of Saxony imprisoned and
tortured the Scottish alchemist Alexander Seton. A dangerous thing, a
clever man.

The story of the Philosopher’s Stone never reached its climax. The
alchemists never did turn lead into gold. But the story took a long time
to die. Even around 1700, Isaac Newton still thought it was worth having
a go, and the idea of turning lead into gold by _chemical_ means was
finally killed off only in the nineteenth century. Nuclear reactions,
mind you, are another matter: the transmutation can be done, but it is
wildly uneconomic. And unless you’re very careful, the gold is
radioactive (although, of course, this will keep the money circulating
quickly, and we might see a sudden upsurge of philanthropy).

How did we get from alchemy to radioactivity? The pivotal period of
Western history was the Renaissance, roughly spanning the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, when ideas imported from the Arab world collided
with Greek philosophy and mathematics, and Roman artisanship and
engineering, leading to a sudden flowering of the arts and the birth of
what we now call science. During the Renaissance, we learned to tell new
stories about ourselves and the world. And those stories changed both.

In order to understand how this happened, we must come to grips with the
real Renaissance mentality, not the popular view of a ‘Renaissance man’.
By that phrase, we mean a person with expertise in many areas – like
Roundworld’s Leonardo da Vinci, who bears a suspicious resemblance to
the Disc’s Leonard of Quirm. We use this phrase because we contrast such
people with what we call a ‘well-educated’ person today.

In medieval Europe, and indeed long after that, the aristocracy
considered ‘education’ to mean classical knowledge – the culture of the
Greeks – plus a lot of religion, and not much else. The king was
expected to be well informed about poetry, drama and philosophy, but he
wasn’t expected to know about plumbing or brickwork. Some kings did in
fact get rather interested in astronomy and science, either out of
intellectual interest or the realisation that technology is power, but
that wasn’t part of the normal royal curriculum.

This view of education implied that the classics were all the validated
knowledge that an ‘educated’ person needed, a view not far from that of
many English ‘public’ schools until quite recently, and of the
politicians they have produced. This view of what was needed by the
rulers contrasted with what was needed by the children of the peasantry
(artisan skills and, lately, the ‘three Rs’²).

Neither the classics nor the three Rs formed the basis for the genuine
Renaissance man, who sought a fusion of those two worlds. Pointing to
the artisan as a source of worldly experience, of knowledge of the
material world and its tools such as an alchemist might use, led to a
new rapprochement between the classical and the empirical, between
intellect and experience. The actions of such men as Dee – even those of
the occultist Paracelsus in his medical prescriptions – emphasised this
distinction, and started the fusion of reason and empiricism that so
impresses us today.

As we’ve said, the word ‘Renaissance’ refers not just to rebirth, but to
a specific rebirth, that of ancient Greek culture. This, however, is a
modern view, based on a mistaken view of the Greeks, and of the
Renaissance itself. In ‘classical’ education, no attention is paid to
engineering. Of course not. Greek culture ran on pure intellect, poetry
and philosophy. They didn’t have engineers.

Oh, but they did. Archimedes constructed great cranes that could lift
enemy ships out of the water, and we still don’t know exactly how he did
it. Hero of Alexandria (roughly contemporary with Jesus) wrote many
texts about engines and machines of various kinds of the previous three
hundred years, many of which show that prototypes must have been made.
His coin-operated machines were not too different from those that could
be found on any city street in 1930s London or New York, and would
probably have been more reliable when it came to disgorging the
chocolate, if the Greeks had known about chocolate. The Greeks had
elevators, too.

The problem here is that information about the technical aspects of
Greek society has been transmitted to us through a bunch of theologians.
They liked Hero’s steam engine, and indeed many of them had a little
glass one on their desk, a sort of Theologians’ Toy that they could spin
with a candle flame. But the mechanical ideas behind such toys just
passed them by. And, just as Greek engineering has not been transmitted
to us by theologians, the spiritual attitude of the Renaissance has not
come down to us through our ‘rational’ schoolteachers. Much of the
attempted spirituality within the alchemical position was basically a
religious stance, marvelling at the Works of the Lord as they were
exposed by the marvels of changes of state and form, when materials were
subjected to heat, to ‘percussion’, and to solution and crystallisation.

This stance has been taken over by today’s innocents of rigorous
thinking, the New Agers, who find spiritual inspiration in crystals and
anodised metals, spherical spark-machines and Newton’s pendulums, but do
not ask the deeper questions that lie behind these toys. We find the
very real awe inspired by science’s quest for understanding to be
considerably more spiritual than New Age attitudes.

Today there are mystic massage-therapists, aromatherapists,
iridologists, people who believe that you can ‘holistically’ tell what’s
wrong with someone by examining their irises or the balls of their feet
– only – and who root their beliefs in the writings of Renaissance
eccentrics like Paracelsus and Dee. But those men would have been
horrified to be cited as authorities, especially by such closed-minded
descendants.

Prominent among those who refer back to Paracelsus for authority are
homeopathists. A basic belief of homeopathy is that medicines become
more powerful the more they are diluted. This stance lets them promote
their medicine as being totally harmless (it’s just water) but also
extraordinarily effective (as water isn’t). They notice no contradiction
here. And homeopathic headache tablets say ‘Take one if mild, three if
painful’. Shouldn’t it be the other way round?

Such people see no need to think about what they are doing, because they
base their beliefs on authority. If a question is not raised by that
authority, then it’s not a question they want to ask. So, in support of
their theories, homeopaths quote Paracelsus: ‘That which makes disease
is also the cure.’ But Paracelsus built his entire career on _not_
respecting authority. Moreover, he never said that a disease is _always_
its own cure.

Contrast this modern spectrum of silliness with the robust, critical
attitude of most Renaissance scholars to the idea that arcane practices
can lay bare the bones of the world. People such as Dee, indeed Isaac
Newton, took that critical position very seriously. To a great extent,
so did Paracelsus: for example he repudiated the idea that the stars and
planets control various parts of the human body. The Renaissance view
was that God’s creation has mysterious elements, but those elements are
hidden,³ implicit in the nature of the universe, rather than arcane.

This view is very close to Antonie van Leeuwenhoek’s marvelling at the
animalcules in dirty water, or semen: the astonishing discovery that the
Wonders of Creation extended down into the microscopic realm. Nature,
God’s Creation, was much more subtle. It provided hidden wonders to
marvel at as well as the overt artistic vision. Newton was taken with
the implicit mathematics of the planets in just this way: there was more
to God’s invention than was apparent to the unaided eye, and that
resonated with his Hermetic beliefs (a philosophy derived from the ideas
of Hermes Trismegistos). The crisis of atomism at the time was the
crisis of pre-formation: if Eve had within her all her daughters, each
having within her _her_ daughters like a set of Russian dolls, then
matter must be infinitely divisible. Or, if not, we could work out the
future date of Judgement Day by discovering how many generations there
were until we got to the last, empty daughter.

A characteristic of Renaissance thinking, then, was a degree of
humility. It was critical about its own explanations. This attitude
contrasts favourably with such modern religions as homeopathy or
scientology, creeds that arrogantly claim to offer a ‘complete’
explanation of the Universe in human terms.

Some scientists are equally arrogant, but good scientists are always
aware that science has limitations, and are willing to explain what they
are. ‘I don’t know’ is one of the great, though admittedly
under-utilised, scientific principles. Admitting ignorance clears away
so much pointless nonsense. It lets us cope with stage magicians
performing their beautiful, and very convincing, illusions – convincing,
that is, while we keep our brains out of gear. We know they have to be
tricks, and admitting ignorance lets us avoid the trap of believing the
illusion to be real merely because we don’t know how the trick works.
Why should we? We’re not members of the Magic Circle. Admitting
ignorance similarly protects us against mystic credulity when we
encounter natural events that have not yet caught the eye of a competent
scientist (and his grant-awarding body), and that still seem to be …
magic. We say ‘The magic of nature’ … more the Wonder of Nature, or the
Miracle of Life.

This is a stance that nearly all of us share, but it’s important to
understand the historical tradition it is grounded in. It isn’t simply a
case of admiring the complexity of God’s works. It implies the attitudes
of Newton, van Leeuwenhoek and earlier; indeed, right back to Dee. And,
doubtless, to some Greek, or several. It involves the Renaissance belief
that if we investigate the wonder, the marvel, the miracle, then we’ll
find even more wonders, marvels and miracles: gravity, say, or
spermatozoa.

So what do we, and what did they, mean by ‘magic’? Dee spoke of the
arcane arts, and Newton was committed to many explanations that were
‘magickal’, especially his commitment to action at a distance,
‘gravity’, which derived from the mystical attraction/repulsion basics
of his Hermetic philosophy.

So ‘magic’ means three things, all apparently quite different. Meaning
one is: ‘something to be wondered at’, and this ranges from card tricks
to amoebas to the rings of Saturn. Meaning two is turning a verbal
instruction, a _spell_, into material action, by occult or arcane means
… turning a person into a frog, or _vice versa_, or a _djinn_ building a
castle for his master. The third meaning is the one we use: the
technical magic of turning a light switch on, and getting light, without
even having to say ‘fiat lux’.

Granny Weatherwax’s recalcitrant broomstick is type two magic, but her
‘headology’ is largely a very, very good grasp of psychology (type three
magic carefully disguised as type two). It brings to mind Arthur C.
Clarke’s phrase ‘Any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic’, which we quoted and discussed in _The
Science of Discworld_. Discworld exemplifies magic by spells, and indeed
is maintained as an unlikely creation by being immersed in a strong
magical field (type two). Adults of Earthly cultures, like Roundworld,
pretend to have lost intellectual belief in magic of the Discworld kind,
while their culture is turning more and more of their technology into
magic (third kind). And the development of Hex throughout the books is
turning Sir Arthur on his head: Discworld’s sufficiently advanced magic
is now practically indistinguishable from technology.

We can see, as (fairly) rational adults, where the first kind of magic
comes from. We see something wonderful and feel tremendously happy that
the universe is a place that can include ammonites, say, or kingfishers.
But where did we get our belief in the second, irrational kind of magic?
How does it come about that all cultures have children that begin their
intellectual lives by believing in magic, instead of the real causality
that surrounds them?

A plausible explanation is that human beings are initially programmed
through fairy stories and nursery tales. All human cultures tell stories
to their children; part of the development of our specific humanity is
the interaction that we get with early language.

All cultures use animal icons for this nursery tuition, so we in the
West have sly foxes, wise owls and frightened chickens. They seem to
come out of a human dreamtime, where all animals seem to be types of
human being in a different skin, and talk as a matter of course. We
learn what the subtle adjectives mean from the actions – and words – of
the creatures in the stories. Inuit children don’t have a ‘sly’ fox
icon; their fox is ‘brave’ and ‘fast’, while the Norwegian iconic fox is
secretive and wise, full of good advice for respectful children. The
causality in these stories is always verbal: ‘So the fox said … and they
did it!’ or ‘I’ll huff and I’ll puff and I’ll blow your house down.’ The
earliest communicated causality that the child meets is verbal
instructions that cause material events. That is, spells.

Similarly, parents and carers are always transmuting the child’s
expressed desires into actions and objects, from food appearing on the
table when the child is hungry to toys and other birthday and Christmas
gifts. We surround these simple verbal requests with ‘magical’ ritual.
We require the spell to begin with ‘please’, and its execution to be
recognised by ‘thank you’.⁴ It is indeed not surprising that our
children come to believe that the way to acquire or access bits of the
real world is simply to ask – indeed, simply asking or commanding is
_the_ classic spell. Remember ‘open, sesame’?

To a child, the world does work like magic. Later in life, we wish that
we could go on like that, with our ‘wishes coming true’.⁵ So we design
our shops, our webpages, our cars to fit this truly ‘childish’ view of
the world.

Coming home in the car and clicking the garage open, clicking the
infrared remote to open or lock the car, changing TV channels – even
switching on the light by the wall switch – are just that kind of magic.
Unlike our Victorian forebears, we like to hide the machinery and
pretend it’s not there. So Clarke’s dictum is not at all surprising.
What it means is that this ape keeps trying, with incredible ingenuity,
to get back into the nursery, when everything was done for it. Maybe
other intelligent/extelligent species will have a similar helpless early
life, which they will attempt to compensate for or relive through their
technology? If so, they will ‘believe in magic’, too, and we will be
able to diagnose this by their possession of ‘please’ and ‘thank you’
rituals.

We can see this philosophy surviving into adulthood in different human
cultures. In ‘adult’ stories like the Arabian Nights, an assortment of
_djinni_ and other marvels grant the heroes’ wishes by magical means,
just like those child-wishes coming true. Many ‘romantic’ adult stories
have the same kind of setting, as do many fantasy tales. Fairness
demands we add that, contrary to popular opinion, modern fantasy stories
don’t; it’s hard to get much tension in a plot when anything is possible
at the snap of a wand and so the practice of ‘magic’ therein tends to be
difficult, dangerous and to be avoided wherever possible. Discworld is a
magical world – we can hear the thoughts of a thunderstorm, for example,
or the conversation of dogs – but magic in the pointy hat sense is very
seldom used. The wizards and witches treat it rather like nuclear
weaponry: it does no harm for people to know you’ve got it, but
_everyone_ will be in trouble if it gets used. This is magic for
grown-ups; it has to be hard, because we know there’s no such thing as a
free goblin.

Unfortunately, adult beliefs about causality are usually contaminated by
the less sophisticated wish-fulfilment philosophy that we carry with us
from the tinkly magic of our infancies. For example, scientists will
object to alternative theories on the grounds that ‘if that was true, we
wouldn’t be able to do the sums’. Why do they think that nature cares
whether humans can do the sums? Because their own desire to do the sums,
which lets them write papers for learned journals, contaminates their
otherwise rational view. There’s a feeling of feet being stamped; the
Almighty should change Her laws so that we _can_ do the sums.

There are other ways to set up beliefs about causality, but they are
difficult for creatures immersed in their own cultural assumptions:
nearly everything that an adult human being is required to do is either
made magical by technology, or it is to do with another human being,
serving or being served.

These management, leadership and aristocracy issues have been handled
very differently in different societies. Feudal societies have a
baronial class, who are in many respects allowed to remain in their
nursery personas by being surrounded by servants and slaves and other
parent-surrogates. Rich people in more complex societies, and
high-status people in general (knights, kings, queens, princesses, Mafia
bosses, operatic divas, pop idols, sports stars) seem to have set up
societies around them that pander to their needs in a very
child-pampering way. As our society has become more technical, more and
more of us, right down to the lowest status levels of society, have come
to benefit from the accumulating magic of technology. Supermarkets have
democratised and validated the provision of all we could want to each of
our child-natures. The child-magic has been appropriated by more and
more adults, through technology, and the legitimate kind, the ‘wonder of
nature’ magic, has lost out.

In the mid-seventeenth century there was a philosopher, Baruch Spinoza,
who derived from the synthetic Renaissance position, and from his
criticism of Descartes’ publications, a wholly new view of causality. He
was one of several figures who bridged the Renaissance and helped
engender the Enlightenment. He developed his critical view of his own
Jewish cultural authorities into a new rational view of universal
causality. He rejected Moses’ hearing God’s voice, and angels, and lots
more ‘occult’ thinking, particularly early cabbalism;⁶ he took the naïve
magic out of his own religion. He was a lens-grinder, an occupation that
requires the persistent checking of performance against reality. So he
put in the artisan’s view of causality, and he took out the magic of
God’s word. The Jewish community in Amsterdam excommunicated him. They’d
learned about that from the Catholics, but it didn’t translate very well
into Jewish practice, even of those times.

Spinoza was a pantheist. That is, he believed there is a little bit of
God in everything. His main reason for believing this was that if God
were separate from the material universe, then there would be an entity
greater than God, namely, the entire universe plus God. It follows that
Spinoza’s God is not a _being_, not a person in whose image humanity can
be made. For this reason, Spinoza was often considered to be an atheist,
and many orthodox Jews still view him that way. Despite this, his
_Ethics_ makes a beautiful, logically argued case for a particular type
of pantheism. In fact, Spinoza’s viewpoint is almost indistinguishable
from that of most philosophically inclined scientists, from Newton to
Kauffman.

Before Spinoza, even his supposed predecessors like Descartes and
Leibniz had God moving things in the World by the power of his Voice:
magic, child-thinking. Spinoza introduced the idea that an overarching
God could run the universe without being anthropomorphic. Many modern
Spinozans see the set of rules, devised, described or attributed by
science to the physical world, as the embodiment of that kind of God.
That is to say, what happens in the material world happens that way
because God, or the Nature of the Physical World, constrains it to do
so. And out of that come ideas resembling narrativium instead of magic
and wish-fulfilment.

A Spinozan view of child development sees the opposite of
wish-fulfilment. There are rules, constraints, that _limit_ what we can
do. The child learns, as she grows, to modify her plans as she perceives
more of the rules. Initially, she might attempt to cross the room
assuming that the chair is not an obstacle; when it doesn’t move out of
her way, she will feel frustration, a ‘passion’. And throws a paddy.
Later, as she constructs her path to avoid the chair, more of her plans
will peaceably, and successfully, come to fruition. As she grows and
learns more of the rules – God’s Will or the warp and woof of universal
causation – this progressive success will produce a calm acceptance of
constraints: peace rather than passion.

Kauffman’s _At Home in the Universe_ is a very Spinozan book, because
Spinoza saw that we do indeed make our home, with the reward of peace
and the discipline of passion and its control, each of us in their own
universe. We fit the universe as a whole, we evolved in it and of it,
and a successful life is based on appreciating how it constrains our
plans and rewards our understanding. ‘Please’ and ‘thank you’ have no
place in Spinozan prayer. That view melds the artisan with the
philosopher, the tribal respect for tradition with the barbarian virtues
of love and honour.

And it gives us a wholly new kind of story with a civilising message.
Instead of the barbarian ‘And then he rubbed the lamp again … and again
the genie appeared’, we have the first king’s son taking on a task, to
win the hand of the fair princess … and he fails. Amazing! No barbarian
protagonist ever fails. Indeed, nobody _ever_ ultimately fails except
evil giants, sorcerers and Grand Viziers, in tribal or barbarian magical
tales. However, the new story tells of the second king’s son learning
from this failure, and shows the listener – the learner – how difficult
the task is. Nevertheless, _again he fails_, because learning is not
easy. But the third son – or the third billygoat Gruff or the third pig,
with his house of brick – shows how to succeed in a Spinozan,
enlightened world of observation and experience. Stories in which people
learn from the failures of others are a hallmark of a civilised society.

Narrativium has entered our Make-a-Human kit. It makes a different kind
of mind from the tribal one, which is all ‘do this because we’ve always
done it that way and it works’ and ‘don’t do that because it’s taboo,
evil and we’ll kill you if you do’. And it also differs from the
barbarian mind: ‘That way lies honour, booty, much wealth and many
children (if I can only get a _djinn_, or a dgun); I would not demean
myself, dishonour these hands, with menial work.’ In contrast, the
civilised child learns to repeat the task, to work with the grain of the
universe.

The reader of tales that have been moulded and informed by narrativium
is prepared to do whatever an understanding of the task requires.
Perhaps, in the universe of the story, qualifying for princesses’ hands
in marriage isn’t the preoccupation of the average middle-class, but the
attitude of the third prince will serve him well down the mine, in the
Stock Exchange, in the Wild West (according to Hollywood, a great
purveyor of narrativium), or as father and baron. We say ‘he’ because
‘she’ has a more difficult time: narrativium has not been mined and
modelled for girls, and the way the feminist myths are shaping it does
not seem to address the same questions as the old boy-oriented models.
But we can put that right if we realise that narrativium trains by
constraint.

Discworld, although technically a world run on fairy tale rules, derives
much of its power and success from the fact that they are consistently
challenged and subverted, most directly by the witch Granny Weatherwax,
who cynically uses them or defies them as she sees fit. She roundly
objects to girls being forced by the all-devouring ‘story’ to marry a
handsome prince solely on the basis of their shoe size; she believes
that stories are there to be challenged. But she herself is part of a
larger story, and they follow rules, too. In a sense, she’s always
trying to saw off the branch she’s sitting on. And her stories derive
their power from the fact that we have been programmed from an early age
to believe in the monsters that she is battling.

¹ Isn’t ‘Bombastus’ a lovely name? Well-chosen, too.

² Readers who have not met this felicitous phrase, for reasons of youth
or geography, should be told that the three Rs are Reading, Riting and
Rithmetic. What this tells us about the educational establishment is
unclear, but it _could_ be a joke. The three Rs, not the educational
establishment, that is. Though, come to think of it …

³ Hidden knowledge at that time was spectacularly practical knowledge,
exemplified by the Guild secrets and especially by the Freemasons. It
was dressed up in ritual, because it was mostly passed on verbally and
not written down.

⁴ Carers even encourage or berate the child: ‘What’s the magic word? You
forgot the magic word!’

⁵ Years ago, Jack wrote a book called _The Privileged Ape_ about just
this tendency. What he wanted to call it – and should have, but the
publisher got cold feet – was _The Ape That Got What It Wanted_. (When
it gets it, of course, it no longer wants it.)

⁶ A system of mystic beliefs based on the Jewish _Kabbala_.

SEVEN

CARGO CULT MAGIC

[image] THE PHRASE THAT KEPT OCCURRING to Rincewind was _cargo cult_.

He’d run across it – he encountered most things by running across them –
on isolated islands out on the big oceans.

Say that, once, a lost ship arrived, and while taking on food and water
it handed out a few goodies to the helpful locals, like steel knives,
arrowheads and fish-hooks.¹ And then it sailed away, and after a while
the steel wore out and the arrowheads got lost.

What was needed was another ship. But not many ships came to these
lonely islands. What was needed was a _ship attractor_. Some sort of
_decoy_. And it didn’t much matter if it was made out of bamboo and palm
leaves, so long as it looked like a ship. Ships would be bound to be
attracted to another ship, or else how did you get small boats?

As with many human activities, it made perfect sense, for certain values
of ‘sense’.

Discworld magic was all about controlling the vast oceans of magic that
poured though the world. All the Roundworld magicians could do was to
build something like bamboo decoys on the shores of the big, cold,
spinning universe, which pleaded: please let the magic come.

‘It’s terrible,’ he said to Ponder, who was drawing a big circle on the
floor, to Dee’s fascination. ‘They believe they live in _our_ world.
With the turtle and everything!’

‘Yes, and that’s strange because the rules here are quite easy to spot,’
said Ponder. ‘Things tend to become balls, and balls tend to move in
circles. Once you work that out, everything else falls into place. In a
curved movement, of course.’

He went back to chalking the circle.

The wizards had been staying in Dee’s house. He seemed quite happy about
this, in a mildly bemused way, like a peasant who had suddenly been
visited by a family of unexpected relatives from the big city who were
doing incomprehensible things but were rich and interesting.

The trouble was, Rincewind thought, that the wizards were explaining to
Dee that magic didn’t work while, at the same time, doing magic. A
crystal ball was giving instructions. An ape was knuckling in and out
of, for want of a better word, fresh air, and wandering around Dee’s
library making excited ‘ook’ noises and assembling the books to make a
proper entrance in L-space. And the wizards themselves, as was their
wont, prodded at things and argued at cross-purposes.

And Hex had tracked down the elves. It made no sense, but their descent
on Roundworld had plunged through time and come to rest millions of
years in the past.

Now the wizards had to get there. As Ponder explained, sometimes
resorting to hand gestures for the hard of comprehension, this wasn’t
difficult. Time and space in the round universe were entirely
subordinate. The wizards, being made of higher-order stuff, could quite
easily be moved around within it by magic from the _real_ world. There
were additional, complex reasons, mostly quite hard to spell.

The wizards didn’t understand almost all this, but they did like the
idea of being high-order stuff.

‘But there was _nothing_ back there,’ said the Dean, watching Ponder
work on the circle. ‘There wasn’t even anyone you could call people, Hex
says.’

‘There were monkeys,’ said Rincewind. ‘Things like monkeys, anyway.’ He
had his own thoughts on this score, although the accepted wisdom on
Discworld was that monkeys were the descendants of people who had given
up trying.²

‘Oh, the _monkeys_,’ snapped Ridcully. ‘I remember them. Completely
useless. If you couldn’t eat it or have sex with it, they just didn’t
want to know. They just mucked about.’

‘I think this was even before that,’ said Ponder. He stood up and
brushed chalk dust off his robe. ‘Hex thinks that the elves did
something to … something. Something that became humans.’

‘Interfered with them?’ said the Dean.

‘Yes, sir. We know they can affect people’s minds when they sing—’

‘You said _became humans_?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir. Sorry, sir. I really don’t want to have that argument all
over again, sir. On Roundworld, things become other things. At least,
_some_ of some things become other things. I’m not saying that happens
on Discworld, sir, but Hex is quite certain that it happens here. Can we
just pretend for a moment, sir, that this is true?’

‘For the sake of argument?’

‘Well, for the sake of not having an argument, sir, really,’ said
Ponder. Mustrum Ridcully on the subject of evolution could go on for far
too long.

‘All right, then,’ said the Archchancellor with some reluctance.

‘And we know, sir, that elves can _really_ affect the minds of lesser
creatures …’

Rincewind let the words go over his head. He didn’t need to be told
this. He’d spent far more time in the field – and the ditch, the forest,
hiding in the reeds, staggering across deserts – and had run into and
away from elves a couple of times. They didn’t like all the things that
Rincewind thought made life worthwhile, like cities and cookery and not
being hit over the head with rocks on a regular basis. He’d never been
certain if they actually _ate_ anything, other than for amusement; they
acted as if what they really consumed was other creatures’ fear.

They must have loved humanity when they found it. Humanity was very
creative, when it came to being frightened. It was _good_ at filling the
future full of dread.

And then it had gone and spoiled everything by using that wonderful,
fear-generating mind for thinking up things to take the fear away – like
calendars, locks, candles and stories. Stories in particular. Stories
were where the monsters died.

While the wizards argued, Rincewind went to see what the Librarian was
doing. The ape, shorn of his dress but still wearing his ruff to conform
to local clothing standards, was as happy as, well, as happy as a
librarian among books. Dee was quite a collector. Most of the books were
about magic or numbers or magic _and_ numbers. They weren’t very
magical, though. The pages didn’t even turn by themselves.

The crystal sphere had been placed on a shelf, so that Hex could watch.

‘The Archchancellor wants us all to go back and stop the elves,’ said
Rincewind, sitting down on a stack of tides. ‘He thinks we can ambush
them before they do anything. Me, I don’t think it’s going to work.’

‘Ook?’ said the Librarian, sniffing a bestiary and laying it aside.

‘Because things generally don’t, that’s why. Best laid plans, and all
that. And these aren’t best laid plans, anyway. “Let’s get back there
and beat the devils to death with big iron bars” is not, in my opinion,
a best laid plan. What’s funny?’

The Librarian’s shoulders were shaking. He passed a book across to
Rincewind, who read the passage that had been pointed out by a black
fingernail.

He stopped reading, and stared at the Librarian.

It was uplifting. Oh, it was uplifting. Rincewind hadn’t read anything
like it. But …

He’d spent the day in this city. There were dog fights and bear pits and
that wasn’t the worst of it. He’d seen the heads on spikes over the
gates. Of course, Ankh-Morpork had been bad, but Ankh-Morpork had
thousands of years of experience of being a big city and had become,
well, _sophisticated_ in its sins. This place was half farmyard.

The man who wrote this woke up every morning in a city that burned
people alive and had _still_ written this.

‘—what a piece of work is a man … how noble in reason … how infinite in
faculty … in form, in moving, how express and admirable …’

The Librarian was almost sobbing with laughter.

‘Nothing to laugh at, it’s a perfectly valid point of view,’ said
Rincewind. He shuffled the pages.

‘Who wrote this?’ he said.

‘According to the flows of L-space, he is widely regarded as one of the
greatest playwrights who ever lived,’ said Hex, from the shelf.

‘What was his name?’

‘His own spelling is inconsistent,’ said Hex, ‘but the consensus is that
his name was William Shakespeare.’

‘Does he exist on this world?’

‘Yes. In one of the many alternate histories.’

‘So not actually _here_, then?’

‘No. The leading playwright in this city is Arthur J. Nightingale.’

‘Is he any good?’

‘He is the best they have. Objectively, he is dreadful. His play _King
Rufus III_ is widely considered the worst play ever written.’

‘Oh.’

‘Rincewind!’ bellowed the Archchancellor.

The wizards were gathering in the circle. They had tied horseshoes and
bits of iron to their staffs and had the look of high-order men prepared
to kick low-order ass. Rincewind tucked the pages in his robe, picked up
Hex and hurried over.

‘I’ll just—’ he began.

‘You’re coming, too. No arguing. And the Luggage,’ snapped Ridcully.

‘But—’

‘Otherwise we might have a talk about seven buckets of coal,’ the
Archchancellor went on.

He _knew_ about the buckets. Rincewind swallowed.

‘Leave Hex behind with the Librarian, will you?’ said Ponder. ‘He can
keep an eye on Dr Dee.’

‘Isn’t Hex coming?’ said Rincewind, alarmed at the prospect of losing
the only entity at UU that seemed to have a grasp on things.

‘There will be no suitable avatars,’ said Hex.

‘He means no magic mirrors, no crystal balls,’ said Ponder. ‘Nothing
that people _expect_ to be magical. No people at all, where we’re going.
Put Hex down. We’ll be back instantly, in any case. Ready, Hex?’

For a moment the circle glowed, and the wizards vanished.

Dr Dee turned to the Librarian.

‘It works!’ he said. ‘The Great Seal works! Now I can—’

He vanished. And the floor vanished. And the house vanished. And the
city vanished. And the Librarian landed in the swamp.

¹ And new diseases, although it was quite hard to make bamboo models of
these.

² The Librarian, on the other knuckly hand, held the view that humans
were _apes_ who had given up trying. They were the ones who simply
couldn’t cut the mustard when it came to living in harmony with their
environment, maintaining a workable social structure and, above all,
sleeping while holding on.

EIGHT

PLANET OF THE APES

[image] ‘WHAT A PIECE OF WORK is a man! How noble in reason! How
infinite in faculty! In form, in moving, how express and admirable! In
action how like an angel! In apprehension how like a god!’

But you wouldn’t want to watch him eat, close up …

William Shakespeare was another key figure in the transition from
medieval mysticism to post-Renaissance rationalism. We were going to
mention him, but we had to wait for him to turn up in Roundworld.

Shakespeare’s plays are a cornerstone of our present Western
civilisation.¹ They led us from a confrontation between aristocratic
barbarism and tradition-bound tribalism into real civilisation as we
know it. And yet … he seems to be a contradiction: uplifting sentiments
in a barbarous age. That’s because he was standing at a pivotal point in
history. The elves have been seeking something that will become human,
and will interfere with Roundworld to make sure they get it. Humans are
superstitious. But the human condition can also create a Shakespeare.
Though not in this version of history.

The elves aren’t the only Discworld inhabitants that have interfered
with Roundworld: the wizards have tried some ‘uplift’ of their own, in
the sense of David Brin, and using the techniques of Arthur C. Clarke.
Near the end of _The Science of Discworld_, the apes of Roundworld are
sitting in their cave, watching a manifestation from another dimension,
an enigmatic black rectangular slab … The Dean of Unseen University taps
on it with his pointer, to attract attention, and chalks the letters
R-O-C-K. ‘Rock. Can anyone tell me what you do with it?’ But all the
apes are interested in is S-E-X.

The next time the wizards look at Roundworld, the space elevator is
collapsing. The planet’s inhabitants are heading out into the universe
on vast ships made from the cores of comets.

Something very dramatic has happened between the apes and the space
elevator. What was it? The wizards have no idea. They doubt very much it
could have had much to do with those apes, who were very much The Wrong
Stuff.

In the first volume of _The Science of Discworld_, we explored no
further. We left a gap. It was a tiny part of the historical record on
the geological timescales that governed everything up to the ape, but
rather a big gap in terms of changes to the planet. But now even the
wizards are aware that the apes, unpromising material as they may have
been, did in fact evolve into the creatures that built the space
elevator and fled from a very dangerous planet in search of, as
Rincewind would put it, a place where you are not hit on the head with
rocks on a regular basis. And, apparently, a key step in their evolution
was elvish interference.

How did it actually happen on Roundworld? Here, the whole process took a
mere five million years. One hundred thousand Grandfathers² ago, we and
the chimpanzees shared a distant ancestor. The chimpanzeelike ancestor
of Man was also the Manlike ancestor of the chimpanzee. To us, it would
have looked astonishingly like a chimpanzee – but to a chimpanzee, it
would have looked astonishingly like a human.

DNA analysis shows, beyond any shadow of reasonable doubt, that our
closest living relatives are chimpanzees: the ordinary (‘robust’)
chimpanzee _Pan troglodytes_ and the more slender (‘gracile’) bonobo
_Pan paniscus_, often politically incorrectly called the pygmy
chimpanzee. Our genomes have 98 per cent in common with both, leading
Jared Diamond to refer to humans as ‘the third chimpanzee’ in a book of
the same tide.

The same DNA evidence indicates that we and today’s chimpanzees parted
company, specieswise, those five million years (100,000 Grandfathers)
ago. That figure is debatable, but it can’t be very far wrong. The
gorillas split off a little earlier. The earliest fossils of our
‘hominid’ ancestors are found in Africa, but there are numerous later
fossilised hominids from other parts of the world such as China and
Java. The oldest known are two species of _Australopithecus_, each about
4–4.5 million years old. The Australopithecines had a good run: they
hung around until about 1–1.5 million years ago, at which point they
gave way to genus _Homo: Homo rudolfensis, Homo habilis, Homo erectus,
Homo ergaster, Homo heidelbergensis, Homo neanderthalensis_, and finally
us, _Homo sapiens_. And somehow another Australopithecine inserted
itself into the middle of those _Homos_. In fact the more hominid
fossils we find, the more complicated our conjectured ancestry becomes,
and it now looks as if many different hominid species coexisted on the
plains of Africa for most of the past five million years.

Today’s chimpanzees are quite bright, probably a lot brighter than the
apes that the Dean tried to teach spelling to. Some remarkable
experiments have shown that chimps can understand a simple version of
language, presented to them as symbolic shapes. They can even form
simple concepts and make abstract associations, all within a linguistic
frame. They can’t build a space elevator, and they never will unless
they evolve considerably and avoid being killed for ‘bush meat’.

We can’t build one either, but it might take no more than a couple of
hundred years before the things are sprouting all along the equator. All
you need is a material with enough tensile strength, perhaps some
composite involving carbon nanotubes. Then you dangle cables from
geostationary satellites, hang elevator compartments from them, equip
them with suitable space elevator music … after which, leaving the
planet becomes entirely straightforward. The energy cost, hence the
marginal financial cost, is near enough zero, because for everything
that needs to go up, something else needs to come down. It could be moon
rock, or platinum mined in the asteroid belt, or the astronaut that the
person going up is due to replace on duty. The capital cost of such a
project is enormous, though, which is why we’re not in any great hurry
right now.

The big scientific problem in this connection is: how can evolution get
so quickly from an ape that can’t compete mentally with a chimpanzee to
a godlike being that can write poetry as good as Shakespeare’s, and has
advanced so rapidly from that point that it will surely soon erect
(drop) a space elevator? 100,000 Grandfathers hardly seems long enough,
given that it took about 50 million Grandfathers³ to get from a
bacterium to the first chimpanzee.

Something that dramatic needed a new trick. That trick was the invention
of culture. Culture allowed any individual ape to make use of the ideas
and discoveries of thousands of other apes. It let the ape collective
acquire knowledge cumulatively, so that it didn’t all get lost when its
owner died. In _Figments of Reality_ we coined the term ‘extelligence’
for this suite of tricks, and the word is beginning to become common
currency. Extelligence is like our own personal intelligence, but it
lives outside us. Intelligence has limits; extelligence is infinitely
expandable. Extelligence lets us pull ourselves upwards, as a group, by
our own mental bootstraps.

The contradiction between Shakespeare’s noble sentiments and the
heads-on-spikes culture in which he lived is a consequence of his
position as a very intelligent intelligence in a not-very-extelligent
extelligence. Many individuals possessed the nobility to qualify for
Shakespeare’s praise, but their as yet rudimentary extelligence had not
yet transmitted that nobility into the general culture. The culture was,
or claimed to be, noble in principle – kings taking their authority from
God Himself – but it was a barbarian style of nobility. And it was
welded to a barbarian cruelty, the kings’ means of self-preservation.

There may be many ways to make intelligent creatures, and many more ways
to knit them together into an extelligent culture. The crab civilisation
in _The Science of Discworld_ was doing fine until its Great Leap
Sideways was clobbered by an inbound comet. We made that one up, but who
knows what might have happened a hundred million years ago? All we know
for sure – or for a given value of ‘sure’, since even now a lot of our
knowledge is guesswork – is that some things like apes turned into us.
It takes a special kind of arrogance and blindness to extrapolate that
story to the rest of the universe without wondering about alternatives.

An important ingredient in _our_ story was brains. Weight for weight,
humans have far bigger brains than any other animal on the planet. The
average human brain has a volume of about 1,350 cubic centimetres, which
is roughly three times as great as the brain of apes with the same size
body as ours. Whale brains are bigger than ours, but whales are even
bigger, so the amount of whale per brain cell is greater than the amount
of human per brain cell. When it comes to brains, quantity is less
important than quality, of course. But a brain capable of really
complicated things like carbon nanotube engineering and fixing
dishwashers has to be fairly large, because the abilities of small
brains are limited by lack of room to do anything interesting.

We’ll see shortly that brains alone are not enough. Nonetheless, without
brains, or adequate substitutes, you don’t get very far.

There are two main theories of human origins. One is rather dull and
probably correct; the other is exciting and most likely wrong.
Nevertheless, the second one has quite a lot going for it and is a
better story, so let’s take a look at them both.

The dull, conventional theory is that we evolved on the savannahs.
Roving groups of early apes trailed through the long grass, picking up
whatever food – seeds, lizards, insects – they could find, much like
today’s baboons.⁴ And as they did so, lions and leopards prowled through
the long grass looking for monkeys. Those monkeys or apes that were
better at spotting the telltale flicker of a big cat’s tail, and finding
a tree rather quickly, survived to have babies; those that performed
poorly at such tasks did not. The babies inherited those survival
skills, and passed them on to _their_ babies.

What these tasks need is computational power. Spotting a tail and
finding a tree are pattern-recognition problems. Your brain needs to
pick out the tail-shape from a background of similarly buff-coloured
rocks and mud; it has to choose a tree that is tall enough, and
climbable enough, without being _too_ climbable, and it has to be able
to do it fast. A capacious brain with a big memory (of past occasions
when something hairy poked out from behind a rock, and of locations for
climbable trees) can pick up the visual traces of a lion much more
effectively than a small brain can. A brain whose nerve cells transmit
signals to each other more quickly can analyse incoming sensory data and
conclude ‘lion’ a lot faster than a slower brain can. So there was
evolutionary pressure on the early apes and monkeys to develop bigger
and faster brains. There was also evolutionary pressure on the lions to
conceal themselves more effectively, so that those bigger and faster ape
and monkey brains still didn’t notice anything suspicious. So a
predator-prey ‘arms race’ developed, a positive feedback loop that made
both lions and apes far more effective in their ecological roles.

That is the conventional story of human evolution. But there is another
story, less orthodox, with two main sources.

Human beings are very weird apes, indeed very weird animals altogether.
They have extremely short fur, mostly just a downy covering. They walk
upright on two legs. They have a layer of fat, all the year round. They
mate face-to-face (often). They have exceptionally good breath-control;
good enough to be able to speak. They weep and they sweat. They adore
water, and can swim long distances. A newborn baby, dropped in a pool,
can keep itself afloat: the ability to swim is instinctive. All these
peculiarities led Elaine Morgan to write _The Aquatic Ape_ in 1982.
There she suggested a radical theory: that humans evolved not on the
savannahs, surrounded by fierce predators, but on the beach. That
explains the swimming, the upright stance (it’s easier to evolve a
two-legged gait if you are buoyed up by seawater), and the lack of hair
(which causes problems when you swim, providing an evolutionary reason
for it to disappear). In fact it can be argued that it explains all of
the peculiarities of humans that we’ve just listed. The original
scientific underpinnings of this theory were developed by Alister Hardy.

In their 1991 _The Driving Force_ Michael Crawford and David Marsh took
the story one stage further, by added one extra ingredient. Literally.
The most important thing that the beach provides is seafood. And the
most important thing that seafood provides is ‘essential fatty acids’,
which are a crucial ingredient in brains. In fact, nearly two-thirds of
the human brain is made from them. Fatty acids are good for making
membranes, and brains use electrical signals in membranes to compute.
Myelin, in a membrane sheath surrounding nerve cells, speeds up the
transmission of signals in the human nervous system by a factor of five
or so. It takes a lot of essential fatty acids, then, to make a big,
fast human brain, so it must have taken almost as much to make the brain
of our distant ape ancestor. Oddly, though, our bodies cannot make those
special fatty acids from simpler chemicals, like we make most
complicated biochemicals that we need. We have to get the fatty acids,
ready-made, from our food; that’s why the word ‘essential’ is used to
describe them. Even more oddly, there are few essential fatty acids out
on the savannahs. They would exist only in living creatures, of course,
but even there, they are fairly rare. The richest source of essential
fatty acids is seafood.

Perhaps all this explains why we want to spend so much time on the
beach. But whatever the explanation, the ability to make big brains was
one key step in our evolution away from our hairy, quadrupedal,
100,000-fold great grandfather.

Big brains, however, are not enough. What really matters is what you do
with them. And what we managed to do was to play off one brain against
another, so that over the millennia they got better and better at
competing and communicating.

Ape brains competing with lion brains leads to an arms race that
improves both, but the arms race is fairly slow, because both brains are
being used for very limited purposes as far as the competition goes. Ape
brains competing with other ape brains gives the whole brain a workout,
all the time, so the rate of evolution is likely to be much higher.

For every species, the main competition comes from other creatures of
the _same_ species. This is reasonable; they’re the ones that want
exactly the same resources that you do. This opens the door to elvish
interference, in our Discworld metaphor. The nasty side of human nature,
which in extremes leads to evil, is inescapably bound up with the nice
side. One very direct way to compete with your neighbour is to bash him
on the head, hard.

However, there are more subtle ways to gain evolutionary advancement, as
we will see later. The elvish approach is crude, and ultimately
self-defeating, for a sufficiently extelligent species.

The possession of brains opens up new non-genetic ways to pass
characteristics on to your children. You can give them a good start in
life by moulding how their brains react to the outside world. The
generic term for this kind of non-genetic transfer between the
generations is _privilege_. There are numerous instances of privilege in
the animal kingdom. When a mother blackbird provides yolk in her egg for
the baby blackbird to feed from, that’s privilege. When a cow provides
milk for her calf, that’s even more privilege. When a mother tarantula
wasp provides a paralysed, living spider for her grubs to grow in,
that’s privilege.

Humans have taken privilege to a qualitatively new level. Human parents
invest an astonishing amount of time and effort in their children, and
spend decades – entire lifetimes, in many ways – looking after them. In
conjunction with big brains, slowly getting bigger as each generation
passes, privilege leads to two new tricks, learning and teaching. Those
tricks feed off each other, and both require the best brain you can
acquire.⁵

Genes are involved in building brains, and genes can perhaps predispose
individuals to be unusually good at learning or teaching. However, both
of these educational processes involve far more than mere genes: they
take place within a culture. The child does not just learn from its
parents. It learns from its grandparents, from its siblings, from its
aunts and uncles, from the whole troupe or tribe. It learns, as all
parents discover, to their dismay, from undesirable sources as well as
authorised ones. Teaching is the attempt to transmit ideas from the
adult brain to that of the child; learning is the child’s attempt to
insert those ideas into its brain. The system is imperfect, with a lot
of garbled messages along the way, but despite its faults it is _much_
faster than genetic evolution. That’s because brains, networks of nerve
cells, can adapt much more rapidly than genes can.

The faults, oddly enough, probably accelerate the process, because they
are a source of creativity and innovation. An accidental
misunderstanding may sometimes lead to an improvement.⁶ In this respect,
cultural evolution is just like genetic evolution: it is only because
the DNA copying system makes mistakes that organisms can change.

Culture didn’t arise in a vacuum: it had many precursors. One crucial
step towards the development of culture was the invention of the nest.
Before nests came into being, any experimentation by the young either
worked, or led to a quick death. Within the protection of the nest,
however, young animals can try things out, make mistakes and profit from
them; for example, by learning not to do the same thing again. Outside
the nest, they never get a chance to try a second time. In this manner
nests led to another development, the role of play in educating the
young animal. Mother cats bring half-dead mice for their kittens to
practise hunting on. Mother birds of prey do the same for their
offspring. Polar bear cubs slide down snow-slopes and look cute. Play is
good fun, and the kids enjoy it; at the same time, it equips them for
their adult roles.

Social animals, ones that gather in groups and operate _as_ groups, are
a fertile breeding-ground for privilege and for education. And with
appropriate communication, groups of animals can achieve things that no
individual can manage. A good example is dogs, which evolved the ability
to hunt in packs. When such tricks are being played, it is important to
have some recognition signal that lets the pack distinguish its own
members from outsiders, otherwise the pack can do all the work and then
an outsider can steal the food. Each dog pack has its own call-sign, a
special howl that only insiders know. The more elaborate your brain, the
more elaborate the communication from brain to brain can be, and the
more effectively education works.

Communication helps with the organisation of group behaviour, and it
opens up survival techniques that are more subtle than bashing others on
the head. Within the group, cooperation becomes a far more viable
option. Today’s great apes generally work as small groups, and it seems
likely that their ancestors did the same. When humans split off from the
chimpanzee lineage, those groups became what we now call tribes.

Competition between tribes was intense, and even today some jungle
tribes in South America and New Guinea think nothing of killing anyone
they meet who comes from a different tribe. This is a reversion to the
‘bash on the head’ option, but now one group cooperates to bash the
other group’s members on the head. Or, usually, _one_ such member at a
time. Less than a century ago, most such tribes did the same (one of the
stories we’ve told ourselves throughout our tribal history is that we
are The People, The True Human Beings – which means that everyone else
isn’t).

Chimpanzees have been observed killing other chimpanzees, and they
regularly hunt smaller monkeys for meat. That isn’t cannibalism. The
food is a different species. Most humans cheerfully consume other
mammals, even quite intelligent ones like pigs.⁷

Just as dog-packs need an agreed recognition signal to identify their
members, so each tribe needs to establish a distinct identity. The
possession of big brains makes it possible to do this by means of
elaborate, shared rituals.

Ritual is by no means confined to humans: many species of birds, for
instance, have special mating dances, or engage in strange devices to
attract the female’s attention, like the decorative collections of
berries and pebbles assembled by the male bower-bird. But humans, with
their highly developed brains, have turned ritual into a way of life.
Every tribe, and nowadays every culture, has developed a Make-a-Human
kit whose object is to bring up the next generation to adopt the tribal
or cultural norms and pass them on to their own children.

It doesn’t always work, especially nowadays when the world has shrunk
and cultures clash across non-geographical boundaries – Iranian
teenagers accessing the Internet, for example – but it still works
surprisingly well. Corporations have taken up the same idea, with
‘corporate bonding’ sessions. This is what the wizards were up to with
their paintballs. Studies have shown that sessions of this kind have no
useful effect, but businesses still waste billions on them every year.
The second most probable reason is that such sessions are fun anyway.
The first most probable is that everyone likes an opportunity to shoot
Mr Davis in Human Resources. And one important reason is that it
_sounds_ as though it ought to work; our culture is full of stories
where such things do.

An important part of the Make-a-Human kit is the Story. We tell our
children stories, and through those stories they learn what it is like
to be a member of our tribe or our culture. They learn from the story of
Winnie the Pooh getting stuck in Rabbit’s hole that greed can lead to
constraints on food. From the Three Little Pigs (a civilising story, not
a tribal one) they learn that if you watch your enemy for repetitive
patterns, you can outwit him. We use stories to build our brains, and
then we use the brains to tell ourselves, and each other, stories.

As time passes, those tribal stories acquire their own status, and
people cease to question them because they are traditional tribal
stories. They acquire a veneer of – well, the elves would call it
‘glamour’. They seem wonderful, despite numerous obvious faults, and
most people do not question them. On Discworld, precisely this process
occurred with stories and folk-memories about elves, as we can
illustrate with three quotations from _Lords and Ladies_. In the first,
the god of all small furry prey, Herne the Hunted, has just come to the
terrified realisation that ‘_They’re all coming back_!’. Jason Ogg, who
is a blacksmith, the eldest son of the witch Nanny Ogg, and not very
bright, asks her who _They_ are:

‘The Lords and Ladies,’ she said.

‘Who’re they?’

Nanny looked around. But, after all, this was a forge … It wasn’t just a
place of iron, it was a place where iron died and was reborn. If you
couldn’t speak the words here, you couldn’t speak ’em anywhere.

Even so, she’d rather not.

‘_You_ know,’ she said. ‘The Fair Folk. The Gentry. The Shining Ones.
The Star People. _You_ know.’

‘What?’

Nanny put her hand on the anvil, just in case, and said the word.

Jason’s frown very gently cleared, at about the same speed as a sunrise.

‘Them?’ he said. ‘But aren’t they nice and—’

‘See?’ said Nanny. ‘I _told_ you you’d get it wrong!’

You said: The Shining Ones. You said: The Fair Folk. And you spat, and
touched iron. But generations later, you forgot about the spitting and
the iron, and you forgot why you used those names for them, and you
remembered only that they were beautiful … We’re stupid, and the memory
plays tricks, and we remember the elves for their beauty and the way
they move, and we forget what they _were_. We’re like mice saying, ‘Say
what you like, cats have got real _style_.’

Elves are wonderful. They provoke wonder.

Elves are marvellous. They cause marvels.

Elves are fantastic. They create fantasies.

Elves are glamorous. They project glamour.

Elves are enchanting. They weave enchantment.

Elves are terrific. They beget terror.

The thing about words is that meanings can twist just like a snake, and
if you want to find snakes look for them behind words that have changed
their meaning.

No-one ever said elves are _nice_.

Elves are _bad_.

For most purposes (though, admittedly, not when dealing with elves) it
doesn’t greatly matter if the traditional tales make no real sense.
Father Christmas and the Tooth Fairy make no immediate sense (on
Roundworld, but see _Hogfather_ for their Discworld significance). Mind
you, it’s clear why children are happy to believe in such generosity.
The most important role of the tribal Make-a-Human kit is to provide the
tribe with its own collective identity, making it possible for it to act
as a unit. Tradition is good for such purposes; sense is optional. All
religions are strong on tradition, but many are weak on sense, at least
if you take their stories literally. Nevertheless, religion is
absolutely central to most cultures’ Make-a-Human kit.

The growth of human civilisation is a story of the assembly of
ever-larger units, knitted together by some version of that Make-a-Human
kit. At first, children were taught what they must do to be accepted as
members of the family group. Then they were taught what they must do to
be accepted as members of the tribe. (Believing apparently ridiculous
things was a very effective test: the naïve outsider would all too
readily betray a lack of belief, or would simply have no idea what the
appropriate belief was. Is it permitted to pluck a chicken before dark
on Wednesday? The tribe knew, the outsider did not, and since any
reasonable person would guess ‘yes’, the tribal priesthood could go a
long way by making the accepted answer ‘no’.) After that, the same kind
of thing happened for the local baron’s serfs, for the village, the
town, the city and the nation. We spread the net of True Human Beings.

Once units of any size have acquired their own identity, they can
_function_ as units, and in particular they can combine forces to make a
bigger unit. The resulting structure is hierarchical: the chains of
command reflect the breakdown into sub-units and sub-sub-units.
Individual people, or individual sub-units, can be expelled from the
hierarchy, or otherwise punished, if they stray outside accepted (or
enforced) cultural norms. This is a very effective way for a small group
of people (barbarian) to maintain control over a much larger group
(tribal). It works, and because of that we still labour under its
restrictions, many of which are undesirable. We have invented techniques
like democracy to try to mitigate the undesirable effects, but these
techniques bring new problems. A dictatorship can generally take action
more rapidly than a democracy, for example. It’s harder to argue.

The path from ape to human is not just one of evolutionary pressures
producing more and more effective brains; not just a tale of the
evolution of intelligence. Without intelligence, we could never have got
started on that path, but intelligence alone was not enough. We had to
find a way to share our intelligence with others, and to store useful
ideas and tricks for the benefit of the whole group, or at least, those
in a position to make use of it. That’s where extelligence comes into
play. Extelligence is what really gave those apes the springboard that
would launch them into sentience, civilisation, technology, and all the
other things that make humans unique on this planet. Extelligence
amplifies the individual’s ability to do good – or evil. It even creates
new forms of good and evil, such as, respectively, cooperation and war.

Extelligence operates by putting ever more sophisticated stories into
the Make-a-Human-Being kit. It pulled us up by our own bootstraps: we
could climb from tribal to barbarian to civilised.

Shakespeare shows us doing it. His period was _not_ a rebirth of
Hellenistic Greece or Imperial Rome. Instead, it was the culmination of
the barbarian ideas of conquest, honour and aristocracy, codified in the
principles of chivalry, meeting its match in the written principles of a
tribal peasantry, and disseminated by printing. This kind of
sociological confrontation produced many events in which the two
cultures meet head on.

This was exemplified by the Warwickshire enclosure uprisings. In
Warwickshire, the aristocracy carved up land into small parcels, and the
peasantry got very upset because the aristocracy didn’t give any heed to
what kind of land was in each parcel. All the aristocrats knew about
peasant farming was a simplistic calculation: this much land will
suffice for that many peasants. The peasants knew what was actually
involved in growing food, so that the only thing you could do with a
small piece of woodland, for instance, was to chop down all the trees to
make room to grow some food.

Today’s bean-counting managerial style in many businesses, and all
British public services, is exactly the same. This kind of confrontation
between the barbarian attitudes of the nobility and the tribal ones of
the peasantry is precisely portrayed in many of Shakespeare’s plays, as
an illustration of low-life, with its folk wisdom as comic relief and
pathos, set against the lofty ideals of the ruling classes – leading so
often to tragedy.

But also to high comedy. Think of Theseus, Duke of Athens, on the one
hand, and Bottom on the other, in _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_.

¹ On his first visit to England in 1930, Mahatma Gandhi was asked ‘What
do you think of modern civilisation?’ He is said to have replied ‘That
would be a good idea.’

² A time measurement we developed in _The Science of Discworld_ as a
‘human’ way of measuring large amounts of time. It’s 50 years, a
‘typical’ age gap between grandparent and grandchild. Most of the really
interesting bits of human development have taken place in the last 150
Grandfathers. Remember – objects in the rear view mirror are closer than
they appear.

³ Most of them being Grandfather bacteria, you appreciate. That’s the
trouble with metaphors.

⁴ Though they’re monkeys, not apes.

⁵ It helps considerably to steal privilege from other species; for
instance, all that food material in plant seeds, tubers and bulbs.

⁶ It happens all the time on Discworld!

⁷ But we eat sheep, too.

NINE

THE ELVISH QUEEN

[image] _IN THE HEAT OF THE NIGHT, magic moved on silent feet_.

_One horizon was red with the setting sun. This world went around a
central star. The elves did not know this. If they had done, it would
not have bothered them. They never bothered with detail of that kind.
The universe had given rise to life in many strange places, but the
elves were not interested in that, either_.

_This world had created lots of life, too. None of it had ever had what
the elves considered to be potential. But this time_ …

_It had iron, too. The elves hated iron. But this time, the rewards were
worth the risk. This time_ …

_One of them signalled. The prey was close at hand. And now they saw it,
clustered in the trees around a clearing, dark blobs against the
sunset_.

_The elves assembled. And then, at a pitch so strange that it entered
the brain without the need to use the ears, they began to sing_.

‘Charge!’ cried Archchancellor Ridcully.

The wizards, all bar Rincewind, charged. He peered around from behind a
tree.

The elf song, a creative dissonance of tones that went straight into the
back of the brain, ceased abruptly.

Thin figures spun around. Almond eyes glowed in triangular faces.

People who knew the wizards only as the world’s most avid diners would
have been quite surprised at their turn of speed. Besides, while it may
take a little while for a wizard to reach maximum acceleration, he’s
then very hard to stop. And he carries such a cargo of aggression; the
stratagems of the Uncommon Room at UU are guaranteed to give any wizard
a maximum load of virulence just itching for a target.

The Dean hit first, striking an elf a blow with his staff. A horseshoe
had been wired to the end. The elf screamed and twisted back, clutching
at its shoulder.

There were many elves but they hadn’t been expecting an attack. And iron
was so powerful. A handful of flung nails had the effect of buckshot.
Some tried to fight back, but the dread of iron was too strong.

The prudent and the survivors took to their skinny heels, while the dead
evaporated.

The attack took less than thirty seconds. Rincewind watched it from
behind his tree. He was not being cowardly, he reasoned. This was a job
for specialists, and could safely be left to the senior wizards. If,
later on, there was a problem involving slood dynamics or fretwork, or
someone needed to misunderstand some magic, he would be happy to step
forward.

There was a rustling behind him.

Something was there. What it was _changed_ as he turned and stared.

The first talent of the elves was their singing. It could turn other
creatures into potential slaves. The second talent was their ability to
change not their shape but how their shape was perceived. For a moment
Rincewind caught sight of a slim, spare figure glaring at him and then,
in one blurred moment, it became a woman. A queen, in a red dress and a
rage.

‘Wizards?’ she said. ‘Here? Why? How? Tell me!’

A gold crown glittered in her dark hair and murder gleamed in her eyes
as she advanced on Rincewind, who backed up against his tree.

‘This is _not_ your world!’ the elf queen hissed.

‘You’d be amazed,’ said Rincewind. ‘Now!’

The queen’s brow wrinkled. ‘Now?’ she repeated.

‘Yes, I said _now_,’ Rincewind said, grinning desperately. ‘_Now_ was
the word I said, in fact. _Now_!’

For a moment the queen looked puzzled. And then she somersaulted
backwards in a high arc, just as the Luggage’s lid snapped shut where
she had been. She landed behind it, hissed at Rincewind, and vanished
into the night.

Rincewind glared at the box. ‘Why did you wait? Did I tell you to wait?’
he demanded. ‘You just like to stand right behind people and wait for
them to find out, right?’

He looked around. There was no sign of any more elves. In the middle
distance the Dean, having run out of enemies, was attacking a tree.

Then Rincewind looked up. Along the branches, clinging to one another
and staring down at him in wide-eyed amazement, were dozens of what
looked, in the moonlight, like rather small and worried monkeys.

‘Good evening!’ he said. ‘Don’t worry about us, we’re just passing
through …’

‘Now this is where it all gets complicated,’ said a voice behind him. It
was a familiar one, being his own. ‘I’ve only got a few seconds before
the loop closes, so here’s what you have to do. When you go back to
Dee’s time … hold your breath.’

‘Are you _me_?’ said Rincewind, peering into the gloom.

‘Yes. And I’m telling you to hold your breath. Would I lie to me?’

There was an inrush of air as the other Rincewind disappeared and, down
in the clearing, Ridcully bellowed Rincewind’s name.

Rincewind stopped looking around and hurried down to the other wizards,
who were looking immensely pleased with themselves.

‘Ah, Rincewind, I thought you wouldn’t want to be left behind,’ said the
Archchancellor, grinning nastily. ‘Got any, did you?’

‘The queen, in fact,’ said Rincewind.

‘Really? I’m impressed!’

‘But she – _it_ got away.’

‘They’ve all gone,’ said Ponder. ‘I saw a blue flash on that hill up
there. They’ve gone back to their world.’

‘D’you think they’ll come back?’ said Ridcully.

‘It doesn’t matter if they do, sir. Hex will spot them and we can always
get there in time.’

Ridcully cracked his knuckles. ‘Good. Capital exercise. Much better than
magicking paint at one another. Builds grit and team interdependency.
Someone go and stop the Dean attacking that rock, will you? He does
rather get carried away.’

A faint white ring appeared on the grass, wide enough to hold the
wizards.

‘Ah, the ride back,’ said the Archchancellor, as the excited Dean was
hustled towards the rest of the group. ‘Time to—’

The wizards were suddenly in empty air. They fell. All but one of them
were not holding their breath before they hit the river.

Wizards do, however, have good floating capabilities and a tendency to
bob up and down. And the river was in any case rather like a slowly
moving swamp. Floating logs and mud banks choked it. Here and there, mud
banks had become sufficiently established to sprout a crop of trees. By
degrees, and with much arguing about where dry land actually began – it
was not very obvious – they splashed their way to the shore. The sun was
hot overhead, and clouds of mosquitoes shimmered among the trees.

‘Hex has brought us back to the wrong time,’ said Ridcully, wringing out
his robe.

‘I don’t think he’d do that, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder, meekly.

‘The wrong place, then. This is _not_ a city, in case you hadn’t
noticed.’

Ponder looked around in bewilderment. The landscape around them was not
exactly land and not exactly river. Ducks were quacking, somewhere.
There were blue hills in the distance.

‘On the upside,’ said Rincewind, extracting frogs from a pocket,
‘everything smells better.’

‘This is a _swamp_, Rincewind.’

‘So?’

‘And I can see smoke,’ said Ridcully.

There was a thin grey column in the middle distance.

Reaching it took a lot longer than the mere distance suggested. Land and
water were contesting every step of the way. But, eventually, and with
only one sprain and a number of bites, the wizards reached some thick
bushes and peered into the clearing beyond.

There were some houses, but that was stretching the term. They were
little more than piles of branches with reed roofs.

‘They could be savages,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Or perhaps someone sent them all out into the country to forge a
dynamic team spirit,’ said the Dean, who had been badly bitten.

‘Savages would be too much to hope for,’ said Rincewind, watching the
huts carefully.

‘You _want_ to find savages?’ said Ridcully.

Rincewind sighed. ‘I _am_ the Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography,
sir. In an unknown situation, _always_ hope for savages. They tend to be
quite polite and hospitable provided you don’t make any sudden moves or
eat the wrong sort of animal.’

‘Wrong sort of animal?’ said Ridcully.

‘Taboo, sir. They tend to be related. Or something.’

‘That sounds rather … sophisticated,’ said Ponder suspiciously.

‘Savages often are,’ said Rincewind. ‘It’s the civilised people that
give you trouble. They always want to drag you off somewhere and ask you
unsophisticated questions. Edged weapons are often involved. Trust me on
this. But these aren’t savages, sir.’

‘How can you tell?’

‘Savages build better huts,’ said Rincewind firmly. ‘These are edge
people.’

‘I’ve never heard of edge people!’ said Ridcully.

‘I made it up,’ said Rincewind. ‘I run into them occasionally. People
that live right on the edge, sir. Out on rocks. In the worst kind of
desert. No tribe or clan. That takes too much effort. Of course, so does
beating up strangers, so they’re the best kind of people to meet.’

Ridcully looked around at the swamp. ‘But there’s waterfowl everywhere,’
he said. ‘Birds. Eggs. Lots of fish, I’ll be bound. Beavers. Animals
that come down to drink. I could eat myself greasy to the eyebrows here.
This is _good_ country.’

‘Hold on, one of them’s coming out,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

A stooping figure had emerged from a hut. It straightened up, and stared
around. Huge nostrils flared.

‘Oh my, look what just fell out of the ugly tree,’ said the Dean. ‘Is it
a troll?’

‘He’s certainly a bit rugged,’ said Ridcully. ‘And why is he wearing
boards?’

‘I think he’s just not very good at tanning hides,’ said Rincewind.

The enormous shaggy head turned towards the wizards. The nostrils flared
again.

‘He smelled us,’ said Rincewind, and started to turn. A hand grabbed the
back of his robe.

‘This is not a good time to run away, _Professor_,’ said Ridcully,
lifting him off the ground in one hand. ‘We know you’re good at
languages. You get on with people. You have been chosen to be our
ambassador. Do not scream.’

‘Besides, the thing looks like cruel and unusual geography,’ said the
Dean, as Rincewind was thrust out of the bushes.

The big man watched him, but made no attempt to attack.

‘Go _on_!’ hissed the bushes. ‘We need to find out when we are!’

‘Oh, right,’ said Rincewind, eyeing the giant cautiously. ‘And he’s
going to tell me, is he? He’s got a calendar, has he?’

He advanced carefully, hands up to show that he didn’t have a weapon.
Rincewind was a great believer in not being armed. It made you a target.

The man had obviously seen him. But he didn’t seem very excited about
it. He watched Rincewind as someone might watch a passing cloud.

‘Er … hello,’ said Rincewind, stopping just out of range. ‘Me big fella
Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography belong Unseen University, you …
oh dear, you haven’t even discovered washing, have you? Either that or
it’s the clothes belong you. Still, no obvious weapons. Er …’

The man took a few steps forward and tugged the hat off Rincewind’s head
in one quick movement.

‘Hey—!’

What was visible of the big face broke into a grin. The man turned the
hat this way and that. Sunlight sparkled off the word ‘Wizzard’ in cheap
sequins.

‘Oh, I see,’ said Rincewind. ‘Pretty glitter. Well, that’s a start …’

TEN

BLIND MAN WITH LANTERN

[image] THE WIZARDS ARE NOW BEGINNING to understand that, while you
_can_ eliminate evil by eliminating extelligence, the result can be
about as interesting as watching daytime television. Their plan to stop
the elves interfering with human evolution has worked, but they don’t
like the result. It is bland and unintelligent. It has no spark of
creativity.

How did human creativity arise? By now you won’t be surprised to learn
that it came from stories. Let’s take a closer look at the current
scientific view of human evolution, and fill in that gap between R-O-C-K
and the space elevator.

An elf, observing Earth’s landmasses 25 million years ago, would have
seen vast areas of forest. From the hills of northern India to Tibet and
China, and down into Africa, these forests held a great variety of small
apes, ranging from about half the size of chimpanzees to the size of
gorillas. The apes were at home on the ground and in the lower branches
of the forest, and they were so common that today we have many fossils
of them. In addition, the Old World monkeys were starting to diversify
in the upper levels of the forest. Earth was a Monkey Planet.

But also a Snake Planet, a Big Cat Planet, a Nematode Planet, an Alga
Planet and a Grass Planet. Not to mention Plankton Planet, Bacterium
Planet and Virus Planet. The elf might not have noticed that the African
apes had produced several ground-dwelling kinds, not very different from
the monkey-derived baboons. And it might also have failed to spot the
presence of gibbons in the high branches, alongside the monkeys. These
creatures were not particularly remarkable against a background of
spectacular large mammals like rhinoceroses, a variety of forest
elephants, bears. But we humans are interested in them, because they
were our ancestors.

We call them ‘woods-apes’, dryopithecines. Some, known as
_Ramapithecus_, were of lighter build – the jargon is ‘gracile’. Others,
such as _Sivapithecus_, were big and strong – ‘robust’. The lineage of
_Sivapithecus_ was the one that led to orangutans. These early apes
would have been shy, morose creatures like today’s wild apes,
occasionally playful, but the adults would have been very belligerent
and conscious of status within the group.

The forests inhabited by the woods-apes slowly dwindled as the climate
cooled and dried, and grasslands – savannah country – took over. There
were ice ages, but in the region of the tropics these did not reduce
temperatures severely. However, they did change the patterns of
rainfall. The monkeys thrived, producing many ground-living kinds like
baboons and vervets, and the ape populations got smaller.

By ten million years ago, there were few apes left. There are almost no
fossil apes from that period. It seems plausible that, as now and as
previously, those apes that did still exist were forest creatures. Some,
like today’s chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans, were probably common
in a few locations in the forests, but you’d have needed a lot of luck
to find them. The observing elf might, even then, have put _all_ of
these apes on its Endangered List of Earth Mammals. Like very nearly all
animal groups that had evolved, the forest apes were soon to be history
rather than ecology. The common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees was,
then, a not very remarkable ape that probably lived much as the
different chimpanzees do now: some in flooded forest like today’s
bonobos, some in rain-forest, and some in fairly open woodland grading
into grasslands. The gorilla lineage separated from the other apes
around this time.

At first, the elf would probably not have been very interested as –
according to one of the two popular theories of human origins – a new
kind of ape began to evolve a more upright stance than those of its
relatives, lost its hair, and moved out on to the savannah. Many other
mammals did the same; there was a new kind of living to be made on the
great grass plains. Giant hyenas, massive wild dogs, lions and cheetahs
made a good living from the vast herds of herbivores that lived on the
productive savannah grasses; the giant pythons were probably originally
savannah animals, too.

The story has been told many times, in many versions. And that’s just
the point: we understand our ancestry _through_ story. We wouldn’t be
able to work out our ancestry from the fossils that we have discovered
unless we’d learned just what clues to look for, especially since few
fossil sites have enough evidence left.

The new ancestral plains ape saw the world differently. Judging from the
behaviour of today’s chimpanzees, especially bonobos, it was a highly
intelligent animal. We call their fossils southern apes,
australopithecines, and there are hundreds of books that tell stories
about them. They may have sojourned by the sea, doing clever things on
beaches. Some certainly lived on lake margins. Today’s chimpanzees use
stones to smash hard nuts open, and sticks to extract ants from nests;
the australopithecines also used stones and sticks as tools, rather more
so than their cousins the chimpanzees now do. They may have killed small
game, as chimpanzees do. They probably used sexual behaviour to hang
much of their pleasure on, like today’s bonobos, but most likely they
were more gender-conscious and male-dominant. Like previous apes, they
diverged into gracile and robust lines. The robust ones, called
_Anthropithecus boisi_, or even a different genus _Zinjanthropus_
(‘nutcracker man’) and other defamatory names, were vegetarians like
today’s gorillas, and probably left no descendants in modern times.

This kind of split into gracile and robust forms, by the way, seems to
be one of the standard patterns of evolution. Mathematical models
suggest that it probably happens when a mixed population of big and
small creatures can exploit the environment more effectively than a
single population of medium-sized ones, but this idea has to be
considered highly speculative until more evidence comes in. The
zoological world was recently given a reminder of how common such a
split is, and of how little we really know about the creatures of our
own planet.

The animal involved could not have been better known, nor more
appropriate to Discworld: the elephant.¹ As every child learns at an
early age, there are two kinds of elephant, two distinct species: the
African elephant and the Indian elephant.

Not so. There are three species. Zoologists have been arguing for at
least a century about what they thought was at most a subspecies of
‘the’ African elephant _Loxodonta africana_. The typical big, burly
African elephant lives on the savannah. The elephants that live in the
forest are shy, and difficult to spot: there is just one of them in the
Paris zoo, for example. Biologists had assumed that because the forest
elephants and the savannah elephants can interbreed at the edges of the
forest, they could not be separate species. After all, the standard
definition of a species, promoted by the evolutionary biologist Ernst
Mayr, is ‘able to interbreed’. So they either insisted that there was
just one species, or that ‘African elephant’ had a distinguished
subspecies, the forest elephant _Loxodonta africana cyclotis_. On the
other hand, zoologists who have had the good fortune to see forest
elephants are in no doubt that they look very different from the
savannah ones: they are smaller, with straighter, longer tusks, and
round ears, not pointed ones. Nicholas Georgiadis, a biologist at the
Mpala Research Centre in Kenya, has said: ‘If you see a forest elephant
for the first time, you think, “Wow, what is that?”’ But because
biologists _knew_, on theoretical grounds, that the animals _had_ to be
all the same species, the observational evidence was rejected as
inconclusive.

However, in August 2001 a team of four biologists – Georgiadis, Alfred
Roca, Jill Pecon-Slattery and Stephen O’Brien – reported in the journal
_Science_ their ‘Genetic evidence for two species of elephant in
Africa’. Their DNA analysis makes it absolutely clear that the African
elephant really does come in two distinct forms: the usual robust form,
and a separate gracile form. Moreover, the gracile African elephants
really are a different species from the robust ones. As different, in
fact, as either African species is from the Indian one. So now we have
the robust African plains elephant _Loxodonta africana_ and the gracile
African forest elephant _Loxodonta cyclotis_.

What of the belief that there could be only one species because of the
potential for interbreeding? This particular definition of species is
taking a hammering at the moment, and deservedly so. The main reason is
a growing realisation that even when animals _can_ interbreed, they may
decide not to.

The story of the Third Elephant is not new: only the names have been
changed. Before 1929 every zoologist ‘knew’ there was only one species
of chimpanzee; after 1929, when the bonobos of the inaccessible swamps
of Zaire were recognised as a second species,² it became obvious to many
zoos that they had possessed two distinct chimpanzee species for years,
but not realised it. Exactly the same story is now being played out with
elephants.

As we’ve mentioned, Discworld recently revived interest in its fifth
elephant, a story told, you will be surprised to hear, in _The Fifth
Elephant_. According to legend, there were originally five elephants
standing on Great A’Tuin and supporting the Disc, but one slipped, fell
off the turtle, and crashed into a remote region of Discworld:

They _say_ that the fifth elephant came screaming and trumpeting through
the atmosphere in the young world all those years ago and landed hard
enough to split continents and raise mountains.

No one actually saw it land, which raised the interesting philosophical
question: when millions of tons of angry elephant come spinning through
the sky, and there is no one to hear it, does it – philosophically
speaking – make a noise?

And if there was no one to see it hit, did it _actually_ hit?

There is evidence, in the form of vast deposits of fat and gold (the
great elephants that support the world do not have ordinary bones), deep
underground in the Schmaltzberg mines. However, there is a more
down-to-Disc theory: some catastrophe killed off millions of mammoths,
bison and giant shrews, and then covered them over. On Roundworld, there
would be a good scientific test to distinguish the two theories: are the
deposits of fat shaped like a crash-landed elephant? But there’s no
point even in looking, on Discworld, because narrative imperative will
ensure that they are, even if they were formed by millions of mammoths,
bison and giant shrews. Reality has to follow the legend.

Roundworld has so far reached only its third elephant, although Jack
hopes that some careful selective breeding might yet bring back a
fourth: the pygmy elephant, which lived in Malta and was about the size
of a Shetland pony. It would make a marvellous pet – except that, like
many diminutive creatures, it would probably be rather bad-tempered. And
the very devil to discourage from getting on the settee.

We are a gracile ape (not that you’d notice in some parts of the world,
where many of us more closely resemble a robust hippopotamus). About
four million years ago one gracile lineage of apes started to get bigger
brains and better tools. Against all the rules of taxonomy we call this
lineage, our lineage, _Homo_: it really should be _Pan_, because we are
the third chimpanzee. We use this name because it is certainly our own
lineage, and we prefer to think of ourselves as being enormously
different from the apes. In this we could be right: we may indeed share
98 per cent of our genes with chimpanzees, but then, we share 47 per
cent with cabbages. Our big difference from the apes is cultural, not
genetic. Anyway, within the _Homo_ lineage we again find gracile and
robust stocks. _Homo habilis_ was our gracile tool-making ancestor, but
_Homo ergaster_ and others went the vegetarian, robust way. If there
actually is a yeti or a bigfoot, the best bet is a robust _Homo_. From
_Homo habilis_’s success, a larger-brained _Homo_ spread out over
Africa, into Asia (as Peking Man) and Eastern Europe about 700 million
years ago.

We have labelled one variety of these fossils _Homo erectus_. The
visiting elf would certainly have noticed this fellow. He had several
kinds of tools, and he used fire. He may even have possessed language,
of a kind. What we have every reason to suspect that he did, that his
ancestors and cousins only occasionally achieved, was to ‘understand’
his world and change it. Chimpanzees engage in quite a lot of ‘if …
then’ activities, including ‘lying’: ‘if I pretend not to have seen that
banana, I can come back and get it later when that big male won’t steal
it from me’.

The young of this early hominid grew up in family groups where things
were happening that were unlike anything anywhere else on the planet.
Sure, there were lots of other mammal nests, packs and troupes, where
the young were playing at being adult or just fooling around; nests were
safe, and trial-and-error was rarely lethal, so the young could learn
safely. But in the human lineage, father was making stone tools,
grunting at his women _about_ the children, _about_ the cave, _about_
putting more wood on the fire. There would be favourite gourds _for_
banging, perhaps _for_ fetching water, spears _for_ hunting, lots of
stones _for_ tools.

Meanwhile, in Africa, another new lineage had arisen about 120,000 years
ago, and spread; we call it ancient _Homo sapiens_, and it led to us.
Its brain was even bigger, and in caves on the coast of South Africa it
– we – had begun to make better tools, and to make primitive paintings
on rocks and cave walls. Our population exploded, and we migrated. We
reached Australia just over 60,000 years ago, and Europe about 50,000
years ago.

In Europe there had been a moderately robust _Homo_, the Neanderthal
_Homo sapiens neanderthalensis_, a subspecies. Some anthropologists
consider us to be a sister subspecies, _Homo sapiens sapiens_ or,
loosely speaking, ‘Seriously wise man’. Wow. The Neanderthals’ stone
tools were well developed for various functions, but these particular
hominids seem not to have been progressive. Their culture hardly changed
over tens of thousands of years. But they seem to have had some kind of
spiritual impulse, for they buried their dead with ceremony – or, at
least, with flowers.

Our more gracile ancestors, the Cro-Magnon people, lived at the same
time as the last of the Neanderthals, and there are many theories about
what happened when the two subspecies interacted. Basically, we survived
and the Neanderthals didn’t …

Why? Was it because we bashed them on the head more effectively than
they bashed us? Did we outbreed them? _In_breed them? Squeeze them out
into the ‘edge country’? Crush them with superior extelligence? We’ll
put our own theory forward later in the book.

We don’t subscribe to the ‘rational’ story of human evolution and
development, the story that has named us so pretentiously _Homo sapiens
sapiens_. Briefly, that story focuses on the nerve cells in our brains,
and says that our brains got bigger and bigger until finally we evolved
Albert Einstein. They did, and we did, and Albert was indeed pretty
bright, but nonetheless the thrust of that story is nonsense, because it
doesn’t discuss why, or even how, our brains got bigger. It’s like
describing a cathedral by saying ‘You start with a low wall of stones
and as time passes you add more stones so that it gets higher and
higher’. There’s a lot more to a cathedral than that, as its builders
would attest.

What actually happened is much more interesting, and you can see it
going on all around you today. Let’s look at it from the elf’s
viewpoint. We don’t programme our children rationally, as we might set
up a computer. Instead, we pour into their minds loads of irrational
junk about sly foxes, wise owls, heroes and princes, magicians and
genies, gods and demons, and bears that get stuck in rabbit-holes; we
frighten them half to death with tales of terror, and they come to enjoy
the fear. We beat them (not very much in the last few decades, but for
thousands of years before that, for sure). We embed the teaching
messages in long sagas, in priestly injunctions, and invented histories
full of dramatic lessons; in children’s stories that teach them by
indirection. Stand near a children’s playground, and watch (these days,
check with the local police station first, and in any case be sure to
wear protective clothing). Peter and Iona Opie did just that, many years
ago, and collected children’s songs and games, some of them thousands of
years old.

Culture passes through the whirlpool that is the child community without
needing adults for its transmission: you will all remember
Eeny-Meeny-Miny-Mo, or some other counting-out ritual. There is a
children’s subculture that propagates itself without adult intervention,
censorship, or indeed knowledge.

The Opies later collected, and began to explain to adults, the original
nursery stories like Cinderella and Rumpelstiltskin. In late medieval
times, Cinderella’s slipper had been a fur one, not glass. And that was
a euphemism, because (at least in the German version) the girls gave the
prince their ‘fur slipper’ to try on … The story came to us through the
French, and in that language ‘_verre_’ can either be ‘glass’ or ‘fur’.
The Grimm brothers went for the hygienic alternative, saving parents the
danger of embarrassing explanations.

Rumpelstiltskin was an interestingly sexual parable, too, a tale to
programme the idea that female masturbation leads to sterility. Remember
the tale? The miller’s daughter, put in the barn to ‘spin straw into
gold’, virginally _sits on_ a little stick that becomes a little man …
The dénouement has the little man, when his name is finally identified,
jumping in to ‘plug’ the lady very intimately, and the assembled
soldiers can’t pull him out. In the modern bowdlerised version, this
survives vestigially as the little man pushing his foot through the
floor and not being able to pull it out, a total _non sequitur_. So none
of those concerned, king, miller or queen, can procreate (the stolen
first child has been killed by the soldiers), and it all ends in tears.
If you doubt this interpretation, enjoy the indirection: ‘What is his
name? What is his name?’ recurs in the story. What _is_ his name? What
is a stilt with a rumpled skin? Whoops. The name has an equivalent
derivation in many languages, too. (In Discworld, Nanny Ogg claimed to
have written a children’s story called ‘the Little Man Who Grew Too
Big’, but, then, Mrs Ogg always believed that a _double entendre_ can
mean only one thing.)

Why do we like stories? Why are their messages embedded so deeply in the
human psyche?

Our brains have evolved to understand the world through patterns. These
may be visual patterns, such as the tiger’s stripes, or aural ones, like
the howl of the coyote. Or smells. Or tastes. Or narratives. Stories are
little mental models of the world, sequences of ideas strung like beads
on a necklace. Each bead leads inexorably to the next bead; we _know_
that the second little pig is going to get the chop: the world would not
be working properly if it didn’t.

We deal not just in patterns, but also in meta-patterns. Patterns of
patterns. We watch archer-fish shooting down insects with jets of water,
we enjoy the elephant using its nose to acquire doughnuts from zoo
visitors (less these days, alas); we delight in the flight of
house-martins (there are fewer swallows to enjoy now) and the songs of
garden-birds. We admire the weaver birds’ nests, the silk moths’
cocoons, the cheetahs’ speed. All these things are characteristic of the
creatures concerned. And what is characteristic of us? Stories. So, by
the same token, we enjoy the stories of people. We are the storytelling
chimpanzee, and we appreciate the meta-pattern involved in that.

When we became more social, collecting into groups of a hundred or more,
probably with agriculture, more stories appeared in our extelligence, to
guide us. We had to have rules for behaviour, ways to deal with the
infirm and the handicapped, ways to divert violence. In early and
present-day tribal societies, everything that is not forbidden is
mandatory. Stories point to difficult situations, like the Good
Samaritan story in the New Testament; the Prodigal Son, too, is
instructive by indirection, like Rumpelstiltskin. To drive that home,
here is a tale from the Nigerian Hausa tribe, _Blind Man’s Lantern_.

A young man is coming home late from seeing his girlfriend in the next
village; it is very dark under a starry sky and the path back to his own
village is not easy to follow. He sees a lantern bobbing towards him,
but when it gets closer he sees that it is carried by the Blind Man of
his own village.

‘Hey, Blind Man,’ he says. ‘You whose darkness is no darker than your
noonday! What do _you_ carry a lantern for?’

‘It is not for my need I carry this lantern,’ says the Blind Man. ‘It is
to keep off you fools with eyes!’

We, as a species, don’t only specialise in storytelling. Just as with
the other specialities above, our species has a few more oddities.
Probably the most odd characteristic that our elvish observer would note
is our obsessive regard for children. We not only care for our _own_
children, which is entirely to be expected biologically, but for other
people’s children, too; indeed for other humankind’s children (we often
find foreign-looking children _more_ attractive than our own); indeed
for the children of all land vertebrate _species_. We coo over lambs,
fawns, newly hatched turtles, even tadpoles!

Our sibling species, chimpanzees, are far more realistic. They too
prefer baby animals. They prefer them for food, being more tender.
(Humans also have a liking for lamb, calf, piglet, duckling … We can coo
over them _and_ eat them.) After the kind of warfare now well documented
between chimpanzee groups, the victors will kill and eat the young of
the vanquished. Male lions will kill the young of prides they take over,
and eating the corpses is not unusual. Many mammalian females will eat
their young if both are starving, and will frequently ‘re-process’ the
first litter in this manner anyway.

No, it’s very clear that we are the odd men out. Odd Men indeed. We do
have mental circuits to delight in, and protect, our own babies, so that
the later Mickey Mouse converged on the outline of a three-year-old
toddler, as did E.T. It is no wonder that so many people paid his phone
bill. But we also go daft about cuddly juveniles of far too many other
kinds. Biologically, this is very odd.

A by-product of our finding other species’ babies so attractive has
clearly been the domestication of dogs, cats, goats, horses, elephants,
hawks, chickens, cattle … These symbioses have given immense pleasure to
billions of people, and to their animals, and have contributed greatly
to our nutrition. Those who feel that we have exploited the animals
unfairly should consider the alternatives for the animals, in the wild,
where nearly all of them are eaten alive as babies, without even the
benefit of a quick death.

Agriculture can perhaps be attributed to our other propensity,
storytelling: the seed becoming the plant has served as an image for so
many new words and thoughts, metaphors, new understandings of nature.
And the wealth generated by agriculture permitted people to afford
princes and philosophers, peasants³ and popes. The cultural capital has
grown as we have passed our knowledge on to succeeding generations. But
it’s more comfortable to enjoy that culture if there are a couple of
warehouses full of barley for beer, wheat in the fields and cows in the
meadows.

We have very recently made the whole business of symbiosis with plants
and animals much more technical – those controversial ‘genetically
modified organisms’ – and we have lost a lot by taking our animal
helpers out of the system, especially dogs and horses, and replacing
them with machinery.

We could not have predicted what the animal and plant symbioses did for
us, for our extelligence, and we don’t know what losing them will do.
Events like that explode on us as the bicycle ride that is extelligence
careers down this long technical hill, and can have totally unexpected
effects.

Yes, the Ford Model T made motoring affordable to many more people – but
a socially much more important change was that it gave privacy in
comfort for the first time, so that a large proportion of the next
generation was sired on the upholstery of the car’s back seat.
Similarly, the dog coming in as a symbiont meant that we could hunt more
successfully. Then, as a guard dog, it meant that private farms could be
protected, and there was help with rounding up the animals and keeping
away predators, including human ones. Lapdogs probably affected our
sexual courtesies, particularly in eighteenth-century France, and dog
and cat shows have stirred our upper-middle classes with, in modern
England, the lower aristocracy.

Think for a moment about what we’ve done to dogs and cats. More than
horses and cows, they grow up in our families. We play with them, like
we play with our own children, and the play often involves our own
children. As with our own children, this interaction begets minds in our
pets. Even human children don’t do much good on the mind front if they
don’t play. And Jack found, and showed Ian, that even invertebrates,
bright invertebrates like mantis shrimps, can acquire minds if they’re
involved in play activities. We described in _Figments of Reality_ how
this happens. Let’s just note here that we have uplifted⁴ our symbionts
into the world of mind. Dogs worry about things, much more than wolves
do. So dogs have at least some sense of themselves as a creature that
lives in time, with some kind of awareness that it has a future as well
as a present. Mind is _catching_.

Usually we think of the domestication of the dog as a selection process
driven by human intentions. The process may have started accidentally,
perhaps with a tribe bringing up a wolf pup that the kids had brought
into the cave, but at a relatively early stage it became a deliberate
training programme. Proto-dogs were selected for obedience to their
master and for useful skills such as hunting. As time passed, obedience
evolved into devotion, and the modern dog arrived on the scene.

However, there is an attractive alternative theory: the dogs selected
us. It was the dogs that trained the humans. In this scenario, humans
that were willing to allow wolf pups into the cave, and had the ability
to train them, were rewarded by the dogs, for example by a willingness
to assist in the hunt. Those humans that performed best at these tasks
found it easier to acquire new pups and train new generations. The
selection on the human side would have been cultural rather than
genetic, because there hasn’t been enough time for genetic influences to
make a lot of difference directly. However, there may well have been
selection on the genetic level for having enough intelligence to
appreciate how useful a trained wolf could be, or having the generalised
teaching skills, such as persistence, to carry out successful training.
At any rate, the tribe as a whole benefited from those few individuals
who could train proto-dogs, so that the selective pressure in favour of
generalised dog-training genes must have been slight.

This isn’t one of those either-or choices: we are not obliged to accept
one theory to the exclusion of the other. And this is a point we should
make very firmly, for this and many other theories: things happen, all
over the place and apparently in some confusion, and afterwards mankind
goes and chops it all up into ‘stories’. We need to do it like that
that, but occasionally we should stand back and realise what it is we
are doing.

In the case of the dogs, there is in all likelihood a fair amount of
truth in both theories, and what happened was a complicit co-evolution
of dogs and people. As dogs became more obedient and easier to train,
people became more willing to train them; as people became more willing
to consider possessing a dog, the dogs became more adept at playing
along and making themselves useful.

The situation is, perhaps, more clear-cut with cats. Here it was very
much a case of the cats being in the driving-seat. Rudyard Kipling’s
Just-So Story of ‘The Cat That Walks By Itself’ is too naïve an
acceptance of the impression that cats set out to give – that they do
things their own way and merely tolerate those people who play along –
but in most cases you can’t train a cat. Very few cats are willing to
perform tricks, whereas many dogs visibly enjoy performing for human
pleasure. To the ancient Egyptians, cats were tiny gods on Earth,
personified in the cat-goddess Bastet. Bastet was originally worshipped
around Bubastis, in the Nile delta, and she had a lion’s head; later,
this transmuted (transmogrified?) into a cat’s head. Bastet-worship then
spread to Memphis, where she became conflated with Sakhmet, a local
lion-headed goddess. Bastet was a generalised goddess of things that
were especially important to women, such as fertility and safe
childbirth. Cats were also worshipped, as godling avatars of Bastet, and
they were often mummified because of their religious significance. There
was a sort of dog-god, the jackal-headed Anubis, but the difference was
that he had a substantial ‘hands-on’ job: he was the god of embalming,
and his role was to assist (or impede) the passage of the dead through
the underworld. Anubis judged whether the dead were worthy of the
afterlife. The only duties that the cat-godlings had were to allow
humans to worship them.

Nothing new there, then.

Even today, cats assiduously give the impression of being independent;
they seldom come when called, and are liable to depart at a moment’s
notice for reasons that are never very clear. All cat-owners know,
however, that this impression is superficial: their cats need attention,
and know it. But this need shows up indirectly. For example, Ian’s cat
‘Ms Garfield’ usually comes out to the front of the house to greet the
arrival of the family car, but her pleasure at the car’s appearance is
heavily disguised as a strident harangue: ‘Where the bloody hell have
you lot been?’ After absences on holiday or overseas, family members
find that whenever they are in the garden, the cat coincidentally is in
the same part of the garden – but either asleep or apparently just
passing through. It looks as though house-cats are slowly losing the
domestication battle, but putting up a strong fight. Feral cats are
another matter, and real working cats like farm cats are often genuinely
independent. These days, though, many farm cats are treated much like
house-cats. At any rate, there are some good research projects still to
be carried out on the co-evolution of ancient humans and their livestock
and pets.

In another instance of this co-evolution, the horse made chivalry a
possible culture (hence the name, of course: compare the French
‘cheval’) and enabled the Mongols to achieve one of the largest,
best-controlled empires in human history. Under the Khans it was said
that a virgin could walk unmolested from Seville to Hang Chou. Only in
the twentieth century was that again achievable, with luck and possibly
a harder search for the virgin. The Spanish took horses to America,
where humans had killed off several equine species some 13,000 years
before,⁵ and changed the lives of all the North American Indian tribes –
and the cowboys, of course. And, a little later, Hollywood.

The horse did wonders for the genetics of humans, too. Just as they say
that the invention of the bicycle saved East Anglia from an incest
implosion, so the people that had come out of Africa were only a tiny
part of early _Homo sapiens_’s genetic diversity. All recent studies of
the DNA genetics of human populations agree that the genetic diversity
outside Africa is only a tiny fraction of the diversity that is still
found on that continent. Those who left, to go as far as Australia or
China, to Western Europe or via the high Arctic to America, are less
diverse in total than many small indigenous African peoples. With the
arrival of the horse, it became possible for traders to carry goods –
and gene alleles – for very long distances, very effectively. So the
out-of-Africa humans have inherited a relatively small part of the
African gene-pool: they are genetically impoverished, but well stirred.

At the end of the twentieth century there was, for some years, a belief
that _Homo sapiens_ was a polyphyletic species. This word means that
different groups of _Homo sapiens_ evolved from different groups of
_Homo erectus_ in different places. This, it was thought, might account
for the racial differences, especially differences in skin pigmentation,
that seemed to fit geography pretty well. From DNA studies, we now know
this theory can’t be true. On the contrary, there was a bottleneck in
our population as we came out of Africa – humanity was reduced to rather
small numbers – and all of us living today, all of the out-of-Africa
‘races’, were extracted from that small population. All the _Homo
erectus_ died out. The evidence so far looks as if there was only one
exodus, of a minimum of some 100,000 people. We were all there _in
potentia_ in that tiny population, Japanese and Eskimos and Norsemen and
Sioux and Beaker people and Mandarin Chinese; Indians and Jews and
Irishmen. In the same way, all the current kinds of dog were ‘present’
in the original domesticated wolf (assuming it was indeed a wolf) – that
is, they were in the wolf’s space of the adjacent possible – and we’ve
pulled out Saint Bernards and chihuahuas and labradors and King Charles
spaniels and poodles from that local region of organism-space.

There was, about thirty years ago, a brief fashion for the concept of
‘mitochondrial Eve’, and many media reports seem to have picked up the
idea that there was just one woman, a veritable Eve, in that ancestral
bottleneck. This is nonsense, but the media reports were written up to
encourage the belief. The real story, as always, was a little more
complicated, and it goes like this. There are mitochondria in the cells
of people, indeed of most animals and plants. These are the
billions-of-generations, descendants of symbiotic bacteria, and they
still have some of their ancient DNA heredity, called mitochondrial DNA.
Mitochondria from the mother go into the embryo’s cells, but those from
father do not: they die, or go only into the placenta. In any event,
mitochondrial inheritance is very nearly all maternal. The mitochondrial
DNA accumulates mutations over time, with important genes changing less
(presumably because the resulting babies, if any, were defective) and
some DNA sequences changing quite quickly. That enables us to judge how
far back it is to the common ancestor of any pair of women, from the
accumulated differences in several DNA sequences. Surprisingly, nearly
all such pairs from very different women converge on to a single
consensus sequence, about 70,000 years ago.

A single woman, the ancestor of us all.

Eve?

Well, that was the story that the media latched on to, and you can see
why. However, it doesn’t hang together. The occurrence of just one
mitochondrial DNA sequence doesn’t mean that there was just one _woman_
with that sequence, or that she was the ancestress of all the other
women whose DNA was sequenced. Evidence based on the current diversity
of various genes shows that there were at least 50,000 women in the
human population 70,000 years ago, and _many_ of them will have had that
particular DNA sequence, or one that cannot be distinguished from it
with the evidence remaining today. The lineages of the women who did not
have that sequence continued for some time, but eventually died out:
their ‘branch’ of the human family tree doesn’t reach all the way to the
present day. We can’t be certain why those lineages died out, but in
mathematical models such effects are commonplace. Perhaps the women
carrying sequences like today’s sole survivor were more ‘fit’, or they
simply came to outnumber the others by chance. It is even possible that
the choice of the contemporary women to test was in some way biased, and
that more than one mitochondrial DNA sequence is actually present in
today’s women.

How do we know that there were at least 100,000 humans 70,000 years ago,
and not, as in the stories, just two 6,000 years ago? Many (about 30 per
cent) of the genes in the cell nucleus have several versions in today’s
human population. Like most ‘wild’ populations (not bred in the
laboratory or for dog shows), each individual human has two versions of
about 10 per cent of his or her genes, different versions received from
father and mother in sperm and egg. Humans have roughly 30,000 genes, of
which about 3,000 will be represented by two versions in the average
person. For some genes, notably those of the immune system that give
each of us a very specific lock-and-key individuality, making us
susceptible to some ailments but resistant to others, there are hundreds
of versions of _each_ gene (of four important ones, anyway). The
(common) chimpanzee has a set of these immune variants that is very like
the human: in one list of 65 variants of one immune gene, only two were
_not_ exactly the same. We don’t know about the DNA of enough bonobos
yet to see if the story is the same for them, but the smart money says
that it will be, possibly even more so. The gorilla set seems to be a
little different again (but only about thirty gorillas have been
tested).

At any rate, _all_ of these immune gene variants had to come out of
Africa in that ‘bottleneck’ population that produced all the ex-African
human populations. It is unreasonable to suppose that each individual
inherited different versions of each variable gene from their parents:
some will have carried only one version, the same from both parents, and
no one can have carried more than two. The humans that came out of
Africa have about 500 immune variants, at least, in common with,
chimpanzees, out of about 750 possibilities. The humans who stayed in
Africa have more: they weren’t subject to the bottleneck. There are many
other genes where several ancient versions (ancient because they’re
common to us, chimpanzees, perhaps gorillas, maybe other species) have
come through; 100,000 people is a reasonable minimum to carry all those.
If you want to be critical and get that number down a bit, you could
argue that a.few variants from African populations may have been mixed
in later, for example via slavery to the US, or to Mediterranean peoples
and then via Phoenician sailors to the rest of us. Still, the evidence
does not point to an Adam and an Eve, unless they came with a lot of
servants, slaves or concubines.

The Biblical stories don’t mention those.⁶

¹ There’s been a very cute discovery about elephants recently, and the
only place we can find to put it is this footnote. (This, after all, is
what footnotes are for.) It has been known since 1682 that elephants’
lungs are unusual, without the ‘pleural cavity’, a space between the
lungs and the chest wall that is filled with fluid, that most mammals
have. Instead of fluid, elephants’ lungs are surrounded by loose
connective tissue. It now looks as if this type of lung exists because
it lets elephants go snorkelling, breathing through their trunks. In
2001 the physiologist John West calculated that with a normal pleural
cavity, the pressure of the water would burst the tiny blood vessels in
the pleural membrane and snorkelling could be fatal. We’re now wondering
whether the trunk evolved in the ocean as a snorkel. Land vertebrates
first evolved from fish that came up on to the seashore. Much later, a
variety of mammals went back into the oceans and evolved into several
kinds of sea-mammals, the most spectacular modern descendants being
whales. We now see that somewhere along the way, some of those
water-adapted mammals came back on to the land and turned into
elephants. So the elephant is now on its _second_ evolutionary journey
out of the water and on to the land. It would be nice if it made up its
mind.

² See _The Science of Discworld_, chapter 38.

³ Peasants do cost.

⁴ David Brin fans will know what we mean here: in the Five Galaxies, no
race (save for the long-defunct Progenitors) ever became extelligent
without the aid of a sponsor race which already was. Save for humans,
because even in an SF story we need to feel superior. We are, after all,
the True Human Beings.

⁵ Always be careful of the twentieth-century ‘story’ of ‘the natives who
live in harmony with their environment’. It tends to gloss over the fact
that back in history they killed off all the really big animals, and now
it’s a choice between harmony and death.

⁶ Mind you, Genesis does say that after Cain killed Abel he was exiled
to the land of Nod, on the east of Eden, where he ‘knew his wife’ and
Enoch was born. It doesn’t tell us how the wife got to Nod in order to
be known. She could have been one of those unmentioned servants, slaves
or concubines. That, in turn, raises even more problems with the story
of Adam and Eve.

ELEVEN

THE SHELLFISH SCENE

[image] THE WIZARDS WATCHED CAREFULLY.

‘There’s five of them sitting there with him now,’ said Ponder. ‘And
some children. He seems to be getting on well enough.’

‘They’re very interested in his hat,’ said the Dean.

‘A pointy hat always commands respect in any culture,’ said Ridcully.

‘Then why have several of them tried to eat it?’ said the Lecturer in
Indefinite Studies.

‘At least they don’t appear to be warlike,’ said Ponder. ‘Let’s go and
introduce ourselves, shall we?’

And, again, when the wizards arrived at the little group around the fire
there was the strange sensation of … nothing. No surprise, no shock. The
heavy people treated them as if they’d just returned from the bar; their
curiosity level extended perhaps to the flavour of crisps they’d brought
back, but no further.

‘Friendly souls, ain’t they?’ said Ridcully. ‘Which one’s the boss?’

Rincewind looked up, and then turned and snatched his hat from a big
fist.

‘None of them,’ he snapped. ‘Stop pinching the sequins!’

‘Have you mastered their language?’

‘I can’t! They don’t have one! It’s all point and kick! That’s my _hat_,
thank you so very very!’

‘We watched you walking around,’ said Ponder. ‘Surely you’ve learned
something?’

‘Oh, yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘Follow me, and I’ll show you – _give me my
hat_!’

Holding his sequin-stripped hat firmly on his head with both hands, he
led the wizards to a big lagoon on the other side of the village. An arm
of the river flowed through it; the water was crystal clear.

‘See the shells?’ said Rincewind, pointing to a large heap a little way
from the beach.

‘Freshwater mussels,’ said Ridcully. ‘Very nutritious. Well?’

‘It’s a big heap, right?’

‘And?’ said Ridcully. ‘I’m quite fond of mussels myself.’

‘You see that hill further along the bank? The one covered in grass? And
the one behind that, with all the shrubs and trees? And the – well, see
how the whole _area_ is a lot higher than rest of the land around here?
If you want to know why, just kick the soil away. It’s mussel shells all
the way down! These people have been here for thousands and thousands of
years!’

The tiny clan had followed them and were watching with the
uncomprehending interest that was their ground-state expression. Several
of them waded in after mussels.

‘That’s a lot of shellfish,’ said the Dean. ‘Obviously not a taboo
animal.’

‘Yes, and that’s surprising because frankly these people seem related to
them,’ said Rincewind wearily. ‘Their stone tools are frankly rubbish
and they can’t build huts and they can’t even make fire.’

‘But we saw a—’

‘Yes. They’ve _got_ fire. They wait for lightning to strike a tree or
set fire to grass,’ said Rincewind. ‘Then they just keep it going for
years and years. Believe me, it took a lot of grunting and pointing to
work _that_ one out. And they have no idea about art. I mean, you know,
pictures? I drew a picture of a cow in the dirt and they seemed puzzled.
I really think they were just seeing … well, lines. Just lines.’

‘Perhaps you’re not very good at cow pictures?’ said Ridcully.

‘Look around,’ said Rincewind. ‘No beads, no face paint, no decoration.
You don’t have to be very advanced to knock out a bear claw necklace.
Even people who live in caves know how to draw. Ever seen those caves up
in Ubergigle? Buffaloes and mammoths as far as the eye can see.’

‘I must say you’ve seemed to strike up a rapport with them very quickly,
Rincewind,’ said Ponder.

‘Well, I’ve always been good at understanding other people enough to get
an inkling of when to start running,’ said Rincewind.

‘You don’t _always_ have to run, do you?’

‘Yes. Of course. The important thing is to know when it’s the
appropriate moment, though. Ah, this one’s Ug,’ said Rincewind, as a
white-haired man prodded him with a thick finger. ‘So are all the
others.’

The current Ug pointed towards the Shell Midden foothills.

‘He appears to want us to go with him,’ said Ponder.

‘He might,’ said Rincewind. ‘Or he might be pointing out where he last
had a really satisfying bowel movement. See them all watching us?’

‘Yes.’

‘See that strange expression they have?’

‘Yes.’

‘You wonder what they’re thinking?’

‘Yes.’

‘Nothing. Believe me. That expression means that they’re waiting for the
next thought to turn up.’

Beyond the Shell Midden Mountains was a thicket of willows, and in the
centre of the thicket was a much older tree, or what remained of one. It
had been split in two, was now dead, and at some point had been burned.

The clan hung back, but the white-haired Ug followed them into it a
little way.

Something crackled under Rincewind’s foot. He looked down, saw a
yellowing bone, and nearly experienced an appropriate moment. Then he
spotted the faint hummocks around the clearing, many of them overgrown.

‘And here’s the tree that fire came from,’ said Ridcully, who had
noticed them as well. ‘Sacred ground, gentlemen. And they bury their
dead.’

‘Not exactly _buried_,’ said Rincewind. ‘More just _left_, I think
you’ll find. I think they just want to show me where they got fire.’

Ridcully reached for his pipe.

‘These people really don’t make it?’ he said.

‘They didn’t understand the question,’ said Rincewind. ‘Well, I _say_
question … they didn’t understand what I _hope_ was the question. We’re
not talking progressive thinkers here. It must have been a big step when
they invented the idea of taking the skins off animals _before_ wearing
them. I’ve never met any people quite so … well, _dull_. I can’t work
them out. They’re not _exactly_ stupid, but their idea of repartee is an
answer within ten minutes.’

‘Well, this’ll buck their ideas up,’ said Ridcully, and lit his pipe. ‘I
expect they’ll be impressed!’

The Ugs looked at one another. They watched the Archchancellor blowing
smoke. And then they attacked.

On the Discworld the only tribe known to have absolutely no imaginations
whatsoever are the N’tuiftif, although they are gifted with great powers
of observation and deduction. They just never invent anything. They were
the first tribe ever to _borrow_ fire. Being surrounded by other tribes
who were as imaginative as anything, they are also very good at hiding;
when you are surrounded by tribes to whom a stick means ‘club, prod,
lever, world domination’ you are at a natural disadvantages when, to
you, a stick means ‘stick’.

To someone else a stick currently meant ‘pole’.

A figure vaulted across the clearing and landed in front of the Ugs.

Orangutans do not enter the boxing ring, being too intelligent. If they
did, however, the fact that they could knock out the opponent without
getting up off their stool would quite make up for lack of finesse in
the footwork.

Most of the tribe turned to run, and would have come face to face with
the Luggage if it had a face. They rocked when it butted them, and tried
to wonder what it was. And by then the Librarian was on top of them.

Those that worked out this was a good time to flee, fled. Those that
didn’t, stayed on the ground where they had been put.

The astonished Archchancellor was still holding the burning match when
the Librarian advanced on him, screaming loudly.

‘What say?’ he said.

‘There’s a lot about him being in a library and the next minute being in
the river over there,’ Ponder supplied.

‘That all? Sounded more.’

‘The rest was swearing, sir.’

‘Apes swear?’

‘Yes, sir. All the time.’

There was another burst from the Librarian, accompanied by a pounding of
knuckles on the ground.

‘More swearing?’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh _yes_, sir. He’s really quite upset. Hex has told him there are no
longer any libraries whatsoever at any point in the planet’s history.’

‘Ow!’

‘Quite, sir.’

‘I burned my fingers!’ Ridcully sucked his thumb. ‘Where is Hex,
anyway?’

‘I was just wondering that, sir. After all, the crystal ball belonged in
the city which isn’t here any more …’

They turned and looked at the tree.

It must have blazed furiously when the lightning struck. Probably it had
been dead and dry anyway. There were only a few stumps of branches. The
whole thing was black, and strangely ominous against the green of the
willows.

Rincewind was sitting at the top.

‘What the hell are you doing up there, man?’ Ridcully bellowed.

‘I can’t run across water, sir,’ Rincewind called down. ‘And … I think
I’ve found Hex. This tree talks …’

TWELVE

EDGE PEOPLE

[image] RINCEWIND’S ‘EDGE PEOPLE’ are a caricature of early hominids,
and quite close to what anthropologists used to _think_ Neanderthals
were like.

We now think that Neanderthals had a bit more going for them, quite
apart from burying their dead. At least, it suits the mood of the times
to desire to think that they did have something happening behind that
big brow-ridge. A bone with holes in it, which some archaeologists
believe to be a 43,000-year-old Neanderthal bone flute, has been found
in Slovenia. But others dispute that it is a musical instrument.
Francesco d’Errico and Philip Chase have studied the bone carefully, and
they are certain that the holes were gnawed in it by animals, not bored
by a musically minded Neanderthal. We do not know if it’s been handed to
a musician …

Whatever the status of the flute, it is clear that Neanderthal culture
didn’t change significantly over long periods of time. The culture that
led to us did. It changed dramatically, and so far it’s never stopped.

What made us so different from the Neanderthals?

According to the Out of Africa theory, our ancestors, and everybody
else’s, came from an original population that evolved in Africa. They
migrated through the Middle East; the ones bound for Australia probably
left from South Africa, but _might_ have gone round through the Far East
and Malaysia. If you’ve got boats, you can do either.

In principle the immune-gene story that we discussed in Chapter 10 could
tell us more, but nobody’s yet done the research: either the Australian
‘aborigines’ have the same gene spectrum as the rest of us
post-bottleneck humans, or they have their own small and characteristic
selection instead. Whichever is the case, it will tell us something
interesting, but until someone gathers the genetic data, we have no idea
_which_ interesting thing it will tell us. A lot of science is like
that, a win-win situation. But try explaining that to the bean-counters
who control research funding.

When we speak of ‘migrations’ in this context, you shouldn’t think of
the exodus of the Hebrews from Egypt. It wasn’t a case of one group of
humans taking forty years or whatever and conquering other hominids
along the way. It was more likely the successive formation of small
settlements, slowly getting further and further away from the original
homeland. The people themselves didn’t even know that they were
migrating. It was just ‘Hey, Alan, why don’t you and Marilyn settle down
to hunter-gathering a couple of valleys over, by that nice Euphrates
river?’ Then, after a hundred years, there would be a few settlements on
the far side of the river, too. This isn’t pure speculation:
archaeologists have found some of the settlements.

If humans formed new settlements a mile away every ten years, it would
take only 50,000 years, a mere 1,000 grandfathers, for them to diffuse
from Africa all the way to the frozen north. And they surely diffused
faster than that. Hardly anybody actually _went_ anywhere; it was just
that the kids set up home a few hundred yards along the track, where
there was a bit more room to bring up _their_ kids.

As we diffused, we diversified. It is impressive how diverse we are,
physically and culturally. But perhaps, from the elvish viewpoint, we’re
all much the same, from Chinese to Inuit to Maya to Welshman. Our
similarities are far greater than our differences.¹ We had diversified
in Africa, too, from the tall willowy Masai and Zulus to the !Kung²
‘pygmies’ and the stout Yoruba. These peoples are really, anciently,
different: they differ from us, and from each other, almost as much as
wolves differ from jackals. The post-bottleneck humans differentiated
quite recently, just as the breeds of dogs differentiated from one kind
of wolf (or perhaps it was a jackal).

This kind of rapid differentiation is a standard evolutionary story,
called ‘adaptive radiation’. ‘Radiation’ means ‘spread’, and ‘adaptive’
means that the organisms _change_ as they spread, adapting to new
environments – and, especially, to the changes brought about by their
own adaptive radiation. It happened to ‘Darwin’s finches’, where one
small group of finches of a single species arrived in the Galápagos
islands, and within a few million years had radiated into 13 separate
species, plus a 14th on the Cocos Islands. (We wonder what the legend of
_The Fourteenth Finch_ might be.) Another well-known example is the vast
array of cichlid fish that diversified in Lake Victoria over the last
half a million years or so. There they produced variants for the catfish
niche, for the planktonic filter-feeder, for the general-detritus
feeder; they evolved into species with big crushing teeth for eating
mollusc-shells, species that specialised in scraping scales or fins off
other fish, and species that specialised in eating the eyes of other
fish. Yes, really: when fish from that species were caught, all they had
in their stomachs was eyes.³ These cichlids ranged in size from a couple
of centimetres to half a metre. The original river-dwelling species
_Haplochromis burtoni_, whose descendants they all are, grows to a
length of 10–12 centimetres.

Curiously, the range of genetics of these fishes was quite small,
considering their morphological and behavioural ranges: about the same
as out-of-Africa humans, but not as wide as in-Africa humans. At least,
that’s the case according to some reasonable ways to estimate genetic
diversity.

The second part of this story nearly always involves extinction: just
occasionally, one of the newly differentiated species has evolved a new
and successful trick, and survives while all the others perish. But the
usual demise of these specialised, adaptively radiated fish happens when
a professional specialist – a catfish perhaps, whose ancestors have been
feeding on detritus for 20 million years – comes in and takes over from
the amateur cichlid catfish. Unfortunately, in this case, it wasn’t an
inoffensive catfish, but the Nile perch, a specialised carnivore from an
ancient stock. The Nile perch has now cleaned out nearly all of the Lake
Victoria cichlid explosion, which is why we wrote the previous passage
in the past tense.⁴ The main remnants of that glorious radiation of the
cichlids are now to be found in the homes of a few amateur hobbyists,
who are keeping some of the odd cichlid species in aquaria, and the
Geoffrye Museum in London, which by chance has one of the largest ranges
of cichlids and is now sponsored by public bodies. We don’t know yet if
any of the cichlid variants in Lake Victoria has hit on a trick to
survive even the Nile Perch.

It’s difficult to know what Nile Perch is about to come in and prune
_Homo sapiens_’ current diversity. With luck, it will be our own
propensity to miscegenation, aided and abetted by airlines, despite the
contrary admonitions of our priests. Maybe we’ll all be mixed up into
one fairly diverse type. Or maybe it will be _Independence Day_ aliens,
out to conquer the galaxy. Or perhaps more competent ones, with
elementary virus protection software.

Were we the Nile Perch for the Neanderthals? What was special about us
that they couldn’t compete with? In an editorial in _Astounding Science
Fact and Fiction_, John Campbell Jr proposed that we have been selecting
ourselves – in very elvish ways – from earliest times. Campbell credited
his idea to the nineteenth-century anthropologist Lewis Morgan, but in
truth Campbell contributed most of the story.

It runs: we select ourselves, through puberty rituals and other tribal
rites. To some extent these interact with our religious stories, but as
a socialising technique the puberty ritual may have preceded all but the
most basic of animistic beliefs. It certainly sits at the base of our
Make-a-_Homo-sapiens_ kit. But the Neanderthals may not have possessed
such a cultural kit, at least not in the same effective form. If they
didn’t, they would probably have been much like Rincewind’s edge people,
indeed like all the other great apes: settled and (mostly) contented in
their Garden of Eden, but not going anywhere.

What is so special about puberty rituals? What story makes them a
necessary part of how we evolved ourselves into the storytelling animal?
Just this, said Campbell: puberty rituals select the breeders. This is
the standard mechanism of ‘unnatural selection’ used to breed new
varieties of dahlias or dogs, only here it bred new varieties of humans
or stabilised existing varieties. The wizards have always known about
unnatural selection, and it is reified on Discworld as the God of
Evolution in _The Last Continent_. Unnatural selection is not just a
matter of genetics, either. If you don’t get to breed, then you don’t
have the opportunity to pass on your cultural prejudices to your
children. At best you can try to pass them on to other people’s
children.

Here’s how it works. Over there, we see a group of half a dozen lads,
perhaps aged 11 to 14. The older men have prepared an ordeal, and the
kids must endure this to become accepted as full members of the tribe:
that is, breeders. Perhaps they will be circumcised or otherwise
wounded, and the wounds will be ‘dressed’ with painful herbs; perhaps
they will be whipped with scorpions or biting insects; perhaps their
faces will be seared with red-hot metal brands; perhaps (indeed,
usually) the older men will violate them sexually. They will be starved,
purged, beaten … oh yes, we are a very inventive species in this regard.

Those who ran away were not accepted into the group,⁵ and so were not
breeders. So, in particular, they were not our ancestors, because they
weren’t anyone’s ancestors. In contrast, those who submitted to the
humiliation were rewarded by acceptance into the tribe. Campbell’s
insight was that these puberty rituals selected _against_ the immediate
animal avoidance-of-pain response, and selected _for_ both imagination
and heroism: ‘If I bear this pain now I will be rewarded by getting the
privileges these old men get, and I can imagine that they went through
exactly this, and survived.’

Later on it was the priests who administered the pain. That is how they
_became_ the priests, and how successive generations came to ‘respect’
them and their teachings. By then, humiliation had become its own
reward, at both ends of the instrument of torture (see _Small Gods_),
and humans had been selected for obedience to authority.

Indeed, Stanley Milgram’s book _Obedience to Authority_ shows just how
obedient we are, by using the authority of a white laboratory coat to
force people to torture other people, remotely. The other people were
actually actors, responding to ‘mild’, ‘strong’ and ‘excruciating’ pain
– or so the experimental subject was led to believe – with the
appropriate actions. Milgram’s book shows how human beings invented
authority and obedience, both very elvish sentiments. That ingredient in
the story of our evolution explains Adolf Eichmann as well as Einstein:
we won’t go any deeper into that issue here, because we’ve already
covered it in _The Privileged Ape_ and _Figments of Reality_.

A few people refused Milgram’s instructions, though, and these mavericks
have always been generated either by experience (some of the refusers
had survived concentration camps, or had been otherwise tortured
themselves) or by the Make-a-Human kit itself. Many of these kits
generate a few mavericks, and we are optimistic about the Western one
that uses Hollywood films to laud resistance to authority. But perhaps
that comes only by working through the right genetics and the right home
background.

Many of these ancient rituals have become empty now. Jews use
circumcision to test the parents’ commitment, rather than that of the
baby, who has no choice. Jack was the Boston foreskin collector in the
early 1960s; it was a very good source of the living human skin samples
that he needed for his research on pigment cells in the skin. He saw a
lot of parents, many of whom went very pale and a few of whom fainted:
more men did that than women. The Jewish Bar Mitzvah is very daunting to
the child, in prospect, though, as with circumcision, nobody _fails_ it
– not any more. But people did fail in the past, with serious
consequences. For example in the ghettos, where only a third of the
population married, the mothers of the ‘best’ girls chose only the boys
who performed their Bar Mitzvah best. This would account for the kind of
verbal success that the Jewish faction of many Western populations has
achieved. Another explanation, that Jews were permitted verbal abilities
only because land- or property-owning was denied them, is a contextual
constraint within which they had to live. Why they were good enough
verbally to succeed despite that constraint is the interesting question,
and Bar Mitzvah competition and selection of breeders is a persuasive
answer.

Gypsy populations provide a possible counterexample, though, with very
little testing of young men before marriage, which frequently takes
place at ages that other cultures consider to be pre-pubertal. The few
gypsies who have been successful in Western cultures have not been
primarily verbally successful. Music provides a good contrast, with
gypsies excelling in dance while classical composers and instrumental
soloists are often Jewish. Of course, gypsies also share our common
selective ancestry, if we’re right about puberty rites being ancestral
and effectively universal.

The other great apes don’t torture their children for ritual purposes,
and the other hominids like Neanderthals probably didn’t either. So they
haven’t produced a civilisation. Sorry, but that which does not kill us
_does_ appear to have made us strong.

There is another story that we now tell, about what happened to the
young men around the time when people were inventing agriculture, which
explains barbaric societies. Don’t get us wrong here: we don’t mean that
torturing adolescents is barbaric. It’s not, from the tribal point of
view. It is an entirely proper way to get them accepted into the tribe.
‘We’ve done it ever since god-on-high made the world, and to prove it,
here’s the holy circumcision-knife we’ve always used.’ No, from the
tribal point of view, the barbarians that we have in mind are awful;
they don’t have _any_ rules or traditions … Even the Manky tribe, over
that way a couple of miles, is better than them; at least the Mankies
_have_ traditions, even if they are different from ours. And we’ve
stolen some of their women, and they have the most _amazing_ tricks …

The problem is that lot up on the hillside, the young men who have been
expelled from the tribe because they failed the rituals, or went of
their own accord (and so failed the test anyway). ‘Couple of my brothers
up there with ’em, and Joel’s boy, and of course the four kids that were
left when Gertie died. Oh, they’re all right on their own; it’s when
they’re in that gang together, all doing their hair in that same funny
way to be different, that you lock up the sheep and let the dogs loose.
They’ve got these funny words like “honour” and “bravery” and “pillage”
and “hero” and “our gang”. When my brothers come down the valley to my
farm – by themselves – I give ’em some food. But some gang of young men,
I’m not saying it was that lot and I’m not saying it wasn’t, set the
Brown’s farm alight, just for the hell of it …’

In any cowboy film we find the message that barbarism is opposed to
tribalism, that honour and tradition are not good bedfellows. And that,
having selected himself or herself for imagination and the ability to
endure pain for future pleasure, _Homo sapiens_ is now prepared to die
for his or her beliefs, for his or her gang, for honour, for hatred, or
for love.

Civilisation, as we know it, seems to combine elements of both ways of
human culture, tribal by tradition and barbaric for honour, for pride.
Nations are internally tribal, but present a barbarian face to other
nations. Our extelligence tells us stories, and we tell our children
stories, and the stories guide us about what to be or do in what
circumstances. Shakespeare is the ultimate civiliser, in this view. His
plays were composed against the barbarian background, in a city where
you could see heads on spikes and ritually dismembered bodies; all of
them were set on the tribal, traditional base that is most of human
life, most of the time. He tells us very persuasively that evil fails in
the end, that love conquers, and that laughter – the greatest gift that
barbarism brought to tribalism – is one of the sharpest weapons, because
it civilises.

Cohens are the hereditary High Priest lineage of the Jews. Jack was once
asked, in Jerusalem, whether he was not proud to be a Cohen, in view of
the noble Jewish history that the High Priests had promoted. Jack sees
this nobility as based in about six inches of blood in the streets,
nearly all of it other people’s, so he is not proud. Instead, to the
extent that any of us is responsible for what their ancestors did, he is
ashamed. He loves _Small Gods_, in much the way he enjoys the Jewish Day
of Atonement, Yom Kippur: it engenders a feeling of repentance, and he
can always find plenty to repent. He is sure that this emotion – guilt –
is a legacy of the Morgan/Campbell selection of his ancestors through
tribal rituals.

Tribesmen aren’t ‘proud’; for them, everything that isn’t mandatory is
forbidden, so what is there to be proud about? You can praise your
children for doing things right, or admonish or punish them for doing
things wrong, but you can’t take pride in what you – a fully fledged
member of the tribe – do. That comes with the territory. However, you
_can_ be guilty about not having done the things that you should have
done. Having said that, High Priests waging war on dissenters or
neighbouring tribes, leading to atrocities like heads on spikes, is
straight barbarism.

The distinction between tribalism and barbarism is illuminated by the
story of Dinah in chapter 34 of Genesis. Dinah, an Israelite, was the
daughter of Leah and Jacob, and ‘when Schechem the son of Hamor the
Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her,
and defiled her’. Then Schechem fell in love with her, and wanted to
make her his wife. But the sons of Jacob felt that maybe Schechem had
gone about things in the wrong order: ‘… the men were grieved, and they
were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with
Jacob’s daughter, which thing ought not to be done’. So when Hamor, the
father of Schechem, asked for approval of the marriage, and for an
intermingling of his tribe with the Israelites, the sons of Jacob came
up with a cunning plan.

They told the Hivites that they would agree to the proposal, but only
after the Hivites had circumcised themselves, so that they were just
like the Israelites. The Hivites were willing to go along with this,
because they told themselves that ‘These men are peaceable with us,
therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land,
behold, it is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us
for wives, and let us give them our daughters’. The decision was made,
and ‘every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of the
city’. And they stood around in pain for a couple of days. At that
point, Dinah’s brothers Simeon and Levi hauled Dinah out of Schechem’s
house, put all the Hivite men to the sword, destroyed their city and
took all their domestic animals, their wealth, their children and their
wives. This story of deceit and betrayal has not been given much
circulation in recent years; it doesn’t appeal to people’s sense of
humour any more, as it once did.

At any rate, in that story, the Hivite response to Schechem’s crime is
tribal, but the Israelites behave like barbarians. The Hivites, after
their initial mistake, want to make amends and coexist peacefully, and
they’re prepared to offer dowries and other concessions to try to make
up for what Schechem did. But all that matters to the Israelites is a
twisted kind of ‘honour’, in which cruelty, murder and theft are
justified to protect Dinah’s reputation. Or, more likely, their own
sense of manhood.

A favourite Discworld character is Cohen the Barbarian, a satire on
sword-and-sorcery heroes like Conan the Barbarian, all muscles and
trolls’ teeth necklaces and testosterone-propelled heroism. He first
appears in the second Discworld novel _The Light Fantastic_:

‘Hang on, hang on,’ said Rincewind. ‘Cohen’s a great chap, neck like a
bull, got chest muscles like a sack of footballs. I mean, he’s the
Disc’s greatest warrior, a legend in his own lifetime. I remember my
grandad telling me he saw him … my grandad telling me he … my grandad …’

He faltered under the gimlet gaze.

‘Oh,’ he said. ‘Oh. Of course. Sorry.’

‘Yesh,’ said Cohen, and sighed. ‘Thatsh right, boy. I’m a lifetime in my
own legend.’

Cohen, by then 87, is the sort of barbarian whose hordes ride into town,
set the houses on fire and look wistfully at the women. But he’s no
softie: as he ages, he goes hard, like oak. In _Interesting Times_ he
explains to Rincewind why, in the area known as the Ramtops, there’s no
future in the Barbarian business any more:

‘Fences and farms, fences and farms _everywhere_. You kill a dragon
these days, people _complain_. You know what? You know what happened?’

‘No. What happened?’

‘Man came up to me, said my teeth were offensive to trolls. What about
that, eh?’

According to Jewish tradition, Cohens are the true Cohanim, the lineal
descendants of Aaron. Recent research into the genetics of Cohens has
turned up some interesting findings about the very prideful (barbaric)
issue of Cohen heredity. Professor Vivian Moses (yes, indeed …) and a
group of scientists in Israel decided to check whether the tradition has
any factual basis. Just as the mitochondrial DNA sequence traces female
heredity, so the Y-chromosome, possessed only by males, can be used to
trace male heredity.

There has been an interesting division of the Jewish peoples, and that
provides a scientific check on the story of the Cohanim. During the
Diaspora, some Jews remained in North Africa, but one large population
went into Spain. They are known as Sephardi, and the Rothschilds,
Montefiores and other banking families are all Sephardic. Another, more
diffuse population went into middle-Europe, especially Poland, and they
are known as Ashkenazi. Moses and his colleagues looked at the
Y-chromosomes of representative Sephardi and Ashkenazi Cohens and
non-Cohens (‘Israelites’). They found characteristic DNA sequences,
specific to Cohanim, in about half of the Cohens that they tested, but
with small and characteristic differences in the three groups. From
these differences it is reasonable to suppose that Ashkenazi and
Sephardi Jews separated rather less than 2,000 years ago, and that all
Cohens were a single group only 2,500 years ago.

This looks like a very nice story, with the DNA evidence supporting the
expected history. But science is the best guard against believing things
because you want to. There is a factor that Moses and his colleagues
didn’t explicitly consider, and it needs to be explained away, because
it makes those figures much too good.

Most human groups pretend to practise monogamy, but like swans and
gibbons and other creatures that we thought were faithful for life,
there are plenty of adulterous relationships and children ‘whose legal
and biological parentage differ’. In English society, about one child in
seven is in that position, and the proportion doesn’t differ much
between the slums of Liverpool and the stockbroker belt of Maidenhead.⁶

The most restrained people that we know, in this regard, are the Amish
of Eastern Pennsylvania and other parts of the United States, for whom
the figure is a mere one in twenty. So, to err on the safe side, let’s
assume that all of the Mrs Cohens, from the present day back 100
generations to the sons of Aaron, were as well behaved as the Amish.
Then the proportion of Cohen males with Aaron’s Y-chromosome should be
0.95¹⁰⁰, which is considerably less than one in a hundred. So how can it
be as high as one in two?

There is a possible explanation, consonant with what we know about human
sexuality, or at least with what John Symons, an expert on human sexual
practices, says in his books. According to many surveys of sexual
behaviour, going right back to Alfred Kinsey around 1950, women practise
adultery with men of both higher and lower status. The two situations
frequently occur in different social contexts, with women ‘doing favours
for’ higher status men (think Clinton), but going down-market for ‘a bit
of rough’. Overwhelmingly often, however, when a baby results the father
is of higher status than the woman’s husband or regular partner.

This implies that if Mrs Cohen, living in a ghetto or any other
pre-dominantly Jewish society, wants to go up-market, her only choices
are other Cohens. So the maintenance of the Aaron Y-chromosome may have
been assured by sexual snobbery rather than amazing fidelity, and that’s
a much more likely story.

¹ This is why we have been forced to invent differences of religious
belief, which give us an excuse to kill each other because They are so
dramatically different from us True Human Beings – they don’t even know
that spilling salt, and then failing to hop three time around the table,
invites a demon into your home. _So_ it’s all right to wipe the False
Humans, Them, from the face of the planet.

² The! is a symbol denoting a particular clicking sound.

³ A meal that should see you through the week, as the old music hall
joke reminds us.

⁴ Lakes Malawi and Tanganyika still have their cichlid species flocks;
your local tropical-fish shop will have representatives.

⁵ ‘Going walkabout’ seems to have been a way to avoid this torture for
at least some Australian tribes.

⁶ Yes, we know you don’t believe this, but … The first reliable data are
in Elliott Philipp’s analysis of blood-groups from families in high-rise
apartments in Liverpool in the late 1960s, published in 1973. There, 10
per cent of the ‘legal paternities’ were biologically impossible. So,
correcting for the cases where the milkman had the same blood-group as
the legal father, about 13–17 per cent were ‘discrepant paternities’, as
the coy phrase goes. Hundreds of births in Maidenhead, in the
stockbroker-belt, yielded the same proportions. American figures for the
1980s were about 10 per cent, but these were underestimates because they
were not corrected as above. That’s the thing about science: it tells
you stuff you didn’t expect. It gets worse. Or maybe you feel it gets
better. At any rate many animals that until recently were famed for
their fidelity, such as swans, turn out to be partial to a bit on the
side. That ubiquitous beast, the monogamus, is rapidly going extinct.

THIRTEEN

STASIS QUO

[image] THE BREEZE SHOOK THE WILLOWS. And, in the centre of the willows,
the lightning-struck tree spoke, in a very faint voice. The Ugs had seen
lightning strike the same tree three times. It was the highest point in
the area, thanks to the shell mounds.

Even for creatures so preternaturally against thinking any kind of new
thoughts, this made an impression. In some way, they’d felt, the tree
had importance. It was an important thing. The place of the tree was an
important place, where the sky touched the ground.

It wasn’t much of an opening, it was a story without a plot and it
barely amounted to a belief, but Hex had to make do with what could be
found.

Now the wizards were considering the future, or futures.

‘_Nothing_ changes?’ said the Dean.

‘No, sir,’ said Ponder, for the fourth time. ‘And, yes, this is indeed
the same _time_ as the city we were in. But things are different.’

‘The city was almost modern!’

‘Yes, it had heads on spikes,’ said Rincewind.

‘It was a bit backward, admittedly,’ said Ridcully. ‘And the beer was
foul. But it had possibilities.’

‘But I don’t understand! We _stopped_ the elves,’ said the Dean.

‘And now we’ve got thousands and thousands of years of this,’ said
Ponder. ‘That’s what Hex says. These people won’t even have learned how
to make fire before the big rock hits. Rincewind is right. They’re not
exactly stupid, they just don’t … progress. Remember the crab
civilisation we found?’

‘But they had wars and took prisoners and slaves!’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘Yes. Progress,’ said Ponder.

‘Heads on spikes,’ said Rincewind.

‘Do stop going on about that, it was only two heads,’ snapped Ponder.

‘Perhaps we did something else that changed history,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies. ‘Maybe we trod on the wrong insect or something?
Only a thought,’ he added, when they glared at him.

‘We just saw off the elves, that’s all we did,’ said Ridcully. ‘Elves
cause exactly the sort of things we’ve seen here. Superstition and—’

‘The Ugs aren’t superstitious,’ said Rincewind.

‘They didn’t like it when I struck that match!’

‘They didn’t start worshipping you, either. They just don’t like things
that happen too quickly. But I _told_ you, they don’t draw pictures,
they don’t use body paint, they don’t _make_ things … I asked Ug about
the sky and the moon, and as far as I can tell they don’t think about
them. They’re just things in the sky.’

‘Oh, come now,’ said Ridcully, ‘_everyone_ tells stories about the
moon.’

‘They don’t. They don’t have any stories at all,’ said Rincewind.

There was silence as this sank in.

‘Oh dear,’ said Ponder.

‘No narrativium,’ said the Dean. ‘Remember? That’s what this universe
lacks. We never found a trace of it. Nothing knows what it’s supposed to
be.’

‘There must be _something_ like it, surely?’ said Ridcully. ‘The place
looks normal, after all. Seeds grow up into trees and grass, by the look
of it. Clouds know they have to stay up in the sky.’

‘If you remember, sir,’ said Ponder, using the tone that meant _I know
you’ve forgotten, sir_, ‘we found that this universe has things that
work instead of narrativium.’

‘Then why are these people just sittin’ about?’

‘Because that’s all they have to do!’ said Rincewind. ‘There doesn’t
seem to be much around that can hurt them, there’s enough food, the sun
is shining … it’s all gravy! They’re like … lions. Lions don’t need
stories. Eat when you’re hungry, sleep when you’re tired. That’s all
they need to know. What else do they need?’

‘But it must get cold in the winter, surely?’

‘So? It gets warmer in the spring! It’s just like the moon and the
stars! Things happen!’

‘And they’ve been like this for hundreds of thousands of years,’ said
Ponder.

There was some more silence.

‘Remember those stupid big lizards?’ said the Dean. ‘They lasted for
more than a hundred million years, I remember. I suppose they were quite
successful, in their way.’

‘Successful?’ said Ridcully.

‘I mean they lasted a long time.’

‘Really? And did they build a single university?’

‘Well, no—’

‘Did they draw a single picture? Invent writing? Offer even small
classes of elementary tuition?’

‘Not that I know—’

‘And they all got killed off by a yet another big rock,’ said Ridcully.
‘They really did not know what hit them. Bein’ around for millions of
years is not an achievement. Even lumps of stone can manage that.’

The circle of wizards was sunk in gloom.

‘And Dee’s people were doin’ quite well,’ muttered Ridcully. ‘Terrible
beer, of course.’

‘I suppose …’ Rincewind began.

‘Yes?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Well … how about if we went back and stopped us from stopping the
elves? And least we’d be back among people more interesting than cows.’

‘Could we do that?’ said Ridcully to Ponder.

‘I suppose so,’ said Ponder. ‘Technically, if we stop ourselves, then
nothing will change, I assume. All this won’t have happened … I think.
That is to say, it _will_ have happened, because we’ll remember it, but
then it won’t have happened.’

‘Fair enough,’ said Ridcully. Wizards do not have a lot of patience with
temporal paradoxes.

‘_Can_ we stop ourselves?’ said the Dean. ‘I mean, how do we do it?’

‘We’ll just explain the situation to us,’ said Ridcully. ‘We’re
reasonable men.’

‘Hah!’ said Ponder, and then looked up. ‘Oh, sorry, Archchancellor. I
must have been thinking about something else. Do go on.’

‘Ahem. If I was just about to fight elves, and someone who looked very
much like me came up and told me not to, I’d assume it was an elvish
trick,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘They can make you think they
look like someone else, you know.’

‘I’d know me if I saw me!’ said the Dean.

‘Look, it’s easy,’ said Rincewind. ‘Trust me. Just tell yourself
something about yourself that no one else could possibly know.’

A worried look crossed the Dean’s face.

‘Would that be wise?’ he said. Like many people, wizards often have
secrets they don’t want themselves to know.

Ridcully stood up. ‘We know it’ll work,’ he said, ‘because it’s already
happened to us. Think about it. We must succeed in the end, because we
know a species like this gets off the planet.’

‘Yes,’ said Ponder, slowly, ‘and, then again, no.’

‘What the hell does that mean?’ Ridcully demanded.

‘Well … we’ve been to a future where it happens, certainly,’ said
Ponder, twiddling his pencil nervously. ‘But there are other futures.
The multiplex nature of the universe that allows it to absorb and
cushion the effects of apparent paradoxes also means that nothing is
certain, even if you know it is.’ He tried to avoid Ridcully’s stare.
‘We went to a future. At the moment, it exists only in our memories.
Then, it was real. Now, it may never be. Look, Rincewind was telling me
about some play writer he’s found, born around about Dee’s time but not
in this branch of the universe. Yet we know he has _an_ existence,
because L-space contains all possible books in all possible histories.
Do you see what I mean? Nothing is certain.’

After a while, the Chair of Indefinite Studies said, ‘You know, I think
I prefer the kind of universal law that says the third son of a king
always gets the princess. _They_ make sense.’

‘The universe is so big, sir, that it obeys all possible laws,’ said
Ponder. ‘For a given value of “teapot”.’

‘Look, if we go back in time and talk to ourselves, why don’t we
remember it?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

Ponder sighed. ‘Because although it has already happened to us, it
hasn’t yet happened to _us_.’

‘I, er, tried something like that,’ said Rincewind. ‘While you were
having your mussel soup just now I got Hex to send me back in time to
warn myself to hold my breath when we landed in the river. It worked.’

‘Did you hold your breath?’

‘Yes, because I’ve warned myself.’

‘So … was there any time anywhere where you didn’t hold your breath,
thus giving yourself a mouthful of river water and causing you to go
back to make sure you _did_?’

‘Probably there was, I think, but there isn’t now.’

‘Oh, I _see_,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘You know, it’s a good
job we’re wizards, otherwise this time travel business could really be
confusing …’

‘At least we know that Hex can still make contact with us,’ said Ponder.
‘I’ll ask him to move us back again.’

The Librarian watched them go.

A moment later, the rest of everywhere went with them.

FOURTEEN

POOH AND THE PROPHETS

[image] THE UGS HAVE NO REAL STORIES, hence no sense of their place in
time. They have no conception of the future, and therefore no wish to
change it.

_We_ know that there are other futures …

As Ponder Stibbons remarks, we live in a multiplex universe. We look at
the past and we see times and places where things could have been
different, and we wonder whether we could have ended up in a different
present. By analogy, we look at the present and imagine many different
futures. And we wonder which of them will happen, and what we can do now
to affect the choice.

We could be wrong. Maybe the fatalist view, ‘it is written’, is right.
Maybe we are all automata, working out the deterministic future of a
clockwork universe. Or maybe the Quantum philosophers are right, and all
possible futures (and pasts) coexist. Or maybe everything that exists is
just one point in a multiplex phase space of universes, a single card
dealt from Fate’s deck.

How did we acquire this sense of ourselves as beings who exist in time?
Who remember their past, and use it to try (usually unsuccessfully) to
control their future?

It all goes back a long, long way.

Watch a proto-human watching a zebra watching a lioness. The three
mammalian brains are doing very different things. The herbivore brain
has seen the lioness, is barely conscious (we guess, watch some horses
in a field) of the whole 360 degrees of his environment, and has marked
some things, like that tuft of grass over there, that female over there
who could just be in heat, that male who’s giving her the right signals,
the three bushes that could have a surprise behind them … If the lioness
moves, she suddenly gets priority, but not totally because there are
other considerations. Another lioness could well be behind those bushes,
and I’d better move up on that nice grass before Nigella does … Looking
at that grass makes me think of the taste of that long grass … THE
LIONESS IS MOVING.

The lioness is thinking: that’s a nice zebra stallion, won’t go for him,
he’s too strong (memory of a previous eye injury from a zebra kick), but
if I get him running, Dora behind those bushes can probably jump on the
young female over there who is trying to attract the male, then I can
run after it with her …

There is probably no more of a plan than that in the zebra’s brain, but
it does foresee a little bit of the future and plug memories into
present planning. _If I stand up now_ …

The human is looking at the lioness and the zebra. Even if it’s a _Homo
erectus_, we bet it had stories in its head: that lioness will run out,
the zebra will startle, the other lioness will go for … ah, that young
female. Then I can run out there and get in front of the young male; I
see myself running at him and hitting him with this stone. _Homo
sapiens_ may well have done better from the beginning; his brain was
bigger and probably better. He may, from the beginning, have had room
for several alternative, thought-about ‘or’ scenarios and probably the
‘and’ one which goes ‘and I will be a big hunter and meet interesting
women’. ‘If’ probably came along later, perhaps with cave paintings, but
making predictions put our ancestors way ahead of their predators and
their prey.

There has been a variety of suggestions about why our brains suddenly
grew to nearly double their previous size, from the need to keep the
faces of our social group in mind while gossiping about them, to the
need to compete with other hunter-gatherers, to the competitive nature
of language and its structuring of the brain so that lying could be
successful for the li-ar, but then the li-ee got better at detecting
lies. Such escalations all have an attraction to them. They make good
stories, ones that we can easily imagine, filling in the background just
as we do with hearing sentences or enjoying pictures. That doesn’t make
them true, of course, just as our attraction to the supposed seashore
phase of our history doesn’t make ‘aquatic apes’ true either. The
stories serve as placeholders for whatever the real pressures were: the
meta-explanation of why our brain growth took off is that competitive
advantage was to be won by All Of The Above routes, and many more.

Perhaps the human viewer of that wildlife scene is a cameraman for a
natural history TV series. Even a mere 15 years ago, he would have had
an Arriflex (or if he was paying for it himself, perhaps just a Bolex
Hl6) l6mm film camera with a very precious 800 feet (260 metres) of film
loaded, and perhaps another dozen film packs in his rucksack (800 feet
gives about 40 minutes of filming: if you’re very good, or very lucky,
five minutes of useful stuff). _Now_ he has a video camera that would
have seemed miraculous then, which can reuse and reuse a length of tape
until it’s full of five-minute sequences, end to end. All the things he
wished for, then, are in the apparatus in his hand now: it stays in
focus, it compensates for a bit of wobble, it goes down to
_unbelievably_ low light levels (for those of us who grew up with
photographic film) and it zooms over a range much wider than we ever had
before.

It’s magic, in fact.

And in his head are a dozen alternative scenarios for the lions and
zebras, which he’ll flick to instantly as the animals act to constrain
their futures. He’s actually thinking about other things altogether,
letting the experienced professional part of his brain do the work while
he daydreams (‘I’ll get an award for this and meet interesting women’).
It’s like driving on a quiet motorway: a lot of the thinking has been
taken out of it.

Our ancestors honed that ability, to consider alternative scenarios. And
within any of those scenarios, the ability to make a story of what was
happening was a very powerful way to remember it and to communicate it.
And, particularly, to employ it as a parable, to direct your future
action or that of your children. Human beings need a very long time to
get that brain up-and-running, at least twice as long as their brother
and sister chimpanzees. That is why three-year-old chimps are nearly
adult in chimp behaviour, and can do some of the mental tricks of six-
or seven-year-old children.

But the young chimps don’t hear stories. Our children have been hearing
stories since they recognised any words at all, and by three years old
they are making up their own stories about what is happening around
them. We are all impressed by their vocabulary skills, and by their
acquisition of syntax and semantics; but we should also note how good
they are at making narratives out of events. From about five years old,
they get their parents to do things for them by placing those things in
narrative context. And most of their games with peers have a context,
within which stories are played out. The context they create is just
like that of the animal and fairy stories we tell them. The parents
don’t instruct the child how to do this, nor do the children have to
elicit the ‘right’ storytelling behaviours from their parents. This is
an evolutionary complicity. It seems very natural – after all, we are
_Pan narrans_ – that we tell stories to children, and that children and
parents enjoy the activity. We learn about ‘narrativium’ very early in
our development, and we use it and promote it for the whole of our
lives.

Human development is a complex, recursive behaviour. It is not simply
reading out DNA ‘blueprints’ and making another working part (contrary
to the new folk-biology of genes). To show you how truly remarkable our
development is, despite seeming so simple and so natural, let’s have a
look at some earlier parent–child behaviour.

Keep in mind a distinction that is being imported into more and more
scientific thinking, that between ‘complicated’ and ‘complex’.
‘Complicated’ means a whole set of simple things working together to
produce some effect, like a clock or an automobile: each of the
components – brakes, engine, body-shell, steering – contributes to what
the car does by doing its own thing, pretty well. There are some
interactions, to be sure. When the engine is turning fast, it has a
gyroscopic effect that makes the steering behave differently, and the
gearbox affects how fast the engine is going at a particular car speed.
To see human development as a kind of car assembly process, with the
successive genetic blueprints ‘defining’ each new bit as we add them, is
to see us as only complicated.

A car being driven, however, is a _complex_ system: each action it takes
helps determine future actions and is dependent upon previous actions.
It changes the rules for itself as it goes. So does a garden. As plants
grow, they take nutrients from the soil, and this affects what else can
grow there later. But they also rot down, adding nutrients, providing
habitat for insects, grubs, hedgehogs … A mature garden has a very
different dynamic from that of a new plot on a housing estate.

Similarly, we change our own rules as we develop.

There are always several superficially different, non-overlapping
descriptions of any complex system, and one way to deal with a complex
system is to collect these descriptions and choose appropriate ones for
different ways of influencing its behaviour.¹ An amusingly simple
example can be seen in many French and Swiss railway stations and
airports: a sign that says

LOST PROPERTY

OBJETS TROUVÉS

The French means ‘_found_ objects’. But we don’t think that this is a
case of the English losing objects and the French finding them. It’s two
descriptions of the same situation.

Now look at a baby in a pram, throwing its rattle out on to the pavement
for Mummy, or child-minder, or indeed passers-by, to retrieve. We
probably think that the child is not coordinated enough yet to keep its
rattle within reach: we think ‘Lost Property’. Then we see Mummy give
the rattle back to the child, to be rewarded with a smile, and we think
‘No, it’s more subtle: there is a baby teaching its mother to fetch,
just as we adults do with dogs’. _Now_ we think ‘Objets Trouvés’. The
baby’s smile is itself part of a complex, reciprocal system of rewards
that was set up long ago in evolution. We watch babies ‘copy’ the smiles
of parents – but no, it can’t be copying, because even blind babies
smile. Anyway, copying would be immensely difficult: from anywhere on
the retina, the undeveloped brain must ‘sort out’ a face with a smile,
then work out which of its own muscles to work to produce that effect,
without a mirror. No, it’s a pre-wired reflex. Babies reflexly react to
cooing sounds and to pre-wired recognition of smiles; an upwardly-curved
line on a piece of paper works just as well. The ‘smile’ icon rewards
the adult, who then tries hard to keep the baby doing it. The complex
interactions proceed, changing both participants progressively.

They can be analysed more easily in unusual situations, such as sighted
children with ‘signing’ parents, perhaps deaf or dumb, but occasionally
as part of a psychological experiment. For example in 2001 a team of
Canadian researchers headed by Laura Ann Petitto studied three children,
about six months old, all with perfect hearing but born to deaf parents.
The parents ‘cooed over’ the babies in sign language, and the babies
began to ‘babble’ sign language – that is, make a variety of random
gestures with their hands – in return. The parents used an unusual and
very rhythmic form of sign language, quite unlike anything they would
use to adults. Similarly, adults speak to babies in a rhythmic sing-song
voice, and between the ages of about six months and a year the babies’
babble takes on properties of the parents’ specific language. They are
rewiring and ‘tuning’ their sense organs, in this case the cochlea, to
hear that language best.

Some scientists think that babbling sounds is just random opening and
closing of the jaw, but others are convinced it is an essential stage in
the learning of language. The use of special rhythms by parents, and the
spontaneous ‘babbling’ with hand-movements when the parents are deaf,
indicate that the second theory is closer to the mark. Petitto suggests
that the use of rhythm is an ancient evolutionary trick, exploiting the
natural sensitivities of the young child.

As the child grows, its complex interaction with surrounding humans
comes to produce wholly unexpected results: what we call ‘emergent’
behaviour, meaning that it is not overtly present in the behaviour of
the components. Where two or more systems interact like this, we call
the process a _complicity_. The interaction of an actor with an audience
can build up a wholly new and unexpected relationship. The evolutionary
interaction of blood-sucking insects with vertebrates paved the way for
protozoan blood parasites that cause diseases like malaria and
sleeping-sickness. The car-and-driver behaves differently from either
alone (and car-and-driver-and-alcohol is even less predictable).
Similarly, human development is a progressive interaction between the
child’s intelligence and the culture’s extelligence: a complicity. This
complicity progresses from simple vocabulary-learning to the syntax of
little sentences and the semantics of fulfilling the child’s needs and
wants and the parents’ expectations. The beginning of storytelling then
becomes an early threshold into worlds that our kin the chimpanzees know
not of.

The stories that all human cultures use to mould the expectations and
behaviour of the growing child use iconic figures: always some animals,
and then status-figures of the culture (princesses, wizards, giants,
mermaids). These stories sit in all our minds, contributing to our
acting, our acting-out, our thinking, our predicting what will happen
next, as caveman or cameraman. We learn to expect outcomes of particular
kinds, frequently expressed in ritual words (‘And they all lived happily
ever after’ or ‘So it all ended in tears’).² The stories that have been
used in England over the centuries have changed in complicity with the
changing culture – making the culture change, and responding to those
changes, like a river changing its path across a wide flood-plain that
it has itself built. The Grimm Brothers and Hans Christian Andersen were
but the last of a long series, with Charles Perrault accumulating the
Mother Goose tales around 1690; there were many collections before that,
especially some interesting Italian groupings and retellings for adults.

The great advantage we all get from this programming is very clear. It
trains us to do ‘What if …?’ experiments in our minds, using the rules
that we’ve picked up from the stories, just as we picked up syntax by
hearing our parents talking. These stories-of-the-future enable us to
set ourselves in an extended imagined present, just as our vision is an
extended picture reaching much further out in all directions than the
tiny central part to which we’re paying attention. These abilities
enable each of us to see ourselves as being set in a nexus of space and
time; our ‘here’ and ‘now’ form only the starting place for our seeing
ourselves in other places at other times. This ability has been called
‘time-binding’, and has been seen as miraculous, but it seems to us that
it is the culmination (for now) of an entirely natural progression that
starts from interpreting and enlarging vision or hearing, and from
‘making sense’ in general. The extelligence uses this faculty, and hones
and improves it for each of us, so that we can use metaphor to navigate
our thoughts. Pooh Bear getting stuck, and unable to exit with dignity
because he ate too much honey, is precisely the kind of parable that we
carry with us to guide our actions, as metaphor, from day to day. So are
Biblical stories, with all their lessons for life.

Holy books like the _Bible_ and the _Koran_ take this ability one giant
step further. The Biblical prophets do, wholesale, what each of us has
been programmed to do retail for our own life and those of our own
nearest and dearest. The prophets predicted what would happen to
everybody in the tribe if they continued their current behaviour, and
thereby changed that behaviour. This was a step on the way to those
modern prophets who predict The End Of The World some time soon. They
seem to feel that they have perceived a trend, a constraint in the
universe, that the rest of us have not understood, and whose properties
are directing the universe along some undesirable or calamitous path.
Though they don’t usually mean ‘universe’, they mean ‘my world and
nearer ones’. So far they haven’t been right. But we would not be here
to write these words if they had been, which is another anthropic issue,
but not a very important one because they _have_ been wrong rather
often. They predict what will happen If This Goes On; but, increasingly
it seems, This doesn’t Go On for very long because it’s unexpectedly
replaced by a new This.

We all think that we can become better prophets with practice. We all
think we have a clever way to build ‘the road not taken’ into our
experience. Then we invent time travel, at least in our imaginations. We
all want to go back to the beginning of that argument with the boss, and
do it right this time. We want to unravel the chain of causality that
led to boring edge people. We want to avoid the bad effects of elves but
retain the good ones. We want to play pick-and-mix with universes.

However, despite their emphasis on prophecy, monotheist faiths have real
trouble with multiple futures. Having simplified their theology down to
one God, they also tend to believe that there can be only one ‘right way
to heaven’. The priests tell the people what they must do, and at least
while the religion is fresh the priests are fine examples. This is what
gets you to heaven, they say: no adultery, no murder, no failure to give
a tithe to the Church, and no undercutting the other clergy for
indulgences. Then the gateway to heaven becomes ‘strait’, narrower and
narrower, until only the blessed and the saints can get in without
spending time in some purgatory or other.

Other religions, notably extreme versions of Islam, promise heaven as
the reward for a martyr’s death. These ideas are more closely associated
with barbarian views of the future than tribal ones: paradise, like
Valhalla for the Norse heroes, will be full of the hero’s rewards, from
perpetually renewed women to ample food and drink and hero’s games. But
they are also associated, as they were not in the more purely barbarian
Norse legends, with a belief in fate, in the will of a god that nothing
can avoid or deny. This is the other way for authority to force
obedience: the promise of ultimate reward is a very persuasive story.

Barbarians, for whom honour, glory, power, and love, dignity, bravery
are the meaningful concepts, get plus points for denying authority and
shaping events to their own desires. They have, among their gods and
heroes, the mischievous unpredictable ones like Lemminkainen and Puck.

Barbarian nursery stories, like their sagas, laud the hero. They show
how luck is associated with particular attitudes, especially a pure
heart that does not seek immediate or ultimate reward. There is
frequently a test of this purity, from helping a poor blind cripple, who
turns out to be a god in disguise, to curing or feeding a desperate
animal, who comes to your aid later.

The agents in many of these stories are supernatural – out of the order
of things, magical and causeless – ‘people’, such as fairies (including
fairy queens and fairy godmothers), avatars of the gods, demons, and
_djinni_. People, especially heroes or aspiring heroes (such as
Siegfried, but also Aladdin), attain control over these supernatural
beings with the assistance of magic rings, named swords, spells, or
merely by their own inner nobility. This changes their fortunes, and
luck comes to be on their side; they win battles and bouts against long
odds, they climb tall mountains, they kill immortal dragons and
monsters. No tribal thinker would even dream of stories like these. For
them, fortune favours the well-prepared.

Man is forever inventive, and we have stories that counter even the most
heroic tales: the Sidh, the seven-foot-tall elves of _Lords and Ladies_
and old Irish folklore, the Devil who buys your soul and has you at his
mercy even if you repent, the Grand Vizier, James Bond’s opponents.

What is interesting in our discussion of stories here is the characters
of these anti-heroes. They don’t have any. Elves are the High Folk, but
they don’t have lives of their own; they are simply portrayed as being
antithetic to what people, especially heroes, want to do. We don’t care
about the human aspects of James Bond’s iconic enemies: they are always
portrayed as being mindlessly cruel, or avid for power without
responsibility and without having to overcome obstacles. They are
ciphers, they don’t have creative personalities, and they don’t learn.
If they did, one of them would have shot James Bond dead with a simple
gun many years ago, after learning what happens to those who put their
trust in laser beams and circular saws. They’d remove his watch first,
too.

Rincewind would characterise the elves as ‘edge fairies’. They don’t
tell stories to themselves or, rather, they keep telling the same old
story.

It is natural to think of stories as resting on language, but the
causality probably works the other way round. Gregory Bateson, in his
book _Mind and the Universe_, devotes several chapters to human
languages and how we use them to think. But his start on the subject is
a beautiful mistake. He starts by looking at an ‘outside’ view of
language, a kind of chemical analogy. Words, he says, are obviously the
atoms of language, phrases and sentences the molecules, atoms in
combination. Verbs are reactive atoms, link nouns together, and so on.
He discusses paragraphs, chapters, books … and fiction, that he claims,
very persuasively, is the ultimate triumph of human language.

Bateson shows us a scenario where an audience is watching a murder on
stage, and nobody runs to phone the police. And then he goes into
another mode, addressing his readers directly. He tells them that he
felt that he’d done a really good job on the introduction to language,
so he rewarded himself with a visit to the Washington Zoo. Almost the
first cage inside the gate had two monkeys playing at fighting, and as
he watched them, the whole beautiful edifice that he had written turned
upside down in his mind. The monkeys had no verbs, no nouns, no
paragraphs. But they understood fiction perfectly.

What does this tell us? Not just that we can rewrite that scene with the
boss in our minds. Not even that we can go and see her, and discuss what
happened. Its most important implication is that the distinction between
fiction and fact sits at the base of language, not at the pinnacle.
Verbs and nouns are the most rarefied of abstractions, not the original
raw material. We do not acquire stories through language: we acquire
language through stories.

¹ Until we had really good fast computers, and had learned a little bit
about how to model the complexity of ecosystems or companies or
bacterial communities, most of us practised the reductionist trick of
looking for the bits we thought we could understand and modelling those.
Then we hoped we could put these separate bits together to understand
the whole thing. We were nearly always wrong.

² As G.K. Chesterton pointed out, fairy tales are certainly not, as
modern detractors of the fantasy genre believe, set in a world ‘where
anything can happen’. They existed in a world with rules (‘don’t stray
from the path’, ‘don’t open the blue door’, ‘you must be home before
midnight’, and so on). In a world where _anything_ could happen, you
couldn’t have stories at all.

FIFTEEN

TROUSER LEG OF TIME

[image] _IN THE HEAT OF THE NIGHT, magic moved on silent feet_.

_One horizon was red with the setting sun. This world went around a
central star. The elves did not know this. If they had done, it would
not have bothered them. They never bothered with detail of that kind.
The universe had given rise to life in many strange places, but the
elves were not interested in that, either_.

_This world had created lots of life, too. None of it had ever had what
the elves considered to be potential. But this time_ …

_It had iron, too. The elves hated iron. But this time, the rewards were
worth the risk. This time_ …

_One of them signalled. The prey was close at hand. And now they saw it,
clustered in the trees around a clearing, dark blobs against the
sunset_.

_The elves assembled. And then, at a pitch so strange that it entered
the brain without the need to use the ears, they began to sing_.

‘Chmmmmph!’ said Archchancellor Ridcully, as a heavy body landed on his
back and clamped a hand over his mouth, forcing him back down into the
long, dewy grass.

‘Listen very carefully!’ hissed a voice in his ear. ‘When you were
small, you had a one-eared toy rabbit called Mr Big Pram! On your sixth
birthday your brother hit you on the head with a model boat! And when
you were twelve … do the words “jolly lolly” ring a bell?’

‘Mmph!’

‘Very well. I’m you. There’s been one of those temporal things Mister
Stibbons is always goin’ on about. I’m taking my hand away now and we’ll
both quietly crawl away without the elves seeing us. Understand?’

‘Mmp.’

‘Good man.’

Elsewhere in the bushes the Dean whispered into his own ear: ‘Under a
secret floorboard in your study—’

Ponder whispered to himself: ‘I’m sure we both agree that this should
not really be happening …’

In fact the only wizard who did not bother with concealment was
Rincewind, who tapped himself on the shoulder and evinced no surprise at
seeing himself. In his life he had seen far more unusual things than his
own doppelganger.

‘Oh, you,’ he said.

‘’fraid so,’ he said glumly.

‘Was it you that turned up just now to tell me I should hold my breath?’

‘Er … possibly, but I think I’ve been superseded by me.’

‘Oh. Has Ponder Stibbons being talking about quantum again?’

‘You got it in one.’

‘Another mess up?’

‘More or less. It turns out stopping the elves is a really bad idea.’

‘Typical. Do we both survive? There’s not much room in the office, what
with all the coal—’

‘Ponder Stibbons says we may end up remembering everything, because of
residual quantum infraction, but we’ll sort of be the same person.’

‘Any big teeth or sharp edges involved?’

‘Not so far.’

‘Could be worse, then, all things considered.’

In pairs, the wizards assembled as quietly as they could. Apart from
Ridcully, who seemed to quite enjoy his own company, they tried not to
look at their doppelgangers; it’s quite embarrassing being in the
company of someone who knows everything about you, even if that person
is yourself.

A few feet away, with the suddenness of lightning, a pale circle
appeared on the grass.

‘Our transport is here, gentlemen,’ said Ponder.

One of the Deans, who was standing well apart from the other Dean,
raised his hand.

‘What happens to the ones of us that stay behind?’ he said.

‘It won’t matter,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘They’ll vanish the moment we
do, and the ones of us who end up in the, er, other trouser leg of time
will have the memories of both of us. I think that’s right, isn’t it?’

‘Yes,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘A pretty good summation for the layman.
So, gentlemen, are we ready? One of everyone, into the circle _now_,
please.’

Only the Rincewinds did not move. They knew what to expect.

‘Depressing, isn’t it,’ said one of them, watching the fighting. Both
Deans had managed to knock one another out of the circle on the very
first charge.

‘Especially the way one of the Stibbonses has just laid out the other
one with a left hook,’ said the other Rincewind. ‘An unusual skill in a
man of his education.’

‘Doesn’t give you a lot of confidence, I admit. Toss a coin?’

‘Yes, why not …’

They did so.

‘Fair enough,’ said the winner. ‘Nice to have met me.’ He picked his way
delicately across the groaning bodies and the last couple of struggling
wizards, sat down in the centre of the circle of light, and pulled his
hat as far down over his head as possible.

A moment later he became, very briefly, a six-dimensional knot and
became untied again on a wooden floor in a library.

‘Well, that was relatively painful,’ he murmured, and looked around.

The Librarian was sitting on his stool. The wizards were around
Rincewind, looking amazed and, in some cases, slightly bruised.

Dr Dee was watching them with concern.

‘Oh dear, I see it did not work,’ he said, and sighed. ‘It never works
for me, either. I will instruct the servants to fetch some food.’

When he’d gone, the wizards looked at one another.

‘Did we _go?_’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Yes, but we came back at the same time,’ said Ponder. He rubbed his
chin.

‘I can remember _everything_,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Amazin’! I was
the one that got left behind _and_ the one that—’

‘Let’s just not talk about it, shall we?’ said the Dean, brushing his
robe.

There was the sound of a muffled voice trying to make itself heard. The
Librarian opened his paw.

‘Attention please. Attention please,’ said Hex.

Ponder took the sphere.

‘We’re listening.’

‘Elves are approaching this property.’

‘What, here? In broad daylight?’ said Ridcully. ‘On our damn world?
While we’re actually _here_? The nerve!’

Rincewind looked out of the window on to the drive below.

‘Is it me,’ said the Dean, ‘or has it got colder?’

A carriage was rolling up, with a couple of footmen trotting along
beside it. It was a fine one, by the standards of the city. There were
plumes on the horse. And everything about it was either black or silver.

‘It’s not just you,’ said Rincewind, backing away from the window.

There were sounds at the front door. The wizards heard the distant voice
of Dee, and then the creak of the stairs.

‘Brethren,’ he said, pushing open the door. ‘There appears to be a
visitor for you downstairs.’ He gave them a worried smile. ‘A lady …’

SIXTEEN

FREE WON’T

[image] WHAT IS THE BIGGEST SOURCE OF DANGER for any organism?
Predators? Natural disasters? Fellow organisms of the same species, who
constitute the most direct competition for _everything?_ Sibling rivals,
who compete even in the same family, the same nest? No.

The biggest danger is the future.

If you’ve survived until now, then your past and present offer no
dangers, or at least no new dangers. That time you broke your leg and it
didn’t heal very well left you vulnerable to lions, but the attack is
still going to come, if at all, in the future. You can’t do anything to
change your past – unless you’re a wizard – but you can do something to
change your future. In fact, everything you do changes your future, in
the sense that the nebulous space of future possibilities starts to
crystallise out into the one future that actually happens. If you _are_
a wizard, able to visit the past and change that, too, you still have to
think about how a range of possibilities crystallises out into just one.
You still march forward into your own personal future along your own
personal timeline; it’s just that, when seen from the perspective of
conventional history, that timeline zigzags a lot.

We are committed to a view of ourselves as creatures that exist in time,
not just in an ever-changing present. That is why we are fascinated by
stories of time travel. And by stories about the future. We have
established elaborate methods to foretell the future, and find ourselves
at the mercy of deep-seated concepts such as Destiny and Free Will,
which relate to our place in time and our ability to change the future –
or not. However, we have an ambivalent attitude to the future. In most
respects, we think that it is pre-determined, usually by factors beyond
our control. Otherwise, how could it be predicted? Most scientific
theories of the universe are deterministic: the laws give rise to only
one possible future.

To be sure, quantum mechanics involves unavoidable elements of chance,
at least according to the orthodox attitude of nearly all physicists,
but quantum uncertainty fuzzes out and ‘decoheres’ as we move from the
microscopic world to the macroscopic one, so on a human scale nearly
everything that matters is again deterministic from the physical point
of view. That doesn’t mean that we know ahead of time what’s going to
happen, though. We have seen that two features of the workings of
natural laws, chaos and complexity, imply that deterministic systems
need not be predictable in any practical sense. But when we start to
think about ourselves, we are utterly certain that we are not
deterministic at all. We have free will, we can make choices. We can
choose when to get out of bed, what to eat for breakfast, whether or not
to put the radio on and listen to the news.

We’re not so certain that animals have free will. Do cats and dogs make
choices? Or are they merely responding to innate and unchangeable
‘drives’? When it comes to simpler organisms like amoebas, we find it
difficult to conceive of them choosing between alternatives; though when
we watch them through a microscope, we get a strong feeling that they
know what they’re doing. We’re happy to believe that this feeling is an
illusion, a silly piece of anthropomorphism, investing human qualities
in a tiny bag of biochemicals; no doubt the amoeba is responding,
deterministically, to chemical gradients in its environment. But it
doesn’t look deterministic because of the aforementioned get-outs, chaos
and complexity. In contrast, when we make a choice, we have the
overwhelming impression that we could have chosen to do something else.
If that wasn’t possible, then it wasn’t really a choice.

We therefore model ourselves as free agents making choice after choice
against the background of a complex and chaotic world. We are aware that
any threat to our existence – or anything desirable – will come from the
future, and that the free choices we make now can and will affect how
that future turns out. If only we could foresee the future, we could
work out the best choices, and make the future happen the way we would
like, and not the way the lions would like. Our intelligence gives us
the ability to construct mental models of the future, mostly simple
extrapolations of patterns that we have noticed in the past. Our
extelligence collects these models, and welds them together into
religious prophecies, scientific laws, ideologies, social imperatives …
We are time-binding animals, whose every action is constrained not just
by the past and present, but also by our own anticipations of the
future. We know that we can’t predict the future very accurately, but a
prediction that works only some of the time is, we feel, better than
none. So we tell ourselves and each other stories about the future, and
we use those stories to run our lives.

Those stories form part of the extelligence, and they interact with
other elements in it, such as science and religion, to create a strong
emotional attachment to belief systems or technology that can help us
navigate into that uncertain future. Or claim to do so, and can convince
us that the claim is valid, even if it’s not. In many religions,
enormous respect is paid to prophets, people so wise, or so in tune with
the deity, that they know what the future will bring. The priests gain
respect by predicting eclipses and the turn of the seasons. Scientists
gain rather less respect by predicting the movements of the planets, and
(less effectively) tomorrow’s weather. Whoever controls the future
controls human destiny.

Destiny. That’s a strange concept in a creature that believes it has
free will. If you can control the future, then the future cannot be
fixed. If it is not fixed, then there is no such thing as destiny.
Unless, perhaps, the future converges on the same events, whatever you
do. There are many stories with this theme, of which the most famous is
‘Appointment in Samara’ (parodied in _The Colour of Magic_), when a
man’s efforts to escape Death only bring him to the very place where
Death is waiting.

We entertain contradictory beliefs about the future. That’s not such a
surprise: we’re not the most logically consistent of creatures. We tend
to apply logic locally, within narrow limits, and when it suits us,
We’re very bad at applying it globally, setting one of our cherished
beliefs up against another and looking for the inconsistencies. But we
are especially inconsistent when it comes to dealing with the future.

Paradoxically, free will is the last thing you want if you’re tribal.
You’re caught in the matrix of ‘Everything that isn’t mandatory is
forbidden’, and there is simply no room for free will. On the one hand,
such an existence is very secure; but on the other, punishments and
rewards are just as mandatory as everything else if your sins are found
out. Your personal responsibility is only to obey the rules.

You can still tell yourself stories about the future, but they involve
very narrow choices. ‘Shall I attend the ritual meal tonight and leave
early to say my evening prayers, or shall I stay for the communal
prayers like everybody else?’ Even in a tribal system, a lot of cheating
goes on, because we’re human. ‘Well, now … If I leave _early_, then I
can drop by Fatima’s tent, and my wives won’t know about it …’

Plenty of sins are possible, even in a tribal society, and in reality
ones that survive allow a little flexibility. If, say, you forget to
fast on the Holy Day and someone sees you eating, and you genuinely
thought it was tomorrow, or an enemy told you that it was tomorrow, or
you had been _made_ to think it was tomorrow because an enemy had cast a
curse upon you … then some skilful pleading might mitigate your
punishment.

The natural and attractive option is always to blame others; it is
unbearable to know that you have brought the punishment upon yourself.
If you can’t see how anyone else can be blamed for material reasons,
then blame them for cursing you. Blame Fatima for being attractive and
willing, blame an enemy who lied to you. ‘Luck’ is not available as a
concept in a tribal society, because Allah knows everything, Jehovah is
omniscient: the natural response is fatalistic acceptance of whatever
they throw your way.¹ If you are to attain heaven, so be it; if your
fate is to be flung into the everlasting fires, then that is the Will of
God, to which you are subservient. The best you can do, as a
peasant-level tribesman, is to find out what is in store for you, what
is Written in the Book.

Maybe you don’t really want to know what’s in the Book, but monkey
curiosity overcomes fear, and in any case you can’t change what’s
Written and it might just be nice. So you go to the old lady in the
forest who can read tealeaves, or (today) to the iridologist or the
spiritualist medium. And all of these alleged ways to foresee the future
have a very revealing common feature. They interpret the
small-and-contingent into the large-and-important.

Just like the Roman general spilling the guts of a ram on to the ground
before the battle, so that the small-and-complicated can mirror a
forthcoming battle that will be large-and-complicated, tealeaves and
hand-lines are small-and-complicated, and ‘must’ therefore encode your
complicated future. The kind of magic that is being invoked here is an
unexpressed homology, which on some level we all believe in because we
use it all the time. The stories that we construct in our minds are
small-and-complicated, and they really do mirror the
large-and-complicated things that happen to us. _The Concise Lexicon of
the Occult_ lists 93 methods of divination, from aeromancy (divination
by the shapes of clouds) to xylomancy (divination by the shapes of
twigs). All but four of them employ the small-and-complicated to predict
the large-and-complicated; their materials include salt, barley, wind,
wax, lead, onion sprouts (that one’s called ‘cromniomancy’), laughter,
blood, fish guts, flames, pearls, and the noises made by mice
(‘myomancy’). The other four involve invoking spirits, calling up
demons, or talking to gods.

To many tribal innocents, other people sometimes seem to have access to
different little stories that they can make relevant to your life, like
‘Your fate is written on your hand’ or ‘The dead communicate with me and
they know all’. So people of that inclination can convince you, with a
bit of flummery, that they know your future, and they can produce
convincing large stories which you interpret as your fate.

There is a deep paradox in our attitude to personal free will. We want
to know what the future will be in order to make a free choice that
protects us against it. So we think of the future of everything outside
us as being deterministic, which is why the gypsy or the medium or the
dead can know what it is going to be. Nevertheless, we think of our own
future as involving free choices. Our free will lets us choose to
consult the gypsy, who then convinces us that we have no choice: for
example, that the life-line on our palm determines when we will die. So
our actions betray a deep-seated belief that the laws of the universe
apply to everything except us.

The biggest wholesale business that preys on our convictions and
confusions about free will in a powerful and often cruel universe, is
astrology. Astrologers claim authority from Ancient Egypt, from
Paracelsus and Dee, from Ancient Wisdom of all kinds including the Hindu
Vedas and other Eastern literature. Let us review the appeal of
astrology in the light of narrativium.

Astrologers have an immense following, and they have managed to pick up
on both tribal and barbarian stories. They have the counter-scientific
story for the civilised culture, able to attract both the tribal and
barbarian aspects of our foolishness. They really do believe that the
future, for each of us, is influenced by our time of birth.² They time
it to the second.

What seems to be important to them is against which starry background
(the Zodiac) we view the planets in our own solar system. As we move
from intra-uterine life to the hands of the midwife, doctor, partner,
our lives are determined from then on by astral forces. This strange
belief is supported by so many people, who turn to the ‘Your Stars’
pages first in their daily newspaper, that we should seek some
explanation within our ‘story’ framework. What is the story of our
futures that is implicit in the control of our lives by the positions of
the stars? As opposed, say, to the medical staff who, at the time of our
birth, probably had more gravitational influence upon us³ than the
planet Jupiter was having?

Well, the stars are obviously very numinous, powerful. They’re up there
wheeling over us. At least, they were when we were shepherds, staying
out all night, but most civilised folk now don’t know why the Moon
changes its shape, let alone why or where the pole star is. Yes, all
right, _you_ do, and it’s not surprising. Others don’t, and don’t think
what they don’t know is worth knowing.

They have a vague feel for a few of the constellations, especially the
Big Dipper (or Great Bear), but they don’t know that those stars are not
near to each other, but merely appear to be in that formation when
viewed from Earth, and then only for a short time, astronomically
speaking. Most people don’t entertain astronomical thoughts, so why are
the stars so heavily involved in our most potent stories? Perhaps
because, in our nursery stories, the celestial sphere gives a context, a
primitive animistic one in which Moon and Sun take protagonist parts? We
don’t find that persuasive. Perhaps it is because the power of the stars
entered our cultural stories back in the time when everyone could see
the clear night sky, and has hung on. Or perhaps it is the jargon of the
Zodiac-mongers, with their gypsy fortune-teller use of language to give
received certainty to the most nebulous of prophecies. We’ve never heard
anyone say, after reading the newspaper’s astrology columns, ‘Right,
then, they’re totally wrong today, no more astrology for me!’

There are others playing the same card, from Pyramidologists to Ancient
Astronaut promoters to Flying Saucers Will Save Us visionaries to
Rosicrucians. Regular UFO enthusiasts and Loch Ness monster
photographers are much less dangerous. We focus on the prophets: those
who, like followers of Nostradamus’s prophecies or astrology, must
believe that all the little contingencies add up to a grand pattern of
the human future and that Fate rules us all.

This is the tribal interpretation of the feeling of free will: it is an
illusion, for God already knows our futures. Kismet (the word comes from
the Turkish ‘qismet’ and Arabic ‘qisma’) rules. Moreover – a neat twist
that gives power over people as well as their money – whether you will
be a beetle or a king in the next turn of the cosmic wheel is determined
by the balance that you have achieved in this life. This is equally out
of your control, in practice, but you can escape to an inner life,
making it as far as possible irrelevant to the vicissitudes that attack
your outer self, and thereby avoid beetlehood in your next incarnation.

That apparent escape again depends on our ability to construct stories
about our future. Here, our future divides, with the soul taking one
direction under our own control and freed from the control of powerful
others, while the body is manifestly bowed by slavery, starvation, or
torture. Hundreds of millions have found comfort in that apparent
control of their futures, following the story of their spiritual selves
and denying the pains of the material self.

In the Buddhist literature and practice, something close to that
transcendence seems to be achievable. If you believe in fate, or the
nearby concept of karma, then wisdom can consist only in foreseeing
events, training your spiritual self to accept what happens, and
teaching others to do the same. Some authority will provide your map of
material events, but your destiny cannot be avoided by fighting it. Your
only option is to lead a disciplined spiritual life, guided by stories
of previous successes in this quest, notably the Buddha, and to
entertain hopes of leaving the Wheel of Life altogether, to exist as a
spiritual presence with all ties to the material severed.

This nirvanic view of heaven is not for those who enjoy the material
ride too much to want to get off the bus. And the paradoxical nature of
the prophetic predictions – of all prophetic predictions – is
disturbing. There is no way at all that a deterministic Earth can be
accommodated by today’s view of what planets are like, and most of
today’s more sophisticated religions have no room for an immanent God,
tinkering with each life, and its context, to achieve its destiny. Those
that do have room for immanence encounter real problems with modern
technology, whose basis lies in ways-of-the-universe modelled by
science, not by djinns or the whim of a deity or deities. And although
we may, with Fredric Brown, be amused that when the _djinni_ that worked
the electric light and the radio came out on strike, the steam-power
genies came out in sympathy, we enjoy this animistic fantasy as fuel for
Murphy’s Law and nice Disneyesque animations. We don’t buy any of it for
real causality.

Joseph Needham brought light to this kind of confusion. He pointed out,
in the introduction to his truly gigantic _History of Science in China_,
that the reason why China never developed science as the West knows it
is that they never espoused monotheism. In polytheistic philosophies, it
isn’t very sensible to search for _the_ cause of something, like a
thunderstorm, say: you’re liable to get a very contingent answer
involving several incidents in the love lives of the gods, and an
explanation of the provenance of thunderbolts that verges on the
ridiculous.⁴

Monotheists, however, by which we mean someone like Abraham, to whom we
shall return later, reckon that God had a consistent set of ideas and
causalities in mind when he set the universe up. _One_ set of ideas. If
you expect your one God to be consistent, then it’s worth asking how
those causalities relate to each other: for example, ‘black clouds and
rain will be associated with thunderstorms when …’ whatever. The
monotheist can predict the weather, even if rather badly. But the
polytheist needs a theopsychologist and a precise account of what the
gods are up to at the moment. She needs to know whether a tiff between
two gods will result in a thunderstorm. So scientific causality is
compatible with God-causality, but not with gods-causality.

Monotheists, moreover, have a built-in intolerance. The position that
there is only one truth, only one avenue to the one God, sets each
monotheistic religion in opposition to all others. There is no room for
manoeuvre, no way to tolerate the manifest errors of people who believe
in some other god. So monotheism laid the foundation for the
Inquisition, and for intemperate Christianity through the ages from the
crusades through to African and Polynesian missionaries. ‘I have the
story, and it is the only one’ is characteristic of many cults, all of
them intolerant.

Faiths, of course, do get along. But they get along because of the
hammering they have taken at the hands of science, material development
and better education. They get along because of wise people within them
who recognise the commonality of humanity. Where there are too few wise
people, you get Northern Ireland. If you are lucky.

If the future is not fixed, but malleable, and we can predict the
effects of our present behaviour, however badly, then predicting the
future can be self-defeating. And that can even be the reason for
predicting it.

Most of the Biblical prophets seem, like many science-fiction authors
today, to be warning against what might happen if we go on as we are
doing. So they succeed when their prophecy is _not_ correct, because
people heed it and change their actions. We can understand that; even
though the prophecy didn’t come true, we can all see that it might have
done: it has given us a better idea of the phase space that the future
of our culture lives in.

What about the gypsy who prophesies that a tall dark man will come into
your life, thus making you receptive to all those future tall dark men?
(if tall dark men interest you, of course; it’s up to you.) This could
be a self-fulfilling prophecy, the opposite of the stories told by
Biblical prophets. It’s a story that the recipient is sympathetic to,
wants to happen.

There are said to be only seven basic story plots, so perhaps our minds
are much less varied than we think, so that the newspaper astrologer and
the fortune-teller are navigating a much smaller phase space of human
experience than we thought. This would account for so many people
feeling that the predictions show deep insight.

But when _astronomers_ predict the future, _and get it right_, people
are, paradoxically, much less impressed. When they predict eclipses
correctly, every time, this seems less meaningful than the astrologers
nearly getting many people right, sometimes. Remember Y2K, the prophecy
that planes would fall out of the sky soon after the year 2000 dawned
and your toaster wouldn’t work? That prophecy cost the world several
billion dollars in work to avert the problem – and it didn’t happen. A
waste of time, then? Not at all. It didn’t happen because people took
precautions. If they hadn’t done, the cost would have been much higher.
It was a Biblical prophecy: ‘If this goes on …’ And, lo, the multitude
heeded.

This recursive dependence of prophecy upon people’s responses to it,
unlike most of the other kinds of thing that we say, relates back to our
facility with our own made-up little futures, the stories that we tell
ourselves. They confirm us in our identities. It is no wonder that when
someone – an astrologer or Nostradamus, say – pokes his finger into this
mental place where we live, and inserts some of his own stories, we want
to believe him. His stories are more exciting than ours. We wouldn’t
have thought, going down the stairs to get a train to work, ‘I wonder if
I’m going to meet a tall dark guy today?’ But once it’s been put into
our minds, we smile at all the dark men, even some quite short ones. And
so our lives are changed (perhaps in quite major ways, if you are a man
doing the smiling) as are the stories that we ourselves proposed for our
futures.

This way that we react, fairly predictably, to what the world throws at
us, casts doubt on our otherwise unshakeable belief that _we get to
choose what we do_. Do we truly possess free will? Or are we like the
amoeba, drifting this way and that, propelled by the dynamic of a phase
space that cannot be perceived from outside?

In _Figments of Reality_ we included a chapter with the title ‘We wanted
to have a chapter on free will but we decided not to, so here it is’.
There we examined such issues as whether, in a world without genuine
free will, it would be fair to blame a person for their actions. We
conclude that in a world without genuine free will, there might not be
any choice: they would get blamed anyway because the possibility of them
not being blamed did not exist.

We won’t go over that ground in detail, but we do want to summarise the
main thrust of the argument. We start by observing that there is no
effective scientific test for free will. You can’t run the universe
again, with everything _exactly_ as it was, and see if a different
choice can be made second time round. Moreover, there seems to be no
room in the laws of physics for genuine free will. Quantum
indeterminacy, seized on so readily by many philosophers and scientists
as a catch-all explanation of ‘consciousness’, is the wrong kind of
thing altogether: random unpredictability is not the same as choosing
between clear alternatives.

There are many ways in which the known laws of physics could offer an
_illusion_ of free will, for example by exploiting chaos or emergence,
but there is no way to set up a system that could make different choices
even though every particle in the universe, including those making up
the system, is in the same state on both occasions.

Add to this one rather interesting aspect of human social behaviour:
although we feel as if _we_ have free will, we don’t act as if we
believe that anybody else has. When somebody does something
uncharacteristic, ‘not like them’, we don’t say ‘Oh, Fred is exercising
his free will. He’s been a lot happier since he smiled at the tall, dark
stranger.’ We say ‘What the devil has got into Fred?’ Only when we find
a reason for his actions, an explanation _not_ involving the exercise of
free will (like drunkenness, or ‘doing it for a bet’) do we feel
satisfied.

All of this suggests that our minds do not actually make choices: they
make judgements. Those judgements reveal not what we have chosen, but
what kind of mind we possess. ‘Well, I never would have guessed,’ we
say, and feel we’ve learned something that we can use in future dealings
with that person.

So what about that strong feeling that we get, of making a choice?
That’s not what we’re doing, it’s what it _feels like to us_ when we’re
doing it, just as that vivid grey quale of the visual system is not
actually out there on the elephant, but an added decoration that exists
in our heads. ‘Choosing’ is what our minds feel like from inside when
they’re judging between alternatives. Free will is not a real attribute
of human beings at all: it is merely the quale of judgement.

¹ Admittedly, many African tribes think no such thing: you can hide
things from the fairly simple local god. But then it’s not much of a
god. Probably the tribal mores have been corrupted with the passage of
time.

² Why _birth_, the sheerest accident during our development’ Why not
fertilisation? Or hatching from the _zona pellucida_, the egg membrane?
Or the first heartbeat’ Or the first dream (while still in the uterus)?
Or the first word, or the first carnal experience? There _are_ aspects
of our future that are determined by, at least, the date of our birth
(we may end up the youngest or the oldest child in the school intake
that year, and that can make a big difference) but we’re not talking
about these human-created things here.

³ The gravitational attraction exerted by a single doctor at a distance
of 6 inches is roughly twice that of Jupiter at its closest point to the
Earth.

⁴ At least on Discworld you can _see_ the gods acting disgracefully.

SEVENTEEN

FREEDOM OF INFORMATION

[image] PEOPLE BELIEVED THAT ELVES could look like anything they wanted
to, but this was, strictly speaking, wrong. Elves looked the same all
the time (rather dull and grey, with large eyes, rather similar to
bushbabies without the charm) but they could, without effort, cause
others to see them differently.

Currently the Queen looked like a fashionable lady of the time, in black
lace, sparkling here and there with diamonds. Only with a hand over one
eye and extreme concentration could even a trained wizard dimly see the
true nature of the elf, and even then his eye would water alarmingly.

Nevertheless, the wizards stood up when she entered. There’s such a
thing as courtesy, after all.

‘Welcome to my world, gentlemen,’ said the Queen, sitting down. Behind
her, a couple of guards took up station either side of the door.

‘Ours!’ snarled the Dean. ‘It’s _our_ world!’

‘Let us continue to disagree, shall we?’ said the Queen brightly. ‘You
may have constructed it, but it’s our world now.’

‘We have iron, you know,’ said Ridcully. ‘Would you like some tea, by
the way? Foul stuff made without actual tea.’

‘Much good may it do you. No, thank you,’ said the Queen. ‘Please note
that my guards are human. So is your host. The Dean looks angry. You
intend to _fight_ here? When you have no magic? Be serious, gentlemen.
You should be grateful, after all. This is a world without narrativium.
Your strange humans were monkeys without stories. They did not know how
the world was supposed to _go_. We gave them stories, and made them
people.’

‘You gave them gods and monsters,’ said Ridcully. ‘Stuff that stops
people thinking straight. Superstitions. Demons. Unicorns. Bogeymen.’

‘You have bogeymen on your world, don’t you?’ said the Queen.

‘Yes, we do. But outside, where we can get at ’em. They ain’t stories.
When you can _see_ ’em, they don’t have any power.’

‘Like unicorns,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘When you _meet_
one, you find out it’s just a big sweaty horse. Looks nice, smells
horsey.’

‘And it’s _magical_,’ said the Queen, her eyes gleaming.

‘Yes, but that’s just another thing about it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Big,
sweaty, magical. There’s nothing _mysterious_ about it. You just learn
the rules.’

‘But surely you should be pleased!’ said the Queen, her eyes saying that
she knew they weren’t and was glad of it. ‘Everyone here thinks this
world is just like yours! Many people even believe that it is flat!’

‘Yes, but back home they’d be right,’ said Ridcully. ‘Here they’re just
ignorant.’

‘Well, there is not a single thing you can do about it,’ said the Queen.
‘This is _our_ world, Mister Wizard. It’s all stories. The religions
here … amazing! And the beliefs … wonderful! The crop is bountiful, the
harvest is rewarding. Do you know that more people believe in magic here
than they do on your world?’

‘_We_ don’t have to believe in it. It _works!_’ snapped Ridcully.

‘They believe in it here, and it _doesn’t_,’ said the Queen. ‘And thus
they believe in it even more, while ceasing to believe in themselves.
Isn’t it astonishing?’

She stood up. Most of the wizards went to stand up, too, and one or two
of them got all the way. Misogynists to a man, the wizards were
therefore always punctiliously polite to ladies.

‘Here, you are just rather fussy old men,’ she said. ‘But _we_
understand this world and we have had time to cultivate it. We like it.
You can’t take us away. Your humans need us. We are part of their world
now.’

‘This world, madam, has about another thousand years before all life is
wiped out,’ said Ridcully.

‘Then there are other worlds,’ said the Queen, lightly.

‘That’s _all_ you have to say?’

‘What else is there? Worlds begin and end,’ said the Queen. ‘That is how
the universe works. That is the great circle of existence.’

‘The great circle of existence, madam, can eat my underwear!’ said
Ridcully.

‘Fine words,’ said the Queen. ‘You are good at concealing your true
thoughts from me, but I can also see them in your face, nevertheless.
You think you can still fight us and win. You have forgotten that there
is _no_ narrativium in this world. It does not know how stories should
go. _Here_, the third son of a king is probably just a useless weak
prince. _Here_, there are no heroes, only degrees of villainy. An old
lady gathering wood in the forest is just an old lady and not, as in
your world, almost certainly a witch. Oh, there is a _belief_ in
witches. But a witch here is merely a method of ridding society of
burdensome old ladies and an inexpensive way of keeping the fire going
all night. Here, gentlemen, good does not ultimately triumph at the
expense of a few bruises and a non-threatening shoulder wound. Here,
evil is generally defeated by a more organised kind of evil. My world,
gentlemen. Not yours. Good day to you.’

And then she was gone.

The wizards sat down again. Outside, the carriage rattled away.

‘Quite well spoken for an elf, I thought,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes. ‘Good turn of phrase.’

‘And that’s _it_?’ said Ridcully. ‘We _can’t_ do anything?’

‘We don’t have any magic, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘But we _do_ know everythin’ is goin’ to turn out all right, though,
don’t we?’ said Ridcully. ‘We know that people get off the planet before
the next big wallop, right? We saw the evidence. Right?’

Ponder sighed.

‘Yes, sir. But it might not happen. It’s like the Shell Midden people.’

‘They _didn’t_ happen?’

‘Not … here, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Ah. And you’re goin’ to say “it’s because of quantum” at some point?’

‘I hadn’t intended to, sir, but you’re on the right lines.’

‘So … when we left them, did they pop out of existence?’

‘No, sir. We did.’

‘Oh. Well, so long as _someone_ did …’ said Ridcully. ‘Any thoughts,
gentlemen?’

‘We could go to the pub again?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes,
hopefully.

‘No,’ said Ridcully. ‘This is serious.’

‘So am I.’

‘I don’t see what we can do,’ said the Dean. ‘The humans here needed the
elves to tinker with their heads. When we stopped that, we got the Shell
Midden people. When we _didn’t_ stop it, we got people like Dee, head
half full of rubbish.’

‘I know someone who’d be right at home with this problem,’ said
Ridcully, thoughtfully. ‘Mister Stibbons, we would be able to get back
home now, wouldn’t we? Just to send a semaphore message?’

‘Yes, sir, but there’s no need for that. Hex can do that directly,’ said
Ponder, before he could stop himself.

‘How?’ said Ridcully.

‘I … er … connected him up to the semaphore just after you left, sir. Er
… it was just a matter of pulleys and things. Er … I installed a little
set of repeater arms on the roof of the High Energy Magic Building. Er …
and employed a gargoyle to do the watching, and we needed one anyway,
because the pigeons up there have really got too numerous … er …’

‘So Hex can send and receive messages?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir. All the time. Er …’

‘But that costs a fortune! Is it coming out of your budget, man?’

‘Er, no, sir, because it’s actually quite cheap, er … it’s free,
actually …’ Ponder went for broke. ‘Hex worked out the codes, you see.
The gargoyles up on the big tower don’t bother about where the signals
are coming from, they just notice the codes, so, er, Hex started by
adding the codes for the Assassins’ Guild or the Fools’ Guilds to the
messages and, er, they probably didn’t notice the extra amount on their
bills because they’re using the clacks all the time these days—’

‘So … we’re _stealing_?’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, er, yes, sir, in a way, but it’s hard to know exactly _what_.
Last month Hex worked out the semaphore company’s own codes so his
messages travel as part of their internal signalling, sir. No one gets
billed for that.’

‘This is very disturbing news, Stibbons,’ said Ridcully sternly.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Ponder, looking at his feet.

‘I feel I must ask you a rather difficult and worrying question: is it
likely that anyone will find out?’

‘Oh, no, sir. It’s impossible to trace.’

‘Impossible?’

‘Yes, sir. Every week Hex sends a message to company headquarters
readjusting the total of messages sent, sir. Anyway, there’s so many I
don’t think anyone checks.’

‘Oh? Well, that’s all right then,’ said Ridcully. ‘It never really
happens, and no one can find out it’s us in any case. Can we send all
our messages that way?’

‘Well, technically yes, sir, but I think that might be abusing the—’

‘We _are_ academics, Stibbons,’ said the Dean. ‘And information should
be allowed to flow freely.’

‘Exactly,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘An untrammelled flow of
information is essential to a progressive society. This is the age of
the semaphore, after all.’

‘Obviously it flows _to_ us,’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh, certainly,’ said the Dean. ‘We don’t want it flowing _away_ from
us. We’re talking about flow here, not _spread_.’

‘You wanted a message sent?’ said Ponder, before the wizards got too
deeply into this.

‘And we really don’t have to pay?’ said Ridcully.

Ponder sighed. ‘No, sir.’

‘Jolly good,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Have this one sent to the
kingdom of Lancre, will you? They’ve only got one clacks tower. Got your
notebook? Message begins:

“_To Mistress Esmerelda Weatherwax. How are you? I am fine. An
interesting problem has arisen_ …”

EIGHTEEN

BIT FROM IT

[image] A SEMAPHORE IS A SIMPLE and time-honoured example of a digital
communication system. It encodes letters of the alphabet using the
positions of flags, lights, or something similar. In 1795 George Murray
invented a version that is close to the system currently used in
Discworld: a set of six shutters that could be opened or closed, thus
giving 64 different ‘codes’, more than enough for the entire alphabet,
numbers 0 to 10 and some ‘special’ codes. The system was further
developed but ceased to be cutting-edge technology when the electric
telegraph heralded the wired age. The Discworld semaphore (or ‘clacks’)
has been taken _much_ further, with mighty trunk route towers carrying
bank after bank of shutters, aided by lamps after dark, and streaming
messages bi-directionally across the continent. It is a pretty accurate
‘evolution’ of the technology: if we too had failed to harness steam and
electricity, we might well be using something like it …

There is enough capacity on that system even to handle pictures –
seriously. Convert the picture to a 64 × 64 grid of little squares that
can be black, white or four shades of grey, and then read the grid from
left to right and top to bottom like a book. It’s just a matter of
information, a few clever clerks to work out some compression
algorithms, and a man with a shallow box holding 4,096 wooden blocks,
their six sides being, yes, black, white and four shades of grey. It’ll
take them a while to reassemble the pictures, but clerks are cheap.

Digital messages are the backbone of the Information Age, which is the
name we currently give to the one we’re living in, in the belief that we
know a lot more than anyone else, ever. Discworld is comparably proud of
being in the Semaphore Age, the Age of the Clacks. But what, exactly, is
information?

When you send a message, you are normally expected to pay for it –
because if you don’t, then whoever is doing the work of transmitting
that message for you will object. It is this feature of messages that
has got Ridcully worried, since he is wedded to the idea that academics
travel free.

Cost is one way to measure things, but it depends on complicated market
forces. What, for example, if there’s a sale on? The scientific concept
of ‘information’ is a measure of how much message you’re sending. In
human affairs, it seems to be a fairly universal principle that for any
given medium, longer messages cost more than short ones. At the back of
the human mind, then, lurks a deep-seated belief that messages can be
quantified: they have a _size_. The size of a message tells you ‘how
much information’ it contains.

Is ‘information’ the same as ‘story’? No. A story does convey
information, but that’s probably the least interesting thing about
stories. Most information doesn’t constitute a story. Think of a
telephone directory: lots of information, strong cast, but a bit weak on
narrative. What counts in a story is its meaning. And that’s a very
different concept from information.

We are proud that we live in the Information Age. We do, and that’s the
trouble. If we ever get to the Meaning Age, we’ll finally understand
where we went wrong.

Information is not a thing, but a concept. However, the human tendency
to reify concepts into things has led many scientists to treat
information as if it is genuinely real. And some physicists are starting
to wonder whether the universe, too, might be made from information.

How did this viewpoint come about, and how sensible is it?

Humanity acquired the ability to quantify information in 1948, when the
mathematician-turned-engineer Claude Shannon found a way to define how
much information is contained in a message – he preferred the term
_signal_ – sent from a transmitter to a receiver using some kind of
code. By a signal, Shannon meant a series of binary digits (‘bits’, 0
and 1) of the kind that is ubiquitous in modern computers and
communication devices, and in Murray’s semaphore. By a code, he meant a
specific procedure that transforms an original signal into another one.
The simplest code is the trivial ‘leave it alone’; more sophisticated
codes can be used to detect or even correct transmission errors. In the
engineering applications, codes are a central issue, but for our
purposes here we can ignore them and assume the message is sent ‘in
plain’.

Shannon’s information measure puts a number to the extent to which our
uncertainty about the bits that make up a signal is reduced by what we
receive. In the simplest case, where the message is a string of 0s and
1s and every choice is equally likely, the amount of information in a
message is entirely straightforward: it is the total number of binary
digits. Each digit that we receive reduces our uncertainty about that
_particular_ digit (is it 0 or 1?) to certainty (‘it’s a 1’, say) but
tells us nothing about the others, so we have received one bit of
information. Do this a thousand times and we have received a thousand
bits of information. Easy.

The point of view here is that of a communications engineer, and the
unstated assumption is that we are interested in the bit-by-bit content
of the signal, not in its meaning. So the message 111111111111111
contains 15 bits of information, and so does the message
111001101101011. But Shannon’s concept of information is not the only
possible one. More recently, Gregory Chaitin has pointed out that you
can quantify the extent to which a signal contains _patterns_. The way
to do this is to focus not on the size of the message, but on the size
of a computer program, or _algorithm_, that can generate it. For
instance, the first of the above messages can be created by the
algorithm ‘every digit is a 1’. But there is no simple way to describe
the second message, other than to write it down bit by bit. So these two
messages have the same Shannon information content, but from Chaitin’s
point of view the second contains far more ‘algorithmic information’
than the first.

Another way to say this is that Chaitin’s concept focuses on the extent
to which the message is ‘compressible’. If a short program can generate
a long message, then we can transmit the program instead of the message
and save time and money. Such a program ‘compresses’ the message. When
your computer takes a big graphics file – a photograph, say – and turns
it into a much smaller file in JPEG format, it has used a standard
algorithm to compress the information in the original file. This is
possible because photographs contain numerous patterns: lots of
repetitions of blue pixels for the sky, for instance. The more
incompressible a signal is, the more information in Chaitin’s sense it
contains. And the way to compress a signal is to describe the patterns
that make it up. This implies that incompressible signals are random,
have no pattern, yet contain the most information. In one way this is
reasonable: when each successive bit is maximally unpredictable, you
learn more from knowing what it is. If the signal reads 111111111111111
then there is no great surprise if the next bit turns out to be 1; but
if the signal reads 111001101101011 (which we obtained by tossing a coin
15 times) then there is no obvious guess for the next bit.

Both measures of information are useful in the design of electronic
technology. Shannon information governs the time it takes to transmit a
signal somewhere else; Chaitin information tells you whether there’s a
clever way to compress the signal first, and transmit something smaller.
At least, it would do if you could calculate it, but one of the features
of Chaitin’s theory is that it is impossible to calculate the amount of
algorithmic information in a message – and he can prove it. The wizards
would approve of this twist.

‘Information’ is therefore a useful concept, but it is curious that ‘To
be or not to be’ contains the same Shannon information as, and _less_
Chaitin information than, ‘xyQGRlfryu&d%sk0wc’. The reason for this
disparity is that information is not the same thing as meaning. That’s
fascinating. What really matters to people is the meaning of a message,
not its bit-count, but mathematicians have been unable to quantify
meaning. So far.

And that brings us back to stories, which are messages that convey
meaning. The moral is that we should not confuse a story with
‘information’. The elves gave humanity stories, but they didn’t give
them any information. In fact, the stories people came up with included
things like werewolves, which don’t even _exist_ on Roundworld. No
information there – at least, apart from what it might tell you about
the human imagination.

Most people, scientists in particular, are happiest with a concept when
they can put a number to it. Anything else, they feel, is too vague to
be useful. ‘Information’ is a number, so that comfortable feeling of
precision slips in without anyone noticing that it might be spurious.
Two sciences that have gone a long way down this slippery path are
biology and physics.

The discovery of the ‘linear’ molecular structure of DNA has given
evolutionary biology a seductive metaphor for the complexity of
organisms and how they evolve, namely: _the genome of an organism
represents the information that is required to construct it_. The origin
of this metaphor is Francis Crick and James Watson’s epic discovery that
an organism’s DNA consists of ‘code words’ in the four molecular
‘letters’ A C T G, which, you’ll recall, are the initials of the four
possible ‘bases’. This description led to the inevitable metaphor that
the genome contains information about the corresponding organism.
Indeed, the genome is widely described as ‘containing the information
needed to produce’ an organism.

The easy target here is the word ‘the’. There are innumerable reasons
why a developing organism’s DNA does not determine the organism. These
non-genomic influences on development are collectively known as
‘epigenetics’, and they range from subtle chemical tagging of DNA to the
investment of parental care. The hard target is ‘information’.
Certainly, the genome includes information in some sense: currently an
enormous international effort is being devoted to listing that
information for the human genome, and also for other organisms such as
rice, yeast, and the nematode worm _Caenorhabditis elegans_. But notice
how easily we slip into cavalier attitudes, for here the word
‘information’ refers to the human mind as receiver, not to the
developing organism. The Human Genome Project informs _us_, not
organisms.

This flawed metaphor leads to the equally flawed conclusion that the
genome explains the complexity of an organism in terms of the amount of
information in its DNA code. Humans are complicated because they have a
long genome that carries a lot of information; nematodes are less
complicated because their genome is shorter. However, this seductive
idea can’t be true. For example, the Shannon information content of the
human genome is smaller by several orders of magnitude than the quantity
of information needed to describe the wiring of the neurons in the human
brain. How can we be more complex than the information that describes
us? And some amoebas have much longer genomes than ours, which takes us
down several pegs as well as casting even more doubt on DNA as
information.

Underlying the widespread belief that DNA complexity explains organism
complexity (even though it clearly doesn’t) are two assumptions, two
scientific stories that we tell ourselves. The first story is _DNA as
Blueprint_, in which the genome is represented not just as an important
source of control and guidance over biological development, but as the
information needed to determine an organism. The second is _DNA as
Message_, the ‘Book of Life’ metaphor.

Both stories oversimplify a beautifully complex interactive system. _DNA
as Blueprint_ says that the genome is a molecular ‘map’ of an organism.
_DNA as Message_ says that an organism can pass that map to the next
generation by ‘sending’ the appropriate information.

Both of these are wrong, although they’re quite good science fiction –
or, at least, interestingly bad science fiction with good special
effects.

If there is a ‘receiver’ for the DNA ‘message’ it is not the next
generation of the organism, which does not even exist at the time the
‘message’ is being ‘sent’, but the ribosome, which is the molecular
machine that turns DNA sequences (in a protein-coding gene) into
protein. The ribosome is an essential part of the coding system; it
functions as an ‘adapter’, changing the sequence information along the
DNA into an amino acid sequence in proteins. Every cell contains many
ribosomes: we say ‘the’ because they are all identical. The metaphor of
DNA as information has become almost universal, yet virtually nobody has
suggested that the ribosome must be a vast repository of information.
The structure of the ribosome is now known in high detail, and there is
no sign of obvious ‘information-bearing’ structure like that in DNA. The
ribosome seems to be a fixed ‘machine’. So where has the information
gone? Nowhere. That’s the wrong question.

The root of these misunderstandings lies in a lack of attention to
context. Science is very strong on content, but it has a habit of
ignoring ‘external’ constraints on the systems being studied. Context is
an important but neglected feature of information. It is so easy to
focus on the combinatorial clarity of the message and to ignore the
messy, complicated processes carried out by the receiver when it decodes
the message. Context is crucial to the interpretation of messages: to
their meaning. In his book _The User Illusion_ Tor Nørretranders
introduced the term _exformation_ to capture the role of the context,
and Douglas Hofstadter made the same general point in _Gödel, Escher,
Bach_. Observe how, in the next chapter, the otherwise incomprehensible
message ‘THEOSTRY’ becomes obvious when context is taken into account.

Instead of thinking about a DNA ‘blueprint’ encoding an organism, it’s
easier to think of a CD encoding music. Biological development is like a
CD that contains instructions for building a new CD-player. You can’t
‘read’ those instructions without already having one. If meaning does
not depend upon context, then the code on the CD should have an
_invariant_ meaning, one that is independent of the player. Does it,
though?

Compare two extremes: a ‘standard’ player that maps the digital code on
the CD to music in the manner intended by the design engineers, and a
jukebox. With a normal jukebox, the only message that you send is some
money and a button-push; yet in the context of the jukebox these are
interpreted as a specific several minutes’ worth of music. In principle,
any numerical code can ‘mean’ any piece of music you wish; it just
depends on how the jukebox is set up, that is, on the exformation
associated with the jukebox’s design. Now consider a jukebox that reacts
to a CD not by playing the tune that’s encoded on it, as a series of
bits, but by interpreting that code as a number, and then playing some
other CD to which that number has been assigned. For instance, suppose
that a recording of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony starts, in digital form,
with 11001. That’s the number 25 in binary. So the jukebox reads the CD
as ‘25’, and looks for CD number 25, which we’ll assume is a recording
of Charlie Parker playing jazz. On the other hand, elsewhere in the
jukebox is CD number 973, which actually is Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony.
Then a CD of Beethoven’s Fifth can be ‘read’ in two totally different
ways: as a ‘pointer’ to Charlie Parker, or as Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony
itself (triggered by whichever CDs start with 973 in binary). Two
contexts, two interpretations, two meanings, two results.

Whether something _is_ a message depends upon context, too: sender and
receiver must agree upon a protocol for turning meanings into symbols
and back again. Without this protocol a semaphore is just a few bits of
wood that flap about. Tree branches are bits of wood that flap about,
too, but no one ever tries to decode the message being transmitted by a
tree. Tree rings – the growth rings that appear when you saw through the
trunk, one ring per year – are a different matter. We have learned to
‘decode’ their ‘message’, about climate in the year 1066 and the like. A
thick ring indicates a good year with lots of growth on the tree,
probably warm and wet; a thin ring indicates a poor year, probably cold
and dry. But the sequence of tree rings only became a message, only
conveyed information, when we figured out the rules that link climate to
tree growth. The tree didn’t _send_ its message to us.

In biological development the protocol that gives meaning to the DNA
message is the laws of physics and chemistry. That is where the
exformation resides. However, it is unlikely that exformation can be
quantified. An organism’s complexity is not determined by the _number_
of bases in its DNA sequence, but by the complexity of the actions
initiated by those bases within the context of biological development.
That is, by the _meaning_ of the DNA ‘message’ when it is received by a
finely tuned, up-and-running biochemical machine. This is where we gain
an edge over those amoebas. Starting with an embryo that develops little
flaps, and making a baby with those exquisite little hands, involves a
series of processes that produce skeleton, muscles, skin, and so on.
Each stage depends on the current state of the others, and all of them
depend on contextual physical, biological, chemical and cultural
processes.

A central concept in Shannon’s information theory is something that he
called _entropy_, which in this context is a measure of how statistical
patterns in a source of messages affect the amount of information that
the messages can convey. If certain patterns of bits are more likely
than others, then their presence conveys _less_ information, because the
uncertainty is reduced by a smaller amount. In English, for example, the
letter ‘E’ is much more common than the letter ‘Q’. So receiving an ‘E’
tells you less than receiving a ‘Q’. Given a choice between ‘E’ and ‘Q’,
your best bet is that you’re going to receive an ‘E’. And you learn the
most when your expectations are proved wrong. Shannon’s entropy smooths
out these statistical biases and provides a ‘fair’ measure of
information content.

In retrospect, it was a pity that he used the name ‘entropy’, because
there is a longstanding concept in physics with the same name, normally
interpreted as ‘disorder’. Its opposite, ‘order’, is usually identified
with complexity. The context here is the branch of physics known as
thermodynamics, which is a specific simplified model of a gas. In
thermodynamics, the molecules of a gas are modelled as ‘hard spheres’,
tiny billiard balls. Occasionally balls collide, and when they do, they
bounce off each other as if they are perfectly elastic. The Laws of
Thermodynamics state that a large collection of such spheres will obey
certain statistical regularities. In such a system, there are two forms
of energy: mechanical energy and heat energy. The First Law states that
the total energy of the system never changes. Heat energy can be
transformed into mechanical energy, as it is in, say, a steam engine;
conversely, mechanical energy can be transformed into heat. But the sum
of the two is always the same. The Second Law states, in more precise
terms (which we explain in a moment), that heat cannot be transferred
from a cool body to a hotter one. And the Third Law states that there is
a specific temperature below which the gas cannot go – ‘absolute zero’,
which is around -273 degrees Celsius.

The most difficult – and the most interesting – of these laws is the
Second. In more detail, it involves a quantity that is again called
‘entropy’, which is usually interpreted as ‘disorder’. If the gas in a
room is concentrated in one corner, for instance, this is a more ordered
(that is, less disordered!) state than one in which it is distributed
uniformly throughout the room. So when the gas is uniformly distributed,
its entropy is higher than when it is all in one corner. One formulation
of the Second Law is that the amount of entropy in the universe always
increases as time passes. Another way to say this is that the universe
always becomes less ordered, or equivalently less complex, as time
passes. According to this interpretation, the highly complex world of
living creatures will inevitably become less complex, until the universe
eventually runs out of steam and turns into a thin, lukewarm soup.

This property gives rise to one explanation for the ‘arrow of time’, the
curious fact that it is easy to scramble an egg but impossible to
unscramble one. Time flows in the direction of increasing entropy. So
scrambling an egg makes the egg more disordered – that is, increases its
entropy – which is in accordance with the Second Law. Unscrambling the
egg makes it less disordered, and decreases energy, which conflicts with
the Second Law. An egg is not a gas, mind you, but thermodynamics can be
extended to solids and liquids, too.

At this point we encounter one of the big paradoxes of physics, a source
of considerable confusion for a century or so. A different set of
physical laws, Newton’s laws of motion, predicts that scrambling an egg
and unscrambling it are equally plausible physical events. More
precisely, if _any_ dynamic behaviour that is consistent with Newton’s
laws is run backwards in time, then the result is also consistent with
Newton’s laws. In short, Newton’s laws are ‘time-reversible’.

However, a thermodynamic gas is really just a mechanical system built
from lots of tiny spheres. In this model, heat energy is just a special
type of mechanical energy, in which the spheres vibrate but do not move
_en masse_. So we can compare Newton’s laws with the laws of
thermodynamics. The First Law of Thermodynamics is simply a restatement
of energy conservation in Newtonian mechanics, so the First Law does not
contradict Newton’s laws. Neither does the Third Law: absolute zero is
just the temperature at which the spheres cease vibrating. The amount of
vibration can never be less than zero.

Unfortunately, the Second Law of Thermodynamics behaves very
differently. It _contradicts_ Newton’s laws. Specifically, it
contradicts the property of time-reversibility. Our universe has a
definite direction for its ‘arrow of time’, but a universe obeying
Newton’s laws has two distinct arrows of time, one the opposite of the
other. In our universe, scrambling eggs is easy and unscrambling them
seems impossible. Therefore, according to Newton’s laws, in a
time-reversal of our universe, unscrambling eggs is easy but scrambling
them is impossible. But Newton’s laws are the same in both universes, so
they cannot prescribe a definite arrow of time.

Many suggestions have been made to resolve this discrepancy. The best
mathematical one is that thermodynamics is an approximation, involving a
‘coarse-graining’ of the universe in which details on very fine scales
are smeared out and ignored. In effect, the universe is divided into
tiny boxes, each containing (say) several thousand gas molecules. The
detailed motion inside such a box is ignored, and only the average state
of its molecules is considered.

It’s a bit like a picture on a computer screen. If you look at it from a
distance, you can see cows and trees and all kinds of structure. But if
you look sufficiently closely at a tree, all you see is one uniformly
green square, or pixel. A real tree would still have detailed structure
at this scale – leaves and twigs, say – but in the picture all this
detail is smeared out into the same shade of green.

In this approximation, once ‘order’ has disappeared below the level of
the coarse-graining, it can never come back. Once a pixel has been
smeared, you can’t unsmear it. In the real universe, though, it
sometimes can, because in the real universe the detailed motion inside
the boxes is still going on, and a smeared-out average ignores that
detail. So the model and the reality are _different_. Moreover, this
modelling assumption treats forward and backward time asymmetrically. In
forward time, once a molecule goes into a box, it can’t escape. In
contrast, in a time-reversal of this model it can escape from a box but
it can never get in if it wasn’t already inside that box to begin with.

This explanation makes it clear that the Second Law of Thermodynamics is
not a genuine property of the universe, but merely a property of an
approximate mathematical description. Whether the approximation is
helpful or not thus depends on the context in which it is invoked, not
on the content of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. And the
approximation involved destroys any relation with Newton’s laws, which
are inextricably linked to that fine detail.

Now, as we said, Shannon used the same word ‘entropy’ for his measure of
the structure introduced by statistical patterns in an information
source. He did so because the mathematical formula for Shannon’s entropy
looks exactly the same as the formula for the thermodynamic concept.
Except for a minus sign. So thermodynamic entropy looks like negative
Shannon entropy: that is, thermodynamic entropy can be interpreted as
‘missing information’. Many papers and books have been written
exploiting this relationship – attributing the arrow of time to a
gradual loss of information from the universe, for instance. After all,
when you replace all that fine detail inside a box by a smeared-out
average, you lose information about the fine detail. And once it’s lost,
you can’t get it back. Bingo: time flows in the direction of
information-loss.

However, the proposed relationship here is bogus. Yes, the formulas look
the same … but they apply in very different, unrelated, contexts. In
Einstein’s famous formula relating mass and energy, the symbol _c_
represents the speed of light. In Pythagoras’s Theorem, the same letter
represents one side of a right triangle. The letters are the same, but
nobody expects to get sensible conclusions by identifying one side of a
right triangle with the speed of light. The alleged relationship between
thermodynamic entropy and negative information isn’t quite that silly,
of course. Not _quite_.

As we’ve said, science is not a fixed body of ‘facts’, and there are
disagreements. The relation between Shannon’s entropy and thermodynamic
entropy is one of them. Whether it is meaningful to view thermodynamic
entropy as negative information has been a controversial issue for many
years. The scientific disagreements rumble on, even today, and
published, peer-reviewed papers by competent scientists flatly
contradict each other.

What seems to have happened here is a confusion between a formal
mathematical setting in which ‘laws’ of information and entropy can be
stated, a series of physical intuitions about heuristic interpretations
of those concepts, and a failure to understand the role of context. Much
is made of the resemblance between the formulas for entropy in
information theory and thermodynamics, but little attention is paid to
the context in which those formulas apply. This habit has led to some
very sloppy thinking about some important issues in physics.

One important difference is that in thermodynamics, entropy is a
quantity associated with a _state_ of the gas, whereas in information
theory it is defined for an information _source_: a system that
generates entire collections of states (‘messages’). Roughly speaking, a
source is a phase space for successive bits of a message, and a message
is a trajectory, a path, in that phase space. In contrast, a
thermodynamic configuration of molecules is a _point_ in phase space. A
specific configuration of gas molecules has a thermodynamic entropy, but
a specific message does not have a Shannon entropy. This fact alone
should serve as a warning. And even in information theory, the
information ‘in’ a message is not negative information-theoretic
entropy. Indeed the entropy of the source remains unchanged, no matter
how many messages it generates.

There is another puzzle associated with entropy in our universe.
Astronomical observations do not fit well with the Second Law. On
cosmological scales, our universe seems to have become more complex with
the passage of time, not less complex. The matter in the universe
started out in the Big Bang with a very smooth distribution, and has
become more and more clumpy – more and more complex – with the passage
of time. The entropy of the universe seems to have decreased
considerably, not increased. Matter is now segregated on a huge range of
scales: into rocks, asteroids, planets, stars, galaxies, galactic
clusters, galactic superclusters and so on. Using the same metaphor as
in thermodynamics, the distribution of matter in the universe seems to
be becoming increasingly ordered. This is puzzling since the Second Law
tells us that a thermodynamic system should become increasingly
disordered.

The cause of this clumping seems to be well established: it is gravity.
A second time-reversibility paradox now rears its head. Einstein’s field
equations for gravitational systems are time-reversible. This means that
if any solution of Einstein’s field equations is time-reversed, it
becomes an equally valid solution. Our own universe, run backwards in
this manner, becomes a gravitational system that gets less and less
clumpy as time passes – so getting less clumpy is just as valid,
physically, as getting more clumpy. Our universe, though, does only one
of these things: more clumpy.

Paul Davies’s view here is that ‘as with all arrows of time, there is a
puzzle about where the asymmetry comes in … The asymmetry must therefore
be traced to initial conditions’. What he means here is that even with
time-reversible laws, you can get different behaviour by starting the
system in a different way. If you start with an egg and stir it with a
fork, then it scrambles. If you start with the scrambled egg, and very
very carefully give each tiny particle of egg exactly the right push
along precisely the opposite trajectory, then _it will unscramble_. The
difference lies entirely in the initial state, not in the laws. Notice
that ‘stir with a fork’ is a very general kind of initial condition:
lots of different ways to stir will scramble the egg. In contrast, the
initial condition for unscrambling an egg is extremely delicate and
special.

In a way this is an attractive option. Our clumping universe is like an
unscrambling egg: its increasing complexity is a consequence of very
special initial conditions. Most ‘ordinary’ initial conditions would
lead to a universe that isn’t clumped – just as any reasonable kind of
stirring leads to a scrambled egg. And observations strongly suggest
that the universe’s initial conditions at the time of the Big Bang were
extremely smooth, whereas any ‘ordinary’ state of a gravitational system
presumably should be clumped. So, in agreement with the suggestion just
outlined, it seems that the initial conditions of the universe must have
been very special – an attractive proposition for those who believe that
our universe is highly unusual, and ditto for our place within it.

From the Second Law to God in one easy step.

Roger Penrose has even quantified how special this initial state is, by
comparing the thermodynamic entropy of the initial state with that of a
hypothetical but plausible final state in which the universe has become
a system of Black Holes. This final state shows an extreme degree of
clumpiness – though not the ultimate degree, which would be a single
giant Black Hole. The result is that the entropy of the initial state is
about 10-30 times that of the hypothetical final state, making it
extremely special. So special, in fact, that Penrose was led to
introduce a new time-asymmetric law that forces the early universe to be
exceptionally smooth.

Oh, how our stories mislead us … There is another, much more reasonable,
explanation. The key point is simple: gravitation is very different from
thermodynamics. In a gas of buzzing molecules, the uniform state – equal
density everywhere – is stable. Confine all the gas into one small part
of a room, let it go, and within a split second it’s back to a uniform
state. Gravity is exactly the opposite: uniform systems of gravitating
bodies are unstable. Differences smaller than any specific level of
coarse-graining not only _can_ ‘bubble up’ into macroscopic differences
as time passes, but do.

Here lies the big difference between gravity and thermodynamics. The
thermodynamic model that best fits our universe is one in which
differences dissipate by disappearing below the level of coarse-graining
as time marches forwards. The gravitic model that best fits our universe
is one in which differences amplify by bubbling up from below the level
of coarse-graining as time marches forwards. The relation of these two
scientific domains to coarse-graining is exactly opposite when the same
arrow of time is used for both.

We can now give a completely different, and far more reasonable,
explanation for the ‘entropy gap’ between the early and late universes,
as observed by Penrose and credited by him to astonishingly unlikely
initial conditions. It is actually an artefact of coarse-graining.
Gravitational clumping bubbles up from a level of coarse-graining to
which thermodynamic entropy is, by definition, insensitive. Therefore
virtually _any_ initial distribution of matter in the universe would
lead to clumping. There’s no need for something extraordinarily special.

The physical differences between gravitating systems and thermodynamic
ones are straightforward: gravity is a long-range attractive force,
whereas elastic collisions are short-range and repulsive. With such
different force laws, it is hardly surprising that the behaviour should
be so different. As an extreme case, imagine systems where ‘gravity’ is
so short range that it has no effect unless particles collide, but then
they stick together forever. Increasing clumpiness is obvious for such a
force law.

The real universe is both gravitational and thermodynamic. In some
contexts, the thermodynamic model is more appropriate and thermodynamics
provides a good model. In other contexts, a gravitational model is more
appropriate. There are yet other contexts: molecular chemistry involves
different types of forces again. It is a mistake to shoehorn all natural
phenomena into the thermodynamic approximation or the gravitic
approximation. It is especially dubious to expect both thermodynamic and
gravitic approximations to work in the same context, when the way they
respond to coarse-graining is diametrically opposite.

See? It’s simple. Not magical at all …

Perhaps it’s a good idea to sum up our thinking here.

The ‘laws’ of thermodynamics, especially the celebrated Second Law, are
statistically valid models of nature in a particular set of contexts.
They are _not_ universally valid truths about the universe, as the
clumping of gravity demonstrates. It even seems plausible that a
suitable measure of gravitational complexity, like thermodynamic entropy
but different, might one day be defined – call it ‘gravtropy’, say. Then
we might be able to deduce, mathematically, a ‘second law of gravitics’,
stating that the gravtropy of a gravitic system _increases_ with time.
For example, gravtropy might perhaps be the fractal dimension (‘degree
of intricacy’) of the system.

Even though coarse-graining works in opposite ways for these two types
of system, both ‘second laws’ – thermodynamic and gravitic – would
correspond rather well to our own universe. The reason is that both laws
are formulated to correspond to what we actually observe in our own
universe. Nevertheless, despite this apparent concurrence, the two laws
would apply to drastically different physical systems: one to gases, the
other to systems of particles moving under gravity.

With these two examples of the misuse of information-theoretic and
associated thermodynamic principles behind us, we can turn to the
intriguing suggestion that the universe is made from information.

Ridcully suspected that Ponder Stibbons would invoke ‘quantum’ to
explain anything really bizarre, like the disappearance of the Shell
Midden People. The quantum world _is_ bizarre, and this kind of
invocation is always tempting. In an attempt to make sense of the
quantum universe, several physicists have suggested founding all quantum
phenomena (that is, everything) on the concept of information. John
Archibald Wheeler coined the phrase ‘It from Bit’ to capture this idea.
Briefly, every quantum object is characterised by a finite number of
states. The spin of an electron, for instance, can either be up or down,
a binary choice. The state of the universe is therefore a huge list of
ups and downs and more sophisticated quantities of the same general
kind: a very long binary message.

So far, this is a clever and (it turns out) useful way to formalise the
mathematics of the quantum world. The next step is more controversial.
All that really matters is that message, that list of bits. And what is
a message? Information. Conclusion: the _real_ stuff of the universe is
raw information. Everything else is made from it according to quantum
principles. Ponder would approve.

Information thereby takes its place in a small pantheon of similar
concepts – velocity, energy, momentum – that have made the transition
from convenient mathematical fiction to reality. Physicists like to
convert their technically most useful mathematical concepts into real
things: like Discworld, they reify the abstract. It does no physical
harm to ‘project’ the mathematics back into the universe like this, but
it may do philosophical harm if you take the result literally. Thanks to
a similar process, for example, entirely sane physicists today insist
that our universe is merely one of trillions that coexist in a quantum
superposition. In one of them you left your house this morning and were
hit by a meteorite; in the one in which you’re reading this book, that
didn’t happen. ‘Oh, yes,’ they urge: ‘those other universes _really do
exist_. We can do experiments to prove it.’

Not so.

Consistency with an experimental result is not a proof, not even a
demonstration, that an explanation is valid. The ‘many-worlds’ concept,
as it is called, is an interpretation of the experiments, within its own
framework. But any experiment has many interpretations, not all of which
can be ‘how the universe really does it’. For example, all experiments
can be interpreted as ‘God made that happen’, but those selfsame
physicists would reject their experiment as a proof of the existence of
God. In that they are correct: it’s just one interpretation. But then,
so are a trillion coexisting universes.

Quantum states do superpose. Quantum universes can also superpose. But
separating them out into classical worlds in which real-life people do
real-life things, and saying that _those_ superpose, is nonsense. There
isn’t a quantum physicist anywhere in the world that can write down the
quantum-mechanical description of a person. How, then, can they claim
that their experiment (usually done with a couple of electrons or
photons) ‘proves’ that an alternate you was hit by a meteorite in
another universe?

‘Information’ began its existence as a human construct, a concept that
described certain processes in communication. This was ‘bit from it’,
the abstraction of a metaphor from reality, rather than ‘it from bit’,
the reconstruction of reality from the metaphor. The metaphor of
information has since been extended far beyond its original bounds,
often unwisely. Reifying information into the basic substance of the
universe is probably even more unwise. Mathematically, it probably does
no harm, but Reification Can Damage Your Philosophy.

NINETEEN

LETTER FROM LANCRE

[image] GRANNY WEATHERWAX, KNOWN TO ALL and not least to herself as
Discworld’s most competent witch, was gathering wood in the forests of
Lancre, high in the mountains and far from any university at all.

Wood gathering was a task fraught with danger for an old lady so
attractive to narrativium. It was quite hard these days, when gathering
firewood, to avoid third sons of kings, young swineherds seeking their
destiny and others whose unfolding adventure demanded that they be kind
to an old lady who would _with a certainty_ turn out to be a witch, thus
proving that smug virtue is its own reward.

There is only a limited number of times even a kindly disposed person
wishes to be carried across a stream that they had, in fact, not
particularly desired to cross. These days, she kept a pocket full of
small stones and pine cones to discourage that kind of thing.

She heard the soft sound of hooves behind her and turned with a pine
cone raised.

‘I _warn_ you, I’m fed up with you lads always on the ear’ole for three
wishes—’ she began.

Shawn Ogg, astride his official donkey, waved his hands desperately.¹

‘It’s me, Mistress Weatherwax! I wish you’d stop doing this!’

‘See?’ said Granny. ‘You ain’t havin’ another two!’

‘No, no, I’ve just come up to deliver this for you …’

Shawn waved quite a thick wad of paper.

‘What is it?’

‘’Tis a clacks for you, Mistress Weatherwax! It’s only the third one
we’ve ever had!’ Shawn beamed at the thought of being so close to the
cutting edge of technology.

‘What’s one of them things?’ Granny demanded.

‘It’s like a letter that’s taken to bits and sent through the air,’ said
Sean.

‘By them towers I keep flyin’ into?’

‘That’s right, Mistress Weatherwax.’

‘They move ’em around at night, you know,’ said Granny. She took the
paper.

‘Er … I don’t think they do …’ Shawn ventured.

‘Oh, so I don’t know how to fly a broomstick right, do I?’ said Granny,
her eyes glinting.

‘Actually, yes, I’ve remembered,’ said Shawn quickly. ‘They move them
around _all the time_. On carts. Big, _big_ carts. They …’

‘Yes, yes,’ said Granny, sitting on a stump. ‘Be quiet now, I’m
readin’…’

The forest went silent, except for the occasional shuffling of paper.

Finally, Granny Weatherwax finished. She sniffed. Birdsong came back
into the forest.

‘Silly old fools think they can’t see the wood for the trees, and the
trees _are_ the wood,’ she muttered. ‘Cost a lot, does it, sendin’
messages like this?’

‘That message,’ said Shawn, in awe, ‘cost more than 600 dollars! I
counted the words! Wizards must be made of money!’

‘Well, I ain’t,’ said the witch. ‘How much is one word?’

‘Five pence for the sending and five pence the first word,’ said Shawn,
promptly.

‘Ah,’ said Granny. She frowned in concentration, and her lips moved
silently. ‘I’ve never been one for numbers,’ she said, ‘but I reckon
that comes to … sixpence and one half-penny?’

Sean knew his witches. It was best to give in right at the start.

‘That’s right,’ he said.

‘You have a pencil?’ said Granny. Shawn handed it over. With great care,
the witch printed some block capitals on the back of one of the pages,
and gave it to him.

‘That’s all?’ he said.

‘Long question, short answer,’ said Granny, as it if was some universal
truth. ‘Was there anything else?’

Well, there might be the money, Sean thought. But in her own localised
way, Granny Weatherwax had an academic position in these matters.
Witches took the view that they helped society in all kinds of ways
which couldn’t easily be explained but would become obvious if they
stopped doing them, and that it was worth six pence and one half-penny
not to find out what these were.

He didn’t get his pencil back.

The hole into L-space was quite obvious now. It fascinated Dr Dee, who
was confidently expecting angels to come out of it, although all it had
produced so far was an ape.

The wizards’ automatic response to any problem was to see if there was a
book about it. L-space was providing plenty of books. The difficulty,
however, was finding the ones that applied to the current history; when
you potentially know everything, it’s hard to find anything you want to
know.

‘So let’s see where we are now, shall we?’ said Ridcully, after a while.
‘The last known books in this leg of the trousers of time are due to be
written in—?’

‘About a hundred years’ time,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes,
looking at his notes. ‘Just before the collapse of civilisation, such as
it is. Then there’s fire, famine, war … all the usual stuff.’

‘Hex says people here are back to living in villages when the asteroid
hits,’ said Ponder. ‘Things are rather better on one or two other
continents, but no one even sees it coming.’

‘There have been periods like it before,’ said the Dean. ‘But as far as
we can tell, in the area where we are now there were always small
isolated groups of people who preserved what books there were.’

‘Ah. Our kind of people,’ said Ridcully.

‘Afraid not,’ said the Dean. ‘Religious.’

‘Oh dear,’ said Ridcully.

‘It’s hard to follow, but there appear to be about four main gods on
this continent,’ said the Dean. ‘Loosely associated.’

‘Big beards in the sky?’ said Ridcully.

‘A couple, yes.’

‘Clearly a morphic memory of ourselves, then,’ said Ridcully.

‘It’s hard to tell, with religions,’ said the Dean. ‘But at least they
preserved the idea that books were important and that reading and
writing were more than just a skive for people too weedy to hack at one
another with swords.’

‘Any of these religious places still around?’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes. ‘Would it be useful to drop in, explain that we are, in
fact, the creators of this universe, and put them right on a few
points?’

There was silence. And then Ponder said, in his best
talking-to-superiors voice: ‘I believe, sir, that this world is no
different from our own in its attitude to apparent human beings who turn
up and say that they’re a god.’

‘We wouldn’t get special treatment?’

‘Not of the sort you have in mind, sir, no,’ said Ponder. ‘Besides, the
places in this country appear to have been closed down by a recent
monarch. I’m not sure I understand it all, but it appears to have been
some kind of cost-cutting exercise.’

‘Downsizing of redundant units, re-allocation of staff, that sort of
thing?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘And a few murders, some torturing, that sort
of thing.’

‘But probably nothing, I’m sure, that couldn’t be sorted out by getting
everyone to go and run around in the woods shooting paint at one
another,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, innocently.

‘I shall ignore that, Runes,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now, gentlemen, we _are_
supposed to be thinkers. We haven’t got magic. We _can_ be moved in time
and space, according to Hex. And we’ve got big sticks. What _can_ we
do?’

‘A message has arrived,’ said Hex.

‘From Lancre? That’s quick!’

‘Yes. The message is unsigned. It is: THEOSTRY.’

Hex spelled it out. Ponder wrote it down in his notebook.

‘What does that mean?’ Ridcully looked up at his wizards.

‘Looks a bit religious to me,’ said the Dean. ‘Rincewind? This sort of
thing is right up your street, isn’t it?’

Rincewind looked at the word. Really, when you came to think of it, his
whole _life_ was a crossword puzzle …

‘The clacks people charge by the word, don’t they?’ he said.

‘Yes, it’s scandalous,’ said Ridcully. ‘Five pence a word, on the
long-distance trunk!’

‘And this was sent back by an old woman in Lancre, where as far as I
recall the chicken is the basic unit of currency?’ said Rincewind. ‘Not
much money for fancy messages, then. It looks to me like a simple
anagram of … THE STORY …’

‘I think it means “change the story”,’ said Ponder, without looking up.
‘At a saving of five pence.’

‘We _tried_ changing it!’ said the Dean.

‘Change it in a different way, perhaps? At a different time?’ said
Ponder. ‘We’ve got L-space. We ought to be able to get some guidance
from books written in different futures—’

‘Ook!’

‘I’m sorry, sir, but the library rules don’t apply here!’ said Ponder.

‘Look at it this way, old chap,’ said Ridcully, to the angry Librarian.
‘The rules do of course apply here, everyone can see that, and we
wouldn’t dream of asking you to interfere with the nature of causality
in the normal way of things. It’s just that the nature of causality on
this world is such that, if any libraries survive the next thousand
years without being used for lighting fires or uncomfortable toilet
paper, they’re due to be destroyed in a fireball and/or entombed in ice.
Dr Dee’s wonderful books which you like so much, with their many
delicate illustrations of completely useless magical circles and rather
interesting mathematical cyphers, will go the way of the, the …’ He
snapped his fingers. ‘Someone give me the name of something that’ll be
going completely extinct,’ he demanded.

‘People,’ said Rincewind.

There was silence.

Then the Librarian said: ‘Ook ook.’

‘He says he’s just _finding_ the books, okay?’ said Rincewind. ‘And
he’ll leave them in a pile and go out of the room and no one is to look
at them while he’s gone, because if they do _he won’t know about it_,
and if he coughs loudly before he comes back in that will only be
because he’s got a cough _and not for any other reason_, okay?’

¹ Lancre was so backward that its population of 500 had only one civil
servant, Shawn Ogg, who handled everything from national defence and tax
gathering to mowing the castle lawns, although he was allowed help with
the lawns. Lawns required care.

TWENTY

SMALL GODS

[image] ‘RELIGIOUS,’ SAID THE DEAN.

‘Oh dear,’ said Ridcully.

Discworld’s wizardry is not terribly keen on religion. Given the history
of the Discworld, this is not surprising. One big problem is that on
Discworld, gods are _known_ to be real. We list a few later on, but we
can set the scene with reference to the god of mayflies. In _Reaper
Man_, an old mayfly is telling some youngsters about this god, as they
hover just above the surface of a stream:

‘… you were telling us about the Great Trout.’

‘Ah. Yes. Right. The Trout. Well, you see, if you’ve been a good mayfly,
zigzagging up and down properly—’

‘—taking heed of your elders and betters—’

‘—yes, and taking heed of your elders and betters, then eventually the
Great Trout—’

_Clop_.

_Clop_.

‘Yes?’ said one of the younger mayflies.

There was no reply.

‘The Great Trout what?’ said another mayfly, nervously.

They looked down at a series of expanding concentric rings on the water.

‘The holy sign!’ said a mayfly. ‘I remember being told about that! A
Great Circle in the water! Thus shall be the sign of the Great Trout!’

Roundworld religions avoid the difficulty of gods that you can actually
see, or meet or be eaten by: most of the world’s current religions find
it best to go the whole hog and locate their gods in a place that is not
just outside Roundworld the planet, but outside Roundworld the universe.
This demonstrates admirable foresight, for regions impenetrable today
may be a forest of tourist hotels tomorrow. When the sky was an
unexplored and unfathomable realm, it was fashionable to locate gods in
the sky, or on top of unscalable Mount Olympus, or in the halls of
Valhalla, which amounts to much the same thing. But now all significant
mountains have been climbed, people routinely fly across the Atlantic,
five miles up, and reports of encounters with gods are few.

However, it turns out that when gods don’t manifest themselves in
physical form on an everyday basis, they acquire an impressive degree of
ineffability. On Discworld, on the other hand, it is possible to run
into gods in the street or even in the gutter. They also lounge around
in Discworld’s equivalent of Valhalla, known as Dunmanifestin, which is
situated on top of Cori Celesti, a ten mile high spire of green ice and
grey stone at the Disc’s hub.

Because of the everyday presence of tangible gods, on Discworld there’s
no problem about _belief_ in gods; it’s more a matter of how much you
disapprove of their lifestyle. On Roundworld, deities do not infest the
highways and byways – or, if they do, they do so in such a subtle guise
that the unbeliever does not notice them. It then becomes possible to
have a serious debate about belief, because that’s what most people’s
concept of God rests on.

We’ve already said that on Discworld everything is reified, and that’s
pretty much the case there with belief. Now B-space, the space of
beliefs, is huge, because people have vivid and varied imaginations and
can believe almost anything. Therefore G-space, the space of gods, is
also huge. And on Discworld, phase spaces are reified. So the Discworld
not only _has_ gods: it is infested with them. There are at least 3,000
major gods on the Disc, and scarcely a week passes without the research
theologians discovering more. Some use props like false noses to appear
in religious chronicles under hundreds of different names, which makes
it difficult to keep count accurately. Among them are Cephut, the god of
cutlery (_Pyramids_), Flatulus, god of the winds (_Small Gods_), Grune,
the god of unseasonal fruit (_Reaper Man_), Hat, the vulture-headed god
of unexpected guests (_Pyramids_), Offler, the crocodile god (_Mort_ and
_Sourcery_), Petulia, the goddess of negotiable affection (_Small
Gods_), and Steikheigel, the god of isolated cow byres (_Mort_).

Then there are the minor gods. According to _The Discworld Companion_,
‘There are billions of them, tiny bundles containing nothing more than a
pinch of pure ego and some hunger’. What they hunger for, at least to
start with, is human belief, because on Discworld the size and power of
a god is proportional to how many people believe in him, her, or it.
Things are much the same on Roundworld, in fact, because the influence
and power of a religion are proportional to the number of its adherents.
So the parallel is much closer than you might expect – which is what you
should always expect with Discworld, because it has an uncanny ability
to reflect and illuminate the human condition in Roundworld. Actually,
it’s not always human (or mayfly) belief that matters. According to
_Lords and Ladies_:

There were a number of gods in the mountains and forests of Lancre. One
of them was known as Herne the Hunted. He was a god of the chase and the
hunt. More or less.

Most gods are created and sustained by belief and hope. Hunters danced
in animal skins and created gods of the chase, who tended to be hearty
and boisterous with the tact of a tidal wave. But they are not the only
gods of hunting. The prey has an occult voice too, as the blood pounds
and the hounds bay. Herne was the god of the chased and the hunted and
all small animals whose ultimate destiny is to be an abrupt damp squeak.

When discussing religious beliefs, there is always the danger of
upsetting people. The same goes when discussing football, of course, but
people take their religion nearly as seriously. So let us begin by
acknowledging, as we did towards the end of _The Science of Discworld_,
that ‘all religions are true, for a given value of true’. We have no
wish to damage your beliefs, if you have them, or to damage your lack of
beliefs if you don’t. We don’t mind if we cause you to modify your
beliefs, though. That’s your responsibility and your choice: don’t blame
us. But we’re shortly going to have a go at science, and then we’re
going to have a go at art, so we don’t think it’s fair that religion
should get away scot-free. Anyway, whatever your beliefs, religion is an
essential feature of the human condition, and it’s one of the things
that made us what we are. We _have_ to examine it, and ask whether
Discworld puts it in a new light.

If you are religious, and you want to feel comfortable about what we’re
saying, you can always assume that we’re talking about all the _other_
religions, but not yours. Some years ago, during Ecumenical Week, Rabbi
Lionel Blue was giving the “Thought for the Day’ on BBC Radio 4, as part
of a series on tolerance. He was the first speaker in the series, and he
ended with a joke. ‘They shouldn’t have asked me to start the series,’
he said, and then explained how the later speakers from other religions
would differ from him, and how he would be tolerant about that. ‘After
all,’ he said, ‘they worship God in their way … whereas I worship Him in
His.’

If you see that this _is_ a joke, as the good rabbi did, but also
understand that outside that cosy context this is not, in a
multicultural world, a good way to think, let alone speak, then you’re
already getting to grips with the ambivalent role that religion has
played in human history. And with the mental twists and turns required
to live in a multiculture.

The big problem with religion, for a dispassionate observer, has nothing
to do with belief versus proof. If religion were susceptible to
scientific-style proofs or disproofs, there wouldn’t be a lot to argue
about. No, the big problem is the disparity between individual human
spirituality – the deep-seated feeling that we _belong_ in this awesome
universe – with the unmitigated disasters that organised, large-scale
religions have at various times, including in all probability yesterday,
inflicted on the planet and its people. This is upsetting. Religion
ought to be a force for good, and mostly it is … But when it isn’t, it
goes spectacularly and horribly wrong.

In both _Pyramids_ and _Small Gods_, we see that the real problem in
this connection is not religion as such, but priests. Priests have been
known to seize upon the spiritual feelings of individuals and twist them
into something terrible; the Quisition in _Small Gods_ was hardly an
invention. Sometimes it had been done for power, or for money. It’s even
been done because the priests really believe that this is what the god
of choice wants them to do.

Again, on an individual level many priests (or equivalent) are perfectly
nice people who do many positive things, but collectively they can have
some very negative effects. It is this mismatch that will form the core
of our discussion, because it tells us interesting things about what it
is to be human.

We are very tiny, fragile creatures inside a huge, uncontrollable
universe. Evolution has equipped us not just with eyes to see the
universe, but minds to hold little models of it within us; that is, to
tell ourselves stories about it.

We have learned, over the millennia, to exert more and more control over
our world, but we see evidence every day that our ability to control our
own lives is extremely limited. In the past, disease, death, famine and
ferocious animals were part of everyday existence. You could control
when you planted your crops, but you couldn’t control when the rains
came, and you might just get jumped by a pride of lionesses while you
were bending down to pull up weeds.

It is very uncomfortable to have to cope unaided with that kind of
world, and many people still have to do so. Everyone feels much happier
if they _believe_ that there are ways to control rain and lionesses.

Now, the human mind is an inveterate pattern-seeker, one that finds
patterns even where none exist. Every week millions of perfectly sane
people look for patterns in lottery numbers, oblivious to the absence of
any meaningful structure in random numbers. So it’s not really necessary
for the belief in an ability to control rain or lionesses to correspond
to an actual ability to do so. We all know that even when things are
under control, they can still go wrong, so our faith in our beliefs
seldom gets seriously challenged, whatever happens.

The idea that there is a Rain Goddess who decides when it will rain, or
a Lion God who can either keep you safe from lion attacks or unleash
them upon you, therefore has irresistible advantages. You can’t control
rain, and of course you can’t control a Rain Goddess either, but, with
the proper rituals, you can hope to influence her decisions. This is
where the priesthood comes in, because they can act as an intermediary
between everybody else and the gods. They can prescribe the appropriate
rituals – and, like all good politicians, they can claim the credit when
things work out and blame someone else when they go wrong. ‘What, Henry
was eaten by a lion? Well then, he must not have shown proper respect
when making his daily sacrifice to the Lion God.’ ‘How do you know
that?’ ‘Well, if he had shown proper respect, he wouldn’t have been
eaten.’ Ally that to the priests’ soon-acquired power to throw you to
the earthly representatives of the Lion God if you disagree, and you can
see that the Cult of the Lion God has an awful lot going for it.

People look at the universe around them, and they feel overawed. It’s so
big, so incomprehensible – yet it seems to dance to a tune. People who
grow up in a culture – especially one with a lengthy history and a
well-developed set of techniques for making buildings, planting crops,
hunting animals, building boats – immediately recognise that they are
faced with _something_ that is far greater than they are. Which
immediately raises all the big philosophical questions: where did it
come from, what’s it for, why am I here? And so on.

Imagine how it must have seemed to Abraham, one of the founding fathers
of Judaism. He was probably a shepherd, and he probably lived in and
around Ur, one of the first true city-states. He was surrounded by the
icons of simple-minded religions: gold-plated idols, masks, altars. He
was wildly unimpressed by them. They were trivial things, small-minded.
They did not begin to measure up to the awesomeness of the natural
world, and its stunning power. Additionally, he was aware that
‘something’ much bigger than him was running that world. It knew when to
plant crops and when to reap them, how to tell whether rain was on the
way, how to build boats, how to breed sheep (well, he would have known
that bit), how to have a prosperous life. Even more: it knew how to pass
all this knowledge on to the next generation. Abraham knew that his own
tiny intelligence was nothing compared to this majestic _something_. So
he reified it, and gave it a name: Jehovah, which means ‘that which is’.
So far, so good, but then he made a simple but intellectually fatal
error. He fell for the trap of ‘ontic dumping’.

Nice phrase. What does it mean? Ontology is the study of knowledge. Not
knowledge itself, just its study. One important way to firm up new
knowledge is to invent new words. For instance, when you make an arrow,
someone has to produce the sharp pointy thing that sits at its business
end. They chip it from flint or cast it in bronze; either way, you can’t
go on forever referring to it as ‘the sharp pointy thing on the end of
an arrow’. So you cast around for a metaphor, and you remember that the
thing that sits at the business end of a person or animal is called its
head. So you invent the term ‘arrow-head’.

You have now _dumped_ the knowledge of what the flint or bronze gadget
is into a name. We say ‘dumped’, because for most purposes you don’t
need to recall where the name came from. Arrowhead (no hyphen) has now
become a thing in its own right, not a property possessed in relation to
an arrow.

The human mind is a storytelling device, a metaphor machine: ontic
dumping comes naturally to creatures like us. It’s how our language
works, how our minds work. It’s a trick we use to simplify things that
would otherwise be incomprehensible. It is the linguistic analogue of a
political hierarchy as a way for one person to control millions. As a
side effect, ontically dumped words wallow in associations. We are
seldom conscious of these, except when we occasionally stop and ask
something like ‘What on Earth does “gossamer” mean?’ Then we rush off to
the dictionary and discover that it probably (no one ever knows these
things for sure) comes from ‘goose summer’. What’s that got to do with
fine threads that float on the breeze? Well, in a summer when geese
abound, a _good_ summer, you find a lot of these fine spider-silk
threads hanging in the air …

Subconsciously, though, we are all too aware of the dark associations
several layers down in the ontic-dumping hierarchy. So words, which
ought to be abstract labels, are smeared all over with their own (often
irrelevant) stories.

Abraham, then, was overawed by ‘that which is’, and he ontically dumped
it into a word, Jehovah. Which quickly became a thing, indeed, a
_person_. That’s another of our habits, personifying things. So Abraham
made the tiny step from ‘there is something outside us that is greater
than ourselves’ to ‘there is some_one_ outside us who is greater than
ourselves’. He had looked on the burgeoning extelligence of his own
culture, and before his eyes it turned into God.

And that made so much sense. It explained so much else. Instead of the
world being like it was for reasons he couldn’t understand – even though
that greater something clearly understood it perfectly well – he now saw
that the world was like that because God had made it that way. The rain
fell not because some tawdry idol rain-god made it fall; Abraham was too
smart to believe _that_. It fell because that awesome God whose presence
could be seen everywhere made it fall. And he, Abraham, couldn’t hope to
understand the Mind of God, so of course he couldn’t predict when it
would rain.

We have used Abraham here as a placeholder. Choose your religion, choose
your founder, adapt the story to fit. We’re not saying that we know that
the birth of Judaism happened the way we’ve just explained. That was
just a story, probably no more true than Winnie-the-Pooh and the honey.
But just as Pooh in the rabbit-hole teaches us about greed, so Abraham’s
ontic dumping points to a plausible route whereby sane, sensitive people
can be led from their own private spiritual feelings to reify a natural
process into an unfathomable Being.

This reification has had many positive consequences. People take notice
of the wishes of unfathomable, all-powerful Beings. Religious teachings
often lay down guidelines (laws, commandments) for acceptable behaviour
towards other people. To be sure, there are many disagreements between
the different religions, or between sects within a given religion, about
points of fine detail. And there are some quite substantial areas of
disagreement, such as the recommended treatment of women, or to what
extent basic rights should be extended to the infidel. On the whole,
however, there is a strong consensus in such teachings, for example an
almost universal condemnation of theft and murder. Virtually all
religions reinforce a very similar consensus of what constitutes ‘good’
behaviour, perhaps because it is this consensus that has survived the
test of time. In terms of the barbarian/tribal distinction, it is a
tribal consensus, reinforced by tribal methods such as ritual, but none
the worse for that.

Many people find inspiration in their religion, and it helps instil a
sense of belonging. It enhances their feeling of what an awesome place
the universe is. It helps them cope with disasters. With exceptions,
mainly related to specific circumstances such as war, most religions
preach that love is good and hatred is bad. And throughout history,
ordinary people have made huge sacrifices, often of their own lives, on
that basis.

This kind of behaviour, generally referred to as altruism, has caused
evolutionary biologists a great deal of head-scratching. First, we’ll
summarise how they have thought about the problem and what kinds of
conclusion they have reached. Then we’ll consider an alternative
approach, originally motivated by religious considerations, which looks
to us to be far more promising.

At first sight, altruism is not a problem. If two organisms cooperate,
by which in this context we here mean that each is willing to risk its
life to help the other,¹ then both stand to gain. Natural selection
favours such an advantage, and reinforces it. What more explanation is
needed?

Quite a lot, unfortunately. A standard reflex in evolutionary biology is
to ask whether such a situation is stable – whether it will persist if
some organisms adopt other strategies. What happens, for example, if
most organisms cooperate, but a few decide to cheat? If the cheats
prosper, then it is better to become a cheat than to cooperate, and the
strategy of cooperation is unstable and will die out. Using the methods
of mid-twentieth-century genetics, the approach pioneered by Ronald
Aylmer Fisher, you can do the sums and work out the circumstances in
which altruism is an evolutionarily stable strategy. The answer is that
it all depends upon whom you cooperate with, whose life you risk your
own to save. The closer kin they are to you, the more genes they share
with you, so the more worthwhile it is for you to risk your own safety.
This analysis leads to conclusions like ‘It is worth jumping into a lake
to save your sister, but not to save your aunt.’ And certainly not to
save a stranger.

That’s the genetic orthodoxy, and like most orthodoxies, it is believed
by the orthodox. On the other hand, though: if someone has fallen into a
lake, people do not ask ‘Excuse me, sir, but how closely related are you
to me? Are you, by any chance, a close relative?’ before diving in to
rescue them. If they are the sort of people who dive in, they do so
whoever has fallen into the lake. If not, they don’t. Mostly. A clear
exception arises when a child falls in; even if they can’t swim its
parent is then very likely indeed to plunge in to the rescue, but
probably would not do so for someone else’s child, and even less so for
an adult. So the genetic orthodoxy does have a certain amount going for
it.

Not much, though. Fisher’s mathematics is rather old-fashioned, and it
rests on a big – and very shaky – modelling simplification.² It
represents a species by its gene-pool, where all that matters is the
proportion of organisms that possess a given gene. Instead of comparing
different strategies that might be adopted by an organism, it works out
what strategy is best ‘on average’. And inasmuch as individual organisms
are represented within its framework at all, which they are only as
contributors to the gene-pool, it views competition between organisms as
a direct ‘me versus thee’ choice. A bird that eats seeds is up against a
bird that eats worms in a head-to-head struggle for survival, like two
tennis-players … and may the best bird win.

This is a bean-counting analysis performed with a bean-counting
mentality. The bird with the most beans (energy from seeds or worms,
say) survives; the other does not.

From a complex system viewpoint, evolution isn’t like that at all.
Organisms may sometimes compete directly – two birds tugging at the same
worm, for instance. Or two baby birds in the nest, where direct
competition can be fierce and fatal. But mostly the competition is
indirect – so indirect that ‘compete’ just isn’t the right word. Each
individual bird either survives, or not, against the background of
everything else, including the other birds. Birds A and B do not go
head-to-head. They compete against each other only in the sense that
_we_ choose to compare how A does with how B does, and declare one of
them to be more successful.

It’s like two teenagers taking driving tests. Maybe one of them is in
the UK and the other is in the USA. If one passes and the other fails,
then we can declare the one who has passed to be the ‘winner’. But the
two teenagers don’t even know they are competing, for the very good
reason that they’re not. The success or failure of one has no effect on
the success or failure of the other. Nevertheless, one gets to drive a
car, and the other doesn’t.

The driving-test system works that way, and it doesn’t matter that the
American test is easier to pass than the British one (as we can attest
from personal experience). Evolutionary ‘competition’ mostly works like
the driving test, but with the added complication that just occasionally
it really is more like a tennis match.

From this point of view, evolution is a complex system, with organisms
as entities. Which organisms survive to reproduce, and which do not, are
system-level properties. They depend as much on context (American
driving test versus British) as on the internal features of the
individuals. The survival of a species is an emergent feature of the
whole system, and no simple short-cut computation can predict it. In
particular, computations based on the frequencies of genes in the
gene-pool can’t predict it, and the alleged explanation of altruism by
gene-frequencies is unconvincing.

Why, then, does altruism arise? An intriguing answer was given by
Randolph Nesse in the magazine _Science and Spirit_ in 1999. In a word,
his answer is ‘overcommitment’. And it is a refreshing and much-needed
alternative to bean-counting.

We have said more than once that humans are time-binders. We run our
lives not just on what is happening now, but on what we think will
happen in the future. This makes it possible for us to commit ourselves
to a future action. ‘If you fall sick, I will look after you.’ ‘If an
enemy attacks you, I will come to your aid.’ Commitment strategies
change the face of ‘competition’ completely. An example is the strategy
of ‘mutual assured destruction’ as a deterrent for nuclear war: ‘If you
attack me with nuclear weapons, I will use mine to destroy your country
completely.’ Even if one country has many more nuclear weapons, which on
a bean-counting basis means that it will ‘win’, the commitment strategy
means that it can’t.

If two people, tribes or nations make a pact, and agree to commit
support to each other, then they are both strengthened, and their
survival prospects increase. (Provided it’s a sensible pact. We leave
you to invent scenarios where what we’ve just said is wrong.) Ah, yes,
that’s all very well, but can you trust the other to keep to the
agreement? We have evolved some quite effective methods for deciding
whether or not to trust someone. At the simplest level, we watch what
they do and compare it to what they say. We can also try to find out how
they have behaved in similar circumstances before. As long as we can get
such decisions right most of the time, they offer a substantial survival
advantage. They improve how well _we_ do, against the background of
everything else. Comparison with others is irrelevant.

From a bean-counter’s point of view, the ‘correct’ strategy in such
circumstances is to count how many beans you gain by committing
yourself, compare that to how many you gain by cheating, and see which
pile of beans is biggest. From Nesse’s point of view, that approach
doesn’t amount to a hill of beans. The whole calculation can be
sidestepped, at a stroke, by the strategy of overcommitment. ‘Stuff the
beans: I guarantee that I will commit myself to you, _no matter what_.
And you can trust me, because I will prove to you, and keep proving it
every day that we live, that I am committed at that level.’
Overcommitment beats the bean-counters hands down. While they’re trying
to compare 142 beans with 143, overcommitment has wiped the floor with
them.

Nesse suggests that such strategies have had a decisive effect in
shaping our extelligence (though he doesn’t use that word):

Commitment strategies give rise to complexities that may be a selective
force that has shaped human intelligence. This is why human psychology
and relationships are so hard to fathom. Perhaps a better understanding
of the deep roots of commitment will illuminate the relationships
between reason and emotion, and biology and belief.

Or, to put it another way: perhaps that’s what gave us an edge over the
Neanderthals. Though it would be difficult to find a scientific test for
such a suggestion.

When humans overcommit in this manner, we call it ‘love’. There is far
more to love than the simple scenario just outlined, of course, but one
feature is common to both: love counts not the cost. It doesn’t _care_
about who gets the most beans.³ And by refusing to play the
bean-counters’ game, it wins outright. Which is a very religious,
spiritual and uplifting message. _And_ sound evolutionary sense. What
more could we ask?

Quite a bit, actually, because now it all starts to get nasty. The
reasons, however, are admirable. Every culture needs its own
Make-a-Human kit, to build into the next generation the kind of mind
that will keep the culture going – and, recursively, ensure that the
next generation does the same for the one that comes after that. Rituals
fit very readily into such a kit, because it is easy to distinguish Us
from Them by the rituals that We follow but They don’t.⁴ It is also an
excellent test of a child’s willingness to obey cultural norms by
insisting that they carry out some perfectly ordinary task in an
unnecessarily prescribed and elaborate manner.

Now, however, the priesthood has got its ideological toe in the cultural
doorway. Rituals need someone to organise them, and to elaborate them.
Every bureaucracy builds itself an empire by creating unnecessary tasks
and then finding people to carry them out. A crucial task here is to
ensure that members of the tribe or village or nation really do obey the
norms and carry out the rituals. There has to be some sanction to make
sure that they do, even if they’re free-thinking types who’d rather not.
Because everything is founded on an ontically dumped concept, reference
to reality has to be replaced by belief. The less testable a human
belief is, the more strongly we tend to hold on to it. Deep down we
recognise that although not being testable means that disbelievers can’t
prove we’re wrong, it also means that we can’t prove we’re right. Since
we _know_ that we are, that sets up a tremendous tension.

Now the atrocities begin. Religion slides over the edge of sanity, and
the result is horrors like the Spanish Inquisition. Think about it for a
moment. The priesthood of a religion whose central tenet was universal
love and brotherhood systematically inflicted appalling tortures, sick
and disgusting things, on innocent people who merely happened to
disagree about _minor_ items of belief. This is a massive contradiction
and it demands explanation. Were the Inquisitors evil people who
knowingly did evil things?

_Small Gods_, one of the most profound and philosophical of the
Discworld novels, examines the role of belief in religions, and
Discworld undergoes its own version of the Spanish Inquisition. One
twist is that on Discworld, there is no lack of gods; however, few of
them have any great significance:

There are billions of gods in the world. They swarm as thick as herring
roe. Most of them are too small to see and never get worshipped, at
least by anything bigger than bacteria, who never say their prayers and
don’t demand much in the way of miracles.

They are the small gods, the spirits of places where two ant trails
cross, the gods of microclimates down between the grass roots. And most
of them stay that way.

Because what they lack is _belief_.

_Small Gods_ is the story of one rather larger god, the Great God Om,
who manifests himself to a novice monk called Brutha, in the Citadel at
the heart of the city of Kom in the lands between the deserts of Klatch
and the jungles of Howondaland.

Brutha’s attitude to religion is a very personal one. He runs his own
life by it. In contrast, Deacon Vorbis believes that the role of
religion is to run everybody else’s life. Vorbis is head of the
Quisition, whose role is ‘to do all those things that needed to be done
and which other people would rather not do’. Nobody ever interrupts
Vorbis to ask what he is thinking about, because they are scared stiff
that the answer will be ‘You’.

The Great God’s manifestation takes the form of a small tortoise. Brutha
finds this hard to believe:

I’ve seen the Great God Om … and he isn’t tortoise-shaped. He comes as
an eagle, or a lion, or a mighty bull. There’s a statue in the Great
Temple. It’s seven cubits high. It’s got bronze on it and everything.
It’s trampling infidels. You can’t trample infidels when you’re a
tortoise.

Om’s power has waned because of a lack of belief. He tests his strength
by silently cursing a beetle, but it makes no difference and the insect
plods away unperturbed. He curses a melon unto the eighth generation,
but with no evident effect. He inflicts a plague of boils on it, but all
it does is sit there, slowly ripening. He vows that when he returns to
his rightful state, the Tribes of Beetle and Melons will regret not
responding. For on Discworld, the size of a god is determined by the
strength, and amount, of belief in him (or her, or it). Om’s church had
become so corrupt and powerful that the fearful belief of the common
people had been transferred to the church itself – it’s very _easy_ to
believe in a red-hot poker – and only Brutha, simple soul, still truly
believes. No god ever dies, because there is always some tiny pocket of
belief remaining somewhere in the world, but a tortoise is pretty much
as low as you can get.

Brutha is going to become the Eighth Prophet of Om. (His grandmother
would have made it two generations before, but she was a woman, and
narrative imperative forbids female prophets.) Vorbis’s job is to ensure
that all Omnians remain true to the teachings of the Great God Om, which
is to say, they do what Vorbis tells them. The presence on the Discworld
of the god itself, causing changes to all the old teachings and
generally making trouble, is not greatly to Vorbis’s taste. Neither is
the presence of a genuine prophet. Vorbis is faced with the inquisitor’s
spiritual dilemma, and resolves it in the time-honoured manner of the
Spanish Inquisition (which, basically, is to tell oneself that torturing
people is fine because it’s for their own good, in the long run).

Brutha has a much simpler vision of Omnianism: it is something for
individuals to live by. Vorbis shows Brutha a new instrument that he has
had made: an iron turtle upon which a man or woman can be spreadeagled,
with a firebox inside. The time it takes for the iron to heat up will
give them plenty of time to reflect on their heresies. In a flash of
prophecy, Brutha realises that its first victim will be himself. And in
due course, he finds himself chained to it, and uncomfortably warm, with
Vorbis watching over him, gloating. Then the Great God Om intervenes,
dropped from the talons of an eagle.

One or two people, who had been watching Vorbis closely, said later that
there was just time for his expression to change before two pounds of
tortoise, travelling at three metres per second, hit him between the
eyes.

It was a revelation.

And that does something to people watching. For a start, they believe
with all their heart.

The Great God Om now is truly great. He rises over the Temple, a
billowing cloud shaped like eagle-headed men, bulls, golden horns, all
tangled and fused into one another. Four bolts of fire whir out of the
cloud and burst the chains that fastened Brutha to the iron turtle. The
Great God declares Brutha to be Prophet of Prophets.

The Great God gives Brutha the opportunity to make some Commandments.
The Prophet declines, having decided that ‘You should do things because
they’re right. Not because gods say so. They might say something
different another time’. And he tells Om that there will be no
Commandments unless the god agrees to obey them, too.

Which is a new thought, for a god.

_Small Gods_ has many wise words to say about religion and belief, and
it makes the point that in their own terms the Inquisitors believe they
are doing good. Fyodor Dostoyevsky’s _The Brothers Karamazov_ has a
scene in which the Grand Inquisitor encounters Christ, and explains his
point of view, including why Christ’s renewed message of universal love
couldn’t have come at a worse time and will only cause trouble. Just as
the presence of Brutha, a genuine prophet, was not at all to the liking
of Deacon Vorbis.

The Spanish Inquisitors’ justification of their actions was
philosophically convoluted. The purpose of their tortures was
straightforward: it was to save a sinner from eternal damnation. The
tortures of Hell would be far worse than anything that the Inquisitors
could inflict in this world, and they would never stop. So _of course_
they were justified in using any means whatsoever to save the poor soul
from destruction. They therefore believed that their actions were
justified, and in accordance with Christian principles. Not to act would
have been to leave the person concerned in danger of the terrible fires
of Hell.

Yes, but what if they were wrong in this belief? This is the convoluted
bit. They weren’t quite sure about their religious position. What were
the rules? If they failed to convert one tortured heretic, would the
_Inquisitors_ burn forever? If they converted one heretic, would their
souls be guaranteed a place in Heaven? The Inquisitors believed that by
inflicting pain and terror without knowing the rules, they risked their
own mortal souls. If they were wrong, it was they who would be immersed
in the eternal flames. But they were willing to risk this enormous
spiritual danger, to take upon themselves all of the consequences of
their actions, should they turn out to be wrong. See how incredibly
magnanimous they were being, even as they burned people alive and hacked
them limb from limb with red-hot knives …

Clearly something is wrong. Dostoyevsky solves his own narrative problem
by having Christ respond the way his own teachings would lead him to: he
kisses the Inquisitor. This is an answer, of a kind, but it doesn’t
satisfy our analytical instincts. There is a logical flaw in the
Inquisitors’ position: what is it?

It’s very simple. They have thought about what happens if their belief
that their actions are justified is wrong – but only within the frame of
their religion. They have not asked themselves what their position would
be if their religious beliefs are false, if there is no Hell, no eternal
damnation, no fire and brimstone. Then their justification would fall to
bits.

Of course, if their religion is wrong, then its doctrine of brotherly
love could also be wrong. It doesn’t have to be: some parts might be
fine, others nonsense. But to the Inquisitors it is all of one piece, it
stands or falls as a whole. If they are wrong about their religion, then
there is no sin, no God, and they can cheerfully torture people if they
want to. It really is a nasty philosophical trap.

This is the kind of thing that happens when a big, powerful priesthood
latches on to what started as one person’s awe at the universe. It is
what happens when people construct elaborate verbal traps for
themselves, trip over the logic, and fall headlong into them. It is
where Holy Wars come from, where neighbour can inflict atrocity on
neighbour merely because this otherwise reasonable person goes to a
church with a round tower instead of a square one. It is the attitude
that Jonathan Swift caricatured in _Gulliver’s Travels_, with the
conflict between the big-endians and the little-endians, over which end
of an egg to slice into when eating it. It is, perhaps, why so many
people today are turning to unorthodox cults in an effort to find a home
for their own spirituality. But cults run the same risk as the
Inquisition. The only safe home for one’s personal spirituality is
oneself.

¹ There doesn’t seem to be a good word for ‘to be altruistic’. To altru?

² In Fisher’s day, this simplification was a great idea, because it made
it possible to do the sums. Nowadays, it’s a bad idea, for the same
reason. You can _do_ them, but you can’t put any faith in the answers.

³ Altruism, cooperation and love among humans are not the only examples
of evolutionary overcommitment … as the Librarian well knows. A banana
is _much_ better suited to being eaten by an orangutan than it needs to
be. The rest of the fruit kingdom doesn’t come close. What’s in it for
other fruit, like the tomato, is that its seeds pass through the animal
and are dispersed, complete with a built-in packet of fertiliser. A
bean-counting tomato could reduce its level of suitability and still
ensure that its seeds, rather than those of the competition, were
propagated (the juiciest tomatoes used to be from the plants growing at
the sewage farm …). But an over-committed banana avoids the need to test
such fine points. By going over the top, losing its seed-producing
capacity entirely and relying on humans to propagate it, it ensures that
it wins so comfortably that no competitor even gets a look in.

⁴ … which can be applied so overpoweringly that the people who aren’t Us
aren’t anything. See the Imperial China parody – the Agatean Empire – in
_Interesting Times_, and a number of Roundworld cultures, too. Being
Them is quite a step up by comparison.

TWENTY-ONE

THE NEW SCIENTIST

[image] THERE WAS SOMETHING CALLED, as far as Ponder could work out,
psyence. All his expertise as a reader of invisible writings was needed
to get a grip on this idea – L-space was very hazy about the future of
this world.

‘As far as I can tell,’ he reported, ‘it’s a way of making up stories
that work. It’s a way of finding things out and thinking about them …
_psy_-ence, you see? “Psy” means “mind” and “ence” means, er, _esness_.
It works on Roundworld in the way magic does at home.’

‘Useful stuff, then,’ said Ridcully. ‘Anyone doing it?’

‘Hex is going to try to take us to what appear to be practical examples
of it,’ said Ponder.

‘Time travel _again_?’ said the Dean.

The white circle appeared on the floor …

… and on the sand, and vanished.

The wizards looked around.

‘All right, then,’ said Ponder. ‘So … dry climate, evidence of
agriculture, fields of crops, irrigation ditches, naked man turning a
handle, man staring at us, man screaming and running away …’

Rincewind stepped down into the ditch and inspected the pipe-like device
the man had been turning.

‘It’s just a water-lifting screw,’ he announced. ‘I’ve seen a lot of
them. You turn the handle, water is screwed out of the ditch, goes up
the thread inside and spills out of the top. The screw makes a sort of
line of travelling buckets inside the tube. There’s nothing _special_
about it. It’s just basic … stuff.’

‘Not psyence, then?’ said Ridcully.

‘You tell me, sir,’ said Rincewind.

‘Psyence is quite a difficult concept,’ said Ponder. ‘But I think
perhaps tinkering with this thing to make it more efficient might be
psyence?’

‘Sounds like engineering,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘That’s
where you try and make it in different ways to see if any of them are
better.’

‘The Librarian did turn up one book, very grudgingly,’ said Ponder,
pulling it out of his pocket.

It was called _Basic Science for Schools, pub. 1920_.

‘They’ve spelt it wrong,’ said Ridcully.

‘And it’s not very helpful,’ said Ponder. ‘There’s quite a lot of what
looks like alchemy. You know, mixing stuff up to see what happens.’

‘Is that all it is, then?’ said the Archchancellor, leafing through the
book. ‘Hold on, hold on. _Alchemy_ is, at bottom, all about the
alchemist. His books tell him all the stuff he’s got to do in order make
things work – what to wear, when to wear it, that sort of thing. It’s
very personal.’

‘And?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Hark at this,’ said Ridcully. ‘There’s no invocations, nothing to tell
you what to wear or what phase of the moon it should be. Nothing
important. It just says here “A clean beaker was taken. To this was
added 20 grammes” – whatever they are – “of copper sulphate” …’ He
stopped.

‘Well?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Well, who did the taking? Who added the stuff? What’s going on _here_?’

‘Perhaps it’s trying to say that it doesn’t matter who does it?’ said
Ponder. He’d already glanced at the book, and felt that the perfectly
ordinary ignorance he’d had just before opening it had been multiplied
several times by page ten.

‘Anyone can do it?’ shouted Ridcully. ‘Science is incredibly important
but _anyone_ can do it? And what’s this?’

He held the book open for all to see, his finger pointing at an
illustration. It showed a drawing of an eye, side on, to one side of the
apparatus.

‘Perhaps it’s a God of Science?’ Rincewind suggested. ‘Watching to see
who keeps taking things?’

‘So … science is done by anyone,’ said Ridcully, ‘and most of the
equipment is stolen and it’s all watched by a giant eyeball?’

As one wizard, they looked around, guiltily.

‘There’s just us,’ said Ponder.

‘Then this isn’t science,’ said Ridcully. ‘No giant eyeball visible.
Anyway, we can _see_ it isn’t science. It’s just engineering. Any bright
lad could have built it. It’s obvious how it works.’

‘How _does_ it work?’ said Rincewind.

‘Very simply,’ said Ridcully. ‘The screw goes round and round and the
water comes out here.’

‘Hex?’ said Ponder, and held out his hand. A large volume appeared in
it. It was slim, full of colourful pictures, and entitled _Great Moments
in Science_. It hadn’t escaped his notice that when Hex or the Librarian
wanted to explain something to the wizards they used a children’s book.

He flicked through the passages. Big pictures, big writing.

‘Ah,’ he said. ‘Archimedes invented this. He was a philosopher. He’s
also famous because one day, when he got into his bath, it overflowed.
It says here this gave him an idea—’

‘Buy a bigger bath?’ said the Dean.

‘Philosophers are always having ideas in the bath,’ said Ridcully. ‘All
right, if we’ve got nothing else to go on …’

‘Gentlemen, please?’ pleaded Ponder. ‘Hex, take us to Archimedes. Oh,
and give me a towel …’

‘Nice place,’ said the Dean, as the wizards sat on the sea wall, staring
out at the wine-dark sea. ‘I can feel the sea air doing me good. Anyone
for more wine?’

It had been quite an interesting day. But, Ponder asked, had it been
science? There was a pile of books beside him. Hex had been busy.

‘Must have been science,’ said Ridcully. ‘King gave your man a problem.
How to tell if the crown was all gold. He was thinking about it. Water
sloshed out of bath. He leaped out, we handed him a towel, and then he
worked out that … what was it?’

‘The apparent loss of weight of a body totally or partially immersed in
a liquid is equal to the weight of the liquid it displaces,’ said
Ponder.

‘Right. And he sees it doesn’t just work with bodies, it works with
crowns, too. A few tests, and bingo, science,’ said Ridcully. ‘Science
is just working things out. And paying attention. And hoping there’s
someone around to dry you off.’

‘I’m not … _exactly_ sure that’s all there is to it,’ said Ponder. ‘I’ve
been doing some reading and even people who do science don’t seem clear
about what it is. Look at Archimedes, for example. Is a bright idea
enough? Is it science if you just solve problems? Is that science, or
what you get before you have science?’

‘Your book of Great Moments calls him a scienter,’ Ridcully pointed.

‘Scientist,’ Ponder corrected him. ‘But I’m not sure about that, either.
I mean, that sort of thing happens a lot. People always like to believe
that what they’re doing has been hallowed by history. Supposing men
found out how to fly. They’d probably say “Early experimenters with
man-powered flight included Gudrun the Idiot, who leaped off the clock
tower in Pseudopolis after soaking his trousers in dew and gluing swan
feathers to his shirt” when in fact he wasn’t an early aviator—’

‘—he was a late idiot?’ said Rincewind.

‘Exactly. It’s like with wizards, Archchancellor. You can’t just call
yourself a wizard. Other wizards have to agree that you’re a wizard.’

‘So you can’t have just one scientist, but you can have two?’

‘It appears so, Archchancellor.’

Ridcully lit his pipe. ‘Well, mildly entertaining though it is to watch
philosophers having a bath, can we simply ask Hex to find us a scientist
who is definitely a scientist and who is regarded by other scientists as
a scientist? Then all we have to do is find out if what he’s doing is
any use to us. We don’t want to be all day at this, Stibbons.’

‘Yes, sir. Hex, we—’

They were in a cellar. It was quite large, which was just as well
because several of the wizards fell over upon landing. When they had
picked themselves up and all found the right hat, they saw …

… something familiar.

‘Mr Stibbons?’ said Ridcully.

‘I don’t understand …’ muttered Ponder. But it really _was_ an
alchemical laboratory. It smelled like one. Moreover, it looked like
one. There were the big heavy retorts, the crucibles, the fire …

‘We _know_ what alchemists are, Mr Stibbons.’

‘Yes, er, I’m sorry, sir, something seems to have gone wrong …’ Ponder
held out his hand. ‘Book, please, Hex.’

A small volume appeared.

‘“Great Men Of Science No.2”,’ Ponder read. ‘Er … if I can just take a
quick look inside, Archchancellor …’

‘I don’t think that will be necessary,’ said the Dean, who had picked up
a manuscript that was on the table. ‘Listen to this, gentlemen: “… The
spirit of this earth is ye fire in wch Pontanus digests his feculent
matter, the blood of infants in wch ye [image] & [image] bath
themselves, the unclean green Lion wch, saith Ripley, is ye means of
joyning ye tinctures of [image] and [image], the broth wch Medea poured
on ye two serpents, the Venus by meditation of wch [image] vulgar and
the [image] of 7 eagles saith Philalethes must be decocted …” yada yada
yada.’

He thumped the manuscript on to the table.

‘Genuine alchemical gibberish,’ he said, ‘and I don’t like the sound of
it. What’s “feculent” mean? Do we dare find out? I think _not_.’

‘Er … the man who apparently lived here is described as a giant amongst
scientists …’ muttered Ponder, leafing though the booklet.

‘Really?’ said Ridcully, with a dismissive sniff. ‘Hex, _please_ take us
to a _scientist_. We don’t mind where he is. Not some dabbler. We want
someone who embodies the very essence of _science_.’

Ponder sighed, and dropped the booklet on to the ground.

The wizards vanished.

For a moment the book lay on the floorboards, front cover upwards
showing its title: _Great Men of Science No. 2: Sir Isaac Newton_. Then
it, too, vanished.

There was a thunderstorm grumbling in the distance, and black clouds
hung over the sea. The wizards were back on a beach again.

‘Why is it always beaches?’ said Rincewind.

‘Edges,’ said Ridcully. ‘Things happen on the edges.’

They had been happening here. At first glance the place looked like a
shipyard that had launched its last ship. Large wooden constructions,
most of them in disrepair, littered the sand. There were a few shacks,
too, also with that hopeless look of things abandoned. There was nothing
but desolation.

And an oppressive, silence. A few sea birds cried and flew away, but
that only left the world to the sound of waves and the footfalls of the
wizards as they approached the shacks.

At which point, another sound became apparent. It was a rhythmical
cracking, a _khss … khss … khss_ behind which it was just possible to
hear voices raised in song; the singers sounded as if they were far away
and at the bottom of a tin bath.

Ridcully stopped outside the largest shack, from which the sound
appeared to be issuing.

‘Rincewind?’ he said, beckoning. ‘One for you, I think.’

‘Yes, yes, all right,’ said Rincewind, and entered with extreme caution.

It was dark inside, but he could see workbenches and a few tools, with a
forgotten look about them. The shack must have been thrown up quickly.
There wasn’t even a floor; it had been built directly on the sand.

The singing was coming from a large horn attached to a device on a
bench. Rincewind wasn’t very good at technical things, but there was a
large wheel projecting over the edge of the bench and it was turning
slowly, probably because of the small weight, attached to it by string,
which was gently descending towards the sand.

‘Is everything okay?’ said Ridcully, from outside.

‘I’ve found a kind of voice mill,’ said Rincewind.

‘That’s amazing,’ said a voice from the shadows. ‘That’s exactly what my
master called it.’

His name, he said, was Niklias the Cretan, and he was very old. And very
pleased to see the wizards.

‘I come up here sometimes,’ he said. ‘I listen to the voice mill and
remember the old days. No one else comes here. They say it’s the abode
of madness. And they are right.’

The wizards were sitting around a fire of driftwood, that burned blue
with the salt. They were tending to huddle, although they’d never admit
it. They wouldn’t have been wizards if they couldn’t sense the
strangeness in the place. It had the same depressing effect on the
senses as an old battlefield. It had ghosts.

‘Tell us,’ said Ridcully.

‘My master was Phocian the Touched,’ said Niklias, and he said it the
way of a man telling a story he’d told many times before. ‘He was a
pupil of the great philosopher Antigonus, who one day declared that a
trotting horse must at all times have at least one foot on the ground,
lest it fall over.

‘There was much debate about this and my master, being very rich and
also being a keen pupil, decided to prove that the philosopher was
correct. Oh, dreadful day! For it was then the troubles began …’

The old slave pointed to some derelict woodwork at the far end of the
beach.

‘That was our test track,’ he said. ‘The first of four. I helped him
build it with my own hands. There was a lot of interest at that time,
and many people came to watch the tests. We had hundreds, _hundreds_ of
slaves lying in rows, peering through little slits at just one tiny area
of the track each. It didn’t work. They argued about what they had
seen.’

Niklias sighed. ‘Time, said my master, was important. So I told him
about work gangs, and how songs helped us keep time. He was very excited
about that, and after some thought we built the voice mill which you
have heard. Do not be afraid. There is no magic in it. Sound makes
things shake, does it not? Sound in the big parchment horn, which I
stiffened with shellac, writes the pattern of the sounds it hears on a
warm wax cylinder. We used the weighted wheel to spin the cylinder, and
it worked quite well after we devised the rocking-trap mechanism. After
that, we used it to inscribe the perfect song, and every dawn before we
began work we would sing it with the machine. Hundreds of slaves, all
singing in perfect time on this beach. The effect was amazing.’

‘I bet it was,’ said Ridcully.

‘But still it did not work, no matter what we devised. A trotting horse
travels too fast. My master told me that we must be able to count in
tiny parts of time, and after much thinking we built the toc-toc
machine. Would you care to see it?’

It was like the voice mill, but had a much bigger wheel. And a pendulum.
And a big pointer. As the big wheel turned very slowly, smaller wheels
inside the mechanism spun in a blur, and caused a long pointer to
revolve against a white-painted wooden wall, along an arc covered in
tiny markers. The whole device was mounted on wheels, and had probably
taken four men to move.

‘I come and grease it occasionally,’ said Niklias, patting the wheel.
‘For old time’s sake.’

The wizards looked at one another with a tame surmise, which is a wild
surmise that had been thought about for a while.

‘It’s a clock,’ said the Dean.

‘Pardon?’ said Niklias.

‘We have something like them,’ said Ponder. ‘We use them for telling the
time.’

The slave looked puzzled. ‘For telling the time what?’ he said.

‘He means, so that we know what time it is,’ said Ridcully.

‘What … time … it … is …’ muttered the slave, as if trying a square
thought in a round mind.

‘What hour of the day it is,’ said Rincewind, who had run into minds
like this before.

‘But we can see the sun,’ said the slave. ‘The toc-toc mechanism does
not know where the sun is.’

‘Oh, I know … supposing a baker needed to know how long he should bake
his loaves,’ said Rincewind. ‘Well, with a clock he—’

‘How could he be a baker if he did not know how long it takes to bake a
loaf?’ said Niklias, smiling nervously. ‘No, this is a special thing,
sirs. It is not for uncursed men.’

‘But, but … you’ve got a device for recording sound, too!’ Ponder burst
out. ‘You could record the speeches of great thinkers! Why, even after
they were dead you could still hear—’

‘_Listen_ to the voice of people who aren’t there?’ said Niklias. His
face clouded. ‘Listen to the _voices_ of _dead men_?’

There was silence.

‘Do tell us more about the fascinating project to find out if a trotting
horse is ever entirely airborne,’ said Rincewind, loudly and brightly.

The sun drifted down the sky or, rather, the horizon gradually rose. The
wizards hated to think about that. You could lose your balance if you
thought about it too much.

‘… finally my master came up with a new idea,’ said Niklias.

‘Another one?’ said the Dean. ‘Was it better than his idea about
dropping a horse from a sling to see if it fell over?’

‘Dean!’ snapped Ridcully.

‘Yes, it was,’ said the old slave, who didn’t seem to notice the
sarcasm. ‘We still used the sling, but this time we put it in a very
large cart. The bottom of the cart was open, so that the horse’s hooves
just touched the ground. Are you following me? And then – and this is
the clever part, I felt – my master arranged that the cart was _pulled
by four trotting horses_.’

He sat back, giving them a pleased look, as if expecting praise.

The Dean’s expression slowly changed.

‘Eureka!’ he said.

‘I’ve got a towel in my—’ Rincewind began.

‘No, don’t you see? If the cart is being pulled forward then whatever
the horse does, the ground is disappearing _backwards_. So if you’ve got
a trained horse and you can get it to trot while it’s in the harness …
you designed the cart so that the pulling horses were offset, so that
the supported horse was trotting over unmarked sand?’

‘Yes!’ beamed Niklias.

‘And you raked the sand so that the prints showed up?’

‘Yes!’

‘Then whenever the horse touched the ground and the hoof was stationary
relative to the ground, the ground would in fact be moving, and you’d
get a smeared print, and if you carefully measured the total length of
the ground covered during the trot, and added up the total of all the
smears, and found that they were less than the total length

of the track, then—’

‘You’d be doing it wrong,’ said Ponder.

‘Yes!’ said Niklias, delightedly. ‘That’s what we found!’

‘No, of course it’s right,’ said the Dean. ‘Listen: when the hoof is
stationary—’

‘It’s moving backwards relative to the horse at the same speed that the
horse is moving forward,’ said Ponder. ‘Sorry.’

‘No, listen,’ the Dean protested. ‘It _must_ work, because when the
ground _isn’t_ moving—’

Rincewind groaned. Any minute now all the wizards would express an
opinion, and none of them would listen to anyone else. And here it came
…

‘Are you telling us parts of the horse are actually going _backwards?_’

‘Perhaps if we pulled the cart in the opposite direction—’

‘The hoof would definitely be stationary, look, because if the ground
was moving forward—’

‘It’s no different than it would be if the horse was trotting all by
itself! Look, supposing the cart and all the other horses were
invisible—’

‘You’re all wrong, you’re all wrong! If the horse was … no, wait a
moment—’

Rincewind nodded to himself. The wizards were entering the special fugue
state known as Hubbub, where no-one was going to be allowed to finish a
sentence because someone else would drown them out. It was how the
wizards decided things. In all likelihood, in this case it would result
in them deciding that the horse should, logically, end up at one end of
the beach, while all its feet were up at the other end.

‘My master Phocian said we should try it, and the hooves just left
hoofprints,’ said Niklias the Cretan, when the argument had died away
through lack of breath. ‘Then we tried moving the beach under the horse
…’

‘How?’ said Ponder.

‘We built a long flat barge, filled it full of sand and tried it in the
lagoon,’ said the slave. ‘We suspended the horse from a gantry. Phocian
felt we were getting somewhere when we moved the barge forward at twice
the speed of the horse, but the beast kept trying to keep up … and then
there was the night of the big storm and the barge was sunk. Oh, those
were a few busy months. We lost four horses and Nosios the Carpenter was
kicked in the head.’ The smile faded. ‘And then … and then …’

‘Yes?’

‘… something terrible happened.’

The wizards leaned forward.

‘… Phocian designed the fourth test. It’s over there. Not much to see
now, of course. People stole all the heavy cloth of the Endless Road and
a lot of the woodwork, too.’ The slave sighed. ‘It was Hades to build
and took many months to get right but, in short, it worked like this. We
used a huge roll of heavy white cloth, which we rolled off one huge
spindle and on to the other. Believe me, sirs, even that took some
doing, and the work of forty slaves. At the place where the horse was to
be suspended, we stretched the cloth tight over a shallow trough of
powdered charcoal, so that a little weight on the cloth would press it
down on to the stuff …’

‘Aha,’ said the Dean. ‘I think I can see this one …’

Niklias nodded. ‘My master commanded many changes before the device
functioned to his satisfaction … many gears and rollers and cranks, much
rebuilding of strange mechanisms, much profanity which, I have no doubt,
the gods noted. But finally we suspended the well-trained horse in its
sling and the rider urged it into a trot as the cloth rolled beneath.
And, yes, afterwards, oh sad that day, we measured the length of the
cloth where the horse had trotted and the length of the smears of
charcoal where a hoof had pressed on the cloth and … I hardly dare say
it, even now, the total length of the second was to the length of the
first was as four is to five.’

‘So for a fifth of the time all hooves were in the air!’ said the Dean.
‘Well done! I love a puzzle!’

‘No, it was not well done!’ shouted the slave. ‘My master ranted! We did
it again and again! And it was always the same!’

‘I don’t quite see the problem—’ Ridcully began.

‘He tore at his hair and raved at us, and most of the men fled! And then
he went and sat in the waves on the shore, and after a long while I
dared to go and speak to him, and he turned hollow eyes on me and said,
“Great Antigonus is wrong. I proved him wrong! Not by thoughtful
dispute, but by gross mechanical contrivances! I am ashamed! He is the
greatest of philosophers! He had told us that the sun goes around the
world, he had told us how the planets move! And if he is wrong, what is
right? What have I done? I have squandered the wealth of my family. What
fame is there for me now? What cursed work shall I do next? Should I
steal the colours from a flower? Shall I say to everyone, ‘What you
think is right, is not right’? Shall I weigh the stars? Shall I plumb
the utter depths of the sea? Shall I ask the poet to measure the width
of love and the direction of pleasure? What have I made of myself …” and
he wept.’

There was silence. None of the wizards moved.

Niklias settled down a little. ‘And then he bade me go back and he told
me to take the little money that was left. In the morning he was gone.
Some say he fled to Egypt, some say to Italy. But for myself, I think he
did indeed plumb, at the last, the depth of the sea. For I do not know
what he was, or what he had become. And presently people came and tore
down most of the engines.’

He shifted his weight and looked at the remains of the strange devices,
skeletal against the livid sunset. There was something wistful in his
expression.

‘No one comes now,’ he said. ‘Hardly anyone at all. This is where the
Fates struck and the gods laughed at men. But I remember how he wept.
And so I remain, to tell the story.’

TWENTY-TWO

THE NEW NARRATIVIUM

[image] THE WIZARDS HAVE BEEN TRYING to find some ‘psyence’ in
Roundworld, but it is proving even more elusive than the correct
spelling.

They are having problems because they are tackling a difficult question.
There isn’t a simple definition of ‘science’ that really captures what
it is. And it’s not the sort of thing that comes into existence at a
single place and time. The development of science was a process in which
non-science slowly _became_ science. The two ends of the process are
easily distinguished, but there’s no special place in between where
science suddenly came into being.

These difficulties are more common than you might expect. It is almost
impossible to define a concept precisely – think of ‘chair’, for
example. Is a large beanbag a chair? It is if the designer says it’s a
chair and someone uses it to sit on; it’s not if a bunch of kids are
throwing it at each other. The meaning of ‘chair’ does not just depend
on the thing to which it is being applied: it also depends on the
associated context. And as for processes in which something gradually
changes into something else … well, we’re never comfortable with those.
At what stage in its life does a developing embryo become a human being,
for instance? Where do you draw the line?

You don’t. If the end of a process is qualitatively different from the
start, then something changes in between. But it need not be at a
specific _place_ in between, and if the change is gradual, there _isn’t_
a line. Nobody thinks that when an artist is painting something, there
is one special stroke of the brush at which it turns into a picture. And
nobody asks ‘Whereabouts in that particular brushstroke does the change
take place?’ At first there is a blank canvas, later there’s a picture,
but there isn’t a well-defined moment at which one ceases and the other
begins. Instead, there is a long period of neither.

We accept this about a painting, but when it comes to more emotive
processes like embryos becoming human beings, a lot of us still feel the
need to draw a line. And the law encourages us to think like that, in
black and white, with no intervening shades of grey. But that’s not how
the universe works. And it certainly didn’t work like that for science.

To complicate things even further, important words have changed their
meaning. An old text from 1340 states that ‘God of sciens is lord’, but
there the word¹ ‘sciens’ means ‘knowledge’, and the phrase is saying
that God is lord of knowledge. For a long time science was known as
‘natural philosophy’, but by 1725 the word ‘science’ is being used in
essentially its modern form. The word ‘scientist’, however, seems to
have been invented by William Whewell in his 1840 _The Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences_ to describe a practitioner of science. But there
were scientists before Whewell invented a word for them, otherwise he
wouldn’t have needed a word, and there was no science when God was lord
of knowledge. So we can’t just go by the words people use, as if words
never change their meanings, or as if things can’t exist before we have
a word for them.

But surely science goes back a long, long way? Archimedes was a
scientist, wasn’t he? Well, it depends. It certainly looks to us, now,
as if Archimedes was doing science; indeed we have reached back into
history, picked out some of his work (especially his buoyancy principle)
and called it science. But he wasn’t doing science _then_, because the
context wasn’t suitable, and his mind-set was not ‘scientific’. We see
him with hindsight; we turn him into something we recognise, but he
wouldn’t.

Archimedes made a brilliant discovery, but he didn’t test his ideas like
a scientist would now, and he didn’t investigate the problem in a
genuinely scientific way. His work was an important step along the path
to science, but one step is not a path. And one thought is not a way of
thinking.

What about the Archimedean screw? Was that science? This wonderful
device is a helix that fits tightly inside a cylinder. You place the
cylinder at a slant, with the bottom end in water; turn the helix, and
after a while water comes out at the top. It is generally believed that
the famous Hanging Gardens of Babylon were watered using massive
Archimedean screws. How it works is more subtle than Ridcully imagines:
in particular, the screw ceases to work if it is held at too steep an
angle. Rincewind is right: an Archimedean screw is like a series of
travelling buckets, separate compartments with water in them. Because
they are separate, there is no continuous channel for the water to flow
away along. As the screw turns, the compartments move up the cylinder,
and the water has to go with them. If you hold the cylinder at too steep
a slope, all the ‘buckets’ merge, and the water no longer climbs.

The Archimedean screw surely counts as an example of ancient Greek
technology, and it illustrates their possession of engineering. We tend
to think of the Greeks as ‘pure thinkers’, but that’s the result of
selective reporting. Yes, the Greeks were renowned for their (pure)
mathematics, art, sculpture, poetry, drama and philosophy. But their
abilities did not stop there. They also had quite a lot of technology. A
fine example is the Antikythera mechanism, which is a lump of corroded
metal that some fishermen found at the bottom of the Mediterranean Sea
in 1900 near the island of Antikythera.² Nobody took much notice until
1972, when Derek de Solla Price had the lump X-rayed. It turned out to
be an orrery: a calculating device for the movements of the planets,
built from 32 remarkably precise cogwheels. There was even a
differential gear. Before this gadget was discovered, we simply didn’t
know that the Greeks had possessed that kind of technological ability.

We still don’t understand the context in which the Greeks developed this
device; we have no idea where these technologies came from. They were
probably passed down from craftsman to craftsman by word of mouth – a
common vehicle for technological extelligence, where ideas need to be
kept secret _and_ passed on to successors. This is how secret craft
societies, the best known being the freemasons, arose.

The Antikythera mechanism was Greek engineering, no question. But it
wasn’t science, for two reasons. One is trivial: technology isn’t
science. The two are closely associated: technology helps to advance
science, and science helps to advance technology. Technology is about
making things work without understanding them, while science is about
understanding things without making them work.

Science is a _general_ method for solving problems. You’re only doing
science if you know that the method you’re using has much wider
application. From those written works of Archimedes that still survive,
it looks as if his main method for inventing technology was
mathematical. He would lay down some general principles, such as the law
of the lever, and then he would think a bit like a modern engineer about
how to exploit those principles, but his derivation of the principles
was based on logic rather than experiment. Genuine science arose only
when people began to realise that theory and experiment go hand in hand,
and that the combination is an effective way to solve lots of problems
and find interesting new ones.

Newton was definitely a scientist, by any reasonable meaning of the
word. But not all the time. The mystical passage that we’ve quoted,
complete with alchemical symbols³ and obscure terminology, is one that
he wrote in the 1690s after more than twenty years of alchemical
experimentation. He was then aged about 50. His best work, on mechanics,
optics, gravity, and calculus, was done between the ages of 23 and 25,
though much of it was not published for decades.

Many elderly scientists go through what is sometimes called a
‘philosopause’. They stop doing science and take up not very good
philosophy instead. Newton really did investigate alchemy, with some
thoroughness. He didn’t get anywhere because, frankly, there was nowhere
to go. We can’t help thinking, though, that if there had been somewhere,
he would have found the way.

We often think of Newton as the first of the great rational thinkers,
but that’s just one aspect of his remarkable mind. He straddled the
boundary between old mysticism and new rationality. His writings on
alchemy are littered with cabbalistic diagrams, often copied from early,
mystical sources. He was, as John Maynard Keynes said in 1942, ‘the last
of the Magicians … the last wonder-child to whom the Magi could do
sincere and appropriate homage’. What confuses the wizards is an
accident of timing – well, we must confess that it is actually a case of
narrative imperative. Having homed in on Newton as the epitome of
scientific thinking, the wizards happen to catch him in
post-philosopausal mode. Hex is having a bad day, or perhaps is trying
to tell them something.

If Archimedes wasn’t a scientist and Newton was only one sometimes, just
what is science? Philosophers of science have isolated and defined
something called the ‘scientific method’, which is a formal summary of
what the scientific pioneers often did intuitively. Newton followed the
scientific method in his early work, but his alchemy was bad science
even by the standards of his day, when chemists had already moved on.
Archimedes doesn’t seem to have followed the scientific method, possibly
because he was clever enough not to need it.

The textbook scientific method combines two types of activity. One is
experiment (or observation – you can’t experiment on the Big Bang but
you can hope to observe traces that it left). These provide the
reality-check that is needed to stop human beings believing something
because they want it to be true, or because some overriding authority
tells them that it’s true. However, there is no point in having a
reality-check if it’s bound to work, so it can’t just be the same
observations that you started from. Instead, you need some kind of story
in your mind.

That story is usually dignified by the word ‘hypothesis’, but less
formally it is the theory that you are trying to test. And you need a
way to test it without cheating. The most effective protection against
cheating is to say in advance what results you expect to get when you do
a new experiment or make a new observation. This is ‘prediction’, but it
may be about something that has already happened but not yet been
observed. ‘If you look at red giant stars in this new way then you will
find that a billion years ago they used to …’ is a prediction in this
sense.

The most naïve description of the scientific method is that you start
with a theory and test it by experiment. This presents the method as a
single-step process, but nothing could be further from the truth. The
real scientific method is a recursive interaction between theory and
experiment, a complicity in which each modifies the other many times,
depending on what the reality-checks indicate along the way.

A scientific investigation probably starts with some chance observation.
The scientist thinks about this and asks herself ‘why did that happen?’
Or it may be a nagging feeling that the conventional wisdom has holes in
it. Either way, she then formulates a theory. Then she (or more likely,
a specialist colleague) tests that theory by finding some other
circumstance in which it might apply, and working out what behaviour it
predicts. In other words, the scientist designs an experiment to test
the theory.

You might imagine that what she should be trying to do here is to design
an experiment that will prove her theory is correct.⁴ However, that’s
not good science. Good science consists of designing an experiment that
will demonstrate that a theory is _wrong_ – if it is. So a large part of
the scientist’s job is not ‘establishing truths’, it is trying to shoot
down the scientist’s own ideas. And those of other scientists. This is
what we meant when we said that science tries to protect us against
believing what we want to be true, or what authority tells us is true.
It doesn’t always succeed, but that at least is the aim.

This is the main feature that distinguishes science from ideologies,
religions and other belief systems. Religious people often get upset
when scientists criticise some aspect of their beliefs. What they fail
to appreciate is that scientists are equally critical about their own
ideas and those of other scientists. Religions, in contrast, nearly
always criticise everything _except_ themselves. Buddhism is a notable
exception: it emphasises the need to question everything. But that may
be going too far to be helpful.

Of course, no real scientist actually follows the textbook scientific
method unerringly. Scientists are human beings, and their actions are
driven to some extent by their own prejudices. The scientific method is
the best one that humanity has yet devised for attempting to overcome
those prejudices. That doesn’t mean that it always succeeds. People,
after all, are people.

The closest that Hex manages to come to genuine science is Phocian the
Touched’s lengthy and meticulous investigation of Antigonus’s theory of
the trotting horse. We hope that you have heard of neither of these
gentlemen, since, to the best of our knowledge, they never existed. But
then, neither did the Crab Civilisation – which didn’t stop the crabs
making their Great Leap Sideways. Our story here is modelled on real
events, but we’ve simplified various otherwise distracting issues. With
which we shall now distract you.

The prototype for Antigonus is the Greek philosopher Aristotle, a very
great man who was even less of a scientist than Archimedes, whatever
anyone has told you. In his _De Incessu Animalium_ (_On the Gait of
Animals_) Aristotle says that a horse cannot bound. The bound is a
four-legged gait in which both front legs move together, then both back
legs move together. He’s right, horses don’t bound. But that is the
least interesting thing here. Aristotle explains _why_ a horse can’t
bound:

If they moved the fore legs at the same time and first, their
progression would be interrupted or they would even stumble forward …
For this reason, then, animals do not move separately with their front
and back legs.

Forget the horse: many quadrupeds do bound, so his reasoning, such as it
is, must be wrong. And a gallop is very close to a bound, except that
the left and right legs move at very slightly different times. If the
bound were impossible, then by the same token so should the gallop be.
But horses gallop.

Oops.

You can see that all this is a bit too messy to make a good story, so in
the interests of narrativium we have replaced Aristotle by Antigonus,
and credited him with a very similar theory about a long-standing
historical conundrum: does a trotting horse always have at least one
hoof on the ground? (In a trot, diagonally opposite legs move together,
and the pairs hit the ground alternately.) This is the kind of question
that must have been discussed in ale-houses and public baths since well
before the time of Aristotle, because it’s _just_ out of reach of the
unaided human eye. The first definitive answer came in 1874 when
Eadweard Muybridge (born Edward Muggeridge) used high-speed photography
to show that sometimes a trotting horse has all four feet off the ground
at once. The proportion of times this occurs depends on the speed of the
horse, and can be more than Phocian’s 20 per cent. It can also be zero,
in a slow trot, which further complicates the science. Allegedly,
Muybridge’s photographs won Leland Stanford Jr, a former Governor of
California, the tidy sum of $25,000 in a bet with Frederick MacCrellish.

But what interest us here is not the science of horse locomotion,
fascinating as that may be. It is how a scientific mind would go about
investigating it. And Phocian shows that the Greeks could have made a
lot more progress than they did, if they’d thought like a scientist.
There were no technological barriers to solving such problems; just
mental and (especially) cultural ones. The Greeks could have invented
the phonograph, but if they did, it left no trace. They could have
invented a clock, and the Antikythera mechanism shows they had the
technique, but it seems that they didn’t.

The slaves’ use of songs to keep time has its roots in later history. In
1604 Galileo Galilei used music as a way to determine short intervals of
time in some of his experiments on mechanics. A trained musician can
mentally subdivide a bar into 64 or 128 equal parts, and even untrained
people can distinguish an interval of a hundredth of a second in a piece
of music. The Greeks could have used Galileo’s method if they’d thought
of it, and advanced science by 2,000 years. And they could have invented
innumerable Heath-Robinson gadgets to study a moving horse, if it had
occurred to them. Why didn’t they? Possibly because, like Phocian, they
were too tightly focussed on specific issues.

Phocian’s approach to the trotting horse looks pretty scientific. First
he tries the direct method: he gets his slaves to observe the horse
while it is trotting, and _see_ whether it is ever completely off the
ground. But the horse is moving too fast for human vision to provide a
convincing answer. So then he goes for the indirect approach. He thinks
about Antigonus’s _theory_, and homes in on one particular step: if the
horse is off the ground, then it ought to fall over. That step can be
tested in its own right, though in a different situation: a horse slung
from a rope. (This way of thinking is called ‘experimental design’.) If
the horse does _not_ fall over, then the theory is wrong. But this
experiment is inconclusive, and even if the theory is wrong the
conclusions could still be right, so he refines the hypothesis and
invents more elaborate apparatus.⁵

We don’t want to go too deeply into details of design here. We can think
of ways to make the experiment workable, but the discussion would be a
bit technical. For example, it seems necessary to make the roll of
cloth, the Endless Road, move at a speed that is non-zero, but is also
different from the natural speed with which the horse would move if its
feet were actually hitting solid ground.⁶ You might care to think about
that, and you might even decide that we’re wrong. And you might even be
right.

We also acknowledge that Phocian’s final experiment is open to many
objections. And because the hooves of a trotting horse hit the ground in
pairs, it is actually necessary to halve the total length of the
charcoal smears before comparing them with the length of the cloth. No
matter, these are mere elaborations of what would otherwise be an
entirely transparent story: you understand what we’re getting at.

Taking all this into account, was Phocian a scientist?

No. Hex has bungled again, for despite Phocian’s years of visibly
‘scientific’ activity, he falls down in two respects. One, open to
dispute, is not his fault: he has no peers, no colleagues. There are no
other ‘scientists’ for him to work with, or to criticise him. He’s on
his own and ahead of his time.⁷ Just as there cannot be just one wizard,
there cannot be just one scientist. Science has a social dimension.⁸ The
second reason, though, is decisive. He is mortified when his work proves
that Antigonus, the great authority, is wrong.

Any genuine scientist would give their right arm to prove that the great
authority is wrong.

That’s how you make your reputation, and it’s also the most important
way to contribute to the scientific endeavour. Science is at its best
when it changes people’s minds. Very little of it does that, in part
because our minds have been built by a culture that is pervaded by
science anyway. If a scientist manages to spend 1 per cent of the time
discovering things that are not what they expected, they are doing
amazingly well. But boy, does that 1 per cent count for a lot.

This, then, is science. Questioning authority. Complicity between theory
and experiment. And being within a community of like-minded people to
question _your_ work. Preferably accompanied by a conscious awareness of
all of the above, and gratitude to your friends and colleagues for their
criticisms. And what’s the aim? To find timeless truths? No, that’s
asking too much. To stop frail humans from falling for plausible
falsehoods? Yes – including those of people who at least look and sound
just like you. And to protect people from their willingness to believe a
good story, just because it sounds right and doesn’t upset them. And to
protect them from the firm smack of authority, too.

It took humanity a long time to arrive at the scientific method. No
doubt the reason for the delay was that if you do science properly, you
often find yourself overturning entrenched, well-established beliefs,
including your own entrenched, well-established beliefs. Science is not
a belief system, but many areas of human activity are, so it is not
surprising to find that the early developers of science often found
themselves in conflict with authority. Perhaps the best-known example of
this is Galileo, who ran into trouble with the Inquisition because of
his theories about the solar system. Sometimes science exposes you to
the firm smack instead.

Science, then, is not just a body of teachable facts, and techniques. It
is a way of thinking. In science, established ‘facts’ are always open to
question,⁹ but few scientists will listen to you unless you can offer
some evidence that the old ideas are wrong. If the people who invented
those ideas are dead, then alternatives can quickly gain acceptance, and
the scientific method is working well. If the people who invented those
ideas are still around, in influential positions, then they can put a
lot of obstacles in the way of the new suggestion and the people who
proposed it. Then science is working badly, because people are behaving
like people. Even so, the new idea still can displace the accepted
wisdom. It just takes longer and needs really solid evidence.

Let’s contrast science with alternative ways of thinking about the
universe. The Discworld worldview is that the universe is run by magic:
things happen because people want them to happen. You still have to find
the right spell, or the narrative imperative has to be so strong that
those things will happen anyway even if people _don’t_ want them to, but
the universe exists in order to be there for people.

On Discworld and Roundworld, the worldview of the priesthood is similar,
but with one important difference. They believe that the universe is run
by gods (or a god): things happen because the gods want them to happen,
don’t care if they happen, or have some ineffable long-term aim in view.
However, it is possible for people to ask the priests to intercede with
the gods, on their behalf, in the hope of influencing the gods’
decisions, at least in minor ways.

The philosophical worldview, exemplified by Antigonus, is that the
nature of the world can be deduced by pure thought, on the basis of a
few deep, general principles. Observation and experiment are secondary
to verbal reasoning and logic.

The scientific worldview is that what people want has very little to do
with what actually happens, and that it is unnecessary to invoke gods at
all. Thought is useful, but empirical observations are the main test of
any hypothesis. The role of science is to help us find out how the
universe works. Why it works, or what manner of Being ultimately
controls it, if any, is not a question that science is interested in. It
is not a question to which anyone can give a testable answer.

Oddly enough, this hands-off approach to the universe has given us far
more control over it than magic, religion or philosophy have done. On
Roundworld, magic doesn’t work, so it offers no control at all. Some
people believe that prayer can influence their god, and that in this way
human beings can have some influence over the world in which they live,
like a courtier at a king’s ear. Other people have no such beliefs, and
consider the role of prayer to be largely psychological. It can have an
effect on _people_, but not on the universe itself. And philosophy has a
tendency to follow rather than lead.

Science is a form of narrativium. In fact, all four approaches to the
universe – magic, religion, philosophy and science – involve the
construction of stories about the world. Oddly enough, these different
kinds of story often have many parallels. There is a distinct
resemblance between many religious creation myths and the cosmol-ogists’
‘Big Bang’ theory of the origin of the universe. And the monotheistic
idea that there is only one God, who created everything and runs
everything, is suspiciously close to the modern physicists’ idea that
there should be a single Theory of Everything, a single fundamental
physical principle that unites both relativity and quantum mechanics
into a satisfying and elegant mathematical structure.

The act of telling stories about the universe may well have been more
important to the early development of humanity, and for the initial
growth of science, than the actual content of the stories themselves.
Accurate content was a later criterion. When we start telling stories
about the universe, the possibility arises of comparing those stories
with the universe itself, and refining how well the stories fit what we
actually see. And that is already very close to the scientific method.

Humanity seems to have started from a rather Discworldly view, in which
the world was inhabited by unicorns and werewolves and gods and
monsters, and the stories were used not so much to explain how the world
worked, but to form a crucial part of the cultural Make-a-Human kit.
Unicorns, werewolves, elves, fairies, angels, and other supernatural
were not real. But that didn’t actually matter very much: there is no
problem in using unreal things to programme human minds.¹⁰ Think of all
those talking animals.

The models employed by science are very similar in many respects. They,
too, do not correspond exactly to reality. Think of the old model of an
atom as a kind of miniature solar system, in which tiny hard particles
called electrons whirl around a central nucleus consisting of other
kinds of tiny hard particles: protons and neutrons. The atom is not
‘really’ like that. But many scientists still use this picture today as
the basis for their investigations. Whether this makes sense depends
upon what problem they are working on, and when it doesn’t make sense,
they use something more sophisticated, like the description of an atom
as a probable cloud of ‘orbitals’ which represent not electrons, but
places where electrons could be. That model is more sophisticated, and
it fits reality more closely than a mini solar system, but it still
isn’t ‘true’.

Science’s models are not _true_, and that’s exactly what makes them
useful. They tell simple stories that our minds can grasp. They are
lies-to-children, simplified teaching stories, and none the worse for
that. The progress of science consists of telling ever more convincing
lies to ever more sophisticated children.

Whether our worldview is magical, religious, philosophical or
scientific, we try to alter the universe so that we can convince
ourselves that we’re in charge of it. If our worldview is magical, we
believe that the universe responds to what we want it to do. So control
is just a matter of finding the right way to instruct the universe about
what our wishes are: the right spell. If our worldview is religious, we
know that the gods are really in charge, but we hold out the hope that
we can influence their decisions and still get what we want (or
influence ourselves to accept whatever happens …). If our worldview is
philosophical, we seldom tinker with the universe ourselves, but we hope
to influence how others tinker. And if our worldview is scientific, we
start with the idea that controlling the universe is not the main
objective. The main objective is to _understand_ the universe.

The search for understanding leads us to construct stories that map out
limited parts of the future. It turns out that this approach works best
if the map does not foretell the future like a clairvoyant, predicting
that certain things will happen on certain days or in certain years.
Instead, it should predict that if we do certain things, and set up a
particular experiment in particular circumstances, then certain things
should happen. Then we can do an experiment, and check the reasoning.
Paradoxically, we learn most when the experiment fails.

This process of questioning the conventional wisdom, and modifying it
whenever it seems not to work, can’t go on indefinitely. Or can it? And
if it stops, when does it stop?

Scientists are used to constant change, but most changes are small: they
refine our understanding without really challenging anything. We take a
brick out of the wall of the scientific edifice, polish it a bit, and
put it back. But every so often, it looks as if the edifice is actually
finished. Worthwhile new questions don’t seem to exist, and all attempts
to shoot down the accepted theory have failed. Then that area of science
becomes established (though still not ‘true’), and nobody wastes their
time trying to change it any more. There are always other sexier and
more exciting areas to work on.

Which is much like putting a big plug in a volcano. Eventually, as the
pressure builds up, it will give way. And when it does, there will be a
very big explosion. Ash rains down a hundred miles away, half the
mountain slides into the sea, everything is altered …

But this happens only after a long period of apparent stability, and
only after a huge fight to preserve the conventional ways of thinking.
What we then see is a paradigm shift, a huge change in thought patterns;
examples include Darwin’s theory of evolution and Einstein’s theory of
relativity.

Changes in scientific understanding force changes in our culture.
Science affects how we think about the world, and it leads to new
technologies that change how we live (and, when misunderstood,
deliberately or otherwise, some nasty social theories, too).

Today we _expect_ big changes during our lifetimes. If children are
asked to forecast the future, they’ll probably come up with
science-fictional scenarios of some kind – flying cars, holidays on
Mars, better and smaller technology. They are probably wrong, but that
doesn’t matter. What matters is that today’s children do not say:
‘Change? Oh, everything will probably be pretty much the same. I’ll be
doing just the same things that my Mum and Dad do now, and their Mum and
Dad did before them.’ Whereas even fifty years ago, _one grandfather_,
that was generally the prevailing attitude. Ten or eleven grandfathers
ago, a big change for most people meant using a different sort of
plough.

And yet … Underneath these changes, people are still people. The basic
human wants and needs are much as they were a hundred grandfathers ago,
even if we ever do take holidays on Mars (all that beach … ). The
realisation of those needs may be different – a hamburger instead of a
rabbit brought down with an arrow you made yourself – but we still want
food. And companionship and sex and love and security and lots of other
familiar things.

The biggest significant change, one that really does alter what it is
like to be human, may well be modern communication and transportation.
The old geographical barriers that kept separate cultures separate have
become almost irrelevant. Cultures are merging and reforming into a
global multiculture. It’s hard to predict what it will look like,
because this is an emergent process and it hasn’t finished emerging yet.
It may be something quite different from the giant US shopping mall that
is generally envisaged. That’s what makes today’s world so fascinating –
and so dangerous.

Ultimately, the idea that we are controlling our universe is an
illusion. All we know is a relatively small number of tricks, plus one
great generic trick for generating more small tricks. That generic trick
is the scientific method. It pays off.

We have also the trick of telling stories that work. By this stage in
our evolution, we are spending most of our lives in them. ‘Real life’ –
that is, the real life for most of us, with its MOT tests and paper
wealth and social systems – is a fantasy that we all buy into, and it
works precisely because we all buy into it.

Poor old Phocian tried hard, but found that the old stories weren’t true
when he hadn’t quite got as far as constructing a new one. He performed
a reality check, and found that there wasn’t one – at least, not one
he’d like to believe was real. He suddenly saw a universe with no map.
We’ve got quite good at mapping, since then.

¹ Other recorded spellings are cience, ciens, scians, scyence, sience,
syence, syens, syense, scyense. Oh, and science. Naturally, the wizards
have invented another one.

² So called because it is near the larger island of Kythera. This is
‘anti’=near, not ‘anti’ = opposed to. Though, metaphorically, the two
usages are close. Think about the meaning of ‘opposed to’. And
‘against’.

³ The symbols have the following meanings: © = Sun, i = Moon, § =
Mercury.

⁴ On TV news we are repeatedly told about scientists who are ‘proving’ a
theory. Either the people making the programme were trained in media
studies and have no idea of how science works, or they were trained in
media studies and don’t _care_ how science works, or they’re still
wedded to the old-fashioned meaning of the verb ‘prove’, which means to
test. As in the phrase ‘the exception proves the rule’, which made
perfect sense when it was first stated – the exception casts doubt on
the rule by ‘testing’ it _and finding it inadequate_ – and makes no
sense at all when it is used today to justify ignoring awkward
exceptions.

⁵ In this, he is acting _exactly_ like a scientist. Especially if it’s
very expensive apparatus.

⁶ Gait analysts do put horses on treadmills. However, the closest
parallel to Phocian’s experiment is the widespread use of soot-covered
cylinders to record insect movements.

⁷ There have been many others. One of our favourites is Sir George
Cayley, the early nineteenth-century aeronautical pioneer. He did
sterling work on wing design, invented the light-tension wheel
(effectively the modern bicycle wheel) as a light wheel for aircraft,
and would almost certainly have achieved powered flight if only anyone
had got around to inventing the internal combustion engine. He didn’t go
mad, but he did experiment with an engine that ran on gunpowder.

⁸ We’re in danger of heading into postmodernism here, which is a very
bad idea when discussing an ancient Greek, and even more so when he’s
fictitious. Suffice it to say that science also involves stringent
reality-checks, and therefore is not a _purely_ social activity.

⁹ Some current controversies, all ‘respectable’ – that is, with serious
evidence for both sides – include: Is new variant CJD related to BSE
(mad cow disease)? Has the human sperm count fallen? Was the Moon formed
by a Mars-sized body hitting the Earth? Will the universe ever stop
expanding? How are birds related to dinosaurs? Is quantum mechanics
really random? Was there ever life on Mars? Is the triple-alpha process
evidence that our universe is special? And is there anything that does
_not_ contain nuts?

¹⁰ Yes, in some cases, it is claimed, werewolves and vampires have their
roots in rare human medical conditions. Now try angels and unicorns …

TWENTY-THREE

PARAGON OF ANIMALS

[image] THE WIZARDS WENT BACK TO DEE’S HOUSE in sombre mood, and spent
the rest of the week sitting around and getting on one another’s nerves.
In ways they couldn’t quite articulate, they’d been upset by the story.

‘Science is dangerous,’ said Ridcully at last. ‘We’ll leave it alone.’

‘I think it’s like with wizards,’ said the Dean, relieved to be having a
conversation again. ‘You need to have more than one of them, otherwise
they get funny ideas.’

‘True, old friend,’ said Ridcully, probably for the first time in his
life. ‘So … science is not for us. We’ll rely on common sense to see us
through.’

‘That’s right,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Who cares about
trotting horses anyway? If they fall over they’ve only got themselves to
blame.’

‘As a basis for our discussion,’ said Ridcully, ‘let us agree on what we
have discovered so far, shall we?’

‘Yes. It’s that whatever we do, the elves always win,’ said the Dean.

‘Er … I know this may sound stupid …’ Rincewind began.

‘Yes. It probably will,’ said the Dean. ‘You haven’t been doing very
much since we got back, have you?’

‘Well, not really,’ said Rincewind. ‘Just walking around, you know.
Looking at things.’

‘Exactly! You haven’t read a single book, am I correct? What good is
walking around?’

‘Well, you get exercise,’ said Rincewind. ‘And you notice things.
Yesterday the Librarian and I went to the theatre …’

They’d got the cheapest ticket, but the Librarian paid for two bags of
nuts.

They’d found, once they had settled into this period, that there was no
point in trying to disguise the Librarian too heavily. With a jerkin, a
big floppy hood and a false beard he looked, on the whole, an
improvement on most of the people in the cheap seats, the cheap seats in
this case being so cheap they consisted, in fact, of standing up. The
cheap feets, in fact.

The play had been called _The Hunchback King_, by Arthur J. Nightingale.
It hadn’t been very good. In fact, Rincewind had never seen a
worse-written play. The Librarian had amused himself throughout by
surreptitiously bouncing nuts off the king’s fake hump. But people had
watched it in rapt fascination, especially the scene where the king was
addressing his nobles and uttered the memorable line: ‘Now is the
December of our discontent – _I want whichever bastard is doing that to
stop right now_!’

A bad play but a good audience, Rincewind mused after they had been
thrown out. Oh, the play was a vast improvement on anything the Shell
Midden Folk could have dreamed up, which would have to be called ‘If
We’d Invented Paint We Could Watch It Dry’, but the lines sounded wrong
and the whole thing was laboured and had no flow. Nevertheless, the
faces of the watchers had been locked on the stage.

On a thought, Rincewind had put a hand over one eye and, concentrating
fearfully, surveyed the theatre. The one available eye watered
considerably but _had_ revealed, up in the expensive seats, several
elves.

They liked plays, too. Obviously. They wanted people to be imaginative.
They’d given people so much imagination that it was constantly hungry.
It would even consume the plays of Mr Nightingale.

Imagination created monsters. It made you afraid of the dark, but not of
the dark’s real dangers. It peopled the night with terrors of its own.

So, therefore …

Rincewind had an idea.

‘I think we should stop trying to influence the philosophers and
scholars,’ he said. ‘People with minds like that believe all sort of
things all the time. You can’t stop them. And science is just too
_weird_. I keep thinking of that poor man—’

‘Yes, yes, yes, we’ve been through all this,’ said Ridcully wearily.
‘Get to the _point_, Rincewind. What have you got to say that’s new?’

‘We could try teaching people art,’ said Rincewind.

‘Art?’ said the Dean. ‘Art’s for slackers! That’d make things _worse!_’

‘Painting and sculpture and theatre,’ Rincewind went on. ‘I don’t think
we should try to stop what the elves began. I think we ought to
encourage it as much as possible. Help the people here to get really
good at imagining things. They’re not quite there yet.’

‘But that’s just what the elves want, man!’ snapped Ridcully.

‘Yes!’ said Rincewind, almost drunk with the novelty of having an idea
that didn’t include running away. ‘Let’s _help_ the elves! Let’s help
them to destroy themselves.’

The wizards sat in silence. Then Ridcully said: ‘What are you talking
about?’

‘At the theatre I saw lots of people who wanted to believe that the
world is different from the reality they see around them,’ said
Rincewind. ‘We could—’ He sought a way into Ridcully’s famously
hard-to-open mind. ‘Well, you know the Bursar?’ he said.

‘A gentlemen of whose existence I am aware on a daily basis,’ said
Ridcully gravely. ‘And I’m only glad that this time we’ve left him with
his aunt.’

‘And you remember how we cured his insanity?’

‘We didn’t cure it,’ said Ridcully. ‘We just doctored his medicine so
that he permanently _hallucinates_ that he is sane.’

‘Exactly! You use the disease as the cure, sir! We made him _more_
insane, so now he’s sane again. Mostly. Apart from the bouts of
weightlessness, and, er, that business with the—’

‘Yes, yes, all right,’ said Ridcully. ‘But I’m still waiting for the
_point_ of this.’

‘Are you talking about fighting like those monks up near the Hub?’ said
the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Skinny little chaps who can throw big men
through the air?’

‘Something like that, sir,’ said Rincewind.

Ridcully prodded Ponder Stibbons.

‘Did I miss a bit of conversation there?’ he said.

‘I think Rincewind means that if we take the elves’ work even further
it’ll somehow end up defeating them,’ said Ponder.

‘Could that work?’

‘Archchancellor, I can’t think of anything better,’ said Ponder. ‘Belief
doesn’t have the same power on this world as it does on ours, but it is
still pretty strong. Even so, the elves _are_ here. They are a fixture.’

‘But we know they … sort of _feed_ on people,’ said Rincewind. ‘We want
them to go away. Um … and I’ve got a plan.’

‘_You_ have a plan,’ said Ridcully, in a hollow voice. ‘Does anyone
_else_ have a plan? Anyone? Anyone? Someone?’

There was no reply.

‘The play I saw was awful,’ said Rincewind. ‘These people might be a lot
more creative than the Shell Midden People, but they’ve still got a long
way to go. My plan … well, I want us to move this world into the path of
history that contains someone called William Shakespeare. And absolutely
does not contain Arthur J. Nightingale.’

‘Who’s Shakespeare?’ said Ponder.

‘The man,’ said Rincewind, ‘who wrote this.’ He pushed a battered
manuscript across the table. ‘Read it out from where I’ve marked it,
will you?’

Ponder adjusted his spectacles, and cleared his throat.

‘What a piece of work is, er, this is awful handwriting …’

‘Let me,’ said Ridcully, taking the pages. ‘You don’t have the voice for
this sort of thing, Stibbons.’ He glared at the paper, and then: ‘What a
piece of work is a man! How noble in reason … how infinite in faculty …
in form and moving, how express and admirable! In action, how like an
angel! In apprehension, how like a god! The beauty of the world, the
paragon of animals …’

He stopped.

‘And this man lives _here_?’ he said.

‘Potentially,’ said Rincewind.

‘This man stood knee deep in muck in a city with heads on spikes and
wrote _this_?’

Rincewind beamed. ‘Yes! In his world, he is probably the most
influential playwright in the history of the species! Despite requiring
a lot of tactful editing by most directors, because he had his bad days
just like everyone else!’

‘By “his world” you mean—?’

‘Alternate worlds,’ muttered Ponder, who was sulking. He’d once played
the part of Third Goblin in a school play and felt that he had rather a
good speaking voice.

‘You mean he should be here but ain’t?’ Ridcully demanded.

‘I think he should be here but can’t be,’ said Rincewind. ‘Look, these
aren’t the Shell Midden people, it’s true, but artistically they’re
pretty low down the scale. Their theatre is awful, they haven’t got any
decent artists, they can’t carve a decent statue – this world isn’t what
it should be.’

‘And?’ said Ponder, still smarting.

Rincewind signalled to the Librarian, who ambled around the table
handing out small, green, cloth-bound books.

‘This is _another_ play he will write … is … writing … wrote … will have
written,’ he said. ‘I think you’ll agree that it could be very important
…’

The wizards read it. They read it again. They had a huge argument, but
there was nothing unusual about that.

‘It’s an astonishin’ play, in the circumstances,’ said Ridcully,
eventually. ‘And some of it is a bit familiar!’

‘Yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘And I think that’s because he’ll write it after
listening to you. We need him to. This is a man who can tell the
audience, _tell_ the audience that they’re watching a bunch of actors on
a tiny stage and _then_ make them see a huge battle, right there in
front of their eyes.’

‘Did I miss that bit?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, leafing
hurriedly through the pages.

‘That’s in another play, Runes,’ said Ridcully. ‘Do try to keep up.
Well, Rincewind? Let’s assume, shall we, that we’re going along with
your plan? We have to make sure this man exists here and writes this
play in this world, do we? _Why_?’

‘Can I leave that to Stage Two, sir? It will become obvious, I hope, but
you never know if there are elves listening.’

The wizards were automatically impressed by the idea that this was a
two-stage plan, but Ridcully persisted: ‘I put it to you, Rincewind,
that this is exactly the kind of play elves would _want_ him to write.’

‘Yes, sir. That’s because they’re stupid. Not like you, sir.’

‘We have Hex’s computational power,’ said Ponder. ‘It should be possible
to make sure he turns up in this world, I think.’

‘Um … yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘But first we have to make the world the
kind he _can_ turn up in. This may take a bit of work. Some travelling
may be involved. Back in time … for thousands of years …’

Firelight glowed off the cave walls. The wizards sat on one side of the
fire, on the big rock ledge overlooking the scrubland. The Stinky Cave
People sat on the other.

The cave people watched the wizards with something like awe, but only
because they’d never seen people eat like that. It was Ridcully who’d
suggested that people bearing huge amounts of food are welcome
practically anywhere, but the other wizards considered that this was
just an excuse for him to make a crude but serviceable bow and go and
happily slaughter quite a lot of wildlife.

The wildlife was mostly leftovers now. The wizards moaned about the lack
of onions, salt, pepper, garlic and, in Rincewind’s case, potatoes, but
there was certainly no lack of meat.

They’d spent two weeks doing this, in caves across the continent. They
were getting used to it, although bowel movements were becoming a
problem.

Rincewind, however, was sitting some way from the fire with Burnt Stick
Man.

Being good at languages was, here, not such an important skill as simply
making yourself understood. But Burnt Stick Man was a quick study, and
Rincewind already had several weeks of practice. While the dialogue took
place in inflections and emphasis based upon the syllable ‘grunt’ aided
by gestures, the translation went like this:

‘Okay, so you’ve mastered the idea of charcoal, but may I draw your
attention to these pigments I have here? They’re Whiiite, very simple,
Redddd, like blood, and Yell-low, like, er, egg yolks. Cluck cluck
aaargh cackle? And this fourth colour is some sickly brown ochre I found
which we’ll call for the moment “baby poo”.’

‘With you so far, Pointy Hat Man.’ This was conveyed by an enthusiastic
nod.

‘So here’s the big tip. Not many people know this,’ said Rincewind. ‘You
take your animals, right, which you’ve already been trying to draw, well
done, but you what we call “colour” them. You have to work hard on this
bit. A chewed piece of wood will be your friend here. See how by a
careful mixture of tints I’m giving it a certain, oh, _je ne sais
quoi_?’

‘Hey, that looks like a _real_ buffalo! Scary stuff!’

‘It gets better. May I have the charcoal? Thank you. What’s this?’

Rincewind carefully drew another figure.

‘Man with big [expressive gesture]?’ said Burnt Stick Man.

‘What? Oh. Sorry, I got that wrong … I mean _this_ …’

‘Man with spear! Hey, he’s throwing it at the buffalo!’

Rincewind smiled. There had been a few false starts over the last couple
of weeks, but Burnt Stick Man had exactly the right sort of mind. He was
impressively simple, and people with truly simple minds were very rare.

‘I knew there was something intelligent about you the moment I saw you,’
he lied. ‘Maybe it was the way your brow ridge came around the corner
only two seconds before the rest of you did.’ Burnt Stick Man beamed.
Rincewind went on: ‘And the question you’ve got to ask yourself now is:
how _real_ is this picture, really? And where was the picture before I
drew it? What is going to happen now it’s on the wall?’

The wizards watched from the circle of firelight.

‘Why’s the man poking at the picture?’ said the Dean.

‘I think he’s learnin’ about the power of symbols,’ said Ridcully. ‘Hey,
if anyone doesn’t want any more ribs I’ll finish ’em.’

‘No barbecue sauce,’ moaned the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘How long
before there’s an agricultural revolution?’

‘Could be a hundred thousand years, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘Perhaps a lot
more.’ The Lecturer in Recent Runes groaned and put his head in his
hands.

Rincewind came and sat down. The rest of Burnt Stick Man’s clan, greasy
to the eyebrows with free food, watched him cautiously.

‘That seemed to go well,’ he said. ‘He’s definitely working out the link
between pictures in his head and real life. Any potatoes yet?’

‘Not for thousands of years,’ groaned the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Damn. I mean, here’s meat. There should be potatoes. How hard is that
for a world to understand? Vegetables are less _complicated_ than meat!’
He sighed, and then stared.

Burnt Stick Man, who had been staring motionless at the drawing for a
while, ambled to another rock wall and picked up a spear. He squinted at
the buffalo drawing, which did indeed seem to move as the firelight
flickered, paused, and then hurled the spear at it and ducked behind a
rock.

‘Gentlemen, we’ve found our genius and we’re on our way,’ said
Rincewind. ‘Ponder, can Hex move some buffaloes to right outside this
cave at dawn tomorrow?’

‘That shouldn’t be hard, yes.’

‘Good.’ Rincewind looked around. ‘And there’s quite a few tall trees
here, too. Which is just as well.’

It was dawn, and the tree was full of wizards.

The ground below was full of buffalo. Hex had moved an entire herd,
which was now more or less penned in amongst the rocks and trees.

And, on the rocky ledge in front of the bewildered, panicking creatures,
Burnt Stick Man and the other hunters stared down in disbelief.

But only for a moment. They had spears, after all. They got two of the
creatures before the rest thundered away. And, afterwards, people were
certainly showing Burnt Stick Man a bit of respect.

‘All right, I think I see what you’re getting at,’ said Ridcully, as the
wizards very carefully climbed down.

‘Well, _I_ don’t,’ said the Dean. ‘You’re teaching them basic magic. And
that doesn’t work here!’

‘They _think_ it does,’ said Rincewind.

‘But that was only because we helped them! What’re they going to do
tomorrow when he does another painting and no buffaloes turn up?’

‘They’ll think it’s experimental error,’ said Rincewind. ‘Because it’s
so _sensible_, isn’t it? You draw a magic picture, and the real thing
turns up! It’s _so_ sensible that they’ll take a lot of convincing that
it doesn’t work. Besides …’

‘Besides what?’ said Ponder.

‘Oh, I was thinking that if Burnt Stick Man is _really_ sensible he’ll
keep an eye on the movements of the local animals and make sure he
paints his pictures at the right time.’

Some more weeks went by. There were lots of men like Burnt Stick Man.

And even Red Hands Man …

‘… so,’ said Rincewind, as he sat by the river, squeezing the clay,
‘it’s quite easy to make _other_ things out of it than snakes.’

‘Snakes are easy,’ said Red Hands Man, stained with ochre to the
armpits.

‘And there’s lots of snakes around here, is there?’ said Rincewind. It
looked like prime snake country.

‘Lots of them.’

‘Ever wondered why? You play around rolling snakes out of clay, and
snakes turn up?’

‘_I’m_ making the snakes?’ said Red Hands Man. ‘How can that be? I was
only doing it because of the enjoyable tactile sensations!’

‘It’s an intriguing thought, isn’t it?’ said Rincewind. ‘But it’s okay,
I won’t tell anyone else.’

Red Hands Man stared at his hands as if examining two lethal
instruments. He seemed a little less bright than Burnt Stick Man.

‘Ever thought about making something else?’ said Rincewind. ‘Something
more edible?’

‘Fish are good to eat,’ Red Hands Man conceded.

‘Why not try making a clay fish?’ said Rincewind, with a sincere smile.

Next morning, it rained trout.

In the afternoon a very happy Red Hands Man, now hailed as the saviour
of the clan that lived among the reeds, made a model of a big fat woman
out of clay.

The wizards discussed the moral implications of allowing Hex to rain
enormous women over a wide area. The debate took a long time, with many
pauses for inward reflection, but at last the Dean was voted down. It
was agreed that if you gave a man a fat woman, he’d just have a fat
woman for a day, but if you helped a man become a very important man
because he had the secret of buffaloes or fish, he could get himself as
many fat women as he wanted.

Next morning they went forward a thousand years in time. There was
hardly an unadorned cave on the continent, and quite a lot of fat women.

They went further …

In a forest clearing, a man was making a god out of wood. Either it
wasn’t a very good carving, or it was a good carving but an ugly god.

The wizards watched.

And the Queen of the Elves appeared, with a couple of elves in
attendance. They were male or, at least, appeared male. The queen was
angry.

‘What are you doing, wizards?’ she snapped.

Ridcully gave her a nod of annoying friendliness. ‘Oh, just a little …
what are we calling it, Stibbons?’

‘A sociological experiment, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder.

‘But you’ve been teaching them art! And sculpture!’

‘And music,’ said Ridcully happily. ‘The Lecturer in Recent Runes is
rather good with a lute, it turns out.’

‘Only in a very amateur way, I’m afraid,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes, blushing.

‘Dashed easy to make, a lute,’ said Ridcully. ‘You just need a tortoise
shell and some sinews and you’re well away. I myself have been renewing
my acquaintance with the penny whistle of my boyhood, although I fear
that the Dean’s expertise with the comb-and-paper leaves something to be
desired …’

‘And _why_ are you doing all this?’ the queen demanded.

‘Are you angry? We thought you’d be pleased,’ said Ridcully. ‘We thought
you _wanted_ them this way. You know – imaginative.’

‘_He_ created music?’ said the Queen, glaring at the Lecturer in Recent
Runes, who gave her an embarrassed wave.

‘Oh, no, I assure you,’ he said. ‘Er, they’d worked up to, you know,
basic percussion, the conch shell and so on, but it was all rather dull.
We just helped them along a bit.’

‘Gave them a few tips,’ said Ridcully, jovially.

The Queen’s eyes narrowed. ‘Then you are _planning_ something!’ she
said.

‘Aren’t they doing well?’ said Ridcully. ‘Look at that chap over there.
_Visualisin_’ a god. One with woodworm and knotholes, but pretty good
all the same. Quite complex mental processes, really. We thought that if
you want people with wild imaginations, then we’d help them to be really
good at it. They’ll fill the world with dragons and gods and monsters
for you. You _want_ that.’

The Queen gave him another look, and it was the look of a person with no
sense of humour who nevertheless suspects that there’s some joke
somewhere that is on them.

‘Why should you help us?’ she said. ‘You told me to consume your
underthings!’

‘Well, it’s not as though this world is important enough to fight over,’
said Ridcully.

‘One of you isn’t here,’ said the Queen. ‘Where is the stupid one?’

‘Rincewind?’ said the Archchancellor, with an innocent air that would
not have fooled any human for a moment. ‘Oh, he’s doing pretty much the
same thing, you know. Helping people imagine things. Which, I think, is
what you want.’

TWENTY-FOUR

THE EXTENDED PRESENT

[image] ART? IT LOOKS SUPERFLUOUS. Few of the stories we tell about
human evolution, the _Homo sapiens_ bit, see music or art as being
integral to the process. Oh, it often comes in as a kind of
epiphenomenon, as evidence of how far we’d got: ‘Just look at those
wonderful cave paintings, statuettes, polished jewellery and ornaments!
That shows that our brain was bigger/better/more loving/nearer to that
of the Lecturer in Recent Runes …’ But art has not been portrayed as a
necessary part of the evolution that made us what we are; nor has music.

So why are Burnt Stick Man and Red Hands Man dabbling in art, and why
does Rincewind want to encourage them?

We’ve been told the story of The Naked Ape doing sex, we’ve had
Gossiping Apes and Privileged Apes, various kinds of apes becoming
intelligent on the seashore or running down gazelles on the savannah.
We’ve had lots of development-of-intelligence stories culminating in
Einstein; we have given you the privilege/puberty ritual/selection story
that culminates in Eichmann and Obedience to Authority; but we have not
presented a version of our evolution whose culmination is Fats Waller,
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, or even Richard Feynman on the bongo drums.

Well, now we will.

Music is an important part of most people’s lives, and this is
continually reinforced by film and television. Background music is
constantly informing us of imminent screen events, of tension and
release, of characters’ thoughts and, particularly, of their emotional
states. It is very difficult for anyone brought up in the muzak
environment of the twentieth century to imagine what the ‘primitive’
state of human musical sense can have been.

When we listen to the music of far peoples, of ‘primitive’ tribes, we
have to appreciate that their music has had as long to develop as
Beethoven, and much longer than jazz. Like the amoeba or the chimpanzee,
their music is contemporary with us, not ancestral, though it sounds
primitive, just as they _look_ primitive. And we wonder whether we are
listening for the right things in the right way. It is tempting to think
that popular music, going for instant appeal, might illuminate whatever
inner structure of our brains ‘fits’, and is satisfied by, a musical
theme. If we were orthodox geneticists, we might have said ‘genes for
music’ there. But we didn’t.

In recent years, neuroscientists have developed techniques that allow us
to look at what brains do when we carry out various actions. In
particular, they reveal which bits of brain are active when we enjoy
music. At the moment, with the terribly poor spatial and temporal
resolution that we get from MRI and PET scans, all we can see is that
music excites the right side of the brain. If we are familiar with the
music, then the brain’s memory-regions turn on, and if we analyse it or
try to pick up the lyrics, then the verbal-analysis parts light up. And
opera picks up both of them, which could be why Jack likes it: he enjoys
having his brain put through a blender.

Our affinity with music starts early. In fact, there’s a lot of evidence
that if we hear music in the womb, then it can affect our later musical
preferences. Psychologists play music to babies as soon as they start
kicking, and have discovered that they can categorise it, like we adults
do, and into the same categories. If we play them Mozart, they stop
kicking for a bit, about fifteen minutes; then they start kicking again,
perhaps with some relation to the rhythm. The evidence is claimed, but
it isn’t very persuasive. If we then continue with a different bit of
Mozart, or Haydn or Beethoven, then the kicking pauses, but it resumes
after a minute or so. The Beatles, Stravinsky, sacred chants, or New
Orleans jazz, make them pause for much longer, ten minutes or so.

Playing the same pieces months later reveals that the baby has some
memory of the style as well as of the instruments. Apparently, a quartet
by Mozart triggers recognition of the ‘Mozart’ style just as effectively
as a Mozart symphony. Our brains have sophisticated music-recognition
modules, and we can use them before we speak, indeed before we are born.
Why?

We’re looking for the essence of music – as if we _knew_ what the
essence of sex was for the Naked Ape, or the essence of obedience for
Eichmann – or come to that, what it means to be the most
intelligent/extelligent creature on Roundworld. What we want is a story
that puts the arts, and music, into an explanation of How We Got Here,
and why we waste all that money on the arts faculties of universities.
Why is Rincewind so keen to bring art and music to our ancestors?

It was very common in the early years of the twentieth century to copy
the music of ‘primitive’ tribes. Examples include Stravinsky’s _Rite of
Spring_ and Manuel de Falla’s _Fire Dance_, where the musical style was
thought to give a primitive authenticity. People thought that Bronislaw
Malinowski’s tales of the Trobriand Islanders, with their amazing lack
of the civilised sexual repressions so publicised by Freud in Viennese
society, showed that Natural Humans were happier and less corrupt, and
that their music – for flutes and drums – conveyed their state of
innocence more effectively than classical symphonies. Jazz, invented by
supposedly ‘primitive’ black musicians down in New Orleans, had
resonances that seemed natural, animal (and, for certain Christians,
evil). It was almost as if music were a language, parallel to the words,
developed in different societies with different emphases, and more
revealing of the nature of the people than other aspects of their
culture.

This is the way the media have played it, and like the Flintstones and
Stone Age society, we have an overlay of this outlook that it’s very
difficult to get away from. Margaret Mead, who was taken for a ride by
her native girl friend and told the resulting story in _Coming of Age in
Samoa A Psychological Study of Primitive Youth for Western
Civilization_, romanticised their music and dances in exactly this way.
When Hollywood needs to show the primitive-but-spiritual nature of
Indian braves, cannibal tribes in Borneo, or Hawaiian indigenes, it
shows us the rain dance, the marriage music, and the hula girls. When we
go to these places, the locals put on these dances for us because it
brings in tourist money. The complicity between muzak, hula dances,
opera and background music in Hollywood films has completely buried our
abilities to sort out what constitutes ‘natural’ art or music.

However, that’s not what we want anyway. ‘Natural’ is an illusion.
Desmond Morris made a lot of money selling paintings done by apes. The
apes clearly enjoyed the whole business, and so did Morris, and
presumably so did the people who bought them and looked at them in art
galleries. There is also an elephant that paints, and signs its
paintings. Sort of. There’s a segment of modern painting whose
philosophy seems to relate to this quest for the genuinely primitive.
One side is the tackiest, painting by children, which clearly
demonstrates the stepwise effects of the culture – the extelligence – on
their burgeoning intelligence. To our inexpert eyes, though, these
paintings demonstrate only the enormous gratification achieved by some
parents in response to minimal effort by their children.

Another aspect, more intellectual, is the move towards apparently
real-world constraints, like cubism, or attempts to develop styles that
force us to re-evaluate how we see, like Picasso’s profile faces but
with the two eyes on one side. There is a very common modern form that
arranges rectangles of paper with different textures, or sprays sparse
paint droplets according to some minimal rule, or scatters charcoal dust
on a bold swirly bright oil-paint background and then combs it into the
texture and pattern of the whole canvas. All of these can give pleasure
to the eye. Why? How do they differ from natural objects, some of which
also give considerable pleasure?

Now we want to make a giant leap and bring Mozart, jazz, paper-texture
and charcoal-swirl oil paintings into the same frame. We think that this
frame naturally includes ancient cave-paintings, which we know to be
early, so have more claim to being genuinely primitive, if we could only
look at them with the eyes and minds of viewers contemporary with the
artist. The same problem occurs with Shakespeare, too: we no longer have
the ears or minds – the extelligence – of the first Elizabethan age.

We have to be more than a bit scientific here. We have to consider how
we perceive light, sound, touch – what our sense organs tell us. For a
start, they don’t, and this is the first lesson. In his book
_Consciousness Explained_, Daniel Dennett is very critical of the
Cartesian Theatre¹ picture of consciousness. In this picture, we imagine
ourselves sitting in a little theatre in our minds, where our eyes and
ears pipe in pictures and sounds from the outside world. In school we
all learned that the eye is like a camera, and that a picture of the
world is imaged in the plane of the retina, as if that was the difficult
bit. No, the difficult bit _starts_ there, with different elements of
that picture taking different routes into different parts of the brain.

When you see a moving red bus, the features ‘moving’, ‘red’ and ‘bus’
are separated fairly early in the brain’s analysis of the scene … and
they don’t just get put together again to synthesise your mental
picture. Instead, your picture is synthesised from lots of clues, lots
of bits, and nearly all of what you ‘see’ as you look around the room is
only ‘there’ in your brain. It’s not at all like a TV picture. It is not
picked up instantly and updated, but nearly all of that ‘detailed’
surround is invented as a kind of wallpaper around the little bit that
has your attention. Most of the details are not present _as such_ in
your mind at all, but that’s the illusion that your mind presents to
you.

When we see a painting … except, again, we don’t. There are several ways
to convince people that they invent what they ‘see’, that perception is
not simply a copy of the eye’s image on the retina. There is, for
example, a blind spot on the retina where the optic nerve leaves it.
This is big. It’s as big as 150 full moons (that’s not a misprint: a
hundred and fifty). Not that the moon is as big, to our eyes, as we
usually think – and certainly not as big as Hollywood repeatedly shows
it. We ‘see’ the full moon as much bigger than it ‘is’ (sorry, we have
to use some trick to separate what’s in your mind from reality out
there),especially when it’s near the horizon. The best way to appreciate
that is to demonstrate to yourself that the moon’s image is the size of
your little fingernail at arm’s length. Hold out your arm, and the tip
of your littlest finger more than covers the moon. So the blind spot is
smaller than our description may have suggested, but it’s still a big
chunk of the retinal image. We don’t notice any hole in the picture we
get of the outside world, though, because the brain fills in its best
estimate of what’s missing.

How does the brain _know_ what’s missing from right in front? It
doesn’t, and it doesn’t have to: that’s the point. Although ‘fills in’
and ‘missing’ are traditional terms in this area of science, they are,
again, misleading. The brain doesn’t _notice_ that anything is missing,
so there isn’t a gap to be filled in. The neurons of the visual cortex,
the part of the brain that analyses that retinal image into a scene that
we can recognise and label, are wired up in elaborate ways, which
reinforce certain perceptual prejudices.

For example, experiments with dyes that respond to the brain’s
electrical signals show that the first layer of the visual cortex
detects lines – edges, mostly. The neurons are arranged in local
patches, ‘hypercolumns’, which are assemblies of cells that respond to
edges aligned along about eight different directions. Within a
hypercolumn, all connections are inhibitory, meaning that if one neuron
thinks it has seen an edge pointing along the direction to which it is
sensitive, then it tries to stop the other neurons from registering
anything at all. The result is that the direction of the edge is
determined by a majority vote. In addition, there are also long-range
connections between hypercolumns. These are excitatory, and their effect
is to bias neighbouring hypercolumns to perceive the natural
continuation of that edge, even if the signal they receive is too weak
or ambiguous for them to come to that conclusion unaided.

This bias can be overcome by a sufficiently strong indication that there
is an edge pointing in a different direction; but if the line gets
faint, or part of it is missing, the bias automatically makes the brain
respond as if the line was continuous. So the brain doesn’t ‘fill in’
the gaps: it is set up not to notice that there are gaps. That’s just
one layer of the visual cortex, and it uses a rather simple trick:
extrapolation. We have little idea, as yet, of the inspired guesswork
that goes on in deeper layers of the brain, but we can be sure that it’s
even more clever, because it produces such a vivid sensation of a
complete image.

What about hearing? How does that relate to sound? The standard
lie-to-children about vision is that the cornea and lens make a picture
on the retina, and that allegedly explains vision. Similarly, the
corresponding lie-to-children about hearing centres on a part of the ear
called the cochlea, whose structure allegedly explains how you analyse
sound into different notes. In cross-section, the cochlea looks like a
sliced snail-shell, and according to the lie-to-children, there are
hair-cells all the way down the spiral attached to a tuned membrane. So
different parts of the cochlea vibrate at different frequencies, and the
brain detects which frequency – which musical note – it is receiving, by
being told which part of the membrane is vibrating. In support of this
explanation, we are told a rather nice story about boiler-makers, whose
hearing was often damaged by the noise in the factories where they
worked. Supposedly, they could hear all frequencies except ones near the
frequency that was most common in making boilers. So just one place on
their cochlea was burnt out, and the rest worked OK. This proved, of
course, that the ‘place’ theory of hearing was correct.

Actually, this story tells you only how the ear can discriminate notes,
_not_ how you hear the noise. To explain that, it is usual to invoke the
auditory nerve, which connects the cochlea to the brain. However, there
are as many connections, or more, that go in the other direction, from
brain to cochlea. _You have to tell your ear what to hear_.

Now that we can actually look at what the cochlea does when it’s
hearing, we find not one place vibrating for each frequency, but more
like twenty. And these places move as you flex your outer ear. The
cochlea is phase-sensitive, it can discriminate the kind of difference
that makes an ‘ooh’ sound different from an ‘eeh’ at the same frequency.
This is the kind of change to the sound that you make when you change
the shape of your mouth as you speak. And surprise, surprise, that’s
just the difference that the cochlea – after your outer ear and your own
particular auditory canal, and your own particular eardrum and those
three little bones – can best discriminate. A recording from someone
else’s eardrum, played back up against yours, makes little sense. You
have learned your own ears. But you have taught them, too.

There are about seventy basic sounds, called phonemes, that _Homo
sapiens_ uses in speech. Up to about six months old, all human babies
can discriminate all of these, and an electrode on the auditory nerve
gives different patterns of electrical activity for each. At about six
to nine months old, we start talking scribble, and it very soon becomes
English scribble or Japanese scribble. By a year old the Japanese ear
cannot distinguish ‘l’ from ‘r’, because both phonemes send the same
message from cochlea to brain. English babies can’t discriminate the
different clicks of the !Kung San, nor the differences between the
distinct ‘r’s in French. So our sense organs do _not_ show us the real
world. They stimulate our brains to produce, to invent if you like, an
internal world made of the counters, the Lego™ set, that each of us has
built up as we mature.

Such apparently straightforward abilities as vision and hearing are far
more complicated than we usually imagine. Our brains are much more than
just passive recipients. An awful lot is going on inside our heads, and
we project some of it back into what we think is the outside world. We
are conscious only of a small part of its output. These hidden depths
and strange associations in the brain may well be responsible for our
musical sensibilities.

Music exercises the mind; it’s a form of play. It seems probable that
our liking for music is linked to other things than our ears. In
particular, the brain’s motor activity may be involved, as well as its
sensory activity. In primitive tribes and advanced societies, music and
dance often go together. So it may be the combination of sound and
movement that appeals to our brains, rather than one or the other. In
fact, music may be an almost accidental by-product of how our brains put
the two together.

Patterns of movement have been common in our world for millions of
years, and their evolutionary advantage is clear. The pattern ‘climb a
tree’ can protect a savannah ape from a predator, and the same goes for
the pattern ‘run very fast’. Our bodies surround us with linked patterns
of movement and sound. Like music, they are patterns in time, rhythms.
Breathing, the heartbeat, voices in synch with lips, loud bangs in synch
with things hitting other things.

There are common rhythms in the firing of nerve cells and the movement
of muscles. Different gaits – the human walk and run, the
walk-trot-canter-gallop of the horse – can be characterised by the
timing with which different limbs move. These patterns relate to the
mechanics of bone and muscle, and also to the electronics of the brain
and the nervous system. So Nature has provided us with rhythm, one of
the key elements of music, as a side-effect of animal physiology.

Another key element, pitch and harmony, is closely related to the
physics and mathematics of sound. The ancient Pythagoreans discovered
that when different notes sounded harmonious, there was a simple
mathematical relationship between the lengths of the strings that
produced them, which we now recognise as a relation between their
frequencies. The octave, for example, corresponds to a doubling of
frequency. Simple whole number ratios are harmonious, complicated
relationships are not.

One explanation for this is purely physical. If notes with frequencies
that are not related by simple whole numbers are sounded together, they
interfere with each other to produce ‘beats’, a jarring low-frequency
buzz. Sounds that make the sensory hairs in our ears vibrate in simple
patterns are necessarily harmonious in the Pythagorean sense, and if
they aren’t, we hear the beats and they have an unpleasant effect. There
are many mathematical patterns in musical scales, and they can be
traced, to a great extent, to the physics of sound.

Overlaid on the physics, though, are cultural fashions and traditions.
As a child’s hearing develops, its brain fine-tunes its senses to
respond to those sounds that have cultural value. This is why different
cultures have different musical scales. Think of Indian or Chinese music
compared to European; think of the changes in European music from
Gregorian chants to Bach’s _Well-Tempered Clavier_.

This is where the human mind is situated: on the one hand, subject to
the laws of physics and the biological imperatives of evolution; on the
other, as one small cog in the great machine of human society. Our
liking for music has emerged from the interaction of these two
influences. This is why music has clear elements of mathematical
pattern, but is usually at its best when it throws the pattern book away
and appeals to elements of human culture and emotion that are – for now,
at least – beyond the understanding of science.

Let’s come down to Earth and ask a simpler question. The wells of human
creativity run deep, but if you take too much water from a well it runs
dry. Once Beethoven had written the opening bars of his Symphony in C
Minor – _dah-dah-da DUM_ – that was one less tune for the rest of us.
Given the amount of music that has been composed over the ages, maybe
most of the best tunes have been found already. Will the composers of
the future be unable to match those of the past because the world is
running out of tunes?

There is, of course, far more to a piece of music than a mere tune.
There is melody, rhythm, texture, harmony, development … But even
Beethoven knew you can’t beat a good tune to get your composition off
the ground. By ‘tune’ we mean a relatively short section of music – what
the _cognoscenti_ call a ‘motif’ or a ‘phrase’, between one and thirty
notes in length, say. Tunes are important, because they are the building
blocks for everything else, be it Beethoven or Boyzone. A composer in a
world that has run out of tunes is like an architect in a world that has
run out of bricks.

Mathematically, a tune is a sequence of notes, and the set of all
possible such sequences forms a phase space: a conceptual catalogue that
contains not just all the tunes that have been written, but all the
tunes that could ever be written. How big is T-space?

Naturally, the answer depends on just what we are willing to accept as a
tune. It has been said that a monkey typing at random would eventually
produce _Hamlet_, and that’s true if you’re willing to wait a lot longer
than the total age of the universe. It’s also true that along the way
the monkey will have produced an incredible amount of airport novels.²
In contrast, a monkey pounding the keys of a piano might actually hit on
a reasonable tune every so often, so it looks as though the space of
acceptably tuneful tunes is a reasonable-sized chunk of the space of
_all_ tunes. And at that point, the mathematician’s reflexes can kick
in, and we can do some combinatorics again.

To keep things simple, we’ll consider only European-style music based on
the usual twelve-note scale. We’ll ignore the quality of the notes;
whether played on a piano, violin, or tubular bells, all that matters is
their sequence. We’ll ignore whether the note is played loudly or
softly, and – more drastically – we’ll ignore all issues of timing.
Finally, we’ll restrict the notes to two octaves, 25 notes altogether.
Of course all these things are important in real music, but if we take
them into account their effect is to _increase_ the variety of possible
tunes. Our answer will be an underestimate, and that’s all to the good
since it will still turn out to be _huge_. Really, _really_ huge, right?
No – bigger than _that_.

For our immediate purposes only, then, a tune is a sequence of 30 or
fewer notes, each chosen from 25 possibilities. We can count how many
tunes there are in the same way that we counted arrangements of cars and
DNA bases. So the number of sequences of 30 notes is 25 × 25 × … × 25,
with 30 repetitions of that 25. Computer job, that: it says that the
answer is

867361737988403547205962240695953369140625

which has 42 digits. Adding in the 29-note tunes, the 28-note ones, and
so on we find that T-space contains roughly nine million billion billion
billion billion tunes. Arthur C. Clarke once wrote a science fiction
story about the ‘Nine billion names of God’. T-space contains a million
billion billion billion tunes for every one of God’s names. Assume that
a million composers write music for a thousand years, each producing a
thousand tunes per year, more prolific even than The Beatles. Then the
total number of tunes they will write is a mere trillion. This is such a
tiny fraction of that 42-digit number that those composers will make no
significant inroads into T-space at all. Nearly all of it will be
unexplored territory.

Agreed, not all of the uncharted landscape of tune-space consists of
_good_ tunes. Among its landmarks are things like 29 repetitions of
middle C followed by F sharp, and

BABABABABABABABABABABABABABABA,

which wouldn’t win any prizes for musical composition. Nevertheless,
there must be an awful lot of good new tunes still waiting to be
invented. T-space is so vast that even if good-tune-space is only a
small proportion of it, good-tune-space must also be vast. If all of
humanity had been writing tunes non-stop since the dawn of creation, and
went on doing that until the universe ended, we still wouldn’t run out
of tunes.

It is said that Johannes Brahms was walking along a beach with a friend,
who was complaining that all of the good music had already been written.
‘Oh, look,’ said Brahms, pointing out to sea. ‘Here comes the last
wave.’

Now we come to what may well be the chief function of art and music for
us – but not for edge people or chimpanzees, and probably not for
Neanderthals. This, if we are right, is what Rincewind has in mind.

When we look at a scene we _see_ only the middle five to ten degrees of
arc. We invent the rest all around that bit, and we give ourselves the
illusion that we’re seeing about ninety degrees of arc. We perceive an
extended version of the tiny region that our senses are detecting.
Similarly, when we hear a noise, especially a verbal noise, we set it in
a context. We rehearse what we’ve heard, we anticipate what’s coming,
and we ‘make up’ an extended present, as if we’d heard the whole
sentence in one go. We can hold the entire sentence in our heads, as if
we heard it _as_ a sentence, and not one phoneme at a time.

This is why we can get the words of songs completely wrong and not
realise it. The _Guardian_ newspaper ran an amusing section on this
habit, with examples such as ‘kit-kat angel’ for ‘kick-ass angel’ – bit
of a generation gap there, which underlines how our perceptions are
biased by our expectations. Ian recalls an Annie Lennox song that really
went ‘a garden overgrown with trees’, but always sounded like ‘I’m
getting overgrown with fleas’.

Holding a whole sentence, or a musical phrase, in our minds is what we
do with time when we watch a TV or a cinema-screen. We run the frames
together into a series of scenes, as well as making up all the spatial
stuff that we’re not actually looking at. The brain has so many tricks
that its owner is not conscious of: as you sit there in the cinema, your
eyes are flicking from place to place on the screen, as they are doing
while you read these words. But you turn off your perceptions as your
eyes move, and re-jig your invented image so that your new retinal image
is consistent with the previous version. That’s why you get seasick or
car-sick: if the outside image jumps about and isn’t where you expect it
to be, then that upsets your sense of balance.

Now think about a piece of music. Isn’t the construction of an extended
present precisely the exercise that your brain ‘wants’ to do with a
series of sounds, but without the complication of the meanings? As soon
as you get used to the style of a particular kind of music, you can
listen to it and grasp whole themes, tunes, developments, even though
you’re hearing only one note at a time. And the instrumentalist who is
making the noise is doing the same kind of thing. His brain has
expectations of what the music should sound like, and he fulfils those.
To some extent.

So it seems that our sense of music may be tied to a sense of an
extended present. Some possible scientific evidence for this proposition
has recently been found by Isabelle Peretz. In 1977 she identified a
condition called ‘congenital amusia’. This is not tone-deafness, but
_tune_-deafness, and it should give us some insight into how normal
people recognise tunes, by showing how that goes wrong. People with this
condition cannot recognise tunes, not even ‘Happy Birthday To You’, and
they have little or no sense of the difference between harmony and
dissonance. There is nothing physically wrong with their hearing,
however, and they _were_ exposed to music as children. They are
intelligent and have no history of mental illness. What seems to be
wrong is that when it comes to music, they have no sense of an extended
present. They cannot tap their feet in rhythm. They have no idea what a
rhythm is. Their sense of timing is impaired. Mind you, so is their
sense of pitch; they cannot distinguish sounds separated by an interval
of two semitones – adjacent white keys on a piano. So the lack of an
extended present is not the only problem. Congenital amusia is rare, and
it affects males and females equally. Its sufferers have no difficulty
with language, however, suggesting that the brain’s music modules, or at
least those affected by amusia, differ from its language modules.

The same kind of interpretational step takes place in the visual arts,
too. When you look at a painting – a Turner, say – it evokes in you a
variety of emotions, perhaps nostalgia for a nearly forgotten holiday on
a farm. That may give you a little burst of endorphins, chemicals in the
brain that create a sense of well-being, but presumably you’d get much
the same from a photograph or even a verbal description or a bit of
pastoral poetry. The Turner painting does more than that, perhaps
because it can be more sentimental, more idealised than a photo, however
idyllic. It evokes the memory on a more personal level.

What about other kinds of painting: the paper textures, the charcoal
smear? Jack went to an art gallery, as an innocent in art appreciation,
and tried the ‘context’ trick that any novice is always told to try.
You’re supposed to sit in front of the picture, and gaze at it, and kind
of sink into it and feel how it relates to its surroundings. The result
was instructive. When he paid attention to a small part of the canvas,
he found that he could match the context that his brain had invented
with the one that the artist had actually provided. The charcoal smear
was particularly good for this: each part implied something of the
pattern of the whole. However, there were intriguing differences from
part to part. There were variations on the theme, as in music,
superimposed on the brain’s expectations. Jack’s brain enjoyed comparing
the picture that it was inventing with the progressively different one
that the artist was forcing his brain to construct.

Art goes back a long, long way; the further back we look, the more
controversial the evidence is. The ‘Dame à la Capuche’, a 1.5-inch
(3.5-cm) high statuette of a woman, exquisitely carved from mammoth-tusk
ivory, is 25,000 years old. Some of the most elegant cave paintings,
with simple, sweeping lines that depict horses, bison and the like, are
found in the Grotte Chauvet in France, and in 1995 they were dated at
32,000 years old. The oldest art that undoubtedly _is_ art is about
38,000 years old: beads and pendants, found in Russia. And some beads
made from ostrich egg shells in Kenya, which may be 40,000 years old.

Further back, it all gets less certain. Ochre is a common pigment in
rock drawings, and ochre ‘crayons’ found in Australia are 60,000 years
old. There is a lump of rock from the Golan Heights, whose natural
crevices have been worn deeper, presumably by a human hand wielding
another lump of rock. It bears a vague resemblance to a woman, and it is
about 250,000 years old. But maybe it’s just a lump of rock that a child
idly scratched, and the shape is accidental.

Imagine yourself in the cave as the artist paints bison on the wall. He
(or she?) is creating a picture for your brain that differs
progressively from the one that your brain expects: ‘Now let’s put a
female woolly rhinoceros under him …’ There have been several ‘artists’
on television, doing precisely that trick. Rolf Harris was surprisingly
good at drawing animal sketches before your very eyes. And they were
iconic animals, too: sly fox and wise owl.

There it all is, tied up in a bundle. Our perceptions are tied to our
expectations, and we do not segregate sensations from each other, or
from memories. They are all played off against each other in the
seclusion of our minds. We absolutely do not program our brains with
direct representations of the real world. From the beginning we’re
instructing our brains what to make of what we see, hear, smell and
touch. We put spin on everything, and we anticipate, compare and
contrast, construct lengths of time from successive instants, construct
areas of picture from focused observation. We’ve been doing this, layer
upon layer, taking more subtle nuances from conversation, from flirting
glances, to ‘Will she come to look like her mother does now?’
assessments of the real world, all the time.

That’s what our brains do, and what edge people’s brains don’t.

We suspect that Neanderthals didn’t do that kind of thing much, either,
because there’s an alternative, and it’s consistent with their cultural
torpor. The alternative is to live in a world that you’ve set up to
ensure that nothing is unexpected. All the events follow your
expectations from previous events, so habit engenders security. Such a
world is very stable, and that means it doesn’t _go_ anywhere much. Why
try to leave the Garden of Eden? Gorillas don’t.

Tribal life could be like that for _Homo sapiens_, except that reality
always intrudes, for instance those barbarians up on the hill. But
Neanderthals, maybe, weren’t afflicted by barbarians. Certainly, nothing
seems to have provoked big changes in their lifestyles, even over tens
of thousands of years. Art does provoke changes. It makes us look at the
world in new ways. The elves like that, it gives new ways for them to
terrify people. But Rincewind has seen further than the elves are
capable of seeing, and he’s worked out where art takes us. Where? You’ll
soon find out.

¹ Cartesian, again, because of Descartes, whose _cogito ergo sum_ and
mind-is-different-stuff-from-matter still influence pop philosophy.

² Though Ian has a friend, an engineer named Len Reynolds, whose cat
managed to type ‘FOR’ into his computer by walking on the keyboard.
Three more letters, ‘MAT’, and the cat would have wiped his hard disc.

TWENTY-FIVE

PARAGON OF VEGETABLES

[image] THE WINE-DARK SEA lapped the distant shore. Nice country,
Rincewind thought. A bit like Ephebe. Grapes, olives, honey and fish and
sunshine.

He turned back to his group of proto-actors. They were having difficulty
grasping the idea.

‘Like the priests do in the temples?’ said a man. ‘Is that what you
mean?’

‘Yes, but you can … expand the idea,’ said Rincewind. ‘You can pretend
to _be_ the gods. Or anything else.’

‘Wouldn’t we get into trouble?’

‘Not if you did it respectfully,’ said Rincewind. ‘And people would …
sort of _see_ the gods. Seeing is believing, eh? Besides, children
pretend to be other people all the time.’

‘But that is childish play,’ said the man.

‘People might pay to see you,’ said Rincewind. There was an immediate
increase in interest. Human-shaped creatures were the same everywhere,
Rincewind thought; if you got money for doing it, it had to be worth
doing.

‘Just gods?’ said a man.

‘Oh, no. Anything at all,’ said Rincewind. ‘Gods, demons, nymphs,
shepherds—’

‘No, I couldn’t do a shepherd,’ said the possible thespian. ‘I’m a
carpenter. I don’t know shepherding.’

‘But you know godding?’

‘Well, yeah, that’s just … thundering and shouting and that kind of
thing. Being a decent shepherd takes years of work.’

‘You can’t expect us to act like _people_,’ said another man. ‘That
wouldn’t be right.’

‘It’s not respectful,’ said a third man.

Yes, we mustn’t change things, thought Rincewind. The elves like that
thinking. We mustn’t change things, in case they end up different. Poor
old Phocian …

‘Well, can you do trees?’ he said. He was vaguely aware that actors
warmed up by pretending to be trees, amongst other things, and this
presumably prevented wooden performances.

‘Trees are all right,’ said a man. ‘They’re quite magical. But it
wouldn’t be respectful to our friend over there to ask us to be
carpenters.’

‘All right, then, trees. That’s a start. Now, stretch out your—’

There was a roll of thunder and a goddess appeared. Her hair was in
golden ringlets, her white robe flapped in the breeze, and there was an
owl on her shoulder. The men ran away.

‘Well, my little trickster,’ said the goddess, ‘and what are you
teaching them?’

Rincewind clapped a hand over one eye for a moment.

‘That owl’s _stuffed_,’ he said. ‘You can’t fool me! No animals stay
around elves without going mad!’

The image of the goddess wavered as the Queen tried to maintain control,
but glamour is susceptible to disbelief.

‘Oh, so brave?’ she said, defaulting to her usual appearance.

She turned at a creaking noise behind her. The Luggage had tiptoed up
and opened its lid.

‘That doesn’t frighten _me_,’ she said.

‘Really? It frightens me,’ said Rincewind. ‘Anyway, I’m simply brushing
up their acting skills. Absolutely no problem there, is there? You
should _love_ these people. There’s dryads, nymphs, satyrs, centaurs,
harpies and big giants with one eye, unless that’s a joke about sex I
haven’t fully understood yet. They believe in all of them and none of
them exist! Except possibly the one-eyed giant, that one’s a bit of a
puzzler.’

‘We have seen their performances,’ said the Queen. ‘They are not
respectful of their gods.’

‘But seeing is believing, isn’t it? And you must admit, they’ve got a
lot of gods. Dozens.’

He gave her a friendly smile, while hoping that she was keeping away
from the local cities. They had a lot of temples in them, and shrines
all over the place, but they also had a number of men who, while taking
care to invoke the gods on every occasion, then appeared to expound
ideas that didn’t seem to have any place for gods in them, except as
observers or decoration. But the actors liked playing gods …

‘You’re up to something,’ said the Queen. ‘Everywhere we look, you
wizards are teaching people art. Why?’

‘Well, it’s a rather drab planet,’ said Rincewind.

‘Everywhere we go, they’re telling stories,’ said the Queen, still
slowly circling. ‘They’re filling the sky with pictures, too.’

‘Oh, the constellations?’ said Rincewind. ‘They don’t change, you know.
Not like at home. Amazing. I tried getting one tribe to name that big
one – you know, with what looks like a belt? I thought if they ended up
calling it the Bursar, and that group of little stars off to the right
became The Dried Frog Pills, it’d be a nice souvenir of our visit—’

‘You’re frightened of me, aren’t you,’ said the Queen. ‘All you wizards
are frightened of women.’

‘Not me!’ said Rincewind. ‘Women are less likely to be armed!’

‘Yes you are,’ the Queen insisted, moving closer. ‘I wonder what your
deepest desire is?’

Not to be here right now would be favourite, Rincewind thought.

‘I wonder what I could give you,’ said the Queen, caressing Rincewind’s
cheek.

‘Everyone knows that anything you get from the elves is gone by
morning,’ said Rincewind, trembling.

‘Yet many things are transient but pleasurable,’ said the Queen, moving
rather too close. ‘What is it _you_ want, Rincewind?’

Rincewind shuddered. There was no way he could lie.

‘Potatoes,’ he said.

‘Tuberous vegetables?’ said the Queen, her brows knitting in puzzlement,

‘Well, yes. They’ve got them on one of the other continents, but they’re
not what _I’d_ call spuds, and Ponder Stibbons says that if we left
things as they were then by the time they’ve been brought over to this
continent and bred up a bit it’d be the end of the world. So we thought
we ought to ginger up the creativity level a bit.’

‘And that’s it? That’s why all you wizards are doing all this? Just to
accelerate the breeding of a _vegetable_?’

‘_The_ vegetable, thank you,’ said Rincewind. ‘And you did ask. The
potato, in my opinion, is the crown of the vegetable kingdom. There’s
roast potatoes, jacket potatoes, boiled potatoes, fried potatoes,
curried potatoes—’

‘Just for a stupid tuber?’

‘—potato soup, potato salad, potato pancakes—’

‘All this for something that doesn’t even see daylight!’

‘—mashed potato, chipped potato, stuffed potato—’

The Queen slapped Rincewind’s face. The Luggage bumped into the back of
her legs. It wasn’t entirely sure what was happening here. There were
some things humans did that could be misinterpreted.

‘Do you not think I could give you something better than a potato?’ she
demanded.

Rincewind looked puzzled.

‘Are we talking about a sour cream topping with chives?’ he said.

Something fell out of Rincewind’s robe as he shifted uneasily. The Queen
grabbed it.

‘What’s this?’ she said. ‘There’s writing all over it!’

‘It’s just a script,’ said Rincewind, still thinking about potatoes. ‘A
sort of story of a play,’ he added. ‘Nothing important at all. People
going mad and getting killed, that sort of thing. And a glowworm.’

‘I recognise this script! It’s from the future of this world. Why would
you carry it around? What is so special? Hah, are there potatoes in it?’

She leafed through the pages, as if she could read.

‘This must be important!’ she snapped. And vanished.

One solitary page slid down to the ground.

Rincewind bent down and picked it up. Then he shouted hotly at the empty
air: ‘I suppose a packet of crisps is out of the question?’

TWENTY-SIX

LIES TO CHIMPANZEES

[image] A CENTRAL FEATURE OF HUMAN EXTELLIGENCE is the ability to infer
what is going on in another person’s mind, to guess what the world looks
like from _their_ point of view. Which is what Rincewind is trying to
stop the Queen of the Elves from doing. We can’t make such inferences
with perfect accuracy; that would be telepathy, which is almost
certainly impossible, because each brain is wired up differently and
therefore represents the universe in its own special way. But we’ve
evolved to be pretty good at guessing.

This ability to get inside other people’s heads has many beneficial
consequences. One is that we recognise other people as people, not just
automata. We recognise that they _have_ a mind, that to them the
universe seems just as real and vivid as it does to us, but that the
vivid things they perceive may not be the same as those that we
perceive. If intelligent beings are going to get along together without
too much friction, it’s important to realise that other members of your
species have an internal mental universe, which controls their actions
in the same way that your own mind controls yours.

When you can put yourself inside another person’s mind, stories gain a
new dimension. You can identify with a central character, and
vicariously experience a different world. This is the appeal of fiction:
you can captain a submarine, or spy on the enemy, from the safety and
comfort of an armchair.

Drama has the same appeal, too, but now there are real people to
identify with; people who play a fictional role. Actors, actresses. And
they rely even more on getting inside other people’ss minds, especially
the minds of fictional characters. Macbeth. The Second Witch. Oberon.
Titania. Bottom.

How did this ability arise? As usual, it seems to have come about
because of a complicity between the internal signal-processing abilities
of the brain and the external pressures of culture. It arose through an
evolutionary arms race, and the main weapon in that race was the lie.

The story starts with the development of language. As the brains of
proto-humans evolved, getting larger, there was room in them for more
kinds of processing tasks to be carried out. Primitive grunts and
gestures began to be organised into a relatively systematic code, able
to represent aspects of the outside world that were important to the
creatures concerned. A complicated concept like ‘dog’ became associated
with a particular sound. Thanks to an agreed cultural convention, anyone
who heard that sound responded to it with the mental image of a dog; it
wasn’t just a funny noise. If you try to listen to someone speaking a
language that you know, focusing just on the noises that they are making
and trying not to pick up the meaning of their words, you’ll find that
it’s almost impossible. If they speak a language far removed from any
that you know, however, their speech comes over as a meaningless gabble.
It conveys _less_ to you than a cat’s miaow.

In the brain are circuits of nerve cells that have learned to decode
gabble into meaning. We’ve seen that as a child grows, it begins by
babbling a random assortment of phonemes, the ‘units’ of sound that a
human mouth and larynx can produce. Gradually the child’s brain prunes
the list down to those sounds that it hears from its parents and other
adults. While it is doing that, the brain is _destroying_ connections
between nerve cells that seem to be obsolete. Quite a lot of the early
mental development of an infant consists of chopping down a randomly
connected, all-purpose brain, and pruning it into a brain that can
detect the things that are considered important in the child’s culture.
If the child is not exposed to much linguistic stimulus in early
childhood – such as a ‘feral’ child brought up by animals – then they
can’t learn a language properly in later life. After about the age of
ten, the brain’s ability to learn language fades away.

Much the same happens with other senses, in particular the sense of
smell. Different people smell the same thing differently. To some, a
particular odour may be offensive, to others innocuous, and to yet
others, nonexistent. As with language, there are cultural biases to
certain smells.

The primary function of language – by which we mean ‘the main
evolutionary trick that made it advantageous, leading to its
preservation and enhancement by natural selection’ – is to convey
meaningful messages to other members of the same species. We do this in
several ways: ‘body language’ and even bodily odours convey vivid
messages, largely without our being conscious of them. But spoken
language is far more versatile and adaptable than the other kinds, and
we are very conscious of what others are saying. Especially when it is
about _us_.

One of the commonest generic evolutionary tricks is to cheat. As soon as
a bunch of organisms has evolved some specific ability or behaviour, a
new possibility arises: subverting that behaviour. Predictable behaviour
patterns provide a natural springboard from which organisms can leap out
into the space of the adjacent possible. Bees evolved the abilities to
collect nectar and pollen, to feed themselves. Later, we subverted that
activity by providing them with better homes than they would find in
nature. We get to steal their honey, by providing them with hives as the
up-market adjacent-possible homes.

Many evolutionary trends have arisen from subversion. So, as the ability
to put specific thoughts into the minds of others became established, it
was natural for evolution to experiment with methods for subverting that
process. You didn’t have to put your own genuine thoughts into the minds
of others: you could try to put different thoughts there. Perhaps you
could gain an advantage by misleading the creatures you were
‘communicating’ with. The result was the evolution of lying.

Many animals tell lies. Monkeys have been observed making the troupe’s
‘danger’ call-sign. Then, as the rest of the troupe heads off for cover,
the liar grabs the food that they have temporarily abandoned. On a more
primitive but just as effective level, mimicry in the animal kingdom is
a form of lying. A harmless hover-fly displays the black-and-yellow
warning bands of a wasp, telling the lie ‘I am dangerous, I can sting’.

As humanity evolved, those monkey lies turned into more sophisticated
ape lies, then hominid lies, then human lies. As we became more
intelligent, our capacity for telling lies co-evolved alongside another
important ability: the ability to tell when someone was lying to you. A
monkey troupe can evolve several defences against a member who abuses
the danger-signal for his own ends. One is to recognise that this
individual can’t be trusted, and ignore their calls. The nursery tale of
the little boy who cried ‘wolf’ exposes the dangers inherent in this
area, both for the troupe and for the individual. Another is to punish
the individual for telling the lie. A third is to evolve the ability to
tell the difference between a lying danger-signal and a true one. Is the
monkey crying ‘danger’ staring at someone else’s food with a greedy
glint in their eye?

Just as there are sound evolutionary reasons for telling lies, so there
are sound evolutionary reasons for being able to detect them. If others
are trying to manipulate you to their advantage, then it is very
probably to your disadvantage. So it is in your best interests to
realise that, and avoid being manipulated. The result is an inevitable
arms race, in which the ability to tell lies is played off against the
ability to detect them. It is no doubt still going on, but already the
result is some very sophisticated lying, and some very sophisticated
detection. Sometimes the look on a person’s face tells us they’re
telling an untruth; sometimes the tone of voice.

One effective way to recognise a lie is to put yourself inside the other
person’s mind, and ask yourself whether what they are saying is
consistent with what you have convinced yourself they are thinking. For
instance, they are saying what a sweet little child you have, but you
remember from previous encounters that usually they can’t stand kids.
Maybe your child is different, of course, but then you notice that
worried look in their eyes, as if they’d rather be somewhere else …

Empathy is not just a nice way to understand someone else’s point of
view. It’s a weapon that you can use to your own advantage. Having
understood their point of view, you can compare it with what they’re
saying, and work out whether to believe them. In this manner, the
existence of lies in language’s phase space of the adjacent possible
encouraged the development of human empathy, and with it, individual
intelligence and collective social cohesion. Learning to tell lies was a
major step forward for humanity.

We can put ourselves inside the minds of other people with some degree
of credibility, because we are people ourselves. We do at least know
what it’s like to be a person. But even then, we are probably deluding
ourselves if we think that we really know exactly what’s going on inside
someone else’s mind, let alone what that feels like to them. Each human
mind is wired differently, and is the product of its owner’s own
experiences. It is even more problematic whether we can imagine what it
is like to be an animal. On Discworld, an accomplished witch can put
herself inside an animal’s mind, as we see, for instance, in this
passage from _Lords and Ladies_:

She Borrowed. You had to be careful. It was like a drug. You could ride
the minds of animals and birds, but never bees, steering them gently,
seeing through their eyes. Granny Weatherwax had many times flicked
through the channels of consciousness around her. It was, to her, part
of the heart of witchcraft. To see through other eyes …

… through the eyes of gnats, seeing the slow patterns of time in the
fast pattern of one day, their minds travelling rapidly as lightning …

… to listen with the body of a beetle, so that the world is a
three-dimensional pattern of vibrations …

… to see with the nose of a dog, all smells now colours …

It’s a poetic image. Does a dog ‘see’ smells? There is a folk belief
that smell is far more important to a dog than sight, but this could
well be an exaggeration based on the more credible observation that
smell is more important to dogs than it is to humans. But even here we
must add ‘consciously, at least’, because we react subconsciously to
pheromones and other emotionally loaded chemicals. Some years ago David
Berliner was working on the chemicals in human skin, and he left an open
beaker containing some skin extracts on the laboratory bench. Then he
noticed that his lab assistants were becoming distinctly more animated
than usual, with a lot of camaraderie and mild flirtation. He froze the
extract and put it away in the laboratory refrigerator for safekeeping.
Thirty years later, he analysed the substances in the beaker and found a
chemical called androstenone, which is rather like a sex hormone. A
series of experiments showed that this chemical was responsible for the
animated behaviour. However, androstenone has no smell. What was going
on?

Some animals possess a ‘vomeronasal’ organ (often called the ‘second
nose’). This is a small region of tissue in the nose, which detects
certain chemicals but is separate from the standard olfactory (smelling)
system. The conventional wisdom had long been that humans do not possess
a vomeronasal organ, but the curious behaviour of his assistants made
the scientist wonder. Berliner discovered that the conventional wisdom
was wrong: some humans, at least, do have a vomeronasal organ, and it
responds to pheromones. Those are special chemicals that trigger strong
responses in animals, such as fear or sexual arousal. The vomeronasal
organ’s owners are not consciously aware that they are sensing anything,
but boy, do they respond.

This story shows how easily we can get sensations wrong. In this case,
you _know_ what it vomeronasally smells like to be a human: you don’t
feel anything at all, not consciously. But you certainly respond! So
your reactions, and what they ‘feel like’, are very different. The
sounds we hear, the sensations of heat and cold on our skin, the smells
that assail our nostrils, the unmistakable taste of salt … all these are
qualia, vivid ‘feelings’ stuck on to our perceptions by our minds to
help us recognise them more readily. They have a basis in reality, yes,
but they are not real features of the outside world. They must be real
features of brain architecture and function, real things happening in
real nerve cells, but that level of reality is very different from the
level that we perceive.

So we should be suspicious of the belief that we can know what it feels
like to be a dog. In 1974 the philosopher Thomas Nagel published a
famous essay ‘What is it like to be a bat?’ in the _Philosophical
Review_, in which he made the same point. We can imagine what it is like
to be a human who is behaving – superficially at least – like a bat, but
we have no idea what it feels like to the _bat_, and it is questionable
whether human knowledge can ever extend in such a direction.

We probably get bats wrong anyway. We know that bats use echo-location
to sense their surroundings, much as a submarine uses sonar. The bat or
submarine emits sharp pulses of sound, and hears the returning echoes.
From those, it can ‘compute’ what the sound must be bouncing off. We
naturally assume that the bat responds to echoes in the same kind of way
that we would: it hears them. We naturally expect the qualia of bat
echo-location to be similar to the human qualia evoked by
sound-patterns, of which the richest example is music. So we imagine the
bat flying along to the accompaniment of incredibly rapid rhythms played
on bongo drums.

However, this could be a false analogy. Echo-location is the main sense
of a bat, so the ‘correct’ corresponding sense of a human is _its_ main
sense, which is sight, not hearing. The August 1993 edition of _Nature_
has a picture of a bat on the cover, with the words ‘How bats’ ears
see’. This refers to a technical article, by Steven Dear, James Simmons
and Jonathan Fritz, who discovered that the neurons in the part of the
bat’s brain that processes returning echoes are connected together in a
very similar way to those in the human _visual_ cortex. In terms of
neural architecture, it looks very much as if the bat’s brain uses the
echoes to build up an _image_ of its surroundings. Analogously, today’s
submarines use computers to turn a series of echoes into a
three-dimensional map of the surrounding water. _Figments of Reality_
developed this point to give a partial answer to Nagel’s question:

[In effect] bats _see_ with their ears, and their sonar qualia might
well be like our visual ones. Intensity of sound might come over to the
bat as a kind of ‘brightness’, and so on. Possibly the bat’s sonar
qualia ‘see’ the world in black and white and shades of grey, but they
could also pick up and render vivid various more subtle features of
sound reflections. The closest analogy in humans is texture, which we
sense by touch, but the bat could sense by sound. Soft objects reflect
sound less well than hard ones, for instance. So bats may well ‘see’
textured sound. If so – and here our analogy is intended only as a very
rough way to convey the idea – the sonar quale for a soft surface might
‘look’ green to the bat’s mind, that for hard ones might look red, that
for liquid ones like a colour only bees can see, and so on …

On Roundworld, such statements are no more than guesswork, supported by
analogies of neural architecture. On Discworld, witches know what it
feels like to be a bat, or a dog, or a beetle. And Angua the werewolf
smells in colours, which is very close to our suggestion that bats hear
in images and ‘see’ textures. But even on Discworld, the witches do not
actually feel what it is like to be a bat. They feel what it is like to
be a human who has ‘borrowed’ the sensory organs and neural processing
equipment of a bat. It may feel quite different to be a bat when a witch
is not hitching a free ride on its mind.

Even though we can’t be certain what it feels like to be an animal, or
another person, the attempt has several uses. As we said, the ability
involved here is empathy: being able to understand what another person
feels like. We’ve already seen that this is an important social skill,
and that the same ability, deployed in a different way for a different
purpose, gives us a chance to detect that someone else is lying to us.
If we put ourselves inside their heads and realise that what they are
saying is different from what we believe they are thinking, then we
suspect them of lying.

The word ‘lie’ has negative overtones, deservedly so, but what we’re
talking about here can be constructive as well as destructive, and often
is. For the purposes of the present discussion, a lie is anything
contrary to the truth, but it’s not at all clear what ‘the truth’ is, or
even whether there is only one of it, as the word ‘the’ would seem to
indicate. When two people have a row, it is generally impossible for
either of them, or anyone else, to figure out exactly what really
happened. Our thoughts are tainted by perceptions. This is unavoidable,
because what we think of as being ‘real’ is what our minds make of what
comes from the sense organs: fudged, tuned, and mangled by a succession
of interpretations by different bits of brain, _plus_ some wallpaper
additions. We never know what is _really_ out there around us. All we
know is what our minds construct from what our eyes, ears and fingers
report.

Not to put too fine a point on it, those perceptions are lies. The vivid
universe of colour that our brain derives from the light that falls on
our retinas _does not really exist_. The redness of a rose is derived
from its physical features, but ‘being red’ is not a physical feature as
such. ‘Emitting light of a certain wavelength’ gets closer to being a
physical feature. However, the vivid redness that we ‘see’ does not
correspond to a specific wavelength. Our brains correct the colours of
visual images for shadows, light reflected on to parts of the image by
other parts of a different colour, and so on. Our sensation of redness
is a decoration added to the perception by our brain: a quale. So what
we ‘see’ is not an accurate perception of what is there, but a mental
transform of a sensory perception of what is there.

To a bee, that same uniformly red rose may look very different, with
obvious markings. The bee ‘sees’ in ultraviolet, a wavelength outside
our range of perceptions. The rose emits a whole distribution of
wave-lengths of light; we see a small part of that, and call it reality.
The bee sees a different part and responds to it in its own beelike way,
using the markings to land on the flower and collect nectar, or to
dismiss it from consideration and fly on to the next possibility.
Neither the bee’s perception, nor ours, _is_ the reality.

In Chapter 24 we explained that our minds select what they perceive in
more ways than just passively ignoring signals that our senses can’t
pick up. We fine-tune our senses to see what we want them to see, hear
what we want them to hear. There are more nerve connections going _from_
the brain to the ear than there are from the ear to the brain. Those
connections adapt the ear’s ability to perceive certain sounds, maybe by
making it more sensitive to sounds that could represent danger and less
sensitive to sounds that don’t really matter much. People who are not
exposed to certain sounds as children, when their ears and brains are
being tuned to pick up language, cannot distinguish them as adults. To
the Japanese, the two phonemes ‘l’ and ‘r’ sound identical.

The lies that our senses tell us are not malicious. They are partial
truths rather than untruths, and the universe is so complicated, and our
minds are so simple in comparison, that the best we can ever hope for is
half-truths. Even the most esoteric ‘fundamental’ physics is at best a
half-truth. Indeed, the more ‘fundamental’ it becomes, the less true it
gets. It is therefore no surprise that the most effective method we have
yet devised for passing extelligence on to our children is a systematic
series of lies.

It is called ‘education’.

We can hear the hackles rising even as we write, as quantum signals echo
back down the timelines from future readers in the teaching profession
turning to this page. But before hurling the book across the room or
sending an offended e-mail to the publisher, ask yourself just how much
of what you tell children is true. Not worthy, not defensible: _true_.
At once you’ll find yourself on the defensive: ‘Ah, yes, but of course
children can’t understand all of the complexities of the real world. The
teacher’s job is to simplify everything as an aid to understanding …’

Quite so.

Those simplifications are lies, within the meaning we are currently
attaching to that word. But they are helpful lies, constructive lies,
lies that even when they are really _very_ wrong still open the door to
a better understanding next time round. Consider, for example, the
sentence ‘A hospital is a place where people are sent so that the
doctors can make them better’. Well, no sensitive adult would wish to
tell a child that sometimes people go into hospital alive and come out
dead. Or that often it’s not possible to make them better. For a start,
the child may have to go into hospital at some stage, and too big a dose
of truth early on might make it difficult for the parents to persuade
them to do so without making a fuss. Nonetheless, no adult would
consider that sentence to be an accurate statement of what hospitals are
really about. It is, at best, an ideal to which hospitals aspire. And
when we justify our description on the grounds that the truth would
upset the child, we are admitting that the sentence is a lie, and
asserting that social conventions and human comfort are more important
than giving an accurate description of what the world is about.

They often are, of course. A lot depends on context and intention. In
Chapter 4 of _The Science of Discworld_ we called these helpful untruths
and half-truths ‘lies-to-children’. They must be distinguished from the
much less benevolent ‘lies-to-adults’, another word for which is
‘politics’. Lies-to-adults are constructed with the express purpose of
concealing intentions; their aim is to mislead. Some newspapers tell
lies-to-adults; others do their best to tell truths-to-adults, although
they always end up by telling adult versions of lies-to-children.

In the twenty-fifth Discworld novel _The Truth_, journalism comes to the
Disc, in the form of William de Worde. His career begins with a monthly
newsletter sent to various Discworld notables, usually for five dollars
each month, but in the case of one foreigner for half a cartload of figs
twice per year. He writes one letter, and pays Mr Cripslock the engraver
in the Street of Cunning Artificers to turn it into a woodcut, from
which he prints five copies. From these small beginnings emerges
Ankh-Morpork’s first newspaper, when de Worde’s ability to sniff out a
story is allied to the dwarves’ discovery of movable type. It is
rumoured that the dwarves have found a way to turn lead into gold – and
since the type is made of lead, in a way they have.

The main journalistic content of the novel is a circulation battle
between de Worde’s _Ankh-Morpork Times_, with its banner ‘THE TRUTH
SHALL MAKE YOU FREE’, and the _Ankh-Morpork Inquirer_ (THE NEWS YOU ONLY
HEAR ABOUT). The _Times_ is an upmarket broadsheet, running stories with
headlines like ‘Patrician Attacks Clerk With Knife (He had the knife,
not the clerk)’, and checking its facts before publishing them. The
_Inquirer_ is a tabloid, whose headlines are more of the ‘ELVES STOLE MY
HUSBAND’ kind, and it saves money by making all the stories up. As a
result, it can undercut its upmarket competitor when it comes to price,
_and_ the stories are much more interesting. Truth eventually prevails
over cheap nonsense, however, and de Worde learns from his editor
Sacharissa a fundamental principle of journalism:

‘Look at it like this,’ said Sacharissa, starting a fresh page. ‘Some
people are heroes. And some people jot down notes.’

‘Yes, but that’s not very—’

Sacharissa glanced up and flashed him a smile. ‘Sometimes they’re the
same person,’ she said.

This time it was William who looked down, modestly.

‘You think that’s really true?’ he said.

She shrugged. ‘Really true? Who knows? This is a newspaper, isn’t it? It
just has to be true until tomorrow.’

Lies-to-children, even the broadsheet newspaper sort, are mostly benign
and helpful, and even when they are not, they are _intended_ to be that
way. They are constructed with the aim of opening a pathway that will
eventually lead to more sophisticated lies-to-children, reflecting more
of the complexities of reality. We teach science and art and history and
economics by a series of carefully constructed lies. Stories, if you
wish … but then, we’ve already characterised a story as a lie.

The science teacher explains the colours of the rainbow in terms of
refraction, but slides over the _shape_ of the rainbow and the way those
colours are arranged. Which, when you come to think of it, are more
puzzling, and more what we want to know about when we ask why rainbows
look like they do. There’s a lot more to the physics than a raindrop
acting as a prism. Later, we may develop the next level of lie by
showing the child the elegant geometry of light rays as they pass
through a spherical raindrop, refracting, reflecting, and refracting
back out again, with each colour of light focused along a slightly
different angle. Later still, we explain that light does not consist of
rays at all, but electromagnetic waves. By university, we are telling
undergraduates that those waves aren’t really waves at all, but tiny
quantum wave-packets, photons. Except that the ‘wave-packets’ in the
textbooks don’t actually do the job … And so on. _All_ of our
understanding of nature is like this; none of it is Ultimate Reality.

TWENTY-SEVEN

LACK OF WILL

[image]THE WIZARDS WERE NEVER QUITE CERTAIN where they were. It wasn’t
their history. History gets named afterwards: The Age of Enlightenment,
the Depression. Which is not to say that people sometimes aren’t
depressed with all the enlightenment around them, or strangely elevated
during otherwise grey times. Or periods are named after kings, as if the
country was _defined_ by whichever stony-faced cut-throat had schemed
and knifed his way to the top, and as if people would say, ‘Hooray, the
reign of the House of Chichester – a time of deep division along
religious lines and continuing conflict with Belgium – is now at an end
and we can look forward to the time of the House of Luton, a period of
expansion and the growth of learning! The ploughing of the big field is
going to be a lot more interesting from now on!’

The wizards had settled for calling the time they’d arrived ‘D’ and,
now, they were back there, in some cases quite suntanned.

They had commandeered Dee’s library again.

‘Stage One seemed to have worked quite well, gentlemen,’ said Ponder
Stibbons. ‘The world is certainly a lot more colourful. We do seem to
have, er, _assisted_ the elves in the evolution of what I might venture
to call _Homo narrans_, or “Storytelling Man”.’

‘There’s still religious wars,’ said the Dean. ‘And still the heads on
spikes.’

‘Yes, but for more interesting reasons,’ said Ponder. ‘That’s humans for
you, sir. Imagination is imagination. It gets used for _everything_.
Wonderful art and really dreadful instruments of torture. What was that
country where the Lecturer in Recent Runes got food poisoning?’

‘Italy, I think,’ said Rincewind. ‘The rest of us had the pasta.’

‘Well, it’s full of churches and wars and horrors and some of the most
amazing art. Better than we’ve got at home. We can be proud of that,
gentlemen.’

‘But when we showed them the book the Librarian found in L-space, of
Great Works of Art with the full colour pictures …’ mumbled the Chair of
Indefinite Studies, as if he had something on his mind but wasn’t
certain how to phrase it.

‘Yes?’ said Ridcully.

‘… well, it wasn’t actually _cheating_, was it?’

‘Of course not,’ said Ridcully. ‘They must have painted them
_somewhere_. Some other dimension. Something quantum. A parallel
eventuality or something with that sort of a name. But that doesn’t
matter. It all goes round and round and it comes out here.’

‘But I think we said too much to that big chap with the bald head,’ said
the Dean. ‘The artist, remember? Could’ve been the double of Leonard of
Quirm? Beard, good singing voice? You shouldn’t have told him about the
flying machine that Leonard built.’

‘Oh, he was scribbling so much stuff no one’ll take any notice,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Anyway, who’ll remember an artist who can’t get a simple
smile right? The point _is_, gentlemen, that the fantastic imagination
and the, er, practical imagination go hand in hand. One leads to the
other. Can’t separate them with a big lever. Before you can make
something, you have to picture it in your head.’

‘But the elves are still here,’ said the Lecture in Recent Runes. ‘All
we’ve done is do their work even better! I don’t see the _point_!’

‘Ah, that’s Stage Two,’ said Ponder. ‘Rincewind?’

‘What?’

‘You’re going to talk about Stage Two. Remember? You told us you wanted
to get the world to the right stage?’

‘I didn’t know I had to make a presentation!’

‘You mean you don’t have any slides? No paperwork at all?’

‘Paperwork slows me down,’ said Rincewind. ‘But it’s obvious, isn’t it?
We say Seeing is Believing … and I thought about that, and it’s not
really true. We don’t believe in chairs. Chairs are just things that
exist.’

‘So?’ said Ridcully.

‘We don’t _believe_ in things we can see. We believe in things that we
can’t see.’

‘And?’

‘And I’ve been checking this world against L-space and I think we’ve
made it the one where humans survive,’ said Rincewind. ‘Because now they
can picture gods and monsters. And when you can picture them, you don’t
need to _believe_ in them any more.’

After a long silence the Chair of Indefinite Studies said, ‘Is it just
me, or has anyone else noticed how many huge cathedrals they’ve been
building on this continent? Big, big buildings full of wonderful
craftsmanship? And those painters we talked to have been very keen on
religious paintings …’

‘And your point is …?’ said Ridcully.

‘It’s just that this has been happening at the same time as people have
been really taking an interest in how the world works. They’re asking
more questions. How? and Why? and questions like that,’ said the Chair
of Indefinite Studies. ‘They’re acting like Phocian but without going
mad. Rincewind seems to be suggesting that we’re killing off the gods of
this place.’

The wizards looked at him.

‘Er,’ he went on, ‘if you think a god is huge and powerful and
everywhere, then it’s natural to be god-fearing. But if someone comes
along and paints that god as a big bearded chap in the sky, it’s not
going to be long before people say, don’t be silly, there can’t be a big
bearded man on a cloud somewhere, let’s go and invent Logic’

‘Can’t there be gods here?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘We’ve
got a mountaintop _full_ of ’em at home.’

‘We’ve never detected deitygen in this universe,’ said Ponder
thoughtfully.

‘But it’s said to be generated by intelligent creatures, just like cows
generate marsh gas,’ said Ridcully.

‘In a universe based on magic, certainly,’ said Ponder. ‘This one is
just based on bent space.’

‘Well, there’s been lots of wars, lots of deaths and I’d bet there’s
lots of believers,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, now looking
extremely uncomfortable. ‘When thousands die for a god, you get a god.
If someone is _prepared_ to die for a god, you get a god.’

‘At home, yes. But does that work here?’ said Ponder.

The wizards sat in silence for a while.

‘Are we going to get into any sort of religious trouble for this?’ said
the Dean.

‘None of us has been struck by lightning yet,’ said Ridcully.

‘True, true. I just wish there was a less, er, permanent test,’ said the
Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘Er … the dominant religion on this
continent seems to be a family concern, somewhat similar to Old
Omnianism.’

‘Big on smiting?’

‘Not lately. It’s gone very quiet _vis-à-vis_ heavenly fire, widespread
flooding and transmutation into food additives,’ said the Chair.

‘Don’t tell me,’ said Ridcully. ‘A public appearance, some simple moral
precepts, and then apparent silence? Apart, that is, for millions of
people arguing what “Do not steal” and “Don’t Commit Murder” actually
mean?’

‘That’s right.’

‘_Just_ like Omnianism, then,’ said the Archchancellor glumly. ‘Noisy
religion, silent god. We must tread carefully, gentlemen.’

‘But I did point out that there is no perceptible trace whatsoever of
any deities of any kind anywhere in this universe!’ said Ponder.

‘Yes, very puzzling,’ said Ridcully. ‘Nevertheless, we have no magical
powers here and it pays to be careful.’

Ponder opened his mouth. He wanted to say: We know everything about this
place! We’ve watched it happen! It’s all balls, spinning in curves. It’s
matter bending space and space moving matter. Everything here is the
result of a few simple rules! That’s all! It’s all just a matter of
rules! It’s all … logical.

He wanted it to be logical. Discworld wasn’t logical. Some things
happened on the whim of gods, some things happened because it was a good
idea at the time, some things happened out of sheer randomness. But
there was no logic – at least, no logic that Ponder approved of. He’d
gone to the little town called Athens that Rincewind had talked about,
in a sheet borrowed from Doctor Dee, and listened to men not entirely
unlike the philosophers of Ephebe talking about logic, and it had made
him want to burst into tears. _They_ didn’t have to live in a place
where things changed on a whim.

Everything ticked and tocked and turned for them like a great big
machine. There were rules. Things stayed the same. The same reliable
stars came up every night. Planets didn’t disappear because they’ve
wandered too close to a flipper and been flicked far away from the sun.

No trouble, no complications. A few simple rules, a handful of elements
… it was all so easy. Admittedly, he found it a little hard to work out
_exactly_ how you got from a few simple rules to, say, the sheen on
mother-of-pearl or the common porcupine, but he was sure that you did.
He wanted, intensely, to believe in a world where logic worked. It was a
matter of faith.

He envied those philosophers. They nodded to their gods and then, by
degrees, destroyed them.

And now he sighed.

‘We’ve done the best we can,’ he said. ‘Your plan, Rincewind?’

Rincewind stared at the glass sphere that was the current abode of Hex.

‘Hex, is this world ready for the William Shakespeare of whom we spoke?’

‘It is.’

‘And he exists?’

‘No. Two of his grandparents did not meet. His mother was never born.’

In his hollow voice, Hex recounted the sad history, in detail. The
wizards took notes.

‘Right,’ said Ridcully, rubbing his hands together when Hex finished.
‘This at least is a simple problem. We shall need a length of string, a
leather ball of some kind, and a large bunch of flowers …’

Later, Rincewind stared at the glass sphere that was the current abode
of Hex.

‘Hex, now is this world ready for the William Shakespeare of whom we
spoke?’

‘It is.’

‘And he exists?’

‘Violet Shakespeare exists. She married Josiah Slink at the age of
sixteen. No plays have been written, but there have been eight children
of which five have survived. Her rime is fully occupied.’

The wizards exchanged glances.

‘Perhaps if we offered to babysit?’ said Rincewind.

‘Too many problems,’ said Ridcully firmly. ‘Still it’s a change to have
an _easy_ one for once. We will need the probable date of conception, a
stepladder and a gallon of black paint.’

Rincewind stared at the glass sphere that was the current abode of Hex.

‘Hex, is this world ready for the William Shakespeare of whom we spoke?’

‘It is.’

‘And he exists?’

‘He was born, but died at the age of 18 months. Details follow …’

The wizards listened. Ridcully looked thoughtful for a moment.

‘This will require some strong disinfectant,’ he said. ‘And a lot of
carbolic soap.’

Rincewind stared at the glass sphere that was the current abode of Hex.

‘Hex, is this world ready for the William Shakespeare of whom we spoke?’

‘It is.’

‘And he exists?’

‘No. He was born, successfully survived several childhood illnesses, but
was shot dead one night while poaching game at the age of thirteen.
Details follow …’

‘Another easy one,’ said Ridcully, standing up. ‘We shall need … let me
see … some drab clothing, a dark lantern and a very large cosh …’

Rincewind stared at the glass sphere that was the current abode of Hex.

‘Hex, is this world ready for the William Shakespeare of whom we spoke?
_Please_?’

‘It is.’

‘And he exists?’

‘Yes.’

The wizards tried not to look hopeful. There had been too many false
dawns in the last week.

‘Alive?’ said Rincewind. ‘Male? Sane? Not in the Americas? Not struck by
a meteorite? Not left incapacitated by a hake during an unusual fall of
fish? Or killed in a duel?’

‘No. At this moment he is in the tavern that you gentlemen frequent.’

‘Does he have all his arms and legs?’

‘Yes,’ said Hex. ‘And … Rincewind?’

‘Yes?’

‘As one of two unexpected collateral events to this latest interference,
the potato has been brought to these shores.’

‘Hot damn!’

‘And Arthur J. Nightingale is a ploughman and never learned to write.’

‘Near miss there,’ said Ridcully.

TWENTY-EIGHT

WORLDS OF IF

[image] THE WIZARDS HAVE DEVISED A SECRET WEAPON in their battle against
the elves for the soul of Roundworld, and they are busily re-engineering
history to make sure that their weapon gets invented. The weapon is one
Will Shakespeare – Arthur J. Nightingale just can’t hack it. And they’re
proceeding by trial and error, with a lot of both. Nonetheless, they
gradually persuade the flow of history to converge, step by step,
towards their desired outcome.

Black paint? You may know this superstitious practice, but if not:
painting the kitchen ceiling black is supposed to guarantee a boy.¹ The
wizards will try anything. To begin with. And if it doesn’t work,
they’ll try something else, until eventually they get somewhere.

Why is it unreasonable to expect them to succeed in one go, but
reasonable to expect them to achieve their objective by repeated
refinements?

History is like that.

There is a dynamic to history, but we find out what that dynamic is only
as the events concerned unfold. That’s why we can put a name to
historical periods only after they’ve happened. That’s why the history
monks on Discworld have to wander the Disc making sure that historical
events that ought to happen _do_ happen. They are the guardians of
narrativium and they spread it around dispassionately to ensure that the
whole world obeys its storyline. The history monks come into their own
in _Thief of Time_. Using great spinning cylinders called
Procrastinators, they borrow time from where it is not needed and repay
it where it is:

_According to the Second Scroll of Wen the Eternally Surprised_, Wen the
Eternally Surprised sawed the first procrastinator from a trunk of a
_wamwam_ tree, carved certain symbols on it, fitted it with a bronze
spindle, and summoned the apprentice, Clodpool.

‘Ah, very nice, master,’ said Clodpool. ‘A prayer wheel, yes?’

‘No, this is nothing like as complex,’ said Wen. ‘It merely stores and
moves time.’

‘That simple, eh?’

‘And now I shall test it,’ said Wen. He gave it a half-turn with his
hand.

‘Ah, very nice, master,’ said Clodpool. ‘A prayer wheel, yes?’

‘No, this is nothing like as complex,’ said Wen. ‘It merely stores and
moves time.’

‘That simple, eh?’

‘And now I shall test it,’ said Wen. He moved it a little less this
time.

‘That simple, eh?’

‘And now I shall test it,’ said Wen. This time he twisted it gently to
and fro.

‘That si-si-si That simple-ple, eh eheh simple, eh?’ said Clodpool.

‘And I have tested it,’ said Wen.

On Roundworld we don’t have history monks – or, at least, we’ve never
caught anyone playing that role, but could we ever do so? – but we do
have a kind of historical narrativium. We have a saying that ‘history
repeats itself’ – the first time as comedy, the second time as tragedy,
because the one thing we learn from history is that we never learn from
history.

Roundworld history is like biological evolution: it obeys rules, but
even so, it seems to make itself up as it goes along. In fact, it seems
to make up its _rules_ as it goes along. At first sight, that seems
incompatible with the existence of a dynamic, because a dynamic is a
rule that takes the system from its present state to the next one, a
tiny instant into the future. Nonetheless, there must be a dynamic,
otherwise historians would not be able to make sense of history, even
after the event. Ditto evolutionary biology.

The solution to this conundrum lies in the strange nature of the
historical dynamic. It is emergent. Emergence is one of the most
important, but also the most puzzling, features of complex systems. And
it is important for this book, because it is the existence of emergent
dynamics that leads humans to tell stories. Briefly: if the dynamic
wasn’t emergent, then we wouldn’t need to tell stories about the system,
because we’d all be able to understand the system on its own terms. But
when the dynamic is emergent, a simplified but evocative story is the
best description that we can hope to find …

But now we’re getting ahead of our own story, so let’s back up a little
and explain what we’re talking about.

[line]

A conventional dynamical system has an explicit, pre-stated phase space.
That is, there exists a simple, precise description of everything that
the system can possibly do, and in some sense this description is known
in advance. In addition, there is a fixed rule, or rules, that takes the
current state of the system and transforms it into the next state. For
example, if we are trying to understand the solar system, from a
classical point of view, then the phase space comprises all possible
positions and velocities for the planets, moons, and other bodies, and
the rules are a combination of Newton’s law of gravity and Newton’s laws
of motion.

Such a system is deterministic: in principle, the future is entirely
determined by the present. The reasoning is straightforward. Start with
the present state and work out what it will be one time-step into the
future by applying the rules. But we can now consider that state as the
new ‘present’ state, and apply the rule again to find out what the
system will be doing two time-steps into the future. Repeat again, and
we know what will happen after three time-steps. Repeat a billion times,
and the future is determined for the next billion time-steps.

This mathematical phenomenon led the eighteenth-century mathematician
Pierre Simon de Laplace to a vivid image of a ‘vast intellect’ that
could predict the entire future of every particle in the universe, once
it was furnished with an exact description of all those particles at
_one_ instant. Laplace was aware that performing such a computation was
far too difficult to be practical, and he was also aware of the
difficulty, indeed the impossibility, of observing the state of every
particle at the same moment. Despite these problems, his image helped to
create an optimistic attitude about the predictability of the universe.
Or, more accurately, of small enough bits of it. And for several
centuries, science made huge inroads into making such predictions
feasible. Today, we can predict the motion of the solar system billions
of years in advance, and we can even predict the weather (fairly
accurately) _three whole days_ in advance, which is amazing. Seriously.
Weather is a lot less predictable than the solar system.

Laplace’s hypothetical intellect was lampooned in Douglas Adams’s _The
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy_ as Deep Thought, the supercomputer
which took five million years to calculate the answer to the great
question of life, the universe, and everything. The answer it got was
42. ‘Deep Thought’ is not so far away from ‘Vast Intellect’, although
the name originates in the pornographic movie _Deep Throat_, whose title
was the cover-name of a clandestine source in the Watergate scandal in
which the presidency of Richard Nixon self-destructed (how soon people
forget …).

One reason why Adams was able to poke fun at Laplace’s dream is that
about forty years ago we learned that predicting the future of the
universe, or even a small part of it, requires more than just a vast
intellect. It requires absolutely exact initial data, correct to
infinitely many decimal places. No error, however minuscule, can be
tolerated. _None_. No marks for trying. Thanks to the phenomenon known
as ‘chaos’, even the smallest error in determining the initial state of
the universe can blow up exponentially fast, so that the predicted
future quickly becomes wildly inaccurate. In practice, though, measuring
anything to an accuracy of more than one part in a trillion, 12 decimal
digits, is beyond the abilities of today’s science. So, for instance,
although we can indeed predict the motion of the solar system billions
of years in advance, we can’t predict it _correctly_. In fact, we have
very little idea where Pluto will be, a hundred million years from now.

Ten million, on the other hand, is a cinch.

Chaos is just one of the practical reasons why it’s generally impossible
to predict the future (and get it right). Here we’ll examine a rather
different one: complexity. Chaos afflicts the prediction method, but
complexity afflicts the rules. Chaos occurs because it is impossible to
say in practice what the state of the system is, exactly. In a complex
system, it may be impossible to say what the range of possible states of
the system is, even approximately. Chaos throws a spanner in the works
of the scientific prediction machine, but complexity turns that machine
into a small cube of crumpled scrap metal.

We’ve already discussed the limitations of the Laplacian world-picture
in the context of Kauffman’s theory of autonomous agents expanding into
the space of the adjacent possible. Now we’ll take a closer look at how
such expansions occur. We’ll see that the Laplacian picture still has a
role to play, but a less ambitious one.

A complex system consists of a number (usually large) of entities or
agents, which interact with each other according to specific rules. This
description makes it sound as though a complex system is just a
dynamical system whose phase space has a huge number of dimensions, one
or more per entity. This is correct, but the word ‘just’ is misleadingly
dismissive. Dynamical systems with big phase spaces can do remarkable
things, far more remarkable than what the solar system can do.

The new ingredient in complex systems is that the rules are ‘local’,
stated on the level of the entities. In contrast, the interesting
features of the system itself are global, stated on the level of the
entire system. Even if we know the local rules for entities, it may not
be possible – either in practice, or in principle – to deduce the
dynamical rules of the system as a whole. The problem here is that the
calculations involved may be intractable, either in the weak sense that
they would take far too long to do, or in the strong sense that you
can’t actually do them at all.

Suppose, for example, that you wanted to use the laws of quantum
mechanics to predict the behaviour of a cat. If you take the problem
seriously, the way to do this is to write down the ‘quantum
wave-function’ of every single subatomic particle in the cat. Having
done this, you apply a mathematical rule known as Schrödinger’s
equation, which physicists tell us will predict the future state of the
cat.²

However, no sensible physicist would attempt any such thing, because the
wavefunction is far too complicated. The number of subatomic particles
in a cat is enormous; even if you could measure their states precisely –
which of course you can’t do anyway – the universe does not contain a
sheet of paper big enough to list all the numbers. So the calculation
can’t even get started, because in practical terms the present state of
the cat is indescribable in the language of quantum wavefunctions. As
for plugging the wavefunction into Schrödinger’s equation, well, forget
it.

Agreed, this is not a sensible way to model the behaviour of a cat. But
it does make it clear that the usual physicists’ rhetoric about quantum
mechanics being ‘fundamental’ is at best true in a philosophical sense.
It’s not fundamental to our _understanding_ of the cat, although it
might be fundamental to the cat.

Despite these difficulties, cats generally manage to behave like cats,
and in particular they discover their own futures by living them. Down
on the philosophical level, again, this may be because the universe is a
lot better at solving Schrödinger’s equation than we are, and because it
doesn’t need a description of the quantum wavefunction of the cat: it’s
already got the cat, which _is_ its own quantum wavefunction from this
point of view.

Let’s accept that, even though it’s rather likely that the universe
doesn’t propagate a cat into its future by applying anything that
corresponds to Schrödinger’s equation. The equation is a human model,
not the reality. But even if Schrödinger’s equation is what the universe
‘really’ does – and more so if it’s not – there’s no way that we limited
humans can follow the ‘calculation’ step by step. There are too many
steps. What interests us about cats occurs on the system level: things
like purring, catching mice, drinking milk, getting stuck in the
catflap. Schrödinger’s equation doesn’t help us understand those
phenomena.

When the logical chain that leads from an entity-level description of a
complex system to system-level behaviour is far too complicated for any
human being to follow it, that behaviour is said to be an _emergent
property_ of the complex system, or just to be ‘emergent’. A cat
drinking milk is an emergent property of Schrödinger’s equation applied
to the subatomic particles that make up the cat. And the milk, and the
saucer … and the kitchen floor, and …

One way to predict the future is to cheat. This method has many
advantages. It works. You can test it, so that makes it _scientific_.
Lots of people will believe the evidence of their own eyes, unaware that
eyes tell lies and you’ll never catch a competent charlatan in the act
of cheating.

The wizards got Shakespeare right, aside – at a late stage – from the
minor matter of sex. When it comes to a baby’s sex, the Grand Master of
Foretelling the Future was ‘Prince Monolulu’. He was a West African who
wore very impressive tribal gear and haunted (in a very material sense)
the markets in the East End of London in the 1950s. Prince Monolulu
would accost pregnant women with the cry ‘I will tell you the sex of
your baby, money back guarantee!’ Many ladies fell for this ploy, and
paid a shilling, then about a fiftieth of one week’s wages.

Level One of the trick is that random guesses would guarantee the Prince
50 per cent of the money, but he was much more cunning than that. He
improved the scheme to Level Two by writing the prophecy on a note,
putting it into an envelope, and getting the sucker to sign across the
seal. When it turned out that the anticipated John was really Joan, or
Joan was John, the few who bothered to return to reclaim their money
found that, on opening their envelope, it contained a correct
prediction. They didn’t get their money back, because Prince Monolulu
insisted that what was in the envelope was what he had originally told
them; the sucker must have remembered it wrong. In reality, the envelope
always contained the opposite prediction to the verbal one.

History is a complex system; its entities are people, its rules of
interaction are the complicated ways in which human beings behave
towards each other. We don’t know enough sociology to write down
effective rules at this entity level. But even if we did, the
system-level phenomena, and the system-level rules that govern them,
would almost certainly be emergent properties. So the rule that
propagates the state of the entire system one step into the future is
not something we can write down. It is an emergent dynamic.

When the system-level dynamic is emergent, then even the system itself
does not ‘know’ where it is going. The only way to find out is to let
the system run and see what happens. You have to allow the system to
make up its own future as it goes along. In principle only one future is
possible, but there is no short cut that lets you predict what will
happen before the system itself gets there and we all find out. This
behaviour is typical of complex systems with emergent dynamics. In
particular, it is typical of human history and of biological evolution.
And cats.

Biologists learned long ago not to trust evolutionary explanations in
which the evolving organisms ‘knew’ what they were trying to achieve.
Explanations like ‘the elephant evolved a long trunk in order to suck up
water without bending down’. The objectionable item here is not the
reason why the elephant’s trunk is long (though, of course, that can be
debated): it is the phrase ‘in order to’. This endows elephants with
evolutionary prescience, and suggests (wrongly) that they can somehow
choose the direction in which they evolve. All this is obvious nonsense,
so it’s not sensible to have a theory that attributes purpose to
elephant evolution.

Unfortunately, a dynamic looks remarkably like purpose. If elephant
evolution follows a dynamic, then it looks as if the end result is
predetermined, in which case the system ‘knows’ in advance what it ought
to be doing. The individual elephants need not be conscious of their
objective, but the _system_ in some sense has to be. That would be a
good argument against a dynamic description if the evolutionary dynamic
for elephants was something we could prescribe ahead of time. However,
if that dynamic is emergent, then the system itself, along with the
elephants, can find out where it’s headed only by going there and
discovering where it gets to.

The same goes for history. Being able to put a name to a historical
period only after it’s happened looks remarkably like what you’d observe
if there is a historical dynamic, but it is emergent.

This far into the discussion, it may seem that an emergent dynamic is no
better than no dynamic at all. Our task now is to convince you that this
is not so. The reason is that although an emergent dynamic cannot be
deduced, in complete logical detail, from entity-level rules, _it is
still a dynamic_. It has its own patterns and regularities, and it may
be possible to work with those directly.

Exactly this is going on when a historian says something like ‘Croesus
the Unprepared was a rich but weak king who never maintained a
sufficiently large army. It was therefore inevitable that his kingdom
would be overrun by the neighbouring Pictogoths, and his treasury would
be plundered’. This kind of story proposes a system-level rule, a
historical pattern, which can sometimes be compelling. We can question
how scientific such stories are, because it is always easy to be wise
after the event. But in this case the story generalises: rich weak kings
are asking to be invaded by mean, poor barbarians. And that’s a
prediction, wisdom before the event, and as such it is scientifically
testable.³

The stories that evolutionary biologists tell are of the same kind, and
they become science when they stop being Just-So Stories, justifications
after the event, and become general principles that make predictions.
These predictions are of a limited kind: ‘in _these_ circumstances
expect _this_ behaviour’. They are not predictions of the type ‘On
Tuesday at 7.43pm the first elephant trunk will evolve’. But this is
what ‘prediction’ means in science: saying ahead of time that under
certain conditions, certain things will happen. You don’t have to
predict the timing of the experiment.

An evolutionary example of this kind of pattern can be found in the
co-evolution of ‘creodonts’, big cats like sabretooth tigers, and their
‘titanothere’ prey – large-hoofed mammals, often with huge horns. When
it comes to improving performance for the big cats, the line of least
resistance is to develop bigger teeth. Faced with that, the best
response for the prey is to develop thicker skins and bigger horns. An
evolutionary arms race now becomes pretty much unavoidable: the cats get
bigger and bigger teeth, and the prey respond with thicker and thicker
skins … to which the cats’ only response is even bigger teeth … and so
it goes. An evolutionary arms race sets in, with both species trapped in
a single strategy. The end result is that the cats’ teeth get so
enormous that the poor animals can hardly move their heads, while the
titanotheres’ skins, and multiple horns on nose and brow, and associated
musculature, get so heavy that they find trouble dragging themselves
across the plains. Both species promptly die out.

This creodont-titanothere arms race has happened at least five times in
evolutionary history, taking about five million years to run its course
on each occasion. It is a striking example of an emergent pattern, and
the fact that it plays out in exactly the same way over and over again
confirms that there really is an underlying dynamic. In all likelihood
it would be happening again, now, except for the arrival of humans, who
have clobbered both the big cats and their slow prey.

Notice that we’ve been calling these system-level patterns ‘stories’,
and so they are. They have a narrative, a consistent internal logic;
they have a beginning and an end. They are stories because they cannot
be ‘reduced’ to an entity-level description; that would be more like an
interminable soap opera. ‘Well, this electron bumped into that electron
and the two of them got together and emitted a photon …’ repeated, with
slight variations, a truly inconceivable number of times. One of the
central questions about emergent dynamics is: what would happen if we
ran the system again, in slightly different circumstances? Would the
same patterns emerge, or would we see something completely different? If
European history in the early twentieth century was rerun, but without
Adolf Hitler, would World War II have happened anyway, by a different
route? Or would it all have been sweetness and light? Historically, this
is a crucial question. There is no doubting that Hitler was instrumental
in starting World War II; the deeper question here is whether he was a
product of the politics of the time, and in his absence someone else
would have done much the same, or whether it was Hitler who moulded
history and created a war when otherwise nothing would have happened.

At risk of being controversial, we are inclined to the view that World
War II was a pretty much inevitable consequence of the political
situation in the 1930s, with Germany saddled with huge reparations for
World War I, the trains not running on time … and Hitler was merely the
medium through which the national will to war was expressed. But it’s
not the answer that concerns us here: it is the nature of the question.
It is a ‘what if’ question, and it is about historical phase space. It
does not ask what happened; it asks what might have happened instead.

This point is well understood on Discworld. In _Lords and Ladies_ we
find the following passage:

There are indeed such things as parallel universes, although parallel is
hardly the right word – universes swoop and spiral around one another
like some mad weaving machine or a squadron of Yossarians⁴ with
middle-ear trouble.

And they branch. But, and this is important, not all the time. The
universe doesn’t much care if you tread on a butterfly. There are plenty
more butterflies. Gods might note the fall of a sparrow but they don’t
make any effort to catch them.

Shoot the dictator and prevent the war? But the dictator is merely the
tip of the whole festering boil of social pus from which dictators
emerge; shoot one and there’ll be another one along in a minute. Shoot
him too? Why not shoot everyone and invade Poland? In fifty years’,
thirty years’, ten years’ time the world will be very nearly back on its
old course. History always has a great weight of inertia.

Almost always …

At circle time, when the walls between this and that are thinner, when
there are all sorts of strange leakages … Ah, then choices are made,
then the universe can be sent careening down a different leg of the
well-known Trousers of Time.

This kind of question can be asked of any dynamical system, emergent or
not; but it takes on a special aspect when the dynamic ‘makes itself up
as it goes along’. In a rerun, would it make up the same thing? Would it
tell the same story? If so, that story is robust: it has a degree of
inevitability, not just in some particular run of history, but in all of
them.

Science fiction writers explore historical phase space in ‘alternate⁵
universe’ stories, where one historical event is changed and the author
develops possible consequences. Philip K. Dick’s _The Man in the High
Castle_ explores a history in which Germany won World War II. Harry
Harrison’s _West of Eden_ trilogy explores a world in which the K/T
meteorite missed and the dinosaurs survived. Science writers also ask
about historical phase space, especially in the context of evolution.
The most celebrated example is Stephen Jay Gould’s _Wonderful Life_,
which asks whether humans would arise again on Earth if evolution were
to be run again. His answer, ‘no’, rests on a very literal
interpretation of ‘human’. Harrison’s answer in _West of Eden_ is that
intelligent mosasaurs – contemporaries of the dinosaurs that had
returned to the sea – would evolve, and play the same role on the
evolutionary stage that humans have played in this world. (For plot
reasons he also has genuine humans in his alternate universe, but the
Yilané, the smart mosasaur descendants, were there first.)

Where Gould sees divergence and massive changes brought about by chance
events, Harrison sees convergence: same play, different actors. To
Gould, a change of actor is significant; to Harrison, what matters is
the play. Both have good arguments to present, but the main point is
that they are tackling different questions.

A second way in which science fiction writers explore alternative
historical tracks is through the time travel story, and this brings us
back to the wizards of Unseen University and their battle against the
elves. There are two kinds of time travel story. In the first kind, the
protagonists mainly use their ability to travel in time as a way of
observing the past or future; a good example is the first significant
time travel novel, H.G. Wells’s _The Time Machine_ of 1895. The time
machine is a vehicle for Wells to discuss the future of humanity, but
his Time Traveller makes no real effort to _change_ history. In
contrast, the narrative theme of Robert Silverberg’s 1969 novel _Up the
Line_ is the paradoxes that arise if it is possible to travel into the
past and change it. In this story, the Time Service does not set out to
change the past; on the contrary, its prime objective is to preserve the
past and avoid paradoxes, despite the activities of observers from the
future, who are cataloguing the past by visiting it and seeing what
actually happened.

The classic time travel paradox is ‘what if I went back and killed my
grandfather?’ The logic of the situation, of course, is that with
granddad dead, you wouldn’t have been born, so you wouldn’t be able to
go back and kill him, so he’d have lived, so you would have been born …
All attempts to resolve this self-contradictory causal loop are cheats:
perhaps granddad dies, but you get born anyway with different
grandparents, but then it wasn’t really granddad that you killed. In the
‘many worlds’ interpretation of quantum mechanics, the causal logic of
the universe holds together provided the grandfather that gets killed
was in a different parallel universe from that of the killer. But then
he wasn’t your real granddad, either, just a parallel version in some
other universe.

A slightly more subtle time paradox is the Cumulative Audience Paradox.
If people in the future have access to time machines, then they are
bound to want to go back and witness all of the great historical events,
like the crucifixion. But we know, from existing descriptions of these
events, that they did not happen in front of crowds of thousands of
visitors from the future. So where were they? This is a temporal
analogue of the Fermi Paradox⁶ about intelligent aliens: if they’re all
over the galaxy, then why aren’t they here? Why haven’t they visited us?
Other time paradoxes are used as essential plot elements in Robert A.
Heinlein’s short stories ‘By his bootstraps’ and ‘All you zombies’. In
the latter, a time-traveller manages to be his own father, son, and –
via a sex change – mother. When asked where he comes from, he replies
that he knows exactly where he comes from. The big puzzle is: where does
everybody _else_ come from? This idea is taken to serious extremes by
David Gerrold in _The Man Who Folded Himself_.

Over the last few decades, serious physicists have started thinking
about the possibility of time travel and the resolution of any
associated paradoxes. Their work is a tribute to narrative imperative on
Roundworld. The reason they are asking such questions is no doubt that
as children they read stories like those of Wells, Silverberg, Heinlein
and Gerrold. When they became professional physicists, the stories
bubbled up from their subconscious, and they began to take the idea
seriously – not as a practical engineering issue, but as a theoretical
challenge.

Do the laws of physics permit time travel, or not? You’d expect the
answer to be ‘no’, but the remarkable consequence of the theorists’
research is that it is ‘yes’. A working time machine is still a long way
off, and it may be that we’re missing some basic physical principle that
would change the answer to ‘no’, but the fact is that today’s accepted
frontier physics does not forbid time travel. It even offers a few
scenarios in which it could occur.

The context for such research is general relativity, in which the
continuum of space and time can be distorted by gravity. Or, more
accurately, in which gravity is caused by such distortions, ‘curved
spacetime’. In place of a time machine, the physicists look for a
‘closed timelike curve’. Such a curve corresponds to an object that
travels into the future and ends up in its own past, and so becomes
trapped in a closed ‘time loop’.

The best known way to generate a closed timelike curve is to use a
wormhole. A wormhole is a short-cut through space, obtained by fusing a
Black Hole to its time-reversal, a White Hole. Just as Black Holes suck
in anything that comes near them, White Holes spit things out. A
wormhole sucks things in at its black end and spits them out at its
white end. Of itself, a wormhole is more a matter-transmitter than a
time machine, but it becomes a time machine when allied to the famous
Twin Paradox. In relativity, time slows down for objects moving at very
high speeds. So if one member of a pair of twins heads out to a distant
star at very high speed, and then returns, she will have aged less than
the other twin who stayed at home. Suppose that the travelling twin
takes with her the white end of a wormhole, while her sister keeps the
black end. Then when the travelling twin returns, the white end is
younger than the black end: the exit from the wormhole lies in the past
of the entrance. So anything that is sucked into the black end is spat
out in its own past. Because the white end is now right next to the
black one – the twin has come back home – the object can hop across to
the Black Hole and go round and round this closed loop in spacetime,
tracing a closed timelike curve.

There are practical problems in making such a gadget, the main one(!)
being that the wormhole will collapse too quickly for an object to pass
through it, unless it is held open by threading ‘exotic matter’ with
negative energy through it. Nonetheless, none of this is forbidden by
the current laws of physics. So what of the paradoxes? It turns out that
the laws of physics forbid genuine paradoxes, although they permit many
apparent paradoxes. A useful technique for understanding the difference
is known as a Feynman diagram, which is a picture of the motion of an
object (usually a particle) in space and time.

For example, here is an apparent time travel paradox. A man is
imprisoned in a concrete cell, locked from the outside, with no food, no
water and no possibility of escape. As he sits in a corner in despair,
waiting for death, the door opens. The person who has opened it is …
himself. He has returned in a time machine from the future. But how (the
paradox) did he get to the future in the first place? Well, a kind
person opened the door and set him free …

There seems to be something very odd about the causality in this story,
but the corresponding Feynman diagram shows that it violates none of the
laws of physics. First, the man follows a space-time path that puts him
inside the cell and then removes him from it through an opened door.
This time-line continues into his future until he encounters a time
machine. Then the time-line reverses direction, heading into the past,
until he encounters a locked cell. He opens it, and his time-line
reverses again, propelling him into his own future. So the man follows a
single zig-zag path through time, and at every step the laws of physics
hold good. Provided his time machine violates no physical law, of
course.

If you try to ‘explain’ the grandfather paradox by this method, it
doesn’t work. The time-line leading from grandfather to killer is
severed when the killer returns; there is no consistent scenario, even
in a Feynman diagram. So some stories of time travel are consistent with
the laws of physics, and have their own kind of causal logic, albeit
twisted; but other equally plausible stories are inconsistent with the
laws of physics. You can rescue the Grandfather Paradox by assuming that
changing the past in a logically inconsistent way switches you into a
different alternate universe – say a quantum-mechanical parallel world.
But then it wasn’t your grandfather that you killed, but the grandfather
of an alternate you. So this ‘resolution’ of the Grandfather Paradox is
a cheat.

Faced with all this, the way that the wizards handle the complications
of time travel seems quite reasonable!

¹ The superstition is common in the Black Country, in places like
Wombourne and Wednesbury. Though that’s not why it’s called the Black
Country. The thing about your Black Country is, it’s black. At least, it
_was_ black, with industrial grime and pollution, when it got its name.
Some bits no doubt still are.

² Schrödinger pointed out that quantum mechanics often gives silly
answers like ‘the cat is half alive and half dead’. His intention was to
dramatise the gap between a quantum-level description of reality and the
world we actually live in, but most physicists missed the point and
derived complicated explanations of why cats really are like that. And
why the universe needs conscious observers to ensure that it continues
to exist. Only recently did they twig what Schrödinger was on about, and
come up with the concept of ‘decoherence’, which shows that
superpositions of quantum states rapidly change into single states
unless they are protected from interaction with the surrounding
environment. And the universe doesn’t need _us_ to make it hold
together, sorry. See _The Science of Discworld_, with a cameo appearance
of Nanny Ogg’s cat Greebo.

³ Discworld runs this far more sensibly. Heroes will have adventures.

⁴ Recall that Yossarian is a pilot in Joseph Heller’s _Catch-22_.

⁵ We use this word because it’s standard in science fiction, but UK
English would require ‘alternative’.

⁶ Named after the physicist Enrico Fermi. See _Evolving the Alien_ by
Jack Cohen and Ian Stewart.

TWENTY-NINE

ALL THE GLOBE’S A THEATRE

[image]THE ELVES DID NOT SPEND A LOT OF TIME in serious thought. They
could control people who could do the thinking for them. They didn’t
play music, they did not paint, they never carved stone or wood. Control
was the talent, and it was the only one they had ever needed.

Nevertheless, there were ones who had survived for many thousands of
years, and while they had no great intelligence they had accumulated
that mass of observations, experience, cynicism and memory that can pass
for wisdom among people who don’t know any better. One of the wisest
things they did was not read.

They had found some clerks to read the play.

They listened.

Then, when it was over, the Queen said: ‘And the wizards have been
showing great interest in this man?’

‘Yes, your majesty,’ said one of the old ones.

The Queen frowned. ‘This … _play_ is … good. It treats us … kindly. We
are firm but fair with mortals. We offer rewards to those who deal well
with us. Our beauty is satisfactorily referred to. Our … issues with our
husband are treated more romantically than I would like, but,
nevertheless … it is positive, it enhances us, it places us yet more
firmly in the human world. One of the wizards was actually carrying
this.’

One of the senior elves cleared its throat. ‘Our grip is loosening, your
majesty. Humanity is becoming more, shall we say, questioning?’

The Queen shot it a glance. But it was older than many Queens, and did
not step back.

‘You think it will do us harm? Is it a plot against us?’

The senior elves looked at one another. The main reason that they
thought it was a plot was that they were predisposed to see plots. In
the court of Faerie, an inability to see it coming meant that it took
you by the throat.

‘We think it may be,’ one said at last.

‘How? In what way?’

‘We know the wizards have been seen in the company of the author,’ said
the elf.

‘Then perhaps they are endeavouring to _stop_ him writing the play, have
you thought of that?’ snapped the Queen. ‘Can you see _any_ way in which
those words harm us?’

‘We are agreed that we cannot … nevertheless, we have a sense that in
some way—’

‘It is so simple! At last we are done some real honour and the wizards
will try to stop it! Are you so stupid that you cannot see that?’

Her long dress swirled as she turned on her heel. ‘It _will_ happen,’
she said. ‘I will see to it!’

The senior elves filed out, not looking at her face. They knew those
moods.

On the stairs one said to the others: ‘Purely out of interest … can any
of _us_ put a girdle around the Earth in three minutes?’

‘That would be a very big girdle,’ said an elf.

‘And would _you_ wish to be called Peaseblossom?’

The eyes of the old elf were grey, flecked with silver. They had seen
horrible things under many suns, and in most cases had enjoyed them.
Humans were a valuable crop, the elf conceded. There had never been a
species like it for depth of awe, terror and superstition. No other
species could create such monsters in its heads. But sometimes, it
considered, they were not worth the effort.

‘I think not,’ it said.

‘Well, now, Will – do you mind if I call you Will? Oh, Dean, fetch Will
another pint of this really unpleasant ale, will you? Now … where was I
… oh yes, I really enjoyed that play of yours. Magnificent, I thought!’
Ridcully beamed. Around him, the inn hummed with life.

Will tried to focus. ‘Which one was that, good sir?’ he said.

Ridcully’s smile remained fixed, but began to unravel around the edges.
He was never one for unnecessary reading.

‘The one with the king in it,’ he said, aiming for safety.

On the other side of the table Rincewind did some desperate pantomime.

‘The rabbit,’ said Ridcully. ‘The rat. The ferret. Sounds like … hat.
Rat. Rodent. Thing with teeth.’

Rincewind gave up, leaned across and whispered.

‘Something about the shrew,’ said Ridcully. Rincewind whispered a little
harder.

‘The one about the tame shrew. The man married a shrew. A shrewish
woman. Not a real shrew, obviously, haha. No one would marry a real
shrew. It would be a completely foolish idea.’

Will blinked. He was not, as an actor and a writer, averse to alcohol
bought by other people, and these people were being very good hosts. It
was just that they seemed to be completely deranged.

‘Er … I thank you,’ he said. He was aware of being stared at, and also
of a strange but not unpleasant animal smell. He turned on the bench and
was rewarded with a grin. It occupied all the space between a deep hood
and a jerkin. There were a couple of brown eyes, too, but it was the
grin his gaze kept coming back to.

The Librarian raised his tankard and gave Will a friendly nod. This
caused the grin to get bigger.

‘Now I’m sure you hear this all the time,’ said Ridcully, slapping Will
so hard on the back that his drink slopped, ‘but we’ve got an idea for
you. Dean, more ale all round, eh? It really is very weak stuff. Yes, an
idea.’ He poked Will in the chest. ‘Too many kings, that’s the trouble.
What the public wants now, what puts bums on seats—’

‘Feet,’ said Rincewind.

‘What?’

‘Bums on feet, Archchancellor. It’s mostly standing room in the
theatre.’

‘Feet, then. Bums, anyway. Thank you, Dean. Cheers.’ Ridcully wiped his
mouth delicately and turned his attention again to Will, who tried to
avoid the prodding finger.

‘Bums on, haha, feets,’ he said, and blinked. ‘Funny thing, funny thing,
something similar happened to us, ’smatterofact, few years ago,
Midsummer’s Eve, these chaps were going to put on a play thingy for the
king, next thing, elves all over the place, haha. Why, yes, Runes, I’ll
have another if you’re paying, it’s far too sweet to be a serious drink.
Where was I? Ah. Elves. What you’ve got to do, what you’ve gotta do … is
… why aren’t you writing this down?’

In the morning Rincewind opened his eyes at the fourth attempt and with
the assistance of both hands. There was a moment of brain lag, where the
little wheels spun happily with no work to do, and then big horrible
machinery cut in.

‘Whg d’hl der …’ he said, and then got control of his mouth as well.

Bits of last night crept out of hiding to do their treacherous dance
before his eyes. He groaned.

‘We couldn’t have done that, could we?’ he muttered.

And memory said: that was only the start …

Rincewind sat up and waited until the world stopped moving.

He’d been on the floor in the library. The other wizards lay scattered
around the room or sprawled across piles of books. The air smelled of
beer.

A veil will be drawn over the following half an hour, and lifted to find
the wizards sitting around the table.

‘It must’ve been the pork scratchings,’ said the Dean.

‘I don’t remember any pork scratchings,’ muttered Ponder.

‘Something crunchy, anyway. They may have been moving about.’

‘There’s no doubt in my mind that it was caused by all this travelling
we’ve been doing,’ said Ridcully. ‘That sort of thing must take a
terrible toll on the system. We’ve been concentrating so hard, d’yer
see, that the moment we relaxed the strain we just unwound, like a big
spring.’

The wizards brightened up. Rascally drunkenness was too much of an
embarrassment to men who could sit through an entire meal at the UU high
table, but time sickness … yes, that had a certain cachet. They could
live with time sickness although, at the moment, they were wishing they
didn’t have to.

‘That’s right!’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘It wasn’t the
fight!’

‘And it couldn’t possibly have been the carousing, which was really
quite moderate by our standards,’ said the Dean.

‘In fact we didn’t get drunk at all!’ said the Chair of Indefinite
Studies, brightly.

Unfortunately, Rincewind’s memory was literally treacherous. It worked
perfectly.

‘So, then,’ he said, wishing that he didn’t have to, ‘we didn’t tell
Will all that stuff?’

‘What stuff?’ said Ridcully.

‘All about our magical library, for one thing. And you kept saying
“Here’s a good one, I bet you can use this” and you told him about those
witches up in Lancre and how they got the new king on the throne, and
that time the elves broke through, and how the Selachii and the Venturi
families are always fighting—’

‘We did?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes. And about the countries we’ve visited. Lots of things.’

‘Why didn’t someone stop me?’

‘The Dean did try. That’s when you hit him with the Chair of Indefinite
Studies, I think.’

The wizards sat in ale-smelling gloom.

‘Should we have another try?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘What, and tell him to forget it all?’ said Ridcully. ‘Talk sense, man.’

‘Perhaps we could go back in time and stop ourselves telling—’

‘Don’t say that! No more of that!’ snapped the Archchancellor.

Rincewind pulled a copy of the play towards him. The wizards froze.

‘Go on,’ said Ridcully. ‘Tell us the worst. What did he write?’

Rincewind opened the book and read a couple of lines at random:

‘_You spotted snakes, with double tongue_;

_Thorny hedgehogs, be not_—’

‘No, no, no,’ muttered the Dean, his head in his hands. ‘Please tell me
no one sang him the Hedgehog Song …’

Rincewind’s lips moved as he read on. He turned over a few pages. He
flicked back to the beginning.

‘It’s all here,’ he said. ‘Same rather bad jokes, same unbelievable
confusions, everything! Just as it was before! But it’s going to happen
here!’

The wizards looked at one another and dared to share a smug expression.

‘Ah well, there we are then,’ said Ridcully, sitting back. ‘Job done.’

Rincewind turned some more pages. His recollections of the night were
not coherent, but even a genius couldn’t have made sense out of a bunch
of drunken wizards all talking at once.

‘Hex?’ he said.

The crystal ball said: ‘Yes?’

‘Will this play be performed in this world?’

‘That is the intention,’ said the voice of Hex.

‘And then what will happen?’

Hex told them, and added: ‘That is one outcome.’

‘Just a moment,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘There’s more than one outcome?’

‘Certainly. The play may not take place. Phase space contains a
broadsheet account of a disruption of the first performance, followed by
a fire in which a number of people died. Subsequently the theatres were
closed and the playwright died during a riot. He was struck by a pike.’

‘You mean a halberd, of course,’ said Ridcully.

‘A pike,’ Hex repeated. ‘A fishmonger was involved.’

‘What happened to civilisation?’

Hex was silent for a moment, and then said: ‘Humanity failed by three
years to leave the planet.’

THIRTY

LIES TO HUMANS

[image] _PLEASE TELL ME NO ONE SANG him the Hedgehog Song_ …

The Hedgehog Song, a Discworld ditty in the general tradition of Eskimo
Nell, first made its appearance in _Wyrd Sisters_ with its haunting
refrain ‘The hedgehog can never be buggered at all’. The wizards have
wielded the power of story with a vengeance. They have used it to prime
their secret weapon, Shakespeare, and are convinced that he will prove
more effective than a MIRVed ICBM. But before he’s launched, they’ve
very properly started to worry about collateral damage: possible
cultural contamination by the Hedgehog Song.

It is a consequence only marginally less dire than eternal
elf-infestation, but on the whole, preferable.

In the real Roundworld, the power of story is just as great as it is in
the fictional counterpart. Stories have power because we have minds, and
we have minds because stories have power. It’s a complicity, and all
that remains is to unwrap it.

As we do so, bear in mind that Discworld and Roundworld are not so much
different as complementary. Each, in its own estimation at least, gave
birth to the other. On Roundworld, the Disc is seen as fantasy, the
invention of an agile mind; Discworld is a series of stories (amazingly
successful) along with ceramic models, computer games and cassette
tapes. Discworld runs on magic, and on narrative imperative. Things
happen on Discworld because people assume they will, and because some
things have to happen to complete the story. From the standpoint of
Roundworld, Discworld is a Roundworld invention.

The Discworld view is similar, but inverted. The wizards of Unseen
University _know_ that Roundworld is merely a Discworld creation, an
unanticipated spin-off from an all-too-successful attempt to split the
thaum and create the first self-sustaining magical chain reaction. They
know this because they were there when it happened. Roundworld was
deliberately created to keep magic out. Surprisingly, the magic-free
vacuum acquired its own regulatory principle. Rules. Things happen on
Roundworld because they are consequences of the rules. However, it is
astonishingly difficult to look at the rules and understand what their
consequences will be. Those consequences are emergent. The wizards
discovered this to their cost, as every attempt to do something
straightforward in Roundworld – like creating life or jump-starting
extelligence – went seriously awry.

These two worldviews are not mutually contradictory, for they are
worldviews of two different worlds. Yet, thanks to the
interconnectedness of L-space, each world illuminates the other.

The strange duality between Roundworld and Discworld parallels another:
the duality between Mind and Matter. When Mind came to Roundworld, a
very remarkable change occurred. Narrative imperative appeared in
Roundworld. Magic came into existence. And elves, and vampires, and
myth, and gods. Characteristically, all of these things came into being
in an indirect and offbeat way, like the relationship between rules and
consequences. Things didn’t exactly _happen_ because of the power of
story. Instead, the power of story made minds _try_ to make the things
in the story happen. The attempts were not always successful, but even
when they failed, Roundworld was usually changed.

Narrative imperative arrived on Roundworld like a small god, and grew in
stature according to human belief. When a million human beings all
believe the same story, and all try to make it come true, their combined
weight can compensate for their individual ineffectiveness.

There is no science in Discworld, only magic and narrativium. So the
wizards put science into Discworld in the form of the Roundworld
Project, as detailed in _The Science of Discworld_. With elegant
symmetry, there was no magic or narrativium in Roundworld, so humans put
them there, in the form of story.

Before narrative imperative can exist, there has to be narrative, and
that’s where Mind proved decisive. The imperative followed hard on the
heels of the narrative, and the two complicitly co-evolved, for as soon
as there was a story, there was someone who wanted to make it come true.
Nonetheless, the story beat the compulsion by a nose.

What makes humans different from all other creatures on the planet is
not language, or mathematics, or science. It is not religion, or art, or
politics, either. All of those things are mere side effects of the
invention of story. Now it might seem that without language there can be
no stories, but that is an illusion, brought about by our current
obsession with recording stories as words on paper. Before there was a
word for ‘elephant’ it was possible to point at an elephant and make
evocative gestures, to draw an elephant on the cave wall and add spears
flying towards it, or to mould a model of an elephant from clay and act
out a hunting scene. The story was as clear as day, and an elephant-hunt
would follow hard on its heels.

We are not _Homo sapiens_, Wise Man. We are the third chimpanzee. What
distinguishes us from the ordinary chimpanzee _Pan troglodytes_, and the
bonobo chimpanzee _Pan paniscus_, is something far more subtle than our
enormous brain, three times as large as theirs in proportion to body
weight. It is what that brain makes possible. And the most significant
contribution that our large brain made to our approach to the universe
was to endow us with the power of story. We are _Pan narrans_, the
storytelling ape.

Even today, five million years since we and the other two species of
chimpanzee went our separate evolutionary ways, we still use stories to
run our lives. Every morning we buy a newspaper to find out, so we tell
ourselves, what is happening in the world. But most things that are
happening in the world, even rather important ones, never make it into
the papers. Why not? Because newspapers are written by journalists, and
every journalist learned at their mother’s knee that what grabs
newspaper readers is a _story_. Events with zero significance for the
planet, such as a movie star’s broken marriage, are stories. Events that
matter a great deal, such as the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) as
propellants in aerosol cans of shaving-cream, are not stories. Yes, they
can become stories, and in this case do when we discover that those
selfsame CFCs are destroying the ozone layer; we even have a title for
the story, The Ozone Hole. But nobody knew or recognised there was a
story when shops first started selling aerosol cans, even though that
was the decisive event.

Religions have always recognised the power of a good story. Miracles run
better at the box-office than mundane good actions. Helping an old lady
across the road isn’t much of a story, but raising the dead most
certainly is. Science is riddled with stories. In fact, if you can’t
tell a convincing story about your research, nobody will let you publish
it. And even if they did, nobody else would understand it. Newton’s laws
of motion are simple little stories about what happens to lumps of
matter when they are given a push – stories only a little more precise
than ‘if you keep pushing, it will go faster and faster’. And
‘Everything moves in circles’, as Ponder would insist.

Why are we so wedded to stories? Our minds are too limited to grasp the
universe for what it is. We’re very small creatures in a very big world,
and there is no way that we could possibly represent that world in full,
intricate detail inside our own heads. Instead, we operate with
simplified representations of limited parts of the universe. We find
simple models that correspond closely to reality extremely attractive.
Their simplicity makes them easy to comprehend, but that’s not much use
unless they also _work_. When we reduce a complex universe to a simple
principle, be it The Will of God or Schrödinger’s Equation, we feel that
we’ve really accomplished something. Our models are stories, and
conversely, stories are models of a more complex reality. Our brains
fill in the complexity automatically. The story says ‘dog’ and we
immediately have a mental picture of the beast: a big, bumbling Labrador
with a tail like a steam-hammer, tongue lolling, ears flopping.¹ Just as
our visual system fills in the blind spot.

We learn to appreciate stories as children. The child’s mind is quick
and powerful, but uncontrolled and unsophisticated. Stories appeal to
it, and adults rapidly discovered that a story can put an idea into a
child’s head like nothing else can. Stories are easy to remember, both
for teller and listener. As that child grows to adulthood, the love of
stories remains. An adult has to be able to tell stories to the next
generation of children, or the culture does not propagate. And an adult
needs to be able to tell stories to other adults, such as their boss or
their mate, because stories have a clarity of structure that does not
exist in the messiness of the real world. Stories always make sense:
that’s why Discworld is so much more convincing than Roundworld.

Our minds make stories, and stories make our minds. Each culture’s
Make-a-Human kit is built from stories, and maintained by stories. A
story can be a rule for living according to one’s culture, a useful
survival trick, a clue to the grandeur of the universe, or a mental
hypothesis about what might happen if we pursue a particular course.
Stories map out the phase space of existence.

Some stories are just entertainment, but even those usually have a
hidden message on a deeper, possibly more earthy, level – as with
Rumpelstiltskin. Some stories are Worlds of If, a way for minds to try
out hypothetical choices and imagine their consequences. Word-play in
the Nest of the Mind. And some of those stories have such a compelling
logic that narrative imperative takes over, and they transmute into
plans. A plan is a story together with the intention of making it come
true.

Inside Roundworld, as it sits in its glass globe within the confining
walls of the library of Unseen University, our story is coming to its
climax. Will Shakespeare has written a play (it is, of course, _A
Midsummer Night’s Dream_), a play that the elves believe will
consolidate their power over human minds. The narrative of this play has
collided with Rincewind’s mental model of what he wants to do, and the
flying sparks have ignited a plot. How will it all end? That is one of
the compulsive aspects of a story. You’ll just have to wait and see.

We have seen how history unfolds an emergent dynamic, so that even
though everything is following rigid rules, even history itself has to
wait and see how it all turned out. Yes, everything is following the
rules, but there is no short cut that will take you to the destination
before the rules themselves get there. History is not a story that
exists in a book, the fatalistic ‘it is written’. It is a story that
makes itself up as it goes along, like a story that someone is reading
and you are listening to. It is _being_ written …

Philosophically, there ought to be a big difference between a story that
is already written, and one that is being created word by word as you
read it. The one is a story whose every sentence is predetermined; not
only can there be only one possible outcome, but the outcome is already
‘known’. The other is a story whose next sentence does not yet exist,
whose ending in unknown even to the storyteller. You are reading the
first kind of story, but while we were writing it, it was the second
kind of story. In fact, it started out as a totally different story, but
we never wrote that one at all. The philosophers realised long ago that
it is no easy matter to determine which kind of story fits our world. If
we had the ability to run the world again, we might discover that it
does different things on the second occasion, and if so, the history of
the universe would be a story that unfolds as it goes, not one already
committed to paper.

But this doesn’t look like a feasible experiment.

Our fascination with stories lays us open to a variety of errors in our
relationship with the outside world. The rapid spread of rumours, for
instance, is a tribute to how our love of a juicy story overcomes our
critical faculties. The mechanism is precisely the one that the
scientific method tries very hard to protect us against: believing
something because you want it to be true. Or, for some rumours, because
you fear it could be true. A rumour is one example of a more general
concept, introduced in 1976 by Dawkins in _The Selfish Gene_. He came up
with this notion in order to be able to discuss an evolutionary system
that was different from the Darwinian evolution of organisms. It is the
_meme_. The associated subject of ‘memetics’ is science’s attempt to
comprehend the power of story.

The word ‘meme’ was coined by deliberate analogy with ‘gene’, and
‘memetics’ with ‘genetics’. Genes are passed from one generation of
organisms to the next; memes are passed from one human mind to another
human mind. A meme is an idea that is so attractive to human minds that
they want to pass it on to others. The song ‘Happy Birthday to You’ is a
highly successful meme; so, for a long time, was Communism, though that
was a complicated system of ideas, a _memeplex_. Ideas exist as some
cryptic pattern of activity in brains, so brains, and their associated
minds, provide an environment in which memes can exist and propagate.
Indeed, replicate, for when you teach a child to sing ‘Happy Birthday to
You’, you don’t forget the song yourself. The Hedgehog Song is an
equally successful Discworld meme.

As the home computer spread across the globe, and became inextricably
wired into the Internet’s extelligence, an environment was created that
gave birth to an insidious silicon-based form of meme: the computer
virus. All viruses so far seem to have been written deliberately by
humans, although at least one turned out to be a far more successful
replicator than its designer had intended, thanks to a programming
error. ‘Artificial life’ simulations using evolving computer programs
are often run inside a ‘shell’ that isolates them from the outside
world, because of the unlikely but possible evolution of a really nasty
computer virus. The world’s computer network is certainly complex enough
to evolve its own viruses, given enough time.

Memes are mind-viruses.

In _The Meme Machine_, Susan Blackmore says that ‘Memes spread
themselves around indiscriminately without regard to whether they are
useful, neutral, or positively harmful to us.’ The song ‘Happy Birthday
to You’ is mostly harmless, although it is just about possible to see it
as an insidious piece of propaganda for global commerce if you’re that
way inclined. Advertising is a conscious attempt to unleash memes; a
successful advertising campaign starts to build its own momentum as it
spreads by word of mouth as well as overt TV or newspaper ads. Some
advertising is beneficial (Oxfam, say) and some is manifestly harmful
(tobacco). In fact, many memes are harmful, but still propagate very
effectively: among them are the chain-letter and its financial analogue,
pyramid selling. Just as DNA propagates without having any conscious
intentions of its own, so memes replicate without having conscious
objectives. The people who set the memes loose may have had overt
intentions, but the memes themselves don’t. Those that perform well,
leading human minds to pass them on in quantity, thrive; those that do
not, die out, or at best live on as small, isolated pockets of
infection. The spread of a meme is much like the spread of a disease.
And just as you can protect yourself against some diseases, by taking
the right precautions, you can also protect yourself against becoming
infected with a meme. The ability to think critically, and to question
statements that rest on authority instead of evidence, are quite
effective defences.

This is our message to you. You need not be a victim of the power of
story, like Vorbis the Quisitor, smitten by an earthbound tortoise, the
Wrath of Om. You can be a Granny Weatherwax, sailing through story-space
like a master navigator, attuned to every breath of narrative wind (and
a lot of it is, mark you), tacking against the gale like a maverick,
avoiding the Shoals of Dogma and the Scylla and Charybdis of Indecision
…

Sorry, we got carried away. What we mean is: if you understand the power
of story, and learn to detect abuses of it, you might actually deserve
the appellation _Homo sapiens_.

Blackmore’s book argues that many aspects of human nature are explained
much better by memetics, the mechanisms whereby memes exist and
propagate, than by any existing rival theory. In our terminology,
memetics illuminates the complicity between intelligence and
extelligence, between the individual mind and the culture of which it is
but one tiny part. Some critics counter that the memeticists can’t even
say what the basic unit of a meme is. For example, are the first four
notes of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony (dah-dah-da DUM) a meme, or is the
meme really the whole symphony? Both replicate successfully: the second
in the minds of music-lovers, the first in a weird variety of minds.

However, this kind of criticism never carries much weight when a new
theory is being developed. Not that this stops the critics, of course.
By the time a scientific theory can ‘define’ its concepts with complete
precision, it’s dead. Very few concepts can actually be defined
completely: not even something like ‘alive’. What, precisely, does
‘tall’ mean? ‘Rich’? ‘Wet’? ‘Convincing’? Let alone ‘slood’. If it comes
to the crunch, the basic unit of _genetics_ has not been defined in any
convincing way, either. Is it a DNA base? A DNA sequence that codes for
proteins, a ‘gene’ in the most limited sense? A DNA sequence with a
known function – a ‘gene’ in its broadest sense? A chromosome? An entire
genome? Does it have to exist inside an organism? Most DNA in the world
contributes nothing genetic to the future: there’s DNA in dead skin
flakes, falling leaves, rotting logs …

Dawkins’s famous phrase ‘It is raining DNA outside’, applied to downy
seeds of the willow tree at the start of chapter 5 of _The Blind
Watchmaker_, is poetic. But very little of that DNA leads anywhere; it’s
just another molecule to be broken down as the falling seeds rot. A few
seeds survive to germinate; fewer still produce plants; and most of
those die or are eaten before they grow into a willow tree and produce
the next rainfall of seeds. DNA has to be in the right place (in sexual
species, eggs or sperm) at the right time (fertilisation) before it
propagates itself in any genetic sense. None of this stops genetics
being a real science, and a very exciting and important one. So the
fuzziness of definitions is not a good stick with which to beat the
memetic dog, or indeed any dog that has anything going for it.

In his original discussion, almost as an aside, Dawkins suggested that
religion is a meme, which goes something like ‘If you wish to avoid the
everlasting fires, you must believe _this_, and pass it on to your
children’.² The popularity of religion is no doubt more complicated than
that; nevertheless, there is the germ of an idea here, because that
sentence does correspond rather closely to the central message of many –
not all – religions. The theologian John Bowker was sufficiently
disturbed by this suggestion that he wrote _Is God a Virus_? to shoot it
down. The fact that he bothered shows that he saw it as an important
(and from his viewpoint dangerous) question.

Blackmore recognises that a religion, or any ideology, is too complex to
be propagated by a single meme, just as an organism is too complex to be
propagated by a single gene. Dawkins recognised this, too, and came up
with a concept that he called ‘coadapted meme complexes’. These are
systems of memes that replicate collectively. The meme ‘If you wish to
avoid the everlasting fires, you must believe _this_, and pass it on to
your children’ is too simple to get very far, but if it is allied to
other memes like ‘The way to avoid the everlasting fires can be found in
the Holy Book’ and ‘You must read the Holy Book or face eternal
damnation’, then the whole collection of memes forms a network that
replicates far more effectively.

A complexity theorist would call such a collection of memes an
‘autocatalytic set’: each meme is catalysed, its replication is
assisted, by some or all of the others. In 1995 Hans-Cees Speel coined
the term ‘memeplex’. Blackmore has a whole chapter on ‘Religions as
memeplexes’. If this line of argument bothers you, hang on a minute. Are
you saying that religion is _not_ a collection of beliefs and
instructions that can be passed very successfully from one person to
another? That’s what ‘memeplex’ means. Anyway, replace ‘religion’ by
‘political party’ if you want to – not the one you support, naturally.
Those other idiots who advocate/despise (delete whichever is
inapplicable) free market economics, state pensions, public ownership of
industry, private ownership of public services … And bear in mind that
while the secret of the spread of your own religion may be that it is
The Truth, that can’t possibly be the secret of the spread of all those
other false religions in the world. Why the devil do sensible people
believe _that_ kind of rubbish?

Because it is a successful memeplex.

The evidence for memetic transmission of ideologies is extensive. For
example, every one of the world’s religions (barring ancient ones whose
origins are lost in the mists of time) seems to have started with a very
small group of believers and a charismatic leader. They are specific to
particular cultural backgrounds; the meme needs a fertile substrate on
which to grow. Many cherished beliefs of Christianity, for example, seem
absurd to anyone not brought up in the Christian tradition. Virgin
birth? (Well, that one was actually an inspired mistranslation of the
Hebrew for ‘young woman’, but no matter.) Restored the dead to life?
Communion wine becomes blood? Communion wafers are the body of Christ –
and you _eat_ them? Really? To believers, of course, all this makes
perfect sense, but to outsiders, uninfected by the meme, it’s
laughable.³

Blackmore points out that when it comes to a choice between doing good
and spreading the meme, religious people tend to go for the meme. To
most Catholics, and many other people, Mother Teresa was a saint (and
she looks well set to become one in the fullness of time). Her work in
the slums of Calcutta was selfless and altruistic. She did a lot of
good, no question. But some Calcuttans feel that she diverted attention
away from the real problems, and helped only those who accepted the
teachings of her faith. For example, she was staunchly against birth
control, the one practical thing that would have done the most good for
the young women who needed her help. But the Catholic memeplex forbids
birth control, and in a crunch, the meme wins. Blackmore sums up her
analysis like this:

These religious memes did not set out with an intention to succeed. They
were just behaviours, ideas and stories that were copied from one person
to another … They were successful because they happened to come together
into mutually supportive gangs that included all the right tricks to
keep them safely stored in millions of brains, books and buildings, and
repeatedly passed on to more.

In Shakespeare, memes become art. And now we move up another conceptual
level. In drama, genes and memes cooperate to produce a temporary
construct on a stage, for other extelligences to view. Shakespeare’s
plays give them pleasure, and change their minds. They, and works like
them, redirect human culture by attacking our own mental elvishness.

The power of story. Don’t leave home without it. And never, never,
_never_ underestimate it.

¹ It then comes as quite a jolt when we discover that the animal is a
chihuahua.

² The ‘Shema’ prayer, which orthodox Jews must say at least three times
a day, includes ‘And these words, which I command you this day, shall be
upon your heart; and you shall teach them diligently to your children,
and you shall talk of them when you sit in your house, when you walk
upon the way, when you lie down and when you rise up.’

³ Of course it ceases to be laughable if, despite its bizarre
appearance, it happens to be _true_. And we’ve already agreed that all
religions are true, for a given value of ‘true’.

THIRTY-ONE

A WOMAN ON STAGE?

[image] IT WAS THE SMELL of the theatre Rincewind remembered. People
talked about ‘the smell of the greasepaint, the roar of the crowd’ but,
he assumed, the word ‘roar’ must have been taken to mean the same as
‘stink’.

He also wondered why this theatre was called The Globe. It was not even
completely circular. But, he supposed, the new world might happen here …

He’d made a big concession for the occasion. He’d unstitched the few
remaining sequins from the word ‘WIZZARD’ on his hat. Given its general
lack of shape, and his robe’s raggedness, it now made him look far more
like one of the crowd, albeit a one that knew the meaning of the word
‘soap’.

He worked his way back through the throng to the wizards, who had
managed to get real seats.

‘How is it going?’ said Ridcully. ‘Remember, lad, the show _must_ go
on!’

‘Things are fine, as far as I can see,’ whispered Rincewind. ‘No sign of
any elves at all. We did spot a fishmonger in the crowd, so the
Librarian slugged him and hid him behind the theatre, just in case.’

‘You know,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, who was leafing
through the script, ‘this chap would write much better plays if he
didn’t have to have actors in them. They seem to get in the way all the
time.’

‘I read the _Comedy of Errors_ last night,’ said the Dean. ‘And I could
see the error right there. There wasn’t any comedy. Thank gods for
directors.’

The wizards looked at the crowd. It wasn’t as well behaved even as the
ones back home; people were picnicking, small parties were being held,
and there was a general sense that the audience looked upon the actual
play as pleasant background noise to their personal social occasions.

‘How will we know when it starts?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Oh, trumpets get blown,’ said Rincewind, ‘and then generally two actors
come on and tell one another what they already know.’

‘No sign of the elves anywhere,’ said the Dean, looking around with a
hand over one eye. ‘I don’t like it. It’s too quiet.’

‘No, sir, no, sir,’ said Rincewind. ‘That’s not the time not to like it.
The time not to like it is when it’s suddenly as noisy as all hell,
sir.’

‘Well, you get backstage with Stibbons and the Librarian, will you?’
said Ridcully. ‘And try not to look conspicuous. We mustn’t take any
chances.’

Rincewind worked his away around behind the stage, trying not to look
conspicuous. But it was a first night, and there was an informality
about the whole business that he’d never seen back home. People just
seemed to wander around. Back home, there never seemed to be so much
_pretence_; here, the actors played at being people and, down below,
people played at being an audience. The overall effect was rather
pleasing. The plays had a conspiratorial quality. Make it interesting
enough, their audience was saying, and we’ll believe anything. If you
don’t, we’ll have a party with our friends right here and throw nuts at
you.

Rincewind sat down on a pile of boxes offstage and watched as the play
began. There were raised voices and the gentle, subtle sound of an
expectant audience ready to tolerate quite a lot of plot exposition
provided there was a joke or a murder at the end of it.

There was no sign of elves, no telltale shimmer in the air. The play
wound on. Sometimes there was laughter, in which the deep boom of
Ridcully was distinctly noticeable, especially, for some reason, when
the clowns were on stage.

The stage elves met with approval, too. Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth and
Mustardseed … creatures of blossom and air. Only Puck seemed to
Rincewind to be anything like the elves he knew, and even he seemed more
of a prankster than anything else. Of course, the elves could be
pranksters, too, especially if a footpath ran beside a really
_dangerous_ ravine. And the glamour they used … well, here it was
charming …

… and there was the Queen, a few feet away. She didn’t flash into
existence, she emerged from the scenery. A group of lines and shadows
that had always been there suddenly, without actually changing, became a
figure.

She was wearing a black lace dress hung about with diamonds, so that she
looked like walking night.

She turned to Rincewind, with a smile.

‘Ah, potato man,’ she said. ‘We see your wizardly friends out there. But
they won’t be able to do anything. This show _will_ go on, you know.
Just as written.’

‘… will go on …’ murmured Rincewind. He couldn’t move. She’d hit him
with her full force. In desperation, he tried to fill his mind with
potatoes.

‘We _know_ you told him a garbled version,’ said the Queen, walking
around his quivering body. ‘And a lot of nonsense it was. So I appeared
to him in his room and put the whole thing in his mind. So simple.’

Roast potatoes, thought Rincewind. Sort of gold with brown edges, and
maybe almost black here and there so they’re nice and crunchy …

‘Can’t you hear the applause?’ said the Queen. ‘They like us. They
actually _like_ us. We’ll be in their paintings and stories from now on.
You’ll _never_ get us out of there …’

Chips, thought Rincewind, straight from the deep fryer, with little
bubbles of fat still spitting and popping … but he couldn’t stop his
treacherous head from nodding.

The Queen looked puzzled.

‘Don’t you think about _anything_ but potatoes?’ she said.

Butter, thought Rincewind, chopped chives, melted cheese, salt …

But he couldn’t stop the thought. It opened up inside his head, pushing
away all potato-shaped fantasies. _All we have to do is nothing, and
we’ve won!_

‘What?’ said the Queen.

Mash! Huge mounds of mash! Creamed mash!

‘You’re trying to hide something, wizard!’ said the Queen, a few inches
from his face. ‘What is it?’

Potato cakes, fried potato skins, potato croquettes …

… no, not potato croquettes, no one ever did them properly … and it was
too late, the Queen was reading him like a book.

‘So …’ she said. ‘You think only mysteries last? Knowledge in
_unbelief?_ Seeing is _disbelieving?_’

There was a creaking above them.

‘The play’s not over, wizard,’ said the Queen. ‘But it’s going to stop
right _now_.’

At this point, the Librarian dropped on her head.

Winkin the glove stitcher and Coster the apple seller discussed the play
on the way home.

‘The bit with the queen and the man with the asses ears was good,’ said
Winkin.

‘Aye, it was.’

‘And the wall bit, too. When the man said “he is no crescent, and his
horns are invisible within the circumference”, I nearly widdled my
breeches. I like a good joke, me.’

‘Aye.’

‘But I didn’t understand why all those people in the fur and feathers
and stuff were chased across the stage by the man in the hairy red
costume, and why the fat men in the expensive seats all got up and on to
the stage and why the idiot in the red dress was running around
screaming about potatos, whatever _they_ are. While Puck was speaking at
the end I definitely thought I could hear a fight going on.’

‘Experimental theatre,’ said Winkin.

‘Good dialogue,’ said Coster.

‘And you’ve got to hand it to those actors, the way they kept going,’
said Winkin.

‘Yeah, and I could have sworn there was another Quene up on stage,’ said
Coster, ‘and she looked like a woman. You know, the one who was trying
to strangle that man babbling about potatoes.’

‘A woman on stage? Don’t be daft,’ said Winkin. ‘Good play, though.’

‘Yeah. I think they could cut out the chase sequence, though,’ said
Coster. ‘And frankly I don’t think you could get a girdle that big.’

‘Yes, it would be dreadful if special effects took over,’ said Winkin.

Wizards, like many large men, can be quite light on their feet.
Rincewind was impressed. By the sound of it, they were right behind him
as he sped along the path by the river.

‘Best not to wait for a curtain call, I thought,’ Ridcully panted.

‘Did you see me … wallop the Queen with a horseshoe?’ wheezed the Dean.

‘Yes … pity it was an actor,’ said Ridcully. “The other one was the elf.
Still, not a _complete_ waste of a horseshoe.’

‘But we certainly showed them, eh?’ said the Dean.

‘The history is completed,’ said the voice of Hex, from Ponder’s
bouncing pocket. ‘Elves will be viewed as fairies and such they will
become. Over the course of several centuries belief in them will dwindle
as they are moved into the realm of art and literature, which is where
the remnant of them will subsequently exist. They will become a subject
suitable for the amusement of children. Their influence will be severely
curtailed but will never die away completely.’

‘_Never_?’ panted Ponder, who was getting winded.

‘There will always be some influence. Minds on this world are extremely
susceptible.’

‘Yes, but we’ve pushed imagination to the next stage,’ puffed Ponder.
‘People can imagine that the things they imagine are imaginary. Elves
are little fairies. Monsters get pushed off the map. You can’t fear the
unseen when you can see it.’

‘There will be new kinds of monsters,’ said Hex, from Ponder’s pocket.
‘Humans are very inventive in that respect.’

‘Heads … on … spikes,’ said Rincewind, who liked to save his breath for
running.

‘Many heads,’ said Hex.

‘There’s always heads on spikes somewhere,’ said Ridcully.

‘The Shell Midden People didn’t have heads on spikes,’ said Rincewind.

‘Yes, but they didn’t even have spikes,’ said Ridcully.

‘You know,’ wheezed Ponder, ‘we _could_ have just told Hex to move us
directly to the opening into L-space …

They landed on the wooden floor, still running.

‘Can we teach him to do that on Discworld?’ said Rincewind, after they’d
picked themselves up from the heap by the wall.

‘No! Otherwise what use would you be?’ said Ridcully. ‘Come on, let’s go
…’

Ponder hesitated by the L-space portal. It was filled with dull, greyish
light, and a distant view of mountains and plains of books.

‘There’s still elves here,’ he said. ‘They’re persistent. They might
find some way to—’

‘Will you come on?’ snapped Ridcully. ‘We can’t fight _every_ battle.’

‘Something could still go wrong, though.’

‘Whose fault will that be now? No, come _on_!’

Ponder looked around, gave a little shrug, and stepped into the hole.

After a moment a hairy red arm came through and pulled more books
through the hole, piling them up until it was a wall of books.

Brilliant light, so strong that it lanced out between the pages, flashed
for a while somewhere in the heap.

Then it went dark. After a moment, a book slipped out of the pile, and
it collapsed, the books tumbling to the floor, and there was nothing
left but a bare wall.

And, of course, a banana.

THIRTY TWO

MAY CONTAIN NUTS

[image] WE ARE THE STORYTELLING APE, and we are incredibly good at it.

As soon as we are old enough to want to understand what is happening
around us, we begin to live in a world of stories. We _think_ in
narrative. We do it so automatically that we don’t think we do it. And
we have told ourselves stories vast enough to live in.

In the sky above us, patterns older than our planet and unimaginably far
away have been fashioned in gods and monsters. But there are bigger
stories down below. We live in a network of stories that range from ‘how
we got here’ to ‘natural justice’ to ‘real life’.

Ah, yes … ‘real life’. Death, who acts as a kind of Greek chorus in the
Discworld books, is impressed by some aspects of humanity. One is that
we have evolved to tell ourselves interesting and useful little lies
about monsters and gods and tooth fairies, as a kind of prelude to
creating really big lies, like ‘Truth’ and Justice’.

There is no justice. As Death remarks in _Hogfather_, you could grind
the universe into powder and not find one atom of justice. We created
it, and while we acknowledge this fact, nevertheless there is a sense in
which we feel it’s ‘out there’, big and white and shining. It’s another
story.

Because we rely so much on them, we love stories. We require them on a
daily basis. So a huge service industry has grown up over several
thousand years.

The basic narrative forms of drama – the archetypal stories – can all be
found in the works of the ancient Greek playwrights: Aeschylus,
Aristophanes, Euripides, Sophocles … Most of the dramatic tricks go back
to ancient Greece, especially Athens. No doubt they are older than that,
for no tradition starts in fully developed form. The ‘chorus’, a gaggle
of bit-players who form a backdrop for the main action and in various
ways reinforce it and comment on it, is of Greek or earlier origin. So
is the main division of the form of a play, though not necessarily its
substance, into comedy and tragedy. So, possibly, is the invention of
the huge stuffed joke willy, always good for a laugh from the cheap
seats.

The Greek concept of tragedy was an extreme form of narrative
imperative: the nature of the impending disaster had to be evident to
the audience and to virtually all of the players; but it also had to be
evident that it was going to happen anyway, despite that. You were
Doomed, as you should be – but we’ll watch anyway, to see how
_interestingly_ you’ll be Doomed. And if it sounds silly to watch a
drama when you know the ending in advance, consider this: how likely is
it, when you settle down to watch the next James Bond movie, that he
_won’t_ defuse the bomb? In fact you’ll be watching a narrative as rigid
as any Greek drama, but you’ll watch anyway to see how the trick is done
this time.

In our story, Hex is the chorus. In form, our tale is comedy; in
substance, it is closer to tragedy. The elves are a Discworld
reification of human cruelty and wickedness, they are evil incarnate
because – traditionally – they have no souls. Yet in their various
aspects they fascinate us, as do vampires and monsters and werewolves.
It’d be a terrible event if the last jungle yields up its tiger, and so
it would be, too, when the last forest yields up its werewolf (yes, all
right, technically they don’t exist, but we hope you know what we mean:
it’d be a bad day for humanity when we stop telling stories).

We’ve piled on to elves and yetis and all the other supernatural aspects
of ourselves; we’re happier to say that monsters are out there in the
deep dark forest than locked in here with us. Yet we need them, in a way
we find hard to articulate; the witch Granny Weatherwax tried to
summarise it in _Carpe Jugulum_, when she said ‘We need vampires, if
only to remind us what garlic is for’. G.K. Chesterton did rather better
when, in an article defending fairy stories, he disputed the suggestion
that stories tell children that there are monsters. Children already
_know_ there are monsters, he said. Fairy stories tell them that
monsters can be killed.

We need our stories to understand the universe, and sometimes we forget
that they’re only stories. There is a proverb about the finger and the
moon; when a wise man points at the Moon, the fool looks at the finger.
We call ourselves _Homo sapiens_, possibly out of a hope that this may
be true, but the storytelling ape has a tendency to confuse moons and
fingers.

When your god is an ineffable essence that exists outside of space and
time, with unimaginable knowledge and indescribable powers, a god of
boundless sky and high places, belief slips easily into the mind.

But the ape isn’t happy with that. The ape gets bored with things it
can’t see. The ape wants pictures. And it gets them, and then a god of
endless space becomes an old man with a beard sitting in the clouds.
Great art takes place in the god’s honour, and every pious brush gently
kills what it paints. The wise man says ‘But this is just a metaphor!’,
and the ape says ‘Yeah, but those tiny wings couldn’t lift a cherub that
fat!’ And then not so wise men fill the pantheon of heaven with
hierarchies of angels and set the plagues of man on horseback and write
down the dimensions of Heaven in which to imprison the lord of infinite
space.¹ The stories begin to choke the system …

Seeing is _not believing_.

Rincewind knows this, which is why he encourages Shakespeare to make
elves real. Because once you’re called Mustardseed, it’s downhill all
the way …

The elves cannot understand Rincewind’s ploy. Not until his thoughts
give it away to the Queen of the Elves, and the salvation of the world
rests upon 300 pounds of plummeting orangutan. Nevertheless, the plan
worked very well. This is Oberon, near the end of the play:

Through the house give glimmering light,

By the dead and drowsy fire;

Every elf and fairy sprite

Hop as light as bird from brier;

And this ditty, after me,

Sing and dance it trippingly.

There’s no hope for them. Next stop, nursery wallpaper. Whereas witches,
now:

Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,

Witch’s mummy, maw and gulf

Of the ravin’d salt-sea shark,

Root of hemlock digg’d I’th’ dark,

Liver of blaspheming Jew,

Gall of goat, and slips of yew

Silver’d in the moon’s eclipse,

Nose of Turk, and Tartar’s lips,

Finger of birth-strangled babe

Ditch-delivered by a drab—

Make the gruel thick and slab;

Add thereto a tiger’s chaudron,

For th’ ingredience of our cauldron.

No contest. What’s a chaudron? Entrails. _Definitely_ no contest. The
witches appear on stage in _Macbeth_ only three times, but they steal
the show. They probably got fan mail. The fairies are present for a
large part of _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_, but it is Bottom that steals
the show and only Puck has a glimmer of the old evil. They’ve been
parcelled, stamped and sent on their way to Tinkly Wood.

To be sure, Shakespeare’s Oberon is not all sweetness and light. He uses
the juice of a herb, the flower known as Love-in-idleness, to enchant
Titania, Queen of the Fairies, because she has gained possession of a
changeling child, and he wants it. He makes her fall in love with
Bottom, who at that point in the story is an ass. And he is appeased,
and she is entirely happy with the turn of events, when she gives him
the child. But that’s low-level, sanitised nastiness, a fretful
squabble, not a war.

The allure of the unknown fades into the tawdry reality of a specific
representation, once you see it dripping sequins. Abraham’s God of
Extelligence was far more compelling than a few golden (probably just
gold leaf) idols. But when the Renaissance artists started to paint God
as a bearded man in the clouds, they opened the way to doubt. The image
just wasn’t impressive enough. The pictures on radio are always so much
better than those on TV.

For the last few hundred years, humanity has been killing its myths.
Faith and superstition have been giving way, slowly and against
considerable resistance, to the critical assessment of evidence. They
may, perhaps, be enjoying a bit of a revival: many rational thinkers
have bemoaned the slide into cults and the wierd offshoots of New Ageism
… But those are all very subdued versions of the old myths, the old
beliefs; their teeth have been drawn.

Science alone is not The Answer. Science too has its myths. We have
shown you some of them, or at least what we believe to be some of them.
The misuse of anthropic reasoning is a clear example, as in the case of
the carbon resonance, but argued with no thought for the fudge-factor of
the red giant.

The ideal of the scientific method is often not realised. Its usual
statement is an oversimplification in any case, but the basic worldview
captures the essence. Think critically about what you are told. Do not
accept the word of authority unthinkingly. Science is not a belief
system: no belief system instructs you to question the system itself.
Science does. (There are many scientists, however, who treat it as a
belief system. Be wary of them.)

The most dangerous myths and ideologies, today, are the ones that have
not yet been destroyed by the rising ape. They still strut their stuff
on the world’s stage, causing grief and havoc – and the tragedy is that
it’s all to no purpose. Most of it doesn’t _matter_. Issues like
abortion do matter, to some extent; even ‘pro-choice’ adherents would
prefer that the choice should not be necessary. Issues like short skirts
or lengths of beards do _not_ matter, and it’s foolish and dangerous to
make a big fuss about them on a planet that is bursting at the seams
with an excess of people. To do so is to promote the memeplex above the
good of humanity. It is the action of a barbarian mind, a mind
sufficiently removed from reality that the consequences of its resident
memeplex do not affect it directly. It is not the actions of the naïve
young men who carry the suicide bomb, or fly the airliner into a
skyscraper, that are the root of the problem; it is the actions of the
evil old men who lead them to behave like that, all for the sake of a
few memes.

The key memes are not religious, in this case, we suspect, even though
religion is often blamed: that’s mostly a smokescreen. Those old men are
motivated by political memes, and the religious memeplex is merely
another of their weapons. But they are also trapped in their own
stories, and this is high tragedy. Granny Weatherwax would never make
that mistake.

The elves are still with us, in our heads. Shakespeare’s humanity, and
the critical faculties encouraged by science, are two of our weapons
against them. And fight them we must.

And to achieve that, we need to invent the right stories. The ones we’ve
got have brought us a long way. Plenty of creatures are intelligent, but
only one tells stories. That’s us, _Pan narrans_.

And what about _Homo sapiens_? Yes, we think that would be a very good
idea …

¹ Revelation xxi.16 gives it as 12,000 furlongs in length, breadth and
height, or a cube 1,500 miles on a side. Noticeably smaller than the
Moon.


INDEX

The page references in this index correspond to the printed edition from which this ebook was created. To find a specific word or phrase from the index, please use the search feature of your ebook reader.

A

Aaron 141, 142

‘aborigines’ 132

abortion 344

Abraham 172, 210–12, 344

acids, alchemy 66

actors 282–3

Adam and Eve 125

Adams, Douglas 304

adaptive radiation, evolution 133–4

adenine 52

adultery 142

advertising, memes 329

Aeschylus 341

Africa

forests 107

human evolution 88, 113

human genetic diversity 122, 132–3

Out of Africa theory 122, 124, 131–3

tribal beliefs 167*

African elephant 110–11

agriculture 118

aircraft 244*

Aladdin 158

alchemy 66–8, 239

algorithms 183–4

aliens 134

Fermi Paradox 314

Allah 167

‘alternate universe’ stories, science

fiction 312–13

altruism 213–14, 215

amino acids 186

Amish 142

ammonium chloride 66

amoebas 165, 186, 188

amusia, congenital 274–5

Andersen, Hans Christian 155

androstenone 287

angels 247

animals

in cave paintings 276

co-evolution 310

co-evolution with humans 119–21

cultural evolution 94–5

domestication 117–21

in fairy stories 74

free will 165

imagining being one 286, 287–9

mimicry 284

nests 94, 113

play 94

vomeronasal organ 287

Anthropic Principle 28, 30

_Anthropithecus boisi_ 109

anti-heroes 158

Antikythera mechanism 237–8, 242

Anubis 120

apes

evolution 107–8

human evolution 87–92, 99, 108–9, 112–13

paintings 265

_The Aquatic Ape_ (Morgan) 91–2

Arabian Nights 75

Arabs

alchemy 66

and the Renaissance 69

archer-fish 116

archetypal stories 340–1

Archimedean screw 237

Archimedes 70, 236–7, 238, 239, 241

Arctic 122

aristocracy, barbarian attitudes of 89, 99–100

Aristophanes 341

Aristotle 241–2

‘arrow of time’ 190, 191, 192, 194,195

arsenic 67

art

context 275

perception of 275–7

prehistoric man 275–6

teaching with lies 293

_see also_ music; paintings

Ashkenazi 141

Asia, human evolution 113

asteroids 47

_Astounding Science Fact and Fiction_ 134

astrology 65, 66, 169–70, 173

astronomy, predictions 173

_At Home in the Universe_ (Kauffman) 78

Athens 65, 341

atomism 72

atoms

carbon formation 28–30

models of 247–8

auditory nerve 268

Australia

‘aborigines’ 132

human evolution 113, 122, 131

rock drawings 276

_Australopithecus_ 88, 109

authority, obedience to 136, 157

autonomous agents 57

Avicenna 67

B

babbling, language development 154

babies

development of 188

human regard for 117

listening to music 263–4

predicting sex of 307–8

smiles 153–4

speech development 269

baboons 90, 107, 108

Babylon, Hanging Gardens 237

Bach, Johan Sebastian 270

background music 262–3, 265

balance, seasickness 274

bananas 217*

Bar-Mitzvah 136–7

barbarians

distinction from tribalism 137–41

nobility as 89, 99–100

storytelling 78, 157–8

Bastet 120

Bateson, Gregory 158–9

bats, echo-location 287–9

BBC 208

beaches, human evolution on 91–2

The Beatles 263, 272

bees 284, 290

Beethoven, Ludwig van 263, 271, 330

behaviour

altruism 213–14, 215

cheating 284

emergent behaviour 154–5, 307

lying 284–6, 289–93, 340

beliefs

as memes 331–2

religion 206–8, 218–22

science and 344

Berliner, David 286–7

beryllium 29

Bible 156, 173

bicycles 121–2

Big Bang 193, 194, 239, 247

bigfoot 113

Billingsley, Sir Henry 65

binary code 183

biology

phase spaces 51–5

_see also_ evolution

biospheres 55, 56–7

birds

adaptive radiation 133

birds of prey 94

meta-patterns 116

rituals 95

birth, astrology 169–70

birth control 333

Black Country 301*

Black Holes 194, 315

black paint, superstitions 301

blackbirds 93

Blackmore, Susan 329, 330, 331, 332, 333

_Blind Man’s Lantern_ (Hausa story) 116–17

blind spot, retina 266–7

_The Blind Watchmaker_ (Dawkins) 331

Blue, Rabbi Lionel 208

body language 284

Bond, James 158, 341

bonobo chimpanzees 109, 111, 124, 325

books, size of 49–50

Borneo 265

bower-birds 95

Bowker, John 331

Brahms, Johannes 273

brain

alternative scenarios 149–51, 155–6

congenital amusia 274–5

consciousness 22

cultural evolution 91–5

echo-location 288

endorphins 275

evolution of 23

hearing 268–9, 290

human evolution 114

listening to music 263–4, 269

memes 328–33

mental models 25–7, 166

mind theories 21

need for storytelling 326

neurons 186

pattern recognition 91, 116

sensory perception 266–9, 273–7, 287

size 90, 150–1

storytelling 325

telepathy 282

thought processes 21–2

understanding language 283

vision 266–8, 288, 290

breeding, puberty rituals 134–7

Brin, David 86, 119*

British Museum 50

_The Brothers Karamazov_ (Dostoyevsky) 221

Brown, Fredric 172

BSE (mad cow disease) 245*

Bubastis 120

bubbles, shape of 45–6

Buddhism 171, 241

bureaucracy 217

C

cabbalism 76

Cain and Abel 125*

Calcutta 333

Camerer, Colin 51

Campbell, John Jr 134, 135–6

car-sickness 274

carbon, formation of 27–30

cargo cults 80

cars 118, 152–3

Cartesian duality 20

Cartesian Theatre, model of consciousness 266

Carthage 46

_Catch-22_ (Heller) 311*

Catholic Church 333

cats

computing ability 271*

domestication 117, 118–19, 120–1

evolution of creodonts 310

free will 165

play 94

quantum mechanics 306–7

cattle 93, 117

causality

beliefs 74–6

human behaviour and 25–6

monotheism 172

Spinoza and 76–7

cave paintings 113, 265, 275–6

Cayley, Sir George 244*

CDs 187–8

cells, mitochondria 123

Celsus 67

centrifugal force 46

CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) 325–6

chain-letters 329

Chaitin, Gregory 183–4

chaos theory 165, 175, 304–5

Chase, Philip 131

cheating

altruism and 213

lying 284–6, 289–93, 340

predictions 307–8

cheetahs 109, 116

chemistry, alchemy and 66

chemotherapy 67

chess 48

Chesterton, G.K. 155*, 341–2

chickens 117

children

education 291

emergent behaviour 154–5

hearing 270

human regard for 117

importance of storytelling 342

language development 283

learning 93–4, 114–15

learning rules 77

‘lies-to-children’ 268, 291–3

paintings 265

rituals 217

storytelling 74–5, 78–9, 151–2,326–7

subculture 115

wish-fulfilment 74–5, 76, 77

chimpanzees 273

common ancestor with man 87, 108, 109

development 151–2

and human DNA 87–8, 112–13

immune system 124

intelligence 113

man as the third chimpanzee 325

meat-eating 95, 117

species 111

China 122

alchemy 67

apes 107

hominids 88

music 270

science 172

chivalry 99, 121

choices 165–6, 174–5

Christ 221, 332

Christian II, Elector of Saxony 68

Christianity 172, 221, 332–3

chromosomes 330

Y-chromosome 141, 142–3

cichlid fish 133–4

Cinderella 115

circles, area 46

circumcision 136, 139

civilisation, evolution of 98

_see also_ culture

CJD 245*

Clarke, Arthur C. 73, 75, 86, 272

‘classical’ education 69, 70

climate, tree growth rings 188

Clinton, Bill 142

cloning 31–2

closed timelike curves 314–15

co-evolution 119–21, 310

cochlea 268

Cocos Islands 133

codes

digital information 183

DNA 52, 53–4, 185–6

Cohen family 138–9, 141–3

coin-operated machines 70

cold dark matter 20

_Collapse of Chaos_ (Stewart and Cohen) 54

colour

perception of 289–90

rainbow 293

combinatorics 48–9

_The Comedy of Errors_ (Shakespeare) 334

_Coming of Age in Samoa_ (Mead) 264

commitment strategies 215–16

communication

with babies 154

cultural evolution 94–5

digital communications 181–4

in dog packs 94–5

early hominids 113

and evolution of brain 23

_see also_ language

Communism 328

competition, evolutionary 214–15

complex systems 152–4

emergence 303, 307

entropy 190

evolution and 54, 57

history 308

organisms 188

predictability 165, 305–6

universe 193–5

complicated systems 152

complicity, emergent behaviour 154–5

computers

algorithms 183–4

inability to understand stories 53

viruses 329

concepts, defining 235–6

_The Concise Lexicon of the Occult_ 168

congenital amusia 274–5

consciousness

Cartesian Theatre 266

qualia 22

_Consciousness Explained_ (Dennett) 266

constants, fundamental 28, 30, 48

constellations 170

context, art 275

cooperation, altruism 213–14, 215

cornea 268

corporations, identity 96

cosmology _see_ universe

counting, combinatorics 48–9

cowboys 121, 138

cows 93, 117

Crawford, Michael 92

creation myths 247

creativity, cultural evolution 94, 107

creodonts, co-evolution 310

Crick, Francis 185

Cro-Magnon man 114

Cubism 265

cults 222, 344

culture

children’s subculture 115

cultural evolution 89–100

cultural identity 96–8

and evolution 89–90

global multiculture 250

importance of storytelling 155, 327

memetics 330

music 270–1

Cumulative Audience Paradox 313–14

cytosine 52

D

‘Dame à la Capuche’ 275

dance 265, 269

dark matter 20

Darwin, Charles 133, 249

Davies, Paul 194

Dawkins, Richard 328, 331

_De Incessu Animalium_ (Aristotle)241–2

deafness 154

Dear, Steven 288

Dee, John 65, 66, 70, 71, 73, 169

_Deep Throat_ 304

definitions, fuzziness 235–6, 330–1

democracy 98

Dennett, Daniel 266

d’Errico, Francesco 131

Descartes, René 19–20, 76, 77, 266*

destiny 164–5, 166, 171

deterministic systems 165, 169, 303–5

Devil 158

Diamond, Jared 88

Diaspora 141

Dick, Philip K. 312

dictatorships 98, 311–12

Dido 46

digital communications 181–4

Dinah 139–40

dinosaurs 312

_The Discworld Companion_ 207

Discworld novels

_Carpe Jugulum_ 341

_The Colour of Magic_ 166

_Equal Rites_ 24

_The Fifth Elephant_ 111–12

_Hogfather_ 98, 340

_Interesting Times_ 139–40, 217*

_The Last Continent_ 135

_The Light Fantastic_ 139

_Lords and Ladies_ 43, 96–7, 158, 207, 286, 311–12

_Mort_ 207

_Pyramids_ 206, 207, 208

_Reaper Man_ 205, 207

_Small Gods_ 136, 139, 207, 208–9, 218–21

_Sourcery_ 207

_Thief of Time_ 21*, 302

_The Truth_ 292

_Wyrd Sisters_ 323

diseases 329

alchemy 67

parasitic 155

diversity

adaptive radiation 133–4

human 122, 132–3

divination 66, 168

DNA 329, 330–1

Cohen family 141–3

and evolution 94

genomes 185–7

human evolution 88–9

meaning 188

mitochondrial DNA 123–4

phase space 51–4

polyphyletic species 122

dogs

breeds 122, 133

domestication 117, 118–20

free will 165

hunting in packs 94–5

sense of smell 286

Dolly the Sheep 31

domestication of animals 117–21

Dostoyevsky, Fyodor 221

drama 282–3, 333, 340–1

_The Driving Force_ (Crawford and Marsh) 92

dryopithecines 108

duality, Cartesian 20

dynamical systems

evolution 308–9

historical dynamic 301–3, 308, 311–12, 327–8

phase spaces 43–8, 303–4, 305

re-running systems 311–12

E

ears, hearing 268–9, 270, 273, 290

Earth, shape of 46

East Anglia 121–2

echo-location 287–9

ecology, biospheres 55, 56–7

economics

Law of Supply and Demand 51

phase space 50–1

teaching with lies 293

education 291, 293

lies-to-children 291, 293

medieval Europe 69

‘three R’s’ 69

eggs, scrambling 190, 191, 194

Egypt, ancient 120, 169

Eichmann, Adolf 136, 262, 264

Einstein, Albert 114, 136, 192, 193–4, 249, 262

electron-volts 29*

electrons, models of atom 247–8

_Elements_ (Euclid) 65

elephants 116, 117

evolution 110–12, 308–9

lungs 110*

Elixir of Life 66–7

Elizabeth I, Queen of England 65

embryos 188, 235, 236

_Emerald Tablet_ 66

emergent behaviour

co-evolution 310

complex systems 303, 307

complicity 154–5

evolution 308–10

historical dynamic 303, 308, 311–12, 327–8

re-running systems 311–12

emotions, art and 275

empathy 285–6, 289

empiricism 70

endorphins 275

energy

carbon formation 27, 29–30

electron-volts 29*

Laws of Thermodynamics 189–93

phase spaces 44–8

potential energy 45

work cycles 57

engineering, ancient Greece 70, 237–8, 242, 243

Enlightenment 76

Enoch 125*

entertainment, storytelling as 327

entropy

information 189, 192–3

thermodynamic 189–90, 192–3

universe 193–6

epigenetics 185

essential fatty acids, and human evolution 92

E.T. 117

ethics, cloning 31

_Ethics_ (Spinoza) 77

Euclid 65

Euripides 341

Europe

Ashkenazi Jews 141

human evolution 113–14, 122

music 270

twentieth-century history 311

Eve

existence of 125

‘mitochondrial Eve’ 122–4

pre-formation theory 72

evil, elimination of 107

evolution

adaptive radiation 133–4

‘alternate universe’ stories 312

altruism 213–14, 215

apes 107–8

co-evolution 119–21, 310

competition 214–15

and complexity 54, 57

cultural evolution 89–100

dynamics of 308–9

elephants 110–12

extinction 133–4

genomes 185–6

gracile and robust forms 109–11, 113

humans 87–8, 108–9, 112–14

lying and 284–6

memes 328–33

phase space 55

predictions 309–10

exformation, context 187

exotic matter 315

experiments

interpreting 197–8

scientific method 239–41, 243–4, 248

extelligence

cultural evolution 89–90, 99

eliminating evil 107

future possibilities 166

memetics 330

overcommitment strategy 216

symbiosis and 118

‘time-binding’ ability 156, 166

extended present, and sense of music 274

extinction

genetic diversity 133–4

Neanderthals 134–5, 137

eyes

colour vision 290

vision 266–8, 273–4

F

failure, learning from 78–9

fairies 158, 247, 343

fairy stories

function of 74, 152, 155, 342

hidden meanings 115–16

Falla, Manuel de 264

false narratives 28

fantasy stories 75

fatalism 149, 167–8, 171

Father Christmas 97–8

fatty acids, and human evolution 92

feminism, myths 79

‘feral’ children 283

Fermi, Enrico 314*

Fermi Paradox 314

feudalism 76

Feynman, Richard 262

Feynman diagrams, time travel 315–16

fiction

‘alternate universe’ stories 312–13

getting inside another person’s mind 282

time travel 313–14

_see also_ storytelling

_Figments of Reality_ (Stewart and Cohen) 89, 119, 136, 174, 288

films

background music 262–3, 265

narrative imperative 341

‘primitive’ tribes in 265

watching 273–4

finches 133

_Finnegan’s Wake_ (Joyce) 50*

fire 57

_Fire Dance_ (Falla) 264

First Law of Thermodynamics 189, 190

fish, adaptive radiation 133–4

Fisher, Ronald Aylmer 213, 214

flames 57

Flintstones 264

Florida 27

food, and human evolution 92

Ford Model T 118

forest elephants 110–11

forests 107–8

fortune-telling 168

fossils

apes 107, 108

hominids 88

free will 164–6

animals 165

laws of physics and 174–5

paradoxes of 168–9

tests for 174

tribalism and 167, 170–1

Freemasons 71*, 238

French language 269

frequencies

hearing 268

pitch and harmony 270

Freud, Sigmund 264

Fritz, Jonathan 288

fruit 217*

fundamental constants, physics 28, 30, 48

future possibilities

attitudes to 164–75

chaos theory 304–5

cheating predictions 307–8

determinism 303–4

free will 165–6

‘time-binding’ ability 156, 166, 215

time travel 313–16

_see also_ predictions

G

gaits, patterns of movement 270

Galápagos islands 133

galaxies, and cold dark matter 20

Galen 67

Galileo Galilei 242–3, 245

Gandhi, Mahatma 86*

Garden of Eden 276

gardens 153

gases, thermodynamics 48, 54–5, 56, 189–93, 195–6

Geffrye Museum, London 134

general relativity, theory of 314–15

Genesis 125*

genetically modified organisms 118

genetics

altruism 213–14, 215

basic unit 330–1

cloning 31

Cohen family 141–3

and culture 93–4

DNA 51–4, 185–8

and evolution 94

human diversity 122, 132–3

immune system 124–5, 131–2

mitochondrial DNA 123–4

Y-chromosome 141, 142–3

genomes

DNA phase space 51–4

human evolution 88

information 185–7

meaning 188

Georgiadis, Nicholas 110–11

Germany, World War II 311, 312

Gerrold, David 314

gibbons 108

goats 117

God 171

images of 342, 344

as lord of knowledge 236

monotheism 172, 247

pantheism 77

personification of 211–12

proof of existence 197

and rules of physical world 77

_Gödel, Escher, Bach_ (Hofstadter) 187

gods 205–6

polytheism 172

Golan Heights 276

gold, alchemy 67, 68

Good Samaritan 116

gorillas 88, 108, 124, 276

Gould, Stephen Jay 312–13

gracile apes 112–13

gracile forms, evolution 109–11, 113

Grandfather Paradox, time travel 313, 316

gravity 73

cold dark matter 20

distribution of matter in universe 193–6

potential energy 45

relativity 314

solar system 303

Greece, ancient 99

alchemy 66

engineering 70, 237–8, 242, 243

plays 341

Renaissance and 65–6, 69

Gregorian chants 270

Grimm Brothers 115, 155

Grotte Chauvet 275

group behaviour, cultural evolution 94–5

guanine 52

_Guardian_ 273

Guilds 71*

guilt 139

_Gulliver’s Travels_ (Swift) 222

gypsies 137

H

_Hamlet_ (Shakespeare) 271

Hanging Gardens of Babylon 237

_Haplochromis burtoni_ 133

‘Happy Birthday to You’ 328, 329

Hardy, Alister 92

harmony, music 270, 274

Harris, Rolf 276

Harrison, Harry 312–13

Hausa tribe 116–17

Hawaii 265

Haydn, Joseph 263

healing 68

hearing 268–9, 270, 273, 290

heat energy 189, 190

heaven, ‘right way to heaven’ 157

Heinlein, Robert A. 314

helium, carbon formation 28–30

Hell 221, 222

Heller, Joseph 311*

heretics 221

Hermes Trismegistos 66, 72

Hermeticism 72, 73

Hero of Alexandria 70

heroes 157–8

hidden knowledge 71–2

Hinduism 169

history

‘alternate universe’ stories 312

historical dynamic 301–3, 308, 311–12, 327–8

rules 302–3, 308

storytelling 309

teaching with lies 293

_History of Science in China_ (Needham) 172

_The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy_ (Adams) 304

Hitler, Adolf 311

Hivites 139–40

Hofstadter, Douglas 187

Hogan, Craig 30

Hollywood 79, 121, 136, 265, 266

Holy Wars 222

homeopathy 71, 72

hominids 88, 113

_Homo_ 112–13

_Homo erectus_ 88, 113, 122, 150

_Homo ergaster_ 88, 113

_Homo habilis_ 88, 113

_Homo heidelbergensis_ 88

_Homo neanderthalensis_ 88

_Homo rudolfensis_ 88

_Homo sapiens_ 32, 88, 113, 122, 150, 342, 345

_Homo sapiens neanderthalensis_ 113–14

_Homo sapiens sapiens_ 114

honey 284

honour 138

horns, co-evolution 310

horoscopes 65, 66

horses

bounding 241–2

co-evolution with humans 121–2

domestication 117, 118

trotting 242, 243–4

hospitals 291

house-martins 116

hover-flies 284

Hoyle, Fred 29–30

hula dances 265

Human Genome Project 185

humans

brains 90

cloning 31

co-evolution with animals 119–22

creativity 107

cultural evolution 89–100

cultural identity 96–8

domestication of animals 117–21

early population size 122–5

evolution 87–8, 108–9, 112–14

genetic diversity 122, 132–3

genome 52–3, 185–6

importance of storytelling 116–17

mitochondrial DNA 123–4

puberty rituals 134–7

racial differences 122

regard for children 117

total number of 52

use of alternative scenarios 149–51, 155–6

hunting, dogs 94–5

hydrochloric acid 66

hyenas 109

hypercolumns, visual cortex 267

hypotheses, scientific method 239–41, 248–9

I

ice ages 108

iconic figures, storytelling 74, 155

ideas, memes 328–33

ideologies, memetics 332

ignorance 72

illusions, magicians 72

immortality, Elixir of Life 66–7

immune system, genetics 124–5, 131–2

India 107

music 270

Indian elephant 110, 111

infinity 49

information 182–4

context 187–8, 192–3

entropy 189, 192–3

genomes 185–7

and meaning 184–5

universe as 196–8

Information Age 181–2

innocence, primitive tribes 264

innovation

cultural evolution 94

genetic evolution 55, 57

_Inquirer_ 292

Inquisition 172, 218, 220, 221–2, 245

intelligence

and human evolution 89–90, 99

lies 286

memetics 330

interbreeding, species 110, 111

Internet 96, 329

Inuit, storytelling 74

invertebrates, play 119

invisibility, cold dark matter 20

Iran 96

_Is God a Virus?_ (Bowker) 331

Islam 157

Israelites 139–40

J

Japanese, speech development 269, 290

Java 88

jazz 263, 264, 265

Jehovah 167, 210, 211–12

Jews

Cohen family 138–9, 141–3

Judaism 210–12

_Kabbala_ 66, 76*

rituals 136–7

‘Shema’ prayer 331*

verbal ability 137

journalism 291–2, 325–6

Joyce, James 50*

Judaism 210–12

Judgement Day 72

jukeboxes 187–8

justice 340

K

_Kabbala_ 66, 76*

karma 171

Kauffman, Stuart 54–5, 56–7, 77, 78, 305

Kelley, Edward 68

Kenya 275

Kepler, Johannes 66

Keynes, John Maynard 239

kings 89

Kinsey, Alfred 142

Kipling, Rudyard 120

Kismet 171

knowledge, ontology 211

_Koran_ 156

!Kung 132–3, 269

L

language

chimpanzees and 88

development of 283

hearing sentences 273

learning 154

lies 285–6

music as 264

ontic dumping 211

perception of 273

primary function 284

speech development 269, 290

and storytelling 158–9

Laplace, Pierre Simon de 304, 305

Law of Supply and Demand 51

laws of nature 19

Laws of Thermodynamics 189–93, 196

lead, alchemy 68

learning

cultural evolution 93–4

from failure 78–9

Leeuwenhoeck, Antonie van 72, 73

Leibniz, Gottfried wilhelm 77

Lemminkainen 157

Lennox, Annie 273

lenses, eyes 268

Leonardo da Vinci 69

libraries 50

Library of Congress 50

lies 340

detecting 285–6, 289

and evolution 284–6

‘lies-to-adults’ 291–2

‘lies-to-children’ 268, 291–3

perception and 289–90

life

autonomous agents 57

Elixir of Life 66–7

evolution 54, 55

light

cold dark matter 20

colour and 289–90

learning about 293

lions 109, 151

brain 149–50

cannibalism 117

and human evolution 90–1, 92

Liverpool 142

logic 166–7

love 216–17

_Loxodonta africana_ 110–11

_Loxodonta cyclotis_ 110–11

luck 157–8, 167

lungs, elephants 110*

lying _see_ lies

M

_Macbeth_ (Shakespeare) 343

MacCrellish, Frederick 242

mad cow disease 245*

magic

belief in 66

illusions 72

meanings 73–5

technology as 73, 75, 76

‘wonder of nature’ 73, 76

worldviews 248

Maidenhead 142

Malawi, Lake 134*

Malaysia 131

Malinowski, Bronislaw 264

Malta 112

mammals

evolution of sea-mammals 110*

evolution of titanotheres 310

_The Man in the High Castle_ (Dick) 312

_The Man Who Folded Himself_ (Gerrold) 314

mantis shrimps 119

‘many-worlds’ concept 197–8, 313

Mars 245*, 249

Marsh, David 92

Mary Tudor, Queen of England 65

Masai 132

mathematics

combinatorics 48–9

modelling innovation 55

phase spaces 43–8

pitch and harmony 270

tunes 271–3

matter

cold dark matter 20

distribution in universe 193–6

duality with mind 324

wormholes 315

Mayr, Ernst 110

Mead, Margaret 264

meaning

DNA 188

information and 184–5

meat-eating 95, 117

mechanical energy 189, 190

medicine

alchemy 67

homeopathy 71, 72

Paracelsus 67–8

medieval Europe, education 69

Mediterranean 125, 237

_The Meme Machine_ (Blackmore) 329, 330

memeplexes 332

memes and memetics 328–33, 345

memories, art and 275

Memphis 120

mental models 25–7, 166

mercury 67, 68

messages

compressing 183–4

context 187–8

digital communications 182–3

entropy 189

language 284

meta-patterns 116

metals, alchemy 68

metaphors 26

Mickey Mouse 117

microscopes 72

Middle East 131

_A Midsummer Night’s Dream_ (Shakespeare) 100, 327, 335–6, 342–4

migration, early humans 131–2

Milgram, Stanley 136

mimicry 284

mind

consciousness 22

duality with matter 324

evolution of 23

guessing what other people feel 282–3, 286

learning from failure 78–9

making choices 175

memes 328–33

mental models 25–7, 166

need for storytelling 31, 325, 326, 327

in pets 119

recognising lies 285–6

selectivity of perception 266–9, 290

theories of 19–21

_Mind and the Universe_ (Bateson) 158–9

mineral acids 66

miracles 326

‘mitochondrial Eve’ 122–4

models

mental 25–7, 166

scientific 247–8

molecules, phase spaces 48

Mongols 121

monkeys 95

evolution 90–1, 107–8

lying 284–5

play 159

writing _Hamlet_ 271

monogamy 141–2

monotheism 157, 172–3, 247

monsters 340–1

Montefiore family 141

Moon 342

formation of 56, 245*

ignorance of 170

landing on 26, 27

perception of 266–7

stories about 26–7

moons, solar system 47, 303

Morgan, Elaine 91–2

Morgan, Lewis 134

Morris, Desmond 265

Moses 76

Moses, Vivian 141

motion, laws of 56, 190–2, 303, 326

movement, patterns 269–70

Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus 262, 263, 264, 265

MRI scans 263

Murray, George 181, 183

muscles, patterns of movement 270

music

background music 262–3, 265

CDs 187–8

cultural influences 270–1

essence of 264–5

hearing 268

liking for 269

memes 330

musical ability 137

musical instruments 131

perception of 274–5

pitch and harmony 270, 274

‘primitive’ tribes 263, 264–5

recognition by babies 263–4

time in 242–3

tunes 271–3, 274–5

mutations

DNA 52

mitochondrial DNA 123

Muybridge, Eadweard 242

muzak 265

myelin 92

mysticism 66

mythology _see_ storytelling

N

Nagel, Thomas 287, 288

Narrative Causality 23

narrative imperative 24, 324–5, 327, 341

‘narrativium’ 24–5, 26, 27, 30, 78, 152

nations

commitment strategies 215–16

tribalism and barbarism 138

‘natural’, as an illusion 265

natural philosophy 236

natural selection, altruism 213

_Nature_ 288

nature, ‘wonder of nature’ 73, 76

Neanderthals 113–14, 216, 273

extinction 114, 134–5, 137

musical instruments 131

perceptual abilities 276–7

Needham, Joseph 67, 172

nervous system

transmission of signals 92

_see also_ brain

Nesse, Randolph 215, 216

nests 94, 113

neurons, visual cortex 267, 288

neutrons

carbon formation 28–9

models of atom 247

New Ageism 71, 344

New Guinea, tribes 95

New Orleans 264

New Testament 116

New York, taxi-drivers 51

newspapers

‘lies-to-adults’ 291–2

storytelling 31, 325–6

Newton, Isaac 71, 77

alchemy 68, 238–9

hidden knowledge 72

law of gravity 73, 303

laws of motion 190–2, 303, 326

Nigeria 116–17

Nile perch 134

nitric acid 66

Nixon, Richard 304

nobility, barbarian attitudes of 89, 99–100

Nod, land of 125*

Nørretranders, Tor 187

Norse legends 157

North Africa 141

North American Indians 121, 122, 265

Northern Ireland 173

Norway, storytelling 74

nose, vomeronasal organ 287

Nostradamus 170, 174

nuclear reactions, transmuting lead into gold 68

nuclear weapons 215

nucleotides, DNA 52

nucleus, carbon formation 28–9

nursery stories 74, 115–16, 157, 285

O

obedience to authority 136, 157

_Obedience to Authority_ (Milgram) 136

O’Brien, Stephen 111

occultism 66–8

Olympus, Mount 206

ontic dumping 211, 212

opera 263, 265

Opie, Peter and Iona 115

optic nerve 266

orangutans 108

organisms

altruism 213–14, 215

complexity 57, 188

evolution 54, 55

genomes 185–6

orreries 237–8

Out of Africa theory, human evolution 122, 124, 131–3

overcommitment strategy 215, 216–18

ozone layer 326

P

pain, puberty rituals 135–6

paintings 235–6

by apes 265

cave paintings 113, 265, 275–6

images of God 344

looking at 266, 275

primitive paintings 265

_Pan paniscus_ 88, 325

_Pan troglodytes_ 88, 325

pantheism 77

parables 151, 156

Paracelsus 67–8, 70, 71, 169

paradoxes, time travel 313–14, 315–16

parallel universes 311, 313

parasites 155

particles, quantum mechanics 306–7

patterns

emergent dynamics 311–12

movement 269–70

pattern-seeking by brain 209

recognition of 91, 116

signals 183–4

peasants, tribal attitudes 99–100

Pecon-Slattery, Jill 111

Peking Man 113

Pennsylvania 142

Penrose, Roger 194–5

perception 273–7

art 275–6

hearing 268–9, 273

music 274–5

and reality 289–90

recognition of other people 282

vision 266–8

watching films 273–4

words of songs 273

Peretz, Isabelle 274

Perrault, Charles 155

PET scans 22, 263

Petitto, Laura Ann 154

pets 118–19

phase spaces

biology 51–5

biospheres 55, 56–7

dynamical systems 303–4, 305

economics 50–1

messages 193

music 271

physics 43–8, 53, 56

solar system 47, 303

thermodynamics 48, 54–5, 56, 193

pheromones 286–7

Philipp, Elliott 142*

‘philosopause’, scientists 238–9

Philosopher’s Stone 68

_Philosophical Review_ 287

philosophy, worldviews 248

_The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_ (Whewell) 236

Phoenicians 125

phonemes 269, 283, 290

physics

entropy 189–90, 192–3

fundamental constants 28, 30, 48

illusion of free will 175

Newton’s laws of motion 190–2

and paradoxes 315–16

phase spaces 44–8, 53, 56

quantum physics 196–7, 198

Theory of Everything 247

thermodynamics 189–93

time travel 314–16

and truth 290

Picasso, Pablo 265

pitch, music 270

Planck, Max 28

planets

astrology 66, 169–70

hidden knowledge 72

orreries 237–8

solar system 47, 303

plans 327

play

and cultural evolution 94

music as 269

with dogs and cats 118–19

plays 333, 340–1

Pluto 305

Poincaré, Henri 43–4, 50

Poland 141

polar bears 94

politics

‘lies-to-adults’ 291–2

memetics 345

polyphyletic species 122

polytheism 172

popular music 263

population, early humans 122–5

potential energy 45

prayer 246

predators

co-evolution 310

and human evolution 90–1

predictions

chaos theory 304–5

cheating 307–8

complex systems 305–6

divination 168

evolution 309–10

prophecy 173–4

scientific method 240, 248

storytelling and 166, 171

of universe 304–5

Y2K 173–4

pre-formation theory 72

present

predicting future 303–5

and sense of music 274

prey, co-evolution 310

Price, Derek de Solla 237

prices, Law of Supply and Demand 51

pride 138–9

priests 157

negative effects of 208–9

predictions 166

rituals 136, 210, 217–18

‘primitive’ tribes, music 263, 264–5

printing 99

privilege, in evolution 93

_The Privileged Ape_ (Cohen) 74*, 136

Prodigal Son 116

prophets 156–7, 166, 170, 171, 173–4

proteins 186

protons

carbon formation 28–9

models of atom 247

psychology 73

puberty rituals 134–7

Puck 157

punishment 167

pygmy elephants 112

pyramid selling 329

Pythagoras’s Theorem 192

Pythagoreans 270

pythons 109

Q

qualia, consciousness 22

quantum mechanics 165, 198

and free will 174–5

information universe 196–7

‘many-worlds’ concept 197–8, 313

Planck’s constant 28

predictions 306–7

Theory of Everything 247

questions

‘what if’ questions 155–6, 311

‘why’ questions 47

R

racial differences, humans 122

radio 344

radioactivity 68

rainbows 293

_Ramapithecus_ 108

Reagan, Ronald 66

reality, perception and 289–90

recognition of other people 282

red giant stars 28, 29, 30

reflexes 154

relativity

theory of 249

time travel 314–15

religion 205–13

atrocities 218, 220, 221–2

beliefs 206–8, 218–22

cargo cults 80

cat worship 120–1

conflicts with science and technology 171–2, 241

cultural identity 98

gods 205–6

memetics 331–3, 345

monotheism 172–3, 247

pantheism 77

priests 208–10

prophets 166

‘right way to heaven’ 157

rituals 217–18

rules 212

storytelling 326

tribal conflict 132*

universe and 209–12, 213

worldviews 248

Renaissance 65–6, 69–70, 71–2, 76, 344

‘Renaissance man’ 69

resonance, carbon formation 27, 29–30

retina 266–7, 268, 289

rewards, smiles as 153–4

Reynolds, Len 271*

rhythms

music 274

patterns of movement 269–70

ribosomes 186–7

_Rite of Spring_ (Stravinsky) 264

rituals

priesthood 136, 210, 217–18

puberty rituals 134–7

and tribal identity 95–6

robust forms, evolution 109–11, 113

Roca, Alfred 111

rockets, Moon landings 27

Roman Empire 69, 99

romantic stories 75

roses, perception of 289–90

Rothschild family 141

Rudolf II, Emperor 68

rules 324

child development 77

complex systems 305

dynamical systems 303–4

fairy tales 155*

of history 302–3, 308

of physical world 77

religion 212

tribalism 116, 167

rumours 328

Rumpelstiltskin 115, 116, 327

Russia 275

S

sabretooth tigers 310

Sakhmet 120

sal ammoniac 66, 68

Samoa 264

sand, phase space 47–8

savannahs 90–1, 92, 108–9

Schechem 139–40

Schrödinger, Erwin 306*

Schrödinger’s equation 306–7, 326

science 235–50

conflicts with religion 171–2, 241

defining 235, 236, 239

development of 238

God and 77

hidden knowledge 71–2

limitations 72

models 247–8

objection to alternative theories 75–6

and pantheism 77

paradigm shifts 249

predictions 166

Renaissance 69, 71–2

role of 246

scientific method 32, 239–41, 243–5, 248–9, 344

spellings 236*

as storytelling 246–7, 248, 326

teaching with lies 293

technology and 238

worldviews 248

_Science_ 111

_Science and Spirit_ 215

science fiction

‘alternate universe’ stories 312–13

time travel 313–14

scientists, ‘philosopause’ 238–9

scientology 72

seafood, and human evolution 92

seasickness 274

Second Law of Thermodynamics 55, 57, 189–91, 193, 196

seeds 331

selection, puberty rituals 134–7

Self, sense of 21

_The Selfish Gene_ (Dawkins) 328

semaphore 181, 183, 188

sense organs 266–9, 284, 286–7

sentences, hearing 273

Sephardi 141

Seton, Alexander 68

sex

adultery 142

in nursery stories 115

predicting sex of babies 307–8

sex hormones 287

Shakespeare, William 89, 298–300, 301, 307, 323, 345

barbarism and tribalism 86, 99–100, 138

_The Comedy of Errors_ 334

_Hamlet_ 271

_Macbeth_ 343

memes 333

_A Midsummer Night’s Dream_ 100, 327, 335–6, 342–4

modern mind and 265–6

Shannon, Claude, information theory 182–3, 184, 186, 189, 192

‘Shema’ prayer 331*

Siegfried 158

sight 288

colour and 289–90

perception 266–8, 273–4

sign language 154

signals

compressing 183–4

information 182–3

patterns 183–4

silk moths 116

Silverberg, Robert 313, 314

Simmons, James 288

_Sivapithecus_ 108

slaves 242

Slovenia 131

smell, sense of 284, 286–7

smiles, babies 153–4

soap bubbles, shape of 45–6

social animals, cultural evolution 94–5

society

and magic of technology 76

puberty rituals 134–7

solar system

phase space 47, 56, 303

predictability 304, 305

sonar 288

songs

‘Happy Birthday to You’ 328, 329

and time 242

words of 273

Sophocles 341

sounds

echo-location 287–9

hearing 268–9, 290

music 270

understanding language 283

South Africa 113, 131

South America 95

space travel

Moon landings 27

space elevator 88–9

wormholes 315

spacetime, theory of relativity 314–15

Spain 121, 141

Spanish Inquisition 218, 220, 221–2

species

evolution 93

extinction 133–4

interbreeding 110, 111

polyphyletic species 122

speech, development of 269, 290

_see also_ language

Speel, Hans-Cees 332

spells 74

sperm count, human 245*

spheres, volume 46

Spinoza, Baruch 66, 76–7, 78

spirituality 70, 208–9, 222

Stanford, Leland Jr 242

stars

astrology 66

constellations 170

red giants 28, 29, 30

states, phase spaces 44–8

Stenger, Victor 30

Stone Age 264

storytelling 23, 26–7, 31–2, 66

‘adult’ stories 75

alternative scenarios 151, 155–6

archetypal stories 340–1

barbarians 157–8

basic plots 173

causality 74–5

and child development 74–5, 78–9, 151–2, 326–7, 342

computer’s inability to understand 53

and cultural identity 96–8

emergent dynamics 303

exploration of alternatives 47

feminist myths 79

future possibilities 171, 174

guessing what other people feel 282–3

in history 309

iconic figures 74, 155

importance of 116–17

and information 182

language and 158–9

learning from failure 78–9

and meaning 184–5

myths 344–5

narrative imperative 24, 324–5, 327, 341

newspapers 325–6

power of stories 323–7, 330, 333

science as 246–7, 248, 326

teaching children 114–15

_see also_ fiction

Stravinsky, Igor 263, 264

subatomic particles, quantum mechanics 306–7

submarines 288

sulphuric acid 66

supermarkets 76

supernatural 247

superstitions 301, 344

Supply and Demand, Law of 51

swallows 116

Swift, Jonathan 222

swimming 91

symbiosis, and human evolution 117–18

Symons, John 142

syphilis 68

systems

phase spaces 44–8

work cycles 57

_see also_ dynamical systems

T

Tanganyika, Lake 134*

tarantula wasps 93

taxi-drivers, economic phase space 51

teaching 93–4, 291

technology

ancient Greeks 70, 237–8, 242, 243

conflicts with religion 171–2

as magic 73, 75, 76

and science 238

teeth, co-evolution 310

telepathy 282

television 344

advertising 329

background music 262–3

watching 273–4

Teresa, Mother 333

texture, sense of 288

theatre 282–3, 340–1

theories, scientific method 239–41, 248–9

Theory of Everything 247

thermodynamics

entropy 189–90, 192–3, 195

First Law of Thermodynamics 189, 190

models of universe 195–6

phase spaces 48, 54–5, 56

Second Law of Thermodynamics 55, 57, 189–91, 193, 196

Third Law of Thermodynamics 189, 190

and time-reversibility 190–1

things, personifying 211–12

thought

perception and 289

physical processes 21–2

thymine 52

Tibet 107

time

‘arrow of time’ 190, 191, 192, 194, 195

in music 242–3, 274

predicting future 303–5

‘time-binding’ ability 156, 166, 215

time-reversibility 190–1, 193–4

time travel 164, 313–16

_The Time Machine_ (Wells) 313

_The Times_ 292

titanotheres 310

tomatoes 217*

tools

australopithecines 109

Neanderthals 114

Tooth Fairy 97–8

_Torah_ 66

torture 136, 218, 220, 221–2

tourism 265

traditions, cultural identity 98

tragedy, Greek drama 341

travel sickness 274

trees, growth rings 188

tribalism

and barbarism 137–41

commitment strategies 215–16

cultural identity 95–8

fatalism 167–8, 171

music 263, 264–5

perceptual abilities 276–7

puberty rituals 134–7

rules 116, 167

storytelling 96–8, 158

triple-alpha process, carbon formation 28–30

Trobriand Islanders 264

trotting horses 242, 243–4

truth 289–93

tunes 271–3, 274–5

Turner, J.M.W. 275

Twin Paradox, wormholes 315

U

ultraviolet light 290

unicorns 247

United States of America, Amish 142

universe

‘arrow of time’ 191, 192, 195

Big Bang 193, 194, 239, 247

carbon formation 27–30

cold dark matter 20

complexity 193–5

entropy 190, 193–6

fundamental constants 28, 30, 48

future possibilities 165

as information 196–8

laws of nature 19

‘many-worlds’ concept 197–8, 313

need for storytelling 326

pantheism 77

parallel universes 311, 313

phase spaces 48

predictability 304–5

and religion 209–12, 213

role of science 246

worldviews 248

unnatural selection 135

_Up the Line_ (Silverberg) 313

Ur 210

_The User Illusion_ (Nørretranders) 187

V

Valhalla 157, 206

vampires 247*, 341

Vedas 169

verbal ability, Jews 137

Verne, Jules 27

Victoria, Lake 133–4

viruses

computer 329

mutations 52

vision 288

colour and 289–90

perception 266–8, 273–4

visual cortex, brain 267–8, 288

vomeronasal organ 287

W

waller, Fats 262

warfare, commitment strategy 215

Warwickshire, enclosure uprisings 99

wasps 93, 284

water

Archimedean screw 237

phase space 44–5, 46

Watergate scandal 304

Watson, James 185

weather, predictability 304

weaver birds 116

_The Well-Tempered Clavier_ (Bach) 270

Wells, H.G. 313, 314

werewolves 247, 341

West, John 110*

_West of Eden_ (Harrison) 312–13

whales 90, 110*

‘what if’ questions 155–6, 311

Wheeler, John Archibald 197

Whewell, William 236

White Holes 315

‘why’ questions 47

wild dogs 109

Wild West 79

Will of God 326

Winnie the Pooh 26, 96, 156, 212

wish-fulfilment 74–5, 76, 77

witches 66, 343

wizards 9

wolves 119, 122, 133

women, mitochondrial DNA 123–4

_Wonderful Life_ (Gould) 312–13

woods-apes 108

work cycles, autonomous agents 57

World War I 311

World War II 311, 312

worldviews 248

wormholes 315

wounds, healing 68

Y

Y-chromosome 141, 142–3

Y2K predictions 173–4

yeti 113, 341

Yom Kippur 139

Yoruba 133

Z

Zaire 111

zebras 149–50, 151

_Zinjanthropus_ 109

zodiac 65, 169

Zulus 132

This eBook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Version 1.0

Epub ISBN 9781407022611

www.randomhouse.co.uk

First published in Great Britain in 2002

This edition published in 2003

12

Text © Terry and Lyn Pratchett, Joat Enterprises, Jack Cohen 2002

Terry Pratchett, Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen have asserted their right to be identified as the authors of this work under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owners.

First published by
Ebury Press
Random House, 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 2SA

The Random House Group Limited Reg. No. 954009

www.rbooks.co.uk

Addresses for companies within The Random House Group can be found at: www.randomhouse.co.uk

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN 9780091888053
