[cover]

 Ape and Essence

Aldous Huxley

Vintage Books (1972)

Rating:

★★★☆☆

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Review

"'Painfully and majestically vivid; it is a great piece of work'
Guardian"

 Product Description

In February 2108, the New Zealand Rediscovery Expedition reaches
California at last. Although it is over a century since the world was
devastated by nuclear war, the blight of radiation still gnaws away at
the survivors. The expedition expects to find physical destruction, but
they are quite unprepared for the moral degradation that confronts them.

Ape and Essence

by Aldous Huxley

Copyright, 1948, by Aldous Huxley

 

 

I

TALLIS

 

          IT WAS the day of Gandhi's assassination; but on Calvary the
sightseers were more interested in the contents of their picnic baskets
than in the possible significance of the, after all, rather commonplace
event they had turned out to witness. In spite of all the astronomers
can say, Ptolemy was perfectly right: the centre of the universe is
here, not there. Gandhi might be dead; but across the desk in his
office, across the lunch table in the Studio Commissary, Bob Briggs was
concerned to talk only about himself.

          "You've always been such a help," Bob assured me, as he made
ready, not without relish, to tell the latest instalment of his history.

          But at bottom, as I knew very well and as Bob himself knew
even better than I, he didn't really want to be helped. He liked being
in a mess and, still more, he liked talking about his predicament. The
mess and its verbal dramatisation made it possible for him to see
himself as all the Romantic Poets rolled into one -- Beddoes committing
suicide, Byron committing fornication, Keats dying of Fanny Brawne,
Harriet dying of Shelley. And seeing himself as all the Romantic Poets,
he could forget for a little the two prime sources of his misery -- the
fact that he had none of their talents and very little of their sexual
potency.

          "We got to the point," he said (so tragically that it occurred
to me that he would have done better as an actor than as a writer of
screen plays), "we got to the point, Elaine and I, where we felt like. .
. like Martin Luther."

          "Martin Luther?" I repeated in some astonishment.

          "You know -- ich kann nicht anders. We just couldn't -- but
couldn't -- do anything but go off together to Acapulco."

          And Gandhi, I reflected, just couldn't do anything but resist
oppression nonviolently and go to prison and finally get shot.

          "So there it was," he went on. "We got on a plane and flew to
Acapulco."

          "Finally!"

          "What do you mean, 'finally'?"

          "Well, you'd been thinking about it for a long time, hadn't
you?"

          Bob looked annoyed. But I remembered all the previous
occasions when he had talked to me about the problem. Should he or
should he not make Elaine his mistress? (That was his wonderfully
old-world way of putting it.) Should he or should he not ask Miriam for
a divorce?

          A divorce from the woman who in a very real sense was still
what she had always been -- his only love; but in another very real
sense Elaine was also his only love -- and would be still more so if he
finally decided (and that was why he couldn't decide) to "make her his
mistress." To be or not to be -- the soliloquy had gone on for the best
part of two years, and if Bob could have had his way it would have gone
on for ten years longer. He liked his messes to be chronic and mainly
verbal, never so acutely carnal as to put his uncertain virility to yet
another humiliating test. But under the influence of his eloquence, of
that baroque facade of a profile and prematurely snowy hair, Elaine had
evidently grown tired of a merely chronic and platonic mess. Bob was
presented with an ultimatum: it was to be either Acapulco or a clean
breach.

          So there he was, bound and committed to adultery no less
irrevocably than Gandhi had been bound and committed to nonviolence and
prison and assassination, but, one may suspect, with more and deeper
misgivings. Misgivings which the event had wholly justified. For, though
poor Bob didn't actually tell me what had happened at Acapulco, the fact
that Elaine was now, as he put it, "acting strangely" and had been seen
several times in the company of that unspeakable Moldavian baron, whose
name I have fortunately forgotten, seemed to tell the whole ludicrous
and pathetic story. And meanwhile Miriam had not only refused to give
him a divorce: she had taken the opportunity of Bob's absence and her
possession of his power of attorney to have the title to the ranch, the
two cars, the four apartment houses, the corner lots at Palm Springs and
all the securities transferred from his name to hers. And meanwhile he
owed thirty-three thousand dollars to the Government for arrears of
income tax. But when he asked his producer for that extra two hundred
and fifty dollars a week which had been as good as promised him, there
was only a long and pregnant silence.

          "What about it, Lou?"

          Measuring his words with a solemn emphasis, Lou Lublin gave
his answer.

          "Bob," he said, "in this Studio, at this time, not even Jesus
Christ himself could get a raise."

          The tone was friendly; but when Bob tried to insist, Lou had
banged his desk and told him that he was being un-American. That
finished it.

          Bob talked on. But what a subject, I was thinking, for a great
religious painting! Christ before Lublin, begging for a raise of only
two hundred and fifty bucks a week and being turned down flat. It would
be one of Rembrandt's favourite themes, drawn, etched, painted a score
of times. Jesus turning sadly away into the darkness of unpaid income
tax, while in the golden spotlight, glittering with gems and metallic
highlights, Lou in an enormous turban still chuckled triumphantly over
what he had done to the Man of Sorrows.

          And then there would be Breughel's version of the subject. A
great synoptic view of the entire Studio; a three-million-dollar musical
in full production, with every technical detail faithfully reproduced;
two or three thousand figures, all perfectly characterised; and in the
bottom right-hand corner long search would finally reveal a Lublin, no
bigger than a grasshopper, heaping contumely upon an even tinier Jesus.

          "But I've had an absolutely stunning idea for an original,"
Bob was saying with that optimistic enthusiasm which is the desperate
man's alternative to suicide. "My agent's absolutely crazy about it --
thinks I ought to be able to sell it for fifty or sixty thousand."

          He started to tell the story.

          Still thinking of Christ before Lublin, I visualised the scene
as Piero would have painted it -- the composition, luminously explicit,
an equation in balanced voids and solids, in harmonising and contrasting
hues; the figures in adamantine repose. Lou and his assistant producers
would all be wearing those Pharaonic headdresses, those huge inverted
cones of white or coloured felt, which in Piero's world serve the double
purpose of emphasising the solid-geometrical nature of the human body
and the outlandishness of Orientals. For all their silken softness, the
folds of every garment would have the inevitability and definitiveness
of syllogisms carved in porphyry and throughout the whole we should feel
the all-pervading presence of Plato's God, forever mathematizing chaos
into the order and beauty of art.

          But from the Parthenon and the Timaeus a specious logic leads
to the tyranny which, in the Republic, is held up as the ideal form of
government. In the field of politics the equivalent of a theorem is a
perfectly disciplined army; of a sonnet or picture, a police state under
a dictatorship. The Marxist calls himself scientific and to this claim
the Fascist adds another: he is the poet -- the scientific poet -- of a
new mythology. Both are justified in their pretensions; for each applies
to human situations the procedures which have proved effective in the
laboratory and the ivory tower. They simplify, they abstract, they
eliminate all that, for their purposes, is irrelevant and ignore
whatever they choose to regard as inessential; they impose a style, they
compel the facts to verify a favourite hypothesis, they consign to the
waste paper basket all that, to their mind, falls short of perfection.
And because they thus act like good artists, sound thinkers and tried
experimenters, the prisons are full, political heretics are worked to
death as slaves, the rights and preferences of mere individuals are
ignored, the Gandhis are murdered and from morning till night a million
school-teachers and broadcasters proclaim the infallibility of the
bosses who happen at the moment to be in power.

          "And after all," Bob was saying, "there's no reason why a
movie shouldn't be a work of art. It's this damned commercialism. . ."

          He spoke with all the righteous indignation of an ungifted
artist denouncing the scapegoat whom he has chosen to take the blame for
the lamentable consequences of his own lack of talent.

          "Do you think Gandhi was interested in art?" I asked.

          "Gandhi? No, of course not."

          "I think you're right," I agreed. "Neither in art nor in
science. And that's why we killed him."

          "We?"

          "Yes, we. The intelligent, the active, the forward-looking,
the believers in Order and Perfection. Whereas Gandhi was a reactionary
who believed only in people. Squalid little individuals governing
themselves, village by village, and worshiping the Brahman who is also
Atman. It was intolerable. No wonder we bumped him off."

          But even as I spoke I was thinking that that wasn't the whole
story. The whole story included an inconsistency, almost a betrayal.
This man who believed only in people had got himself involved in the
subhuman mass-madness of nationalism, in the would-be super-human, but
actually diabolic, institutions of the nation-state. He got himself
involved in these things, imagining that he could mitigate the madness
and convert what was satanic in the state to something like humanity. 
But nationalism and the politics of power had proved too much for him.
It is not at the centre, not from within the organisation, that the
saint can cure our regimented insanity; it is only from without, at the
periphery. If he makes himself a part of the machine, in which the
collective madness is incarnated, one or the other of two things is
bound to happen. Either he remains himself, in which case the machine
will use him as long as it can and, when he becomes unusable, reject or
destroy him. Or he will be transformed into the likeness of the
mechanism with and against which he works, and in this case we shall see
Holy Inquisitions and alliances with any tyrant prepared to guarantee
ecclesiastical privileges.

          "Well, to get back to their disgusting commercialism," Bob
said at last. "Let me give you an example. . ."

          But I was thinking that the dream of Order begets tyranny, the
dream of Beauty, monsters and violence. Athena, the patroness of the
arts, is also the goddess of scientific warfare, the heavenly Chief of
every General Staff. We killed him because, after having briefly (and
fatally) played the political game, he refused any longer to go on
dreaming our dream of a national Order, a social and economic Beauty;
because he tried to bring us back to the concrete and cosmic facts of
real people and the inner Light.

          The headlines I had seen that morning were parables; the event
they recorded, an allegory and a prophecy. In that symbolic act, we who
so longed for peace had rejected the only possible means to peace and
had issued a warning to all who, in the future, might advocate any
courses but those which lead inevitably to war.

          "Well, if you've finished your coffee," said Bob, "let's go."

          We rose and walked out into the sunshine. Bob took my arm and
squeezed it.

          "You've been enormously helpful," he assured me again.

          "I wish I could believe it, Bob."

          "But it's true, it's true."

          And perhaps it was true, in the sense that stirring the mess
before a sympathetic public made him feel better, more like the
Romantics.

          We walked on for a little in silence -- past the Projection
Rooms and between the Churrigueresque bungalows of the executives. Over
the entrance to the largest of them a great bronze plaque bore the
inscription, LOU LUBLIN PRODUCTIONS.

          "What about that salary raise?" I asked. "Shall we go in and
have another shot at it?"

          Bob uttered a rueful little laugh, and there was another
silence. When at last he spoke, it was in a pensive tone.

          "Too bad about old Gandhi," he said. "I suppose his great
secret was not wanting anything for himself."

          "Yes, I suppose that was one of the secrets."

          "I wish to God I didn't want things so much."

          "Same here," I fervently concurred.

          "And when you finally get what you want, it's never what you
thought it was going to be."

          Bob sighed and relapsed into silence. He was thinking, no
doubt, of Acapulco, of the horrible necessity of passing from the
chronic to the acute, from the vaguely verbal to the all too definitely
and concretely carnal.

          We emerged from the street of executive bungalows, crossed a
parking lot and entered a canyon between towering sound stages. A
tractor passed, pulling a low trailer, on which was the bottom half of
the west door of a thirteenth-century Italian cathedral.

          "That's for 'Catherine of Siena.' "

          "What's that?"

          "Hedda Boddy's new picture. I worked on the script two years
ago. Then they gave it to Streicher. And after that it was rewritten by
the OToole-Menendez-Boguslavsky team. It's lousy."

          Another trailer rattled past with the upper half of the
cathedral door and a pulpit by Niccolo Pisano.

          "When you come to think of it," I said, "she's very like
Gandhi in some ways."

          "Who? Hedda?"

          "No, Catherine."

          "Oh, I see. I thought you were talking about the loincloth."

          "I was talking about saints in politics," I said. "They didn't
actually lynch her, of course; but that was only because she died too
young. The consequences of her politics hadn't had time to show up. Do
you go into all that in the script?"

          Bob shook his head.

          "Too depressing," he said. "The public likes its stars to be
successful. Besides, how can you talk about church politics? It would
certainly be anti-Catholic and might easily become un-American. No, we
play safe -- concentrate on the boy she dictated her letters to. He's
wildly in love -- but it's all sublimated and spiritual, and after she's
dead he goes into a hermitage and prays in front of her picture. And
then there's the other boy who actually made passes at her. It's
mentioned in her letters. We play that for all its worth. They're still
hoping to be able to sign up Humphrey. . ."

          A loud hooting made us both jump.

          "Look out!"

          Bob caught my arm and pulled me back. From the courtyard in
the rear of the Story Department a two-ton truck emerged into the
roadway.

          "Why don't you look where you're going?" shouted the driver as
he passed.

          "Idiot!" Bob yelled back; then, turning to me, "Do you see
what it's loaded with?" he asked. "Scripts." He shook his head. "Taking
them to the incinerator. Which is where they belong. A million dollars
worth of literature." He laughed with melodramatic bitterness.

          Twenty yards up the road, the truck swung sharply to the
right. Its speed must have been excessive; centrifugally propelled, half
a dozen of the topmost scripts spilled out into the road. Like prisoners
of the Inquisition, I thought, making a miraculous escape on the way to
the stake.                                                             
         "The man can't drive," Bob was grumbling. "One of these days
he'll kill somebody."

          "But meanwhile let's see who's been saved."

          I picked up the nearest of the scripts. " 'A Miss is as Good
as a Male, Screenplay by Albertine Krebs.' "

          Bob remembered it. It stank. "Well, what about 'Amanda'?" I
turned over the pages. "It must have been a musical. Here's some poetry.

          " 'Amelia needs a meal,

          But Amanda needs a man. . ."

          Bob wouldn't let me go on.

          "Don't, don't! It made four and a half million during the
Battle of the Bulge."

          I dropped "Amanda" and picked up another of the spread-eagled
volumes. This one, I noticed, was bound in green, not in the Studio's
standard crimson.

          " 'Ape and Essence,' " I read aloud from the hand-lettered
front cover.

          " 'Ape and Essence'?" Bob repeated in some surprise.

          I turned to the flyleaf.

          " 'An original Treatment by William Tallis, Cottonwood Ranch,
Murcia, California.' And here's a note in pencil. 'Rejection slip sent
11-26-47. No self addressed envelope. For the Incinerator' -- twice
underlined."

          "They get thousands of these things," Bob explained.

          Meanwhile I was looking into the body of the script.

          "More poetry."

          "Christ!" said Bob in a tone of disgust.

          " 'Surely it's obvious,' " I began reading:

          "'Surely it's obvious.

          Doesn't every schoolboy know it?

          Ends are ape-chosen; only the means are man's.

          Papio's procurer, bursar to baboons,

          Reason comes running, eager to ratify;

          Comes, a catch-fart with Philosophy, truckling to tyrants;

          Comes, a pimp for Prussia, with Hegel's Patent History;

          Comes with Medicine to administer the Ape-King's aphrodisiac;

          Comes, rhyming and with Rhetoric, to write his orations;

          Comes with the Calculate to aim his rockets

          Accurately at the orphanage across the ocean;

          Comes, having aimed, with incense to impetrate

          Our Lady devoutly for a direct hit.'"

          There was a silence. We looked at one another questioningly.

          "What do you think of it?" Bob said at last.

          I shrugged my shoulders. I really didn't know.

          "Anyhow, don't throw it away," he went on. "I want to see what
the rest is like."

          We resumed our walk, turned a final corner and there, a
Franciscan convent among palm trees, was the Writers' Building.

          "Tallis," Bob was saying to himself, as we entered, "William
Tallis. . ." He shook his head. "Never heard of him. And anyhow, where's
Murcia?"

          The following Sunday we knew the answer -- knew it not merely
in theory and on the map, but experimentally, by going there, at eighty
miles an hour, in Bob's (or rather Miriam's) Buick convertible. Murcia,
California, was two red gasoline pumps and a very small grocery store on
the southwestern fringe of the Mojave desert.

          The long drought had broken two days before. The sky was still
overcast and a cold wind blew steadily from the west. Ghostly under
their roof of slate-coloured cloud, the San Gabriel mountains were white
with newly fallen snow. But to the north, far out in the desert, the sun
was shining in a long narrow strip of golden light. All around us were
the soft rich greys and silvers, the pale golds and russets of the
desert vegetation -- sagebrush, burrobrush, bunch grass and buckwheat,
with here and there a strangely gesticulating Joshua tree, rough barked,
or furred with dry prickles, and tufted at the end of its many-elbowed
arms with thick clusters of green metallic spikes.

          An old deaf man, at whom we had to shout our questions, at
last understood what we were talking about. Cottonwood Ranch -- of
course he knew it. Take that dirt road there; drive south for a mile;
then turn east, follow the irrigation ditch for another three quarters
of a mile, and there it was. The old man wanted to tell us much more
about the place; but Bob was too impatient to listen. He threw the car
into gear and we were off.

          Along the irrigation ditch the cottonwoods and willows were
aliens, clinging precariously, in the midst of those tough ascetic lives
of the desert, to another, easier, more voluptuous mode of being. They
were leafless now, the mere skeletons of trees, white against the sky;
but one could imagine how intense, under the fierce clear sun, would be
the emerald of their young leaves three months from now.

          The car, which was being driven much too fast, crashed heavily
into an unexpected dip. Bob swore.

          "Why any man in his senses should choose to live at the end of
a road like this, I can't imagine."

          "Perhaps he takes it a little more slowly," I ventured to
suggest.

          Bob did not deign so much as to glance at me. The car rattled
on at undiminished speed. I tried to concentrate on the view.

          Out there, on the floor of the desert, there had been a
noiseless, but almost explosive transformation. The clouds had shifted
and the sun was now shining on the nearest of those abrupt and jagged
buttes, which rose so inexplicably, like islands, out of the enormous
plain. A moment before they had been black and dead. Now suddenly they
had come to life between a shadowed foreground and a background of
cloudy darkness. They shone as if with their own incandescence.

          I touched Bob's arm and pointed.

          "Now do you understand why Tallis chooses to live at the end
of this road?"

          He took a quick look, swerved round a fallen Joshua tree,
looked again for a fraction of a second and brought his eyes back to the
road.

          "It reminds me of that etching by Goya -- you know the one.
The woman riding a stallion, and the animal's turning its head and has
her dress between its teeth -- trying to pull her down, trying to tear
the clothes off her. And she's laughing like a maniac, in a frenzy of
pleasure. And in the background there's a plain, with buttes sticking
out of it, just like here. Only if you look carefully at Goya's buttes,
you see that they're really crouching animals, half rats, half lizards
-- as big as mountains. I bought a reproduction of it for Elaine."

          But Elaine, I reflected in the ensuing silence, hadn't taken
the hint. She had allowed the stallion to drag her to the ground; she
had lain there, laughing and laughing, uncontrollably, while the big
teeth ripped at her bodice, tore the skirt to shreds, grazing the soft
skin beneath with a fearful but delicious threat, with the tingling
imminence of pain. And then, at Acapulco, those huge rat-lizards had
stirred out of their stony sleep, and suddenly poor old Bob had found
himself surrounded, not by deliciously swooning Graces, not by the
laughing troop of rosy-bottomed Cupids, but by monsters.

          But meanwhile we had reached our destination. Between the
trees along the ditch I saw a white frame house under an enormous
cottonwood, with a windmill to one side of it, a corrugated iron barn to
the other. The gate was closed. Bob stopped the car and we got out. A
white board had been nailed to the gatepost. On it an unskilled hand had
painted a long inscription in vermilion.

          The leech's kiss, the squid's embrace,

               The prurient ape's defiling touch:

          And do you like the human race?

               No, not much.

          THIS  MEANS  YOU,  KEEP  OUT.

          "Well, we've evidently come to the right place," I said.

          Bob nodded. We opened the gate, walked across a wide expanse
of beaten earth and knocked at the door of the house. It was opened
almost immediately by a stout elderly woman in spectacles, wearing a
flowered blue cotton dress and a very old red jacket. She gave us a
friendly smile.

          "Car broken down?" she enquired.

          We shook our heads and Bob explained that we had come to see
Mr. Tallis.

          "Mr. Tallis?"

          The smile faded from her face; she looked grave and shook her
head. "Didn't you know?" she said. "Mr. Tallis passed on six weeks ago."

          "Do you mean, he's dead?"

          "Passed on," she insisted, then launched out into her story.

          Mr. Tallis had rented the house for a year. She and her
husband went to live in the little old cabin behind the barn. It only
had an outside toilet but they had been used to that back in North
Dakota, and luckily it had been a warm winter. Anyhow they were glad of
the money, what with prices the way they were nowadays; and Mr. Tallis
couldn't have been pleasanter, once you understood that he liked his
privacy.

          "I suppose it was he who put up that sign on the gate?"

          The old lady nodded and said that it was kind of cute; she
meant to leave it there.

          "Had he been sick for a long time?" I asked.

          "Not sick at all," she answered. "Though he always did say he
had heart trouble."

          And that was why he had passed on. In the bathroom. She found
him there one morning, when she came to bring him his quart of milk and
a dozen eggs from the store. Stone cold. He must have laid there all
night. She had never had such a shock in all her life. And then what a
commotion on account of there not being any relatives that anybody knew
about! The doctor was called and then the sheriff, and there had to be a
court order before the poor man could even be buried, much less
embalmed. And then all the books and papers and clothes had to be packed
up and seals put on the boxes, and everything stored somewhere in Los
Angeles, just in case there should be an heir somewhere. Well, now she
and her husband were back in the house, and she felt rather badly about
it, because poor Mr. Tallis still had four months of his lease to run
and he'd paid everything in advance. But of course in one way she was
thankful, now that the rain and snow had come at last -- on account of
the toilet being inside the house, not outside, like when they were
living in the cabin. She paused for breath. Bob and I exchanged glances.
"Well, in the circumstances," I said, "I think we'd better be going."

          But the old lady wouldn't hear of it. "Come in," she insisted,
"come in." We hesitated; then, accepting her invitation, followed her
through a tiny entrance lobby into the living room. An oil stove was
burning in a corner of the room; the air was hot and an almost tangible
smell of fried food and nappies filled the house. A little old man like
a leprechaun was seated in a rocking chair near the window, reading the
Sunday comics. Near him a pale, preoccupied-looking young girl -- she
couldn't have been more than seventeen -- was holding a baby in one arm
and, with the other hand, buttoning her pink blouse. The child belched;
a bubble of milk appeared at the corner of its mouth. The young mother
left the final button undone and tenderly wiped the pouting lips.
Through the open door of another room came the sound of a fresh soprano
voice singing, "Now is the Hour," to the accompaniment of a guitar.

          "This is my husband," said the old lady. "Mr. Coulton."

          "Pleased to meet you," said the leprechaun, without looking up
from his comics.

          "And this is our granddaughter, Katie. She got married last
year."

          "So I see," said Bob. He bowed to the girl and gave her one of
those fascinating smiles, for which he was so famous.

          Katie looked at him as though he were merely a piece of
furniture; then, fastening that final button, she turned without a word
and started to climb the steep stairs that led to the upper floor.

          "And these," Mrs. Coulton went on, indicating Bob and myself,
"are two friends of Mr. Tallis."

          We had to explain that we weren't precisely friends. All we
knew of Mr. Tallis was his work; but that had interested us so much that
we had come here, hoping to make his acquaintance -- only to learn the
tragic news of his death.

          Mr. Coulton looked up from his paper.

          "Sixty-six," he said. "That's all he was. I'm seventy-two
myself. Seventy-two last October."

          He uttered the triumphant little laugh of one who has scored a
victory, then returned to Flash Gordon -- Flash the invulnerable, Flash
the immortal, Flash the perpetual knight errant to girls, not as they
lamentably are, but as the idealists of the brassiere industry proclaim
that they ought to be.

          "I happened to see what Mr. Tallis had sent in to our Studio,"
said Bob.

          Again the leprechaun looked up.

          "You're in the movies?" he enquired.

          Bob admitted that he was.

          In the next room the music broke off suddenly in the middle of
a phrase.

          "One of those big shots?" Mr. Coulton enquired.

          With the most charming false modesty, Bob assured him that he
was only a writer who occasionally dabbled in directing.

          The leprechaun nodded slowly.

          "I see in the paper where that guy Goldwyn says all the big
shots got to take a fifty per cent cut in their salary."

          His eyes twinkled gleefully, once again he uttered his
triumphant little laugh. Then abruptly disinteresting himself from
reality, he returned to his myths.

          Christ before Lublin! I tried to change the painful subject by
asking Mrs. Coulton whether she had known that Tallis was interested in
the movies. But as I spoke a sound of footsteps in the inner room
distracted her attention.

          I turned my head. In the doorway, dressed in a black sweater
and a tartan skirt there stood -- who? Lady Hamilton at sixteen, Ninon
de Lenclos when she lost her virginity to Coligny, la petite Morphil,
Anna Karenina in the schoolroom.

          "This is Rosie," said Mrs. Coulton proudly, "our other
granddaughter. Rosie's studying singing," she confided to Bob. "She
wants to get into the movies."

          "But how interesting!" cried Bob enthusiastically, as he rose
and shook hands with the future Lady Hamilton.

          "Maybe you could give her some advice," said the doting
grandmother.

          "I'd be only too happy. . ."

          "Fetch another chair, Rosie."

          The girl raised her eyelids and gave Bob a brief but intense
look. "Unless you don't mind sitting in the kitchen," she said.

          "Of course not!"

          They vanished together into the inner room. Looking out of the
window, I saw that the buttes were again in shadow. The rat-lizards had
closed their eyes and were shamming death -- but only to lull their
victim into a sense of false security.

          "It's more than luck," Mrs. Coulton was saying, "it's
Providence. A big shot in the movies coming here, just when Rosie needs
a helping hand."

          "Just when movies are going to fold up like vaudeville," said
the leprechaun without raising his eyes from the page before him.

          "What makes you say those things?"

          "It's not me that says them," the old man answered. "It's that
Goldwyn guy."

          From the kitchen came the sound of a startlingly childish
laugh. Bob was evidently making headway. I foresaw another trip to
Acapulco, with consequences even more disastrous than the first.

          Innocently the procuress, Mrs. Coulton smiled with pleasure.

          "I like your friend," she said. "Gets on well with kids. None
of that stuffed shirt business."

          I accepted the implied rebuke without comment and asked her
again if she had known that Mr. Tallis was interested in movies.

          She nodded. Yes, he'd told her that he was sending something
to one of the Studios. He wanted to make some money. Not for himself;
for though he'd lost most of what he once had, there was still enough to
live on. No, he wanted some extra money to send to Europe. He'd been
married to a German girl, way back, before the First World War. Then
they'd been divorced and she had stayed on in Germany with the baby. And
now there wasn't anybody left but a granddaughter. Mr. Tallis wanted to
bring her over here; but the people at Washington wouldn't let him. So
the next best thing was to send her a lot of money so she could eat
properly and finish her education. That was why he'd written that thing
for the movies.

          Her words suddenly reminded me of something in Tallis's script
-- something about children in postwar Europe prostituting themselves
for bars of chocolate. The granddaughter -- had she perhaps been one of
those children? "Ich give you Schokolade, du give me Liebe. Understand?"
They understood only too well. One Hershey bar now; two more afterward.

          "What happened to the wife?" I asked. "And the granddaughter's
parents?"

          "They passed on," said Mrs. Coulton. "I guess they were
Jewish, or something."

          "Mind you," said the leprechaun suddenly, "I don't have
anything against Jews. But all the same. . ." He paused. "Maybe Hitler
wasn't so dumb after all."

          This time, I could see, it was to the Katzenjammer Kids that
he returned.

          Another peal of childish laughter broke out in the kitchen.
Lady Hamilton at sixteen sounded as though she were about eleven. And
yet how mature, how technically perfect had been the look with which she
greeted Bob! Obviously, the most disquieting fact about Rosie was that
she was simultaneously innocent and knowing, a calculating adventuress
and a pigtailed schoolgirl.

          "He married again," the old lady went on, ignoring both the
giggle and the anti-Semitism. "Someone on the stage. He told me the
name, but I've forgotten it. Anyhow it didn't last long. She went off
with some other fellow. I say it served him right for going off with her
when he had a wife back there in Germany. I don't think it's right, all
this divorcing and marrying somebody else's husband."

          In the ensuing silence I fabricated a whole biography for this
man I had never seen. The young New Englander of good family. Carefully
educated, but not to the point of pedantry. Naturally gifted, but not so
overwhelmingly as to make him wish to exchange a life of leisure for the
fatigues of professional authorship. From Harvard he had gone on to
Europe, had lived gracefully, had known the best people everywhere. And
then -- in Munich, I felt sure -- he had fallen in love. I visualised
the girl, wearing the German equivalent of Liberty dresses -- the
daughter of some successful artist or patron of the arts. One of those
almost disembodied, those as it were floating products of Wilhelmine
wealth and culture; a being at once vague and intense, fascinatingly
unpredictable and maddeningly idealistic, tief and German. Tallis had
fallen in love, had married, had fathered a child in spite of his wife's
frigidity, had been almost asphyxiated by the oppressive soulfulness of
the domestic atmosphere. How fresh and healthy, by comparison, had
seemed the air of Paris and the personal ambience of that young Broadway
actress whom he had met vacationing there!

         

                   La belle Americaine,

                   Qui rend les hommes fous,

                   Dans deux ou trois semaines

                   Partira pour Corfou.

          But this one didn't leave for Corfu -- or if she did, it was
in Tallis's company. And she wasn't frigid, she didn't float, she was
neither vague, nor intense, neither deep, nor soulful, nor an art snob.
What she was, unfortunately, was a bit of a bitch. And that bit had
grown larger with the passage of the years. By the time he divorced her,
it had become the entire animal.

          Looking back from the vantage point of 1947, the Tallis of my
imagination could see precisely what he had done: for the sake of a
physical pleasure and the simultaneous excitement and satisfaction of an
erotic imagination, he had condemned a wife and a daughter to death at
the hands of maniacs, and a granddaughter to the caresses of any soldier
or black marketeer with a pocketful of sweetmeats or the price of a
decent meal.

          Romantic fancies! I turned to Mrs. Coulton.

          "Well, I wish I'd known him," I said.

          "You'd have liked him," she assured me. "We all liked Mr.
Tallis. I'll tell you something," she confided. "Every time I make the
trip to Lancaster for the Ladies' Bridge Club, I go to the cemetery,
just to visit with him."

          "And I bet he hates it," said the leprechaun.

          "Now, Elmer," his wife protested.

          "But I heard him say it," Mr. Coulton insisted. "Time and
again. 'If I die here,' he says, 'I want to be buried out in the
desert.' "

          "He wrote as much in that script he sent to the Studio," I
said.

          "He did?" Mrs. Coulton's tone was one of incredulity.

          "Yes, he even describes the grave he meant to be buried in.
All by itself, under a Joshua tree."

          "I could have told him it wasn't legal," said the leprechaun.
"Not since the morticians lobbied that bill through the legislature at
Sacramento. I knew a man that had to be dug up twenty years after he was
buried-way out there behind the buttes." He waved a hand in the
direction of Goya's saurian rats. "It cost his nephew three hundred
dollars by the time he was all through."

          He chuckled at the recollection.

          "I wouldn't want to be buried in the desert," said his wife
emphatically.

          "Why not?"

          "Too lonely," she answered. "I'd hate it."

          While I was wondering what to say next, the pale young mother
came down the stairs carrying a nappy. She stopped for a moment to look
in at the kitchen.

          "Listen, Rosie," she said in a low, angry voice, "It's time
you did some work for a change."

          Then she turned and walked towards the entrance lobby, where
an open door revealed the modern conveniences of that indoor bathroom.

          "He's got diarrhoea again," she said bitterly, as she passed
her grandmother.

          Flushed, her eyes bright with excitement, the future Lady
Hamilton emerged from the kitchen. Behind her, in the doorway, stood the
future Hamilton, busily imagining that he was going to be Lord Nelson.

          "Grandma," the girl announced, "Mr. Briggs thinks he can
arrange for me to have a screen test."

          The idiot! I got up.

          "Time we were going, Bob," I said, knowing that it was already
too late.

          From the half-open door of the bathroom came the squelchy
sound of nappies being rinsed in the toilet bowl.

          "Listen!" I whispered to Bob as we passed.

          "Listen to what?" he asked.

          I shrugged my shoulders. Ears have they, neither do they hear.

          Well, that was the nearest we ever got to Tallis in the flesh.
In what follows the reader can discover the reflection of his mind. I
print the text of "Ape and Essence" as I found it, without change and
without comment.

II

The Script

          TITLES, credits and finally, to the accompaniment of trumpets
and a chorus of triumphant angels, the name of the PRODUCER.

          The music changes its character, and if Debussy were alive to
write it, how delicate it would be, how aristocratic, how flawlessly
pure of all Wagnerian lubricity and bumptiousness, all Straussian
vulgarity! For here on the screen, in something better than
Technicolour, it is the hour before sunrise. Night seems to linger in
the darkness of an almost unruffled sea; but from the fringes of the sky
a transparent pallor mounts from green through deepening blue to the
zenith. In the east the morning star is still visible.

NARRATOR

          Beauty inexpressible, peace beyond understanding. . .

          But, alas, on our screen

          This emblem of an emblem

          Will probably look like

          Mrs. Somebody's illustration

          To a poem by Ella

          Wheeler Wilcox.

          Out of the sublime in Nature

          Art all too often manufactures

          Only the ludicrous.

          But the risk must be run;

          For you there, you in the audience,

          Somehow and at any price,

          Wilcox or worse,

          Somehow you must be reminded

          Be induced to remember,

          Be implored to be willing to

          Understand what's What.

          As the Narrator speaks, we fade out of our emblem of an emblem
of Eternity into the interior of a picture palace filled to capacity.
The light grows a little less dim and suddenly we become aware that the
audience is composed entirely of well-dressed baboons of both sexes and
of all ages from first to second childhood.

NARRATOR

          But man, proud man,

          Drest in a little brief authority --

          Most ignorant of what he is most assur'd.

          His glassy essence -- like an angry ape,

          Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven

          As make the angels weep.

          Cut to the screen, at which the apes are so attentively
gazing. In a setting such as only Semiramis or Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer could
have imagined we see a bosomy young female baboon, in a shell-pink
evening gown, her mouth painted purple, her muzzle powdered mauve, her
fiery red eyes ringed with mascara. Swaying as voluptuously as the
shortness of her hind legs will permit her to do, she walks onto the
brightly illuminated stage of a night club and, to the clapping of two
or three hundred pairs of hairy hands, appreaches the Louis XV
microphone. Behind her, on all fours and secured by a light steel chain
attached to a dog collar, comes Michael Faraday.

NARRATOR

          "Most ignorant of what he is most assur'd . . ." And I need
hardly add that what we call knowledge is merely another form of
Ignorance -- highly organised, of course, and eminently scientific, but
for that very reason all the more complete, all the more productive of
angry apes. When Ignorance was merely ignorance, we were the equivalents
of lemurs, marmosets and howler monkeys. Today, thanks to that Higher
Ignorance which is our knowledge, man's stature has increased to such an
extent that the least among us is now a baboon, the greatest an
orangutan or even, if he takes rank as a Saviour of Society, a true
Gorilla.

          Meanwhile the baboon-girl has reached the microphone. Turning
her head, she catches sight of Faraday on his knees, in the act of
straightening his bent and aching back.

          "Down, sir, down!"

          The tone is peremptory; she gives the old man a cut with her
coral-headed riding switch. Faraday winces and obeys, the apes in the
audience laugh delightedly. She blows them a kiss, then, drawing the
microphone toward her, she bares her formidable teeth and starts to
sing, in an expiring bedroom contralto, the latest popular success.

          Love, Love, Love --

          Love's the very essence

          Of everything I think, of everything I do.

          Give me, Give me, Give me,

          Give me detumescence.

          That means you.

          Close-up of Faraday's face, as it registers astonishment,
disgust, indignation and, finally, such shame and anguish that tears
begin to flow down the furrowed cheeks.

          Montage shots of the Folks in Radio Land, listening in.

          A stout baboon housewife frying sausages, while the
loudspeaker brings her the imaginary fulfilment and real exacerbation of
her most unavowable wishes.

          A baboon baby standing up in its cot, reaching over to the
portable on the commode and dialling the promise of detumescence.

          A middle-aged baboon financier, interrupting his reading of
the stock market news to listen, with closed eyes and a smile of
ecstasy. Give me, give me, give me, give me.

          Two baboon teen-agers, fumbling to music in a parked car.
"That mean you -- ou." Close-up of mouths and paws.

          Cut back to Faraday's tears. The singer turns, catches sight
of his agonised face, utters a cry of rage and starts to beat him, blow
after savage blow, while the audience applauds tumultuously. The gold
and jasper walls of the night club evaporate and for a moment we see the
figures of the ape and her captive intellect silhouetted against the
dawning twilight of our first sequence. Then these too fade out, and
there is only the emblem of an emblem of Eternity.

NARRATOR

          The sea, the bright planet, the boundless crystal of the sky
-- surely you remember them! Surely! Or can it be that you have
forgotten, that you have never even discovered what lies beyond the
mental Zoo and the inner Asylum and all that Broadway of imaginary
theatres, in which the only name in lights is always your own?

          The Camera moves across the sky, and now the black serrated
shape of a rocky island breaks the line of the horizon. Sailing past the
island is a large, four-masted schooner. We approach, we see that tie
ship flies the flag of New Zealand and is named the Canterbury. Her
captain and a group of passengers are at the rail, staring intently
toward the east. We look through their binoculars and discover a line of
barren coast. Then, almost suddenly, the sun comes up behind the
silhouette of distant mountains.

NARRATOR

          This new bright day is the twentieth of February, 2108, and
these men and women are members of the New Zealand Rediscovery
Expedition to North America. Spared by the belligerents of the Third
World War -- not, I need hardly say, for any humanitarian reason, but
simply because, like Equatorial Africa, it was too remote to be worth
anybody's while to obliterate -- New Zealand survived and even modestly
flourished in an isolation which, because of the dangerously radioactive
condition of the rest of the world, remained for more than a century
almost absolute. Now that the danger is over, here come its first
explorers, rediscovering America from the West. And meanwhile, on the
other side of the world, the black men have been working their way down
the Nile and across the Mediterranean. What splendid tribal dances in
the bat-infested halls of the Mother of Parliaments! And the labyrinth
of the Vatican -- what a capital place in which to celebrate the
lingering and complex rites of female circumcision! We all get precisely
what we ask for.

          The scene darkens; there is a noise of gunfire. When the
lights come up again, there squats Dr. Albert Einstein, on a leash,
behind a group of baboons in uniform.

          The Camera moves across a narrow no-man's land of rubble,
broken trees and corpses, and comes to rest on a second group of
animals, wearing different decorations and under another flag, but with
the same Dr. Albert Einstein, on an exactly similar string, squatting at
the heels of their jack boots. Under the tousled aureole of hair, the
good, innocent face wears an expression of pained bewilderment. The
Camera travels back and forth from Einstein to Einstein. Close shots of
the two identical faces, staring wistfully at each other between the
polished leather boots of their respective masters.

          On the sound track, the voice, the saxophones and cellos
continue to yearn for detumescence.

          "Is that you, Albert?" one of the Einsteins hesitantly
enquires.

          The other slowly nods his head.

          "Albert, I'm afraid it is."

          Overhead the flags of the opposing armies suddenly begin to
stir in the freshening breeze. The coloured patterns open out, then fold
in again upon themselves, are revealed and once more hidden.

NARRATOR

          Vertical stripes, horizontal stripes, noughts and crosses,
eagles and hammers. Mere arbitrary signs. But every reality to which a
sign has been attached is thereby made subject to its sign. Goswami and
Ali used to live at peace. But I got a flag, you got a flag, all
Baboon-God's children got flags. So even Ali and Goswami got flags; and
because of the flags it immediately became right and proper for the one
with the foreskin to disembowel the one without a foreskin, and for the
circumcised to shoot the uncircumcised, rape his wife and roast his
children over slow fires.

          But, meanwhile, above the bunting float the huge shapes of
clouds, and beyond the clouds is that blue void which is an emblem of
our glassy Essence, and at the foot of the flagstaff grows the wheat and
the emerald green rice and the millet. Bread for the body and bread for
the spirit. Our choice is between bread and bunting. And bunting, I need
hardly add, is what we have almost unanimously chosen.

         

          The Camera drops from the flags to the Einsteins and passes
from the Einsteins to the much-decorated General Staffs in the
background. All at once and simultaneously the two Field Marshalissimos
shout an order. Immediately, from either side, appear baboon
technicians, with fully motorised equipment for releasing aerosols. On
the pressure tanks of one army are painted the words, SUPER-TULAREMIA,
on those of their opponents, IMPROVED GLANDERS, GUARANTEED 99.44% PURE.
Each group of technicians is accompanied by its mascot, Louis Pasteur,
on a chain. On the Soundtrack there is a reminiscence of the
baboon-girl. Give me, give me, give me, give me detumescence. . . . Then
these voluptuous strains modulate into "Land of Hope and Glory," played
by massed brass bands, and sung by a choir of fourteen thousand voices.

NARRATOR

          What land, you ask? And I answer,

          Any old land.

          And the Glory, of course, is the Ape-King's,

          As for the Hope --

          Bless your little heart, there is no hope,

          Only the almost infinite probability

          Of consummating suddenly,

          Or else by agonising inches,

          The ultimate and irremediable

          Detumescence.

          Close shot of paws at the stopcocks; then the Camera draws
back. Out of the pressure tanks two streams of yellow fog start to roll
toward one another, sluggishly, across no-man's land.

NARRATOR

          Glanders, my friends, Glanders -- a disease of horses, not
common among humans. But, never fear, Science can easily make it
universal. And these are its symptoms. Violent pains in all the joints.
Pustules over the whole body. Below the skin hard swellings, which
finally burst and turn into sloughing ulcers. Meanwhile the mucous
membrane of the nose becomes inflamed and exudes a copious discharge of
stinking pus. Ulcers rapidly form within the nostrils and eat away the
surrounding bone and cartilage. From the nose the infection passes to
the eyes, mouth, throat and bronchial passages. Within three weeks most
of the patients are dead. To see that all shall die has been the task of
some of those brilliant young D.Sc's now in the employ of your
government. And not of your government only: of all the other elected or
self-appointed organisers of the world's collective schizophrenia.
Biologists, pathologists, physiologists -- here they are, after a hard
day at the lab, coming home to their families. A hug from the sweet
little wife. A romp with the children. A quiet dinner with friends,
followed by an evening of chamber music or intelligent conversation
about politics or philosophy. Then bed at eleven and the familiar
ecstasies of married love. And in the morning, after orange juice and
Grapenuts, off they go again to their job of discovering how yet greater
numbers of families precisely like their own can be infected with a yet
deadlier strain of bacillus mallei.

          There is another yelp of command from the Marshalissimos.
Among the booted apes in charge of either army's supply of Genius there
is a violent cracking of whips, a tugging of leashes.

          Close shot of the Einsteins as they try to resist.

          "No, no. . . I can't."

          "I tell you I can't."

          "Disloyal!"

          "Unpatriotic!"

          "Filthy Communist!"

          "Stinking bourgeois-Fascist!"

          "Red Imperialist!"

          "Capitalist-Monopolist!"

          "Take that!"

          "Take that!"

          Kicked, whipped, half throttled, each of the Einsteins is
finally dragged toward a kind of sentry box. Inside these boxes are
instrument boards with dials, knobs and switches.

NARRATOR

          Surely it's obvious.

          Doesn't every schoolboy know it?

          Ends are ape-chosen; only the means are man's.

          Papio's procurer, bursar to baboons,

          Reason comes running, eager to ratify;

          Comes, a catch-fart, with Philosophy, truckling to tyrants;

          Comes, a pimp for Prussia, with Hegel's Patent History;

          Comes with Medicine to administer the Ape-King's aphrodisiac;

          Comes, rhyming and with Pihetoric, to write his orations;

          Comes with the Calculus to aim his rockets

          Accurately at the orphanage across the ocean;

          Comes, having aimed, with incense to impetrate

          Our Lady devoutly for a direct hit.

          The brass bands give place to the most glutinous of
Wurlitzers, "Land of Hope and Glory" to "Onward, Christian Soldiers."
Followed by his very Reverend Dean and Chapter, the Right Reverend, the
Baboon-Bishop of the Bronx advances majestic, his crozier in his
jewelled paw, to pronounce benediction upon the two Field Marshalissimos
and their patriotic proceedings.

NARRATOR

          Church and State

          Greed and Hate: --

          Two Baboon-Persons in one Supreme Gorilla.

OMNES

          Amen, amen.

THE BISHOP

In nomine Babuini. . . .

          On the sound-track it is all vox humana and the angel voices
of choristers.

          "With the (dim) Cross of (pp) Jesus, (ff) going on before."

          Huge paws hoist the Einsteins to their feet and, in a
close-up, seize their wrists. Ape-guided, those fingers, which have
written equations and played the music of Johann Sebastian Bach, close
on the master switches and, with a horrified reluctance, slowly press
them down. There is a little click, then a long silence which is broken
at last by the voice of the Narrator.

NARRATOR

          Even at supersonic speeds the missiles will take an
appreciable time to reach their destination. So what do you say, boys,
to a spot of breakfast while we're waiting for our Last Judgment!

          The apes open their haversacks, throw some bread, a few
carrots and two or three lumps of sugar to the Einsteins, then fall to
themselves on rum and Bologna sausage.

          We dissolve to the deck of the schooner, where the scientists
of the Rediscovery Expedition are also breakfasting.

NARRATOR

          And these are some of the survivors of that Judgment. Such
nice people! And the civilization they represent -- that's nice too.
Nothing very exciting or spectacular of course. No Parthenons or Sistine
Chapels, no Newtons or Mozarts or Shakespeares; but also no Ezzelinos,
no Napoleons or Hitlers or Jay Goulds, no Inquisitions or NKVD's, no
purges, pogroms or lynchings. No heights or abysses, but plenty of milk
for the kids, and a reasonably high average IQ, and everything, in a
quiet provincial way, thoroughly cosy and sensible and humane.

         

          One of the men raises his binoculars and peers at the shore,
now only a mile or two distant. Suddenly he utters an exclamation of
delighted astonishment.

          "Look!" He hands the glasses to one of his companions. "On the
crest of the hill."

          The other looks.

          Telescopic shot of low hills. On the highest point of the
ridge, three oil derricks stand silhouetted against the sky, like the
equipment of a modernised and more efficient Calvary.

          "Oil!" cries the second observer excitedly. "And the derricks
are still standing."

          "Still standing?"

          There is general astonishment.

          "That means," says old Professor Craigie, the geologist, "that
there can't have been much of an explosion hereabouts."

          "But you don't have to have explosions," explains his
colleague from the Department of Nuclear Physics. "Radioactive gases do
the job just as effectively and over much wider areas."

          "You seem to forget the bacteria and the viruses," puts in
Professor Grampian, the biologist. His tone is that of a man who feels
that he has been slighted.

          His young wife, who is only an anthropologist and so has
nothing to contribute to the argument, contents herself with glaring
angrily at the physicist.

          Athletic in tweeds, but at the same time brightly intelligent
behind her horn-rimmed glasses, Miss Ethel Hook, of the Department of
Botany, reminds them that there was, almost certainly, a widespread
employment of plant diseases. She turns for confirmation of what she
says to her colleague, Dr. Poole, who nods approvingly.

          "Diseases of food plants," he says in his professorial manner,
"would have a long-range effect hardly less decisive than that produced
by fissionable material or artificially induced pandemics. Consider, for
example, the potato. . ."

          "But why bother about any of this fancy stuff?" bluffly booms
the engineer of the party, Dr. Cudworth. "Cut the aqueducts, and it's
all over in a week. No drinky, no livey." Delighted by his own joke, he
laughs enormously.

          Meanwhile Dr. Schneeglock, the psychologist, sits listening
with a smile of hardly disguised contempt.

          "But why even bother about aqueducts?" he asks. "All you need
do is just to threaten your neighbour with any of the weapons of mass
destruction. Their own panic will do the rest. Remember what the
psychological treatment did to New York, for example. The short-wave
broadcasts from overseas, the headlines in the evening papers. And
immediately there were eight millions of people trampling one another to
death on the bridges and in the tunnels. And the survivors scattered
through the countryside, like locusts, like a horde of plague-infected
rats. Fouling the water supply. Spreading typhoid and diphtheria and
venereal disease. Biting, clawing, looting, murdering, raping. Feeding
on dead dogs and the corpses of children. Shot at sight by the farmers,
bludgeoned by the police, machine-gunned by the State Guard, strung up
by the Vigilantes. And the same thing was happening in Chicago, Detroit,
Philadelphia, Washington; in London, in Paris; in Bombay and Shanghai
and Tokyo; in Moscow, in Kiev, in Stalingrad; in every capital, every
manufacturing centre, every port, every railway junction, all over the
world. Not a shot had been fired and civilization was already in ruins.
Why the soldiers ever found it necessary to use their bombs, I really
can't imagine."

NARRATOR

          Love casts out fear; but conversely fear casts out love. And
not only love. Fear also casts out intelligence, casts out goodness,
casts out all thought of beauty and truth. What remains is the dumb or
studiedly jocular desperation of one who is aware of the obscene
Presence in the corner of the room and knows that the door is locked,
that there aren't any windows. And now the thing bears down on him. He
feels a hand on his sleeve, smells a stinking breath, as the
executioner's assistant leans almost amorously toward him. "Your turn
next, brother. Kindly step this way." And in an instant his quiet terror
is transmuted into a frenzy as violent as it is futile. There is no
longer a man among his fellow men, no longer a rational being speaking
articulately to other rational beings; there is only a lacerated animal,
screaming and struggling in the trap. For in the end fear casts out even
a man's humanity. And fear, my good friends, fear is the very basis and
foundation of modern life. Fear of the much touted technology which,
while it raises our standard of living, increases the probability of our
violently dying. Fear of the science which takes away with one hand even
more than what it so profusely gives with the other. Fear of the
demonstrably fatal institutions for which, in our suicidal loyalty, we
are ready to kill and die. Fear of the Great Men whom we have raised, by
popular acclaim, to a power which they use, inevitably, to murder and
enslave us. Fear of the War we don't want and yet do everything we can
to bring about.

          As the Narrator speaks, we dissolve to the alfresco picnic of
the baboons and their captive Einsteins. They eat and drink, with gusto,
while the first two bars of "Onward Christian Soldiers" are repeated
again and again, faster and faster, louder and louder. Suddenly the
music is interrupted by the first of a succession of enormous
explosions. Darkness. A long-drawn, deafening noise of crashing,
rending, screaming, moaning. Then silence and increasing light, and once
again it is the hour before sunrise, with the morning star and the
delicate, pure music.

NARRATOR

          Beauty inexpressible, peace beyond understanding. . .

          Far off, from below the horizon, a column of rosy smoke pushes
up into the sky, swells out into the likeness of an enormous toadstool
and hangs there, eclipsing the solitary planet.

          We dissolve again to the scene of the picnic. The baboons are
all dead. Horribly disfigured by burns, the two Einsteins lie side by
side under what remains of a flowering apple tree. Not far off a
pressure tank is still oozing its Improved Glanders.

FIRST EINSTEIN

          It's unjust, it isn't right. . .

SECOND EINSTEIN

          We, who never did any harm to anybody;

FIRST EINSTEIN

          We, who lived only for Truth.

NARRATOR

          And that precisely is why you are dying in the murderous
service of baboons. Pascal explained it all more than three hundred
years ago. "We make an idol of truth; for truth without charity is not
God, but his image and idol, which we must neither love nor worship."
You lived for the worship of an idol. But, in the last analysis, the
name of every idol is Moloch. So here you are, my friends, here you are.

          Stirred by a sudden gust, the stagnant plague-fog noiselessly
advances, sends a wreath of pus-coloured vapour swirling among the apple
blossoms, then descends to engulf the two recumbent figures. A choking
scream announces the death, by suicide, of twentieth-century science.

          We dissolve to a point on the coast of Southern California,
twenty miles or thereabouts due west of Los Angeles. The scientists of
the Rediscovery Expedition are in the act of landing from a whaleboat. A
huge sewer, shattered where it enters the sea, stands in the background.

NARRATOR

          Parthenon, Coliseum --

          Glory that was Greece, grandeur etcetera.

          And there are all the others --

          Thebes and Copan, Arezzo and Ajanta;

          Bourges, taking heaven by violence,

          And the Holy Wisdom, floating in repose.

          But the glory that was Queen Victoria

          Remains unquestionably the W.C.;

          The grandeur that was Franklin Delano

          Is this by far the biggest drainpipe ever --

          Dry now and shattered, Ichabod, Ichabod;

          And its freight of condoms (irrepressibly buoyant,

          Like hope, like concupiscence) no longer whitens

          This lonely beach with a galaxy as of windflowers

          Or summer daisies.

          Meanwhile the scientists, with Dr. Craigie at their head, have
crossed the beach, scrambled up the low cliff and are making their way
across the sandy and eroded plain toward the oil wells on the hills
beyond.

          The Camera holds on Dr. Poole, the Chief Botanist of the
Expedition. Like a browsing sheep, he moves from plant to plant,
examining flowers through his magnifying glass, putting away specimens
in his collecting box, making notes in a little black book.

NARRATOR

          Well, here he is, our hero, Dr. Alfred Poole D.Sc. Better
known to his students and younger colleagues as Stagnant Poole. And the
nickname, alas, is painfully apt. For though not unhandsome, as you see,
though a Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand and by no means a
fool, in the circumstances of practical life his intelligence seems to
be only potential, his attractiveness no more than latent. It is as
though he lived behind plate glass, could see and be seen, but never
establish contact. And the fault, as Dr. Schneeglock of the Psychology
Department is only too ready to tell you, the fault lies with that
devoted and intensely widowed mother of his -- that saint, that pillar
of fortitude, that vampire, who still presides at his breakfast table
and with her own hands launders his silk shirts and sacrificially darns
his socks.

         

          Miss Hook now enters the shot -- enters it on a burst of
enthusiasm.

          "Isn't this exciting, Alfred?" she exclaims.

          "Very," says Dr. Poole politely.

          "Seeing Yucca gloriosa in its native habitat -- who would have
imagined that we'd ever get the chance? And Artemisia tridentata."

          "There are still some flowers on the Artemisia," says Dr.
Poole. "Do you notice anything unusual about them?"

          Miss Hook examines them, and shakes her head.

          "They're a great deal bigger than what's described in the old
text books," he says in a tone of studiedly repressed excitement.

          "A great deal bigger?" she repeats. Her face lights up.
"Alfred, you don't think . . .?"

          Dr. Poole nods.

          "I'm ready to bet on it," he says. "Tetraploidy. Induced by
irradiation with gamma rays."

          "Oh, Alfred," she cries ecstatically.

NARRATOR

          In her tweeds and her horn-rimmed spectacles Ethel Hook is one
of those extraordinarily wholesome, amazingly efficient and intensely
English girls to whom, unless one is oneself equally wholesome, equally
English and even more efficient, one would so much rather not be
married. Which is probably why, at thirty-five, Ethel is still without a
husband. Still without a husband -- but not, she dares to hope, for much
longer. For though dear Alfred has not yet actually proposed, she knows
(and knows that he knows) that his mother's dearest wish is for him to
do so -- and Alfred is the most dutiful of sons. Besides they have so
much in common -- botany, the University, the poetry of Wordsworth. She
feels confident that before they get back to Auckland it will all be
arranged -- the simple ceremony with dear old Dr. Trilliams officiating,
the honeymoon in the Southern Alps, the return to their sweet little
house in Mount Eden, and then after eighteen months, the first baby. . .

          Cut to the other members of the expedition, as they toil up
the hill toward the oil wells. Professor Craigie, their leader, halts to
mop his brow and to take stock of his charges.

          "Where's Poole?" he asks. "And Ethel Hook?"

          Somebody points and, in a long shot, we see the distant
figures of the two botanists.

          Cut back to Professor Craigie, who cups his hands around his
mouth and shouts. "Poole, Poole!"

          "Why don't you leave them to their little romance?" asks the
genial Cudworth.

          "Romance indeed!" Dr. Schneeglock snorts derisively.

          "But she's obviously sweet on him."

          "It takes two to make a romance."

          "Trust a woman to get her man to pop the question."

          "You might as well expect him to commit incest with his
mother," says Dr. Schneeglock emphatically.

          "Poole!" bellows Professor Craigie once more, and turning to
the others, "I don't like people to lag behind," he says in a tone of
irritation. "In a strange country. . . You never know."

          He renews his shouting.

          Cut back to Dr. Poole and Miss Hook. They hear the distant
call, look up from their tetraploid Artemisia, wave their hands and
start in pursuit of the others. Suddenly Dr. Poole catches sight of
something that makes him cry aloud.

          "Look!" He points a forefinger.

          "What is it?"

          "Echinocactus hexaedrophorus -- and the most beautiful
specimen."

          Medium long shot from his viewpoint of a ruined bungalow among
the sagebrush. Then a close shot of the cactus growing between two
paving stones, near the front door. Cut back to Dr. Poole. From the
leather sheath at his belt he draws a long, narrow-bladed trowel.

          "You're not going to dig it up?"

          His only answer is to walk over to where the cactus is growing
and squat down beside it.

          "Professor Craigie will be so cross," protests Miss Hook.

          "Well then, run ahead and keep him quiet."

          She looks at him for a few seconds with an expression of
solicitude.

          "I hate to leave you alone, Alfred."

          "You talk as though I were five years old," he answers
irritably. "Go ahead, I tell you."

          He turns away and starts to dig.

          Miss Hook does not immediately obey, but stands looking at him
in silence for a little while longer.

NARRATOR

          Tragedy is the farce that involves our sympathies, farce, the
tragedy that happens to outsiders. Tweedy and breezy, wholesome and
efficient, this object of the easiest kind of satire is also the subject
of an Intimate Journal. What flaming sunsets she has seen and vainly
attempted to describe! What velvety and voluptuous summer nights! What
lyrically lovely days of springl And oh, the torrents of feeling, the
temptations, the hopes, the passionate throbbing of the heart, the
humiliating disappointments! And now, after all these years, after so
many committee meetings attended, so many lectures delivered and
examination papers corrected, now at last, moving in His mysterious way,
God has made her, she feels, responsible for this helpless and unhappy
man. And because he is unhappy and helpless, she loves him -- not
romantically of course, not as she loved that curly-headed scamp who,
fifteen years ago, swept her off her feet and then married the daughter
of that rich contractor, but genuinely none the less, with a strong,
protective tenderness.

          "All right," she says at last. "I'll go ahead. But promise you
won't be long."

          "Of course I won't be long."

          She turns and walks away. Dr. Poole looks after her; then,
with a sigh of relief at finding himself once more alone, resumes his
digging.

NARRATOR

          "Never," he is repeating to himself, "Never! Whatever mother
may say." For though he respects Miss Hook as a botanist, relies on her
as an organiser and admires her as a high-minded person, the idea of
being made one flesh with her is as unthinkable as a violation of the
Categorical Imperative.

          Suddenly, from behind him, three villainous-looking men,
black-bearded, dirty and ragged, emerge very quietly from out of the
ruins of the house, stand poised for a moment, then throw themselves
upon the unsuspecting botanist and, before he can so much as utter a
cry, force a gag into his mouth, tie his hands behind his back and drag
him down into a gully, out of sight of his companions.

          We dissolve to a panoramic view of Southern California from
fifty miles up in the stratosphere. As the Camera plummets downward, we
hear the Narrator's voice.

NARRATOR

The sea and its clouds, the mountains glaucous-golden,

The valleys full of indigo darkness,

The drought of lion-coloured plains,

The rivers of pebbles and white sand.

And in the midst of them the City of the Angels.

Half a million houses,

Five thousand miles of streets,

Fifteen hundred thousand motor vehicles,

And more rubber goods than Akron,

More celluloid than the Soviets,

More Nylons than New Rochelle,

More brassieres than Buffalo,

More deodorants than Denver,

More oranges than anywhere,

With bigger and better girls --

The great Metrollopis of the West.

          And now we are only five miles up and it becomes increasingly
obvious that the great Metrollopis is a ghost town, that what was once
the world's largest oasis is now its greatest agglomeration of ruins in
a wasteland. Nothing moves in the streets. Dunes of sand have drifted
across the concrete. The avenues of palms and pepper trees have left no
trace.

          The Camera comes down over a large rectangular graveyard,
lying between the ferro-concrete towers of Hollywood and those of
Wilshire Boulevard. We land, pass under an arched gateway, enjoy a
trucking shot of mortuary gazebos. A baby pyramid. A Gothic sentry box.
A marble sarcophagus surmounted by weeping seraphs. The more than
life-size statue of Hedda Boddy -- "affectionately known," reads the
inscription on the pedestal, "as Public Sweetheart Number One. Hitch
your wagon to a Star.'" We hitch and move on; and suddenly in the midst
of all this desolation, here is a little group of human beings. There
are four men, heavily bearded and more than a little dirty, and two
young women, all of them busy with shovels in or around an opened grave
and all dressed identically in shirts and trousers of tattered homespun.
Over these rough garments each wears a small square apron upon which, in
scarlet wool, is embroidered the word NO. In addition to the aprons, the
girls wear a round patch over either breast and, behind, a pair of
somewhat larger patches on the seat of their trousers. Three unequivocal
negatives greet us as they approach, two more, by way of Parthian shots,
as they recede.

          Overseeing the labourers from the roof of an adjacent
mausoleum sits a man in his middle forties, tall, powerfully built, with
the dark eyes and hawk nose of an Algerian corsair. A black curly beard
emphasizes the moistness and redness of his full lips. Somewhat
incongruously, he is dressed in a pale grey suit of
mid-twentieth-century cut, a little too small for him. When we catch our
first sight of him, he is absorbed in the paring of his nails.

          Cut back to the gravediggers. One of them, the youngest and
handsomest of the men, looks up from his shovelling, glances
surreptitiously at the overseer on the roof and, seeing him busy with
his nails, turns an intensely concupiscent look on the plump girl who
stands, stooped over her spade, beside him. Close shot of the two
prohibitory patches: NO and again NO, growing larger and larger the more
longingly he looks. Cupped already for the deliciously imagined contact,
his hand goes out, tentative, hesitant; then, with a jerk, as conscience
abruptly gets the better of temptation, is withdrawn again. Biting his
lip, the young man turns away and, with redoubled zeal, addresses
himself once more to his digging.

          Suddenly a spade strikes something hard. There is a cry of
delight, a flurry of concerted activity. A moment later a handsome
mahogany coffin is hoisted to the surface of the ground.

          "Break it open."

          "O.K., Chief."

          We hear the creaking and cracking of rent wood.

          "Man or woman?"

          "Man."

          "Fine! Spill him out."

          With a yo-heave-ho they tilt the coffin and the corpse rolls
out onto the sand. The eldest of the bearded gravediggers kneels down
beside it and starts methodically to relieve the thing of its watch and
jewellery.

NARRATOR

          Thanks to the dry climate and the embalmer's art, what remains
of the Managing Director of the Golden Rule Brewing Corporation looks as
though it had been buried only yesterday. The cheeks are still pink with
the rouge applied by the undertaker for the lying-in-state. Stitched
into a perpetual smile, the upturned corners of the lips impart to the
round, crumpet-like face the maddeningly enigmatic expression of a
Madonna by Boltraffio.

          Suddenly the lash of a dogwhip cuts across the shoulders of
the kneeling gravedigger. The Camera pulls back to reveal the Chief
impending, whip in hand, like the embodiment of divine Vengeance, from
the height of his marble Sinai.

          "Give back that ring."

          "Which ring?" the man falters.

          For answer the Chief administers two or three more cuts with
the dog whip.

          "No, no -- please! Ow! I'll give it back. Stop!"

          The culprit inserts two fingers into his mouth and after a
little fumbling draws forth the handsome diamond ring which the deceased
brewer bought for himself, when business was so hearteningly good during
the Second World War.

          "Put it there with the other things," commands the Chief and,
as the man obeys, "Twenty-five lashes," he continues with grim relish,
"that's what you're going to get this evening."

          Blubbering, the man begs for indulgence -- just for this once.
Seeing that tomorrow is Belial Day. . . And after all he's old, he has
worked faithfully all his life, has risen to the rank of a Deputy
Supervisor. . . .

          The Chief cuts him short.

          "This is a Democracy," he says. "We're all equal before the
Law. And the Law says that everything belongs to the Proletariat -- in
other words, it all goes to the State. And what's the penalty for
robbing the State?" The man looks up at him in speechless misery.
"What's the penalty?" the Chief bellows, raising his whip.

          "Twenty-five lashes," comes the almost inaudible reply.

          "Good! Well, that settles that, doesn't it? And now what are
the clothes like?"

          The younger and slimmer of the girls bends down and fingers
the corpse's double-breasted black jacket.

          "Nice stuff," she says. "And no stains. He hasn't leaked or
anything."

          "I'll try them on," says the Chief.

          With some difficulty they divest the cadaver of its trousers,
coat and shirt, then drop it back into the grave and shovel the earth
back over its one-piece undergarment. Meanwhile the Chief takes the
clothes, sniffs at them critically, then doffs the pearl-grey jacket
which once belonged to the Production Manager of Western-Shakespeare
Pictures Incorporated, and slips his arms into the more conservative
tailoring that goes with malt liquors and the Golden Rule.

NARRATOR

          Put yourself in his place. You may not know it, but a complete
scribbler, or first card-engine, consists of a breast, or small swift,
and two swifts, with the accompanying workers, strippers, fancies,
doffers, etc. And if you don't have any carding machinery or power
looms, if you don't have any electric motors to run them, or any dynamos
to generate the electricity, or any turbines to turn the dynamos, or any
coal to raise steam, or any blast furnaces to make steel -- why then,
obviously, you must depend for your fine cloth on the cemeteries of
those who once enjoyed these advantages. And so long as the
radioactivity persisted, there weren't even any cemeteries to exploit.
For three generations the dwindling remnant of those who survived the
consummation of technological progress lived precariously in the
wilderness. It is only during the last thirty years that it has been
safe for them to enjoy the buried remains of le comfort moderne.

          Close shot of the Chief, grotesque in the borrowed jacket of a
man whose arms were much shorter and whose belly was much larger than
his own. The sound of approaching footsteps makes him turn his head.

          In a long shot from his viewpoint we see Dr. Poole, his hands
tied behind his back, trudging wearily through the sand. Behind him walk
his three captors. Whenever he stumbles or slackens his pace, they prick
him in the rear with needle-sharp yucca leaves and laugh uproariously to
see him wince.

          The Chief stares at them in astonished silence as they
approach.

          "What in Belial's name?" he brings out at last.

          The little party comes to a halt at the foot of the mausoleum.
The three members of Dr. Poole's escort bow to the Chief and tell their
story. They had been fishing in their coracle off Redondo Beach; had
suddenly seen a huge, strange ship coming out of the mist; had
immediately paddled back to shore to escape detection. From the ruins of
an old house they had watched the strangers land. Thirteen of them. And
then this man had come wandering with a woman to the very threshold of
their hiding place. The woman had gone away again and, while the man was
grubbing in the dirt with a tiny spade, they had jumped on him from
behind, gagged him, bound him and now had brought him here for
questioning.

          There is a long silence, broken finally by the Chief.

          "Do you speak English?"

          "Yes, I speak English," Dr. Poole stammers.

          "Good. Untie him; hoist him up."

          They hoist him -- so unceremoniously that he lands on all
fours at the Chiefs feet.

          "Are you a priest?"

          "A priest?" Dr. Poole echoes in apprehensive astonishment. He
shakes his head.

          "Then why don't you have a beard?"

          "I. . . I shave."

          "Oh, then you're not. . ." The Chief passes a finger across
Dr. Poole's chin and cheek. "I see, I see. Get up."

          Dr. Poole obeys.

          "Where do you come from?"

          "New Zealand, sir."

          Dr. Poole swallows hard, wishes his mouth were less dry, his
voice less tremulous with terror.

          "New Zealand? Is that far?"

          "Very far."

          "You came in a big ship? With sails?"

          Dr. Poole nods and adopting that lecture-room manner, which is
always his refuge when personal contacts threaten to become too
difficult, proceeds to explain why they weren't able to cross the
Pacific under steam.

          "There would have been no place to refuel. It's only for
coastwise traffic that our shipping companies are able to make use of
steamers."

          "Steamers?" the Chief repeats, his face alight with interest.
"You still have steamers? But that must mean you didn't have the Thing?"

          Dr. Poole looks puzzled.

          "I don't quite catch your meaning," he says. "What thing?"

          "The Thing. You know -- when He took over." Raising his hands
to his forehead, he makes the sign of the horns with extended
forefingers. Devoutly,

his subjects follow suit.

          "You mean the Devil?" says Dr. Poole dubiously.

          The other nods.

          "But, but. . . I mean, really. . ."

NARRATOR

          Our friend is a good Congregationalist, but, alas, on the
liberal side. Which means that he has never given the Prince of this
world his ontological due. To put it brutally, he doesn't believe in
Him.

          "Yes, He got control," the Chief explains. "He won the battle
and took possession of everybody. That was when they did all this."

          With a wide, comprehensive gesture he takes in the desolation
that was once Los Angeles. Dr. Poole's expression brightens with
understanding.

          "Oh, I see. You mean the Third World War. No, we were lucky;
we got off without a scratch. Owing to its peculiar geographical
situation," he adds professorially, "New Zealand was of no strategic
importance to. . ."

          The Chief cuts short a promising lecture.

          "Then you've still got trains?" he questions.

          "Yes, we've still got trains," Dr. Poole answers, a little
irritably. "But, as I was saying. . ."

          "And the engines really work?"

          "Of course they work. As I was saying. . ."

          Startlingly the Chief lets out a whoop of delight and claps
him on the shoulder.

          "Then you can help us to get it all going again. Like in the
good old days before. . ." He makes the sign of horns. "We'll have
trains, real trains." And in an ecstasy of joyous anticipation, he draws
Dr. Poole toward him, puts an arm round his neck and kisses him on both
cheeks.

          Shrinking with an embarrassment that is reinforced by disgust
(for the great man seldom washes and is horribly foul-mouthed) Dr. Poole
disengages himself.

          "But I'm not an engineer," he protests. "I'm a botanist."

          "What's that?"

          "A botanist is a man who knows about plants."

          "War plants?" the Chief asks hopefully.

          "No, no, just plants. Things with leaves and stalks and
flowers -- though of course," he adds hastily, "one mustn't forget the
cryptogams. And as a matter of fact the cryptogams are my special pets.
New Zealand, as you probably know, is particularly rich in cryptogams. .
."

          "But what about the engines?"

          "Engines?" Dr. Poole repeats contemptuously. "I tell you, I
don't know the difference between a steam turbine and a diesel."

          "Then you can't do anything to help us get the trains running
again?"

          "Not a thing."

          Without a word the Chief raises his right leg, places his foot
against the pit of Dr. Poole's stomach, then sharply straightens the
bent knee.

          Close shot of Dr. Poole, as he raises himself, shaken and
bruised, but with no bones broken, from the heap of sand onto which he
has fallen. Over the shot we hear the Chief shouting to his retainers.

          Medium shot of the gravediggers and fishermen, as they come
running in response to the summons.

          The Chief points down at Dr. Poole.

          "Bury him."

          "Alive or dead?" asks the plumper of the girls in her rich
contralto voice.

          The Chief looks down at her. Shot from his viewpoint. With an
effort he turns away. His lips move. He is repeating the relevant
passage from the Shorter Catechism. "What is the nature of woman?
Answer: Woman is the vessel of the Unholy Spirit, the source of all
deformity, the enemy of the race, the. . ."

          "Alive or dead?" the plump girl repeats.

          The Chief shrugs his shoulders.

          "As you like," he answers with studied indifference.

          The plump girl claps her hands.

          "Goody, goody!" she cries and turns to her companions. "Come
on, boys. Let's have some fun."

          They close in on Dr. Poole, lift him screaming from the ground
and drop him feet first into the half-filled grave of the Managing
Director of the Golden Rule Brewing Corporation. While the plump girl
holds him down, the men shovel the loose dry earth into place. In a very
short time he is buried up to the waist.

On the sound track the victim's screams and the excited laughter of the
executioners taper off into a silence that is broken by the voice of the
Narrator.

NARRATOR

          Cruelty and compassion come with the chromosomes;

          All men are merciful and all are murderers.

          Doting on dogs, they build their Dachaus;

          Fire whole cities and fondle the orphans;

          Are loud against lynching, but all for Oakridge;

          Full of future philanthropy, but today the NKVD.

          Whom shall we persecute, for whom feel pity?

          It is all a matter of the moment's mores,

          Of words on wood pulp, of radios roaring,

          Of Communist kindergartens or first communions.

          Only in the knowledge of his own Essence

          Has any man ceased to be many monkeys.

          The laughter and the pleas for mercy return to the sound
track. Then, suddenly, we hear the Chief.

          "Stand back," he shouts. "I can't see."

          They obey. In silence the Chief looks down at Dr. Poole.

          "You know all about plants," he says at last. "Why don't you
grow some roots down there?'

          The sally is greeted by enormous guffaws.

          "Why don't you put out some nice little pink flowers?"

          We are shown a close-up of the botanist's agonised face.

          "Mercy, mercy. . ."

          The voice breaks, grotesquely; there is another burst of
hilarity.

          "I could be useful to you. I could show you how to get better
crops. You'd have more to eat."

          "More to eat?" the Chief repeats with sudden interest. Then he
frowns savagely. "You're lying!"

          "I'm not. I swear by Almighty God."

          There is a murmur of shocked protest.

          "He may be almighty in New Zealand," says the Chief. "But not
here -- not since the Thing happened."

          "But I know I can help you."

          "Are you ready to swear by Belial?"

          Dr. Poole's father was a clergyman and he himself is a regular
churchgoer; but it is with heartfelt fervour that he does what is asked
of him.

          "By Belial. I swear by Almighty Belial."

          Everyone makes the sign of the horns. There is a long silence.

          "Dig him up."

          "Oh, Chief," the plump girl protests. "That isn't fair!"

          "Dig him up, you vessel of Unholiness!"

          His tone carries immediate conviction; they dig with such
fervour that in less than a minute Dr. Poole is out of his grave and
standing rather unsteadily, at the foot of the mausoleum.

          "Thank you," he manages to say; then his knees give way and he
collapses.

          There is a chorus of contemptuously good-humoured laughter.

          The Chief leans from his marble perch. "Here, you there, the
red-headed vessel." He hands the girl a bottle. "Make him drink some of
this," he orders. "He's got to be able to walk. We're going back to
Headquarters."

          She sits down beside Dr. Poole, raises his limp body, props
the wobbling head against the interdictions on her bosom, and
administers the restorative.

          Dissolve to a street. Four of the bearded men are carrying the
Chief in a litter. The others straggle behind, moving slowly through the
drifted sand. Here and there, under the porches of ruined filling
stations, in the gaping doorways of office buildings, lie heaps of human
bones.

          Medium close shot of Dr. Poole. Still holding the bottle in
his right hand, he walks a little unsteadily, singing "Annie Laurie" to
himself, with intense feeling. Drunk on an empty stomach -- the empty
stomach, moreover, of a man whose mother has always had conscientious
objections to alcohol -- the strong red wine has taken prompt effect.

          "And for bonny Annie Laurie

          I'd lay me doon and dee. . ."

          In the middle of the final phrase, the two girl grave-diggers
enter the shot. Approaching the singer from behind, the plump one gives
him a friendly slap on the back. Dr. Poole starts, turns around, and
looks suddenly apprehensive. But her smile is reassuring.

          "I'm Flossie," she says. "And I hope you're not cross with me
because I wanted to bury you?"

          "Oh, no, no, not a bit," Dr. Poole assures her in the tone of
one who says he has no objection to the young lady lighting a cigarette.

          "It's not that I had anything against you," Flossie assures
him.

          "Of course not."

          "I just wanted a laugh, that's all."

          "Quite, quite."

          "People look so screamingly funny when they're being buried."

          "Screamingly," Dr. Poole agrees, and forces a nervous giggle.

          Feeling the need for more courage, he fortifies himself with
another swig from the bottle.

          "Well, see you later," says the plump girl. "I've got to go
and talk to the Chief about lengthening the sleeves of his new jacket."

          She gives him another slap on the back and hurries away.

          Dr. Poole is left alone with her companion. He steals a glance
at her. She is eighteen; she has red hair and dimples, a charming face
and a slender adolescent body.

          "My name's Loola," she volunteers. "What's yours?"

          "Alfred," Dr. Poole replies. "My mother was a great admirer of
In Memoriam," he adds by way of explanation.

          "Alfred," the red-headed girl repeats. "I shall call you
Alfie. I'll tell you something, Alfie: I don't really like these public
burials. I don't know why I should be different from other people, but
they don't make me laugh. I can't see anything funny about them."

          "I'm glad to hear it," says Dr. Poole.

          "You know, Alfie," she resumes, after a little silence,
"you're really a very lucky man."

          "Lucky?"

          Loola nods.

          "First of all you're dug up -- and I've never seen that happen
before -- and now you walk straight into the Purification Ceremonies."

          "Purification Ceremonies?"

          "Yes, it's Belial Day tomorrow -- Belial Day," she insists in
response to the blank look of incomprehension on the other's face.
"Don't tell me you don't know what happens on Belial Eve."

          Dr. Poole shakes his head.

          "But when do you have your Purification?"

          "Well, we take a bath every day," says Dr. Poole, who has just
been reminded, yet once more, that Loola most decidedly doesn't.

          "No, no," she says impatiently. "I mean the Purification of
the Race."

          "Of the Race?"

          "Hell, your priests don't let the deformed babies go on
living, do they?"

          There is a silence; then Dr. Poole counters with a question of
his own.

          "Are there many deformed babies born here?"

          She nods affirmatively.

          "Ever since the Thing -- ever since He's been in charge."

          She makes the sign of the horns. "They say that before that,
there weren't any."

          "Did anyone ever tell you about the effect of gamma rays?"

          "Gamma rays? What's a gamma ray?"

          "It's the reason for all those deformed children."

          "You're not trying to suggest that it wasn't Belial, are you?"
Her tone is one of indignant suspicion; she looks at him as St Dominic
might have eyed an Albigensian heretic.

          "No, no, of course not," Dr. Poole hastens to assure her.
"He's the primary cause -- that goes without saying." Clumsily and
inexpertly, he makes the sign of the horns. "I was merely suggesting the
nature of the secondary causes -- the means He used to carry out His. .
. His providential purpose, if you see what I mean."

          His words and, still more, his pious gesture allay Loola's
suspicions. Her face clears; she gives him her most charming smile. The
dimples in her cheeks come to life like a pair of adorable little
creatures fitfully leading a secret and autonomous existence in
independence of the rest of Loola's face. Dr. Poole returns her smile,
but almost instantly looks away, blushing as he does so to the roots of
his hair.

NARRATOR

          Out of the enormity of his respect for his mother, our poor
friend here is still, at thirty-eight, a bachelor. Too full of an
unnatural piety to marry, he has spent half a lifetime surreptitiously
burning. Feeling that it would be a sacrilege to ask a virtuous young
gentlewoman to share his bed, he inhabits, under the carapace of
academic respectability, a hot and furtive world, where erotic
phantasies beget an agonising repentance and adolescent desires forever
struggle with the maternal precepts. And now here is Loola -- Loola
without the least pretension to education or good breeding, Loola au
naturel with a musky redolence which, on second thought, has something
really rather fascinating about it. What wonder if he reddens and
(against his will, for he longs to go on looking at her) averts his
eyes.

          For consolation and in hope of an accession of boldness, he
resorts again to the bottle. Suddenly the boulevard narrows to a mere
footpath between two dunes of sand.

          "After you," says Dr. Poole, politely bowing.

          She smiles her acknowledgment of a courtesy, to which, in this
place where men take precedence and the vessels of the Unholy Spirit
follow after, she is wholly unaccustomed.

          Trucking shot, from Dr. Poole's viewpoint, of Loola's back: NO
NO, NO NO, NO NO, step after step in undulant alternation. Cut back to a
close shot of Dr. Poole, gazing, wide-eyed, and from Dr. Poole's face
once again to Loola's back.

NARRATOR

          It is the emblem, outward, visible, tangible, of his own inner
consciousness. Principle at odds with concupiscence, his mother and the
Seventh Commandment superimposed upon his fancies and the facts of Life.

         

          The dunes subside. Once more the road is wide enough for two
to walk abreast. Dr. Poole steals a glance at his companion's face and
sees it clouded with an expression of melancholy.

          "What is it?" he asks solicitously and, greatly daring, adds
"Loola" and lays a hand on her arm.

          "It's terrible," she says in a tone of quiet despair.

          "What's terrible?"

          "Everything. You don't want to think about those things; but
you're one of the unlucky ones -- you can't help thinking about them.
And you almost go crazy. Thinking and thinking about someone, and
wanting and wanting. And you know you mustn't. And you're scared to
death of what they might do if they found out. But you'd give everything
in the world just for five minutes, to be free for five minutes. But no,
no, no. And you clench your fists and hold yourself in -- and it's like
tearing yourself to pieces. And then suddenly, after all that suffering,
suddenly. . ." she breaks off.

          "Suddenly what?" enquires Dr. Poole.

          She looks at him sharply, but sees on his face only an
expression of inquiring and genuinely innocent incomprehension.

          "I can't make you out," she says at last. "Is it true, what
you told the Chief? You know, about your not being a priest."

          All at once she blushes.

          "If you don't believe me," says Dr. Poole with wine-begotten
gallantry, "I'm ready to prove it."

          She looks at him for a moment, then shakes her head and, in a
kind of terror, turns away. Nervously she smooths her apron.

          "And meanwhile," he continues, emboldened by her new-found
shyness, "you haven't told me just what it is that suddenly happens."

          Loola glances about her to make sure that nobody is within
earshot, then speaks at last almost in a whisper.

          "Suddenly He starts to take possession of everybody. For weeks
he makes them think about those things -- and it's against the Law, it's
wicked. The men get so mad, they start hitting you and calling you a
vessel, the way the priests do."

          "A vessel?"

          She nods.

          "Vessel of the Unholy Spirit."

          "Oh, I see."

          "And then comes Belial Day," she goes on after a little pause.
"And then. . . well, you know what that means. And afterwards, if you
have a baby, the chances are that He'll punish you for what He has made
you do." She shudders, then makes the sign of the horns. "I know we have
to accept what He wills," she adds. "But oh, I do so hope that, if ever
I have any babies, they'll be all right."

          "But of course they'll be all right," cries Dr. Poole. "After
all, there isn't anything wrong about you."

          Delighted by his own audacity, he looks down at her.

          Close shot from his viewpoint: NO NO NO, NO NO NO. . .

          Mournfully, Loola shakes her head.

          "That's where you're wrong," she says. "I've got an extra pair
of nipples."

          "Oh," says Dr. Poole in a tone which makes us realize that the
thought of his mother has momentarily obliterated the effects of the red
wine.

          "Not that there's anything really bad about that," Loola
hastily adds. "Even the best people have them. It's perfectly legal.
They allow you up to three pairs. And seven toes and fingers. Anything
over that gets liquidated at the Purification. My friend Polly -- she
had a baby this season. Her first one. And it's got four pairs, and no
thumbs. There isn't any chance for it. In fact it's been condemned
already. She's had her head shaved."

          "Had her head shaved?"

          "They do it to all the girls whose babies are liquidated."

          "But why?"

          Loola shrugs her shoulders. "Just to remind them that He's the
Enemy."

NARRATOR

          "To put it," as Schroedinger has said, "drastically, though
perhaps a little naively, the injuriousness of a marriage between first
cousins might very well be increased by the fact that their grandmother
had served for a long period as an X-ray nurse. It is not a point that
need worry any individual personally. But any possibility of gradually
infecting the human race with unwanted latent mutations ought to be a
matter of concern to the community." It ought to be; but, needless to
say, it isn't. Oakridge is working three shifts a day; an atomic power
plant is going up on the coast of Cumberland; and on the other side of
the fence, goodness only knows what Kapitza is up to on the top of Mount
Ararat, what surprises that wonderful Russian Soul, about which
Dostoevsky used to write so lyrically, has in store for Russian bodies
and the carcasses of Capitalists and Social Democrats.

          Once again sand bars the road. They enter another winding
pathway between the dunes and are suddenly alone, as though in the
middle of the Sahara.

          Trucking shot from Dr. Poole's viewpoint: NO NO, NO NO. . .
Loola halts and turns back toward him: NO NO NO. The Camera moves up to
her face and all at once he notices that its expression is tragical.

 

NARRATOR

          The Seventh Commandment, the Facts of Life. But there is also
another Fact, to which one cannot react by a mere departmentalized
negation or a no less fragmentary display of lust -- the Fact of
Personality.

          "I don't want them to cut my hair," she says in a breaking
voice.

          "But they won't."

          "They will."

          "They can't, they mustn't." Then, amazed by his own daring, he
adds, "It's much too beautiful."

          Still tragic, Loola shakes her head.

          "I feel it," she says, "in my bones. I just know it'll have
more than seven fingers. They'll kill it, they'll cut my hair off,
they'll whip me -- and He makes us do those things."

          "What things?"

          She looks at him for a moment without speaking; then, with an
expression almost of terror, drops her eyes.

          "It's because He wants us to be miserable."

          Covering her face with her hands, she starts to sob
uncontrollably.

NARRATOR

          The wine within and, without, the musky reminder

          Of those so near, warm, ripe, orby and all but

          Edible Facts of Life. . .   And now her tears, her tears. . .

          Dr. Poole takes the girl in his arms and, while she sobs
against his shoulder, strokes her hair with all the tenderness of the
normal male he has momentarily become.

          "Don't cry," he whispers, "don't cry. It'll be all right. I'll
always be there. I won't let them do anything to you."

          She permits herself gradually to be comforted. The sobbing
becomes less violent and finally ceases altogether. She looks up and the
smile she gives him through her tears is so unequivocally amorous that
anyone but Dr. Poole would have accepted the invitation forthwith. The
seconds pass and, while he is still hesitating, her expression changes,
she drops her eyelids over an avowal that she suddenly feels to have
been too frank, and turns away.

          "I'm sorry," she murmurs, and starts to rub away her tears
with the knuckles of a hand that is as grubby as a child's.

          Dr. Poole takes out his handkerchief and tenderly wipes her
eyes.

          "You're so sweet," she says. "Not a bit like the men here."

          She smiles up at him again. Like a pair of enchanting little
wild animals emerging from concealment, out come the dimples.

          So impulsively that he has no time to feel surprise at what he
is doing, Dr. Poole takes her face between his hands and kisses her on
the mouth.

          Loola resists for a moment, then abandons herself in a
surrender so complete as to be more active than his assault.

          On the sound track "Give me detumescence" modulates into
Liebestod from Tristan.

          Suddenly Loola stiffens into a shuddering rigidity. Pushing
him away, she stares up wildly into his face; then turns and glances
over her shoulder with an expression of guilty terror.

          "Loola!"

          He tries to draw her close again, but she breaks away from him
and starts to run along the narrow path.

          NO NO, NO NO, NO NO. . . .

          We dissolve to the corner of Fifth Street and Pershing Square.
As of old, the Square is the hub and centre of the city's cultural life.
From a shallow well in front of the Philharmonic Auditorium two women
are drawing water in a goatskin, which they empty into earthenware jars
for other women to carry away. From a bar slung between two rusty lamp
posts hangs the carcass of a newly slaughtered ox. Standing in a cloud
of flies, a man with a knife is cleaning out the entrails.

          "That looks good," says the Chief genially.

          The butcher grins and, with bloody fingers, makes the sign of
the horns.

          A few yards away stand the communal ovens. The Chief orders a
halt, and graciously accepts a piece of the newly baked bread. While he
is eating, ten or twelve small boys enter the shot, staggering under
inordinate loads of fuel from the nearby Public Library. They tumble
their burdens onto the ground and, stimulated by the blows and curses of
their elders, hurry back for more. One of the bakers opens a furnace
door and starts to shovel the books into the flames.

          All the scholar in Dr. Poole, all the bibliophile, is outraged
by the spectacle.

          "But this is frightful!" he protests.

          The Chief only laughs.

          "In goes The Phenomenology of Spirit, out comes the corn
bread. And damned good bread it is."

          He takes another bite.

          Meanwhile Dr. Poole has bent down and, from the very brink of
destruction, has snatched to safety a charming little duodecimo Shelley.

          "Thank G--" he begins, but fortunately remembers where he is
and manages to check himself in time.

          He slips the volume into his pocket and, turning to the Chief,
"But what about culture?" he asks. "What about the social inheritance of
humanity's painfully acquired wisdom? What about the best that has been
thought and. . ."

          "They can't read," the Chief answers with his mouth full. "No,
that's not quite true. We teach all of them to read that."

          He points. Medium shot from his viewpoint of Loola -- Loola
with dimples and all the rest, but also with the large red NO on her
apron, the two smaller NO'S on her shirt front.

          "That's all the book learning they need. And now," he commands
his bearers, "move on."

          Trucking shot of the litter as it is carried through the
doorless entrance of what was once the Biltmore Coffee Shop. Here, in
the malodorous twilight, twenty or thirty women, some middle-aged, some
young, some mere girls, are busily weaving on primitive looms of the
kind used by the Indians of Central America.

          "None of these vessels had a baby this season," the Chief
explains to Dr. Poole. He frowns and shakes his head. "When they're not
producing monsters, they're sterile. What we're going to do for
manpower, Belial only knows. . ."

          They advance further into the Coffee Shop, pass a group of
three- and four-year-old children under the supervision of an aged
vessel with a cleft palate and fourteen fingers and come to a halt under
an archway giving access to a second dining room only slightly smaller
than the first

          Over the shot we hear the sound of a chorus of youthful voices
reciting in unison the opening phrases of the Shorter Catechism.

          "Question: What is the chief end of Man? Answer: The chief end
of Man is to propitiate Belial, deprecate His enmity and avoid
destruction for as long as possible."

          Cut to a close shot of Dr. Poole's face, on which we see an
expression of amazement mingled with a growing horror. Then a long long
shot from his viewpoint. In five rows of twelve, sixty boys and girls
between the ages of thirteen and fifteen stand rigidly at attention,
gabbling as fast as they can in a shrill harsh monotone. Facing them, on
a dais, sits a small, fat man wearing a long robe of black and white
goatskins and a fur cap with a stiff leather edging, to which are
attached two medium-sized horns. Beardless and sallow, his face shines
with a profuse perspiration, which he is forever wiping away with the
hairy sleeve of his cassock.

          Cut back to the Chief, as he leans down and touches Dr. Poole
on the shoulder.

          "That," he whispers, "is our leading Satanic Science
Practitioner. I tell you, he's an absolute whizz at Malicious Animal
Magnetism."

          Over the shot we hear the mindless gabble of the children.

          "Question: To what fate is Man predestined? Answer: Belial
has, out of his mere good pleasure, from all eternity elected all now
living to everlasting perdition."

          "Why does he wear horns?" asks Dr. Poole.

          "He's an Archimandrite," the Chief explains. "Due for his
third horn any time now."

          Cut to a medium shot of the dais.

          "Excellent," the Satanic Science Practitioner is saying in a
high piping voice, like the voice of an extraordinarily priggish and
self-satisfied small boy. "Excellent!" He wipes his forehead. "And now
tell me why you deserve everlasting perdition."

          There is a moment's silence. Then, in a chorus that starts a
little raggedly, but soon swells to a loud unanimity, the children
answer.

          "Belial has perverted and corrupted us in all the parts of our
being. Therefore, we are, merely on account of that corruption,
deservedly condemned by Belial."

          Their teacher nods approvingly.

          "Such," he squeaks unctuously, "is the inscrutable justice of
the Lord of Flies."

          "Amen," respond the children.

          All make the sign of the horns.

          "And what about your duty towards your neighbour?"

          "My duty towards my neighbour," comes the choral answer, "is
to do my best to prevent him from doing unto me what I should like to do
unto him; to subject myself to all my governors; to keep my body in
absolute chastity, except during the two weeks following Belial Day; and
to do my duty in that state of life to which it hath pleased Belial to
condemn me."

          "What is the Church?"

          "The Church is the body of which Belial is the head and all
possessed people are the members."

          "Very good," says the Practitioner, wiping his face yet once
more. "And now I need a young vessel."

          He runs his eyes over the ranks of his pupils, then points a
finger.

          "You there. Third from the left in the second row. . . The
vessel with the yellow hair. Come here."

          Cut back to the group around the litter.

          The bearers are grinning with happy anticipation and, looking
intensely red and moist and fleshy among the black curls of the
moustache and beard, even the Chiefs full lips are curved into a smile.
But there is no smile on Loola's face. Pale, her hand over her mouth,
her eyes wide and staring, she is watching the proceedings with the
horror of one who has been through this kind of ordeal herself. Dr.
Poole glances at her, then back at the victim, whom we now see, from his
viewpoint, slowly advancing toward the dais.

          "Up here," squeaks the almost babyish voice in a tone of
authority. "Stand by me. Now face the class."

          The child does as she is told.

          Medium close shot of a tall slender girl of fifteen with the
face of a Nordic madonna. NO, proclaims the apron attached to the
waistband of her ragged pedal pushers; NO, NO, the patches over her
budding breasts.

          The Practitioner points at her accusingly.

          "Look at it," he says, wrinkling up his face into a grimace of
disgust. "Did you ever see anything so revolting?"

          He turns to the class.

          "Boys," he squeaks. "Any of you who feels any Malicious Animal
Magnetism coming out of this vessel, hold up your hand."

          Cut to a long shot of the class. Without exception, all the
boys are holding up their hands. Their faces wear that expression of
lustful and malevolent amusement, with which the orthodox have always
looked on, while their spiritual pastors torment the hereditary
scapegoats or still more severely punish the heretics who threaten the
interest of the Establishment.

          Cut back to the Practitioner. He sighs hypocritically and
shakes his head.

          "I feared as much," he says. Then he turns to the girl beside
him on the dais. "Now tell me," he says, "what is the Nature of Woman?"

          "The Nature of Woman?" the child repeats unsteadily.

          "Yes, the Nature of Woman. Hurry up!"

          She glances at him with an expression of terror in her blue
eyes, then turns away. Her face becomes deathly pale. Her lips tremble;
she swallows hard.

          "Woman," she begins, "woman. . ."

          Her voice breaks, her eyes overflow with tears; in a desperate
effort to control her feelings she clenches her fists and bites her lip.

          "Go on!" the Practitioner shrilly shouts. And picking up a
willow switch from the floor, he gives the child a sharp cut across the
calves of her bare legs. "Go on!"

          "Woman," the girl begins once more, "is the vessel of the
Unholy Spirit, the source of all deformity, the. . . the. . . Ow!"

          She winces under another blow.

          The Science Practitioner laughs and the whole class follows
suit.

          "The enemy. . ." he prompts.

          "Oh, yes -- the enemy of the race, punished by Belial and
calling down punishment on all those who succumb to Belial in her."

          There is a long silence.

          "Well," says the Practitioner at last, "that's what you are.
That's what all vessels are. And now go, go!" he squeals and with sudden
fury he strikes at her again and again.

          Crying with pain, the child jumps down from the dais and runs
back to her place in the ranks.

          Cut back to the Chief. His brow is wrinkled in a frown of
displeasure.

          "All this progressive education!" he says to Dr. Poole. "No
proper discipline. I don't know what we're coming to. Why, when I was a
boy, our old Practitioner used to tie them over a bench and go to work
with a birch rod. 'That'll teach you to be a vessel,' he'd say, and then
swish, swish, swish! Belial, how they howled! That's what I call
education. Well, I've had enough of this," he adds. "Quick march!"

          As the litter moves out of the shot, the Camera holds on Loola
who remains, staring in an agony of fellow feeling at the tear-wet face
and heaving shoulders of the little victim in the second row. A hand
touches her arm. She starts, turns apprehensively and is relieved to
find herself looking into the kindly face of Dr. Poole.

          "I entirely agree with you," he whispers. "It's wrong, it's
unjust."

          Only after she has thrown a quick look over her shoulder does
Loola venture to give him a little smile of gratitude.

          "Now we must go," she says.

          They hurry after the others. Following the litter, they
retrace their steps through the Coffee Shop, then turn to the right and
enter the Cocktail Bar. At one end of the room an enormous pile of human
bones reaches almost to the ceiling. Squatting on the floor, in a thick
white dust, a score of craftsmen are engaged in fashioning drinking cups
out of skulls, knitting needles from ulnas, flutes and recorders from
the longer shank bones, ladles, shoe horns and dominoes from pelvises,
and spigots out of femurs.

          A halt is called, and, while one of the workmen plays "Give me
Detumescence" on a shinbone flute, another presents the Chief with a
superb necklace of graded vertebrae ranging in size from a baby's
cervicals to the lumbars of a heavyweight boxer.

NARRATOR

          "And he set me down in the midst of the valley that was full
of bones; and lo, they were very dry." The dry bones of some of those
who died, by thousands, by millions, in the course of those three bright
summer days that, for you there, are still in the future. "And he said
unto me, Son of man, can these bones live?" The answer, I replied, is in
the negative. For though Baruch might save us (perhaps) from taking our
places in such an ossuary as this, he can do nothing to avert that
other, slower, nastier death. . . .

          Trucking shot of the litter as it is carried up the steps into
the main lobby. Here the stink is overpowering, the filth beyond
description. Close-up of two rats gnawing at a mutton bone, of the flies
on the purulent eyelids of a small girl. The Camera pulls back for a
longer shot. Forty or fifty women, half of them with shaven heads, are
sitting on the stairs, among the refuse on the floor, on the tattered
remnants of ancient beds and sofas. Each of them is nursing a baby, all
the babies are ten weeks old, and all those belonging to shaven mothers
are deformed. Over close-ups of little faces with hare lips, little
trunks with stumps instead of legs and arms, little hands with clusters
of supernumerary fingers, little bodies adorned with a double row of
nipples, we hear the voice of the Narrator.

NARRATOR

          For this other death -- not by plague, this time, not by
poison, not by fire, not by artificially induced cancer, but by the
squalid disintegration of the very substance of the species -- this
gruesome and infinitely unheroic death-in-birth could as well be the
product of atomic industry as of atomic war. For in a world powered by
nuclear fission everybody's grandmother would have been an X-ray
technician. And not only everybody's grandmother -- everybody's
grandfather and father and mother as well, everybody's ancestors back to
three and four and five generations of them that hate Me.

          From the last of the deformed babies the Camera pulls back to
Dr. Poole who is standing, his handkerchief held to his still too
sensitive nose, staring with horrified bewilderment at the scene around
him.

          "All the babies look as if they were exactly the same age," he
says, turning to Loola, who is still beside him.

          "Well, what do you expect? Seeing that practically all of them
were born between the tenth and the seventeenth of December."

          "But that must mean that. . ." He breaks off, deeply
embarrassed. "I think," he concludes hastily, "that things must be
rather different here from what they are in New Zealand. . . ."

          In spite of the wine, he remembers his grey-haired mother
across the Pacific and, blushing guiltily, coughs and averts his eyes.

          "There's Polly," cries his companion, and hurries across the
room.

          Mumbling apologies as he picks his way between the squatting
or recumbent mothers, Dr. Poole follows her.

          Polly is sitting on a straw-filled sack near what was once the
Cashier's desk. She is a girl of eighteen or nineteen, small and
fragile, her head shaved like that of a criminal prepared for execution.
She has a face whose beauty is all in the fine bones and the big
luminous eyes. It is with an expression of hurt bewilderment that those
eyes now look up into Loola's face and from Loola's face move without
curiosity, almost without comprehension, to that of the stranger who
accompanies her.

          "Darling!"

          Loola bends down to kiss her friend. NO NO, from Dr. Poole's
viewpoint. Then she sits down beside Polly and puts a comforting arm
around her. Polly hides her face against the other's shoulder and both
girls begin to cry. As though infected by their grief, the little
monster in Polly's arms wakes up and utters a thin complaining howl.
Polly raises her head from her friend's shoulder and, her face still wet
with tears, looks down at the deformed child, then opens her shirt and
pushing aside one of the crimson NO'S, gives it the breast. With an
almost frantic hunger the child starts to suck.

          "I love him," Polly sobs. "I don't want them to kill him."

          "Darling," is all that Loola can find to say, "darling!"

          A loud voice interrupts her.

          "Silence there! Silence!"

          Other voices take up the refrain.

          "Silence!"

          "Silence there!"

          "Silence, silence!"

          In the lobby all talk ceases abruptly and there is a long,
expectant hush. Then a horn is blown and another of those strangely
babyish, but self-important voices announces: "His Eminence the
Arch-Vicar of Belial, Lord of the Earth, Primate of California, Servant
of the Proletariat, Bishop of Hollywood."

          Long shot of the hotel's main staircase. Dressed in a long
robe of Anglo-Nubian goatskins and wearing a golden crown set with four
tall, sharp horns, the Arch-Vicar is seen majestically descending. An
acolyte holds a large goatskin umbrella over his head and he is followed
by twenty or thirty ecclesiastical dignitaries, ranging in rank from
three-horned Patriarchs to one-horned Presbyters and hornless
Postulants. All of them, from the Arch-Vicar downward, are conspicuously
beardless, sweaty and fat-rumped and, when any of them speaks, it is
always in a fluting contralto.

          The Chief rises from his litter and advances to meet the
incarnation of spiritual authority.

NARRATOR

          Church and State,

          Greed and Hate: --

          Two baboon-persons

          In one Supreme Gorilla.

          The Chief inclines his head respectfully. The Arch-Vicar
raises his hands to his tiara, touches the two anterior horns, then lays
his spiritually charged fingertips on the Chiefs forehead. "May you
never be impaled upon His Horns."

          "Amen," says the Chief; then straightening himself up and
changing his tone abruptly from the devout to the briskly businesslike,
"Everything OK for tonight?" he asks.

          In the voice of a ten-year-old, but with the long-winded and
polysyllabic unctuousness of a veteran ecclesiastic, long accustomed to
playing the role of a superior being set apart from and above his
fellows, the Arch-Vicar replies that all things are in order. Under the
personal supervision of the Three-Horned Inquisitor and the Patriarch of
Pasadena, a devoted band of Familiars and Postulants has travelled from
settlement to settlement, making the yearly census. Every mother of a
monster has been marked down. Heads have been shaved and the preliminary
whippings administered. By this time all the guilty have been
transported to one or other of the three Purification Centres at
Riverside, San Diego and Los Angeles. The knives and the consecrated
bull's pizzles have been made ready and, Belial willing, the ceremonies
will begin at the appointed hour. Before tomorrow's sunrise the
purification of the land should be complete.

          Once more the Arch-Vicar makes the sign of the horns, then
stands for a few seconds in recollected silence. Reopening his eyes, he
turns to the ecclesiastics in his train.

          "Go, take the shaven ones," he squeaks, "take these defiled
vessels, these living testimonies of Belial's enmity, and lead them to
the place of their shame."

          A dozen Presbyters and Postulants hurry down the stairs and
out into the crowd of mothers.

          "Hurry, hurry!"

          "In Belial's name."

          Slowly, reluctantly, the crop-headed women rise to their feet.
Their little burdens of deformity pressed against bosoms heavy with
milk, they move toward the door in a silence more painfully expressive
of misery than any outcry.

          Medium shot of Polly on her sack of straw. A young Postulant
approaches and pulls her roughly to her feet.

          "Up!" he shouts in a voice of an angry and malevolent child.
"Get up, you spawner of filth!"

          And he slaps her across the face. Cringing away from a second
blow, Polly almost runs to rejoin her fellow victims near the entrance.

          Dissolve to a night sky, with stars between thin bars of cloud
and a waning moon already low in the West. There is a long silence; then
we begin to hear the sound of distant chanting. Gradually it becomes
articulate in the words, "Glory to Belial, to Belial in the lowest,"
repeated again and again.

NARRATOR

          An inch from the eyes the ape's black paw

          Eclipses the stars, the moon, and even

          Space itself.  Five stinking fingers

          Are all the World.

         

          The silhouette of a baboon's hand advances toward the Camera,
grows larger and more menacing, and finally engulfs everything in
blackness.

          We cut to the interior of the Los Angeles Coliseum. By the
smoky and intermittent light of torches we see the faces of a great
congregation. Tier above tier, like massed gargoyles, spouting the
groundless faith, the subhuman excitement, the collective imbecility
which are the products of ceremonial religion -- spouting them from
black eyeholes, from quivering nostrils, from parted lips, while the
chanting monotonously continues: "Glory to Belial, to Belial in the
lowest." Below, in the arena, hundreds of shaven girls and women, each
with her tiny monster in her arms, are kneeling before the steps of the
High Altar. Awe-inspiring in their chasubles of Anglo-Nubian fur, in
their tiaras of gilded horns, Patriarchs and Archimandrites, Presbyters
and Postulants stand in two groups at the head of the altar steps,
chanting anti-phonally in a high treble to the music of bone recorders
and a battery of xylophones.

SEMICHORUS I

Glory to Belial,

SEMICHORUS II

To Belial in the lowest!

          Then, after a pause, the music of the chant changes and a new
phase of the service begins.

SEMICHORUS I

It is a terrible thing,

SEMICHORUS II

Terrible terrible,

SEMICHORUS I

To fall into the hands,

SEMICHORUS II

The huge hands and the hairy,

SEMICHORUS I

Into the hands of living Evil,

SEMICHORUS II

Hallelujah!

SEMICHORUS I

Into the hands of the Enemy of man,

SEMICHORUS II

Our boon companions;

SEMICHORUS I

Of the Rebel against the Order of Things --

SEMICHORUS II

And we have conspired with him against ourselves;

SEMICHORUS I

Of the great Blowfly who is the Lord of Flies,

SEMICHORUS II

Crawling in the heart;

SEMICHORUS I

Of the naked Worm that never dies,

SEMICHORUS II

And, never dying, is the source of our eternal life;

SEMICHORUS I

Of the Prince of the Powers of the Air --

SEMICHORUS II

Spitfire and Stuka, Beelzebub and Azazel, Hallelujah!

SEMICHORUS I

Of the Lord of this world;

SEMICHORUS II

And its defiler;

SEMICHORUS I

Of the great Lord Moloch,

SEMICHORUS II

Patron of all nations;

SEMICHORUS I

Of Mammon our master,

SEMICHORUS II

Omnipresent.

SEMICHORUS I

Of Lucifer the all-powerful,

SEMICHORUS II

In Church, in State;

SEMICHORUS I

Of Belial,

SEMICHORUS II

Transcendent,

SEMICHORUS I

Yet, oh, how immanent

ALL TOGETHER

Of Belial, Belial, Belial, Belial

          As the chanting dies away, two hornless Postulants descend,
seize the nearest of the shaven women, raise her to her feet and lead
her up, dumb with terror, to where, at the head of the altar steps, the
Patriarch of Pasadena stands whetting the blade of a long butcher's
knife. The thickset Mexican mother stands staring at him in fascinated
horror, open-mouthed. Then one of the Postulants takes the child out of
her arms and holds it up before the Patriarch.

          Close shot of a characteristic product of progressive
technology -- a harelipped, Mongolian idiot. Over the shot we hear the
chanting of the Chorus.

SEMICHORUS I

I show you the sign of Belial's enmity,

SEMICHORUS II

Foul, foul;

SEMICHORUS I

I show you the fruit of Belial's grace,

SEMICHORUS II

Filth infused in filth.

SEMICHORUS I

I show you the penalty for obedience to His Will,

SEMICHORUS II

On earth as it is in Hell.

SEMICHORUS I

Who is the Breeder of all deformities?

SEMICHORUS II

Mother.

SEMICHORUS I

Who is the chosen vessel of Unholiness?

SEMICHORUS II

Mother.

SEMICHORUS I

And the curse that is on our race?

SEMICHORUS II

Mother.

SEMICHORUS I

Possessed, possessed --

SEMICHORUS II

Inwardly, outwardly:

SEMICHORUS I

Her incubus an object, her subject a succubus --

SEMICHORUS II

And both are Belial;

SEMICHORUS I

Possessed by the Blowfly.

SEMICHORUS II

Crawling and stinging,

SEMICHORUS I

Possessed by that which irresistibly

SEMICHORUS II

Goads her, drives her,

SEMICHORUS I

Like the soiled fitchew,

SEMICHORUS II

Like the sow in her season,

SEMICHORUS I

Down a steep place

SEMICHORUS II

Into filth unutterable;

SEMICHORUS I

Whence, after much wallowing,

SEMICHORUS II

After many long draughts of the swill,

SEMICHORUS I

Mother emerging, nine months later,

SEMICHORUS II

Bears this monstrous mockery of a man.

SEMICHORUS I

How then shall there be atonement?

SEMICHORUS II

By blood.

SEMICHORUS I

How shall Belial be propitiated?

SEMICHORUS II

Only by blood.

          The Camera moves from the altar to where, tier above tier, the
pale gargoyles stare down in hungry anticipation at the scene below. And
suddenly the faces open their black mouths and start to chant in unison,
hesitantly at first, then with growing confidence and ever greater
volume of sound.

          "Blood, blood, blood, the blood, the blood, blood, blood, the
blood. . ."

          We cut back to the altar. The sound of the mindless, subhuman
chanting continues monotonously over the shot.

          The Patriarch hands his whetstone to one of the attendant
Archimandrites, and then with his left hand takes the deformed child by
the neck and impales it on his knife. It utters two or three little
bleating cries, and is silent.

          The Patriarch turns, allows half a pint of blood to spill out
on the altar, then tosses the tiny corpse into the darkness beyond. The
chanting rises in a savage crescendo. "Blood, blood, the blood, the
blood, blood, blood, the blood. . ."

          "Drive her away!" cries the Patriarch in a commanding squeak.

          In terror the mother turns and hurries down the steps. The two
Postulants follow, striking at her savagely with their consecrated
bulls' pizzles. The chanting is punctuated by piercing screams. From the
congregation comes a noise that is half commiserating groan, half grunt
of satisfaction. Flushed and a little breathless from so unusually
strenuous an exercise, the plump young Postulants seize another woman --
a girl this time, frail and slender almost to the point of childishness.
Her face is hidden as they drag her up the steps. Then one of them steps
back a little and we recognise Polly.

          Thumbless, eight-nippled, the child is held up before the
Patriarch.

 

SEMICHORUS I

Foul, foul! How shall there be atonement?

SEMICHORUS II

By blood.

SEMICHORUS I

How shall Belial be propitiated?

          This time it is the entire congregation that answers. "Only by
blood, blood, blood, blood, the blood. . ."

          The Patriarch's left hand closes about the infant's neck.

          "No, no, don't. Please!"

          Polly makes a movement toward him, but is held back by the
Postulants. Very deliberately, while she sobs, the Patriarch impales the
child on his knife, then tosses the body into the darkness behind the
altar.

          There is a loud cry. We cut to a medium close shot of Dr.
Poole. Conspicuous in his front-row seat, he has fainted.

          Dissolve to the interior of the Unholy of Unholies. The
shrine, which stands at one end of the arena's shorter axis, to the side
of the high altar, is a small oblong chamber of adobe brick, with an
altar at one end and, at the other, sliding doors, closed at present,
except for a gap at the centre through which one can see what is going
on in the arena. On a couch in the centre of the shrine reclines the
Arch-Vicar. Not far off a hornless Postulant is frying pig's trotters
over a charcoal brazier, and near him a two-horned Archimandrite is
doing his best to revive Dr. Poole, who lies inanimate on a stretcher.
Cold water and two or three sharp slaps in the face at last produce the
desired result. The botanist sighs, opens his eyes, wards off another
slap and sits up.

          "Where am I?" he asks.

          "In the Unholy of Unholies," the Archimandrite answers, "And
there is his Eminence."

          Dr. Poole recognises the great man and has enough presence of
mind to incline his head respectfully.

          "Bring a stool," commands the Arch-Vicar.

          The stool is brought. He beckons to Dr. Poole, who scrambles
to his feet, walks a little unsteadily across the room and sits down. As
he does so a particularly loud shriek makes him turn his head.

          Long shot, from his viewpoint, of the High Altar. The
Patriarch is in the act of tossing yet another little monster into the
darkness, while his acolytes shower blows upon its screaming mother.

          Cut back to Dr. Poole, who shudders and covers his face with
his hands. Over the shot we hear the monotonous chanting of the
congregation. "Blood, blood, blood."

          "Horrible!" says Dr. Poole, "Horrible!"

          "And yet there's blood in your religion too," remarks the
Arch-Vicar, smiling ironically. " 'Washed in the blood of the Lamb.'
Isn't that correct?"

          "Perfectly correct," Dr. Poole admits. "But we don't actually
do the washing. We only talk about it -- or, more often, we only sing
about it, in hymns."

          Dr. Poole averts his eyes. There is a silence. At this moment
the Postulant approaches with a large platter, which, together with a
couple of bottles, he sets down on a table beside the couch. Spearing
one of the trotters with a genuine antique twentieth-century forgery of
an early Georgian fork, the Arch-Vicar starts to gnaw.

          "Help yourself," he squeaks between two bites. "And here's
some wine," he adds, indicating one of the bottles.

          Dr. Poole, who is extremely hungry, obeys with alacrity and
there is another silence, loud with the noise of eating and the chant of
the blood.

          "You don't believe it, of course," says the Arch-Vicar at
last, with his mouth full.

          "But I assure you. . ." Dr. Poole protests.

          His zeal to conform is excessive, and the other holds up a
plumb, pork-greasy hand.

          "Now, now, now! But I'd like you to know that we have good
reasons for believing as we do. Ours, my dear sir, is a rational and
realistic faith." There is a pause while he takes a swig from the bottle
and helps himself to another trotter. "I take it that you're familiar
with world history?"

          "Purely as a dilettante," Dr. Poole answers modestly. But he
thinks he can say that he has read most of the more obvious books on the
subject -- Graves's Rise and Extinction of Russia, for example;
Basedow's Collapse of Western Civilization; Bright's inimitable Europe,
an Autopsy; and, it goes without saying, that absolutely delightful and,
though it's only a novel, that genuinely veracious book, The Last Days
of Coney Island by dear old Percival Pott. "You know it, of course?"

          The Arch-Vicar shakes his head.

          "I don't know anything that's been published after the Thing,"
he answers curtly.

          "But how stupid of me!" cries Dr. Poole, regretting, as so
often in the past, that gushing loquacity with which he overcompensates
a shyness that, left to itself, would reduce him almost to
speechlessness.

          "But I've read quite a bit of the stuff that came out before,"
the Arch-Vicar continues. "They had some pretty good libraries here in
Southern California. Mined out now, for the most part. In future, I'm
afraid, well have to go further afield for our fuel. But meanwhile we've
baked our bread and I've managed to save three or four thousand volumes
for our Seminary."

          "Like the Church in the Dark Ages," says Dr. Poole with
cultured enthusiasm. "Civilization has no better friend than religion.
That's what my agnostic friends will never. . ." Suddenly remembering
that the tenets of that Church were not quite the same as those
professed by this, he breaks off and, to hide his embarrassment, takes a
long pull at his bottle.

          But fortunately the Arch-Vicar is too much preoccupied with
his own ideas to take offence at the faux pas or even to notice it.

          "As I read history," he says, "it's like this. Man pitting
himself against Nature, the Ego against the Order of Things, Belial" (a
perfunctory sign of the horns) "against the Other One. For a hundred
thousand years or so the battle's entirely indecisive. Then, three
centuries ago, almost overnight the tide starts to run uninterruptedly
in one direction. Have another of these pig's feet, won't you?"

          Dr. Poole helps himself to his second, while the other begins
his third.

          "Slowly at first, then with gathering momentum, man begins to
make headway against the Order of Things." The Arch-Vicar pauses for a
moment to spit out a piece of cartilage. "With more and more of the
human race falling into line behind him, the Lord of Flies, who is also
the Blowfly in every individual heart, inaugurates his triumphal march
across a world, of which he will so soon become the undisputed Master."

          Carried away by his own shrill eloquence and forgetting for a
moment that he is not in the pulpit of St. Azazel's, the Arch-Vicar
makes a sweeping gesture. The trotter falls off his fork. With a
good-humoured laugh at his own expense, he picks it up from the floor,
wipes it on the sleeve of his goat-skin cassock, takes another bite and
continues.

          "It began with machines and the first grain ships from the New
World. Food for the hungry and a burden lifted from men's shoulders. 'Oh
God, we thank Thee for all the blessings which in Thy Bounty. . .'
Etcetera etcetera." The Arch-Vicar laughs derisively. "Needless to say
nobody ever gets anything for nothing. God's bounties have their price,
and Belial always sees that it's a stiff one. Take those machines, for
example. Belial knew perfectly well that, in finding a little
alleviation from toil, flesh would be subordinated to iron and mind
would be made the slave of wheels. He knew that if a machine is
foolproof, it must also be skillproof, talentproof, inspirationproof.
Your money back if the product should be faulty, and twice your money
back if you can find in it the smallest trace of genius or
individuality! And then there was that good food from the New World. 'Oh
God, we thank Thee. . .' But Belial knew that feeding means breeding. In
the old days, when people made love, they merely increased the infantile
mortality rate and lowered the expectation of life. But after the coming
of the food ships, it was different. Copulation resulted in population
-- with a vengeance!"

          Once again the Arch-Vicar utters his shrill laugh.

          Dissolve to a shot through a powerful microscope of
spermatozoa frantically straggling to reach their Final End, the vast
moonlike ovum in the top left-hand corner of the slide. On the sound
track we hear the tenor voice in the last movement of Liszt's Faust
Symphony: La femme eternelle toujours nous eleve. La femme eternelle
toufours . . . Cut to an aerial view of London in 1800. Then back to the
Darwinian race for survival and self-perpetuation. Then to a view of
London in 1900 -- and again to the spermatozoa -- and again to London,
as the German airmen saw it in 1940. Dissolve to a close shot of the
Arch-Vicar.

          " 'Oh God,' " he intones in the slightly tremulous voice that
is always considered appropriate to such utterances, " 'we thank Thee
for all these immortal souls.'" Then, changing his tone, "These immortal
souls," he goes on, "lodged in bodies that grow progressively sicklier,
scabbier, scrubbier, year after year, as all the things foreseen by
Belial inevitably come to pass. The overcrowding of the planet. Five
hundred, eight hundred, sometimes as many as two thousand people to a
square mile of food-producing land -- and the land in process of being
ruined by bad farming. Everywhere erosion, everywhere the leaching out
of minerals. And the deserts spreading, the forests dwindling. Even in
America, even in that New World, which was once the hope of the Old. Up
goes the spiral of industry, down goes the spiral of soil fertility.
Bigger and better, richer and more powerful -- and then almost suddenly,
hungrier and hungrier. Yes, Belial foresaw it all -- the passage from
hunger to imported food, from imported food to booming population and
from booming population back to hunger again. Back to hunger. The New
Hunger, the Higher Hunger, the hunger of enormous industrialised
proletariats, the hunger of city dwellers with money, with all the
modern conveniences, with cars and radios and every imaginable gadget,
the hunger that is the cause of total wars and the total wars that are
the cause of yet more hunger."

          The Arch-Vicar pauses to take another swig from his bottle.

          "And remember this," he adds: "even without synthetic
glanders, even without the atomic bomb, Belial could have achieved all
His purposes. A little more slowly, perhaps, but just as surely, men
would have destroyed themselves by destroying the world they lived in.
They couldn't escape. He had them skewered on both His horns. If they
managed to wriggle off the horn of total war, they would find themselves
impaled on starvation. And if they were starving, they would be tempted
to resort to war. And just in case they should try to find a peaceful
and rational way out of their dilemma, He had another subtler horn of
self-destruction all ready for them. From the very beginning of the
industrial revolution He foresaw that men would be made so
over-weeningly bumptious by the miracles of their own technology that
they would soon lose all sense of reality. And that's precisely what
happened. These wretched slaves of wheels and ledgers began to
congratulate themselves on being the Conquerors of Nature. Conquerors of
Nature, indeed! In actual fact, of course, they had merely upset the
equilibrium of Nature and were about to suffer the consequences. Just
consider what they were up to during the century and a half before the
Thing. Fouling the rivers, killing off the wild animals, destroying the
forests, washing the topsoil into the sea, burning up an ocean of
petroleum, squandering the minerals it had taken the whole of geological
time to deposit. An orgy of criminal imbecility. And they called it
Progress. Progress," he repeats, "Progress! I tell you, that was too
rare an invention to have been the product of any merely human mind --
too fiendishly ironical! There had to be Outside Help for that. There
had to be the Grace of Belial, which, of course, is always forthcoming
-- that is, for anyone who's prepared to cooperate with it. And who
isn't?"

          "Who isn't?" Dr. Poole repeats with a giggle; for he feels
that he has to make up somehow for his mistake about the Church in the
Dark Ages.

          "Progress and Nationalism -- those were the two great ideas He
put into their heads. Progress -- the theory that you can get something
for nothing; the theory that you can gain in one field without paying
for your gain in another; the theory that you alone understand the
meaning of history; the theory that you know what's going to happen
fifty years from now; the theory that, in the teeth of all experience,
you can foresee all the consequences of your present actions; the theory
that Utopia lies just ahead and that, since ideal ends justify the most
abominable means, it is your privilege and duty to rob, swindle,
torture, enslave and murder all those who, in your opinion (which is, by
definition, infallible), obstruct the onward march to the earthly
paradise. Remember that phrase of Karl Marx's: 'Force is the midwife of
Progress.' He might have added -- but of course Belial didn't want to
let the cat out of the bag at that early stage of the proceedings --
that Progress is the midwife of Force. Doubly the midwife, for the fact
of technological progress provides people with the instruments of ever
more indiscriminate destruction, while the myth of political and moral
progress serves as the excuse for using those means to the very limit. I
tell you, my dear sir, an undevout historian is mad. The longer you
study modern history, the more evidence you find of Belial's Guiding
Hand." The Arch-Vicar makes the sign of the horns, refreshes himself
with another drink of wine, then continues. "And then there was
Nationalism -- the theory that the state you happen to be subject to is
the only true god, and that all other states are false gods; that all
these gods, true as well as false, have the mentality of juvenile
delinquents; and that every conflict over prestige, power or money is a
crusade for the Good, the True and the Beautiful. The fact that such
theories came, at a given moment of history, to be universally accepted
is the best proof of Belial's existence, the best proof that at long
last He'd won the battle."

          "I don't quite follow," says Dr. Poole.

          "But surely it's obvious. Here you have two notions. Each is
intrinsically absurd and each leads to courses of action that are
demonstrably fatal. And yet the whole of civilised humanity decides,
almost suddenly, to accept these notions as guides to conduct. Why? And
at Whose suggestion, Whose prompting, Whose inspiration? There can be
only one answer."

          "You mean, you think it was. . . it was the Devil?"

          "Who else desires the degradation and destruction of the human
race?"

          "Quite, quite," Dr. Poole agrees. "But all the same as a
Protestant Christian, I really can't. . ."

          "Is that so?" says the Arch-Vicar sarcastically. "Then you
know better than Luther, you know better than the whole Christian
Church. Are you aware, sir, that from the second century onward no
orthodox Christian believed that a man could be possessed by God? He
could only be possessed by the Devil. And why did people believe that?
Because the facts made it impossible for them to believe otherwise.
Belial's a fact, Moloch's a fact, diabolic possession's a fact."

          "I protest," cries Dr. Poole. "As a man of science. . ."

          "As a man of science you're bound to accept the working
hypothesis that explains the facts most plausibly. Well, what are the
facts? The first is a fact of experience and observation -- namely that
nobody wants to suffer, wants to be degraded, wants to be maimed or
killed. The second is a fact of history -- the fact that, at a certain
epoch, the overwhelming majority of human beings accepted beliefs and
adopted courses of action that could not possibly result in anything but
universal suffering, general degradation and wholesale destruction. The
only plausible explanation is that they were inspired or possessed by an
alien consciousness, a consciousness that willed their undoing and
willed it more strongly than they were able to will their own happiness
and survival."

          There is a silence.

          "Of course," Dr. Poole ventures at last to suggest, "those
facts could be accounted for in other ways."

          "But not so plausibly, not nearly so simply," insists the
Arch-Vicar. "And then consider all the other evidence. Take the First
World War, for example. If the people and the politicians hadn't been
possessed, they'd have listened to Benedict XV or Lord Lansdowne --
they'd have come to terms, they'd have negotiated a peace without
victory. But they couldn't, they couldn't. It was impossible for them to
act in their own self-interest. They had to do what the Belial in them
dictated -- and the Belial in them wanted the Communist Revolution,
wanted the Fascist reaction to that revolution, wanted Mussolini and
Hitler and the Politburo, wanted famine, inflation and depression;
wanted armaments as a cure for unemployment; wanted the persecution of
the Jews and the Kulaks; wanted the Nazis and the Communists to divide
Poland and then go to war with one another. Yes, and He wanted the
wholesale revival of slavery in its most brutal form. He wanted forced
migrations and mass pauperization. He wanted concentration camps and gas
chambers and cremation ovens. He wanted saturation bombing (what a
deliciously juicy phrase!). He wanted the destruction overnight of a
century's accumulation of wealth and all the potentialities of future
prosperity, decency, freedom and culture. Belial wanted all this and,
being the Great Blowfly in the hearts of the politicians and generals,
the journalists and the Common Man, He was easily able to get the Pope
ignored even by Catholics, to have Lansdowne condemned as a bad patriot,
almost a traitor. And so the war dragged on for four whole years; and
afterward everything went punctually according to Plan. The world
situation went steadily from bad to worse, and as it worsened, men and
women became progressively more docile to the leadings of the Unholy
Spirit. The old beliefs in the value of the individual soul faded away;
the old restraints lost their effectiveness; the old compunctions and
compassions evaporated. Everything that the Other One had ever put into
people's heads oozed out, and the resulting vacuum was filled by the
lunatic dreams of Progress and Nationalism. Granted the validity of
those dreams, it followed that mere people, living here and now, were no
better than ants and bedbugs and might be treated accordingly. And they
were treated accordingly, they most certainly were!"

          The Arch-Vicar chuckles shrilly and helps himself to the last
of the trotters.

          "For his period," he continues, "old man Hitler was a pretty
good specimen of a demoniac. Not so completely possessed, of course, as
many of the great national leaders in the years between 1945 and the
beginning of the Third World War, but definitely above the average of
his own time. More than almost any of his contemporaries, he had a right
to say, 'Not I, but Belial in me.' The others were possessed only in
spots, only at certain times. Take the scientists, for example. Good,
well-meaning men, for the most part. But He got hold of them all the
same -- got hold of them at the point where they ceased to be human
beings and became specialists. Hence, the glanders and those bombs. And
then remember that man -- what was his name? -- the one that was
President of the United States for such a long time. . . ."

          "Roosevelt?" suggests Dr. Poole.

          "That's it -- Roosevelt. Well, do you recall that phrase he
kept repeating through the whole of the Second World War? 'Unconditional
surrender, unconditional surrender.' Plenary inspiration -- that's what
that was. Direct and plenary inspiration!"

          "You say so," demurs Dr. Poole. "But what's your proof?"

          "The proof?" repeats the Arch-Vicar. "The whole of subsequent
history is the proof. Look at what happened when the phrase became a
policy and was actually put into practice. Unconditional surrender --
how many millions of new cases of tuberculosis? How many millions of
children forced to be thieves or prostituting themselves for bars of
chocolate? Belial was particularly pleased about the children. And
again, unconditional surrender -- the ruin of Europe, the chaos in Asia,
the starvation everywhere, the revolutions, the tyrannies. Unconditional
surrender -- and more innocents had to undergo worse suffering than at
any other period in history. And, as you know very well, there's nothing
that Belial likes better than the suffering of innocents. And finally,
of course, there was the Thing. Unconditional surrender and bang! --
just as He'd always intended. And it all happened without any miracle or
special intervention, merely by natural means. The more one thinks about
the workings of His Providence, the more unfathomably marvellous it
seems." Devoutly, the Arch-Vicar makes the sign of the horns. There is a
little pause. "Listen," he says, holding up his hand.

          For a few seconds they sit without speaking. The dim, blurred
monotone of the chant swells into audibility. "Blood, blood, blood, the
blood. . ." There is a faint cry as yet another little monster is
spitted on the Patriarch's knife, then the thudding of bulls' pizzles on
flesh and, through the excited roaring of the congregation, a succession
of loud, scarcely human screams.

          "You'd hardly think he could have produced us without a
miracle," the Arch-Vicar thoughtfully continues. "But He did, He did. By
purely natural means, using human beings and their science as His
instruments, He created an entirely new race of men, with deformity in
their blood, with squalor all around them and ahead, in the future, no
prospects but of more squalor, worse deformity and, finally, complete
extinction. Yes, it's a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the
Living Evil."

          "Then why," asks Dr. Poole, "do you go on worshiping Him?"

          "Why do you throw food to a growling tiger? To buy yourself a
breathing space. To put off the horror of the inevitable, if only for a
few minutes. In earth as it is in Hell -- but at least one's still on
earth."

          "It hardly seems worth while," says Dr. Poole in the
philosophical tone of one who has just dined.

          Another unusually piercing scream makes him turn his head
toward the door. He watches for a while in silence. This time, his
expression is one in which horror has been considerably mitigated by
scientific curiosity.

          "Getting used to it, eh?" says the Arch-Vicar genially.

NARRATOR

          Conscience, custom -- the first makes cowards,

          Makes saints of us sometimes, makes human beings.

          The other makes Patriots, Papists, Protestants,

          Makes Babbitts, Sadists, Swedes or Slovaks,

          Makes killers of Kulaks, chlorinators of Jews,

          Makes all who mangle, for lofty motives,

          Quivering flesh, without qualm or question

          To mar their certainty of Supreme Service.

          Yes, my friends, remember how indignant you once felt when the
Turks massacred more than the ordinary quota of Armenians, how you
thanked God that you lived in a Protestant, progressive country, where
such things simply couldn't happen -- couldn't happen because men wore
bowler hats and travelled daily to town by the eight twenty-three. And
then reflect for a moment on a few of the horrors you now take for
granted; the outrages against the most rudimentary human decencies that
have been perpetrated on your behalf (or perhaps by your own hands); the
atrocities you take your little girl to see, twice a week, on the news
reel --and she finds them commonplace and boring. Twenty years hence, at
this rate, your grandchildren will be turning on their television sets
for a look at the gladiatorial games; and, when those begin to pall,
there will be the Army's mass crucifixion of Conscientious Objectors or
the skinning alive, in full colour, of the seventy thousand persons
suspected, at Tegucigalpa, of un-Honduranean activities.

         

          Meanwhile, in the Unholy of Unholies, Dr. Poole is still
looking out through the crack between the sliding doors. The Arch-Vicar
is picking his teeth. There is a comfortable, postprandial silence.
Suddenly Dr. Poole turns to his companion.

          "Something's happening," he cries excitedly. "They're leaving
their seats."

          "I'd been expecting that for quite a long time now," replies
the Arch-Vicar, without ceasing to pick his teeth. "It's the blood that
does it. That and, of course, the whipping."

          "They're jumping down into the arena," Dr. Poole continues.
"They're running after one another. What on earth . . . ? Oh, my God! I
beg your pardon," he hastily adds. "But really, really. . ."

          Much agitated, he walks away from the door.

          "There are limits," he says.

          "That's where you're wrong," replies the Arch-Vicar. "There
are no limits. Everybody's capable of anything -- but anything."

          Dr. Poole does not answer. Drawn irresistibly by a force that
is stronger than his will, he has returned to his old place and is
staring out, avidly and in horror, at what is going on in the arena.

          "It's monstrous!" he cries indignantly. "It's utterly
revolting."

          The Arch-Vicar rises heavily from his couch and, opening a
little cupboard in the wall, takes out a pair of binoculars, which he
hands to Dr. Poole.

          "Try these," he says. "Night glasses. Standard Navy equipment
from before the Thing. You'll see everything."

          "But you don't imagine. . ."

          "Not merely do I imagine," says the Arch-Vicar, with an
ironically benignant smile; "I see with my own eyes. Go ahead, man.
Look. You've never seen anything like this in New Zealand."

          "I certainly have not," says Dr. Poole in the kind of tone his
mother might have used.

          All the same he finally raises the binoculars to his eyes.

          Long shot from his viewpoint. It is a scene of Satyrs and
Nymphs, of pursuits and captures, provocative resistances followed by
the enthusiastic surrender of lips to bearded lips, of panting bosoms to
the impatience of rough hands, the whole accompanied by a babel of
shouting, squealing and shrill laughter.

          Cut back to the Arch-Vicar, whose face is puckered into a
grimace of contemptuous distaste.

          "Like cats," he says at last. "Only cats have the decency not
to be gregarious in their courting. And you still have doubts about
Belial -- even after this?"

          There is a pause.

          "Was this something that happened after. . . after the Thing?"
Dr. Poole enquires.

          "In two generations."

          "Two generations!" Dr. Poole whistles. "Nothing recessive
about that mutation. And don't they. . . well, I mean, don't they feel
like doing this sort of thing at any other season?"

          "Just for these five weeks, that's all. And we only permit two
weeks of actual mating."

          "Why?"

          The Arch-Vicar makes the sign of the horns.

          "On general principles. They have to be punished for having
been punished. It's the Law of Belial. And, I may say, we really let
them have it if they break the rules."

          "Quite, quite," says Dr. Poole, remembering with discomfort
the episode with Loola among the dunes.

          "It's pretty hard for the ones who throw back to the old-style
mating pattern."

          "Are there many of those?"

          "Between five and ten per cent of the population. We call them
'Hots.' "

          "And you don't permit. . . ?"

          "We beat the hell out of them when we catch them."

          "But that's monstrous!"

          "Of course it is," the Arch-Vicar agrees. "But remember your
history. If you want solidarity, you've got to have either an external
enemy or an oppressed minority. We have no external enemies, so we have
to make the most of our Hots. They're what the Jews were under Hitler,
what the bourgeois were under Lenin and Stalin, what the heretics used
to be in Catholic countries and the Papists under the Protestants. If
anything goes wrong, it's always the fault of the Hots. I don't know
what we'd do without them."

          "But don't you ever stop to think what they must feel?"

          "Why should I? First of all, it's the law. Condign punishment
for having been punished. Second, if they're discreet, they won't get
punished. All they've got to do is to avoid having babies at the wrong
season and to disguise the fact that they fall in love and make
permanent connections with persons of the opposite sex. And, if they
don't want to be discreet, they can always run away."

          "Run away? Where to?"

          "There's a little community up North, near Fresno. Eighty-five
per cent Hot. It's a dangerous journey, of course. Very little water on
the way. And if we catch them, we bury them alive. But if they choose to
take the risk, they're perfectly free to do so. And then finally there's
the priesthood." He makes the sign of the horns. "Any bright boy, who
shows early signs of being a Hot, has his future assured: we make a
priest of him."

          Several seconds pass before Dr. Poole ventures to ask his next
question.

          "You mean, you. . . ?"

          "Precisely," says the Arch-Vicar. "For the Kingdom of Hell's
sake. Not to mention the strictly practical reasons. After all, the
business of the community has got to be carried on somehow, and
obviously the laity are in no condition to do it."

          The noise from the arena swells to a momentary climax.

          "Nauseous!" squeaks the Arch-Vicar with a sudden
intensification of abhorrence. "And this is nothing to what it will be
later on. How thankful I am that I've been preserved from such ignominy!
Not they, but the Enemy of Mankind incarnate in their disgusting bodies.
Kindly look over there." He draws Dr. Poole toward him; he points a
thick forefinger. 'To the left of the High Altar -- with that little
red-headed vessel. That's the Chief. The Chief!" he repeats with
derisive emphasis. "What sort of a ruler is he going to be during the
next two weeks?"

          Resisting the temptation to make personal remarks about a man
who, though temporarily in retirement, is destined to return to power,
Dr. Poole utters a nervous little laugh.

          "Yes, he certainly seems to be relaxing from the cares of
State."

 

NARRATOR

          But why, why does he have to relax with Loola? Vile brute and
faithless strumpet! But there is at least one consolation -- and to a
shy man, plagued with desires he dares not act upon, a very great
consolation: Loola's conduct is the proof of an accessibility which, in
New Zealand, in academic circles, in the neighbourhood of his Mother,
could only be furtively dreamed about as something altogether too good
to be true. And it is not only Loola who proves herself accessible. The
same thing is being demonstrated, no less actively, no less vocally, by
those mulatto girls, by Flossie, the plump and honey-coloured Teuton, by
that enormous Armenian matron, by the little tow-headed adolescent with
the big blue eyes. . . .

          "Yes, that's our Chief," says the Arch-Vicar bitterly. "Until
he and the other pigs stop being possessed, the Church just takes over."

          Incorrigibly cultured, in spite of his overwhelming desire to
be out there with Loola -- or almost anyone else, if it comes to that --
Dr. Poole makes an apt remark about the Spiritual Authority and the
Temporal Power.

          The Arch-Vicar ignores it.

          "Well," he says briskly, "it's time I got down to business."

          He calls a Postulant, who hands him a tallow dip, then crosses
over to the altar at the east end of the shrine. Upon it stands a single
candle of yellow beeswax, three or four feet high and disproportionately
thick. The Arch-Vicar genuflects, lights the candle, makes the sign of
the horns, then comes back to where Dr. Poole is staring out, wide-eyed
with fascinated horror and shocked concupiscence, at the spectacle in
the arena.

          "Stand aside, please."

          Dr. Poole obeys.

          A Postulant slides back first one door, then the other. The
Arch-Vicar steps forward and stands in the centre of the opening,
touching the gilded horns of his tiara. From the musicians on the steps
of the High Altar comes a shrill screeching of thighbone recorders. The
noises of the crowd die away into a silence that is only occasionally
punctuated by the bestial utterance of some joy or anguish too savagely
violent to be repressed. Antiphonally, the priests begin to chant.

SEMICHORUS I

This is the time,

SEMICHORUS II

For Belial is merciless,

SEMICHORUS I

Time for Time's ending.

SEMICHORUS II

In the chaos of lust.

SEMICHORUS I

This is the time,

SEMICHORUS II

For Belial is in your blood,

SEMICHORUS I

Time for the birth in you

SEMICHORUS II

Of the Others, the Aliens,

SEMICHORUS I

Of Itch, of Tetter,

SEMICHORUS II

Of tumid Worm.

SEMICHORUS I

This is the time,

SEMICHORUS II

For Belial hates you,

SEMICHORUS I

Time for the Soul's death,

SEMICHORUS II

For the Person to perish,

SEMICHORUS I

Sentenced by craving,

SEMICHORUS II

And pleasure is the hangman;

SEMICHORUS I

Time for the Enemy's

SEMICHORUS II

Total triumph,

SEMICHORUS I

For the Baboon to be master,

 

SEMICHORUS II

That monsters may be begotten.

SEMICHORUS I

Not your will, but His,

SEMICHORUS II

That you may all be lost forever.

         

          From the crowd rises a loud unanimous "Amen."

          "His curse be on you," the Arch-Vicar intones in his
high-pitched voice, then moves back to the end of the shrine and mounts
the throne that stands next to the altar. From outside we hear a
confused shouting that grows louder and louder, and suddenly the shrine
is invaded by a throng of corybantic worshipers. They rush to the altar,
they tear off one another's aprons and fling them in a mounting pile at
the foot of the Arch-Vicar's throne. NO, NO, NO -- and for each NO there
is a triumphant shout of "Yes," followed by an unequivocal gesture
toward the nearest person of the opposite sex. In the distance the
priests are monotonously chanting, "Not your will, but His, that you may
all be lost forever" -- again and again.

          Close shot of Dr. Poole, as he watches the proceedings from a
corner of the oratory.

          Cut back to the crowd, face after mindless, ecstatic face
enters the field of view and passes out again. And there, suddenly, is
Loola's face -- the eyes shining, the lips parted, the dimples wildly
alive. She turns her head, she catches sight of Dr. Poole.

          "Alfie!" she cries.

          Her tone and expression evoke an equally rapturous response.

          "Loola!"

          They rush together in a passionate embrace. Seconds pass.
Vaselinelike, the strains of the Good Friday music from Parsifal make
themselves heard on the sound track.

          Then the faces come unstuck, the Camera pulls back.

          "Quick, quick!"

          Loola seizes his arm and drags him toward the altar.

          "The apron," she says.

          Dr. Poole looks down at the apron, then, blushing as red as
the NO embroidered upon it, averts his eyes.

          "It seems so. . . so indecorous," he says.

          He stretches out his hand, withdraws it, then changes his mind
yet again. Taking a corner of the apron between his thumb and
forefinger, he gives it a couple of feebly ineffective tweaks.

          "Harder," she cries, "Much harder!"

          With an almost frantic violence -- for it is not only the
apron that he is tearing away, it is also his mother's influence and all
his inhibitions, all the conventions in which he has been brought up --
Dr. Poole does as he is told. The stitching yields more easily than he
had anticipated and he almost falls over backward. Recovering his
balance, he stands there, looking in sheepish embarrassment from the
little nappy that represents the Seventh Commandment into Loola's
laughing face and then down again at the crimson prohibition. Cut back
and forth: NO, dimples, NO, dimples, NO. . . .

          "Yes!" shouts Loola triumphantly. "Yes!"

          Snatching the apron out of his hand, she throws it down at the
foot of the throne. Then with a "Yes" and another "Yes," she rips the
patches from her chest and, turning to the altar, makes her reverence to
the Candle.

          Medium close shot from the back of Loola genuflecting. All at
once an elderly man with a grey beard rushes excitedly into the shot,
tears the twin NO'S off the seat of her homespun pants and starts to
drag her toward the door of the shrine.

          Giving him a slap in the face and a vigorous push, Loola
breaks away and for the second time throws herself into Dr. Poole's
arms.

          "Yes?" she whispers.

          And emphatically he answers, "Yes!"

          They kiss, smile rapturously at each other, then move in the
direction of the darkness beyond the sliding doors. As they pass the
throne, the Arch-Vicar leans down and, smiling ironically, taps Dr.
Poole on the shoulder.

          "What about my field glasses?" he says.

                   Dissolve to a night scene of ink-black shadows and
expanses of moonlight. In the background stands the mouldering pile of
the Los Angeles County Museum. Amorously interlaced, Loola and Dr. Poole
enter the shot, then pass into impenetrable darkness. Silhouettes of men
pursuing women, or women throwing themselves on men, appear for a moment
and vanish. To the accompaniment of the Good Friday music we hear a
rising and falling chorus of grunts and moans, of explosively shouted
obscenities and long-drawn howls of agonising delight.

NARRATOR

          Consider the birds. What a delicacy in their love-making, what
old-world chivalry! For although the hormones produced within the body
of the breeding hen predispose her to sexual emotion, their effect is
neither so intense nor of so brief a duration as that of the ovarian
hormones in the blood of female mammals during oestrus. Moreover, for
obvious reasons, the cock bird is in no position to enforce his desires
upon an unwilling hen. Hence the prevalence among male birds of bright
plumage and of an instinct for courtship. And hence the conspicuous
absence of these charming things among male mammals. For where, as in
the mammals, the female's amorous desires and her attractiveness to the
male sex are wholly determined by chemical means, what need is there of
masculine beauty of the niceties of preliminary courtship?

          Among humans every day of the year is potentially the mating
season. Girls are not chemically predestined during a few days, to
accept the advances of the first male who presents himself. Their bodies
manufacture hormones in doses sufficiently small to leave even the most
temperamental of them a certain freedom of choice. That is why, unlike
his fellow mammals, man has always been a wooer. But now the gamma rays
have changed all that. The hereditary patterns of man's physical and
mental behaviour have been given another form. Thanks to the supreme
Triumph of Modern Science, sex has become seasonal, romance has been
swallowed up by the oestrus and the female's chemical compulsion to mate
has abolished courtship, chivalry, tenderness, love itself.

          At this moment a radiant Loola and a considerably dishevelled
Dr. Poole emerge from the shadows. A burly male, temporarily unattached,
comes striding into the shot. At the sight of Loola, he stops. His mouth
falls open, his eyes widen, he breathes heavily.

          Dr. Poole gives the stranger one look, then turns nervously to
his companion.

          "I think perhaps it might be a good thing if we walked this
way . . ."

          Without a word the stranger rushes at him, gives him a push
that sends him flying and takes Loola in his arms. She resists for a
moment; then the chemicals in her blood impose their Categorical
Imperative, and she ceases to struggle.

          Making a noise like a tiger at feeding time, the stranger
lifts her off her feet and carries her into the shadows.

          Dr. Poole, who has had time to pick himself up, makes as
though to follow, to wreak vengeance, to rescue the distressed victim.
Then a combination of apprehension and modesty causes him to slacken his
pace. If he advances, heaven knows what he may find himself intruding
upon. And then that man, that hairy hulk of bone and muscle. . . . On
the whole it might perhaps be wiser. . . . He comes to a halt and stands
hesitant, not knowing what to do. Suddenly two beautiful young mulatto
girls come running out of the County Museum and simultaneously throw
their brown arms round his neck and cover his face with kisses.

          "You great big beautiful bastard," they whisper in husky
unison.

          For a moment Dr. Poole hesitates between the inhibitory
recollection of his mother, the fidelity to Loola prescribed by all the
poets and novelists, and the warm, elastic Facts of Life. After about
four seconds of moral conflict, he chooses, as we might expect, the
Facts of Life. He smiles, he returns the kisses, he murmurs words which
it would startle Miss Hook and almost kill his mother to hear, he
encircles either body with an arm, caresses either bosom with hands that
have never done anything of the kind except in unavowable imaginings.
The noises of mating swell to a brief climax, then diminish. For a
little while there is complete silence.

          Accompanied by a train of Archimandrites, Familiars,
Presbyters and Postulants, the Arch-Vicar and the Patriarch of Pasadena
come pacing majestically into the shot. At the sight of Dr. Poole and
the mulattos, they come to a halt. Making a grimace of disgusted
abhorrence, the Patriarch spits on the ground. More tolerant, the
Arch-Vicar only smiles ironically.

          "Dr. Poole!" he flutes in his odd falsetto.

          Guiltily, as though he had heard his mother calling, Dr. Poole
drops those busy hands of his and, turning toward the Arch-Vicar, tries
to assume an expression of airy innocence. "These girls," his smile is
meant to imply, "who are these girls? Why, I don't even know their
names. We were just having a little chat about the higher cryptogams,
that's all."

          "You great big beautiful . . ." begins a husky voice.

          Dr. Poole coughs loudly and fends off the embrace that
accompanies the words.

          "Don't mind us," says the Arch-Vicar pleasantly. "After all,
Belial Day comes but once a year."

          Approaching, he touches the gilded horns of his tiara, then
lays his hands on Dr. Poole's head.

          "Yours," he says with a suddenly professional unctuousness,
"has been an almost miraculously sudden conversion. Yes, almost
miraculously." Then, changing his tone, "By the way," he adds, "we've
had a bit of trouble with your friends from New Zealand. This afternoon
somebody spotted a group of them in Beverly Hills. I guess they were
looking for you."

          "Yes, I suppose so."

          "But they're not going to find you," says the Arch-Vicar
genially. "One of our Inquisitors went out with a posse of Familiars to
deal with them."

          "What happened?" Dr. Poole anxiously enquires.

          "Our men laid an ambush, let fly with arrows. One was killed,
and the others made off with the wounded. I don't think we shall be
bothered again. But just to make certain. . ." He beckons to two of his
attendants. "Listen," he says. "There isn't going to be a rescue and
there isn't going to be an escape. I make you responsible, do you
understand?"

          The two Postulants bow their heads.

          "And now," says the Arch-Vicar, turning back to Dr. Poole,
"well leave you to beget all the little monsters you can."

          He winks, pats Dr. Poole on the cheek, then takes the
Patriarch's arm and, followed by his retinue, moves away.

          Dr. Poole stares after the retreating figures, then glances
uneasily at the two Postulants who have been appointed to guard him.

          Brown arms are thrown around his neck.

          "You great big beautiful. . ."

          "No, really. Not in public. Not with those men around!"

          "What difference does that make?"

          And before he has time to answer, husky, musky, dusky, the
Facts of Life close in on him again, and in a complicated embrace, like
some half reluctant, half blissfully consenting Laocoon, he is ravished
away into the shadows. With an expression of disgust, the two Postulants
simultaneously spit.

NARRATOR

L'ombre etait nuptiale, auguste et solennelle

 

He is interrupted by a burst of frenzied caterwauling.

NARRATOR

          When I look into the fishponds in my garden,

          (And not mine only, for every garden is riddled

          With eel holes and reflected moons), methinks

          I see a Thing armed with a rake that seems,

          Out of the ooze, out of the immanence

          Among the eels of heaven, to strike at me --

          At Me the holy, Me divine! And yet

          How tedious is a guilty conscience! How

          Tedious, for that matter, an unguilty one!

          What wonder if the horror of the fishponds

          Draws us toward the rake? And the Thing strikes,

          And I, the uneasy Person, in the mud,

          Or in the liquid moonlight, thankfully

          Find others than myself to have that blind

          Or radiant being.

          Dissolve to a medium shot of Dr. Poole asleep on the drifted
sand at the foot of a towering wall of concrete. Twenty feet away one of
his guards is also sleeping. The other is absorbed in an ancient copy of
Forever Amber. The sun is already high in the heavens and a close shot
reveals a small green lizard crawling over one of Dr. Poole's
outstretched hands. He does not stir, but lies as though dead.

NARRATOR

          And this, too, is the beatific being of somebody who most
certainly isn't Alfred Poole D.Sc. For sleep is one of the preconditions
of the Incarnation, the primary instrument of divine immanence.
Sleeping, we cease to live that we may be lived (how blessedly!) by some
nameless Other who takes this opportunity to restore the mind to sanity
and bring healing to the abused and self-tormented body.

          From breakfast to bedtime you may be doing everything in your
power to outrage Nature and deny the fact of your Glassy Essence. But
even the angriest ape at last grows weary of his tricks and has to
sleep. And, while he sleeps, the indwelling Compassion preserves him,
willy nilly, from the suicide which, in his waking hours, he has tried
so frantically hard to commit. Then the sun rises again, and our ape
wakes up once more to his own self and the freedom of his personal will
-- to yet another day of trick playing or, if he chooses, to the
beginnings of self-knowledge, to the first steps toward his liberation.

          A peal of excited feminine laughter cuts short the Narrator's
speech. The sleeper stirs and, at a second, louder outburst, starts into
full wakefulness and sits up, looking around him in bewilderment, not
knowing where he is. Again that laughter. He turns his head in the
direction of the sound. In a long shot from his viewpoint we see his two
brown-skinned friends of the previous night emerging at full speed from
behind a sand dune and darting into the ruins of the County Museum. At
their heels, in concentrated silence, runs the Chief. All three
disappear from view.

          The sleeping Postulant wakes up and turns to his companion.

          "What's that?" he asks.

          "The usual thing," the other answers, without looking up from
Forever Amber.

          As he speaks, shrill squeals reverberate through the cavernous
halls of the Museum. The Postulants look at one another in silence, then
simultaneously spit.

          Cut back to Dr. Poole.

          "My God," he says aloud, "my God!"

          He covers his face with his hands.

NARRATOR

          Into the satiety of this morning-after let loose a rodent
conscience and the principles learned at a mother's knee -- or not
infrequently across it (head downward and with shirt tails well rucked
up), in condign spankings, sadly and prayerfully administered, but
remembered, ironically enough, as the pretext and accompaniment of
innumerable erotic daydreams, each duly followed by its remorse, and
each remorse bringing with it the idea of punishment and all its
attendant sensualities. And so on, indefinitely. Well, as I say, let
those loose into this, and the result may easily be a religious
conversion. But a conversion to what? Most ignorant of what he is most
assured, our poor friend doesn't know. And here comes almost the last
person he would expect to help him to discover.

          As the Narrator speaks this last sentence, Loola enters the
shot.

          "Alfie!" she cries happily. "I was looking for you."

          Cut briefly to the two Postulants, who look at her for a
moment with all the distaste of enforced continence, then turn away and
expectorate.

          Meanwhile, after one brief glance at those "lineaments of
satisfied desire," Dr. Poole guiltily averts his eyes.

          "Good morning," he says in a tone of formal politeness. "I
hope you. . . you slept well?"

          Loola sits down beside him, opens the leather bag which she
carries slung over her shoulder and extracts half a loaf of bread and
five or six large oranges.

          "Nobody can think of doing much cooking these days," she
explains. "It's just one long picnic until the cold season begins
again."

          "Quite, quite," says Dr. Poole.

          "You must be awfully hungry," she goes on. "After last night."

          Her dimples come out of hiding, as she smiles at him.

          Hot and blushing with embarrassment, Dr. Poole hastily tries
to change the subject of conversation.

          "Those are beautiful oranges," he remarks. "In New Zealand
they don't do really well except in the extreme. . ."

          "There!" says Loola, interrupting him.

          She hands him a thick hunk of bread, breaks off another for
herself and bites into it with strong white teeth.

          "It's good," she says with her mouth full. "Why don't you
eat?"

          Dr. Poole who realises that, in effect, he is ravenously
hungry, but who is unwilling, for the sake of decorum, to admit the fact
too openly, nibbles daintily at his crust.

          Loola snuggles against him and leans her head on his shoulder.

          "It was fun, Alfie, wasn't it?" She takes another bite of
bread and without waiting for him to answer, continues: "More fun with
you than with any of the others. Did you think that too?"

          She looks up at him tenderly.

          Close shot from her viewpoint of Dr. Poole's expression of
agonising moral discomfort.

          "Alfie!" she cries, "what's the matter?"

          "Perhaps it would be better," he manages at last to say, "if
we talked about something else."

          Loola straightens herself up and looks at him for a few
seconds intently and in silence.

          "You think too much," she says at last. "You mustn't think. If
you think, it stops being fun." The light suddenly goes out of her face.
"If you think," she goes on in a low voice, "it's terrible, terrible.
It's a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living Evil. When I
remember what they did to Polly and her baby. . ."

          She shudders, her eyes fill with tears and she turns away.

NARRATOR

          Those tears again, those symptoms of personality -- the sight
of them evokes a sympathy that is stronger than the sense of guilt.

         

          Forgetting the Postulants, Dr. Poole draws Loola toward him
and with whispered words, with the caresses one uses to quiet a crying
child, tries to comfort her. He is so successful that, in a minute or
two, she is lying quite still in the crook of his arm. Sighing happily,
she opens her eyes, looks up at him and smiles with an expression of
tenderness, to which the dimples add a ravishingly incongruous hint of
mischief.

          "This is what I've always dreamed of."

          "It is?"

          "But it never happened -- it never could happen. Not till you
came. . ." She strokes his cheek. "I wish your beard didn't have to
grow," she adds. "You'll look like the other fellows then. But you
aren't like them, you're quite different."

          "Not so different as all that," says Dr. Poole.

          He bends down and kisses her on the eyelids, on the throat, on
the mouth -- then draws back and looks down at her with an expression of
triumphant masculinity.

          "Not different in that way," she qualifies. "But different in
this way." She pats his cheek again. "You and I sitting together and
talking and being happy because you're you and I'm me. It doesn't happen
here. Except. . . except. . ." She breaks off. Her face darkens. "Do you
know what happens to people who are Hots?" she whispers.

          This time it is Dr. Poole's turn to protest against thinking
too much. He backs up his words with action.

          Close shot of the embrace. Then cut to the two Postulants,
staring disgustedly at the spectacle. As they spit, another Postulant
enters the shot.

          "Orders from His Eminence," he says, making the sign of the
horns. "This assignment's over. You're to report back to headquarters."

          Dissolve to the Canterbury. A wounded seaman, with an arrow
still sticking in his shoulder, is being hoisted in a sling from the
whaleboat to the deck of the schooner. On the deck lie two other victims
of the Californians' archery -- Dr. Cudworth with a wound in his left
leg and Miss Hook. The latter has an arrow imbedded deeply in her right
side. The doctor, as he bends over her, looks grave.

          "Morphine," he says to his orderly. "Then we'll get her down
to the surgery as quickly as we can. . ."

          Meanwhile there has been a shouting of orders and suddenly we
hear the noise of the donkey engine and the clanking of the anchor chain
as it is wound round the capstan.

          Ethel Hook opens her eyes and looks around her. An expression
of distress appears on her pale face.

          "You're not going to sail away and leave him?" she says. "But
you can't, you can't!" She makes an effort to raise herself from the
stretcher; but the movement causes so much pain that she falls back
again, with a groan.

          "Quiet, quiet," says the doctor soothingly, as he swabs her
arm with alcohol.

          "But he may still be alive," she feebly protests. "They can't
desert him; they can't just wash their hands of him."

          "Hold still," says the doctor and, taking the syringe from his
orderly, he drives the needle into the flesh.

          The clanking of the anchor chain rises to a crescendo as we
dissolve to Loola and Dr. Poole.

          "I'm hungry," says Loola, sitting up.

          Reaching for her knapsack, she takes out what is left of the
bread, breaks it in two, hands the larger fragment to Dr. Poole and
sinks her teeth into the other. She finishes her mouthful and is about
to start on another, when she changes her mind. Turning to her
companion, she takes his hand and kisses it.

          "What's that for?" he asks.

          Loola shrugs her shoulders.

          "I don't know. I just suddenly felt like that." She eats some
more bread, then, after a ruminative silence, turns to him with the air
of one who has just made an important and unexpected discovery.

          "Alfie," she announces, "I believe I shall never want to say
Yes to anyone except you."

          Greatly moved, Dr. Poole leans forward, takes her hand and
presses it to his heart.

          "I feel I've only just discovered what life's all about," he
says.

          "Me too."

          She leans against him, and like a miser irresistibly drawn to
count his treasure yet once more, Dr. Poole runs his fingers through her
hair, separating lock from thick lock, lifting a curl and letting it
fall back noiselessly into its place.

NARRATOR

          And so, by the dialectic of sentiment, these two have
rediscovered for themselves that synthesis of the chemical and the
personal, to which we give the names of monogamy and romantic love. In
her case it was the hormone that excluded the person; in his, the person
that could not come to terms with the hormone. But now there is the
beginning of a larger wholeness.

          Dr. Poole reaches into his pocket and pulls out the little
volume which he rescued yesterday from the furnace. He opens it, turns
the pages and begins to read aloud.

          "'Warm fragrance seems to fall from her light dress

          And her loose hair; and where some heavy tress

          The air of her own speed has disentwined,

          The sweetness seems to satiate the faint wind;

          And in the soul a wild odour is felt

          Beyond the sense, like fiery dews that melt

          Into the bosom of a frozen bud.'"

          "What's that?" Loola asks.

          "You!" He bends down and kisses her hair. "'And in the soul,'"
he whispers, " 'a wild odour is felt beyond the sense.' In the soul," he
repeats.

          "What's the soul?" Loola asks.

          "Well. . ." He hesitates; then, deciding to let Shelley give
the answer, he resumes his reading.

          "'See where she stands, a mortal shape indued

          With love and life and light and deity,

          And motion which may change, but never die,

          An image of some bright Eternity,

          A shadow of some golden dream; a Splendour

          Leaving the third sphere pilotless; a tender

          Reflection of the eternal Moon of Love. . .'"

          "But I don't understand a word of it," Loola complains.

          "And until today," says Dr. Poole, smiling down at her, "until
today, neither did I."

          We dissolve to the exterior of the Unholy of Unholies, two
weeks later. Several hundreds of bearded men and slatternly women are
queued up, in double file, awaiting their turn to enter the shrine. The
Camera passes down the long line of dull and dirty faces, then holds on
Loola and Dr. Poole, who are in the act of passing through the sliding
doors.

          Within all is gloom and silence. Two by two the nymphs and
prancing satyrs of a few short days ago shuffle despondently past an
altar, whose mighty candle is now eclipsed by a tin extinguisher. At the
foot of the Arch-Vicar's empty throne lies the heap of discarded Seventh
Commandments. As the procession slowly passes, the Archimandrite in
charge of Public Morals hands out to every male an apron and to every
female an apron and four round patches.

          "Out through the side door," he repeats to each recipient.

          And out through the side door, when their turn comes, Loola
and Dr. Poole duly go. There, in the sunshine, a score of Postulants are
busily at work, with thread and needle, stitching aprons to waistbands,
patches to trouser seats and shirt fronts.

          The Camera holds on Loola. Three young seminarists in
Toggenberg cassocks accost her as she emerges into the open air.

          She hands her apron to the first, a patch to each of the
others. All three set to work simultaneously and with extraordinary
rapidity. NO, NO and NO.

          "Turn around, please."

          Handing over her last patches, she obeys; and, while the apron
specialist moves away to attend to Dr. Poole, the others ply their
needles so diligently that, in half a minute, she is no less forbidding
from behind than when seen from in front

          "There!"

          "And there!"

          The two clerical tailors step aside and reveal a close shot of
their handiwork. NO NO. Cut back to the Postulants, who express their
sentiments by spitting in unison, then turn toward the door of the
shrine.

          "Next lady, please."

          Wearing a look of extreme dejection, the two inseparable
mulatto girls step forward together.

          Cut to Dr. Poole. Aproned and bearded with a fortnight's
growth of hair, he walks over to where Loola is waiting for him.

          "This way, please," says a shrill voice.

          In silence they take their places at the end of yet another
queue. Resignedly, two or three hundred persons are waiting to be
assigned their tasks by the Grand Inquisitor's Chief Assistant in charge
of Public Works. Three-horned and robed impressively in a white Saanen
soutane, the great man is sitting with a couple of two-horned Familiars
at a large table, on which stand several steel filing cabinets salvaged
from the offices of the Providential Life Insurance Company.

          A series of montage shots exhibits, in twenty seconds, the
slow, hour-long advance of Loola and Dr. Poole towards the well-spring
of Authority. And now at last they have reached their destination. Close
shot of the Grand Inquisitor's Special Assistant as he tells Dr. Poole
to report to the Director of Food Production at his office in the ruins
of the Administration Building of the University of Southern California.
This gentleman will see that the botanist gets a laboratory, a plot of
ground for his experimental planting, and up to four labourers to
perform the manual work.

          "Up to four labourers," the prelate repeats, "Though at
ordinary times. . ."

          Unauthorised, Loola breaks into the conversation.

          "Oh, let me be one of the labourers," she begs. "Please."

          The Grand Inquisitor's Special Assistant gives her a long
withering look, then turns to his Familiars.

          "And who, pray, is this young vessel of the Unholy Spirit?" he
asks.

          One of the Familiars extracts Loola's card from the file and
provides the relevant information. Aged eighteen and hitherto sterile,
the vessel in question is reported to have associated during one
off-season with a notorious Hot, who was later liquidated while trying
to resist arrest. Nothing however was ever proved against the said
vessel and its conduct has been generally satisfactory. Said vessel has
been employed, for the past year, as a miner of cemeteries and is to be
similarly employed during the coming season.

          "But I want to work with Alfie," she protests.

          "You seem to forget," says the first Familiar, "that this is a
Democracy. . ."

          "A Democracy," adds his colleague, "in which every proletarian
enjoys perfect freedom."

          "True freedom."

          "Freely doing the will of the Proletariat."

          "And vox proletariate, vox Diaboli."

          "While, of course, vox Diaboli, vox Ecclesiae."

          "And we here are the Church's representatives."

          "So you see."

          "But I'm tired of cemeteries," the girl insists. "I'd like to
dig up live things for a change."

          There is a brief silence. Then the Grand Inquisitor's Special
Assistant bends down and, from under his chair, produces a very large
consecrated bull's pizzle, which he lays on the table before him. Then
he turns to his subordinates.

          "Correct me if I'm wrong," he says. "But my impression is that
any vessel rejecting proletarian liberty is liable to twenty-five lashes
for each and every such offence."

          There is another silence. Pale and wide-eyed, Loola stares at
the instrument of torture, then looks away, makes an effort to speak,
finds herself voiceless and, swallowing hard, tries again.

          "I won't resist," she manages to bring out. "I really want to
be free."

          "Free to go on mining cemeteries?"

          She nods affirmatively.

          "There's a good vessel!" says the Special Assistant.

          Loola turns to Dr. Poole and, for a few seconds, they look
into one another's eyes without speaking.

          "Good-by, Alfie," she whispers at last.

          "Good-by, Loola."

          Two more seconds pass; then she drops her eyes and walks away.

          "And now," says the Special Assistant to Dr. Poole, "we can
get back to business. At ordinary times, as I was saying, you would be
expected to make use of not more than two labourers. Do I make myself
clear?"

          Dr. Poole inclines his head.

          We dissolve to a laboratory in which the sophomores of the
University of Southern California once pursued the study of Elementary
Biology. There are the usual sinks and tables, Bunsen burners and
balances, cages for mice and guinea pigs, glass tanks for tadpoles. But
the dust is thick over everything and scattered about the room lie half
a dozen skeletons, still associated with the crumbling remains of slacks
and sweaters, of Nylons and costume jewellery and brassieres.

          The door opens and Dr. Poole enters, followed by the Director
of Food Production, an elderly, grey-bearded man wearing homespun
trousers, the standard apron and a cutaway coat that must once have
belonged to the English butler of some twentieth-century motion picture
executive.

          "A little messy, I'm afraid," says the Director
apologetically. "But I'll have the bones cleared out this afternoon and
tomorrow the charvessels can dust off the tables and wash the floors."

          "Quite," says Dr. Poole, "quite."

          Dissolve to the same room a week later. The skeletons have
been removed and thanks to the charvessels the floors, walls and
furniture are almost clean. Dr. Poole has three distinguished visitors.
Wearing his four horns and the brown, Anglo-Nubian habit of the Society
of Moloch, the Arch-Vicar is seated beside the Chief, who is dressed in
the much be-medalled uniform of a Rear-Admiral of the United States
Navy, recently disinterred from Forest Lawn. At a respectful distance
behind and to one side of the two Heads of Church and State sits the
Director of Food Production, still disguised as a butler. Facing them,
in the posture of a French Academician preparing to read his latest
production to some choice and privileged audience, sits Dr. Poole.

          "Shall I begin?" he asks.

          The heads of Church and State exchange glances; then turn to
Dr. Poole and simultaneously nod their assent. He opens his notebook and
adjusts his spectacles.

          "Notes on Soil Erosion and Plant Pathology in Southern
California," he reads aloud. "Followed by a Preliminary Report on the
Agricultural Situation and a Plan of Remedial Action for the Future. By
Alfred Poole D.Sc. Assistant Professor of Botany at the University of
Auckland."

          As he reads, we dissolve to a slope among the foothills of the
San Gabriel Mountains. Naked but for a cactus here and there, the stony
ground lies dead and mangled in the sunshine. A network of ramifying
gullies furrows the hillside. Some of them are still in the infancy of
erosion, others have cut their way deep into the ground. The ruins of a
substantial house, half of which has already been engulfed, stand
precariously at the edge of one of these strangely fretted canyons. In
the plain, at the foot of the hill, dead walnut trees emerge from the
dried mud in which successive rains have buried them.

          Over the shot we hear the sonorous drone of Dr. Poole's voice.

          "In true symbiosis," he is saying, "there is a mutually
beneficial relationship between two associated organisms. The
distinguishing mark of parasitism, on the other hand, is that one
organism lives at the expense of another. In the end this one-sided
relationship proves fatal to both parties; for the death of the host
cannot but result in the death of the parasite by which it has been
killed. The relationship between modern man and the planet, of which,
until so recently, he regarded himself as the master, has been that, not
of symbiotic partners, but of tapeworm and infested dog, of fungus and
blighted potato."

          Cut back to the Chief. Within its nest of curly black beard,
the red-lipped mouth has opened into an enormous yawn. Over the shot Dr.
Poole reads on.

          "Ignoring the obvious fact that his devastation of natural
resources would, in the long run, result in the ruin of his civilization
and even in the extinction of his species, modern man continued,
generation after generation, to exploit the earth in such a way that. .
."

          "Couldn't you make it a bit snappier?" asks the Chief.

          Dr. Poole begins by looking offended. Then he remembers that
he is a condemned captive on probation among savages, and forces a
nervous smile.

          "Perhaps it might be best," he says, "if we passed without
more ado to the section on Plant Pathology."

          "I don't care," says the Chief, "so long as you make it
snappy."

          "Impatience," pipes the Arch-Vicar sententiously, "is one of
Belial's favourite vices."

          Dr. Poole, meanwhile, has turned over three or four pages and
is ready to start again.

          "Given the existing state of the soil, yield per acre would be
abnormally low, even if the principal food plants were completely
healthy. But they are not healthy. After viewing crops in the field,
after inspecting grains, fruits and tubers in storage, after examining
botanical specimens under an almost undamaged pre-Thing microscope, I
feel certain that there is only one explanation for the number and
variety of plant diseases now rampant in the area -- namely, deliberate
infection of the crops by means of fungus bombs, bacteria-bearing
aerosols and the release of many species of virus-carrying aphides and
other insects. Otherwise how account for the prevalence and extreme
virulence of Giberella Saubinettii and Puccinia graminis? Of
Phytophthora infestans and Synchitrium endobioticum? Of all the mosaic
diseases due to viruses? Of Bacillus amylovorus, Bacillus carotovorus,
Pseudomonas citri, Pseudomonas tumefaciens, Bacterium. . ."

          Cutting short his recitation almost before it has begun, the
Arch-Vicar interrupts him.

          "And you still maintain," he says, "that these people weren't
possessed by Belial!" He shakes his head. "It's incredible how prejudice
can blind even the most intelligent, the most highly educated. . ."

          "Yes, yes, we know all that," says the Chief impatiently. "But
now let's cut all the cackle and get down to practical business. What
can you do about all this?"

          Dr. Poole clears his throat.

          "The task," he says impressively, "will be long-drawn and
extremely arduous."

          "But I want more food now," says the Chief imperiously. "I've
got to have it this very year."

          Somewhat apprehensively Dr. Poole is forced to tell him that
disease-resisting varieties of plants cannot be bred and tested in under
ten or twelve years. And meanwhile there is the question of the land;
the erosion is destroying the land, erosion must be checked at all
costs. But the labour of terracing and draining and composting is
enormous and must go on unremittingly, year after year. Even in the old
days, when manpower and machinery were plentiful, people had failed to
do what was necessary to preserve the fertility of the soil.

          "It wasn't because they couldn't," puts in the Arch-Vicar. "It
was because they didn't want to. Between World War II and World War III
they had all the time and all the equipment they needed. But they
preferred to amuse themselves with power politics, and what were the
consequences?" He counts off the answers on his thick fingers. "Worse
malnutrition for more people. More political unrest. Resulting in more
aggressive nationalism and imperialism. And finally the Thing. And why
did they choose to destroy themselves? Because that was what Belial
wanted them to do, because He had taken possession. . ."

          The Chief holds up his hand.

          "Please, please," he protests. "This isn't a course in
Apologetics or Natural Diabology. We're trying to do something."

          "And unfortunately the doing will take a long time," says Dr.
Poole.

          "How long?"

          "Well, in five years you might find yourself holding your own
against erosion. In ten years there'd be a perceptible improvement. In
twenty years, some of your land might be back to as much as seventy per
cent of its original fertility. In fifty years. . ."

          "In fifty years," puts in the Arch-Vicar, "the deformity rate
will be double what it is at present. And in a hundred years the triumph
of Belial will be complete. But complete!" he repeats with a childlike
giggle. He makes the sign of the horns and gets up from his chair. "But
meanwhile I'm all for this gentleman doing everything he can."

          Dissolve to the Hollywood Cemetery. Trucking shot of the
monuments, with which our earlier visit to the graveyard has already
made us familiar.

          Medium close shot of the statue of Hedda Boddy. The Camera
drops from the figure to the pedestal and the inscription.

          ". . . . affectionately known as Public Sweetheart Number One.
'Hitch your wagon to a Star.' "

          Over the shot we hear the sound of a spade being thrust into
the ground, then the rattle of sand and gravel as the earth is tossed
aside.

          The Camera pulls back, and we see Loola standing in a
three-foot hole, wearily digging.

          The sound of footsteps makes her look up. Flossie, the plump
girl of the earlier sequence, enters the shot.

          "Getting on all right?" she asks.

          Loola nods without speaking and wipes her forehead with the
back of her hand.

          "When you hit the pay dirt," the plump girl goes on, "come and
report to us."

          "It'll take at least an hour more," says Loola gloomily.

          "Well, keep at it, kid," says Flossie in the maddeningly
hearty tones of a person delivering a pep talk. "Put your back into it.
Prove to them that a vessel can do as much as a man! If you work well,"
she goes on encouragingly, "maybe the Superintendent will let you keep
the Nylons. Look at the pair I got this morning!"

          She pulls the coveted trophies from her pocket. Except for a
greenish discoloration around the toes, the stockings are in perfect
condition.

          "Oh!" cries Loola in envious admiration.

          "But we didn't have any luck with the jewellery," says
Flossie, as she puts the stockings away again. "Just the wedding ring
and a rotten little bracelet. Let's hope this one won't let us down."

          She pats the Parian stomach of Public Sweetheart Number One.

          "Well, I must get back," she continues. "We're digging for the
vessel who's buried under that red stone cross -- you know, the big one,
near the north gate."

          Loola nods.

          "I'll be there as soon as I make a strike," she says.

          Whistling the tune of "When I survey the Wondrous Horns," the
plump girl walks out of the shot. Loola sighs, and resumes her digging.

          Very softly, a voice pronounces her name.

          She starts violently and turns in the direction from which the
sound has come.

          Medium shot from her viewpoint of Dr. Poole advancing
cautiously from behind the tomb of Rudolf Valentino.

          Cut back to Loola.

          She flushes, then turns deathly pale. Her hand goes to her
heart.

          "Alfie," she whispers.

          He enters the shot, jumps into the grave beside her and,
without a word, takes her in his arms. The kiss is passionate. Then she
hides her face against his shoulder.

          "I thought I should never see you any more," she says in a
breaking voice.

          "What did you take me for?"

          He kisses her again, then holds her at arm's length and looks
into her face.

          "Why are you crying?" he asks.

          "I can't help it."

          "You're lovelier even than I remembered."

          She shakes her head, unable to speak.

          "Smile," he commands.

          "I can't."

          "Smile, smile. I want to see them again."

          "See what?"

          "Smile!"

          With an effort, but full of a passionate tenderness, Loola
smiles up at him.

          In her cheeks the dimples emerge from the long hibernation of
her sorrow.

          "There they are," he cries in delight, "there they are!"

          Delicately, like a blind man reading Herrick in Braille, he
passes a finger across her cheek. Loola smiles more effortlessly, the
dimple deepens under his touch. He laughs with pleasure.

          At the same moment the whistled tune of "When I behold the
Wondrous Horns" swells from a distant pianissimo through piano to mezzo
forte.

          An expression of terror appears on Loola's face.

          "Quick, quick!" she whispers.

          With astonishing agility Dr. Poole scrabbles out of the grave.

          By the time the plump girl re-enters the shot he is leaning in
a studiedly casual attitude against the monument to Public Sweetheart
Number One. Below him, in the pit, Loola is digging like mad.

          "I forgot to tell you that we're knocking off for lunch in
half an hour," Flossie begins.

          Then, catching sight of Dr. Poole, she utters an exclamation
of surprise.

          "Good morning," says Dr. Poole politely.

          There is a silence. Flossie looks from Dr. Poole to Loola and
from Loola back to Dr. Poole.

          "What are you doing here?" she asks suspiciously.

          "I'm on my way to St. Azazel's," he answers. "The Arch-Vicar
sent a message that he wanted me to attend his three lectures to the
Seminarists. Belial in History -- that's the subject of them."

          "You've chosen a very funny way to get to St. Azazel's."

          "I was looking for the Chief," Dr. Poole explains.

          "Well, he's not here," says the plump girl.

          There is another silence.

          "In that case," says Dr. Poole, "I'd better be trotting along.
Mustn't keep either of you young ladies from your duties," he adds with
an artificial and entirely unconvincing brightness. "Good-by. Good-by."

          He bows to the two girls, then, assuming an air of easy
nonchalance, walks away.

          Flossie looks after him in silence, then turns severely to
Loola.

          "Now listen, kid," she begins.

          Loola stops digging and looks up from the grave.

          "What is it, Flossie," she asks with an expression of
uncomprehending innocence.

          "What is it?" the other echoes derisively. "Tell me, what's
written on your apron?"

          Loola looks down at her apron, then back at Flossie. Her face
reddens with embarrassment.

          "What's written on it?" the plump girl insists.

          "'No!'"

          "And what's written on those patches?"

          "'No!'" Loola repeats.

          "And on the other ones, when you turn around?"

          "'No!'"

          "No, no, no, no, no," says the plump girl emphatically. "And
when the Law says no, it means no. You know that as well as I do, don't
you."

          Loola nods her head without speaking.

          "Say you know it," the other insists. "Say it."

          "Yes, I know it," Loola brings out at last in a barely audible
voice.

          "Good. Then don't pretend you haven't been warned. And if that
foreign Hot ever comes prowling around you again, just let me know. I'll
see to him."

          We dissolve to the interior of St. Azazel's. Once the Church
of Our Lady of Guadalupe, St. Azazel's has undergone only the most
superficial of alterations. In the chapels, the plaster figures of St.
Joseph, the Magdalen, St. Anthony of Padua and St. Rose of Lima have
merely been painted red and fitted with horns. On the high altar nothing
has been changed except that the crucifix has been replaced by a pair of
enormous horns carved out of cedar wood and hung with a wealth of rings
and wrist watches, of bracelets, chains, earrings and necklaces, mined
from the cemeteries or found in association with old bones and the
mouldering remnants of jewel boxes.

          In the body of the church some fifty Toggenberg-robed
seminarists -- with Dr. Poole, incongruously bearded and in tweeds, in
the middle of the front row -- are sitting with bowed heads while, from
the pulpit, the Arch-Vicar pronounces the final words of his lecture.

          "For as in the Order of Things all might, if they had so
desired, have lived, so also in Belial all have been, or inevitably
shall be, made to die. Amen."

          There is a long silence. Then the Master of Novices rises.
With a great rustling of fur, the seminarists follow suit and start to
walk, two by two, and with the most perfect decorum, toward the west
door.

          Dr. Poole is about to follow them, when he hears a high
childish voice calling his name.

          Turning, he sees the Arch-Vicar beckoning from the steps of
the pulpit.

          "Well, what did you think of the lecture?" squeaks the great
man, as Dr. Poole approaches.

          "Very fine."

          "Without flattery?"

          "Really and truly."

          The Arch-Vicar smiles with pleasure.

          "I'm glad to hear it," he says.

          "I specially liked what you said about religion in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries -- the retreat from Jeremiah to the
Book of Judges, from the personal and therefore the universal to the
national and therefore the internecine."

          The Arch-Vicar nods.

          "Yes, it was a pretty close shave," he says. "If they'd stuck
to the personal and the universal, they'd have been in harmony with the
Order of Things, and the Lord of Flies would have been done for. But
fortunately Belial had plenty of allies -- the nations, the churches,
the political parties. He used their prejudices. He exploited their
ideologies. By the time they'd developed the atomic bomb, he had people
back in the state of mind they were in before 900 B.C."

          "And then," says Dr. Poole, "I liked what you said about the
contacts between East and West -- how He persuaded each side to take
only the worst the other had to offer. So the East takes Western
nationalism, Western armaments, Western movies and Western Marxism; the
West takes Eastern despotism, Eastern superstitions and Eastern
indifference to individual life. In a word, He saw to it that mankind
should make the worst of both worlds."

          "Just think if they'd made the best!" squeaks the Arch-Vicar.
"Eastern mysticism making sure that Western science should be properly
used; the Eastern art of living refining Western energy; Western
individualism tempering Eastern totalitarianism." He shakes his head in
pious horror. "Why, it would have been the kingdom of heaven. Happily
the grace of Belial was stronger than the Other One's grace."

          He chuckles shrilly; then laying a hand on Dr. Poole's
shoulder, he starts to walk with him toward the vestry.

          "You know, Poole," he says, "I've got to be very fond of you."
Dr. Poole mumbles his embarrassed acknowledgements.

          "You're intelligent, you're well educated, you know all kinds
of things that we've never learned. You could be very useful to me and,
on my side, I could be very useful to you -- that is," he adds, "if you
were to become one of us."

          "One of you?" Dr. Poole repeats doubtfully.

          "Yes, one of us."

          Comprehension dawns on an expressive close-up of Dr. Poole's
face. He utters a dismayed "Oh!"

          "I won't disguise from you," says the Arch-Vicar, "that the
surgery involved is not entirely painless, nor wholly without danger.
But the advantages to be gained by entering the priesthood would be so
great as to outweigh any trifling risk or discomfort. Nor must we
forget. . ."

          "But, Your Eminence. . ." Dr. Poole protests. The Arch-Vicar
holds up a plump, damp hand.

          "One moment, please," he says severely. His expression is so
forbidding that Dr. Poole hastens to apologise.

          "I beg your pardon."

          "Granted, my dear Poole, granted."

          Once again the Arch-Vicar is all amiability and condescension.

          "Well, as I was saying," he goes on, "we must not forget that,
if you were to undergo what I may call a physiological conversion, you
would be delivered from all the temptations to which, as an unmutated
male, you will most certainly be exposed."

          "Quite, quite," Dr. Poole agrees. "But I can assure you. . ."

          "Where temptations are concerned," says the Arch-Vicar
sententiously, "nobody can assure anyone of anything."

          Dr. Poole remembers his recent interview with Loola in the
cemetery, and feels himself blushing.

          "Isn't that rather a sweeping statement?" he says without too
much conviction.

          The Arch-Vicar shakes his head.

          "In these matters," he says, "one can never be too sweeping.
And let me remind you of what happens to those who succumb to such
temptations. The bulls' pizzles and the burying squad are always in
readiness. And that is why, in your own interests, for your future
happiness and peace of mind, I advise you -- nay, I beg and implore you
-- to join our Order."

          There is a silence. Dr. Poole swallows hard.

          "I should like to be able to think it over," he says at last.

          "Of course, of course," the Arch-Vicar agrees. "Take your
time. Take a week."

          "A week? I don't think I could decide in a week."

          "Take two weeks," says the Arch-Vicar, and when Dr. Poole
still shakes his head, "Take four," he adds, "take six, if you like. I'm
in no hurry. I'm only concerned about you." He pats Dr. Poole on the
shoulder. "Yes, my dear fellow, about you."

          Dissolve to Dr. Poole at work in his experimental garden,
planting out tomato seedlings. Nearly six weeks have passed. His brown
beard is considerably more luxuriant, his tweed coat and flannel
trousers considerably dirtier, than when we saw him last. He wears a
gray homespun shirt and moccasins of local manufacture.

          When the last of his seedlings is in the ground, he
straightens himself up, stretches, rubs his aching back, then walks
slowly to the end of the garden and stands there motionless, looking out
at the view.

          In a long shot, we see, as it were through his eyes, a wide
prospect of deserted factories and crumbling houses, backed in the
distance by a range of mountains that recedes, fold after fold, toward
the east. The shadows are gulfs of indigo, and in the richly golden
lights the far-off details stand out distinct and small and perfect,
like the images of things in a convex mirror. In the foreground,
delicately chased and stippled by the almost horizontal light, even the
baldest patches of parched earth reveal an unsuspected sumptuousness of
texture.

NARRATOR

          There are times, and this is one of them, when the world seems
purposefully beautiful, when it is as though some mind in things had
suddenly chosen to make manifest, for all who choose to see, the
supernatural reality that underlies all appearances.

          Dr. Poole's lips move and we catch the low murmur of his
words.

         

          " 'For love and beauty and delight

          There is no death nor change; their might

          Exceeds our organs, which endure

          No light, being themselves obscure.'"

          He turns and walks back toward the entrance to the garden.
Before opening the gate, he looks cautiously around him. There is no
sign of an unfriendly observer. Reassured, he slips out and almost
immediately turns into a winding path between sand dunes. Once again his
lips move.

          " 'I am the Earth,

          Thy mother; she within whose stony veins

          To the last fibre of the loftiest tree,

          Whose thin leaves trembled in the frozen air,

          Joy ran, as blood within a living frame,

          When thou didst from her bosom, like a cloud

          Of glory, arise, a spirit of keen joy.'"

          From the footpath Dr. Poole emerges into a street flanked by
small houses, each with its garage and each surrounded by the barren
space that was once a plot of grass and flowers.

          " 'A spirit of keen joy,' " he repeats and then sighs and
shakes his head.

NARRATOR

          Joy? But joy was murdered long ago. All that survives is the
laughter of demons about the whipping posts, the howling of the
possessed as they couple in the darkness. Joy is only for those whose
life accords with the given Order of the world. For you there, the
clever ones who think you can improve upon that Order, for you, the
angry ones, the rebellious, the disobedient, joy is fast becoming a
stranger. Those who are doomed to reap the consequences of your
fantastic tricks will never so much as suspect its existence. Love, Joy
and Peace -- these are the fruits of the spirit that is your essence and
the essence of the world. But the fruits of the ape-mind, the fruits of
the monkey's presumption and revolt are hate and unceasing restlessness
and a chronic misery tempered only by frenzies more horrible than
itself.

          Dr. Poole, meanwhile, continues on his way.

          " "The world is full of woodmen,'" he says to himself,

          " "The world is full of woodmen, who expel

          Love's gentle dryads from the trees of life

          And vex the nightingales in every dell.'"

NARRATOR

          Woodmen with axes, dryad-killers with knives,
nightingale-vexers with scalpels and surgical scissors.

          Dr. Poole shudders and, like a man who feels himself dogged by
some malevolent presence, quickens his pace. Suddenly he halts and once
more looks about him.

NARRATOR

          In a city of two and a half million skeletons the presence of
a few thousands of the living is hardly perceptible. Nothing stirs. The
silence is total and, in the midst of all these cosy little bourgeois
ruins, seems conscious and in some sort conspiratorial.

          His pulses quickened by hope and the fear of disappointment,
Dr. Poole turns off the road and hurries along the drive that leads to
the garage of Number 1993. Sagging on their rusted hinges, the double
doors stand ajar. He slips between them into a musty twilight. Through a
hole in the west wall of the garage a thin pencil of late afternoon
sunshine reveals the left front wheel of a Super de Luxe Four-Door
Chevrolet Sedan and, on the ground beside it, two skulls, one an
adult's, the other evidently a child's. Dr. Poole opens the only one of
the four doors which is not jammed and peers into the darkness within.

          "Loola!"

          He climbs into the car, sits down beside her on the
disintegrated upholstery of the back seat, and takes her hand in both of
his.

          "Darling!"

          She looks at him without speaking. In her eyes there is an
expression almost of terror.

          "So you were able to get away after all?"

          "But Flossie still suspects something."

          "Damn Flossie!" says Dr. Poole in a tone that is intended to
be carefree and reassuring.

          "She kept asking questions," Loola goes on. "I told her I was
going out to forage for needles and cutlery."

          "But all you've found is me."

          He smiles at her tenderly and raises her hand to his lips; but
Loola shakes her head.

          "Alfie -- please!"

          Her tone is a supplication. He lowers her hand without kissing
it.

          "And yet you do love me, don't you?"

          She looks at him with eyes that are wide with a frightened
bewilderment, then turns away.

          "I don't know, Alfie, I don't know."

          "Well, I know," says Dr. Poole decidedly. "I know I love you.
I know I want to be with you. Always. Till death do us part," he adds
with all the fervour of an introverted sexualist suddenly converted to
objectivity and monogamy.

          Loola shakes her head again. "All I know is that I oughtn't to
be here."

          "But that's nonsense!"

          "No, it isn't. I oughtn't to be here now. I oughtn't to have
come those other times. It's against the Law. It's against everything
that people think. It's against Him," she adds after a moment's pause.
An expression of agonised distress appears on her face. "But then why
did He make me so that I could feel this way about you? Why did He make
me like those -- like those --" She cannot bring herself to utter the
abhorred word. "I used to know one of them," she goes on in a low voice.
"He was sweet -- almost as sweet as you are. And then they killed him."

          "What's the good of thinking about other people?" says Dr.
Poole. "Let's think about ourselves. Let's think how happy we could be,
how happy we actually were two months ago. Do you remember? The
moonlight. . . And how dark it was in the shadows! And in the soul a
wild odour is felt beyond the sense. . . !"

          "But we weren't doing wrong then."

          "We're not doing wrong now."

          "No, no, it's quite different now."

          "It isn't different," he insists. "I don't feel any different
from what I did then. And neither do you."

          "I do," she protests -- too loudly to carry conviction.

          "No, you don't."

          "I do."

          "You don't. You've just said it. You're not like these other
people -- thank God!"

          "Alfie!"

          She makes a propitiatory sign of the horns.

          "They've been turned into animals," he goes on. "You haven't.
You're still a human being -- a normal human being with normal human
feelings."

          "I'm not."

          "Yes, you are."

          "It isn't true," she wails. "It isn't true."

          She covers her face with her hands and starts to cry.

          "He'll kill me," she sobs.

          "Who'll kill you?"

          Loola raises her head and looks apprehensively over her
shoulder, through the rear window of the car.

          "He will. He knows everything we do, everything we even think
or feel."

          "Maybe He does," says Dr. Poole, whose Liberal-Protestant
views about the Devil have been considerably modified during the past
few weeks. "But if we feel and think and do the right thing, He can't
hurt us."

          "But what is the right thing?" she asks.

          For a second or two he smiles at her without speaking.

          "Here and now," he says at last, "the right thing is this."

          He slips an arm about her shoulders and draws her toward him.

          "No, Alfie, no!"

          Panic-stricken, she tries to free herself; but he holds her
tight.

          "This is the right thing," he repeats. 'It mightn't always and
everywhere be the right thing. But here and now it is -- definitely."

          He speaks with the force and authority of complete conviction.
Never in all his uncertain and divided life has he thought so clearly or
acted so decisively.

          Loola suddenly ceases to struggle.

          "Alfie, are you sure it's all right? Are you absolutely sure?"

          "Absolutely sure," he replies from the depths of his new,
self-validating experience. Very gently he strokes her hair.

          "'A mortal shape,'" he whispers, "'indued with love and life
and light and deity. A Metaphor of Spring and Youth and Morning, a
Vision like incarnate April.'"

          "Go on," she whispers.

          Her eyelids are closed, her face wears that look of
supernatural serenity which one sees upon the faces of the dead.

          Dr. Poole begins again.

          " 'And we will talk, until thought's melody

          Become too sweet for utterance, and it die

          In words, to live again in looks, which dart

          With thrilling tone into the voiceless heart,

          Harmonising silence without a sound.

          Our breath shall intermix, our bosoms bound

          And our veins beat together, and our lips

          With other eloquence than words, eclipse

          The soul that burns between them, and the wells

          Which boil under our being's inmost cells,

          The fountains of our deepest life, shall be

          Confused in Passion's golden purity;

          As mountain springs under the morning sun,

          We shall become the same, we shall be one

          Spirit within two frames, oh! Wherefore two?' "

          There is a long silence. Suddenly Loola opens her eyes, looks
at him intently for a few seconds, then throws her arms round his neck
and kisses him passionately on the mouth. But even as he clasps her more
closely, she breaks away from him and retreats to her end of the seat.

          He tries to approach, but she holds him at arm's length.

          "It can't be right," she says.

          "But it is right."

          She shakes her head.

          "It's too good to be right, I should be too happy if it were.
He doesn't want us to be happy." There is a pause. "Why do you say He
can't hurt us?"

          "Because there's something stronger than He is."

          "Something stronger?" She shakes her head. "That was what He
was always fighting against -- and He won."

          "Only because people helped Him to win. But they don't have to
help Him. And, remember, He can never win for good."

          "Why not?"

          "Because He can never resist the temptation of carrying evil
to the limit. And whenever evil is carried to the limit, it always
destroys itself. After which the Order of Things comes to the surface
again."

          "But that's far away in the future."

          "For the whole world, yes. But not for single individuals, not
for you or me, for example. Whatever Belial may have done with the rest
of the world, you and I can always work with the Order of Things not
against it."

          There is another silence.

          "I don't think I understand what you mean," she says at last,
"and I don't care." She moves back toward him and leans her head against
his shoulder. "I don't care about anything," she goes on. "He can kill
me if He wants to. It doesn't matter. Not now."

          She raises her face towards his and, as he bends down to kiss
her, the image on the screen fades into the darkness of a moonless
night.

 

NARRATOR

          L'ombre etait nuptiale, auguste et solennelle. But this time
it is a nuptial darkness whose solemnity is marred by no caterwaulings,
no Liebestods, no saxophones pleading for detumescence. The music with
which this night is charged is clear, but undescriptive; precise and
definite, but about realities that have no name; all-embracingly liquid,
but never viscous, without the slightest tendency to stick possessively
to what it touches and comprehends. A music with the spirit of Mozart's,
delicately gay among the constant implications of tragedy; a music akin
to Weber's, aristocratic and refined, and yet capable of the most
reckless joy and the completest realisation of the world's agony. And is
there perhaps a hint of that which, in the Ave Verum Corpus, in the
G-minor Quintet, lies beyond the world of Don Giovanni? Is there a hint
already of what (in Bach, sometimes, and in Beethoven, in that final
wholeness of art which is analogous to holiness) transcends the Romantic
integration of the tragic and the joyful, the human and the daemonic?
And when, in the darkness, the lover's voice whispers again of

a mortal form indued

With love and life and light and deity,

is there already the beginning of an understanding that beyond
Epipsychidion there is Adonais and beyond Adonais, the wordless doctrine
of the Pure in Heart?

          Dissolve to Dr. Poole's laboratory. Sunlight pours through the
tall windows, and is dazzlingly reflected from the stainless steel
barrel of the microscope on the work table. The room is empty.

          Suddenly the silence is broken by the sound of approaching
footsteps; the door is opened and, still a butler on moccasins, the
Director of Food Production looks in.

          "Poole," he begins, "His Eminence has come to. . ."

          He breaks off and an expression of astonishment appears on his
face.

          "He isn't here," he says to the Arch-Vicar who now follows him
into the room.

          The great man turns to the two Familiars in attendance on him.

          "Go and see if Dr. Poole is in the experimental garden," he
orders.

          The Familiars bow, squeak, "Yes, Your Eminence," in unison,
and go out.

          The Arch-Vicar sits down and graciously motions to the
Director to follow his example.

          "I don't think I told you," he says; "I'm trying to persuade
our friend here to enter religion."

          "I hope Your Eminence doesn't mean to deprive us of his
invaluable help in the field of food production," says the Director
anxiously.

          The Arch-Vicar reassures him.

          "I'll see that he always has time to give you the advice you
need. But meanwhile I want to make sure that the Church shall benefit by
his talents and. . ."

          The Familiars re-enter the room and bow.

          "Well?"

          "He isn't in the gardens, Your Eminence."

          The Arch-Vicar frowns angrily at the Director, who quails
under his look.

          "I thought you said this was the day he worked in the
laboratory?"

          "It is, Your Eminence."

          "Then why is he out?"

          "I can't imagine, Your Eminence. I've never known him to
change his schedule without telling me."

          There is a silence.

          "I don't like it," the Arch-Vicar says at last. "I don't like
it at all." He turns to his Familiars. "Run back to Headquarters and
have half a dozen men ride out on horseback to find him."

          The Familiars bow, squeak simultaneously, and vanish.

          "And as for you," says the Arch-Vicar, turning on the pale and
abject figure of the Director, "if anything should have happened, you'll
have to answer for it."

          He rises in majestic wrath and stalks toward the door.

          Dissolve to a series of montage shots.

          Loola with her leather knapsack and Dr. Poole, with a
pre-Thing army pack on his back, are climbing over a landslide that
blocks one of those superbly engineered highways, whose remains still
scar the flanks of the San Gabriel mountains.

          We cut to a windswept crest. The two fugitives are looking
down over the enormous expanse of the Mojave desert.

          Next we find ourselves in a pine forest on the northern slope
of the range. It is night. In a patch of moonlight between the trees,
Dr. Poole and Loola lie sleeping under the same homespun blanket.

          Cut to a rocky canyon, at the bottom of which flows a stream.
The lovers have halted to drink and fill their water bottles.

          And now we are in the foothills above the floor of the desert.
Between the clumps of sage brush, the yuccas and the juniper bushes the
walking is easy. Dr. Poole and Loola enter the shot, and the Camera
trucks with them as they come striding down the slope.

          "Feet sore?" he asks solicitously.

          "Not too bad."

          She gives him a brave smile, and shakes her head.

          "I think we'd better stop pretty soon and eat something."

          "Just as you think best, Alfie."

          He pulls an antique map out of his pocket and studies it as he
walks along.

          "We're still a good thirty miles from Lancaster," he says.
"Eight hours of walking. We've got to keep up our strength."

          "And how far shall we get tomorrow?" Loola asks.

          "A little beyond Mojave. And after that I reckon it'll take us
at least two days to cross the Tehachapis and get to Bakersfield." He
returns the map to his pocket. "I managed to get quite a lot of
information out of the Director," he goes on. "He says those people up
north are very friendly to runaways from Southern California. Won't give
them back even when the government officially asks for them."

          "Thank Bel. . . I mean, thank God," says Loola.

          There is another silence. Suddenly Loola comes to a halt.

          "Look! What's that?"

          She points and from their viewpoint we see at the foot of a
very tall Joshua tree, a slab of weathered concrete, standing crookedly
at the head of an ancient grave, overgrown with bunch grass and
buckwheat.

          "Somebody must have been buried here," says Dr. Poole.

          They approach and, in a close shot of the slab, we see, while
Dr. Poole's voice reads aloud the following inscription:

WILLIAM TALLIS

1882-1948

Why linger, why turn back, why shrink, my Heart?

Thy hopes are gone before: from all things here

They have departed, thou shouldst now depart!

          Cut back to the two lovers.

          "He must have been a very sad man," says Loola.

          "Perhaps not quite so sad as you imagine," says Dr. Poole, as
he slips off his heavy pack and sits down beside the grave.

          And while Loola opens her knapsack and takes out bread and
fruit and eggs and strips of dried meat, he turns over the pages of his
duodecimo Shelley.

          "Here we are," he says at last. "It's the very next stanza
after the one that's quoted here.

         

          "'That Light whose smile kindles the Universe

          That Beauty in which all things work and move

          That Benediction, which the eclipsing Curse

          Of birth can quench not, that sustaining Love,

          Which through the web of being blindly wove

          By man and beast and earth and air and sea,

          Burns bright or dim, as each are mirrors of

          The fire for which all thirst, now beams on me

          Consuming the last clouds of cold mortality.'"

          There is a silence. Then Loola hands him a hard boiled egg. He
cracks it on the headstone and, as he peels it, scatters the white
fragments of the shell over the grave.


