The Grey Eminence By Aldous Huxley

A Study in Religion and Politics

[]


Table of Contents

-   CHAPTER I On the Road to Rome
-   CHAPTER II Childhood and Youth
-   CHAPTER III The Religious Background
-   CHAPTER IV The Evangelist
-   CHAPTER V The Approach to Politics
-   CHAPTER VI The Two Collaborators
-   CHAPTER VII La Rochelle
-   CHAPTER IX Nothing Fails Like Success
-   CHAPTER X Politics and Religion
-   CHAPTER XI The Final Scene
-   Appendix
-   Translation


CHAPTER I

On the Road to Rome

THE friar had kilted up his habit, and his bare legs were muddy to the
knees. After the spring rains, the road was like a swamp. It had been
like a lime-kiln, he reflected, last time he walked this way. He
recalled the poem he had written on another of his journeys.

“Quand au plus chaud du jour l’ardente canicule
Fait de l’air un faurneau,
Des climats basanes mon pied franc ne recule,
Quoy que je coule en eau. ¹ ”

That summer of 1618, when the three of them had taken the road for Spain
I Poor Brother Zeno of Guingamp had died of sunstroke at Toulouse. And a
week later, near Burgos, Father Romanus had fallen sick with dysentery.
In three days it was all over. He had limped into Madrid alone. And
alone he was now to limp into Rome. For Father Angelus had had to be
left behind with the Capuchins of Viterbo, too sick of the ague to walk
another step. God bring him soon to health again !

“Ni des Alpes neigeux, ni des hauts Pirennées
Le front audacieux ‘
N’a pu horner le cours de mes grandes journées,
Qui tendent jusqu’ aux cieux.
Cher Seigneur, si ta main m’ enfonça la blessure
De ce perçant dessein,
J’ ay droit de te montrer ma tendre meurtrissure
Et discouvrir mon sein. ²”

‘La blessure de ce perçant dessein,’ he repeated to himself. The phrase
was particularly felicitous. Almost Latin in its pregnancy-like one of
those phrases of Prudentius ….

The Capuchin sighed profoundly. That wound, he reflected, was still
open, and, goaded by the barb of God’s piercing design, he was still
hurrying, at the rate of fifteen leagues a day, across the face of
Europe. When would that design he carried into execution? When would it
he granted to another Godefroy of Bouillon to storm Jerusalem? Not yet
awhile, to all appearances -not till the wars were over, not till the
House of Austria should he humbled and France grow strong enough to lead
the nations on the new Crusade. How long, O Lord, how long?

He sighed again, and the sadness of his thoughts was reflected upon his
face. It was the face of a man in middle life, weathered, gaunt with
self-inflicted hardship, lined and worn with the incessant labour of the
mind. Beneath the broad, intellectual forehead, the prominent blue eyes
were widely opened, almost staring. The nose was powerfully aquiline.
Long and unkempt, a reddish beard already grizzled, covered his cheeks
and chin; but the full-lipped, resolute mouth suggested a corresponding
firmness of the jaw beneath. It was the face of a strong man, a man of
firm will and powerful intelligence; a man also, under the second nature
imposed by a quarter-century of the religious life, of powerful passions
and a fierce intensity of feeling.

Bare-footed -for he had taken off his sandals and was carrying them in
his hand-he walked on through the mud, engrossed in his melancholy
thoughts. Then, recollecting himself, he suddenly realized what he was
doing. Who was he to criticize God’s ways? His sadness was a
recrimination against Providence, a flying in the face of that divine
will, to obey which was the only purpose of his life. And it must be
obeyed without reluctance, whole-heartedly, joyfully. To be sad was a
sin and, as such, an obstacle between his soul and God. He halted and
for more than a minute stood there in the road, covering his face with
his hands. His lips moved; he was praying to be forgiven.

When he walked on, it was in a contrite mood. The natural man, he was
thinking, the old Adam -what a sleepless hostility to God one carried
about in the depths of one’s own mind and body! What a fixed resolve to
sin I And what resourcefulness in the art of sinning, what skill, when
one temptation had been overcome, in discovering another and more subtle
evil to surrender to! There was no remedy but in perpetual vigilance.

Sentinels for ever on guard against the stratagems of the enemy Timeo
Danaos et Jona Firentes. But there was also the great ally, the Divine
friend, without whose aid the garrison must infallibly be destroyed. Oh,
ask him in Open the gates I Sweep clean the streets and garnish the town
with flowers. The sun came out from behind the clouds. The Capuchin
looked up and, from its position in the sky, calculated that the time
must be a little after two o’clock. Rome was still three leagues away.
There was no time to stop. He would have to practise his annihilation in
the Essential Will as he walked. Well, it would not be the first time.

He repeated the Lord’s Prayer slowly and aloud; then addressed himself
to the opening phase of his exercise, the act of pure intention. To do
the will of God, the exterior will, the interior will, the essential
will. To do it for the sake of God alone, and without reference to what
he himself desired, or hoped, or might gain in this world or the next.
To annihilate himself in all he thought and felt and did, so that there
should be nothing left but the instrument of God’s will and a soul
united by God’s grace with that divine substance, which was identical
with the divine, essential will. He held his mind unwaveringly upon that
resolution, while he walked a furlong or more. Then words came once
again. ‘To expose myself to God, to prepare my soul for his coming,
watchfully and with reverence. To tum myself, naked of every other
design, every other feeling and thought and memory, towards such
radiance of divine love and knowledge as God may vouchsafe to give. And
even if he should vouchsafe to give me nothing, even if it should be his
will to leave me without light or consolation, to turn towards him none
the less with thankfulness and in perfect faith. Qui adlit Uret Deo,
unus spiritus est ³.’ To adhere, he repeated, to adhere from the act of
pure intention he passed to that of adoration and humility. ‘God for his
own sake and not with any thought of myself.’ For what was this self of
his? A nothing-but an active nothing, capable of sin and therefore
capable of cutting itself off from the All. An active nothing that had
to be annihilated into passive nothingness, if God’s will was to be
done.

He had worked hard to annihilate that active nothing, and God in his
great mercy had granted him many favours strength to control at least
the grosser impulses of nature, sensible consolations, visions and
revelations, access at moments to the outskirts of the divine presence.
But for all that, his active nothingness still persisted; he was still
capable of negligence and imperfection, even of such downright
wickedness as complacency in the recollection of his own work and God’s
past favours. The old Adam knew how to make use even of the soul’s
efforts to annihilate the Old Adam, and by taking pride in those
efforts, was able to undo their results and strengthen his own
resistance to God. Nay, the very graces of God could be turned, unless
the soul was unremittingly on guard, into a stumbling block and a source
of grievous sins and imperfection.

The Son of God, the incarnate source of all grace-how had he proclaimed
his divinity? By humility, by adoration and love of God. ‘Love, love,
love,’ the Capuchin repeated, ‘humility and love, humility of the
nothing before the all, love and adoration of the all by the nothing,
love.’

Horny like a savage’s from their incessant marching and counter-marching
across the face of Europe, his bare feet splashed through the puddles,
stepped unflinching on the stones, treading the beat of the reiterated
words. ‘Love, Christ’s love, love … .’ It was said that the Cardinal
Nephew had been offended by the behaviour of His Catholic Majesty’s
ambassador. ‘Christ’s love, Christ’s love … .’ These Spaniards were for
ever undoing themselves by their stupid arrogance. ‘Love, love, love…’
Well, so much the better for France. All at once he perceived that the
words he was still repeating to himself had become separated from his
thoughts, that the flame he had been cherishing was extinguished.

‘Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things; but
one thing is needful.’ He excluded the Cardinal Nephew and the Spanish
Ambassador, and re-established the connection between his thoughts and
his words. ‘Love, love, love, Christ’s love … .’ The little flame was
alight again. He kept it burning unwaveringly while he walked a quarter
of a mile.

Then it was time to pass on to operation-the repudiation of distracting
thoughts and the resolve to banish them from the mind.

The Cardinal Nephew and the Spanish Ambassador.

More than five and twenty years had passed since Father Benet of
Canfield had taught him how to pray. More than five and twenty years
-and his mind was not yet completely under control, the devils of
distraction still had power, sometimes, to intrude even into the
sanctuary of orison. There was no final remedy but the grace of God.
Meanwhile, one could only resolve to banish the distracting thoughts
each time they found their way past the defences. If one persisted in
the struggle, if one worked hard and patiently, it would be counted, no
doubt, as a merit. God knew one’s weaknesses and the efforts one made to
overcome them.

Headed in the opposite direction, a train of pack animals from the City
jingled slowly past him. The muleteers interrupted their talk for a
moment and respectfully doffed their hats. Half blind, as he was, with
too much straining over books and documents, the friar saw their gesture
as a blur of movement against the sky. Recognizing its intention, he
raised a hand in blessing; then went back once again to his orison.

In the form of prayer he was accustomed to use, an act of discursive
meditation succeeded the preparatory exercises. Today the perfection he
had chosen as his theme was love. Following the established order of his
discourse, he addressed himself first of all to the consideration of God
as the source of love.

Paternoster, qui es in cœlo. Qui es in cœlo. God, the eternal and
Infinite Being. But when a finite being abandoned itself to the Infinite
Being, Infinite Being was apprehended as Love.

Thus, Infinite Being was at the same time a loving Father-but of
children so rebellious and ungrateful that they were for ever doing all
in their power to shut themselves out from his love.

They shut themselves out from his love and, by that act, to cut
themselves off from their own happiness and salvation. ‘All manner of
virtue and goodness,’ the Capuchin repeated in a whisper, ‘and even that
Eternal Good which is God himself, can never make a man virtuous, good,
or happy, so long as it is outside the soul.’

He raised his head for a moment. In the blue gap of rainwashed sky
between the clouds, the sun was gloriously bright.

But if one chose to drop one’s eyelids against the light, so why, then
one was blind, one walked in darkness. God was love; but the fact could
be fully known only to one who himself loved God.

This thought served as a bridge between the first stage of his
meditation and the second, between God as the source of love and his own
shortcomings as a lover’ of God. He loved God insufficiently because he
was insufficiently detached from the world of creatures in which he had
to do his work. “Factus est in pac; locus ejus.⁴ ” God can be perfectly
loved only by a heart that has been sanctified by the divine presence;
and God is present only in a heart at peace. He is excluded by anxiety,
even when that anxiety is a concern about the works of God. God’s work
must be done; but if it is not done in the peace of perfect detachment,
it will take the soul away from God.

He himself had come nearest to that perfect detachment in the days when
he had worked at preaching and spiritual instruction. But now God had
called him to these more difficult tasks in the world of great events,
and the peace of detachment had become increasingly difficult of
achievement. To dwell in the essential will of God while one was
negotiating with the Duke of Lerma, say, or the Prince of Condé -that
was hard indeed. And yet those negotiations had to be undertaken; they
were a duty, and to do them was God’s exterior will. There could be no
shrinking from such tasks. If peace eluded him while he undertook them,
it was because of his own weakness and imperfection.

That highest degree of orison-the active annihilation of self and all
creatures in the essential will of God-was still beyond him. There was
no remedy but God’s grace, and no way to earn God’s grace but through
constant prayer, constant humility, constant love. ‘Only so could God’s
kingdom come in him, God’s will be done.

It was time to pass to. the third phase of his meditation-reflection on
the Saviour’s acts and sufferings as related to the love of God. Fiat
voluntas tua.⁵ Once in the world’s history God’s will had been done,
fully and completely; for God had been loved and worshipped by one who,
being himself divine, was able to give a devotion commensurate with its
object.

The image of Calvary rose up before the friar’s mind-the image that had
haunted him ever since, as a tiny child, he had first been told of what
wicked men had done to Jesus. He held the picture in his imagination,
and it was more real, more vivid than what he actually saw of the road
at his feet. ‘Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.’ Pity
and love and adoration suffused his whole being, as with a sensible
warmth that was at the same time a kind of pain. Deliberately, he
averted the eyes of his mind. The time had not yet come for such an act
of affection and will. He had still to consider, discursively, the ends
for which the Saviour had thus suffered. He thought of the world’s sins,
his own among them, and how he had helped to hew the cross and forge the
nails, to plait the scourge and the crown of thorns, to whet the spear
and dig the sepulchre. And yet, in spite of it, the Saviour loved him
and, loving, had suffered, suffered, suffered. Had suffered that the
price of Adam’s sin might be paid. Had suffered that, through his
example, Adam’s children might learn how to conquer evil in themselves.
‘Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much.’ Loving,
one was forgiven; forgiven, one became capable of forgiving; forgiving,
one could open one’s soul to God; opening one’s soul to God, one could
love yet more intensely and so the soul could climb a little higher on
the ascending spiral that led towards perfect union. Ama et Jae quod
vis. ‘Let there be love,’ he repeated, modulating his orison out of
Meditation into Affection, transforming it from an act of the discursive
intellect into an act of loving, self-renouncing will ‘Let there be
love. And taking his own lovelessness, taking the malignantly active
nothing that was himself, he offered it up as a sacrifice, as a burnt
offering to be consumed in the fire of God’s love.

Lose life to save it. Die, that life may be hid with Christ in God. Die,
die, die. Die on the cross of mortification, die in the continuous and
voluntary self-noughting of passive and active annihilation.

Die, die, die, die .

In an act of pure contrition he begged God’s forgiveness for being still
himself, Joseph of Paris, and not yet wholly the instrument of the
divine will, at peace even in action, detached even in the turmoil of
business.

Die, help me to die, help me to love so that I may be helped to die. He
laid lovelessness upon an inward altar and prayed that it might be
consumed, prayed that from its ashes might arise a new birth of love.

Trotting up from behind, came a young horseman, gaily plumed, with a
silver-studded saddle and the damascened butts of two fine pistols in
his holsters. He interrupted his whistling to shout a friendly good-day.
The other did not answer, did not even raise his bowed head.

‘What, is he deaf?’ cried the horseman, as he drew up level with the
friar. Then, for the first time, he saw the face under the grey hood.
The spectacle of those lowered lids, those lips almost imperceptibly
moving in prayer, that expression of intense and focussed calm, abashed
the young man into silence.

He mumbled a word of apology, raised his hat, as though to the image in
a wayside shrine, and crossed himself; then set spurs to his horse and
cantered away, leaving the friar to perfect his act of self-immolation
undisturbed.

How delicately the sacrifice had to be performed. How subtly,
effortlessly, unabruptly ! There were occasions when violence might be
used to take the Kingdom of Heaven; but this was not one of them.
Violent annihilation of the self would defeat its own purpose; for such
violence belonged to the merely human will, and to make use of it would
only strengthen that will against the will of God. In this act of
self-abnegation, a man must somehow operate without effort; or rather he
must permit himself to be operated, passively, by the divine will …

In the matter of the Valtelline, of course, His Holiness had more reason
to fear the union between Spain and Austria than to be angry with the
French for ousting a papal garrison.

The Cardinal Nephew would probably. The friar became aware, once again,
that concern with God’s work had drifted like a dark eclipsing cloud
between himself and God. Checking his first movement towards a
passionate self-reproach that would only have made the eclipse
completer, he gently changed the focus of his inner vision, looking past
the Cardinal Nephew, past the Valtelline and Spain and France towards
the pure will of God beyond and above and within them. The cloud drifted
away; he was exposed once more to the light. Patiently, delicately, he
opened himself to its purifying and transforming radiance.

Time passed, and a moment came at length when it seemed to him that he
was fit to go on to the next stage of contemplation. The mirror of his
soul was cleansed; the dust and vapours that ordinarily intervened
between the mirror and that which it was to reflect had been laid to
rest or dissolved. If he now turned his soul to Christ, the divine form
would be reflected clearly and without blasphemous distortion; the image
of the crucified Saviour would be within him, imprinting itself upon his
will, his heart, his understanding, a divine model to be imitated, a
spirit to inform and quicken. Tenaciously he held the beloved image
behind his half-closed eyelids; and this time he permitted himself the
happiness of that adoration, intense to the point of physical pain, that
boundless bliss and agony of compassion, from which he had had to turn
in the earlier, discursive part of his exercise. Suffering, suffering.

Tears filled his eyes. Suffering of the Son of God, of God himself
incarnate as man. Suffering endured by the loving Saviour of all
sinners, this darkest sinner among them. Recede a me, quia homo peccator
sum.⁷ And yet the Saviour name, and took this leper in his arms, and
knelt before him, and washed his feet. Tu mihi lavas pedes? ⁸ These feet
that have walked in wickedness, that are all caked with the filth of sin
and ignorance?

Yes, and not only washes his feet, but, for the sinner’s sake, permits
himself to be taken, judged, mocked, scourged and crucified. He came
back to the Calvary in his heart, to the suffering, the suffering of his
God. And the annihilation for which he had striven seemed now to be
consummated in a kind of rapture of devotion and compassion, love and
pain. He was absorbed into a blissful participation in the sufferings of
God incarnate of God incarnate and therefore at the same time of the
pure essential Godhead out of which the God-Man had proceeded.

That body upon the cross was the invisible made visible. Calvary was
bathed in the uncreated light, irradiated by it, consubstantial with it.
Absorbed into its source and ground, the crucified Christ was
annihilated in the light, and there was nothing but the shining rapture
of love and suffering.

Then, as it were, re-condensing, the light took form again in Jesus
crucified, until a new transfiguration once more assimilated Calvary
with the glory that surrounded it.

Striding along, the friar’s body measured out with its bare feet the
furlongs and the minutes, the hours and the miles.

Within, his soul had reached the fringes of eternity and, in an ecstasy
of adoration and anguish, contemplated the mystery of the incarnation. A
donkey brayed; the outriders in front of a coach sounded their bugles;
someone shouted and there was a sudden outburst of women’s laughter.
Under the Capuchin’s hood, there was a distant consciousness of these
things. Eternity receded. Time and self came gliding in again to take
its place. Reluctantly, the friar raised his head and looked about him.
His myopic eyes discerned a house or two and the movement of men and
animals on the road before him. He looked down again and, to cushion the
shock of this abrupt return from one world to another, reverted to a
discursive meditation on the Word made Flesh.

At the Milvian bridge a group of soldiers had been posted to keep check
on all incoming travellers from the North. The Capuchin answered their
questions fluently, but with a foreign accent that automatically aroused
suspicion. He was taken to the guard-room to give an account of himself.
The officer in charge touched his hat as the friar entered, but did not
rise or remove his booted feet from the table on which he had propped
them. Standing before him, his hands crossed over his breast, the
traveller explained that his name was Father Joseph,that his convent was
in Paris, that he had been sent by his superiors to attend a meeting of
the Chapter General of his order. The officer listened, picking his
teeth, as he did so, with a silver-gilt toothpick. When the Capuchin had
finished, he touched his hat again, belched and said that, while of
course he had no reason whatever to doubt the truth of the Reverend
Father’s words, the existence of certain malefactors, certain brigands,
certain (he made an emphatic flourish with the toothpick) certain
enemies of God and man, who did not scruple to hide their wickedness
under the Franciscan habit, made it necessary for him to ask for the
Reverend Father’s papers. The Capuchin hesitated for a moment, then
inclined his head in acquiescence. Opening his habit at the neck, he
reached into an inner pocket. The packet which he brought out was
wrapped in blue damask and tied with a white silk ribbon. The officer
raised his eyebrows as he took it, then smiled. Undoing the ribbon, he
remarked facetiously that there had been a time when he carried his
mistresses’ love letters in just such a packet as this. Now, with a
jealous wife in his bed and his mother-in-law actually living in the
house.

Suddenly the smile on his fat face was replaced by a look of
astonishment that gave place to one positively of alarm. The object he
had extracted from the packet was a letter sealed with the royal arms of
France and addressed, with the most magnificent flourishes, to His
Holiness Urban VIII. He glanced apprehensively at the friar, then back
again at that formidable superscription, that portentous seal; then with
a great jingling and clatter he took his feet off the table, sprang out
of his chair and, removing his hat, made a deep bow.

‘Forgive me, Reverend Father,’ he said. ‘If I had only known… If only
you had made it clear from the outset.’ ‘There is also a letter to His
Eminence the Cardinal Nephew,’ said the Capuchin. ‘And another, if you
will give yourself the trouble of looking, to His Most Christian
Majesty’s Ambassador. And finally a passport delivered to myself and
signed by His Eminence the Cardinal Minister’ At each name the officer
made another obeisance.

‘If I had known,’ he kept on repeating, while the friar gathered up the
letters, ‘if had only known .. .’ Breaking off, he rushed to the door
and began shouting furiously at his men. When the Capuchin left the
guard-room, he found his way across the bridge lined on either side by a
company of papal musketeers. He halted for a moment, humbly acknowledged
the officer’s salute, raised a hand in blessing, and then crossing his
arms on his breast, he bowed his head and, without looking to right or
left, hurried forward noiselessly on his bare feet between the double
row of pikes.


CHAPTER II

Childhood and Youth

Any given event in any part of the universe has as its determining
conditions all previous and contemporary events in all parts of the
universe. Those, however, who make it their business to investigate the
causes of what goes on around them habitually ignore the overwhelming
majority of contemporary and antecedent happenings. In each particular
case, they insist, only a very few of the determining conditions are of
practical significance. Where simple events are concerned this is true
enough. Here, for example, is a boiling kettle. We want to find out why
it boils. We investigate, discover a lighted gas ring, make experiments
which seem to prove that there is an invariable connection between
boiling and a rise of temperature.

After which we affirm that the ‘cause’ of ebullition in kettles is a
neighbouring source of heat. The statement is crude, but adequate for
most practical purposes. In the case of simple events, we can ignore all
but one or at most a very few of their determining conditions, and still
have sufficient understanding of them to enable us to control them for
our practical purposes.

This is not true, however, in the case of complex events.

Here, the determining conditions which have a practical significance are
much more numerous. The most complex events with which we have to deal
are events of human history. If we wish to establish the determining
conditions of, say, the war of 1914-1918, we are compelled, even for
such purely practical purposes as the framing of future policies, to
consider a great variety of ‘causes,’ past and contemporary, local and
remote, psychological, sociological, political, economic. To determine
the full list of these practically significant ‘causes,’ their relative
importance, their mode of interaction -this is an exceedingly difficult
task. So difficult, indeed, as to be quite beyond the capacity of the
human mind in its present state of development.

But, alas, the insolubility of a problem has never deterred men and
women from confidently propounding solutions. The method adopted is
always the same that of over-simplification.

Thus, all but the immediate antecedents of the event under consideration
are ignored, and history is treated as though it began only yesterday.
At the same time, all embarrassing complexities are mentally abolished.
Men are reduced to convenient abstractions.

The varieties of temperament, talent and motivation are flattened into
uniformity. The event is thus made to seem simple enough to admit of
explanation in terms of a very few ‘causes,’ perhaps even of only one.
This theoretical conclusion is then used as a guide for future action.
Not unnaturally the results are disappointing.

To over-simplify is fatal, and it is impossible to determine fully and
correctly all the practically significant causes of complex events. Are
we then doomed never to understand our history and therefore never to
profit by the experiences of the past? The answer is that, although
understanding will probably never be complete, we can yet understand
enough for some at least of our practical purposes. For example, we can
probably find out enough about the causes of our recent catastrophes to
be able (if we so desire) to frame policies at least a little less
suicidal than those we have pursued in the past.

No episode in history can be entirely irrelevant to any other subsequent
episode. But some events are related, for our practical purposes, more
significantly than others. This friar, for example, whom we have just
left on the Milvian Bridge -he seems, heaven knows, sufficiently remote
from our contemporary preoccupations. But in truth, as we shall find if
we look into his biography a little closely, his thoughts and feelings
and desires were among the significantly determining conditions of the
world in which we live today. The road trodden by those bare horny feet
of his led immediately to the Rome of Urban VIII. More remotely, it led
to August 1914 and September 1939. In the long chain of crime and
madness which binds the present world to its past, one of the most
fatally important links was the Thirty Years’ War. Many there were who
worked to forge this link; none worked harder than Richelieu’s
collaborator, François Leclerc du Tremblay, known in religion as Father
Joseph of Paris, and to anecdotal history as l’Eminence Grise.

But this is by no means his only claim to our attention. If Father
Joseph had been nothing more than an adept at the game of power
politics, there would be no compelling reason for singling him out from
among a number of concurrents. But the friar’s kingdom was not like the
kingdoms of ordinary power politicians, exclusively of this world. Not
merely intellectually, but by actual, direct acquaintance, he knew
something of the other world, the world of eternity. He passionately
aspired to become, and in some measure, with a part of his being, he
actually was, a citizen of the Kingdom of Heaven. Alone of power
politicians, Father Joseph was able to provide, out of the depths of his
proper experience, the final, objective criterion, in relation to which
his policies could be judged. He was one of the forgers of one of the
most important links in the chain of our disastrous destiny; and at the
same time he was one of those to whom it has been given to know how the
forging of such links may be avoided. Doubly instructive in the fields
of politics and religion, his life is further interesting as the
strangest of psychological riddles-the riddle of a man passionately
concerned to know God, acquainted with the highest forms of Christian
gnosis, having experienced at least the preliminary states of mystical
union, and at the same time involved in court intrigue and international
diplomacy, busy with political propaganda, and committed whole-heartedly
to a policy whose immediate results in death, in misery, in moral
degradation were plainly to be seen in every part of seventeenth century
Europe, and from whose remoter consequences the world is still suffering
today.

It was in the spring of 1625 that Father Joseph plodded southward on his
third visit to Rome. His business there was diplomatic and religious. On
behalf of the French government he had come to talk about the Valtelline
and the passes connecting Spanish-controlled Italy with the Hapsburg
empire beyond the Alps. On behalf of his order he had come to get leave
to found some missions. On his own account, he had come to talk with the
Pope and the Cardinal Nephew about his own favourite scheme of a crusade
against the Turks. Wherever he went in Rome, he would speak with
authority, would be heard with deference and attention. This bare-footed
monk was the confidential adviser and right-hand man of Cardinal
Richelieu.

Moreover, long before Richelieu came to power, he had been the confidant
and agent of Marie de Medicis and a number of other great personages of
almost equal importance. Richelieu had been President of the Council of
State for only a year; but Father Joseph of Paris had been known and
appreciated at the Roman Curia for more than ten. Now in 1625, he was
forty-eight, and he still had thirteen years of life before him
-thirteen years of life that were also to be years of steadily
increasing political power. Before half that time had passed, he was
destined to take his place among the five or six most important men in
Europe -among the two or three most generally and cordially detested.
But before we trace the later stages of this strange career, let us go
back to the beginnings.

François Leclerc du Tremblay was born on the fourth of November 1577,
the eldest son of Jean Leclerc, Chancellor of the Duc d’Alençon and
Premier President des Requetes du Palais, and of Marie de La Fayette,
his wife. On his father’s side he came from a distinguished line of
lawyers and administrators.

His mother’s family belonged, not to the noblesse de robe, but to the
landed nobility. Claude de La Fayette, her father, was the possessor of
four baronies, one of which was bequeathed to his grandson, François,
who was known, during his brief sojourn at Court, as the Baron de
Maffliers. Claude de La Fayette and his wife, Marie de Suze, were
Calvinists; but having been blessed with six daughters and, despite the
four baronies, little money, they had had Marie brought up in the
Catholic religion, so that she might enter a convent and so spare them
the expense of a dowry. It may be remarked in passing that such
transactions were not uncommon in the France of this period. Civil wars
of religion might be fought, Huguenots alternately massacred and
tolerated. But all the time French families continued to keep their eyes
unflinchingly on the main chance. Thus in parts of the country where
Catholics and Protestants were pretty evenly divided, parents would
bring up their daughters without any definite religion. When a
satisfactory suitor presented himself, a girl could be hurriedly trained
and confirmed in whichever faith her future husband happened to profess.
Not a very ‘heroic’ way of settling denominational differences in a
mixed community; but at any rate it worked, it made for peace and quiet.

It has been fashionable for some time past to believe that the causes of
strife are generally, even invariably, economic. This is far from true.
Many disputes are purely ideological in origin. In these cases
considerations of economic advantage will often intervene in the
happiest manner to mitigate the furies of theological hatred.

Marie de La Fayette was saved from the convent by a distant cousin of
her mother’s, no less a person than the one-time favourite of Francis I,
Anne, Duchess of Etampes. This superannuated royal concubine was now a
benevolent old lady of nearly seventy and a good friend of the Leclercs.
It was she who arranged the match between her young cousin and Jean
Leclerc, she who supplemented Marie’s meagre dowry by a considerable
settlement from her own purse. The marriage, which turned out to be a
happy one, was celebrated in 1574, and the first child was born, as we
have seen, in 1577 and christened François.

(Was the choice of that particular name intended as a delicate
compliment to the old Duchess? Who knows?) A sister, Marie, entered the
world in the following year. Charles, the youngest of the Leclercs’
three children, was not born until 1684.

François, as he emerged from babyhood, revealed himself as a strange and
very remarkable little boy. At once active and introverted, he loved to
be up and doing, but he loved at the same time to be left alone, so that
he could think his own thoughts. Isolated even in company, he lived in
nobody could discover what private world of his own. This secretiveness
was not, however, incompatible with powerful emotions. He passionately
loved his father and mother; he was deeply attached to his home, to the
family servants, to the dogs and horses, the pigeons and the tame ducks,
the falcons. Violent impulses, gusts of consuming passions not only of
love, but of hatred and anger too, were an important element of that
private world of his; but they existed, even in childhood, behind an
iron wall of self-control, of voluntary reserve, unexpressed in words or
those countless little actions by means of which the outward-turning
nature gives vent so easily to its emotions. François only ‘let himself
go’ in situations where other people were not immediately and personally
involved. He could be ardently enthusiastic about things and ideas; but
he shrank from what he felt to be the indecency of expressed emotional
intimacy with other human beings.

Intellectually, the child was almost preternaturally bright and
precocious. At the age of ten he was chosen by his schoolmasters to
deliver an hour-long funeral oration on Ronsard, in Latin, before a
large and brilliant audience. If the large and brilliant audience had
been able to understand him, he could have delivered an equally
effective oration in Greek, a language he had learnt at almost as ‘early
an age as John Stuart Mill and by the same conversational methods as had
been used to teach Montaigne his Latin.

Along with his intellectual precocity there went a no less extraordinary
forwardness in matters of religious devotion. At the age of four, we are
told, the child was brought down to the dinner table one day when his
parents were entertaining a distinguished company of guests. Let us try
to visualize the scene, to translate it from the telegraphic shorthand
in which Father Joseph’s first biographer records it into language a
little more adequate to the events described. Next to his proud but
rather anxious mother sits the tiny boy, dressed already in a miniature
edition of a grown man’s clothes and looking almost indecently ‘cute’ in
his claret-coloured doublet and starched ruff. From the other end of the
table his father tells him to get up and he obeys with a baby solemnity
that delights them all. They ask him what he means to do when he is a
man, how he likes his baby sister, when he is going to learn to ride.
Finally, a magistrate puts him a question with a double meaning. The
innocence of the answer raises a laugh which the child is utterly at a
loss to understand. Tears comes into his eyes; his mother takes him on
her knee and kisses him. The guests go back to their eating and the
child is set down on stool and given a sweetmeat, which he eats in
silence. His presence is forgotten. Then, suddenly, in a lull of the
conversation, he shouts down the table to his father: may he tell
there's something? Marie tries to check him; but Jean Leclerc is
indulgent: little François shall tell them whatever he likes. The child
stands up on his stool. Smiling, the guests prepare the heckle and
applaud. After the first few words their faces become suddenly serious,
and they listen in silence, profoundly touched The little boy is telling
them a story he has just heard from on of the servants of the house, the
story of the Passion. He tells of the scourging, the crown of thorns. As
he describes the crucifixion, his voice trembles and, all at once, he
breaks down into irrepressible sobbing. His mother takes him into her
arms an tries to comfort him; but for this unhappiness there seems to be
no consolation. In the end she has to carry him from the room.

The child is father of the man. This tiny boy, grief-stricked by the
story of his Saviour’s death, was destined to become the co-founder and,
for many years, the guardian and spiritual director of a new reformed
order of nuns, the Calvarians, whose principal devotion was to be
directed to the suffering mother at the foot of the cross. He was also
destined to become a states man, absorbed in the most dangerous kind of
power politics and to all appearances quite indifferent to the appalling
sufferings for which his policy was responsible. The child in tears for
Jesus the grown man meditating himself, and teaching others to meditate
upon the sufferings endured on Calvary-were these the father and the
brother of Richelieu’s collaborator, of the man who did everything in
his power to prolong the Thirty Year War? This is a question to which,
in its proper place, we shall have to try to find an answer. Meanwhile,
our immediate concern is with a sixteenth-century boyhood. At the age of
eight, François de Tremblay was sent to boarding school in Paris. Or,
rather, he went there at his own wish; for he actually asked to leave
home, on the ground that he was being spoilt by his mother, qui en
voulut faire un délicat.

Once more the child is father of the man. This little Spartan was to
come to manhood as the militant Capuchin, eager to undertake all kinds
of supererogatory self-mortification, was to grow up as the tonsured and
bare-footed politician who, even at the height of his power, even in the
extremities of sickness and fatigue, consistently refused to accept for
himself any mitigation of his order’s Franciscan rule.

At the College de Boncourt François learned more Greek and Latin and was
no doubt as mercilessly beaten, bullied and ill-fed as little boys were
in most of the boarding schools of the period. Among his fellow pupils
and friends at Boncourt was one of whom we shall hear a good deal in a
later chapter of this book, Pierre de Berulle, future Cardinal, founder
of the Oratory, and the most influential member of the French School of
mysticism, which flourished during the first half of the seventeenth
century. Like François, Pierre was precociously serious-minded. From
childhood his piety had been at once ardent and intellectual,
spontaneous and learned. At twelve, we are told by a young Protestant
lady, who afterwards became a Carmelite, he could discuss theology like
a doctor of the Sorbonne. At eighteen he was a controversialist so
powerful and acute that Huguenot ministers were afraid of meeting him in
public debate.

Pierre was two years older than François, even more intelligent and no
less precocious. Moreover, like the younger boy, he was already
passionately religious and serious beyond his years. Their friendship
was that of two future theologians and mystics. One conjures up a
picture of these strange children, squatting apart, in a corner of the
school’s high-walled playground. The other urchins play ball or exchange
those imbecile witticisms which small boys find so exquisitely funny.
With a passionate earnestness and in high treble voices, Pierre and
François discuss the deepest problems of metaphysics and religion. When
François was ten, there occurred an event which must have provided them
with food for many such discussions of the significance of life and the
nature of God and man. In 1587 Jean Leclerc du Tremblay died. ‘François
loved his father with all the repressed violence of which his
passionate, inward-turning nature was capable. His grief on this
occasion was profound; and when the first paroxysm was past, there
remained with him, latent at ordinary times, but always ready to come to
the surface, a haunting sense of the vanity, the transience, the
hopeless precariousness of all merely human happiness.

This precocious conviction that ours is a fallen world was confirmed by
all that François heard or saw around him. All over France the Leaguers
and the Huguenots, assisted by their foreign allies, were busily engaged
in trying to do to their unhappy country what the Lutherans and
Imperialists, with their allies, were to do a generation later to
Germany. For a variety of reasons, the Leaguers and the Huguenots did
not succeed in destroying France, as Father Joseph’s political friends
and enemies were later to succeed in destroying Germany. Fifteen years
of peace and good management under Henry IV were sufficient to restore
the country to prosperity-to fatten it up like a Christmas turkey,
against the coming of Richelieu’s tax collectors. But while the
religious wars lasted, France had to endure all the horrors of massacre
and depredation, of plague and famine, of lawlessness and political
anarchy. Those who had to live through this bloody chaos came to
appreciate the virtues of order and of that institution of monarchy,
which alone at that time could bring them the order they desired. At the
same time the presence of foreigners -Spaniards, Germans, English, who
kept the wars on French soil going and exploited France’s
weakness-served to stimulate French patriotism. It was in these years of
civil strife and foreign intervention that François Leclerc became what
he was to remain all his life a firm believer in absolute monarchy and
an ardent nationalist. These political convictions were to be
elaborately justified in terms of theology, and this justification was
to give them added strength; but it must always be remembered that they
had their source, not in any abstract theory, but in the brute facts of
the boy’s experience.

In 1585 life in Paris became so dangerous that Mme Leclerc decided to
remove with all her family to Le Tremblay, near Versailles, where she
had a fortified house and a band of tenants and farm hands to protect
her. Here François continued his education under a private tutor to whom
he gave the affectionately respectful nickname of Minos. His studies now
included modem languages, especially Spanish and Italian, both of which
he subsequently learnt to write and speak almost as well as his own
native tongue, the rudiments of Hebrew, philosophy, jurisprudence and
mathematics. In the intervals of study he learned to ride and use the
arquebuse, he wandered in happy solitude through the woods, he indulged
his taste for reading. There were not many books at Le Tremblay; but
among those few was a copy of Plutarch’s Lives in translation and a
collection of Christian biographies, mostly of hermits. These two books
he read and re-read. Plutarch confirmed his innate taste for heroism and
the strenuous life; and under the influence of those hermits, his latent
sense of the world’s vanity grew so strong within him that he felt
inspired to write a little treatise on the advantages of the religious
life. This was completed shortly before his twelfth birthday and was
much admired for its style.

Nobody, not even his mother, had sufficient insight to perceive that the
really significant thing about this juvenile production was not the
absurd, strained elegance of its laboriously imitated form, but its
Early Christian substance. Indirectly, in this rather pretentious little
piece of abstract argumentation, the child had announced his own
intention of some day entering religion.

Two and a half years later, when he was fourteen, he made his first,
premature attempt to carry out that intention. This very significant
episode was recorded by François himself when, eight years after the
event, as a Capuchin novice, he was ordered by his superiors to write an
account of his vocation. The document, which bears the curious title
Discours en forme d’ Exclamation, is still extant. Briefly, this is the
story it tells of the events of 1591.

Mme Leclerc was away from home on business, and had left her three
children in the care of one of the neighbouring Squires. It was a gay
household, noisy with a whole troop of young girls, Among these there
was one, of about François’s own age, at whom the boy found himself
looking with an ever-increasing persistence. He had known her from
childhood (she was probably a distant cousin); but up till that moment
neither she nor any other girl had aroused his special interest. This
time it was different. In the penitential language of his autobiography,
‘his concupiscences took fright’ and ‘quivering with a confused
well-being, he saw this girl with eyes quite different from those which
had been his before.’ It was one of those overwhelming passions of
adolescence -passions which it is the stupid custom of adults to deride
under the name of ‘calf love,’ but which are often more violent, more
agonizingly intense than anything experienced in later life. When Juliet
loved and died, she was no older than François Leclerc at the time of
his first and final excruciation of the heart-just fourteen. ‘Her whole
face,’ wrote the Capuchin novice in his Discourse in the form of an
Exclamation, ‘her whole face shone, her looks darted lightning.’ In a
little while François ‘had no eyes but for her; his ears were deaf to
every utterance but hers; he had given her all his heart, and except in
her he could find no rest.’

From the first, it was an uneasy passion, troubled with the sense of
guilt. Those Plutarchian heroes were there to remind him that love is
the enemy of high ambition; those hermits proclaimed the vanity of human
wishes; and when he prayed, the old facility of communication between
his soul and its God and Saviour was lost. That transfigured face, that
young voluptuous body, the smell of her hair, the wild beating of his
own heart -these stood in the way of his prayers, ‘filling the whole
field of inward vision, eclipsing God. Then one day something happened.
He was playing at cards with the whole troop of them, half a dozen
jeunes filles en fleur, his own beloved among them, ‘laughing and
joking, open mouthed,’ when suddenly, without apparent cause, he became
aware of what he was doing, and with a fearful lucidity perceived its
utter senselessness. He was appalled. Most of us, I suppose, have had a
similar experience have woken up all of a sudden from the sleep of
everyday living into momentary awareness of the nature of ourselves and
our surroundings.

_It is a party in a parlour,_

 

Crammed just as they on earth were crammed,

 

Some sipping punch, some sipping tea,

 

And all as silent as could be,

 

All silent and all damned.

 

Suddenly to realize that one is sitting, damned, among the other
damned-it is a most disquieting experience; so disquieting that most of
us react to it by immediately plunging more deeply into our particular
damnation in the hope, generally realized, that we may be able, at least
for the time, to stifle our revolutionary knowledge. François was one of
those to whom such a course is impossible. The devastating consciousness
of what he was doing was succeeded almost immediately by a sense of the
presence of God -a sense which gave him such extraordinary joy, that
there, at the card table, he almost fainted. His companions noticed his
sudden pallor and insisted on taking him out into the open air. The
bells were ringing for Vespers as they came out into the garden.
François at once suggested that they should all go to church. Kneeling
there, before the altar, he felt within him the pull of two conflicting
loves, profane and sacred. Beside him knelt the girl whose pretty little
face his own passion had transfigured till it shone for him, like the
face of one who had seen God; before him, above the altar, was the
figure of the crucified Saviour. There was a struggle that ended finally
in François seeing nothing but’ Christ’s feet nailed to the cross and
seemingly awaiting him, Christ’s arms outspread to receive him.’ To that
image of suffering he made a vow consecrating himself definitively to
the service of God.

Returning to the house, he immediately began his preparations for
running away to Paris. He would creep out at night, he would exchange
clothes with the first poor boy he met on the road; he would walk the
twenty miles to the city and ask to be taken in at that Carthusian
monastery, which he had often visited as a child, five or six years
before. It was a mad scheme, and the servant to whom he confided it that
evening lost no time in telling him as much. François, whose native
impetuosity was always held in check by excellent judgment, saw that it
would he wrong for him to fullfil his vow in this surreptitious way, and
decided not to go. Next day he was given an opportunity to fight God’s
battle against his inclinations. A great feast was being given in the
neighbourhood, and all the young people were invited.

There would be dancing, no doubt, and music, and wine, and
lights-festive excitements all the more intoxicating for being so rare
in the lives of these country-bred children. And, of course, at night,
on the way home, languid with excess of gaiety, what opportunities, in
the lurching coach, for secret whispers in the dark, for hand-holding
and surreptitious contacts ! For the lover, it was an occasion not to be
missed at any cost; that was why, even at the risk of seeming
discourteous and a prig, young François resolved to miss it. He prayed
much that day for strength, and when the girls were dressed in all their
finery and the coach was at the door, he was able to say no to all
entreaties, even those of the beloved. In the end they had to drive away
without him. It was a victory-but a victory that was succeeded a day or
two later by defeat. For before the week was out, he was as much the
slave of his passion as he had ever been. The only difference was that
he suffered more acutely than in the past from the reproaches of his
conscience.

This painful state of things lasted for four months. At the end of this
time two events occurred, two accidents which the Capuchin novice could
only regard as providential. Playing with his arquebus, François came
very near to killing his own mother. (Mme Leclerc had returned and they
were living again at Le Tremblay.) And almost at the same time a band of
marauding soldiers passed near the house and unloaded from their packs,
among other unwanted articles of plunder, a tattered volume, called
Barlaam and Josaphat.

In his intense thankfulness for the preservation of his mother’s life
from the effects of his own negligence, François renewed his vows. -
This time there was no going back on them. So violently did he break
away from the bondage of the preceding months that he could ‘scarcely
bear even to look at’ the girl whose caresses he had so ardently desired
only a short time before. At the same time he conceived a real horror of
women in general and of the love of the sexes. This horror was to remain
with him all his life. He could forget it, of course, in the
contemplation of God; but when he was out in the world, separated from
the divine presence, the old aversion continued to haunt him. In later
life, Father Joseph shrank from too close and direct contact even with
his own sister. ‘I do not care,’ he used to say, ‘I do not care to see
the sex’ (that curious seventeenth-century name for women must have
given him a peculiar satisfaction) ‘except shut up and curtained from
sight, like so many mysteries not to be regarded save with a kind of
horror.’ In other words, the only satisfactory woman was a cloistered
woman, and the only tolerable way to enjoy female company was through
the wicket of a confessional or the bars of a convent parlour.
Otherwise, ‘they should only be visited like wild beasts, whom one is
content to see without approaching.’ The intensity of Father Joseph’s
aversion was proportionate, no doubt, to the intensity of his early
passion and the amount and violence of the force he had to use against
himself in order to master it.

And now for that old book, which the soldiers threw aside as they passed
Le Tremblay. François picked it up, read it, and at once, as he says,’
fell in love with it.’ It was as though the voice of God were speaking
from its pages, confirming him in his resolution and, for his
consolation, expatiating upon the peace and happiness of the spiritual
life. In modern times a whole literature has sprung up around the pious
tale which finally determined the future Father Joseph’s

vocation. Barlaam and Josaphat is a major historical curiosity.

For this medieval romance about an Indian prince who leaves the life of
pleasure, to which his too solicitous father has condemned him, and who
embraces the contemplative life under the direction of a hermit, is
nothing more nor less than a Christianized biography of Gautama Buddha.
Not only in its main lines, but in detail and actually in phrasing,
Barlaam and Josaphat follows the Sanskrit of the Lalita Vistara. Nor is
this all. The very name of the prince reveals his identity. The story
had been originally translated into Greek from an Arabic version, and
the Arabic letters for Y and B are easily confused. Josaphat is the
corruption of Bodisat. Barlaam’s disciple is the Bodisatva or future
Buddha. It is one of the tragedies of history that Christendom should
never have known anything of Buddhism beyond this garbled version of the
semi-legendary biography of its founder. In the teachings of primitive,
southern Buddhism, Catholicism would have found the most salutary
correctives for its strangely arbitrary theology, for its strain of
primitive savagery inherited from the less desirable parts of the Old
Testament, for its incessant and dangerous preoccupations with torture
and death, for its elaborately justified beliefs in the magic efficacy
of rites and sacraments. But, alas, so far as the West was concerned,
the Enlightened One was destined, until very recent times, to remain no
more than the hero of an edifying fairy tale. In fact Henri IV had heard
his mass and was in Paris. Order was restored; the city became safe to
live in. Mme Leclerc came back to town, and François was sent to
continue his studies in what the wars of religion had left of the
University-which was so little that, after a few months, the young man
decided to remove to another educational establishment, the Academy
conducted by Antoine de Pluvinel.

In sixteenth-century France an Academy was a kind of finishing school
for young gentlemen. The studies included horsemanship and mathematics,
fortification and fencing, military drill, calligraphy and good manners.
At Pluvinel’s, the most aristocratic and fashionable of all the
Academies in France, the regular course of instruction lasted two years;
but the already brilliantly accomplished François Leclerc du Tremblay
was able to take his degree in gentlemanliness in less than one. By the
autumn of 1495 he was ready for the Grand Tour. Accompanied by a trusted
old servant and ten or twelve other young noblemen of his own age, he
set out for Italy. And what about Barlaam and Josaphat? What about the
hermits, and that treatise on the religious life and his vows at the
foot of the crucifix? Had they slipped his memory? Had he pushed them
impatiently aside along with the other foolishnesses of childhood? Not
at all. Nothing had been forgotten, and the old resolutions still stood.
He was only waiting for the right moment, the final and unmistakable
call. It might come very soon; it might be delayed perhaps for years.
Meanwhile he would obey his mother and do his best to perform all the
duties of the estate into which he had been born. For the other young
men in his company, this jaunt to Italy was the first exciting
opportunity to be free of parental control, and free, what was more, in
that promised land of the Sonnetti Lussuriosi and Giulio Romano’s
engravings. For François, on the contrary, it was merely another stage
in a process of education that was to equip him, physically and
mentally, to accomplish, in some yet undetermined sphere, the will of
his God and Saviour. Strong in the vow of chastity he had made after the
incident with the arquebus, strong too in his horror and dread of women,
he had no fear of the temptations to which his companions, as they rode
southward from Paris, were already gleefully promising themselves to
succumb. Italy would teach him only what it was right and necessary for
him to learn; nothing more.

Once over the border, François did not waste his time.- In Florence he
studied the language, fencing and, above all, the art of horsemanship,
for which, at that period, the Italians were famed above all others. He
was an excellent rider and had a passion for horseflesh and all the
niceties of equitation -a passion which he was soon compelled to
sacrifice to his religious vocation; for a Capuchin might travel only on
his own bare feet. From Florence he proceeded to Rome, where he had an
opportunity of learning something of the papal foreign office, a model
of diplomatic sharp practice unrivalled by anything of its kind in
Europe. Turning northward again, François stopped at Loretto for
religious reasons; at Bologna, to visit the university; at Ferrara, to
pay his respects to the Duke and inspect His Highness’s museum of
natural history; and at Padua, for a considerable stay to study
jurisprudence. The letters which François sent at this time to his
mother have been lost. It is a pity; for it would be interesting to know
if he made the acquaintance of Galileo, who was then teaching at Padua,
or what were the subjects discussed at those informal meetings which
were regularly held, out of school hours, at the houses of the
professors.

From Padua, the young man proceeded to Venice, which was full of exiled
Byzantine scholars and was consequently the best place in all Europe for
studying Greek. From Venice he crossed the Alps into Germany, of which
he saw enough at least to know what the country looked like before the
Thirty Years’ War. Less than a year after his departure he was back
again in Paris.

When the young Baron de Maffliers was presented at court, he made an
excellent impression. Gabrielle d’Estrées, the king’s young mistress
(she was only two years older than François himself), called him ‘the
Cicero of France and of his age.’ The Monarch expressed himself less
emphatically, but he too took approving notice of the youth. It was not
to be wondered at François was not only handsome, in a finely
aristocratic and aquiline style; he was also very intelligent; behaved
himself with discretion beyond his years; had the most exquisite
manners; and could converse delightfully about anything-but without ever
abandoning that reserve, without ever departing from that caution, with
which he tempered his enthusiasms, his teeming imagination, his impulses
to immediate action. Years later, Cardinal Richelieu had two nicknames
for his old friend and collaborator’ Ezechiely’ and
‘Tenebroso-Cavernoso.’

The names were admirably chosen to describe that curiously complex
nature. Ezechiely was the enthusiast, the visionary, the Franciscan
evangelist and mystic; Tenebroso-Cavernoso, the man who never gave
himself away, the poker-faced diplomatist, the endlessly resourceful
politician. These two strangely dissimilar personalities inhabited the
same body, and their incongruous conjunction was an important element in
the character of the man whose destiny we have set ourselves to follow.

François spent a full year at court. It was an instructive interlude. In
that very co-educational school of the Louvre, he learned all kinds of
useful lessons to listen with an air of respectful interest to royal
bores; to suffer high-born fools gladly; to pay delicate compliments to
the ladies whose much-exposed bosoms filled him with such an intensity
of fascinated disgust; to pick the brains of the well informed without
appearing to be inquisitive; to discriminate between the important and
the unimportant, the genuinely powerful and the merely showy. For the
future Secretary of State and diplomat, such knowledge was
indispensable.

Early in 1597 François was given an opportunity to continue his
education in yet another field; he was sent to get his first taste of
war at the siege of Amiens. This fortress, full of munitions and
military stores, had been betrayed by a supporter of the League to the
Spaniards, who were in turn besieged by a French army under the command
of the Constable, Montmorency. Now, Montmorency was the husband of that
legitimized daughter of Henri II who, twenty years before, had
graciously condescended to be François Leclerc’s godmother. He took the
boy under his personal care and was much gratified by the way in which
he conducted himself throughout the siege. Men began to prophesy that
this young Baron de Maffliers would make a first-rate soldier.

Amiens fell in due course, and its fall was an excellent occasion for
concluding the war, of which both Henri IV and Philip II were heartily
tired. Henri IV, however, had allies, without whose consent he could not
make peace. Of these allies, the most important was Elisabeth of
England, who had reasons of her own for wishing to prolong hostilities.
To secure Elizabeth’s assent to peace, Henri IV dispatched to London a
seasoned diplomat, Hurault de Maisse, who happened to be a distant
relative of the du Tremblays. François made use of the connection to get
himself attached to the ambassador’s retinue, and in the autumn of this
same year, Is 97, he landed in England. For a young man in search of an
education, London provided golden opportunities. The court was
frequented by accomplished and even learned men, with whom one could
talk in Latin about Erasmus and the Iliad and the new edition of Aulus
Gellius. The Elizabethan drama was in full eruption, and the
distinguished foreign guests were frequently treated to the, for them,
somewhat bewildering spectacle. And all the while, of course, Hurault de
Maisse was busily negotiating with the Queen and her ministers; François
was given the opportunity of studying diplomacy in action and from the
inside. Finally, there was the old royal harridan, to whom it was the
attache’s special duty to pay court. She, for her part, was delighted to
converse with so handsome a young man, so exquisitely brought up and
with such an extraordinary mastery of those dead and living languages,
which she herself knew so well and was so fond of talking. (When Hurault
de Maisse complimented her on this accomplishment, Elizabeth
characteristically answered that there was nothing remarkable in
teaching a woman to speak; the difficulty was to make her hold her
tongue.)

For any other young man, that brief visit in London would have been
nothing but a most amusing and perhaps instructive adventure. And, in
effect, that was what it was for François Leclerc during the first week
or two of his stay. He was excited by the strangeness of all he saw,
pleased with his own success, charmed and delighted by the people with
whom he came in contact. He enjoyed himself in England, and he liked the
English.

And precisely because he liked them, his happy exhilaration at being
among them suddenly evaporated. These pleasant, friendly people, who
spoke Latin with such a deliciously comic accent-they were all heretics,
and therefore all irrevocably doomed. The whole nation was doomed.
Millions upon millions of men, women and children sunk in a spiritual
darkness, through which there was only one road, and that road led
directly to everlasting torment. François was appalled at the thought,
and his old sense of the vanity of human wishes, the transience and
illusoriness of what is commonly called happiness, came back upon him
with redoubled intensity. Consider these English. How tranquilly they
passed their time, as though all were well with them. And yet, within a
few short years every one of them would be in hell. As for himself, kind
Providence had decreed that he should be born a Catholic. But even that
inestimable godsend was no sufficient guarantee of real happiness.

He was only potentially saved. To the very last moment of his life, sin
might undo the effects of baptism. Hell remained not indeed the
certainty it was for Elizabeth and the aged Burleigh and all the rest of
them, but a terrifying possibility, even a probability if he continued
to lead his present worldly life. Wealth, honours, military glory, the
flattering attentions of a king, the compliments of a royal paramour
-what was the worth of such trifles in comparison with eternal salvation
and the doing of God’s will on earth?

It was with such questions ringing in his ears that the Baron de
Maffliers returned to France in the first weeks of 1598. Arriving in
Paris, he went at once to see his confessor, Dr. Andre Du Val, who
listened attentively to what he said and gave him to read a little book
that had been published during his absence in England. It was entitled
Bref Discours sur l’ Abnégation intérieure, and its author was none
other than Pierre de Berulle, then a young priest, studying theology at
the Sorbonne. Inward abnegation! The words seemed magically apposite.
François read the book and then re-read it, with passion. It was another
Barlaam and Josaphat -but with the added advantage that its author was
alive and in Paris. At once he sought out his old schoolfellow. Berulle
received him with delight; and from that time forth, François was seen
no more at court, and avoided all the acquaintances he had made there.
Consciously and deliberately, he was preparing for the moment, which he
now divined was very close at hand, the solemn moment when he should be
called to break with his past and begin an entirely new existence.

The little world into which he was now introduced by Berulie and Du Val
was a truly extraordinary society, composed for the most part of people
in whom the highest intellectual powers were accompanied by an intense
religious fervour and, in some cases, by rare and striking spiritual
gifts. Its central figure was a woman, Mme Acarie, and it was around her
that the others, men and women, lay and religious, respectfully
gravitated. Born in 1566, Barbe Avrillot was married at the age of
sixteen to a man who, like her own father, belonged to the noblesse de
robe.

Pierre Acarie was one of those restless, clever fools, who have to be
continually ‘doing something,’ and whose total lack of judgment makes
them always choose to do something futile or disastrous. Most of his
large fortune he dissipated in financing persuasive swindlers.
Passionately the politician, he espoused the cause of the League with so
much ardour that, after the triumph of Henri VI, he was deprived of his
post, exiled from Paris and, committing some further imprudence, came
near to losing all that remained of his property and even his life. He
owed his safety to the untiring efforts of a wife whom he had
consistently maltreated. It was not until she was twenty-two that Mme
Acarie discovered her religious vocation. Reading a book of devotion,
she came upon the phrase: ‘ Trop est avare a qui Dieu ne suffit’-too
covetous is he to whom God is not enough. The effect of these words was
extraordinary; ‘it was as though God had struck her with a thunderbolt.’
She became a different person -one who knew by immediate intuition that
the kingdom is within, that God can be progressively experienced, that
it is the duty of human beings to begin here and now the unimaginable
task of becoming ‘perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect.’

At the time of François Leclerc’s return from London, Pierre Acarie had
been in exile for more than three years and his wife and six children,
temporarily reduced to complete penury, were living with the Berulles.
Their house in the rue Paradis and, later, when Pierre Acarie’s fortunes
had been somewhat restored, the Hotel Acarie became for the religious
life of France what the Hotel de Rambouillet was to be, a generation
later, for French literature and French manners.

Mme Acarie’s influence was felt only by her contemporaries; for, unlike
St. Teresa, whom she resembled in her ceaseless practical activity no
less than in the eminence of her mystical gifts, she left no record of
her experiences in writing. She is known to us only in her biography
(which was written by Dr. Andre Du Val) and in the records left by the
men and women who knew her. From these it is evident that nobody could
be with her, even for a short time, without recognizing that here was a
person, different from ordinary human beings, not only in degree, but
actually in kind. Mme Acarie was one in whom the process of illumination
and sanctification has gone so far that the merely human element is no
more than a thin psycho-physical shell enclosing a core of constantly
realized divine immanence.

Some saints have charmed their contemporaries ; Mme Acarie’s sanctity
was of a more awe-inspiring kind. St. François de Sales, who was her
friend and acted for a time as her confessor, wrote of the ‘infinite
respect’ in which he held her; and it was the same With all who
approached this extraordinary woman. Those who knew little of the
spiritual life were further impressed by the physical phenomena which
often accompanied her mystical states-by those trances and ecstasies,
which she tried so hard to control and which, along with all experienced
directors, then as now, she regarded not so much as a symptom of divine
grace as of her own weakness. (Mme Acarie also received the stigmata,
but managed to conceal the marks from those who surrounded her. The
fact, which she confided to only three people, of whom Berulle was one,
was known only after her death.) Late in the eighteenth century, Barbe
Acarie was formally beatified; unofficially, however, her sanctity had
been universally recognized during her lifetime. Even professors of
theology, like Du Val, could not fail to perceive who and what she was.
In 1594, by a kind of providential practical joke, Du Val, the
fabulously learned schoolman, had been introduced to Mme Acarie.

For the first time in his life, this expert in the science of deity
found himself in the same room with someone whose acquaintance with the
subject was not merely discursive and intellectual, but immediate and
intuitive. Within the first five minutes, he had recognized that,
whereas he himself knew all about God, this woman knew God directly.
With an entirely admirable humility, the theologian placed himself under
the spiritual guidance of the unlearned mystic, and from that time until
her death in 1618, Du Val remained Mme Acarie’s faithful pupil and most
trusted friend.

One of the members of Mme Acarie’s circle was a certain Capuchin friar,
whose name in religion was Father Benet. This Father Benet had been born
in the early fifteen-sixties at Canfield in Essex, the son of a
prosperous squire called Fitch. As a young man, William Fitch went up to
London to study for the law. The reading of some bootlegged volume of
Catholic devotion converted him all of a sudden from a life of
dissipation to seriousness and the old religion. To study Catholic
theology was impossible in England; accordingly the new convert crossed
the Channel and made his way to Douai, where he enrolled himself at the
English college. In 1586 he took the habit of a Capuchin and from the
first days of his novitiate in Paris revealed himself as a man of the
highest spiritual gifts. His contemporary influence was at least as
great as that of Mme Acarie -probably even greater; for, as Bremond puts
it, Benet of Canfield was ‘the master of the masters,’ the teacher of a
whole generation of saintly mystics, who were responsible, by their
doctrine and example, for that great renascence of personal religion,
which revitalized French Catholicism during the first half of the
seventeenth century. Mme Acarie herself was a disciple of Father Benet.
The story of their relationship is a curious one. That phrase, ‘trop est
avare ci qui Dieu ne suffit,’ had opened up for Barbe Acarie the kingdom
of God existing, latent and unrecognized, in her own spirit. The
experience of divine grace was too much for her physical organism;
ecstasies and trances became embarrassingly frequent. Her mother-in-law
showed a pained disapproval; her husband exploded in indignation.

Doctors were summoned and she was bled to the verge of collapse; the
local parson was asked to give her a good talking to, which he did,
sometimes even in public. It was all of no avail ; Mme Acarie continued
to experience mystical graces and, in spite of all her efforts,
continued to be subject to periodical trances and ecstasies. Finally, in
1593, Father Benet was sent for. Already accepted as an authority on
these high spiritual matters, the Capuchin pronounced unhesitatingly
that Mme Acarie’s experiences were of divine origin; and he proceeded to
instruct the young woman in the elements of that mystical theology, of
which her conventionally pious upbringing had left her completely
ignorant. Thanks to Father Benet, Mme Acarie came to know what was
happening to her; how she stood in relation to the mystics who had
preceded her; what spiritual discipline she ought to undertake; and how
she should prepare herself to receive the divine graces.

Berulie owed even more to father Benet than did Mme Acarie. The Capuchin
taught him, not merely the technique of meditation and contemplation,
but also a complete theory of mysticism-a theory which, as we shall see
in the next chapter, differed in certain important respects from the
traditional theology of Dionysius and his followers down to the time of
St. John of the Cross, and whose propagation by Berulie and the members
of his school was to affect the whole future course of Christian
mysticism.

Berulie and Mme Acarie were Father Benet’s most influential pupils; but
there were many, many others of lesser note. ‘God alone knows,’ writes
his contemporary biographer, ‘the number of religious who, with the aid
of his documents, delivered by word of mouth and in writing, have raised
themselves to sublime states of perfection.’

It was from this master of the masters that François Leclerc received
his initiation into the ‘unitive life.’ Father Benet and, to an even
higher degree, Mme Acarie possessed that profound insight into character
which comes to men and women of advanced spirituality, and which is
technically known as the discernment of spirits. It is recorded of Mme
Acarie that she could distinguish infallibly between those who had been
graced with a gift for contemplation and those who had not, and that she
considered it very unwise to impose a mystical education upon the
latter. The fact that Father Benet undertook to teach him, and that Mme
Acarie saw no objection to it, seems on the face of it sufficient proof
that François had in him the makings of a genuine mystic. It is the
business of his biographer to discover why and in the name of what
religious principle this potential John of the Cross preferred to become
the right-hand man of Cardinal Richelieu.

Mme Acarie, as I have said, was an active mystic. The house in the rue
Paradis was the rallying point of all those, lay or religious, who took
an interest in the reform of existing monastic orders or the creation of
new congregations. At the same time, It was the headquarters of a very
efficient organization for the distribution of charity. Contributions
came from the most unexpected sources. For example, each time the King
sat down to play for high stakes, he would propitiate the Almighty and
sacrifice to the goddess of luck by sending five and twenty crowns to
Mme Acarie for her good works. Voluntary helpers distributed the sums
collected and undertook the labour of visiting the poor, the sick, the
imprisoned. It was labour far from light or agreeable. Paris at the
beginning of the seventeenth century was an overgrown medieval city,
undrained, unswept, pestilential and brutalized with overcrowding. The
hospitals were like charnel houses, and the prisons like hells on earth.
It was in this frightful Paris of the poor and the criminal that, as one
of Mme Acarie’s helpers, the youthful Baron de Massiers began a new
chapter of his education. He had tasted successively of learning,
travel, courts, war and diplomacy. Now, under the tutorship of Father
Benet and Mme Acarie, he was being given a first-hand experience of
divine illumination on the one hand and the darkness of human misery and
wickedness on the other.

François Leclerc’s unofficial novitiate was interrupted after a few
months by a curious episode. Secretly, without telling a soul, he left
home and headed post-haste for the south. His destination was the Grande
Chartreuse, in the hills above Grenoble.

Was it on the advice of Du Val or Father Benet or Mme Acarie that the
young man made this decision to become a Carthusian monk? One may be
permitted to doubt it. St. Bruno’s medieval imitation of primitive
Egyptian monasticism had survived almost unchanged through the
centuries, ‘never reformed because never deformed,’ a venerable
institution, but somewhat out of touch with the life of an age which was
busily engaged in modernizing the old religious organizations and
creating a multitude of new ones. His friends in Mme Acarie’s circle
would almost certainly have advised him to join some other, newer order
than the Carthusian. The young man’s choice was probably due in part to
the impression left upon his mind by the visits he had made in childhood
to the Charterhouse of Paris; in part, we may guess, to the fact that,
by taking the Carthusian habit, he would be performing an act of
self-abnegation, the most complete of which he was capable. It was not
that the Carthusian rule was more rigid and mortificatory than all
others. The Capuchins, to take but one example, treated their bodies
with no less severity. But the Capuchins were actives as well as
contemplatives, whereas the Carthusians lived immured and in almost
perpetual silence. To a man of François Leclerc’s ardent temperament and
busy intellect, this total retirement from the world of men must have
seemed the final and absolute sacrifice of self. The child, who had
begged to be sent to a boarding school for fear his mother might turn
him into a mollycoddle, had grown up into this young man, hungry for a
life of confinement, and enforced inactivity-hungry for it precisely
because he knew it would be the most difficult of all for him to bear.

He set out, then, fully resolved to make the supreme sacrifice of all
his inclinations; but on the road, near Nevers, something happened to
make him change his mind. He heard an inward voice telling him to return
at once to Paris, and that he should not enter religion without first
obtaining his mother’s consent. He obeyed. St. Bruno lost a monk, but
St. Francis gained a friar, and Cardinal Richelieu a secretary of state
for foreign affairs.

As François had foreseen, when he left home without taking leave of even
his mother, Mme Leclerc had no intention of helping her eldest son to
abandon a world in which he might reasonably expect to make a brilliant
military or administrative career.

Moreover, she had long been negotiating for an heiress, and now the girl
had been as good as promised her. With the dowry François could restore
the family fortune, sadly diminished since M. du Tremblay’s death, could
buy a good position for his young brother and see to it that his sister
got a satisfactory husband. Not to mention, of course, all the things
that money would permit him to do for himself. And now the boy was
talking about throwing it all up and going into a cloister. The folly of
it. And, after all she had done for him, the ingratitude. Stubbornly,
during the months that followed his return from Nevers, she fought
against her son’s vocation; and, no less stubbornly, the young man
defended it. In the end, torn by conflicting allegiances, he fell sick.
The illness dragged on and grew worse, until at last Mme Leclerc’s
maternal solicitude got the better of her ambition. Reluctantly and
conditionally, she assented to a compromise. She would let him enter
religion on condition that he chose an order whose rule would permit her
to go on seeing him. At this, the divided allegiances were reconciled;
François began at once to recover. After some hesitation, he decided in
favour of the Capuchins. Father Benet of Canfield was consulted; and by
him, in his capacity as Warden of the Capuchin convent of the rue
Saint-Honore, François was given a written ‘obedience’ and sent to the
house of novices at Orleans. Secretly, as on the previous journey, he
left Paris; and this time there was no turning back. On February 2nd,
1599, he put on the habit of a Franciscan novice.

That he had done wisely to leave home without saying goodbye to his
mother was proved a short time later, when Mme Leclerc appeared at the
convent gates accompanied by a high legal dignitary and bearing a royal
injunction that commanded the Capuchins to give her back her son. There
was one last prolonged discussion. The mother’s tone was violent; the
son’s gentle, but unshakably resolute. She declared that she had never
really given her consent; that he was a runaway and the friars no better
than kidnappers; that he was neglecting sacred duties, condemning his
brother and sister to penury, breaking her own heart. François replied
that God had called him and that to neglect this summons would be a sin.
His words were spoken with such a moving sincerity, that Mme Leclerc was
touched, wavered and finally broke down in tears. She gave him her
blessing, burnt the royal lettre de mission and left him to the Church.
From having been the implacable enemy of her son’s vocation, Mme Leclerc
henceforth became its most ardent friend. In her mind, this interview
produced the effects of a conversion. She turned from worldliness to a
piety which her son fostered by a long series of spiritual instructions;
she devoted herself to good works. Her reward, in this world, was to
live long enough to see Father Joseph making a career for himself
incomparably more brilliant than any she could have hoped for the Baron
de Maffiiers.

At this point it will not, I think, be out of place to give a brief
description of the order within whose ranks the one-time baron had now
irrevocably chosen to lead the rest of his life. The history of
Franciscanism is the history of a long-drawn-out struggle between a
pious worldly wisdom on the one hand and, on the other, uncompromising
primitive Christianity. Francis himself had stood for primitive
Christianity; his successor, Brother Elias, for worldly wisdom. During
the first generations of Franciscanism a party of Moderates was opposed
by a party of ‘Zealots’ or ‘Spirituals’; but in the course of time the
names were changed: In later centuries the cause of worldly wisdom is
represented by the ‘Conventuals,’ while over against them stand the
‘Observants,’ so called because they tried, albeit with considerable
reservations, to observe St. Francis’s original rule. Custom and finally
papal authority had stabilized the position of these two branches of
Franciscanism, when, with the Counter-Reformation, a new enthusiasm for
reform began to spread through the Church. Among the Franciscans we have
the reforms represented by the Alcantarines, the Recollets, the
Riformati, and finally, the Capuchins. This order had its first
beginnings in Italy about the year 1520, was regularized by a papal bull
of 1538 and had begun to do fairly well, when its third Vicar,
Bernardino Ochino, turned Calvinist and, in 1543, fled first to Geneva,
then to England, where he became a prebendary of Canterbury and wrote a
kind of cosmic allegory, in which Lucifer raises up the Pope as
Antichrist, only to be thwarted in his machinations by the providential
appearance of Henry VIII. Not unnaturally, the new order had to suffer
for its Vicar’s escapades and for a time there was even talk of
dissolving it altogether. Finally, however, it was spared and its
privileges restored. Within a few years it had become, next to the
Company of Jesus, the most powerful instrument in the Church’s entire
armoury.

The Capuchin rule was a nearer approximation to St. Francis’s original
than that of any of the other Franciscan orders. Thus, the law enjoining
poverty was strictly observed. Neither overtly, nor covertly, by a
subterfuge, might the monastic houses own any property. The wants of
their inmates were to be supplied exclusively by begging, and the
convent was not allowed to accumulate stores for more than a few days.
No friar might use or even handle money. (When representing the King on
diplomatic missions, Father Joseph, as we shall see, was compelled to
accept, albeit reluctantly, a dispensation in regard to this matter.)
The Capuchin’s habit was of rough grey cloth and so rarely replaced that
most of the friars were permanently dirty and in tatters. To the
hardships of poverty were added those of a rigid discipline. Fasts were
numerous in the Capuchin’s life and penances severe. A midnight service
cut short the hours of sleep. Over and above the time set for the
canonical offices, two hours were reserved for private prayers.

Outside the convent, the life of the friars was one of incessant
activity. Their work was to preach, save souls and help the poor.
Abroad, among the infidels, and at home, among heretics and
‘libertines,’ the Capuchins were the great missionaries and converters
of the period. Where the spirit of Catholicism had become lukewarm, they
were the great revivalists. Nor were their ministrations exclusively
spiritual. They worked hard to palliate the chronic miseries of the
poor, and wherever disaster struck, they were always presentas
stretcher-bearers with the armies; as intercessors for the lives of the
conquered; as nurses and grave-diggers in times of pestilence; as relief
workers among the famine-stricken. It has been pointed out that, between
1500 and 1600, the popular attitude towards the regular clergy underwent
a profound change. At the earlier date, monks and friars were regarded
either with an angry resentment or else with mere derision. And such
attitudes were already traditional. The fury of the first Reformers
recalls that of the author of Piers Plowman; the humorous contempt
displayed in the Epistolae Ohscurorum Virorum is fundamentally the same
attitude adopted by Boccaccio and Chaucer. Reformation produced
Counter-Reformation. By the end of the sixteenth century the friar of
popular imagination is no longer the lecherous and greedy incubus
depicted in the Decameron and the Canterhury Tales. He is the new model
Capuchin, the man who respects his vows, who shares the hardships of the
poor and is always ready to he a help in trouble.

Disinterestedness and active kindness wield an extraordinary influence
over men’s minds and are the sources of a curious kind of non-compulsive
power. In the first fifty years of their existence the Capuchins had
thoroughly earned this power and influence. It is one of the tragedies
of history that this moral force should everywhere have been exploited,
by the rulers of Church and State, for the furtherance of their own
generally sinister ends. This harnessing by evil of the power generated
by goodness, is one of the principal and most tragic themes of human
history.

Austerity of life, the assumption of voluntary poverty, a clarity of
collaboration, not of patronage -these were the characteristics that had
earned for the Capuchins the respect and affection of the masses. It was
for precisely the same reasons that the order appealed so strongly to
men of a certain type in the very highest classes of society. François
Leclerc was by no means the only gentleman-friar. Many noblemen and even
some persons of royal blood had joined and were to join the order. What
attracted them was precisely the thing that might haye been expected to
repel them -the extreme severity of the rule, the evangelical poverty,
the familiar contact with the poorest and humblest. Of those who are
born with silver spoons in their mouths, the greater number are only
concerned to keep and, if possible, increase their privileges. But at
all times there has been a minority of men and women, on whom the
possession or privileges has acted as a challenge to their latent
heroism, a spur to renunciation. The underlying motive is sometimes a
genuine love of God, but more often a kind of pride.

The privileged individual wants to prove that he is somebody on his own
account, and apart from his bank balance and his social position, that
he can win the race against all comers, even when he starts from
scratch. A course of noble actions begun in pride may be continued in
pride, so that the last state of the hero is not appreciably better than
the first. On the other hand, it sometimes happens that noble actions
begun in pride transform the doer, who ends his career as someone
fundamentally different from, and better than, the person he was when he
started. There are fashions in magnanimity, and the opportunities for
heroism change from age to age. Thus, in recent years, young people with
too many privileges have sought a life of heroic austerity in politics,
or sport, or science. They have flung themselves into unpopular
political movements, gone mountain climbing or big-game hunting,
campaigned against disease, volunteered in other people’s wars. For the
over-privileged of an earlier age, fighting and exploring strange lands
also offered excellent opportunities for heroism and renunciation; but
they were opportunities that public opinion thought less highly of than
those provided by organized religion.

‘This is a soldier’s life,’ François wrote to his mother a short time
after his entrance into religion, ‘but with this difference : that
soldiers receive death

for the service of men, whereas we hope for life in the service of God.’

To François Leclerc’s counterpart in the modem world, the equivalent of
becoming a Capuchin would have been to join the Communist Party or
enlist for service in the Spanish war. But the equivalent would not be
complete; for the life of a Capuchin was a soldier’s life with a
difference -a soldier’s life with the addition of another dimension,
that of eternity. It is the existence of this other dimension which
imparts to certain biographies of earlier times their peculiar
poignancy. Even the baldest recitals of these lives have about them some
of the depth and intensity of significance, which distinguish Claudel’s
extraordinary Catholic fantasy, Le Soulier de Satin. Consider, for
example, the life story of that Père Ange who, in 1600, performed the
ceremony of our young novice’s final and definitive reception into the
Capuchin order. Like the future Father Joseph, Père Ange had been a
gentleman-a gentleman of a lineage incomparably more illustrious than
that of the Leclercs.

Before his entry into religion, this friar was known as Henri de
Joyeuse, Comte de Bouchage. One of his brothers was a cardinal and had
held successively the three archbishoprics of Toulouse, Narbonne and
Rouen. Another, Anne de Joyeuse, had died at Coutras in 1587, leading
the troops of the League against Henry of Navarre. At the time of his
death he had been admiral of France, duke and peer, Governor of Normandy
and, by his marriage to Marguerite de Lorraine-Vaudemont, brothering law
to Queen Louise, the wife of his master and passionately devoted friend,
Henri III. Yet another brother, Antoine Scipiory, had been Governor of
Languedoc. These family connections, the support of his brother-in-law,
the Duc d’Epernon, and finally the friendship of the king, seemed to
guarantee for young Henri de Joyeuse the most brilliant future. But in
1589 his wife died and, a few days later, he carried out an intention
which he had in mind even at the height of his courtly successes: he
became a Capuchin. The letter sent on this occasion by Henri III to the
Provincial of the order is still extant.

‘Mon Frère,’ he wrote, ‘I know you love me. I am infinitely obliged to
you for it; but in order to make this obligation extreme and to give me
a great contentment, let me beg that neither now nor in the future (as I
am sure that you will not refuse so just a request) shall Frère Ange,
whom I hold as dear as if he were myself or my own child, stir from the
convent of Paris; and I implore you with all my heart, give me this joy,
which will be extreme, that I may still see him and recommend myself to
his prayers.’ The Provincial doubtless obeyed; but the unhappy king had
all too little time in which to recommend himself to his friend’s
prayers. A year after the letter was written, the Duc de Guise was
assassinated at Blois, and before another year had passed, the League
took its revenge and the last of the Valois kings was lying dead, with
Friar Clement’s knife in his bowels. His favourite, meanwhile, was
happily begging his bread, preaching, nursing the sick and learning the
art of mental prayer from Father Benet of Canfield.

In so far as the Capuchins meddled in politics, they were, at this time,
supporters of the League against the new and not yet Catholic king. It
was in his capacity as member of an illustrious family of Leaguers that
Père Ange was chosen, in 1592, to carry out a strange political mission
in Provence, the Lyonnais and Languedoc. He was to try to persuade the
governors of the southern provinces (all of them more or less closely
related to him) to form a new political federation, independent of the
rest of France and under the suzerainty of the Pope. Several months of
negotiation had convinced him that the scheme was unworkable, when the
news came that his brother, the Governor of Languedoc, had lost his life
in an unsuccessful operation against the royal forces. Antoine Scipion
was the last lay Joyeuse. Of the two surviving brothers, one was a
Cardinal, the other a Capuchin -neither of them available for military
service. But the people insisted on having a Joyeuse to lead them.
Enormous crowds surrounded the Capuchin’s headquarters at Toulouse,
shouting ‘We want Père Ange, we want Père Ange’ and (a touch so true to
mob psychology as to be positively Shakespearean) threatening to burn
down the convent if they didn’t get him. Rome was consulted;
dispensations procured; and at last the day came when, in solemn
ceremony, Cardinal de Joyeuse received his brother, dressed all in black
in sign of inward mourning for his change of condition, and, in the
presence of a great congregation, buckled to his side the sword he had
abandoned five years before. Père Ange had been transformed into the Duc
de Joyeuse and Governor of Languedoc. For the next few years he governed
his province and did battle against Henri IV. But with Henri’s
conversion and the pacification of France under a Catholic monarch, the
League lost its reason for existence. Like other governors of provinces,
the Duc de Joyeuse made his peace with the king. Henri IV, who knew how
to choose his servants and collaborators, confirmed him in his titles
and estates and created him a Marshal of France.

Popular clamour had dragged Père Ange from the convent, and now it
looked as though royal favour would keep him out. But the mourning
garments he had put on in 1592 were the emblems of a genuine regret; and
meanwhile his friends in the convent of the rue Saint-Honoré were not
idle. ‘Where is that unitive and ecstatic life,’ Father Benet of
Canfield wrote to him in an impassioned letter, ‘where the coarse habit,
the thick cord, the patched cloak, where are the fasts, the disciplines,
the meals of bread and water, the humilities of kissing the ground and
sweeping the house? The mirror of France, is it spotted ? Is he fled
from the battle, that valiant captain among the Friars Minor? Is he
slain, that child of St. Francis and the seraphic rule? Can it be that
Frère Ange is dead? I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan …

‘And as for this, that on the outside of this letter I style you de
Joyeuse, and within I call you my brother -be not surprised thereat; for
it is only without and externally that you are de Joyeuse, but inwardly
you are Frère Ange. And not only ought you to be Frère Ange, but also
you cannot ever be anything else, even with the Pope’s dispensation.’
Father Benet spoke truly; having once tasted of’ the unitive and
ecstatic life,’ Henri de Joyeuse could not now be anything but Brother
Angel. After seven years as Governor, commander, duke and courtier, he
returned to the order. That was in 1599), the year of François Leclerc’s
novitiate. In 1600, as we have seen already, it was the newly revived
Père Ange who officiated at the reception of the newly created Father
Joseph.


CHAPTER III

The Religious Background

In all that concerned his personal religion, Father Joseph remained to
the end of his life the faithful disciple of Benet of Canfield. If we
would understand the pupil, we must familiarize ourselves with the
teachings of his master. But in order properly to evaluate these
teachings, we must first know something about the mystical tradition on
which they are based and from which they significantly diverge. In
literary form, the mystical tradition makes its first appearance in the
Upanishads, the earliest of which are supposed to date from about the
eighth century before Christ. In these Hindu scriptures we find a
certain metaphysical theory of the universe and of man’s relation to it.
This theory is summarized in the phrase Tat tvam asi-thou art that.
Ultimate reality is at once transcendent and immanent. God is the
creator and sustainer of the world; yet the kingdom of God is also
within us, as a mode of consciousness underlying, so to speak, the
ordinary individualized consciousness of everyday life, but
incommensurable with it; different in kind, and yet realizable by anyone
who is prepared to ‘lose his life in order to save it.’ This
metaphysical theory was an attempt to explain a certain kind of
immediate experience, and in India it was always taught in conjunction
with certain technical instructions regarding the ethical and
psychological means whereby men might come to that experience, or, to
use the language of the metaphysical theory, might realize the Brahman
or ultimate reality latent within them. Among the early Buddhists, the
metaphysical theory was neither affirmed nor denied, but simply ignored,
as being meaningless and unnecessary. Their concern was with the
immediate experience, which, because of its consequences for life, came
to be known as ‘liberation’ or ‘enlightenment.’ The Buddha and his
disciples of the southern school seem to have applied to the problems of
religion that ‘operational philosophy’ which contemporary scientific
thinkers have begun to apply in the natural sciences. ‘ The concept,’
says Professor Bridgman in his Logic of Modern Physics, ‘is synonymous
with the corresponding set of operations.’ ‘A question has meaning, when
it is possible to find operations by which an answer can be given.’
Assertions which do not lend themselves to operational verification are
neither true nor false, but without meaning. Buddha was not a consistent
operationalist; for he seems to have taken for granted, to have accepted
as something given and self-evident, a variant of the locally current
theory of metempsychosis. Where mysticism was concerned, however, his
operationalism was complete.

He would not make assertions about the nature of ultimate reality
because it did not seem to him that the corresponding set of mystical
operations would admit of a theological interpretation. Mystical
operations, he believed, yielded a sufficient answer to such
psychological questions as What is liberation? or What is enlightenment?
They did not, in his opinion, yield a sufficient answer to the questions
What is Brahman? or What is God?

Christianity accepted as given a metaphysical system derived from
several already existing and mutually incompatible systems. Jesus seems
to have taken for granted the existence of the personal deity of the Old
Testament; but at the same time he seems to have used a purely mystical
approach to the kingdom of God which he actually experienced within his
soul. These two elements, the traditionally Hebraic and the mystical,
with its insistence on immediate experience, were also present in the
doctrine of St. Paul, together with others which have added further
complications to Christian theology. Of mysticism in the early Church we
know very little. Such psycho-physical phenomena as rapture,
glossolalia, visions and revelations were common among the early
Christians, and highly esteemed.

These manifestations often occur in individuals whose religion is the
very reverse of mystical; on the other hand, it is a fact of observation
that they sometimes occur as by-products of a genuine mystical
experience. We shall probably be fairly near the truth if we guess that
there was, in the early Church, much corybantic revivalism and a little
mystical contemplation. By the fourth century, as Cassian bears witness,
a well-defined mystical philosophy and discipline had been developed
among the solitaries and coenobites of the Egyptian desert. Cassian’s
dialogues with the Egyptian fathers were known to the medieval
contemplatives and influenced their theories, habits of life and methods
of devotion. Much more influential, because written by one who was a
consummate literary artist as well as a knower of God, were St.
Augustine’s Confessions. Before becoming a Christian, Augustine had been
a student of Plotinus, and the God with whom he sought union was that
neoplatonic ‘something not susceptible of change,’ which lies behind and
is the source of all personal manifestations of deity. Plotinus was
interested in oriental thought and as a young man accompanied the
Emperor Gordian’s expedition to the East, in order to pick up first-hand
information on the subject of Persian and Indian philosophy. His one,
ultimate reality which cannot be understood except through a direct
mystical experience bears a close resemblance to the Brahman which is
also Atman, the That which is at the same time Thou. During the fourth
and fifth centuries, neoplatonism and along with it, at several removes,
the most valuable elements of Hindu religion, entered Christianity and
became incorporated, as one of a number of oddly heterogeneous elements,
into its scheme of thought and devotion.

St. Augustine, as we have seen, played an important part in this
Christianizing of oriental mysticism. Even more important was the part
played by the unknown Syrian monk of the fifth century who, in order to
ensure the widest possible circulation for his writings, put them forth
under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite, St. Paul’s first Athenian
convert. The pious fraud was admirably successful. Dionysius the
Areopagite was read with the reverent attention due to his all but
apostolic position. This was unfortunate in some ways, fortunate in
others; for his books were of very unequal value. On the debit side of
the account must be placed the two disquisitions on the heavenly and
ecclesiastical hierarchies respectively. The first helped to justify the
idolatrous polytheism, into which popular Christianity has always tended
to degenerate; the second had a certain undesirable political
significance info far and it affirmed the divine origin of the Church’s
temporal organization.

Over against these, on the credit side, must be set two very remarkable
books, Concerning the Divine Names and Concerning Mystical Theology.
Using philosophic material derived from neoplatonism and various
oriental sources, and drawing upon his own first-hand experience, their
author sets forth the mystical tradition in its most austere, Vedantic
form. Translated into Latin by Scotus Erigena, in the ninth century,
these books were widely read during the whole of the Middle Ages and
exercised an extraordinary influence. Accepting the Areopagite’s
theology and psychology as given, the medieval mystics proceeded to work
out for themselves the operations corresponding to these concepts,
operations which-in India, in the Egyptian desert, among the Sufis,
wherever contemplation has been practised have always resulted in the
same sort of philosophy. In the literature which these contemplatives
left behind them, we can read a description of Such operations and of
the spiritual discoveries which were made possible by their means.

Benet of Canfield was a learned man and had read, not only the
Areopagite, but also all the important medieval and sixteenth-century
mystics, for whom the writings of pseudoDionysius had been an
inspiration and a comforting guarantee of their own orthodoxy. An artist
is born with certain talents, specifically his own; but he makes use of
those talents within the framework of the current artistic tradition. It
is the same with the mystic, whose religious life is constituted by the
interaction between inborn spiritual aptitudes and the tradition within
which he thinks and works. What was the nature of the tradition, at once
philosophical, ethical and psychological, in which Father Benet had been
brought up? To answer this question I shall briefly summarize a little
book that is one of the finest flowers of medieval mystical literature.
Composed by an so anonymous English author of the fourteenth century,
The Cloud of Unknowing is at once profoundly original and completely
representative of its class. Its author was a man who combined high
spiritual gifts and a remarkable literary and philosophic talent with a
deep knowledge and love of tradition. Within the compass of that small
book the whole medieval development of Dionysian mysticism is exhibited
in its essence, and at the same time, as a modern Catholic writer,
Father John Chapman remarks, ‘it seems to sum up the doctrines of St.
John of the Cross two hundred years beforehand.’

That Father Benet was acquainted with this book is certain; for, in his
admirable commentary on The Cloud, Father Augustine Baker, the English
Benedictine monk and mystical theologian, who was an almost exact
contemporary of Father Joseph, records that his own manuscript copy of
the book had ‘belonged to the private library of Father Benet Fitch, our
countryman, the Capuchin, author of the book called The Will of God, and
upon his death was found among other books in his library.’ Richly did
it deserve its place there. The book’s title implies its central
doctrine. ‘The cloud of unknowing’ is the same as what the Areopagite
calls the ‘superluminous darkness’ -the impenetrable mystery of God’s
otherness. Ultimate reality is incommensurable with our own illusoriness
and imperfection; therefore it cannot be understood by means of
intellectual operations; for intellectual operations depend upon
language, and our vocabulary and syntax were evolved for the purpose of
dealing precisely with that imperfection and illusoriness, with which
God is incommensurable. Ultimate reality cannot be understood except
intuitively, through an act of the will and the affections. ‘Plus
diligitur quain intelligitur’ was a commonplace of scholastic
philosophy. ‘Love can go further than understanding; for love enters
where science remains out of doors. We love God in his essence, but in
his essence we do not see Him.’

The author of The Cloud concerns himself very little with metaphysical
speculations. To him, as to the Buddha, thinking about problems to
which, in the nature of things, vocalized thought can give no answer
seems a waste of time and an obstacle in the way of spiritual advance.
Nor is he interested to quote other men’s opinions. ‘Once men thought it
a meekness to say naught of their own heads, unless they confined it by
scripture and doctors’ words; now it is turned into curiosity and
display of knowledge.’ Because of these views about learning and
speculating, he leaves unexplained the details of the philosophical
system which underlies his practical mysticism. But from all he says it
is evident that he takes for granted the hypothesis then current among
mystical theologians as to the relation existing between God and man.
According to this hypothesis, there exists within the soul something
variously called the ‘synderesis,’ the ‘spark,’ the ‘ground of the
soul,’ ‘ the apex of the higher will.’ Of this divine element in their
being men are, for the most part, unaware, because all their attention
is fixed on the objects of craving and aversion. But, if they choose to
‘die to self,’ they can become aware of the divine element within them
and, in it, experience God. For those who so desire and are prepared to
fullfil the necessary conditions, the transcendent can in some way
become immanent within the spark, at the apex of the higher will.

This theory bears a close family resemblance to that which, from time
immemorial, has been fundamental to Indian thought. But whereas the
oriental mystics have never shrunk from establishing a complete identity
between the ‘spark’ and God himself, the Christians have generally
adopted a more cautious attitude. ‘Thou art That,’ affirm the Indians ;
the Atman is of the same substance with Brahman. A sufi mystic could
say, ‘I went from God to God until they cried from me in me, “Oh, thou.
For Christian thinkers, creature and creator were incommensurable, and
the possibility of union with God did not imply a substantial identity
of the ‘spark’ with that with which it was united. Some statements of
the German and later Flemish mystics have, it is true, a positively
Indian ring about them; but it was precisely for this reason that such
writers as Eckhart were suspect to the ecclesiastical authorities. In
this respect the author of The Cloud is strictly orthodox. Man’s soul
can be ‘oned with God’; but it is not for that reason of the same
substance as God. ‘Only by his mercy without thy desert art thou made a
god in grace, oned with him in spirit, without separation, both here and
in the bliss of heaven without any end. So that although thou be all one
with him in grace, yet thou art full far beneath him in nature.’ This
‘oneing’ of the godhead with the spark in the soul can never be complete
in the present life. The full beatific vision is reserved for
eternity-indeed, in some sense, is eternity. For the soul ‘is immortal
inasmuch as it is capable of the beatific vision.’ Ut heatificahilis est
immortalis. In the flesh, men are not strong enough to bear the plenary
experience of God without physical injury or death. In the words of
Cardinal Berulle, ‘ God is infinitely desirable and infinitely
insupportable. And when it pleases him to apply himself to his creature,
without proportioning himself to his creature, he cannot be supported by
the created being, which feels itself engulfed, ruined by this infinite
power.’ Similarly, the Indians affirm that more than a certain amount of
the highest samadhi is fatal to the body of him who experiences it.

So much for the metaphysical system underlying The Cloud. Our author
accepts the current hypotheses without discussion. What interests him is
something else -the facts of empirical experience which originally
called for interpretation in terms of such hypotheses, and the means
whereby such facts might be reproduced in the souls of those who desired
to experience God. Only by implication and incidentally is the book a
philosophical treatise; explicitly it is a handbook of mystical
practice, a guide to a certain way of life -the way of spiritual
perfection.

The author of The Cloud prefaces his volume by an urgent and emphatic
recommendation to ‘whatsoever thou be that this book shall have in
possession’ that ‘thou neither read it, write it or speak it, nor yet
suffer it to be read, written or spoken, by any other or to any other,
unless it be by such a one, or to such a one as hath (in thy supposing)
in a true will and by a whole intent purposed him to be a perfect
follower of Christ.’ The reason for this recommendation is simple. The
Cloud is a book for those who are already well advanced on the road of
mystical education. It is not a primer. True, ‘the work of this book,’
as the author calls the art of achieving mystical union with God, is
necessary, not merely for a few, but for all. ‘For want of this working
a man falleth ever deeper and deeper into sin, and further and further
from God.’ For this reason the command to be ‘perfect even as your
Father in Heaven is perfect’ is incumbent upon every man and woman.
‘There is no Christian, whatever anyone may say, who is not bound by the
duties of his profession at the baptismal font, to undertake the study
and practice of mystical theology.’ So, continuing a venerable and
orthodox tradition, wrote the Carmelite Father Leon or St. John, an
eminent contemporary of our own Father Joseph. But, like all other
studies and practices, those of mystical theology must begin at the
beginning. And the beginning is a long-drawn process of moral amendment,
discursive meditation and training of the will. Hence the paucity of
mystics; for the world is mainly peopled by Micawbers, optimistically
convinced that something or somebody will turn up and get them out of
the difficulties from which, as a matter of cold fact, they can be saved
only by their own efforts. Many, in this case all, are called; but few
are chosen, for the good reason that few choose themselves.

The author of The Cloud assumes that his readers have already taken the
first steps and are persistent in their resolve to be ‘perfect followers
of Christ.’ To these he imparts the work appropriate to the second, or
higher stage of contemplative life. This work consists in the
cultivation of the art of loving God for himself alone and as he is in
himself -not for what the worshipper can get out of him and not as he is
after passing through the refractive medium of a human personality.
‘Lift up thine heart to God with a blind stirring of love; and mean
himself and none of his goods.’ These ‘stirrings of love’ must be blind,
because, if God is to be experienced as he is in himself, he must be
loved with a pure act of the will, unmitigated by discursive reasoning.
There must be no vain and distractive attempt to comprehend what is in.
its nature incomprehensible. The work of the contemplative is to train
himself in abstraction from all creatures, above all his own feelings,
wishes, memories and thoughts. He must ‘tread them under the cloud of
forgetting,’ and, having done so, must beat ‘with a naked intent,’ a
‘blind stirring of love’ upon the ‘dark cloud of unknowing’ within which
God as he is in himself is for ever wrapped from human sight. If he
beats persistently enough upon the cloud, if the ‘dart of his longing
love’ is sharp enough, if the ‘cloud of forgetting’ between this love
and his own personality is sufficiently thick, it may be granted to the
contemplative to see God, if not yet face to face, at least less darkly
than at first. This is as far as the active work of contemplation can
hope to go. But it sometimes happens, as our author and his fellow
mystics insist, that this active contemplation gives place to a passive
contemplation, in which God is the agent and his worshipper but an
instrument which he uses for his divine purposes. In these cases God‘
sends out a beam of ghostly light, piercing this cloud of unknowing that
is between thee and him.’ It is an act of special grace, in no way
dependent upon the efforts of the contemplative; therefore, the mystics
are all agreed, nothing can profitably be said of passive contemplation
except that it does sometimes occur. (It may be remarked that this
distinction between active and passive contemplation seems to correspond
to the distinction made by Indian writers between the lower and higher
levels of samadhi. Couched in whatever language and formulated at
whatever period, mystical theories are based upon the empirical facts of
mystical experience. It is therefore not to be wondered at if such
theories reveal fundamental similarities of structure.)

Selfhood is a heavy, hardly translucent medium, which cuts off most of
the light of reality and distorts what little it permits to pass. The
Old Adam cannot see God as he is in himself. The aspiring contemplative
must therefore rid himself of selfhood. The author of The Cloud assumes
that the person for whom he writes has already obtained sufficient
mastery over his passions and has learned, in his meditations, to
exclude the discursive, analytical intellect from a sphere in which its
workings serve only to inhibit the direct experience of reality. But the
passions and the discursive intellect are not the only components of the
self; there is also a great psychological province to which the name
most commonly given by mystical writers is ‘distractions,’ a province
little touched upon by ordinary moralists and, for that reason, worth
describing in some detail. Contemplatives have compared distractions to
dust, to swarms of flies, to the movements of a monkey stung by a
scorpion. Always their metaphors call up the image of a purposeless
agitation. And this, precisely, is the interesting and significant thing
about distractions. The passions are essentially purposeful, and the
thoughts, the emotions, the fantasies connected with the passions always
have some reference to the real or imaginary ends proposed, or to the
means whereby such ends may be achieved.

With distractions the case is quite different. It is of their essence to
be irrelevant and pointless. To find out just how pointless and
irrelevant they can be, one has merely to sit down and try to recollect
oneself. Preoccupations connected with the passions will most probably
come to the surface of consciousness, but along with them will rise a
bobbing scum of miscellaneous memories, notions and imaginings-childhood
recollections of one’s grandmother’s Skye terrier; the French name for
henbane; a white-knightish scheme for catching incendiary bombs in mid
air -in a word, every kind of nonsense and silliness. The
psycho-analytical contention, that all the divagations of the
subconscious carry a deep passional significance, cannot be made to fit
the facts. One has only to observe oneself and others to discover that
we are no more exclusively the servants of our passions and our
biological urges than we are exclusively rational; we are also creatures
possessed of a very complicated psycho-physiological machine which
grinds away incessantly and, in the course of its grinding, throws up
into consciousness selections from that indefinite number of mental
permutations and combinations struck out in the course of its random
functioning. These permutations and combinations of mental elements have
nothing to do with our passions or our more rational mental processes;
they are just imbecilities-mere waste products of psycho-physiological
activity. True, such imbecilities may be made use of by the passions for
their own ends, as when the Old Adam in us throws up a barrage of
intrinsically pointless distractions in an attempt to nullify the
creative efforts of the higher will. But even when not so used by the
passions, even in themselves, distractions constitute a formidable
obstacle to any kind of spiritual advance. The imbecile in us is as
radically God’s enemy as the passionate and purposeful maniac, with his
insane cravings and aversions.

Moreover, the imbecile remains at large and busy, when the lunatic has
been tamed or actually destroyed. In other words, a man may have
succeeded in overcoming his passions, in replacing them by a fixed
one-pointed desire for enlightenment, and yet still be hindered in his
advance by the uprush into consciousness of pointless distractions. This
is the reason why all advanced spirituals have attached so much
importance to these imbecilities and have ranked them as grave
imperfections, even as sins. It is, I think, to distractions, or at
least to one of the main classes of distractions, that Christ refers in
that strangely enigmatic and alarming saying, ‘ that every idle word
that men shall speak they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgement. For by thy words shalt thou be justified, and by thy words
shalt thou be condemned.’ Verbalized imbecilities, spoken irrelevances,
all utterances, indeed, that do not subserve the end of enlightenment,
must be condemned as being barriers between the soul and ultimate
reality. They may seem harmless enough; but this harmlessness is only in
relation to mundane ends; in relation to the eternal and spiritual, they
are extremely harmful. In this context, I would like to quote a
paragraph from the biography of that seventeenth-century French saint,
Charles de Condren. A pious lady, named Mlle de la Roche, was in great
distress, because she found it impossible to make a satisfactory
confession. ‘Her trouble was that her sins seemed to her greater than
she was able to say. Her faults were not considerable, nevertheless she
was quite unable, she said, ever to express them. If the confessor told
her that he was content with her accusation, she would answer that she
was not satisfied with it and that, since she was not telling the truth,
he could not give her absolution. If he pressed her to tell the whole
truth, she felt utterly incapable of doing so.’ Nobody knew what to say
to this unfortunate woman, who came in time to be regarded as not quite
right in the head. Finally, she addressed herself to Condren, whose
comments on her case are of the greatest interest.

‘“It is true,” he said, “that you have not adequately expressed your
sins; but the fact is that, in this life, it is impossible to represent
them in all their hideousness; we shall never know them as they really
are until we see them in the pure light of God. God gives you an
impression of the deformity of sin, by which he makes you feel it to be
incomparably greater than it appears to your understanding or can be
expressed by your words. Hence your anguish and distress …. You must
therefore conceive of your sins, as faith presents them to your mind in
other words, as they are in themselves; but you must content yourself
with describing them in such words as your mouth can form.’” All that
Condren says about poor Mlle de la Roche’s no doubt very venial sins
applies with equal force to distractions. Judged by everyday human
standards, they seem matters of no account. And yet, as they are in
themselves, as they are in relation to that ‘pure light of God,’ which
they are able to eclipse and darken, as the sun is darkened by a dust
storm or a cloud of locusts, these trifling imperfections have as much
power for evil in the soul as anger, or an ugly greed, or some obsessive
apprehension.

The psycho-physical machine, which produces distractions as a by-product
of its functioning, works on materials derived from the external world.
This, so far as civilized man is concerned, is mainly a human world,
made in his own image -a projection and material embodiment of his
reason, his passions and his imbecilities. To distractions within
correspond the external distractions of civilized life-news, gossip,
various kinds of sensuous, emotional and intellectual amusements,
novelties and gadgets of every sort, casual social contacts, unnecessary
business, all the diversified irrelevances whose pointless succession
constitutes the vast majority of human lives. Because a large part of
our personality is naturally imbecile, because we like this imbecility
and have a habit of it, we have built ourselves a largely imbecile world
to live in. Deep calls to deep; inner distractions evoke outer
distractions, and in their turn the outer evoke the inner. Between
congenitally distracted individuals and their distracting, imbecile
environment there is set up a kind of self-perpetuating resonance.

“Fate which foresaw
How frivolous a baby man would be
By what distractions he would he possessed,
How he would pour himself in every strife,
And well nigh change his own identity That
it might keep from his capricious play
His genuine self, and force him to obey
Even in his own despite his being’s law,
Bade through the deep recesses of our breast
The unregarded river of our life
Pursue with indiscernible flow its way;
And that we should not see
The buried stream, and seem to he
Eddying at large in blind uncertainty,
Though driving on with it eternally.
But often, in the world’s most crowded streets,
But often in the din of strife,
There rises an unspeakable desire
After the knowledge of our buried life;
A thirst to spend our fire and restless force
In tracking out our true, original course;
A longing to enquire
Into the mystery of this heart which beats
So wild, so deep in us to know
Whence our lives come and where they go.
And many a man in his own breast then delves,
But deep enough, alas I none ever mines.”

Every sensitive human being has at one time or another realized the
pointlessness and squalor of the common life of incessant and reiterated
distractions, has longed for one-pointedness of being and purity of
heart. But how pitifully few have ever chosen to act upon this
realization, have tried to satisfy their longing I None has written more
eloquently of the misery of the distracted life than Matthew Arnold. And
yet, though he was fairly well versed in Christian literature, though,
as a young man, he had been profoundly impressed by an early translation
of the Bhagavad Gita, he sought no practical remedy to that misery, and
denied, even as a matter of theory, the very possibility of such a
remedy existing. The best he can offer is merely the symbol, the
distorted human reflection of a remedy.

“Only -but this is rare- Wizen a beloved hand is laid in ours,
A bolt is shot hack in our breast;
And hears its winding murmur,
And then lie thinks lie knows
The hills where his life rose
And the sea where it goes.”

Note the sad lucidity of the phrase, ‘he thinks he knows.’ More romantic
and optimistic, Browning would have asserted emphatically that the man
did know the secret of life every time his ‘world-deafened ear is by the
tones of a love voice caressed.’ Matthew Arnold was too realistically
minded to fall into such a confusion, and too honest to pretend that he
believed the flattering doctrine which equates those two
incommensurables, the human and the divine. Those who enjoy the natural
ecstasies of passion and affection do not know; they merely think they
know. And for the unlucky ones who do not happen to have a beloved hand
to clasp there is nothing but to

“…demand
Of all the thousand nothings of the hour
Their stupefying power;
All yes, and they benumb us at our call!”

But they benumb us only for a little while, and then the old misery
returns more unbearable than ever. In the theological language of John
Tauler (or whoever it was that wrote The Following of Christ), ‘each sin
begetteth a special spiritual suffering. A suffering of this kind is
like unto that of hell, for the more you suffer, the worse you become;
this happeneth to sinners ; the more they suffer through their sins, the
more wicked they become, and they fall continually more into them, in
order to get free of suffering.’

Like so many poets and moralists before him, Arnold had stated a problem
to which there is no practical solution, except through some system of
spiritual exercises. In the overwhelming majority of individuals,
distraction is the natural condition; one-pointedness must be acquired.
One-pointedness can, of course, be turned to evil purposes no less than
good. But the risk of actualizing a potential evil must always be run by
those who seek the good. In this case, the good cannot be achieved
without one-pointedness. That Arnold should have failed to draw the
unavoidable conclusion from the premises of his own thoughts and
feelings seems puzzling only when we consider him apart from his
environment. The mental climate in which he lived was utterly
unpropitious to the flowering of genuine mysticism. The nineteenth
century could tolerate only false, ersatz mysticism-the nature-mysticism
of Wordsworth; the sublimated sexual mysticism of Whitman; the
nationality mysticisms of all the patriotic poets and philosophers of
every race and culture, from Fitch at the beginning of the period to
Kipling and Barres at the end. Once more, Arnold’s ‘sad lucidity’ did
not permit him to embrace any of these manifestly unsatisfactory
substitutes for the genuine article. He chose instead the mild and
respectable road of literary modernism.

It was a blind alley, of course; but better a blind alley than the
headlong descent, by way of the mysticisms of nationality and humanity,
to war, revolution and universal tyranny. The acquisition of
one-pointedness and the cultivation of genuine mysticism were tasks no
easier in the fourteenth century or the seventeenth, than under Queen
Victoria; they merely seemed more reasonable, more worthy of
consideration by men of culture and intelligence. No concern for his
intellectual respectability deterred the author of The Clout from
telling his pupils the best ways of approaching God and repressing or
circumventing the distractions which interpose themselves between the
soul and ultimate reality. He wrote; and those who read his book -even
those who read it without the smallest intention of following his
instructions- regarded him as an eminently sensible person, treating of
a highly important subject.

In the Cloud a number of different methods for dealing with distractions
are described. There is the method which consists in fixing the unstable
mind by means of what the Indians call a mantra-a word or short phrase
constantly repeated, so that it fills, so to speak, the whole conscious
and subconscious foreground of the personality, leaving the something
that exists in the background (the higher will of scholastic psychology)
free to beat with its blind stirrings of love against the cloud of
unknowing. Another method may be described as the method of repression
and inattention; distractions are ‘trodden down under the cloud of
forgetting’ -not with a vehement effort of the will (for such efforts
tend to defeat their own object and to strengthen, rather than weaken,
the forces of distraction), but by a gentle turning away towards the
object of contemplation. The distraction is ignored; one ‘looks over its
shoulder’ at what lies beyond and, deprived of the attention which gave
it life, the distraction perishes of inanition. Sometimes, however, it
happens that distractions make their assault in such force that they
cannot be defeated or avoided by any of the foregoing methods. In this
case, says our author, it is best to yield to them, to allow them to
swarm over the mind like a conquering horde. Meanwhile, the mind should
make itself conscious of its humiliated defeat, should dwell upon its
own abjectness in being unable to resist the enemy. From this
realization of impotence may spring a livelier sense of the greatness of
goodness of God and, with it, new stirrings of love, new power to beat
with naked intent upon the cloud of unknowing.

It should be noted here that, in the higher stages of contemplation, all
thoughts and feelings, even the holiest, must be counted as
distractions, if they hold back the higher will from its blind beating
against the cloud. Like Eckhart, like St. John of the Cross, and indeed
like all the great mystics of the Dionysian tradition, our author is
emphatic on this point. ‘Weep thou never so much for sorrow of thy sins,
or of the passion of Christ, or have thou never so much thought of the
joys of heaven, what may it do to thee? Surely, much good, much help,
much profit, and much grace will it get thee. But in comparison of this
blind stirring of love, it is but little that it doth, or may do,
without this. This by itself is the best part of Mary, without these
other. They without it profit but little or nought. It destroyeth not
only the ground and the root of sin, but also it getteth virtues. For if
it be truly conceived, all virtues shall be subtly and perfectly
conceived, felt and comprehended in it, without any mingling of thine
intent … For virtue is nought else but an ordered and measured affection
plainly directed unto God for himself.’ Discursive meditations on the
passion are profitable at an earlier stage of the contemplative life;
for those who are far advanced along the road of perfection, they are
distractions interposed between the soul and the dark cloud of godhead.
The same is true of meditations on one’s own sins. Our author takes it
for granted that his pupils have confessed and been absolved of their
old sins and are doing their best to live virtuously as ‘perfect
followers of Christ.’ For those who have reached this state, a constant
dwelling upon past offences and present shortcomings is not merely of no
special profit, it actually tends to increase their egotism-and egotism
is nothing but the root of evil, the settled propensity to sin. Like the
idea of God, the idea of sin must not be analysed by the contemplative.
‘Hold them all whole these words; and mean by sin a lump, thou knowest
not what, none other thing but thyself.’ Sin is the manifestation of
self. Men commit evil and suffer misery, because they are separate egos,
caught in time.

“I am gall, I am heartburn. God’s most deep decree
Bitter would have me taste; my taste was me.
Bones built in me, flesh filled, blood brimmed the curse;
Self yeast of spirit a dull dough sours. I see
The lost are like this, and their scourge to be
As I am mine, their sweating selves; but worse.”

This anguish at being a separate, God-excluding self is the final act of
repentance for the ultimate sin. ‘Thou shalt find, when thou hast
forgotten all other creatures and all their works -yea, and also all
thine own works -that there shall remain yet after, between thee and thy
God, a naked knowing and a feeling of thine own being.’ This knowing and
feeling of our own being is the trespass which cannot be forgiven unless
and until we work to have the unitive experience of God. Conversely the
knowing and feeling of self ‘must always be destroyed, were the time be
that thou mayest feel verily the perfection of this work.’ How may this
sense of separate individuality be destroyed? Only by ‘a full special
grace full freely given by God, and also a full according ableness on
thy part to receive this grace … And this ableness is nought else but a
strong and a deep ghostly sorrow …. All men have matter of sorrow; but
most specially he feeleth matter of sorrow that knoweth and feeleth that
he is. All other sorrows in comparison with this be but as it were game
to earnest. For he may make sorrow earnestly that knoweth and feeleth
not only what he is, but that he is. And whoso never felt this sorrow,
let him make sorrow; for he never yet felt perfect sorrow.’

When he has sorrowed for the sin of his separate individuality, the
contemplative must take the unanalysed sense of his own being and
annihilate it in a sense of the being of God. He must work until the
blind stirring of love, the beating against the cloud of unknowing, the
naked intent to be made one with God as he is in himself, have actually
taken the place of his sense of self, so that when he knows and feels
his own being, he knows and feels as much at least of the being of God
as he has been able to experience through the veils of the divine
darkness. Such, in briefest summary, is the teaching of The Cloud of
Unknowing, a teaching which, as I have said before, is the same in every
essential as that of all the great masters of the Dionysian tradition.
In the years that immediately followed his conversion, Benet of Canfield
made himself familiar with this tradition, and when he himself came to
teach the art of mental prayer to others, he remained in all points but
one its faithful continuator. Father Benet did most of his teaching by
word of mouth or by means of manuscript instructions specially prepared
for each of his pupils. Early in the fifteen-nineties, however, he
composed a fulllength treatise on mystical practice and mystical
theology. Manuscripts of this were communicated to selected individuals
and religious communities, and many copies of the book were made,
generally without the friar’s authorization.

Finally, in the first years of the new century, a pirated version of the
work, very inaccurate and with additions by some other hand, found its
way into print. In defence of his doctrine, Father Benet was compelled
to publish the book as he had written it. Under the title, The Rule of
Perfection, reduced to the sole point of The Will of God, it appeared
first in French, then in the author’s Latin translation, published at
Cologne in 1610. Several editions were called for, and it was
translated, in part, into English (1609) and in its entirety into
Italian (1667). In spite of its considerable contemporary success, The
Rule of Perfection was, within a hundred years, completely forgotten and
is very hard to come by, in any edition or language. All mystics are
agreed that knowledge of ultimate reality comes only to those who have
killed out the Old Adam and conformed the personal will to the will’ of
God; conversely, that killing out of the Old Adam and the conforming of
the personal will to God’s will can only be consummated by those who are
in process of acquiring the knowledge of ultimate reality. Some mystics
have laid the greatest stress upon one aspect of this double,
reciprocating process; some upon the other. Father Benet was one of
those to whom it seemed best and most natural to emphasize the voluntary
aspect of enlightenment.

As the title of his book implies, he was primarily concerned with a
technique for the daily and continuous losing of one’s personal life in
order to gain divine life, for eliminating the personal will in order to
make room for the will of God. His aim was to show how everyday, active
life could be made to subserve contemplation, and how the spirit of
contemplation could be made to animate and transform active life. In all
its editions his book was preceded by an engraved frontispiece,
certainly conceived and perhaps (for it is of a touching incompetence
and amateurishness) actually executed by Father Benet himself. The lower
part of this engraving shows the Saviour at prayer in the Mount of
Olives, with the disciples asleep in the background and, in the sky, an
angel presenting a chalice.

Below are inscribed the words, Non mea voluntas sed tua fiat.⁹ The upper
Part of the engraving is filled by an elaborate circular diagram,
curiously like one of those symbolic mandalas, into which the Buddhists
contrive to cram such a wealth of doctrinal significance. Facing the
frontispiece is a page of print, in which Father Benet has explained the
significance of his diagram. ‘This figure in the form of a sun
represents the will of God. The faces placed here in the sun represent
souls living in the divine will… . These faces are arranged in three
concentric circles, showing the three degrees of this divine will. The
first degree signifies the souls of the active life; the second, those
of the life of contemplation; the third, those of the life of
super-eminence.

Outside the first circle are many tools, such as pincers and hammers,
denoting the active life. Inside the third circle is Jehovah. But round
the second circle we have placed nothing at all, in order to signify
that in this kind of contemplative life, without any other speculations
or practices, one must follow the leading of the will of God. The tools
are on the ground and in shadow, inasmuch as outward works are of
themselves full of darkness. These tools, however, are touched by a ray
of the sun, to show that works may be enlightened and illuminated by the
will of God.

The light of the divine will shines but little on the faces of the first
circle; much more on those of the second; while those of the third are
resplendent. The first show up most clearly; the second, less; the
third, hardly at all. This signifies that the souls of the first degree
are much in themselves; those of the second degree are less in
themselves and more in God; while those of the third degree are almost
nothing in themselves and all in God and absorbed in his essential will.
All these faces have their eyes fixed on the will of God.’ The text of
The Rule of Perfection is in the nature of an extended commentary on
this symbolical frontispiece.

[]

Father Benet begins by classifying’ the will of God under three heads;
Exterior, Interior and Essential. The exterior will of God is ‘a certain
light, norm or rule that guides us in active life’; the interior, ‘a
brightness that directs us and supports the soul in contemplation’; and
the essential, ‘a splendour that governs and perfects the spirit in the
supereminent life.’ the first exercise that the aspirant must learn is
the ‘practice of the intention of the will of God.’ There are six grades
of this intention, which must be actual, unique, willing, indubitable,
clear and prompt.

When one intends actually, one notes within oneself the actual
remembrance of the will of God ; and one excludes thereby the sins of
forgetfulness and mental dissipation. ‘This forgetting,’ writes Father
Benet, ‘is a common error that brings immense harm, depriving us of an
incredible amount of light and grace.’ To intend uniquely, is to
conceive of God’s will as the sole and simple end of all one does or
suffers. By this act one excludes all other selfish or merely irrelevant
ends.

God’s will must not be done in a grimly stoical spirit, but with full
inclination and a sense of peace and joy. In other words, the intention
must be willing. To intend willingly excludes strain, worry and gloom,
and makes the soul capable of receiving the Holy Spirit, of whom it is
written, Factus est in pace locus ejus.

Intending indubitably, one excludes all vacillation; for one believes
firmly that the work undertaken for the will of God is really God’s
will. Clarity of intention refers to the quality of the faith involved.
One clearly conceives the eternal and divine significance of one’s
actions in the world of creatures. Finally there is the act of prompt
intention, which exclude dilatoriness and sloth.

The practice of these six grades of intention is prescribed by Father
Benet at every stage of the spiritual life, from the most rudimentary to
the most advanced. The exercise is a very difficult one, but it is
obvious that anyone who has learned to carry it out faithfully has gone
far in the direction of transforming his entire life into a continuous
act of prayer and contemplation.

A question that naturally arises, as we read this section of the book,
is the following: How do we know which acts are in accord with God’s
will and which are not? Father Benet tries to answer-not, it must be
admitted, with entire success. He divides acts into three classes, those
commanded, directly or indirectly, by divine authority; those
prohibited; and the indifferent. In regard to the first two, God’s will
is clear, because there are laws and commandments which embody an
objective norm of conduct. In regard to the third, what counts is the
intention. For in matters indifferent, ‘the work accords with the
intention, not the intention with the work.’ If, while doing an
indifferent thing, we dedicate our action to God, the doing of it will
actually be the will of God. To go for a walk or to eat one’s dinner,
consciously, for God’s sake is better, so far as one’s own soul is
concerned, than the performance of intrinsically meritorious acts for
one’s own advantage. All this is good as far as it goes; but
unfortunately it does not go far enough. Father Benet says nothing
whatever about a whole class of acts which, so far as their earthly
consequences are concerned, are more important than any others : I mean,
those acts which the individual performs, not for his own sake, but on
behalf and for the advantage of some social organization, such as a
nation, a church, a political party, a religious order, a business
concern, a family. There are no moral problems more difficult than those
connected with this class of actions. All the more reason, then, that in
a treatise on the practice of God’s will they should be thoroughly
examined. Father Benet chose to ignore them. In this he followed the
example of all too many Christian moralists, belonging to both the great
ethical traditions-the mystical, ‘theocentric’ tradition and that other
‘anthropocentric’ tradition derived from Stoicism. If Father Joseph
deviated from the way of perfection into power politics, the fault must
be attributed in part, at least, to his upbringing. Benet of Canfield
never discussed the relationship between political action on the one
hand and, on the other, the unitive life, the doing of the will of God.
In a later chapter it will be necessary to examine this relationship in
some detail.

The second part of The Rule of Perfection deals with the interior will
of God-that ‘brightness which directs and supports the soul in
contemplation.’ According to Father Benet the interior will of God is
realized in stages, of which he counts five, namely, manifestations,
admirations, humiliations, exultations and elevations. (The list, as one
reels off the polysyllables, seems a trifle ridiculous. But then so do
all classifications.

Compared with the manifest continuity of nature, what could be more
absurd than the elaborate hierarchy of names devised by men of science?
And yet, without such a hierarchy of names, there could be no analysis
of the world about us and no intellectual understanding. It is the same
with the higher psychology. Its experiences are continuous and direct;
but they cannot be described or theorized about, and the conditions of
their realization cannot be taught, except in terms of a hierarchy of
analytical names. So long as we remember that ‘words are signs of
things’ and avoid the all too common and absolutely fatal mistake of
‘making things the signs of words,’ classifications can be of the utmost
value to us. With this parenthetic warning, let us return to Father
Benet’s polysyllables.) Manifestations, which are those experiences of
the divine presence that ordinarily accompany the first stages of the
contemplative life, follow normally from the exercise of pure intentions
in regard to the exterior will. The mechanism is simple: purity of
intention in action produces a dying away of passions and affections
directed towards mundane objects; the dying away of passions and
affections produces tranquillity of mind, which in turn produces the
inward silence in which the soul can begin to experience the immanent
divinity. ‘

Admirations arise when the contemplative gains a direct experience of
God’s infinite greatness, together with a correlated experience of his
own intrinsic nothingness. Humiliations are a further fruit of the sense
of personal nothingness, and are valuable as providing an antidote to
that complacency, into which beginners so easily fall after their first
experiences of divine graces.

God’s goodness in uniting himself with the soul in spite of its
abjectness produces exultations. This spiritual joy makes sweet the
progressive denial of self which is the necessary condition of
progressive advance in the way of union. In Father Benet’s own words, it
‘makes us despise carnal consolations, makes easy things that seem
impossible, opens the way to heaven.’

Finally, the contemplative reaches the stage of elevations.

These are the ‘blind stirrings of love’ which result in union. Quis
adhaeret Deo, unus spiritus est ³.

Of the third part of his book Father Benet says specifically that it is
not for beginners. Its subject is the essential will of God, and the
practices it inculcates are the equivalents of pure intention and
contemplation on a higher stage of that ascending spiral, which is the
way of perfection.

The essential will of God is that the soul should become united with
God’s essence. In this union the soul is passive, God alone active. All
the soul can do is to expose itself, utterly naked of its will, to the
will of God, and to use ‘a subtle industry’ in order to strip away the
last shreds of its selfhood.

Father Benet begins by describing two approaches to the supreme task of
doing the essential will of God. The first is through a consideration of
the imperfections in one’s acts of contemplation. Imperfections exist at
every stage of the spiritual life. In the early stages they are gross
and palpable. But as the mind becomes increasingly illuminated, these
disappear and are replaced by faults of a more subtle nature. No
spiritual, however far advanced, can ever afford to relax his
watchfulness; for in an illuminated mind the tiniest imperfection can
effectively hinder union with God. The contemplation of advanced
spirituals has three common defects. First, it may be too fervent, in
which case the soul is not peaceful enough to receive God. Second, the
soul may retain a subtle image of what is in itself imageless, the
essence of God. Thirdly, the soul may conceive of God as being somewhere
else than ‘in its own ground,’ ‘at the apex of the higher will.’ All
these defects can be remedied by suitable acts of ‘denudation.’
Emotionality and images can be stripped away; and when they have been
stripped away, it will be found that the soul has become fit for the
consciousness of God as pure immanence.

The second approach to the doing of God’s essential will is through
Annihilation, which is the final, consummating stage of the long-drawn
process of getting rid of self-will. Annihilation is classified by
Father Benet as passive and active. Passive annihilation occurs when God
actually makes himself present to us in contemplation. Active
annihilation is the being dead to the world while working in the world,
the dwelling inwardly in eternity while outwardly operating in time.
Both types of annihilation are necessary; but active annihilation is the
higher and more perfect condition. Concerning passive annihilation,
Father Benet has little to add to what was said of contemplation in the
preceding section of his book. Distractions are touched upon, and the
contemplative is advised to avoid and circumvent, never to fight against
the intruding irrelevances. ‘For the more a man operates, the more he is
and exists.’ But the more the man exists, the less God exists within
him.

It is for an analogous reason that the advanced contemplative should
avoid in his meditations all particular aspects of the divine life, and
content himself with a ‘simple regard’ directed to God in his totality.
Active annihilation is obtained through a process of’ recording,’ a kind
of continuous, effortless awareness of God, and through a pure faith,
which conceives of God as really present even in those circumstances, in
which there is no sensible inward evidence of that presence and no
reason for inferring it.

In this third section of The Rule, the right relationship between action
and contemplation, between man in time and God in eternity, is discussed
at length and with great subtlety.

Here I can only summarize what Father Benet says about that shrinking
from outward works, into which so many spirituals fall, out of a fear of
being distracted from their contemplation of God. This shrinking, he
insists, defeats its own object and is in fact the final and greatest
obstacle to perfection. For ‘the more the soul fears and retreats from
outward works, the more the images of these things stamp themselves upon
her. Furthermore, she tends to attribute to them the place and standing
of God. God must be recognized as being everywhere and, for the
contemplative, his presence should do away with outward things. Instead
of that, the soul that is afraid of outward things gives so much place
to them that their presence does away with God.’ The spiritual who knows
only passive contemplation, tends to introvert his mind away from
things, to retreat from them into an inward act of contemplation. But
this does not abolish the problem of outward works; it merely postpones
it to another occasion. Moreover, introversion implies extraversion, the
attitude of the average sensual man who regards outward things as fully
real and worthy of being treated as ends in themselves. ‘I say, then,
that introversion must be rejected, because extraversion must never be
admitted; but one must live continuously in the abyss of the divine
essence and in the absolute nothingness of things; and if at times a man
finds himself separated from them (the essence and the nothingness), he
must return to them, not by introversion, but by annihilation.’ The
learning to live in constant active annihilation is probably the most
difficult and exacting of all human tasks; but to those who fullfil it
comes the reward that came to Brother Lawrence and St. Teresa, to Mme
Acarie, to Father Benet himself and, indeed, to all the great mystics;
the experience of living simultaneously in time and eternity, among men
and in God; the peace and bliss, here in this earthly life, of the
beatific vision. The state to which Father Benet gave the name of active
annihilation has been described, not only by Christian mystics, but also
by the contemplatives of other faiths -by Hindus, by Buddhists, by
Taoists, by the Sufis. All are agreed in regarding it as the highest,
the most perfect condition to which the human consciousness purified,
one-pointed, radically transformed can attain.

Up to this point The Rule of Perfection contains nothing which might not
be found in the writings of any of the great contemplatives of the
Dionysian tradition. But from now on Father Benet leaves the path of
pure, undogmatic mysticism followed by his predecessors, to take
another, more specifically Catholic road.

Father Benet departs from traditional mysticism by insisting that even
the most advanced contemplatives should persist in ‘the practice of the
passion’ -in other words, that they should meditate upon the sufferings
of Christ, even when they have reached the stage at which it is possible
for them to unite their souls with the Godhead in an act of ‘ simple
regard.’ The Dionysian mystics, whose religion was primarily
experimental and who were consequently ready to adapt Catholic dogma to
direct and immediate experience, had always maintained the contrary. In
the higher stages of orison, they had insisted, all ideas and images,
even ideas and images connected with the life of Christ, must be put
aside, as distractions standing in the way of perfect union.

In his commentary on The Cloud of Unknowing, Father Augustine Baker
specifically comments on Father Benet’s departure from the traditional
teaching. ‘I ask you to observe,’ he says, ‘that he (the author of The
Cloud) leaves no room for the exercise of the passion, so long as one is
enabled in this exercise of love. This love is directed to the pure
divinity, without the use of any image, either of our Saviour’s
humanity, or of any other creature. So that, according to our author’s
teaching throughout this book, if one be enabled for the said exercise
of the love of the divinity, and that during his whole life, he must not
leave it to go and exercise himself in the passion, much less in any
inferior matter. And in this point our author agreeth fully both with
the author of Secrets Sentiers and with what I myself have affirmed in
my treatise on the exercise of the passion, wherein we differ from the
opinion of Father Benet Fitch in the third book of his Will of God and
from some others also, who would have some exercise of the passion in
all states.’

Father Benet himself was no less clearly aware than Father Baker of the
novelty of his doctrine in this respect. There is no attempt in The Rule
of Perfection to conceal or gloss over the break with tradition. On the
contrary, it is admitted, and a whole chapter is devoted to an elaborate
attempt to justify it. Unhappily Father Benet’s essay in justification
is one of those, to us, completely fantastic rigmaroles, so dear and
apparently so convincing to the medieval and early-modern theologian,
dozens of quotations from the Old and New Testament are strung together
in support of the contention whose truth it is desired to demonstrate. A
few of these quotations have some slight bearing on the point at issue;
but most are perfectly irrelevant and must therefore be subjected to a
process of arbitrary interpretation. This makes it possible for any
statement to have any meaning whatsoever. Thus, Father Benet is able to
find the confirmation of his teaching even in the anecdote of Rahab.
That line of scarlet thread, which the whore of Jericho attached to her
window, as a sign to the invading Israelites, prophetically signified
that ‘God wishes us to place the red and bloody passion of Christ in the
window of our inward house, which is our understanding, to the end that
we may always meditate upon it and contemplate it.’ That this sort of
thing should ever have carried conviction to anybody seems now
completely incomprehensible. The fact that it actually did so is a
salutary reminder that the frames of reference within which men do their
reasoning and feeling do not remain the same, and that at any given
moment of history certain thoughts are strictly unthinkable, certain
sentiments impossible to experience. Father Benet’s real reasons for
teaching that the practice of the passion should be continued at every
stage of the contemplative life were doubtless the following: first, he
himself was strongly attracted to acts of personal devotion; second, he
was a Franciscan, and Franciscan devotion has always been especially
concerned with the passion; and, thirdly, he felt (as many theologians
before and after his day have felt) that the empirical mysticism of the
Dionysians was, in its higher stages at least, too undogmatic to be
truly Catholic. From our particular perch in time we look back and
wonder why on earth Father Benet couldn’t baldly have said so, without
bringing in Rahab and all the other nonsense. Meanwhile the odd fact
remains that, owing to the nature of the frames of reference within
which he thought and felt, justification in terms of a Bronze Age harlot
seemed to Father Benet intrinsically more convincing than justification
in terms of psychology and religious history.

The thesis which Rahab serves to justify is that contemplation of the
passion is more pleasing to God than contemplation of the divinity. ‘One
should not leave the passion to contemplate the divinity, but one should
continue both simultaneously.’ That ‘simple regard,’ with which the
Dionysians had contemplated the Godhead, should be turned instead on
Christ-but not on Christ in his humanity alone; rather as God and man in
one person. ‘The whole difficulty of this simple regard comes from the
contradiction which seems to prevent the human reason from being able to
contemplate in one simple regard God and man, body and spirit.’ The
difficulty, says Father Benet, can only be overcome through a sustained
act of faith which, while the mind dwells on the image of Christ on the
cross, absorbs and annihilates that image in God’s essence. From a
psychological point of view, this whole passage is peculiarly
interesting. It reveals Father Benet as a true mystic, very far advanced
on the road to union; and yet constrained, by the logic of the theology
he has accepted as true, to turn back from ultimate reality towards a
particular manifestation of reality, from the direct intuition of God to
imaginings and discursive reasonings connected with a person.

Such, then, were the doctrines which the youthful Baron de Maffliers
received from his first master in religion, and which, as Father Joseph,
he was later to reproduce, in a simpler and more systematic form, for
the benefit of his converts and the novices entrusted to his charge. The
friar’s own method of orison has been described at length in the first
chapter, and it is unnecessary to add any further details here. Suffice
it to say that his Introduction a la vie spirituelle par une facile
methode d’ oraison is an excellent specimen of its kind, well balanced,
practical, distinguished by sound sense no less than by eloquence. In
spite, however, of all these merits, it was little read. Like The Rule
of Perfection, Father Joseph’s Introduction was soon forgotten, and
exercised no appreciable influence on the course of religious life
during the seventeenth century. To develop Father Benet’s doctrine, to
introduce it to a wider public, was to be the work not of Father Joseph,
but of his friend and fellow disciple, Pierre de Berulle. The history of
this accomplishment and of its unforeseen consequences is only
indirectly relevant to our main theme, but it is intrinsically so
interesting and instructive that I make no excuse for briefly
summarizing it here.

‘An able thinker of our time,’ writes Berulle, ‘has maintained that the
sun is at the centre of the world, not the earth; that the former stands
still, while the latter moves in relation to it. This novel opinion, not
widely accepted in the science of the stars; is useful and should be
followed in the science of salvation.’ This Copernican revolution in
theology was Berulle’s reaction to the intense personalism of the then
fashionable Jesuit devotion, based upon the ‘Spiritual Exercises’ of St.
Ignatius Loyola. At the beginning of his ‘Exercises,’ Ignatius had, it
is true, reaffirmed the fundamental Christian doctrine that man’s end
and purpose in this world is the glory of God. But having made this
affirmation he proceeded to write a book, in which the predominant role
is played by the human individual. The exercises are a gymnastic of the
personal will; so much so that, instead of being an end in itself, the
worship of God is made, in some sort, an instrument to be used by the
gymnast in establishing self-control. For this ptolemaic system of
religious thought and feeling Berulle substituted a thoroughgoing
theocentrism. God is to be worshipped without regard to one’s spiritual
profit. He is to be worshipped for his own sake, in an act of adoration
and awe. He is to be worshipped as he is in himself, the sovereign and
infinite being. To worship this sovereign and infinite being adequately,
a man would have himself to be infinite and possess the highest reality,
In practice, God has only once been worshipped as he should be
worshipped and that was by Christ, who being God as well as man, was
alone capable of giving the infinite adoration due to an infinite and
eternal reality.

All this is strictly in accord with the Dionysian tradition.

All good contemplatives are religious Copernicans, and, in genuine
mysticism, the theocentric hypothesis is axiomatic . Berulle’s
contribution to religious thought and practice consists in this; that he
developed and systematized traditional theocentrism, while at the same
time he developed and systematized into an elaborate ‘Jesus-centrism’
the aberrant mystical doctrine which he had learned from Father Benet.

In discussing the reasons for Father Benet’s departure from the
Dionysian tradition, I suggested that one of these might be found in the
friar’s sense of the essential un-Catholicness of pure mysticism. That
this was true of Berulle is certain. Writing of the school of which
Berulle was the founder, Bremond says that ‘its spirituality continually
refers to and derives authority from the dogmas of the Church.’ Berulle
possessed undoubtedly a great aptitude for the mystical life; but before
being a mystic, he was a Catholic. For him, theology, the gospel story
and ecclesiastical tradition were fundamental data, antecedent to
personal experience, which was something to be bent and moulded into
conformity with them. The contemplatives of the Dionysian tradition, on
the other hand, had adapted dogma to their own experience, with the
result that, in so far as they were advanced mystics,.they had ceased to
be specifically Catholic. To a non-Christian, this seems the supremely
important, the eminently encouraging fact about mysticism-that it
provides the basis for a religion free from unacceptable dogmas, which
themselves are contingent upon ill-established and arbitrarily
interpreted historical facts. To certain pious Christians, on the other
hand, mysticism is suspect precisely because of its undogmatic and
unhistorical character. (Karl Barth, for example, regards it as nothing
but ‘esoteric atheism.’)

Berulle knew and respected the mystics of the Dionysian tradition, but
he preferred not to follow them. Instead, he devoted all the energies of
a powerful intellect to the creation of a new, mystico-Catholic
philosophy of life. In this philosophy, the raw materials of Catholic
dogmas and popular Catholic devotion were worked up into a finished
product of high spirituality by means of techniques borrowed from the
Dionysian contemplatives. The result was in the highest degree
remarkable; but it was not mysticism. It was not mysticism because
though the approach was the same as that of the Dionysian
contemplatives, the object approached was not the imageless Godhead of
their direct experience and of their theology. The revolution which
Berulle accomplished at the instigation of Benet Fitch and under the
influence of Catholic thought and practice was more than Copernican. Not
content with affirming that the sun was the centre of the world, he
insisted that there were several suns. To theocentrism he added
Jesus-centrism and even Virgin-centrism -the contemplation of Christ and
his mother in and for themselves. These two new suns assumed such
importance for Berulle that they came, in his system, very largely to
eclipse the great original sun of the Godhead. ‘Each man,’ he wrote, ‘is
but a part of which Jesus is the whole. It is not enough for a man to be
subordinated; he must be disappropriated and annihilated, and
appropriated to Jesus, subsisting in Jesus, grafted in Jesus, living and
operating in Jesus.’ Substitute ‘God’ for ‘Jesus,’ and the passage might
have been written by the author of The Cloud of Unknowing.

The same significant similarities and differences can be found in the
devotional practices of Berulle and his followers on the one hand and of
the-Dionysian contemplatives, represented by the author of The Cloud on
the other. For Berulle, as for the earlier mystics, the end and purpose
of orison is the annihilation of self through self-abandonment to the
divine will. The act of self-abandonment begins with adoration or
admiration’ a sublime, rare and ravishing occupation,’ in Berulle’s
words-and goes on to ‘adherence,’ which is a process of cleaving to that
which one had adored, of immersing oneself in it, of transubstantiating
the soul into what it contemplates. But here again, where the earlier
mystics had insisted that adoration should beat upon the imageless cloud
which envelops the Godhead, Berulle advocated ‘adherence’ and finally
‘servitude’ to Christ and even to the Virgin. Urban VIII, who raised him
to the cardinalate, gives him, along with the Hat, the title of ‘apostle
of the Incarnate Word.’ The nature and scope of Berulle’s more than
Copernican revolution was not only recognized by his contemporaries; it
was also officially approved. ‘ Virtue,’ the author of The Cloud had
written, translating directly from Richard of St. Victor, ‘is naught
else but an ordered and measured affection, plainly directed unto God
for himself.’ St. Augustine had expressed the same idea in a phrase:
Love, and do what you will. A man who has learnt to love God intensely
and unremittingly can safely do what he wishes, because he will never
wish to do evil.

Berulle and his followers often contrasted their method with that of the
pagan and non-mystical moralists. The moralist, they pointed out, seeks
to become virtuous by strengthening his self-conscious will. His method
consists in making a succession of resolutions to demonstrate some
particular virtue. The carrying out of these resolutions is virtue in
action, and may be expected, in the long run, to establish a habit. The
defect of such a method, as the psychologists of every time and country
have pointed out, is that it engages only the superficial levels of the
mind and leaves the subconscious more or less unaffected. But it is from
the subconscious that our impulses to action, our cravings and
aversions, mainly spring. It follows, therefore, that the moralists’
method of training is fundamentally unsatisfactory. ‘We should
accomplish our acts of virtue,’ says Berulle, ‘more through relation and
homage to Jesus Christ than out of desire for the same virtue in
itself:’ And we should do this, not only because all true religion is
theocentric, but also because theocentrism produces better ethical
results than anthropocentrism and moralism. For, as one of Berulle’s
contemporaries and followers remarks, ‘when one wishes to dye a piece of
white stuff scarlet, one can set about it in two ways; either by
applying the colour to the stuff, a process which takes much time,
labour and trouble; or by dipping it into the dye, which is done without
any trouble. It is the same with the virtues; virtue is a dye in the
heart of Jesus Christ, and when, by love, by adoration and by the other
duties of religion, a soul plunges into it, it easily takes this dye.’
This plunging into the dye is accomplished by means of ‘adherence,’ by a
process of active and yet resigned and self-immolating exposure of the
soul to the divine object of its adoration, which in Berulle’s
devotional practice is generally Christ and sometimes the Virgin,
seldom, as with the true mystic, that imageless Godhead which direct
experience reveals as the ultimate reality.

The effects of Berulle’s more than Copernican revolution were profound,
far-reaching and mainly disastrous. From the end of the seventeenth
century to the end of the nineteenth, mysticism practically disappeared
out of the Catholic Church. As of all historical events, the causes of
this disappearance are many and complex. There can be no doubt, however,
that among these causes the Berullian revolution must take an important
place. By substituting Christ and the Virgin for the undifferentiated
Godhead of the earlier mystics, Berulle positively guaranteed that none
who followed his devotional practices should ever accede to the highest
states of union or enlightenment. Contemplation of persons and their
qualities entails a great deal of analytic thinking and an incessant use
of the imagination. But analytic thinking and imagination are precisely
the things which prevent the soul from attaining enlightenment. On this
point all the great mystical writers, Christian and Oriental, are
unanimous and emphatic. Consequently the would-be mystic who follows
Berulle and chooses as the object of his love and contemplation, not the
Godhead, but a person and personal qualities, thereby erects
insurmountable barriers between himself and the higher states of union.

In this context it is interesting to compare Berulle and Berullism with
Ignatius Loyola and the Jesuit school of devotion. Loyola seems to have
been a born mystic who rejected the gift of passive contemplation in
favour of active meditation based on analytic thought and imagination.
Anthropocentric and moralistic, his Spiritual Exercises lie outside the
field of mystical literature and make little appeal to persons of
mystical temperament. Brought up on these exercises, the Jesuit
theologians were mostly ignorant of the highest mystical states, and,
being ignorant of them, denied their very possibility and regarded with
suspicion or even actively persecuted those who insisted that such
states existed. The influence of Berulle and his followers was of a
subtler kind; for they revolutionized mysticism from within. Unlike
Loyola, Berulle did not reject his own mystical gifts. He preached the
theocentrism traditional among mystics up to the time of St. John of the
Cross, and he practised their traditional ‘adherence.’ Hence the appeal
of his writings to the mystically minded; hence the depth and inwardness
of his influence; hence, too, the fatal consequences of his
subordination of direct mystical experience to personalistic theology.
Berulle no doubt sincerely believed that the soul could adhere to the
Incarnate Word or to the Virgin in exactly the same way as it could
adhere to God, and with the same consequences. But, psychologically,
this is impossible. There cannot be adherence to persons or personal
qualities without analysis and imagination; and where analysis and
imagination are active, the mind is unable to receive into itself the
being of God. Berulle taught potential mystics to follow a path which
could not, in the nature of things, lead to the ultimate goal of
mysticism. It was a path that would lead them to virtue; for (as Coue
sufficiently demonstrated in our own day) imagination is more effective
in this respect than will; a soul can be made virtuous by being dyed in
its own mental image of another’s goodness. It was also a path that
would lead them to intense, affective devotion to divine persons, and to
untiring activity on their behalf. But it was not a path that would lead
to union with ultimate reality. Like the Jesuits, the followers of
Berulie were condemned, by the very nature of their devotions, to a
spiritual ignorance all the more fatal for imagining itself to be
knowledge. It was the prevalence of this ignorance among sincere and
virtuous men that led to the reaction against mysticism in the second
half of the seventeenth century. The aberrations of the Quietists were
used to justify the violence of this reaction. But, as a matter of fact,
neither Molinos nor Mme Guyon wrote anything that a little common sense
cannot easily neutralize. The real objection to the Quietists was that
they were continuators of that Dionysian tradition of mysticism whose
last great representative had been St. John of the Cross. They were out
of place in a world where Jesuitism and Berullism were just coming to
their devotional consummation in the cult of the Sacred Heart. (Jean
Eudes, beatified as the Father, Doctor and Apostle of that cult, was a
Berullian, and the revelations of Margaret Mary Alacoque were sporisored
by the Jesuits.) By the end of the seventeenth century, mysticism has
lost its old significance in Christianity and is more than half dead.

__

‘Well, what of it?’ it may be asked. ‘Why shouldn’t it die?

What use is it when it’s alive?’ ‘

The answer to these questions is that where there is no vision, the
people perish; and that, if those who are the salt of the earth lose
their savour, there is nothing to keep that earth disinfected, nothing
to prevent it from falling into complete decay. The mystics are channels
through which a little knowledge of reality filters down into our human
universe of ignorance and illusion. A totally unmystical world would be
a world totally blind and insane. From the beginnings of the eighteenth
century onwards, the sources of mystical knowledge have been steadily
diminishing in number, all over the planet. We are dangerously far
advanced into the darkness. By a tragic irony (due, of course, to the
ignorance that accompanied their good intentions) the ecstatic Father
Benet, the brilliant and saintly Pierre de Berulle take their place
among the men who have contributed to the darkening of the human spirit.


CHAPTER IV

The Evangelist

In the foregoing chapter I have painted in some detail the religious
setting, historical, contemporary and personal of Father Joseph’s life.
It was against this fixed back-drop of an intense Catholic devotion,
partly mystical, partly imaginative and emotional, that the episodes of
his political career were acted out; and it was in relation to it that
they had to be explained and justified in his own mind.

During the first years of his life as a Capuchin, Father Joseph’s
activities were exclusively religious. His career began, as we have
seen, with a year’s novitiate at Orleans. After his profession in Paris
he was sent to the Capuchin seminary at Rouen. Here the course of
studies ordinarily lasted four years; but the new pupil was already so
far advanced that he was altogether excused the preliminary year of
philosophy and one of the three subsequent years of theology. His
reputation at the seminary was that of a young religious graced with
notable spiritual gifts, fervent in prayer, indefatigable in good works,
burning with the holy ambition to become a saint. He practised
supererogatory austerities in the matter of food and labour; he kept
such a careful watch over pride that he was never heard to speak of his
past life, his present wishes or his future projects; he was eager in
all circumstances to do more than his duty. That Spartan taste of his
for the uncomfortable and the strenuous continually manifested itself,
sometimes in the oddest ways. For example, it was his custom, during
certain of the prescribed periods of prayer, to worship standing,
bare-footed on the flagstones. When sleepiness overtook him (which it
sometimes did, as he was in the habit of shortening his nights with
contemplation) he would combat it but standing on one leg. The practice
was not generally approved of in the seminary; but when warned of the
dangers of excess, the need of discretion even in matters of piety,
Father Joseph would answer that the Kingdom of Heaven is taken by
violence, and continue his prayers to the accompaniment of excruciating
muscular strain.

All this was a sign of most commendable zeal; but what chiefly
interested his superiors was the fact that their new pupil seemed to
have a definite gift of orison. Father Benet had taught him the theory
and practice of his own kind of modified Dionysian mysticism; and the
young Capuchin had brought to his devotions that obsessive,
hallucinatory preoccupation with the sufferings of Calvary which had
haunted his mind from earliest childhood. The result was a type of
mental prayer which his superiors described as an orison of ‘seraphic
and crucified love.’ Intensive practice of this form of contemplation
(to which the young seminarist gave many more hours than the two which
the Capuchin rule prescribed for mental prayer) led not infrequently to
ecstasy and the seeing of visions. If we add to all these the fact that
he had eloquence and a talent for religious controversy and religious
exhortation, we shall not be surprised at the extraordinarily favourable
judgment passed upon him by Ange de Joyeuse . .’Father Joseph,’ he
declared in 1601, when the young man was still at the Rouen seminary,
‘is the perfect Capuchin and the most consummate religious of his
province, indeed of the whole order.’

Benet of Canfield was at this time lying in an English prison, from
which he was not delivered until 1602. But though absent, his influence
over his young pupil’s mind was still strong. How strong we may judge
from the books which Father Joseph read most. The list begins with St.
John’s Gospel and the Epistles of St. Paul, goes on to St. Augustine’s
Confessions and Soliloquies, Dionysius the Areopagite’s Mystical
Theology and Divine Names, the mystical writings of Hugh and Richard of
St. Victor and St. Bernard, and ends with Ruysbroeck and two lesser
contemplatives of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries respectively,
Henry de Herp and the Benedictine Abbot Blosius. It is a little library
of the purest mystical tradition.

Father Joseph’s superiors expressed their high opinion of him by acts no
less than words. In 1603, a few months after he had left the seminary,
the young man was appointed reader in philosophy at the convent of the
rue Saint-Honoré. His career as a theologian and man of learning was cut
short, after only a year, by an aggravation of that progressive defect
of vision which advanced throughout his life until, at the end, he was
nearly blind. Henceforward the scholar’s world of books was closed to
him; but the world of men lay still wide open. In 1604 he was ordained,
received his licence to preach and was sent to take charge of the
novices at the Capuchin house of Meudon. Here he set to work, with an
energy always tempered by tact and skill, teaching the new-made friars
those arts of mental prayer which he himself had learned from Benet of
Canfield only a few years before. To help his pupils, he reduced the
essence of the spiritual life, with its three stages of purgation,
illumination and union, to a series of thirty-six rhymed quatrains; and
for each novice he wrote out a set of spiritual instructions specially
designed for his individual needs.

To his work within the convent he added another labour the
re-evangelization of the neighbouring countryside. Meudon and, along
with it, all the other villages in the neighbourhood of Paris had
suffered extremely during the wars of religion. Not content with
despoiling the people’s farms and shops, the marauding soldiers had
pillaged and often wrecked the churches.

In some communities all organized religious activity had come to an end;
and of the parish priests who remained many had succumbed to the
influence of their anarchic surroundings and were leading lives of a far
from edifying character. With the approval of his superiors, Father
Joseph set himself to recover this spiritually devastated area for the
Church. His missionary efforts were crowned with immediate and startling
success. Wherever he preached thousands would come from miles around to
listen to his impassioned eloquence. Churches and convent chapels were
too small for such congregations and soon he was speaking in the open
air. Many of his listeners went through the crisis of conversion, and
everywhere the habits of traditional piety were re-established. So
great, indeed, was the throng of those desiring to be confessed and take
communion that additional friars had to be sent for from Paris to cope
with them. Well practised in humility, Father Joseph displayed no
personal satisfaction at his triumph, which he regarded as a
particularly good opportunity for practising the ‘active annihilation’
of self in the divine will. Preaching, he tried to remain continuously
aware that he in himself was nothing and God, everything; that this
eloquence, which made the people groan aloud in fear of hell, weep for
their offences, raise supplicating hands towards the mercy seat, was not
his eloquence, but the word of God finding utterance through him, the
utterly unworthy instrument of God’s will. From the active annihilation
of preaching, he would retire at night to his cell and there, in the
dark silence, would give himself up to passive annihilation in an act of
mental prayer. A few hours of sleep, and he was at work again, strong in
powers and energies not his own, at peace and happy in the conviction
that his true vocation had been revealed to him. The service to which he
was called was that of an eyangelist and missionary.

This was now obvious, not only to himself and his companions, but also
to his superiors. So obvious, indeed, that, in the autumn of 1605, he
was relieved of his teaching at Meudon and appointed Warden of the
Capuchin house at Bourges. Here, he would have relatively little to do
within the-convent walls and would therefore be able to devote the best
part of his energies to the work of evangelization outside.

At Bourges, he was no less successful with an educated, urban audience
than he had been among the peasants of Meudon and the neighbouring
countryside. At the request of the city fathers he delivered a series of
addresses which were so well attended that he had to move from the
conventual church to a much larger building. The subject of these
addresses, which generally lasted two hours, was the art of mental
prayer. In the succeeding years we shall find him returning again and
again to this topic. By word of mouth and in written summaries, which he
left with his auditors to be copied and circulated in manuscript, he
urged upon all Christians the desirability, nay, the absolute necessity
of the mystical approach to God. In one such summary written at about
this time he says emphatically that ‘a man who neglects this duty of
orison is blind indeed, not knowing his friends from his enemies. One
can never sufficiently regret the loss entailed by this slothful
neglect, a loss of the inestimable graces brought to the soul by
conversation with God.’ Even during the years when he was acting as
Richelieu’s coadjutor, he still remained, with one side of his being,
the faithful pupil of his first master, Benet of Canfield.

Father Joseph was not allowed to remain for long at Bourges. His talent
for preaching was too valuable to be lavished on a single congregation,
and in the early spring of 1606 he was called to preach the Lenten
sermons in the cathedral of Le Mans. Nothing remarkable happened here,
except that a hysterical woman heard him preach, and conceiving a
violent passion, tried to seduce him. For a man who regarded
uncloistered females as wild beasts and horrific mysteries, the
temptation was not too serious; and after having converted his fair
assailant, Father Joseph proceeded to Angers, and from Angers to Saumur.
To be chosen to preach at Saumur was a very special honour; for Saumur
was one of the walled cities assigned by the Edict of Nantes to the
Huguenots. Under the administration of its very capable and active
governor, De Plessis Mornay, it had become a centre of Calvinist
illumination. An academy had been founded not long before, where young
men were taught by eminent professors, recruited not only from among the
French Huguenots, but from every part of Protestant Europe as well.
Saumur also had a seminary for the training of future ministers, and a
well-equipped press, where Protestant controversialists -De Plessis
Mornay himself among them could print their books and pamphlets.

In this thriving Calvinist city (later to be ruined and half depopulated
by the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes) a Catholic minority enjoyed
liberty of worship and had its church assigned to it. Here Father Joseph
preached and gave addresses on the art of orison; and here, as was his
custom, he wrote out the substance of these addresses to serve as a
handbook for his listeners, when he should be gone. In the intervals of
preaching and instructing, he consulted with the more influential
members of his flock about the possibility of founding a Capuchin
convent in their city: Hitherto Du Plessis Mornay had refused to admit
the friars into his Calvinist preserves. Father Joseph did not yet know
how this formidable opposition was to be broken or circumvented; hut he
was determined that, somehow or other, Saumur should get its Capuchins.
At the meeting of the Chapter of his province, which was held that same
summer in Paris, he broached the subject in a speech. His colleagues and
superiors approved his design and, at the end of August, he left Paris
with the new post of warden of the convent of Rennes and a commission to
take appropriate steps for establishing the friars at Saumur.

For the young Capuchin, this commission was to have profound and
far-reaching consequences. The pious plot to get the better of Du
Plessis Mornay was the first link in a long chain of unforeseeable
circumstances that drew him at last to the very pinnacle of political
power. It all began with his visit to the abbey of Fontevrault.
Fontevrault was the parent house of a twelfth-century order of monks and
nuns, all of whom were under the rule of its Abbess. The order was
immensely rich, had scores of subsidiary houses all over the country and
recruited its nuns from the most aristocratic families. The Abbess was
one of the great dignitaries of the Gallican church. As befitted the
holder of so important a position, ‘Mme de Fontevrault’ was almost never
below the rank of a duchess and frequently above it; for the profitable
charge was often given to princesses of the blood. The incumbent in 1606
was an elderly aunt of Henri IV, called Eleonore de Bourbon. Her exalted
rank and the fact that Fontevrault was distant only a few miles from
Saumur made of Mme de Bourbon the obviously fitting person to deal with
Du Plessis Mornay. To her, then, Father Joseph was sent. She listened
favourably to his request and wrote at once to the governor of Saumur.
Du Plessis Mornay disliked the friars; but he could not afford to offend
a close relation of the king’s. He gave his consent to the founding of a
Capuchin house at Saumur; but followed up this action by privately doing
everything in his power to prevent his consent from doing the Capuchins
any good. All the obstructive machinery of the law was set in motion,
and for three long years the royal edict, which granted the Capuchins a
right to found a convent at Saumur, failed to obtain the necessary
registration from the local Parlement. But the friars were persistent,
and at last, in 1609, the foundation stone of the new convent was
solemnly laid. Father Joseph had triumphed. But he was not to enjoy his
triumph. What he had hoped and expected from his enterprise at Saumur
was the privilege to serve as a missionary among the heretics. What it
actually led to was a very different kind of career.

Mme de Bourbon was very favourably impressed by the young friar who had
been sent to see her. His zeal and piety were exemplary, his judgment
was no less remarkable than his ardour; and, what was more, under the
ragged habit and the unkempt beard, he was an aristocrat, consummately
well educated and of the most polished address. Once a gentleman, always
a gentleman; nothing could disguise the fact that Father Joseph had been
the Baron de Mafliers. Great nobles, ministers of the crown, princes and
princesses of the blood-with this particular friar such people felt at
home. He was ‘one of us,’ a member of their caste. Besides, in the words
of a contemporary, ‘his conversation was ravishing, and he treated the
nobility with infinite dexterity.’ Mme de Bourbon was as much ravished
as all the rest of them. When the business on which he had been sent was
finished, she consulted the young man about her own troubles. These were
not inconsiderable. Without being scandalous, life in Fontevrault and
its dependent houses was exceedingly worldly. These convents were like
very exclusive country clubs for women. Of the three monastic vows, that
of chastity was observed in them scrupulously; that of obedience, only
grudgingly, and that of poverty, not at all. The nuns enjoyed their own
private incomes and lived surrounded by their own possessions and
domestics. Mme de Bourbon was pious in a vague sort of way, and would
have liked to do something about her order. But what? But how?

Father Joseph discussed the matter with the Abbess and her coadjutrix
and niece, Mme Antoinette d’Orleans. Much more intensely and deeply
religious than her aunt, this princess had long dreamed of creating
within the order of Fontevrault, or outside it, a congregation of pure
contemplatives. This young mystic, with his energy and his gift for
business, was exactly the counsellor and helper she had always hoped to
find. Father Joseph worked out two plans, one of mild reformation for
Mme de Bourbon and the more worldly ladies of Fontevrault, the other,
radical, for Mme d’Orleans and such nuns and novices as might wish to
share with her a strictly cloistered life of contemplation. With these
genuine enthusiasts for a mystical and ascetic religion like his own,
Father Joseph was able to co-operate enthusiastically and with the
greatest satisfaction. Not so with Mme de Bourbon and the worldly party.
The young man desired only one thing, to go on being an evangelist and
an apostle of mysticism; and now, by an unfortunate concatenation of
circumstances, here he was, inextricably involved in a labour which he
found peculiarly distasteful-the reformation of nuns who didn’t want to
be reformed, even in moderation, and who were rich and powerful enough
to hamper their reformer at every turn. But the talents he displayed in
the performance of this ungrateful task were so conspicuous, that he was
never allowed to throw it up and return to his missionary labours.
Warden successively of the convents of Rennes, Chinon and Tours, he was
constantly recalled to Fontevrault. There, among those great ladies in
religious fancy dress, he strove heroically to annihilate the last
traces of his own personal feelings towards the task that had been
assigned to him. It was God’s will that this task should be accomplished
and he was merely the instrument of God’s will. Daily and hourly he
renewed his resolution to do that will-actually, uniquely, willingly.

Meanwhile, the fact remained that the job of reforming Fontevrault was
peculiarly difficult and delicate. Two heads being better than one in
such affairs, Father Joseph turned for assistance and advice to the
bishop if the neighbouring see of Luçon, a young man still in his
twenties, but enjoying already a high reputation for ability and
reforming zeal. The name of this precocious ecclesiastic was Armand Jean
du Plessis de Richelieu. The two men met, discussed the immediate
business at hand, exchanged views on matters of more general interest,
and parted as admiring friends. Another link in the chain of Father
Joseph’s destiny had been forged.

The work of reformation dragged on for years. In 1610 Father Joseph was
transferred from the province of Paris to that of Tours, in order that
he might be more continuously at Fontevrault, and from this time until
1613 he lived for months at a stretch in one or other of the convents of
the order, assisting Mme d’Orleans in the creation of her little
community of contemplatives, and trying to persuade the members of the
Fontevrault country club to behave a little more like the nuns they were
supposed to be. The problems with which he had to deal were suddenly
complicated by the death of old Mme de Bourbon.

The appointment of her successor belonged to the crown, and the crown at
this moment was represented by the regent, Marie de Medicis, who chose
the Duchesse de Lavedan. Before and after this appointment the Queen
Mother sought the advice of Father Joseph and, like everyone else who
met him at this time, conceived a very high opinion of his virtues and
abilities -an opinion which she retained until that day in 1630 when her
flight to Brussels finally removed her from the French scene.

Once again, circumstances were conspiring to draw the missionary away
from his preaching into the world of high politics. It would be
unprofitable to describe in detail the work which Father Joseph
accomplished at Fontevrault and the neighbouring abbey in which Mme
d’Orleans had installed those nuns who genuinely desired a life of
austerity and orison. Suffice it to say that thanks to him the behaviour
of the worldly ladies became more decorous and that finally, in 1617,
the community founded by Mme d’Orleans was promoted, by a papal bull, to
the rank of a new and independent order, the Congregation of Our Lady of
Calvary. This last labour was carried to a successful conclusion in the
teeth of the most determined resistance on the part of the new Abbess of
Fontevrault, who was jealous of her authority and hated a reform,
however intrinsically excellent, which threatened to deprive her of any
of her subjects.

Of the two founders of the Calvarian order, Mme d’Orleans died in 1618,
only a few months after it had been declared independent of Fontevrault.
Dying, she bequeathed to Father Joseph the task of steering the new
congregation along the road which together they had mapped out. It was
the road which, from the time of his first entrance into religion, the
Capuchin had chosen for himself -the road of mortification, mystical
orison and the intensive, hallucinatory practice of the passion of
Christ. For almost as long as he could remember Calvary had filled his
imagination; and it was to Calvary that the new congregation was
dedicated. To imagine themselves in the position of Mary at the foot of
the cross, to feel themselves into her thoughts and the emotions she had
felt during her son’s long agony-this was to be the principal devotion
of the nuns; for the rest, they were to practise the art of mental
prayer as systematized by Father Joseph out of the writings of Benet of
Canfield. To their guidance, their spiritual and even their intellectual
education, Father Joseph gave henceforth unstintingly of his time, his
talents and his energies. Even at the height of his political power and
under the heaviest pressure of business, he never neglected the
Calvarians. Whenever he was in Paris or in one of the other towns in
which a Calvary had been established, he found time to give at least one
day in every week to the instruction and encouragement of the nuns. He
composed for their use a small library of treatises on prayer, on
morals, on philosophy, on theology, besides a great number of letters on
the day-to-day problems of the spiritual life. Much of this material
still survives, but has never been printed. According to the
computations of the only modern scholar who has had access to them,
Father Joseph’s treatises and spiritual letters to the Calvarians would
fill, if published, thirty octavo volumes of five hundred pages apiece.
Most of this great mass of material was composed at a time when the
Capuchin was acting as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and
Apostolic Commissary for Missions-two whole-time jobs, to which he added
this third, of spiritual director to an entire congregation of
religious. Vicariously, in these cloistered contemplatives, he was able
to give himself to that life of orison which Father Benet had taught him
to love, but which Richelieu and the affairs of state made it impossible
for him to lead in person. The glory of France, the humiliation of the
House of Austria-these meant a great deal to a patriot who was convinced
that a triumph for his country was also a triumph for God. But the
spiritual well-being of his nuns and their progress in the art of mental
prayer were of no less moment in Father Joseph’s eyes. To the very end,
the power politician tried his best to remain a mystic.

While engaged on his delicate and distasteful business at Fontevrault,
Father Joseph was appointed to be coadjutor to the Provincial of
Touraine; and a little later, when he had won his freedom from the
worldly ladies and had only Mme d’Orleans and her contemplatives to
think of, he became Provincial. The Capuchin province of Touraine
included not merely the district around Tours, but the whole of Poitou
and much of Brittany and Normandy as well. As overseer of this great
domain, Father Joseph regarded it as his duty to become acquainted
personally with every friar within its borders. The frequent journeys of
the preceding years gave place to an almost continuous wandering, by
forced marches, back and forth across the face of the country. During
this period of his life he must have walked literally thousands of
miles. And what miles! In our minds the name, ‘France,’ calls up visions
of a beautifully tidy country of well-tilled fields and well-trimmed
woodlands, covered with a network of admirable roads and dotted with
substantial villages and towns. At the beginning of the seventeenth
century this France was far removed in the yet unrealized future. The
country was dark with great forests, hardly less wild than those which
Caesar had traversed during the Gallic wars. Wolves abounded; and in
some parts of the country bears were still met with, and beavers. Of the
open land, outside the forests, much was still undrained. Great areas
which are now under the plough were then malarious swamps, water logged
during all but the dryest months of the year. Such roads as there were
partook of the nature of the ground they traversed and, in wet weather,
were impassable for wheeled traffic and difficult even for horsemen and
foot passengers. The owners of the land lived in castles and fortified
manors, many of which are still standing, but those who actually
cultivated it were housed in mud and wattle huts so flimsy in their
squalor that most of them have disappeared without leaving a trace of
their existence. The ordinary poverty of the peasants under feudal lords
had been made acute by the devastations of the civil wars; but now, with
the return of peace under Henri VI it was reverting to the merely
chronic condition then regarded as prosperity.

Of the men who had done the fighting in those civil wars, many were now
unemployed and had taken to pimping and thieving in the towns and
highway robbery in the country. The decaying bodies of some of these
malefactors dangled conspicuously from wayside gibbets. But more were
still at large, and travellers went armed and, if possible, in
considerable bands. Father Joseph was fortunate in possessing nothing
except the Capuchin’s reputation for active charity and an austere life.
He might be set upon by wolves, might contract malaria or typhus, might
be drowned while trying to cross a flooded river; but it was very
unlikely that he would be killed by bandits. The treasure which the
Provincial of Touraine was laying up, as he visited the monasteries
under his charge, were not of the kind that would buy anything a
highwayman was likely to desire.

To Father Joseph these interminable cross-country marches were less
fatigues to be dreaded than welcome opportunities for meditations, which
it was legitimate to prolong from the moment of his departure at dawn to
the end of the day’s journey at sunset.

Among the friars of his province Father Joseph had a reputation for
firmness in action tempered by an extraordinary gentleness and humility
of manner. Abuses were promptly corrected, discipline enforced, the
necessary reprimands and punishments unfailingly administered, but
always with mildness, always with an insight into character almost
amounting to that attribute of the saints which is technically called
‘the discernment of spirits.’

In such intervals as were left between his journeys, Father Joseph
continued to preach and write. It was at this time that he composed, for
the novices of his province, that Introduction to the Spiritual Life of
which we have already spoken and in which he set forth most fully his
theory and practice of the mystical life. We have seen that he had
written similar treatises in the past; but this was by far the most
complete and elaborate -for the good reason that this alone was intended
for publication.

During this period of his life, Father Joseph had time to practise his
peculiar method of mystical and imaginative orison with more than
ordinary persistence. He experienced in consequence a renewal of the
phenomena that had accompanied his early devotions at the Rouen
seminary. He saw visions, received revelations, passed into ecstasy.
There were times when he could hardly speak of the sufferings of Christ
without falling into a rapture. On at least one occasion this happened
to him in the pulpit. Mentioning the crucifixion, he was so much moved
that his senses left him, he fell down in a faint and remained for some
time afterwards in a state almost of catalepsy. Such physical symptoms
are generally regarded by experienced mystics as signs, possibly of
divine grace, but certainly of human weakness, and probably also of
inadequate training in, and injudicious practice of, the art of orison.
At the same time, of course, they testify to the intensity of the
experience which produced them. About Ezechiely there was nothing
lukewarm or half-hearted.

Of his psychic experiences, Father Joseph spoke little; but there is no
doubt that he attached great importance to them. In later years, he made
use of visions and revelations -sometimes his own, more often those of
the Calvarian nuns under his charge -as significant factual data, to be
taken into account in framing policies and conducting military
campaigns. He might have spared himself the trouble. These apocalypses
neither made him infallible, nor detracted from his native sagacity as a
politician. It is worth remarking that Father Joseph’s all too human and
anthropocentric attitude towards such by-products of the religious life
was not universally shared by his contemporaries. Here is the judgment
which was passed upon them by Jean-Jacques Olier, founder of the
seminary of Saint-Sulpice and a worthy pupil of Berulle’s greatest
disciple, Charles de Condren. ‘Revelations,’ he writes, ‘are the
aberrations of faith; they are a distraction that spoils simplicity in
relation to God, and that embarrasses the soul, making it swerve from
its directness towards God, and occupying the mind with other things
than God. Special illuminations, auditions, prophecies and the rest are
marks of weakness in a soul that cannot suffer the assaults of
temptation, or bear anxiety about the future and God’s judgment upon it.
Prophecies are also marks of creaturely curiosity in a being towards
whom God is indulgent and to whom, as a father to his importunate child,
he gives a few trifling sweetmeats to satisfy his appetite.’ How far
this is from Father Joseph’s or, for that matter, from Pascal’s hungry
craving and superstitious reverence for signs and miracles! Olier had
achieved a degree of intellectual austerity, of annihilation, as Father
Benet would have put it, to which these others were far from having
attained.


CHAPTER V

The Approach to Politics

Now that Fontevrault had been reformed, it looked as though Father
Joseph might be able to get back to the work he loved best, the work of
which he could not but feel that it was his true vocation. There were so
many things to do heretics to be won back to the Church, lukewarm and
complacent Catholics to be awakened from their fatal apathy, and
everywhere a minority of the devout to be taught the true art of mental
prayer. So many things to do; but, at the head of a whole province of
friars, how much he might hope, with God’s help, to accomplish ! He
rejoiced at the thought of all that it might be granted to him to do and
suffer in this missionary service.

But again destiny intervened and, because it corresponded to one of the
sides of his double nature, because it was intrinsically like the
Tenebroso-Cavernoso in him, proved too strong for the Franciscan
evangelist. In the persons of Richelieu and the Queen Mother, high
politics had already distantly beckoned to him. Now, suddenly, in the
last weeks of 1615, they were all around him. Without warning, he found
himself in the midst of a civil war and in the position to negotiate a
settlement. The murder of Henri IV had left the government of France in
the hands of his widow, who ruled as regent during the minority of Louis
XIII. The portraits of Marie de Medicis reveal a large, fleshy,
gorgeously bedizened barmaid; and the records of her administration
prove her to have been even stupider, if that were possible, than she
looked. With this unintelligence there went an almost abnormal coldness
of temperament. Her only strong passions were for power, which she was
incapable of exercising, and for the expensive bric-a-brac, especially
jewels, for which she indebted herself and the national treasury to the
tune of millions. To love, maternal no less than sexual, she seems to
have been almost insensible. She was an unaffectionate wife, a continent
widow and a neglectful and even heartless mother.

(The Dauphin was brought up at Saint-Germain, where Marie seldom
troubled to visit him. Indirectly, however, she played a decisive part
in his education; for she gave and constantly reiterated the most formal
orders that the child should be birched every morning before breakfast
for the offences of the previous day. The practice was continued even
after Louis had become king of France.) The only person for whom Marie
seems genuinely to have cared was the little deformed maid, who had been
the companion of her unhappy childhood, Leonora Dori, called the
Galigai. This woman was treated by her mistress with a positively
imbecile indulgence. Her husband, the Florentine adventurer, Concini,
was made prime minister and a marshal of France, while the Galigai
herself dictated the policy of the country, appointed ministers, judges,
bishops, ambassadors, governors of provinces (always for a financial
consideration) and, by taking bribes and stealing from the government,
amassed in a few years a fortune running into millions of crowns.

Corrupt rule by foreign gangsters can hardly be popular, and Marie de
Medicis’ government was duly hated by nobles and people alike. It was
hated, what is more, without being feared; for to corruption it added
inefficiency and weakness. The civil wars of the later sixteenth century
had restored to the great French magnates much of the power, the
quasi-autonomy that had been theirs in the Middle Ages, before the rise
of the absolute monarchy. Strong in the loyalty and approval of the
Third Estate, Henri IV had reduced the nobles to obedience. By its
ineptitude and corruption, the regency fairly invited them to reassert
their independence of the crown. When they rebelled, it was ordinarily
Marie de Medicis’ policy to buy them off with enormous gifts of money,
land and preferment. The nobles accepted, swore fealty and, a few months
later, began again. It was the Third Estate that suffered from the
disorder and that paid the bills. But in spite of this, in spite of the
universal detestation inspired by the Queen Mother’s Italian favourites,
the people remained unswervingly loyal to the crown-partly from a
reasoned belief that the crown would protect them from the intolerable
tyrannies of the local magnates, lay and ecclesiastical, partly out of
traditional sentiment.

In seventeenth century France, the divine right of kings was a fact of
crowd psychology. Thus, it was not only because they were oppressors
that the clergy and nobility were disliked; it was also because they
were insufficiently respectful to the king.

_“O Noblesse, o clergé, les aînés de la France, Puisque l’honneur du roi
si mal vous maintenez, Puisque le tiers état en ce point vous devance,
II faut que vos cadets deviennent vos aînés”.¹¹_

So wrote a popular rhymer of this period, and in 1614, at the meeting of
the States-General (the last before 1789), the Third Estate offered a
resolution to the effect that ‘there is no power, spiritual or temporal,
which has any right over the kingdom.’ It was a declaration of
revolutionary royalism, directed against the nobles and the Roman
hierarchy.

In 1615 the magnates were at it again. The Prince of Condé, the Dukes of
Bouillon, Longueville, Mayenne, Nevers -all of them governors of
provinces and possessors of private armies-rose in revolt against the
central government. The real motive of their rebellion was the same as
ever to increase the power and wealth of the nobility at the expense of
the crown. The avowed motive, ironically enough, was to support the
Third Estate in its assertion of the divine right of the king to rule
without interference. Not, of course, that Condé, the leader of the
rebellion, took any interest in the lower classes, or desired the royal
power to be strengthened. If he backed up the resolution of the Third
Estate, it was because such an action might win him the support of the
people in general and of the Protestants in particular. These last
approved of the resolution for the same reason as Marie de Medicis
disapproved of it because it was anti-papal. Condé hoped to use the
force of religious prejudice to back up his own and his friends’ demand
for cash and power.

The rebellion started in the late autumn of 1615. The rebels collected
an army, the government collected an army. It looked this time as though
there might be real fighting. Then suddenly, out of the blue, Father
Joseph made his appearance. The winter was one of the worst in living
memory and an epidemic of what seems to have been influenza was killing
its thousands in every town and village; but the Provincial of Touraine
was carrying out his tours of inspection as usual. At Loudun, he found
himself all of a sudden at the very heart of the rebellion.

To serve as peacemaker was one of the duties of a Capuchin. Without
waiting for instructions from his superiors, Father Joseph resolved
immediately to present himself to Condé. It was not difficult for him to
obtain an audience with the prince.

As Provincial, he was a person of some authority; besides, his younger
brother, Charles du Tremblay, was one of Condé’s gentlemen in waiting.
He was received; he talked with the prince, he sat down to long
discussions with the assembled council of magnates. Speaking with the
authority of a man of God and with the passionate eloquence of the born
preacher, he adjured them to spare their country the horrors of civil
war, to return to their obedience to the king. The magnates raised
objections, put forward their claims and aired their grievances. At
once, the preacher gave way to the diplomatist, Ezechiely to
Tenebroso-Cavernoso. With fascinating skill and those perfect manners
which he had learnt at M. de Pluvinel’s Academy, he reasoned with them,
he cajoled; occasionally, too, he permitted himself an outburst of blunt
frankness, such as a gentleman may be excused for giving vent to when
speaking to his equals. Then, all of a sudden, the tone would change
again, and he was once more the visionary friar, licensed by his habit
to denounce wrong-doing even in the highest place, to give warning even
to princes of its fatal consequences in this world and the next. Such,
throughout his career, was to be Father Joseph’s method of negotiation.
Combining in his own person the oddly assorted characters of Metternich
and Savonarola, he could play the diplomatic game with twice the
ordinary number of trump cards. It must not be imagined that he acted on
these occasions with deliberate insincerity, that he consciously rang
the changes on his dual role. No, he actually was both Ezechiely and
Tenebroso-Cavernoso; and he was really convinced that the policies
pursued so skilfully by the latter were no less in accordance with God’s
will than the preaching and teaching which were the life-work of the
former.

After spending a week with the insurgents, Father Joseph obtained their
leave to present their case to the Queen Mother and her advisers, who
were quartered, with their forces, at Tours. He did so, and, on the
advice of the papal nuncio, was appointed by Marie de Medicis as her
unofficial agent to negotiate terms of settlement.

At Tours he renewed his acquaintance with the Bishop of Luçon. Richelieu
had entered public life in the preceding year as a representative of the
clergy at the States-General; had ingratiated himself to the Queen
Mother by a speech full of the most outrageous flattery; had paid court
to Concini and the Galigai and had been rewarded for his pains with the
post of almoner to the child queen, Anne of Austria. He was now prowling
in the neighbourhood of the court, hungrily on the look out for an
opportunity to snatch the smallest morsel of that political power which’
he felt was due to his extraordinary abilities. Whenever he was
forewarned of the friar’s journeyings, Richelieu would drive out in his
coach to meet him. For a mere duke or prince of the blood, Father Joseph
would not break the rule which forbade him to ride a horse or sit in a
carriage. But Richelieu as a bishop had a right to his obedience. His
command was a momentary dispensation from pedestrian travel. When the
lackeys jumped down and opened the carriage door for him, he could climb
in with a good conscience and in the knowledge that his behaviour was,
ecclesiastically speaking, perfectly regular.

Seated side by side in the swaying coach, the two men talked at length
and confidentially about the current rebellion, about the weakness of
the government, about the state of the country at large, about the
menacing designs of Spain, about the troubles brewing in the Germanies,
about the plight of Rome, caught between its avowed enemies, the
Protestants, and its yet more dangerous and sinister friends, the
Hapsburgs. On most points the friar and the bishop found themselves in
full agreement. Both were convinced that the crying need of France was
for a strong central government; that the power of the nobles and the
Huguenots must be broken and the king made sole master of his realm.
Both wished to see the Gallican church reformed and revivified. Both
were convinced that France was one of the chosen instruments of
Providence and that the country should be made powerful, to the end that
it might play, in the affairs of Christendom, that leading role to which
God had unquestionably called it. But whereas Richelieu was convinced
that the proper policy for this more powerful France must be
specifically anti-Spanish and anti-Austrian; Father Joseph, on the
contrary, thought of collaboration between the great Catholic powers
against the heretics. First among equals, the Bourbons were to work with
the two branches of the Hapsburgs for the reconstitution of united
Christendom. And, with this, his tone would change; Tenebroso-Cavernoso
would give place to Ezechiely. Richelieu would listen, and then as the
prophetic thunders died away, would quietly remark that while, of
course, every good Catholic desired to see Christendom more united, the
fact remained that for a hundred years now Spain and Austria had been
trying to dominate all Europe. France was encircled by their
territories. Spanish armies were on every frontier; Spanish ships came
and went from Biscay to the Netherlands. Sooner or later, it would he
necessary to teach these Hapshurgs a lesson. ‘But the integrity of the
Church,’ the friar protested, ‘the seamless garment...’

‘Woven,’ the Bishop drily interrupted, ‘in Madrid and embroidered at
Vienna.’

And so the discussions went on. In spite of their disagreements on the
matter of foreign policy, Father Joseph’s admiration for the young
bishop daily increased. Among all the corrupt, self-seeking, hopelessly
incompetent creatures who gravitated, either as friends or foes, around
the young king and his vain stupid mother, Richelieu seemed to him the
only person capable of giving to France the things of which that
distracted country stood so sorely in need-internal peace, a strong
government, the reform of abuses. The more he thought and prayed over
the sorry state of the kingdom, the more clear it became to him that
here, in the Bishop of Luçon, was the man whom God had chosen to be his
instrument. He resolved henceforward to do everything in his power to
help his friend to accomplish his manifest destiny. On all his visits to
Tours he found opportunities of recommending Richelieu’s abilities to
the Queen Mother. Later, when the Capuchin had departed for Italy, Marie
de Medicis followed his advice and appointed M. de Luçon to continue and
complete the work of appeasement which had been begun at Loudun.

In the negotiations which led up to the peace of Loudun Father Joseph
displayed to the full his extraordinary political talents. His chief
opponent in the diplomatic game was the protestant Duke of Bouillon, a
man of such force and ability that he was able to hold out for years
against Richelieu in a condition of almost complete political
independence. At the end of these negotiations Bouillon paid the friar a
tribute of which any politician might he proud. ‘This man,’ he said,
‘penetrates my most secret thoughts; he knows things that I have
communicated only to a few people of tried discretion; and he goes to
Tours and returns, on foot, in the rain, the snow and the ice, in the
most frightful weather, without anybody being able to observe him. I
swear, the devil must be in this friar’s body.’

The treaty was finally concluded as the result of a decisive
intervention by Ezechiely. Condé fell sick of the prevailing influenza
and seemed for a day or two at the very door of death. Father Joseph
chose this moment to represent to him, in the most solemn manner, the
dangers to which he would be exposing his soul if he died leaving his
country a prey to civil war. The prince was so terrified that, though he
recovered and lived to make a nuisance of himself for many years to
come, he promptly made his peace with the Queen Mother, as Father Joseph
had insisted that he should.

The treaty of Loudun settled nothing; for the magnates were to rebel
many times more before they were finally curbed by Richelieu. It was
decisive only for Father Joseph. The negotiations with Condé and
Bouillon had revealed him to those in authority as a consummate
politician. Henceforward he would never be allowed to give himself
exclusively to the life of a missionary and mystic. Even if Richelieu
had never come to power, Father Joseph would still have played a part,
albeit a subsidiary part, in the political life of his time. At Loudun
his destiny had drawn him into a position from which he could hardly
retreat, even if he had wanted to. And though a part of him did want to
retreat, though he was often, in the coming years, to protest that
political life was like a hell on earth, there was always a
Tenebroso-Cavernoso who enjoyed the game he played so brilliantly well,
there was always the ardent patriot who knew that God’s purposes and
those of the French government were at bottom identical.

Among the great nobles assembled at Loudun there was one, the Duke of
Nevers, with whom Father Joseph had many long and private conversations.
The historical significance of this personage was in no wise due to his
native abilities. Like Dryden’s Zimri, he was a man, who, stiff in
opinions, always in the wrong, was everything he starts and nothing
long. Nor did the resemblance end there. He was as vain as Buckingham,
as extravagant and ostentatious, as thoroughly unreliable. Perhaps the
most remarkable thing about him was the fact, attested on oath by one of
his body-servants, ‘that he always slept with his eyes open, and that
from those open eyes came rays so frightful that he (the servant) was
often frightened and could never get used to them.’ The secret of the
Duke’s peculiar contemporary importance was due to his genealogical
tree.

By upbringing and title, he was French; by birth, Italian, Greek and
German. His mother was a princess of the house of Cleves; his paternal
grandmother, an imperial Palaeologus; and his father, a Gonzaga. (In a
letter to the Queen Mother Nevers once wrote, with more truthfulness
than tact, that ‘it was well known that the Gonzagas had been princes
long before the Medici had even been gentlemen.’) Being a Gonzaga, he
was in the running, should the direct line fail, for one of the most
important of the Italian states. Years later, the question of his
succession to Mantua led to war between France and Spain, and the
settlement of the quarrel was to call for Father Joseph’s most astute
diplomacy. At present, however, it was not as a Gonzaga, but as a
Palaeologus, that the duke aroused his interest. The sultans had ruled
in Constantinople for more than a hundred and fifty years; but among the
conquered and downtrodden Greeks the memory of political freedom and
their last emperors was still very much alive. The Duke of Nevers was a
descendant of those emperors, and it was therefore to him that the
people of the Morea had recently sent a delegation, begging him to put
himself at the head of a projected uprising of Christians against their
Turkish overlords. The Duke was to bring his name and a store of
munitions; the Greeks promised to do the rest. Nevers, who had a thirst
for glory as well as a keen sense of his own hereditary eminence, was
greatly tempted. But though foolish and impulsive, he had at least sense
to know that the Ottoman empire could not be overthrown by an
undisciplined force of Greek mountaineers, even under the command of a
Palaeologus. If the uprising was to be successful, it must be supported
by a military and naval expedition fitted out by the great powers of
Western Europe. But would the great powers consent to use their
resources in this way? That was the question. And that was the subject
of those long intimate conversations between the Duke and Father Joseph.

In an age when there were no Westerns or detective stories, the most
exciting reading matter an imaginative boy could get hold of was
probably to be found in the chronicles of the Crusades. To a child of
François du Tremblay’s time, the infidels occupied the place reserved in
the minds of a more recent generation of schoolboys for the Redskins.
Most men, as they grew up, forgot about the infidels, just as they now
forget about the Indians. Not so François du Tremblay. Entering the
cloister, he found himself in a world where the infidels were a constant
subject of conversation and even of prayer. St. Francis had been deeply
concerned with missions, martyrdom, and the recovery of the Holy Places.
This concern had become a tradition among his followers. All
Franciscans, including of course the Capuchins, took a kind of
professional interest in crusading. To this professional interest,
Father Joseph added his own private enthusiasm. Ever since childhood
Calvary had been the home of his imagination. The Holy Places were as
dear to him as his native land. To deliver them was a matter of
spiritual patriotism. From the premises of Christ’s sufferings, the
logic of emotion and imagination led to the conclusion that crusading
against the Turks was among the Christian’s highest duties. Father
Joseph’s meditations upon this theme had often crystallized into visions
and auditions; God had commanded him to work for the crusade, had seemed
obscurely to promise success. And now, suddenly, providentially, here
was the last of the Palaeologi; and the Greeks had begged him to come
and lead them against the infidels. It was a new vocation, a call to
tasks even higher and more glorious than those of preaching to the
indifferent and the misguided. Ezechiely’s enthusiasm blazed up. And
simultaneously Tenebroso-Cavernoso surveyed the political scene and
found the juncture peculiarly favourable for a crusade. The existing
equilibrium in Europe was desperately unstable. The Hapsburgs, as
Richelieu was never tired of pointing out, were planning, in the name of
the Counter-Reformation, to impose their direct rule or their influence
upon the whole of Europe. Alarmed by the Spanish-Austrian menace, the
Protestant powers were uneasily preparing for a war, which was expected
to break out on the expiry of the twelve years truce between Spain and
Holland in 1621, but which actually began in 1618, with the revolt of
Bohemia against the Emperor. Under the Queen Mother’s regency, the
traditional anti-Spanish policy of France had been reversed; but it was
suficiently obvious that fear of Hapsburg domination must sooner or
later cause a return to the strategy of François I and Henri IV.
Meanwhile, all the states of Germany had been building up their armies;
the huge military machine of Spain had reached a perfection unknown
since the time of the Romans; Dutch naval power was growing; the Swedes
had started to apply scientific methods to warfare. All Europe fairly
swarmed with soldiers, ready at a word to march. Scoffers might regard a
crusade as absurd and chimerical; but at this particular moment of
history, a shrewd politician could find a great deal to be said for the
idea. If a crusade could be organized in time, the war which everyone
regarded as inevitable might be averted and the great powers reconciled
in their effort against a common enemy. Ezechiely’s dream of a reunited
Christendom would be realized. Events were to prove the plan unworkable.
But, if we grant for the moment the desirability of slaughtering huge
numbers of Moslems, we are forced to agree with Father Joseph that, in
this second decade of the seventeenth century, there was no more
far-sighted policy than that of a great international expedition against
the Turks. The immediate, practical problem was that of persuading the
great powers to accept so far-sighted a policy. Richelieu, when
consulted, shook his head and enumerated the obstacles which would have
to be surmounted. But the others would not allow their enthusiasm to be
damped; and in the end the bishop agreed to do what he could to forward
the scheme, on condition that the Duke of Nevers should join forces with
Father Joseph in pressing his own claims to political power.

No crusade could possibly be launched without the express approval and
encouragement of the Holy See. As soon, therefore, as the necessary
permissions could be obtained and the necessary arrangements made,
Father Joseph set out, on foot as usual, for Rome. The crusade was not
his only business, nor was Nevers the only important personage whom he
represented. From Condé he carried explanations, apologies and a plea to
be forgiven for his recent co-operation with the Huguenots; from Marie
de Medicis a message of greeting; from Mme d’Orteans a reminder that her
Calvarians were still waiting for the bull that would make of them an
independent congregation; and from his own order a request for the right
to organize missions among the heretics of Poitou.

Camillo Borghese, who ruled in Rome as Paul V, was a man of an intensely
legalistic turn of mind, a stickler -for the letter as against the
spirit, a martinet. But though he started by feeling rather suspicious
of the friar’s hints of visions and revelations, that ‘ravishing
conversation,’ ‘that infinite dexterity in dealing with the nobility’
soon had their usual effect. The pope was impressed and finally
convinced. He promised to support the scheme for a crusade with all the
machinery of the Church. But before official representations could he
made, it would be necessary, he insisted, that the friar should sound
out the various governments concerned. When Father Joseph left Rome in
the spring of 1617, he took with him the definite promise of bulls for
the Calvarians and the missions of Poitou, and a pontifical letter
addressed to the court of Spain and empowering him to negotiate for the
crusade. His stay in Rome had been long about eight months in all-but he
had achieved everything he set out to accomplish there. More than that,
he had made the acquaintance of some of the highest dignitaries .of the
Roman Curia, and had left them all profoundly impressed by his zeal, his
integrity and his outstanding talents. The weeks at Loudun had made of
him a man to be reckoned with in France; the months at Rome, a figure of
some consequence within the Church. From this time forward we find him
exchanging letters with nuncios, legates, cardinals, even the papal
secretary of state.

Another man would have been exultant; but Father Joseph was perpetually
on his guard against such lapses into pride and vanity. He had long
since schooled himself out of the external manifestations of personal
satisfaction or displeasure; and to a considerable extent, no doubt, he
had suppressed even their inward manifestations. The only emotional
indulgence he permitted himself, as he hastened northward, through
Umbria and Tuscany, was versifying. Under the stimulus of repressed
elation, his mind fairly seethed with poetic imagery. In the intervals
between his meditations he composed and committed to memory an
astonishing number of verses in French and Latin. In the dead language
he began, and, at the astonishing rate of two hundred lines a day, half
finished a full length epic about Turks and crusaders. In French he
expressed his feelings in a series of religious lyrics, one of which-a
long rhapsody on the spring-time as the symbol of eternal life contains
these really charming stanzas on the nightingale.

“En mille tours il façonne
De sa voix les longs replis:
Ainsi tout le ciel résonne
De mille chœurs accomplis.
Aisément l’ on ne peut dire
De ce long chant nuit et jour,
S’ il meurt, s’ il pâme, ou soupire
De tourment, d’aise ou d’amour.
Quand par les champs je m’ égaye,
En quelque air devotieux,
Ce chantre jaloux s’ essaye
D’ elever sa voix au cieux.
Mais en plus pleine musique
La violente douceur
De l’ harmonie angelique
Répond aux voix de mon cœur.
Ces oisillons qui rassemblent
En un leurs accents divers
Aux motet des Saints ressemblent
Unis en tout l’univers.”¹²

Versifying, praying, singing hymns in competition with the innumerable
nightingales of the Italian spring, Father Joseph entered Turin. Here
once again he became the diplomat. The prophetic eloquence, the
ravishing conversation, the infinite dexterity with the nobility-all
were brought out; but without much success. Charles Emanuel of Savoy had
a war with Spain on his hands and was in no position to think about
crusades against the Turks! After a few weeks, Father Joseph took the
road again, crossed the Alps by forced marches and reached Paris in
early June. During the twelve months of his absence, many strange things
had happened in that exalted political world, into which his destiny was
slowly but surely drawing him. In the autumn of 1616, Richelieu had been
made a member of the Council of State and appointed minister for war and
foreign affairs. That supreme power at which, from earliest manhood, he
had steadily aimed, and which he had pursued by ways so devious and
often so degrading, seemed now within his grasp.

Then, suddenly, the Queen Mother’s system of education bore fruit, and
the fruit was terrible. The boy who had been whipped every morning was
now legally as well as in name the King of France. His mother, however,
still continued to treat him as a child and to keep all the power in her
own and the Concini’s hands. By force of habit and from sloth and
diffidence, Louis XIII had hitherto silently acquiesced in this state of
things. Then, without warning, he took his revenge for all his mother’s
long neglect, all those thousands of cold-blooded and methodical
birchings. He gave orders to the captain of the guard that Concini
should be arrested, adding that, if he resisted, he might be killed. It
was a death warrant. Concini was shot as he entered the Louvre, and a
few hours later his naked and mutilated body was hanging by the heels
from the gibbet on the Pont Neuf, while the mob danced around, howling
with bestial glee.

Even on the following afternoon the crowd was still so dense that
Richelieu’s carriage was held up for many minutes at the approach to the
bridge, and the future cardinal was given ample opportunity to observe
what happens to unpopular ministers when they lose the King’s favour.
For him, the moral of the revolting spectacle was clear: ‘If ever you
get political power,’ that poor gelded and gutted carcase proclaimed,
‘take very good care to stick to it.’ For the eighteen years of his
dominion, Richelieu never ceased to act upon this precept. Meanwhile, of
course, the game was up, at any rate for the time being. Too unimportant
to suffer Concini’s fate, the Bishop of Luçon followed the Queen Mother
into exile. For the next four years the country was ruled by Luynes, a
middle-aged country gentleman, for whom the young Louis had conceived
the most intense affection and admiration, on account of his skill in
falconry.

Father Joseph remained loyal to his exiled friend, and patiently awaited
the opportunity to bring him back to power. For the time being, however,
there was no hope for the Bishop of Luçon. Luynes hated and feared him
for his ability, and to Louis he was repugnant as a creature of his
mother’s ignoble favourite. Father Joseph bided his time and continued
to work on his great project of the crusade. From the reports which came
in from Nevers, who was visiting the various courts of Germany, and from
his numerous ecclesiastical correspondents, he learned that his plan was
winning a fair measure of approval among all except the Spaniards. He
decided that it was time to make use of his pontifical letter to Philip
III. The Procurator of the Capuchin order had given him ‘obediences,’
entitling him to travel as much as he liked, and in the spring of 1618,
a few days after Richelieu had been separated from the Queen Mother and
sent into a remoter exile at Avignon, he set out with two companions for
the south. At Poitiers the journey was unexpectedly interrupted. A few
days before his arrival, his old friend and collaborator, Antoinette
d’Orleans, had died, leaving the newly established congregation of
Calvary without a head. While Father Joseph was at Poitiers, settling
the troubled affairs of his Calvarians, an odd piece of news was brought
to him. The Emperor’s representatives in Bohemia had been thrown out of
a third-story window of the palace at Prague. The long anticipated war
had begun-the war that was destined, though nobody dreamed that such a
thing was possible, to last for thirty years.

As soon as the new abbess was elected, and her rule securely
established, Father Joseph hastened on to Madrid, at such a rate and
through summer weather so torrid, that both of his companions died
before the journey was completed. Of tougher constitution and supported
by a more indomitable spirit and a more constant practice of the divine
presence, Father Joseph reached his destination in safety and at once
plunged into negotiations with the Duke of Lerma and his royal master.
The reception accorded to the Pope’s representative was courteous and
cordial in the extreme; the idea of the crusade was pronounced to be
eminently catholic and meritorious. But when it came to the question of
the means by which this pious approval in principle might be translated
into active diplomatic, military and naval co-operation with France,
Father Joseph found that he was dealing, not with obedient sons of the
Church, but with Spanish nationalists. Simultaneously, of course, the
Spaniards made a corresponding discovery about Father Joseph.

Having a Béarn in one’s own eye may actually sharpen one’s vision for
similar Béarn's in the eyes of others. To Lerma and his master it was
abundantly obvious that, though the friar sincerely believed that a
crusade would be highly pleasing to God, he was also convinced that
France should lead the crusade and derive the chief benefits from it.
Father Joseph rationalized this last belief by an appeal to history.
France had played the chief part on earlier crusades-had played it
because it was evidently the will of Providence that she should do so.
If France were to play any part below the highest in the present
crusade, it would be a rupture of historical tradition and a flouting of
God's will. Therefore, France must play the leading part. It seemed an
irrefragable argument, to a Frenchman. To the Spaniards, unfortunately,
it was less convincing. All they felt certain of was that a crusade such
as Father Joseph projected would strengthen France at the expense of
Spain. Experience had taught them that the old crusading motto, ‘Gesta
Dei per Francos,’ ¹³ could all too easily be transformed in practice
into ‘Gesta Francorum, gesta Dei’¹⁴ and they shrewdly suspected that
some such transformation had actually taken place inside the tonsured
skull of Father Joseph. After four months of strenuous and perfectly
ineffective negotiations, the friar was forced to return home, with
nothing but the vaguest promises, the most non-committal of good wishes.
Spanish coolness and the rigours of winter on the sierras had no power
to chill Father Joseph’s enthusiasm. On the way home he composed a long
lyrical rhapsody on the liberation of the Greeks from Turkish bondage.
Two stanzas of this poem are peculiarly illuminating.

[]

‘Si, pour te soulager,’

he writes, apostrophizing Greece,

“Si pour te soulager, l’univers je tournoie,
C’est trop peu pour mes vœux;
Dans une mer de sang il faut que je me noie
Pour eteindre mes feux.¹⁶”

In other words, Father Joseph’s zeal for a crusade was too burningly hot
to be extinguished by anything short of a sea of other people’s blood.
Few political idealists have spoken so frankly about the consequences of
their idealism. The reason, it may be, is that few political idealists
have spent half a lifetime brooding upon the torture and death of a
man-god, by comparison with whose sufferings those of ordinary human
beings are so infinitesimal as to be practically negligible. And when
the sea of blood had been spilled, what then? Most political idealists
have no doubt at all; liquidate the people who don’t agree with you, and
you will have Utopia. Again Father Joseph is strangely free from
illusions and strangely frank about that freedom.

“J’ignore où mon dessein, qui surpasse ma vue,
Si vite me conduit;
Mais comme un astre ardent qui brille dans la nue,
II me guide en la nuit.”¹⁷

The results of any plan of action are always unknown and unknowable; the
plan must be pursued for its own sake, as an end in itself. This is the
bald truth about politics; but how few politicians have ever had the
perspicacity to see it, or the courage, if they have seen it, to tell
the disquieting truth!

The crusade against the Turks remained to the end of his life one of
Father Joseph’s principal concerns. True, by 1625 he was forced to admit
that any scheme for an international expedition would have to be
abandoned, probably for many years to come. The reasons for this
abandonment were the troubled state of Europe and the persistent
opposition of the two branches of the House of Hapsburg.’ This
opposition to the crusade transformed Father Joseph’s early Spanish
policy into an intense and fixed dislike of ‘the hereditary enemy.’ At
the beginning of the Thirty Years’ War he was whole-heartedly on the
side of the Emperor against the Elector Palatine and the Protestants. Of
the imperial victory of the White Mountain, in 1620 he wrote
enthusiastically: ‘Satan has lost one of his horns, and Jesus, expelled
from these regions, will be re-established in Bohemia.’ A few years
later he was doing everything in his power to make Satan’s horn grow
again. Why? Because a Hapsburg triumph would be dangerous to France and
an obstacle to the launching, under French auspices, of a great crusade
against the infidel. The most ardent of Catholics, he came to believe
that Catholic Austria and Catholic Spain were a menace to the best
interests of Catholicism. This view was far from unorthodox; for it was
shared by no less a person than the Pope. As an Italian prince, the Pope
had very good reasons to fear the House of Hapsburg. A too-sweeping
victory in Germany would make the Emperor and the King of Spain the
undisputed masters of the Peninsula.

On his return from Madrid, Father Joseph continued to work with unabated
zeal for the crusade. Behind the scenes, he helped the Duke of Nevers to
organize the new order of chivalry, which was to form the nucleus of the
projected international army. This Christian Militia, as it was called,
was to enroll its knights and commanders in all parts of Catholic
Europe. Each recruit was to take a crusader’s oath and to contribute to
the common war chest a sum proportionate to his rank and fortune. The
Christian Militia did as well as such an organization could be expected
to do in the circumstances. Many nobles and gentlemen joined the order;
a considerable amount of money was promised; and questions of leadership
and prestige provoked a great deal of heartburning and resulted in
interminable disputes. The Militia received its first serious set-back
when Philip IV of Spain refused to allow its establishment in any of his
possessions. Then, with the absorption of Europe’s best energies in the
war, the order rapidly lost its reason for existence. In 1625, when
Father Joseph obtained its official recognition by Pope Urban VIII, the
Christian Militia was for all practical purposes dead and buried.

Nevers’ war effort was not confined to organizing an order of chivalry.
He raised troops in his domains and had a number of fine ships built to
transport them to Greece. As commander of his little navy, he engaged a
well-known Norman pirate, who had specialized in the Mediterranean and
possessed an unrivalled knowledge of Levantine waters. Father Joseph did
what he could to help the potential Emperor of Byzantium in these
preparations, none of which, however, bore any fruit. The troops
evaporated, the ships were seized by a Protestant squadron from La
Rochelle, the pirate returned to his own line of business, and finally
the Duke of Nevers himself got bored with crusades and began to think
about other things.

“Blest madman, who could every hour employ

With something new to wish, or to enjoy !”

Only Father Joseph remained, a voice crying in the wilderness; and soon
that voice would be changing its tune, would cry no longer for the
destruction of the Turk, but for the humiliation of the Hapsburgs. But
before abandoning (how reluctantly!) his policy of
a-crusade-in-our-time, Father Joseph made one last and most
extraordinary contribution to the cause. In 1617, on his way back from
Rome, he had begun the composition of his Turciad. Thirty-five miles,
three hours of meditation and two hundred hexameters -such was the daily
programme of that strenuous journey. In the years that followed, and on
the roads of France and Spain, he completed and polished the work. By
1625 the epic, in four thousand six hundred and thirty-seven lines, was
complete. That year he took with him to Rome the two printed copies
which constituted, so far as can be discovered, the first and only
edition of the work. One copy was for Urban VIII, the other for Cardinal
Barberini, his nephew and papal secretary of state. Himself a
distinguished classical scholar and the author of many elegantly turned
verses, many truly Ciceronian briefs and bulls, Urban VIII was delighted
with the poem, which he called ‘the Christian Aeneid.’ The Abbe
Dedouvres, who some forty-odd years ago discovered the only surviving
copy of the Turciad, is unable, as a conscientious Latinist, fully to
endorse this pontifical judgment.

Father Joseph, he has to admit, was apt to make regrettable confusions
of moods after declarative verbs and in indirect interrogations. At the
same time the copulative conjunction is all too frequently separated
from the negation. As for his prosody, it shows too many elisions of
monosyllables, while there is persistence of the short syllable in no
less than fortyfour sigmatisms. Nor is the Turciad entirely above
reproach in matters of scansion. Thus, concidit is treated as a dactyl,
when in fact it is an antibacchius. Worse still, inscitiam, which is
manifestly an epitrite III, is made to do duty as a coryambus. Grave
offences! But let those who are without sin in the matter of false
quantities throw the first stone.

Of more interest than the linguistic form of Father Joseph’s epic is its
extraordinary substance. The Turciad is one of those things in virtue of
which plain history is always so much odder than the most romantic of
historical novels. A novelist might possibly invent a character who was
simultaneously a power politician and a practising mystic. But to
fabricate someone who, besides being a power politician and a practising
mystic, should also have composed the four thousand six hundred and
thirty-seven hexameters of the Turciad, is a feat beyond the powers of
any literary artist, however greatly gifted. Every human being is an
individual slice of history, unique and unrepeatable; but the majority
of such slices belong to one or other of a number of familiar and
recognizable classes. This is not the case with exceptional individuals.
These represent the wildest improbabilities, such as only life can make
actual; for life alone possesses the resources and the patience to go on
playing the lotteries of heredity and environment until the necessary
number of one-in-amillion chances turn up simultaneously, and an
exceptional individual appears and runs his course. That is why truth is
so much stranger, richer and more interesting than fiction.

The Turciad opens with the description of a public meeting of angels
called by the Second Person of the Trinity. Addressing the meeting,
Christ expresses his distress at Mohammedan supremacy in the Near and
Middle East, and urges the heavenly powers to do something about it.
Even the Virgin, it is indicated, would be glad to participate in a
Crusade, if such a thing were proper to her station. From this opening
the speaker proceeds to an account of the life of Mohammed, considerably
more picturesque than historical. Near Mecca, he tells his auditors, is
a cave from which a chimney goes down directly into hell. One day the
young Mohammed found his way into this cave and was there kindly
received and instructed in the arts of mischief by Lucifer. This
instruction was easy to give; for round the chimney there ran a series
of galleries which had been fitted up by the devils as a kind of Museum
of Evil. In them had been placed such interesting objects as the tooth
of the serpent which tempted Eve; Cain’s club; the first iron weapons,
invented by Tubal-cain; the emblems of Venus and of Bacchus; all the
rich apparatus of sorcery and magic; material illustrative of all the
heresies from that of Arius to that of Calvin; and finally the armament,
already prepared for future contingencies, to be used in the campaigns
of Antichrist. Duly enlightened by his visit to this chamber of horrors,
Mohammed was sent home to write the Koran and plan the conquest of the
Holy Places.

Having obtained the support of the heavenly hierarchies for a crusade,
Christ next sets out to work upon the princes of Europe, especially
Louis XIII and Philip IV of Spain. By means of a dream?- he explains to
them why a holy war is so urgently necessary. At this point, for no
particular reason, the author of the epic appears on the scene and asks
permission to pass on to the general public the substance of what has
been imparted to the princes. Leave is given, and he at once embarks
upon a theological lecture. After briefly explaining the Holy Trinity,
the creation, the fall, free will, angelology, the beatific vision and
the New Jerusalem, he concludes, at the end of some seven hundred and
fifty lines, with an exhortation to the potential crusaders to ally
themselves immediately with the forces of heaven.

The next five hundred and seventy lines are devoted to the account of
another public meeting in heaven. This time the audience consists, not
of angels, but of saints, who are seated, tier upon tier, in a kind of
amphitheatre, in whose arena stand two golden thrones. From the earth
comes a squadron of cherubim transporting the European princes, who
enjoy the spectacle from a kind of hovering platform composed of the
angels’ wings. Among the nine choirs of saints, those most useful to
crusaders are pointed out to the new arrivals. The list closes with St.
Francis, whom Father Joseph relates, by means of an elegant pun, to
France.

Sihi nam cognata cokaerent,
Francia, Franciscus, fatalia nomina Turcis.¹⁹

Suddenly the Second Person of the Trinity appears again, accompanied by
the Virgin. All rise and make obeisance, while the two take their places
on the thrones prepared for them. In the ensuing silence, Christ calls
for the Duke of Nevers. The Archangel Michael picks up the last of the
Palaeologi from where he is sitting on the platform of angels’ wings,
swoops into the arena and deposits him, more dead than alive with
terror, at the foot of the thrones. After the Virgin has comforted him
with a few reassuring words, Christ proceeds to harangue the duke at
some length, reminding him of his imperial origins and the duties they
impose on him, reminding him also of his faults and that a crusader must
be a man of exemplary conduct. Much moved, Nevers vows to devote the
rest of his life to a crusade against the Turks. Whereupon the Virgin
invests him with the insignia of the Christian Militia. The proceedings
are brought to a close by a long procession of all the heroes who have
fought for the Lord against his enemies. Moses and Joshua head the
parade, which winds on chronologically through Godefroy of Bouillon to
Don John of Austria and the heroes of Lepanto.

Needless to say, this is a golden opportunity for Father Joseph to bring
out one of those sonorous lists of names, so clear to all writers of
epics. With what gusto the pontifical critic must have rolled around his
tongue such lines as ‘Hunneades sollers et Scanderbegius acer’. News of
this meeting is brought to Satan and fills him with considerable
apprehension. Wistfully, he yearns for the coming of Antichrist; but, as
Antichrist shows no signs of appearing, he does what he can on his own
account by starting the war in Bohemia. It was a successful manreuvre
-just how successful Father Joseph was to discover during the remaining
years of his life. In 1625, when the Turciad was completed, he would
only admit a local and temporary set-back. The troubles which the fiend
had stirred up would soon be settled; united Europe would utterly
destroy the Turk and, by this war to end war, inaugurate a golden age of
universal peace -under the leadership of France. And the poem ends with
yet another dream, a dream in which the author is addressed by the
personification of his country, by that France which, because he
believed her to be the instrument of divine providence, he was able,
with a good conscience and without suspecting that he was committing
idolatry, to worship as though she were God.

Thus baldly analysed, the Turciad seems almost uniquely preposterous.
But apply the same process to Paradise Lost, discount the style, strip
away the ornaments, reduce the poem to its naked subject-matter, and you
have something only a little less absurd. Public meetings of angels,
theological discussions -between the First and Second Persons of the
Trinity, angelic battles, complete with three-dimension-strategy,
infernal artillery and the divine equivalent of the tank. Was it all
merely a matter of literary convention, of a self-conscious imitation of
the poetical machinery of another age? Were these strangely
materialistic accounts of life in heaven regarded by their authors as
being as completely fabulous as that, pathetic tale of young Prince
Syphilis, which Fracastoro had composed a hundred years before? It would
be comforting to believe it; but I am afraid that we are not justified
in so believing. In some ineffably Pickwickian way Paradise Lost and the
Turciad and the Apotheosis of Charles V were probably conceived by
Titian, and Father Joseph and Milton as being something more than merely
fantastic. In the case of Titian and Milton this was comprehensible
enough; both, in their different ways, were men of exoteric religion.
Not so Father Joseph. That he had had some direct, unmediated experience
of ultimate reality is unquestionable. In his Introduction to the
Spiritual Life he had described the soul’s union with God. A few years
later, and evidently with no sense of incongruity, he was writing the
Turciad and writing it in the conviction that, by so doing, he was
serving, and in some way telling the truth about, the God whom he had
dimly apprehended in the act of contemplation.

The fact is, of course, that human beings find no difficulty at all in
entertaining, successively or even at the same moment, convictions which
are totally incompatible one with another. Indeed, such
self-contradiction is the normal and natural condition of man. It suits
our book to have different notions at different moments; therefore we
have such notions, even though there is no means of reconciling them.
Complete consistency comes only with complete-pointedness, complete
absorption in ultimate reality.

In the intervals of working for the crusade, Father Joseph devoted his
enormous energies to the organization of missions among the Protestants
of Poitou. Nor was it the Protestants only who stood in need of
evangelization; for though Catholicism survived in the West, it had been
reduced by war, indifference and worldliness to a most abject and
unedifying condition. Almost all the abbeys and most of the parishes had
passed into the control of the local gentry, who spent the church
revenues on themselves and were represented by half-starved and
generally illiterate vicars, acting as their bailiffs. ‘Benefices and
even curacies are given to girls as marriage portions, are counted as
private property, as well by Catholics as Huguenots, and are sold for
cash under contracts drawn up by the notary.’ This Augean stable of
simony and heresy was calculated to rejoice the heart of Ezechiely.’
Here indeed was a labour proportionate to his zeal! Starting at first
with only seven picked helpers, Father Joseph flung himself into the
task of reformation and conversion. His success was spectacular. Hungry
for just such a revival of religion, the Catholics responded with
enthusiasm. Hardly less eager were the Huguenots who flocked in
thousands to see the unfamiliar rites, to hear the liturgical chanting
and the sermons. Impressed as much by the austerity of the missionaries’
lives as by the eloquence of their preaching, many returned, and
considerable numbers were finally converted.

Father Joseph was in his element again, doing the work he loved best.
But he was now too completely committed to the life of high politics to
be able even to imagine that he could become again what he had been-the
popular evangelist, the itinerant teacher of the art of mental prayer.
His missionary campaigns in the West were periodically interrupted by
visits to Paris-visits, in the course of which he was in contact with
people of the highest importance, great noblemen, great ecclesiastics,
the papal nuncio, Luynes himself and even the King. Louis XIII respected
the Capuchin’s political judgment and was impressed by his burning
eloquence, his mysterious accounts of visions and revelations vouchsafed
either to himself or to his Calvarians. Five years before Richelieu
became prime minister, Father Joseph was on sufficiently intimate terms
with the monarch to be made the confidant of what had happened when,
protesting, and with the most intense reluctance, the eighteen year-old
boy had been pushed by Luynes into his consort’s bed. No less than Louis
himself, his brother, Gaston of Orleans, fell under the same prophetic
spell and, in spite of Father Joseph’s position as coadjutor of the
detested cardinal, remained attached to him to the end.

It was during one of Father Joseph’s visits to Paris, in February 1619,
that a courier brought disquieting news from Blois. The Queen Mother had
escaped from the castle, by night, and fled to Angouleme, where she had
placed herself under the protection of the Duke of Epernon. A new and
more dangerous rebellion seemed to threaten. What was to be done? In his
perplexity, Luynes sent for Father Joseph and Berulle. They advised the
immediate despatch to the Queen Mother of some disinterested person whom
she could trust. For example, Father Joseph suggested her almoner,
Bouthillier. Now Bouthillier was dean of Luçon and one of Richelieu’s
most faithful supporters. The dean was the thin end of a wedge, whose
other extremity was the bishop. Bouthillier was sent, and the result was
that Marie demanded, as a first condition of peace, that her trusted
counsellor should be permitted to come back to her from his exile.
Luynes’ reluctance to recall a potentially dangerous rival was
outweighed by his fear of an immediate civil war. Knowing that Richelieu
could be trusted to advise moderation, he accepted the Queen Mother’s
terms. At the beginning of March, Father Joseph’s brother, Charles du
Tremblay, was sent posting south, to Avignon, bearing a letter from the
king to the bishop of Luçon. Breaking the seal, Richelieu read the
command to proceed immediately to Angouleme, to rejoin the Queen Mother.
He obeyed with an alacrity which, owing to the wintry weather and the
appalling state of the roads, exposed him to considerable dangers. At
Angouleme he was joined by Father Joseph and, together, they patched up
a precarious agreement between the Queen Mother’s party and the king.
The peace was not of long duration. A year later, in 1620, the nobles
were using Marie’s grievances as an excuse for yet another uprising. In
the engagement at Pont-de-Cé, royal forces won a decisive victory. At a
kind of consolation prize and to reinforce their loyalty, Marie de
Medicis gave orders that her infantry should be permitted to sack the
town of Angers before retiring further south. Father Joseph, who was in
the neighbourhood, heard of this and immediately demanded an audience of
the Queen. This time the friar’s ‘infinite dexterity with the nobility’
gave place to prophetic eloquence. Standing before the Queen, he told
her unequivocally that, if she suffered Angers to be sacked, the blood
of its people would be upon her head, and that God would damn her
everlastingly.

The doctrine of hell fire was not entirely mischievous in its effects.
On occasions like the present, for example, it could do excellent
service. A stupid, obstinate, heartless creature, like Marie de Medicis,
would have been deaf to any appeal to the higher feelings she did not
possess, or possessed only in a condition so latent that it would have
taken the greatest saint a very long time to bring them into actuality.
But the Queen cared intensely for herself, and she believed without
doubt or question in the physical reality of hell. Thunderously harping
on that portentous theme, Ezechiely was able to put the fear of God into
her. She recalled the order she had given; Angers was saved. Thanks to a
certain kind of intellectual ‘progress,’ the rulers of the modern world
no longer believe that they will be tortured everlastingly, if they are
wicked. The eschatological sanction, which was one of the principal
weapons in the hands of the prophets of past times, has disappeared.
This would not matter, if moral had kept pace with intellectual
‘progress.’ But it has not. Twentieth-century rulers behave just as
vilely and ruthlessly as did rulers in the seventeenth or any other
century. But unlike their predecessors, they do not lie awake at nights
wondering whether they are damned. If Marie de Medicis had enjoyed the
advantages of a modern education, Father Joseph would have thundered in
vain, and Angers would have been sacked.

After the battle of Pont-de-Cé, fighting gave place to negotiations,
which finally bore fruit in the Peace of Angers. As a reward for the
part he had played in averting further civil strife, in moderating the
nobles’ demands and in reconciling the king and his mother, Richelieu
demanded a cardinal’s hat. Luynes made a show of agreeing, sent in a
request to Rome that the Bishop of Luçon should be promoted at the
earliest opportunity, and accompanied his official letter with a private
hint that he was in no hurry to see his rival made a prince of the
Church. Richelieu did not actually receive his hat till 1622, some
months after Luynes’ death. Meanwhile the bishop had become too
important to be trifled with. As the price of his friendship, or at any
rate of his benevolent neutrality, Richelieu demanded and obtained the
hand of Luynes’ nephew, de Combalet, for his niece, Mlle de
Pont-Courlay. It was an excellent match; for, in his brief tenure of
office, Luynes had amassed vast fortunes, not only for himself, but for
all the members of his needy and undistinguished family. The go-between
who actually arranged the marriage was Father Joseph. We cannot doubt
that he believed himself to be doing what his master had called the
Exterior Will of God.

The abrupt conclusion of the war left the king with a considerable army,
fully equipped, but with nothing to do. Luynes was all for disbanding it
at once. Not so Father Joseph. Here, he perceived, was an opportunity
which it would be a sin to miss-an opportunity to begin that great work
of national unification, of which he and Richelieu had talked so often
on the road between Loudun and Tours. The presence of the army was
providential; the king must use it to strengthen the royal authority and
advance the true faith. Specifically, he should lead it into Béarn, at
the Western end of the Pyrenees. This native province of Henri IV still
enjoyed a kind of autonomy; what was worse, it was so virulently
Protestant that for upwards of fifty years, Catholicism had been all but
outlawed within its borders. Let the king march at once, resume his
father’s patrimony and re-establish the true faith.

Louis XIII listened and was inclined to take the friar’s advice, which
was echoed by Richelieu and the whole Catholic party. But Luynes, who
was the most unmilitary of men, objected. The fate of the domestic
crusade hung in the balance. Finally, Father Joseph was called to
express his views before a meeting of the council, presided over by the
king in person. According to Cardinal de Retz, he spoke ‘like the
prophets of the Old Testament’ in favour of an immediate march towards
the south. The majority was won over, and at the head of an army, whose
numbers were swelled by Catholic soldiers from the rebel camp, the king
set out on the crusade.

Béarn yielded without a blow, and was formally incorporated into the
kingdom of France. Jeanne d’Albret’s decrees were rescinded, confiscated
Church lands were restored to their original owners, and Catholicism was
reintroduced into the province. Father Joseph, who accompanied the army,
was kept very busy founding convents, re-consecrating churches,
organizing the missionaries who were to win the heretics back to the
true faith. Like Richelieu, Father Joseph did not believe in dragooning
the Huguenots into conformity. ‘Forced religion,’ he declared, ‘is no
longer religion.’ Military action against the Huguenots was to be taken
not because they were Protestants, but because of their claim to
constitute a quasi-independent state within the state of France. Once
reduced to obedience, they were to be allowed to worship as they
pleased. To convert them would then become the business of Catholic
missionaries, such as the Capuchins. Such were Father Joseph’s
principles in regard to the heretics; and, for the most part, his
practice conformed to those principles. There were plenty of Catholics
who would have liked to see the Protestants more harshly treated. Thanks
to Richelieu, the shrewd, conservative statesman, thanks, too, to Father
Joseph, the ardent evangelist and the missionary, a more tolerant policy
prevailed. The result was that, after their political defeat, the
Huguenots remained a loyal minority of useful and contented citizens.
Louis XIV’s persecution of them, in the latter part of the century, was
without political or economic excuse; it was an act of what is called
‘high idealism,’ in other words of pure and gratuitous bigotry. From
Béarn the royal forces marched on the great Huguenot fortress of
Montauban. They were under the command of Luynes, who had been made
Constable of France. The contrast between the General’s resounding title
and his hopeless incapacity as a soldier was a source to all of
contemptuous merriment. Weeks passed, and the siege of Montauban had to
be ingloriously raised; then after other humiliating failures, the
Constable forestalled his imminent fall from the king’s good graces by
catching typhoid and, in the last days of 1621, miserably dying.

The king was now without either a favourite or a competent adviser, and
for the next two and a half years the government was carried on by a
succession of feeble and generally unsatisfactory ministries. Coming and
going between Touraine and Paris, Father Joseph worked unobtrusively for
the advancement of his friend, the new-made Cardinal. The task was not
easy. For though Richelieu was by far the ablest man in French public
life, the king was reluctant to make use of him. There were many reasons
for this reluctance. To begin with, the Cardinal’s mere physical
presence was extremely repugnant to Louis. Sickly and neurotic himself,
the king liked to be surrounded with healthy bodies and healthy minds.
He shrank with a kind of disgust from the contact of this invalid
priest, whose ordinary restraint of manner concealed nervous
abnormalities at least as considerable, in their own way, as his own.

Furthermore, Louis was painfully conscious of his own shortcomings; he
knew he was slow-witted and ignorant, pathologically moody and
vacillating. The Cardinal’s prodigious abilities and the almost
superhuman quality of his undeviating will were felt by the younger man
as a kind of standing reproach and at the same time as a menace to his
personal independence. His harsh and loveless upbringing had left him
with a fear of being bullied, a mistrust of dominating personalities.
Besides disgusting and shaming, the Cardinal actually frightened him.
But over and against these private reasons for rejecting Richelieu were
ranged all the public and political reasons for accepting him. True, his
reputation in certain respects was bad. He had flattered the infamous
Concinis and had openly acknowledged himself their creature. Then, while
in exile, at Blois, he had kept up a secret correspondence with Luynes,
informing him of all the Queen Mother’s plans. The information had been
useful; but in the giving of it the informer had not increased his
reputation for trustworthiness. Meanwhile, the fact remained that he was
an incomparable politician, and to all appearances the only man capable
of solving his country’s most urgent problems.

Louis XIII took his duties as a king very seriously; the fact that he
overcame his personal distaste for Richelieu and that he contrived to
repress it through all the eighteen years of their association bears
witness to the strength of his public spirit. The first and most
decisive manifestation of that public spirit came when, yielding to a
now irresistible pressure of advice and persuasion, the king admitted
Richelieu to the council of state. That was in April 1624. Four months
later came the second. In August of the same year, La Vieuville, the
head of the ministry, was arrested and the Cardinal installed in his
place. One of Richelieu’s first acts as prime minister was to send a
letter to the Provincial of Touraine. ‘Next to God,’ he declared,
‘Father Joseph had been the principal instrument of his present
fortune,’ and he begged the Capuchin to come at once to Paris, where
there was important work for him to do. The necessary ‘obediences’ were
obtained from the general of the order, and within a very short time
Father Joseph had taken the place he was to occupy until his death in
1638 -the place of unofficial chief of staff for foreign affairs.

[]


CHAPTER VI

The Two Collaborators

Finally and unequivocally, Father Joseph had now surrendered to his
destiny. His career as an evangelist and a teacher of spiritual
exercises was not indeed over -for he continued with almost superhuman
energy to instruct his nuns and direct an ever-growing organization of
foreign and domestic missionaries -but had become secondary to his
career as a politician. From now on he was primarily the collaborator of
Richelieu and, in all but name, his country’s minister for foreign
affairs. In the Capuchin’s life, as in the Cardinal’s, that summer of
1624 marked a decisive turning point. Having reached this date in our
narrative, we may, I think, appropriately devote a few paragraphs to a
comparison of the two men, who were henceforward to work together in
such intimate collaboration. In the course of his fruitless visit to
Madrid, in 1618, Father Joseph had received from his hosts only one
concrete proposition, and that was strictly dishonourable. Important
personages in close touch with the government waited upon the friar in
his cell at the Capuchin convent, assured him of the high esteem in
which he was held by the king, the admiration felt by the Duke of Lerma
for his virtues and talents, the desire of both for a better
understanding with France and their readiness, if he would support the
pro-Spanish policy which had been pursued by Marie de Medicis and had
now, with her exile, fallen into discredit, to place at the friar’s
disposal practically any sum he cared to mention -oh, not for his own
use, of course! How could the Reverend Father imagine such a thing? No,
no, for some good work in which the Reverend Father was interested -some
mission, for example, some new order of religious, dedicated to the
contemplation of God’s transcendent majesty and beauty…

It was the classic temptation, reserved for souls of quality. The common
run of merely animal men and women can be left to Belial-

“Belial, the dissolutest Spirit that fell,
The sensualest and, after Asmodai,
The fleshiest Incubus, who thus advised:
‘Set women in his eye and in his walk.”

But when fishing for the elect, it is a waste of time to bait the hook
with such too, too solid, such obviously unidealistic worms.

“Among the sons of man,
How many have with a smile made small account
Of beauty and her lures, easily scorned
All her assaults, on worthier things intent.”

Therefore, Satan concludes,

“Therefore with manlier objects we must try
His constancy with such as have more show
Of worth, of honour, glory and popular praise
(Rocks, whereon greatest men have oftest wrecked).”

Through the Spanish government, Satan set to work on Father Joseph, but
with no success. The friar was a good Frenchman, who mistrusted
foreigners et dona ferentes. He was also (and this is much more
significant) a good Capuchin, who mistrusted money as such.

How Richelieu would have received a similar offer is uncertain. He was
as good a Frenchman as Father Joseph; but in that age many good
Frenchmen did not scruple to accept substantial gifts and pensions from
foreign governments. The current conventions of honour and morality did
not unequivocally condemn such practices, which were common among the
aristocracies of every country in Europe. This being so, Richelieu would
quite probably have seen no reason for refusing such a gift, all the
more so as he would not have felt bound by it to keep his side of the
bargain. He could have taken the bribe with a good social and political
conscience. As for his personal conscience, that would not have been
troubled even for a moment. He felt no scruples about money and could
indulge 1:his covetousness without a qualm. Such scruples as he had were
mainly sexual. He had a high opinion of continence -no doubt because he
had a low opinion of women. ‘These animals,’ he said of them, ‘are very
strange. One sometimes thinks they must be incapable of doing much harm,
because they are incapable of doing any good; but I protest on my
conscience that there is nothing so well able to ruin a state as they
are.’ Belial, it is evident, was no more dangerous to the Cardinal than
to the friar. But when it came to Mammon, the demon of wealth, and
Lucifer, the arch-fiend of pride and power, the case was very different.
Richelieu was eaten up by a consuming lust for power. Nor was the
reality of power enough; he also desired the appearance of it. There is
a story that his uncle, La Porte, was present at a meeting between
Richelieu and the Duke of Savoy, when the former took precedence over
the latter and, as they walked along, passed first through every
doorway. ‘To think,’ exclaimed the old gentleman in a kind of rapturous
"Nunc Dimittis", ‘to think that I should have seen the grandson of
lawyer La Porte walking in front of the grandson of Charles VI’ Behind
that cold, impassive mask of his, the Cardinal rejoiced as
whole-heartedly as his bourgeois uncle. These triumphs were profoundly
important to him.

No less important were the triumphs he could buy with money-the palaces,
the attendants, the plate, the libraries, the great banquets, the
gorgeous masques for which bishops acted as choreographers, and the
audience consisted of queens and princes, great nobles and ambassadors.
The passion for wealth was born and bred in him, and grew with every
satisfaction it received. His speech before the States-General in 1614
contains a passage which his subsequent behaviour was to render
exquisitely comic. Expatiating on the desirability of employing priests
in the affairs of state, he declared that the clergy ‘are freer than
other men from the private interests which so often harm the public.
Observing celibacy, they have nothing to survive them but their souls,
and these do not accumulate earthly treasures.’ By 1630 the speaker was
in receipt of an income of fifteen hundred thousand livres from the
accumulation of ecclesiastical benefices alone. His salaries,
perquisites and miscellaneous pickings amounted to four or five millions
more. Of the grand total, he spent upon himself four million livres (the
annual subsidy given by France to her Swedish allies was less than a
million), and he put aside at the end of each year enough to make it
possible for him to leave to his nephews and nieces an estate valued in
the scores of millions. When one considers that the purchasing power of
a livre in the early seventeenth century amounted to seven or eight gold
francs, one is forced to admit that, for a man whose profession
discouraged him from ‘accumulating earthly treasures,’ the Cardinal did
not do too badly.

Money and power were not the only ‘manlier objects’ for which Richelieu
yearned. He also had an itch for literary fame. He employed a committee
of five poets to work up his ideas into dramatic form, and when one of
them, Corneille, wrote Le Cid, the Cardinal was consumed by envy and,
through paid critics, tried to prove that the tragedy was entirely
undeserving of the praise it had received.

Richelieu’s, it is evident from his biography, was a case which can have
presented no difficulties to the Tempter. The Satan of Paradise Regained
is only a shade more intelligent than poor Belial; but to land a pike so
frantically greedy as was the Cardinal requires little more than the
bare minimum of cunning. Any old ‘manlier object’ was bait enough for
Richelieu. To Father Joseph, on the contrary, these glittering tin
minnows were of no interest. Bait of a much subtler kind was required
for him -something more intrinsically precious than power, cash or fame,
some imitation of the real Good much more plausible and specious than a
‘ manlier object.’ Of such temptations the Satan of Paradise Regained
makes no mention- for the sufficient reason, of course, that his
inventor was not aware of their existence.

By nature and by puritan upbringing, Milton was a proud, stoical
moralist. Strenuously cultivating self-reliance and a ‘self-esteem
founded on just and right,’ he lived his whole life in happy ignorance
of the fact that religion consists in the exact opposite of
self-reliance and self-esteem-in total self-surrender to a God who is
not merely a very virtuous puritan gentleman, considerably magnified,
but a being of a wholly different order, incommensurable with man even
at his highest and most righteous ; incommensurable, and yet suffering
himself to be experienced by those who are prepared to accept the
conditions upon which that experience may be had : the sacrifice of all
the elements of their personality, the respectable no less than the
discreditable. Milton’s Christ never mentions the final and compelling
reason why he must reject the wealth that will enable him to ‘do good,’
the power by means of which he may establish ‘the kingdom of heaven.’
That reason is that a son of God is what he is in virtue of his
continual and perfect practice of God’s presence; and that the continual
and perfect practice of God’s presence is impossible for a soul
preoccupied with wealth or power. As it stands, Paradise Regained is a
curiously uninteresting and obtuse affair. Its versified arguments are
wordy battles between a Satan who is only John Milton in his uninhibited
day-dreams (‘he was of the devil’s party without knowing it’) and a
Saviour who is the same John Milton at his ideally best, in a kind of
glorified de luxe edition.

A really intelligent Satan would have read the Lives of the saints and
the writings of the mystics, and, having read, would have known how to
deal with such sincere and devoted seekers of perfection as Father
Joseph. And, of course, the real Satan, as opposed to the Miltonic
invention, did know exactly how to deal with him; for the real Satan is
the element in every individual being which hinders that being from
dying to its selfhood and becoming united with the reality from which it
has been separated. This being so, the intelligence, the sensibility,
the spirituality of Satan is always exactly proportionate to the
intelligence, sensibility and spirituality of the individual in whom he
is at work. Milton’s Satan has the intelligence, sensibility and
spirituality of a great poet who is at the same time a proud, passionate
stoic; Richelieu’s, of a great statesman, with a similar stoic morality
much less effectively in control of passions darker and more
destructive. The Satan who tempted Father Joseph into power politics was
a different and much more interesting fiend. It was his business to
tempt a man who had not only taken vows of poverty and humility, but who
had also schooled himself, by a long course of theocentric spiritual
discipline, into a condition in which he genuinely did not desire money
and was more or less completely indifferent to power. As for fame,
contemporary or posthumous, Father Joseph cared nothing for it. As a
politician, he worked without show or noise, keeping himself
deliberately in the background: as a writer, he courted anonymity in
print and was content for the most part to leave his productions
unpublished. In a word, the ordinary ‘manlier objects’ with which men of
exceptional ability are tempted, made no appeal to him whatever. If this
man was to be caught, the fiend would have to become a good deal
cleverer and more subtle than the Satan of Paradise Regained.

Father Joseph was diverted from the road of mystical perfection by a set
of closely related temptations-the temptation to do what seemed to be
his duty, to accomplish what was apparently the external will of God;
the temptation to be mistaken about God’s will and to choose a lower at
the expense of a higher duty; and the temptation to believe that a
disagreeable task must be good just because it was disagreeable. Let us
consider these temptations in detail.

Father Joseph, as we have seen, was intensely a patriot and a royalist.
Born and brought up during the civil wars, he had conceived a veritable
passion for national unity, for order and for what was then the sole
guarantee of these two goods, the monarchy. This passion had been
rationalized into a religious principle by means of the old crusading
faith in the divine mission of France and the newly popularized doctrine
of the divine right of kings. Gesta Die per Francos summed up the first
belief; the second was to find its most pregnantly abbreviated
expression in Bossuet’s dictum : ‘The King, Jesus Christ, the Church-God
under these three names.’ Hanotaux, the historian of Cardinal Richelieu,
writes of the Capuchin that ‘he gave himself to two high causes, which
absorbed his life, God and France, always ready to work and fight for
either cause, but never separating one from the other, always responding
to the call of an inner conviction, namely that France is the instrument
of Providence and French greatness a providential thing.’ Granted the
validity of these doctrines -doctrines which he held with a burning
intensity of conviction-it was obviously Father Joseph’s duty to
undertake political work for king and country, when called upon to do
so. It was his duty because, ex hypothesi, such political work was as
truly the will of God as the work of preaching, teaching and
contemplation.

We come now to the second temptation-the temptation to fall into error
regarding God’s will. One of the immediate reasons for this error has
already been stated: Father Joseph believed that the cause of God and
the cause of France were inseparable. We must now inquire why he chose
to harbour this belief. There seem to be two reasons. The first is that
the circumstances of his upbringing had created habits of thought and
feeling which, in spite of his long-drawn effort to kill out the Old
Adam in him, he had found it impossible to eliminate to the second we
are given a clue by a penetrating phrase of Victor Cousin’s. In one of
his studies of seventeenth century manners, that philosopher-historian
remarked of Father Joseph that ‘he was a man without ambition for
himself, but full of a boundless ambition for France, which he regarded
as the great instrument of Providence.’ In spite of his reading of the
theocentric moralists, in spite of all the thought he had given to the
right ‘relationship between man and God, Father Joseph had failed to see
that vicarious ambition is as much of an obstacle to union as personal
ambition-that a craving for the glorification of France is merely
Satan’s ‘manlier object’ at one remove. And whereas personal ambition is
regarded by all the moralists as undesirable, only the most advanced
theocentrics have detected the perniciousness of vicarious ambition on
behalf of a sect, nation or person. For the immense majority of mankind,
such ambition appears to be entirely creditable. That is what makes it
so peculiarly dangerous for men of good-will, even for aspirants to
sanctity, such as our Capuchin. Father Joseph had freed himself from
personal ambition; but as the devoted servant of a providential France
and a divinely appointed Louis XIII, he was able to go on indulging the
passions connected with ambition, and to go on indulging them, what was
more, without any sense of guilt. To put it cynically, he could enjoy
subconsciously the pleasures of malice, domination and glory, while
retaining the conviction that he was doing the will of God. To retain
this conviction was the more easy for him, inasmuch as he attempted, in
Father Benet’s phrase, actively to annihilate his political actions,
even as he performed them. To what extent such actions are
‘annihilatable’ is another question, which will have to be discussed
later. For the present, it is enough to state that such active
annihilation was in this case consistently attempted.

What finally tempted Father Joseph to commit himself definitely to a
political career was the fact that a political career was extremely
arduous and, to a part at least of his nature, disagreeable.
Tenebroso-Cavernoso might enjoy the scheming and the diplomacy, and
Ezechiely might vicariously exult in his royal master’s triumphs. But
the contemplative who had spent so many hours of each day in communion
with God could not but suffer from having henceforward to devote the
greater number of those hours to affairs of state. That he should deal
with such affairs was, however, his duty and the will of God, who
evidently desired to try to the limit his powers of active annihilation.
Moreover, a political career was very laborious, particularly when
combined, as Father Joseph combined it from the first, with the
direction of a whole congregation of nuns, the work of Apostolic
Commissary for Missions and at least two hours a day of intensive mental
prayer. Hence its attractiveness. As a child he had asked to be sent to
school for fear his mother should turn him into a mollycoddle; and now,
as a man, he thought it his duty to accept the burden of political
responsibility. A part of him, it is true, rather enjoyed the burden,
but there was another part that groaned under its weight. It was because
of that groaning that he felt himself justified in enjoying, that he
felt finally certain that in accepting Richelieu’s invitation he was
doing God’s will. Richelieu shared the friar’s convictions in regard to
France, the monarchy, and the disagreeableness of political labour and
the obligations which that very disagreeableness imposed. But whereas
these convictions were of prime importance to Father Joseph, to
Richelieu they were only a secondary consiseration. Even if France and
the monarchy had meant nothing to him, he would still have found, in his
native genius, his inordinate lust for power, his passion for money,
amply sufficient reasons for going into politics.

Certain passages in the Cardinal’s letters and memoirs throw a very
interesting light on the matters we have been discussing; for they
reveal to us what Richelieu thought about his political activities, in
their relation to God, his fellow-men and his own salvation. The
Cardinal begins by making a sharp distinction between personal and
public morality-between what Niebuhr would call ‘moral men and immoral
society.’

‘Autre chose est être homme de bien selon Dieu
et autre chose être tel selon les hommes.’ ¹⁹

To take a specific example of this difference, the good man according to
God must forgive offences against himself as soon as they are committed;
but where offences have been committed against society, the good man
according to men must do everything in his power to take vengeance. ‘The
reason for this difference springs from the same principle as applied to
two different kinds of obligation. The first and greatest obligation of
a man is the salvation of his soul, which demands that vengeance should
be left to God and not taken by the person offended. The greatest
obligation of kings is the repose of their subjects, the preservation in
its entirety of their state, and of the reputation of their government;
to which end it is necessary to punish all offences against the state so
effectively that the severity of the vengeance may remove the very
thought of renewing the injury.’

Richelieu himself was a representative of the king and an "homme de bien
selon les hommes". This being so, it was not legitimate for him to
behave as an homme de bien selon Dieu, even though failure so to behave
might imperil his chances of eternal bliss. His view of himself was at
bottom very similar to that which the more tender-minded of communist
sympathizers often take of Lenin-that of a kind of secular saviour,
taking upon himself the responsibility for intrinsically evil acts,
which he performs, with full knowledge of their consequences for
himself, in order to ensure the future happiness of mankind. ‘Many men,’
wrote the Cardinal, ‘would save their souls as private persons who damn
themselves as public persons.’ To benefit the French people (if not at
the moment, at any rate at some future time), to increase the power and
glory of France, as personified in her kings, he was prepared to run the
appalling risk of going to hell. And his punishment was not reserved
exclusively for the next world; like all statesmen, he was called upon,
here and now, to accept a frightful burden of fatigues and scruples and
anxieties. He was one who, in his own memorable phrase, ‘lies awake at
night that others may sleep fearlessly in the shadow of his watchings
‘-a l’ ombre de ses veilles. In this heroic self-portrait there is, of
course, an element of truth; but it is very far from being the whole
truth. In describing himself as a Promethean saviour, a voluntary
scapegoat suffering for the sake of the people, Richelieu omitted to
mention those little items of the five-million-a-year income, the
dukedom, the absolute power, the precedence over princes of the blood,
the fawnings and flatteries of all who approached him. ‘Verily, they
have their reward.’

Father Joseph’s rewards were of a more rarefied kind and consisted in
the vicarious indulgence of passions suppressed so far as he personally
was concerned, in the satisfactions associated with the performance of
mainly unpleasant duties, in the strengthening and sustaining sense that
he was accomplishing God’s will. Unlike Richelieu, he did not consider
himself an homme de bien selon les hommes, risking his salvation by
doing immoral things on behalf of the state. In his own eyes, he was
always the homme de bien selon Dieu; for he could always (or at least so
it seemed to him at the beginning of his political career) ‘annihilate’
the questionable things he did for his country by dedicating them all to
God. In this way he believed that he could live and work, even at power
politics, in a state of ‘holy indifference,’ very similar to the state
recommended, in the Bhagavad Gita, to the hero Arjuna as he prepares to
go into battle.

So much for motives and their rationalizations. In temperament, the two
men differed profoundly. Father Joseph, as we have seen, was
simultaneously Ezechiely and Tenebroso-Cavernoso. Richelieu exhibited no
smallest trace of the Hebrew prophet. He had no enthusiasm, only a fixed
intensity of purpose. Inspirations and happy intuitions played little or
no part in his life; everything he did was planned and calculated for
the sole purpose of bringing, not indeed the greatest happiness to the
greatest number, but the greatest advantage to Armand Du Plessis de
Richelieu and the greatest glory to France. In a word, he was
exclusively Tenebroso-Cavernoso -but a Tenebroso-Cavernoso, we must
always remember, strangely mitigated by ill-health and psychological
instability. There was madness in the family. Richelieu’s elder
brother-the Carthusian monk, whom he dragged out of his monastery and
made the Cardinal Archbishop of Lyon was not merely feeble-minded; he
also suffered every now and then from delusions of grandeur, believing
himself to be the First Person of the Trinity. Richelieu himself is
known to have been a victim of fits of morbid depression and occasional
explosions of rage, almost epileptic in their violence. Furthermore, a
tradition was preserved in the royal family that, like his brother, he
was sometimes subject to delusions. But whereas the poor half-wit
thought of himself as God, the arrogant, self-deified genius was doomed,
by a stroke of beautifully poetic justice, to be convinced that he was
less than human. In his spells of mental aberration, the cardinal
imagined himself to be a horse.

These psychological lesions were not, however, so serious that they
prevented Richelieu from doing his work. He did it with the efficiency
which is possible only to those who possess, as well as the highest
intellectual abilities, an extraordinary strength and fixity of
resolution. Few men will anything very strongly, and out of these few,
only a tiny minority are capable of combining strength of will with
unwavering continuity. Most human beings are spasmodic and intermittent
creatures, who like above everything the pleasures of mental indolence.
‘It is for this reason,’ says Bryce, ‘that a strenuous and unwearying
will sometimes becomes so tremendous a power, almost a hypnotic force.’
Lucifer is the highest mythological incarnation of this intense personal
will, and the great men who have embodied it upon the stage of history
participate, to some extent, in his satanic strength and magnificence.
It is because of this strength and magnificence, so very different from
our own weakness and mental squalor, that we continue to hark back
nostalgically to the biographies of such men as Alexander, Caesar,
Napoleon, and that, as each new imitator of Lucifer arises, we prostrate
ourselves before Him, begging him to save us. And, of course, many of
these Great Men would genuinely like to save their fellows. But since
they are what they are, not saints, but petty Lucifers, their well meant
efforts can lead only to the perpetuation, in some temporary less or
more unpleasant form, of those conditions from which humanity is
perpetually praying to be saved. Great Men have invariably failed to
‘deliver the goods’; but because we admire their qualities and envy
their success, we continue to believe in them and to submit to their
power. At the same time, we know quite well, with a part of our being,
that Lucifers cannot possibly do us any good; so we turn for a moment
from such incarnations of the personal will to those very different
human beings, who incarnate the will of God. The Saints are even more
willing to help than the Great Men; but the advice they give is apt to
seem depressing to men and women who want to enjoy the pleasures of
indolence. ‘God,’ say the Saints, ‘helps those who help themselves ‘;
and they go on to prescribe the methods by which it is possible to help
oneself. But we don’t want to have to help ourselves; we want to be
helped, to have somebody who will do the work on our behalf. So we turn
back again to the Incarnations of the personal will. These Great Men
have not the smallest doubt of their ability to give us exactly what we
want -a political system that will make everybody happy and good, a
state religion that guarantees God’s favours here on earth and a
blissful eternity in paradise. We accept their offer; and immediately
the other part .of our being reverts to the saints, from whom once again
we tum to our disastrous Great Men. And so it goes on, century after
century. The pathetic shilly-shallying has left its accumulated traces
in our libraries, where the records of Great Men and their activities in
history fill about as much shelf-room as the records of the Saints and
their dealings with God.

Richelieu was one of the great incarnations of the personal will. It was
to his never relaxed inflexibility of purpose that he owed his
extraordinary career, and by means of which he was able to stamp his
impress so profoundly upon the history of Europe. Father Joseph gave the
appearance of being more dispersed and fluctuating than his political
chief. But under the variations of tone and manner, and in spite of
those sudden gusts of enthusiasm by which he seemed periodically to be
carried away, he retained a fixity of purpose no less unbending. On more
than one occasion, indeed, he proved himself the more determined of the
two; when Richelieu showed signs of weakening, the friar revived his
courage and, by sheer strength of will, carried him forward, through all
difficulties, to the desired goal. ‘I have lost my support,’ Richelieu
kept repeating after his friend’s death, ‘I have lost my support.’ That
Father Joseph was able to act as a source of strength to this man, whose
genius consisted precisely in being strong, was due, one may guess, to
the fact that, for a quarter of a century, he had been following Benet
of Canfield’s Rule of Perfection, reduced to the sole point of the Will
of God. In the language of the mystics, ‘Perfection’ is the state of
total and continuous self-abnegation in Reality-the state of those who
can say, ‘ I live, yet not I, but God lives in me.’ From their
biographies, it is clear that the men and women who have come to such
perfection receive, among the other fruits of the spirit, an
extraordinary accession of moral strength. It is a strength wholly
different in quality from the inflexibility of the tensed, self-centred
personal will of the stoic and the petty Lucifer -of the ‘fiend of
righteousness,’ in Blake’s expressive phrase, and the fiend of
unrighteousness. The will of the self-abnegated person is relaxed and
effortless, because it is not his own will, but a great river of force
flowing through him from a sea of subliminal consciousness that lies
open in its tum to the ocean of reality. He radiates joy and a beautiful
and yet awe-inspiring serenity; he works with irresistible gentleness;
being completely humble, he wields the authority of a power infinitely
greater than himself, and of which he is merely the instrument.

In his early manhood, Father Joseph displayed this peculiar strength
which belongs to the self-abnegated man. That he had completely achieved
the perfection of the unitive life may be doubted. If he had, it is hard
indeed to believe that anything even a sense of duty, even a desire for
painful self-sacrifice would have induced him to enter politics. But
though he had not gone the whole way, he had certainly gone far -far
enough, at any rate, to be able to make a profound impression on the
monks whom, as Provincial of Touraine, it was his business to govern and
instruct. What struck them, as I have already noted, was the gentleness
and humility with which he exercised his powers. Vigilant, firm,
tolerating no lapse from the Franciscan rule, he knew how to punish
without arousing resentment, how to administer rebukes in which he
personally was not involved, except as the channel through which a
force, recognizably divine, was flowing. When Ange de Joyeuse called him
the perfect Capuchin, he was very nearly right. But, alas, not entirely
right.

Enough of the Old Adam remained in him to succumb to those extremely
subtle temptations prepared by his attendant Satan. Without giving up
his mystical practices, and in the belief that he could simultaneously
serve God and the Cardinal, he became a politician. In spite of the
friar’s almost superhuman efforts, the attempt to make the best of both
worlds failed as completely as his Master had said it would. His
policies (as we can now see clearly enough) did not produce the results
they were intended to produce; and the quality of his spiritual life (as
he himself perceived before he died) progressively deteriorated.
Nevertheless, in spite of this deterioration, he carried over into the
period of his association with Richelieu something of the
more-than-personal strength which had been his in the earlier days. Nor
must we forget that, even in cases where the perfection or total
self-abnegation in reality is not achieved, the mere practice of
spiritual exercises is capable by itself of enhancing the strength of
will. Spiritual exercises need not necessarily be associated with God ;
a man can, if he so chooses, make himself one-pointed for
one-pointedness’ sake, or for the sake of his nation, his party, his
sect, or even the devil. In all these cases he will gain strength, for
the simple reason that spiritual exercises are a device for tapping,
canalizing and directing the sources of the will below the threshold of
awareness. A current flowing from the subliminal sea is in itself a
tremendous force, even though this sea may remain cut off from the ocean
of reality beyond it. Richelieu seems to have relied entirely on the
upper levels of the conscious, personal will. Hence the appalling strain
under which he continually lived -a strain that told severely on a
constitution never robust at the best of times, and that resulted every
now and then in a temporary failure of nerve. It was on these occasions
that he turned to the Capuchin for support. From the depths of a nature
in which the conscious will had been systematically aligned with the
subconscious, and through which, perhaps, a little of the power inherent
in reality still flowed, Father Joseph was able to give him the strength
he needed.


CHAPTER VII

La Rochelle

Richelieu had set himself two great tasks: to unify France under an
omnipotent monarchy; to break the power of the Hapsburgs and to exalt
the Bourbons in their place. The possibility of defeating Spain and
Austria depended, obviously, on the previous accomplishment of the first
task. Divided, France was weak. Hampered by his chronically rebellious
nobles and by the Protestants, who formed a state within the state, the
king was powerless to act against his ‘hereditary enemies’ abroad. The
glory of the dynasty and even the safety of the realm (for the Spanish
and Austrian Hapsburgs seemed to be aiming at nothing less than the
hegemony of Europe) demanded the immediate suppression of feudal
privilege and Huguenot power. Only when this had been done would the
king be in a position to conduct a foreign war. In the meantime the
Hapsburgs would have to be attacked mainly by diplomatic means, by
bluff, by endless negotiation, by juggling the balance of power, by
subsidizing governments already at war with Spain or Austria.

On matters of domestic policy, Father Joseph had always been in accord
with the Cardinal; and by 1624 he was coming reluctantly to accept his
foreign policy as well. He saw that, if that great crusade was ever to
be undertaken, Spain and Austria must be humbled into submission to
French leadership. Within a short time the political conversion was
complete; Father Joseph had become as determinedly an enemy of the
Hapsburgs as Richelieu himself.

In 1624 the Thirty Years’ War was just six years old and had already
been the cause of enormous miseries. Bohemia, where the trouble started,
was the first to suffer. Then, in 1619, Bethlen Gabor, the Protestant
Prince of Transylvania, broke into the imperial domains and pillaged
Austria. In 1620 Tilly’s Catholics ravaged Bohemia once more and
committed many atrocities against the civil population. To such
humanitarian protests as were made, Tilly merely replied ‘that his men
were not nuns.’ In 1621 the Protestants re-entered Bohemia under
Mansfeld, and the country suffered as atrociously under its defenders as
it had suffered in the previous year under its enemies.

When the Protestant army had devoured everything there was to eat in
Bohemia, Mansfeld led his men into the Palatinate. Being without money
or supplies, he was compelled to subordinate his policy and strategy to
the demands of his soldiers’ stomachs. Where there was food there his
army must go, regardless of every other consideration. In the
Palatinate, Mansfeld was joined by Christian of Brunswick, and between
them they succeeded in reducing the people to ruin and despair. Defeated
by the imperialists, they were forced to retire into Alsace, and when
Alsace had been gnawed to the bone they occupied Lorraine. From
Lorraine, the army was invited in 1623 into Holland. Battles were fought
on the way in the Spanish Netherlands, and the forces besieging
Berg-op-Zoom were defeated. After which, in 1624, Mansfeld marched his
men into East Friesland, which suffered the same fate as Bohemia, the
Palatinate, Alsace and Lorraine.

From Paris Richelieu and Father Joseph looked on at what was happening
beyond the frontiers and framed a policy expressly intended to prolong
the bloody confusion. France had no effective army, and any direct,
large-scale attack upon the Hapsburgs was therefore out of the question.
But if the war in Germany could be drawn out, Spain and Austria would be
drained of their resources that, by the time France had grown strong,
they would be exhausted. To this end it was decided in Paris that the
embattled Protestants should receive French support, diplomatic and
financial. At the same time new allies were to be sought among the
non-belligerents, and determined efforts made to lure the Catholic
Electors away from the Emperor (whose triumph, it was pointed out, would
necessarily be at their expense, no less than at that of the
Protestants) and to group them into a middle party under the tutelage of
Louis XIII. These ‘tenebrous-cavernoso’ proceedings were supplemented by
a small-scale military operation, skillfully directed at one of the
vital nerve-centres of the Hapsburg system-the Valtelline. Along this
valley, which comes down from the Alps to the head of Lake Como’ and the
only road by which Spain could communicate with Austria. Spanish troops
and bullion from Mexico and Peru could be landed at Genoa, could be
moved across Spanish-owned territory to Milan, and from Milan through
the Valtelline, which was under the protectorate of the Swiss
Confederacy of the Grisons, and across the passes into Austria. If that
road were cut, the two branches of the House of Austria could
communicate only by sea; and with the rise of Dutch naval power, the
Channel and the straits of Dover had become to all intents and purposes
impassable to Spanish shipping. Intervening nominally on behalf of his
Swiss allies, Richelieu swooped down on the strategic valley and, at the
end of 1624, garrisoned it with French troops.

It was, among other things, to talk about the Valtelline that Father
Joseph went to Rome in the spring of 1625. He remained there for four
months and, thanks to the Turciad and his conversational talents, was
treated by Urban VIII with signal favour. Twice every week during the
whole of his stay the Pope received him in private audience and remained
closeted with him for hours at a time. When he trudged home again, it
was with the title of Apostolic Commissary of Missions. From this time
almost to the day of his death, foreign missions were one of his chief
preoccupations. Vicariously, through his organization of devoted
Capuchins, he was able to continue the work of evangelization, to which
he had been so strongly drawn in his youth. His friars were in every
part of the world, from Persia to England, from Abyssinia to Canada. In
the midst of his wearisome and questionable political activities, the
thought that he was helping to spread the gospel of Christ must often
have been a source of strength and consolation. True, his enemies in
Spain and Austria and at the Roman Curia accused him of using his
missionaries as French agents and anti-Hapsburg fifth-columnists. And,
alas, the charge was not entirely baseless. Just as Cromwell was, in all
sincerity, to identify the interests of England with those of the true
Protestant faith, so Father Joseph, with no less conviction, identified
the interests of true Catholicism with those of France. He knew that
trade follows the cross and that an evangelist can be very useful in
representing the interests of the nation to which he belongs.
Inevitably, his French Capuchins preached the gospel of the Bourbons as
well as that of Christ.

Father Joseph’s missions kept him in touch with all kinds of remote,
outlandish places; and this awareness of the world overseas, combined
with his belief in the providential nature of the French monarchy, made
him an imperialist. Dedouvres has convincingly shown that the
epoch-making memorandum of colonization and sea power, which in 1626 was
presented to the king as the work of another hand, was in fact composed
by Father Joseph. The recommendations set forth in this document were
followed to the letter first by Richelieu and later by Colbert. ‘In the
name of the greatest colonists and sailors of France,’ says Dedouvres,
‘we must salute, in the person of Father Joseph, one of their boldest
and most far-sighted precursors on the road of sea power’-a sea power
which, as the memorandum insists, must be valuable as an aid, not only
to commerce, but also and above all to missionary endeavour. No less
than the overthrow of Hapsburg power, the realization of Father Joseph’s
dream of sea power and an empire was contingent upon the unification of
France; and that work was not to be accomplished easily or very quickly.
Richelieu proceeded first against the nobility. An edict was issued in
1626 ordering the destruction of all fortified castles not needed for
the defence of the national frontiers. But it was not by tearing down
old walls and towers that he could bring the nobles to obedience; they
would remain rebellious until such time as he could strike directly at
their privileges and persons. His first opportunity for doing this was
given to the Cardinal in the spring of 1626 when the king’s younger
brother, Gaston, was induced to head a conspiracy, in which the most
active roles were played by the Prince of Condé, two bastard sons of
Henri IV, and that indefatigably charming and promiscuous lady, the
Duchess of Chevreuse. Among the minor conspirators was the Chevreuse’s
lover of the moment, a gay and brilliant young man called the Marquis de
Chalais. Entrusted with the task of murdering Richelieu, Chalais was
suddenly overcome by conscientious scruples and, going to the Cardinal,
confessed his share in the plot. The Cardinal promised him a reward and
went immediately to Gaston; terrified, the heir apparent immediately
turned king’s evidence. Louis and his minister thereupon acted
decisively and swiftly. The two bastards, Vendome and the Grand Prior,
were lured to Paris and there arrested and imprisoned. The prudent Condé
forestalled a similar fate by quickly making his peace with the
Cardinal. Marie de Medicis, who doted on her worthless Gaston and had
been implicated in the conspiracy, was forced to put her signature to a
document in which, as usual on these occasions, she solemnly promised
loyalty and good behaviour for the future. Nothing was done to Mme de
Chevreuse; but for this impunity she had to pay, not long afterwards, by
becoming one of the Cardinal’s secret agents in England. As the mistress
of Lord Holland and the confidante to whom Buckingham had poured out all
the secrets of his love for Anne of Austria, she had sources of
information not available to any merely masculine ambassador.

To Richelieu her reports from London were to be of the utmost value.
Meanwhile, however, she was still actively his enemy; for now, when all
the trouble seemed to have died down, she stirred it once more into
life. Under the influence of her seductions, the infatuated Chalais
started to intrigue again. Visiting Gaston in secret, he tried to
persuade him to flee the country or head a rising of the Huguenots. But
the agents of Richelieu and Tenebroso-Cavernoso were at work. The new
plot was discovered : for the second time in three months Gaston turned
king’s evidence, and put the blame for everything on Chalais. The young
man was arrested, tried, not in a regular court of law, but by one of
those specially appointed commissions which were to become in the
ensuing years the Cardinal’s favourite instruments of repression, and
after having been induced to incriminate his mistress, was executed. To
the other feudal magnates the event seemed incredibly strange and
alarming. It was the first time for many years that a rebellious noble
had Been treated as anything but a candidate for a pension. With the
death of Chalais, conspiracy lost a great deal of its old charm.
Richelieu had won the first round of his fight against the nobility, and
for the time being there was little to fear from that quarter. He was
free to devote his whole attention to the Huguenots.

After Luynes’ unsuccessful siege of Montauban, in 1621, the king and the
Protestants had signed a treaty of peace. But this treaty, as everyone
knew very well, was only a temporary and provisional agreement -so
temporary and provisional that neither side took the trouble to observe
its terms. Whenever an opportunity for scoring an advantage arose, it
was taken regardless of what might happen to be written on that scrap of
paper. Sooner or later, this long-drawn and indecisive conflict between
the king and his two million Protestant subjects would have to be
settled, once and for all. Neither party believed that it could be
settled except by force of arms; both therefore made their preparations.

The first serious breach of the peace was committed in 1627 by a
Protestant, the Duke of Soubise. In command of a small squadron of
fighting ships, he occupied one of the strategically placed islands off
La Rochelle, raided royalist ports and carried off, along with other
booty, the five handsome vessels which the last of the Palaeologi had
had constructed, at great expense, for the transport of Father Joseph’s
crusaders. When things became too hot for him in his home waters,
Soubise set sail, with his prizes, for England, where the common people
immediately took him to their hearts as a Protestant hero. Observing
this, Buckingham decided that he would be a Protestant hero too. By
leading a combined naval and military expedition to the aid of La
Rochelle he hoped to kill two birds with one stone to recover the
popularity which he had lost as the result of the unlucky expedition in
aid of the Elector Palatine and of the king’s marriage to a Catholic
princess; and to take vengeance on Richelieu for having outmanoeuvred
him in negotiation and, worse still, thwarted his amorous designs on
Anne of Austria. In the summer of 1627 he set sail with a great fleet
and seven thousand men. After a brisk fight, he made a landing on the
island of Ré, near La Rochelle, and proceeded to lay siege to the strong
fort of Saint-Martin. Weeks lengthened into months. The French garrison
was starved to the very brink of surrender; then, almost miraculously,
supplies were smuggled through from the mainland. The defenders revived,
and the siege went on. Direct assaults were tried, and failed. The
weather grew worse; the English troops began to sicken. Finally, in
November, Buckingham was forced to raise the siege and sail home. He had
lost four thousand men and achieved absolutely nothing. Hostility
between the king’s forces and the city of La Rochelle broke out in
September 1637. A month later, the king arrived with fresh troops from
Paris. With him came the Cardinal, dressed in Roman purple, but wearing
a breast-plate and a plumed hat, and behind the Cardinal, bare-footed in
the mud, trudged Father Joseph.

La Rochelle was too well fortified to be taken by storm, and in the salt
marshes around the city the royal army sat down for a long siege. Father
Joseph was offered quarters in the house occupied by the Cardinal; but
he declined this comfortable honour in favour of a deserted summerhouse
standing beside a broad ditch at the end of the garden. The fabric was
old and leaky, and when the wind blew hard from offshore and the tides
were high, the ditch overflowed, ankle deep, into the friar’s bedroom.
But to make up for these slight defects, the building possessed one
inestimable advantage; it was private. By going to bed very late and
getting up very early, Father Joseph was able to make time each day for
at least two hours of mental prayer. In the damp and windy solitude of
his gazebo he could meditate in peace.

These periods of recollection, of wordless converse with God and the
crucified Saviour, were more than ever necessary to him at this time. Of
his life under the walls of La Rochelle, he wrote, in a letter to one of
his Calvarian nuns, that it was ‘worse than hell ‘; worse, not because
of its discomforts and dangers (on the contrary, these must rather have
endeared it to a man of Father Joseph’s temper), but, because the strain
and anxiety of his multiple activities made it so peculiarly difficult
for him to make the mystical approach to God. In hell, according to the
theologians, the principal torment of the damned consists in their being
for ever and totally deprived of God’s presence. When Father Joseph said
that public life, particularly public life in war conditions, was worse
than hell, he was not using a mere picturesque figure of speech. In
terms of the philosophy he had accepted, he was making a precise and
sober statement about his psychological condition. In the past he had
advanced at least to the outskirts of the kingdom of God, had had at
least a partial experience of ultimate reality. Now, the dust and smoke
of the Cardinal’s kingdom was obscuring his vision. Having known heaven,
he now found himself excluded from the light. In affirming that such a
state was ‘worse than hell,’ he did not exaggerate. Father Joseph could
find some slight consolation in the thought that the obstacle between
himself and the light of God was his own strenuous performance of God’s
exterior will, and that, if he tried hard enough, he might one day
learn, with God’s grace, to ‘annihilate,’ in a continuous awareness of
the divine presence, even such a life as he was now leading.

Father Joseph’s activities during the long months of the siege were
varied and enormous. To begin with -and this was certainly the work he
found most congenial -he was responsible for the moral, spiritual and,
to some extent, also the physical welfare of the army. Under his command
he had a whole troop of Capuchins, whom he kept incessantly busy.
Services were held for the troops, sermons preached, confessions heard.
Collaborating with the surgeons, the friars organized hospitals and
attended to the needs of the sick and wounded. When there was any
fighting, they were in the thick of it, acting as stretcher-bearers,
assisting the dying to prepare themselves for eternity. Their courage
and devotion were profoundly impressive. To the preaching of such men
even soldiers were prepared to listen. Contemporary observers found the
results nothing less than astounding. Nobody had ever seen or heard of
so well behaved an army.

Unfortunately for Father Joseph, this missionary work among the troops
was only the least of his activities. He was still the Cardinal’s
right-hand man. Foreign affairs was peculiarly ticklish at this time of
domestic conflict-had to be discussed, decisions taken, despatches
written. Court intrigues had to be checkmated ; quarrelling magnates
conciliated. The friar was constantly being called upon to use his
infinite dexterity with the nobility. These were the sort of things he
had been doing ever since Richelieu came into power. At La Rochelle he
was given or took upon himself a number of new responsibilities. Thus,
he attended the councils of war, and gave advice on matters of strategy
and tactics. Imaginative and ingenious, he was for ever propounding the
most brilliant schemes. Some of these were actually tried; but on each
occasion, bad staff work resulted in failure. The fault was not the
friar’s; but his reputation suffered, and he came to be regarded as a
rather absurd, clerical White Knight, full of crack-brained notions
which were made to seem even more ridiculous than they actually were by
his ‘ habit of guaranteeing them as divine revelations. These
revelations came to Father Joseph at the end of long nights, during
which, in his own words, he had ‘redoubled his prayers that God might
give him some light’ on the best way of taking the town by méprise. His
method was to consider all the available information, work out a number
of appropriate plans and then offer the whole in an act of petition,
begging for divine guidance in framing a choice. When the guidance came,
he took the chosen plan to Richelieu and the council of war.

The information on which the Lord was asked to decide came to Father
Joseph mainly from spies in the enemy’s camp; for, as in Paris, so Here
before La Rochelle, the friar acted as chief of Richelieu’s secret
service. To the Tenebroso-Cavernoso side of him this singularly
uninviting role seemed to come quite naturally. Years before there was
any question of his entering politics, he had gone out of his way to
organize a private information service of his own. A host of
correspondents kept him in touch with events in all parts of the
kingdom. So efficient was this service that, at the time of the
expedition into Béarn, he had been able to tell the king and Luynes
exactly what was happening in all the Huguenot strongholds. Nor did he
confine himself only to France. That unrivalled knowledge of foreign
affairs, which made him so useful to the Cardinal, was the fruit of this
same private intelligence service. To be well informed, preferably by
secret and exclusive channels, had always been a real passion with
Father Joseph. Much of his time and energy was spent in elaborately
satisfying that passion; and it may even be that the prospect of being
able to satisfy it more completely than ever before was one of his
inducements for going into politics. In theological language, ‘idle
curiosity’ may have been one of the baits employed by Satan to lure him
away from God. Against this greed for merely mundane information Father
Joseph had been warned, not only by his own master, but by all the great
contemplatives of medieval and modern times. News, they had all assured
him, is one of the great distractions, separating the mind from reality.
For this reason the aspiring contemplative must practise self-denial in
regard to curiosity, just as he does in regard to any other craving or
intellectual dissipation. That Father Joseph should have disregarded the
unanimous advice of all the mystics is strange. How did he justify
himself in his own eyes? Partly, no doubt, by the belief that he could
‘annihilate’ his news-gathering activities. Partly, perhaps, by a
conviction (born of the consciousness of enormous talents) that he had a
vocation for politics comparable to his vocation for preaching and
teaching. Even in those early days, when Ezechiely had gone about the
country winning souls to God, Tenebroso-Cavernoso had felt that he could
do God’s will, and had prepared himself for his yet undetermined task by
a secret and methodical collection of information. Now, through the
instrumentality of Richelieu, the task had been assigned to him, and it
was worse than hell worse than hell, even though it was in accord with
the divine will; worse than hell, in spite of the fact that he had a
real genius, not only for the more avowable forms of politics, but also
for the hidden, backstairs business of espionage and the organization of
fifth columns. ‘In Richelieu’s enterprises,’ writes Fagniez, ‘treason
was almost always called in to supplement open force, or to make force
unnecessary.’ And he goes on to give a number of examples of the way in
which Father Joseph, acting as head of the secret service, made use of
money or honours to buy, now a piece of useful information, now a
complaisance, now a downright treachery. Once again, one wonders how he
contrived to justify himself in his own eyes. Here he was, a Franciscan
friar, vowed to the service of a Church which existed for the salvation
of souls, but using all his own talents, all the baits of Lucifer,
Mammon and Belial, to induce fellow-Christians to damn themselves by
lying, by breaking their pledged word, by betraying the trust imposed in
them. In order to do what he conceived to be his political duty, he had
to do the Satanic opposite of what he had promised to do when he entered
religion.

Catholic secret agents and Huguenot traitors were received by Father
Joseph at his headquarters in the flooded summerhouse. They came at
night, slipping out unobserved through the defenders’ lines. The friar
would sit with them into the small hours, listening to their reports and
giving them instructions. Then, dismissing them with their wages, he
would lie down to sleep. Before daybreak he was up again and on his
knees for an hour or two of that mental prayer, without which he could
not live, but to which, as his political activities were multiplied, he
was finding it ever more difficult to bring a spirit that was fit to
converse with God.

It was a strenuous life, all the more so as Father Joseph kept four
Lents a year and was living, during the greater part of this winter in
the salt marshes, on bread and ditchwater, with an occasional feast-day
dinner of mouldy stock fish. His body showed the marks of fatigue and
undernourishment; but in spite of the Cardinal’s protests, he held on
his course unswervingly. The siege settled down to a dismal routine, and
by February of 1628 Louis XIII was so desperately bored that he insisted
on leaving his army and going back to Paris. It was the fox-hunting at
Versailles that lured him away. In the neighbourhood of La Rochelle a
sportsman could find only wild-fowl and a few hares. The king had done
his best to keep himself amused with hawk and arquebus and beagle. On
more than one occasion military operations had been suspended that the
game might not be disturbed and His Majesty deprived of his favourite,
indeed his only recreation. But by February the longing for foxes had
become irresistible. Richelieu implored his master to stay. With the
king’s departure, he insisted, the army would lose heart. Worse, the
great nobles who had accompanied the expedition might turn from their
wavering loyalty. They were good Catholics, it was true; but the
existence of a strong Protestant minority was the guarantee of royal
weakness, and royal weakness was the condition of the nobles’ power. ‘We
should be fools,’ Bassompierre had said, ‘to take La Rochelle.’ But
while the king was actually present it was psychologically difficult for
him and his fellows not to behave as fools, not to subordinate
long-range interests to the immediate and active expression of
traditional loyalty.

There was yet another reason why Richelieu was anxious for the king to
stay with his army. The Queen Mother was in Paris; and though Richelieu
still made a show of grateful deference towards her, he had done all he
could to keep her from interfering in the affairs of state, not merely
because she was stupid and incompetent, but also because her pro-Spanish
foreign policy was diametrically opposed to his own. Marie’s liking for
the Cardinal had turned to rancorous hatred, and her palace had become
the meeting place of all those who, for whatever reason, desired to see
him overthrown. In Paris these malcontents would have free access to the
king. What if he were to listen to their whisperings ? What if he were
to let himself be worn down by the loud incessant hectoring of his
mother?

In spite, however, of all his minister could say, Louis set out. The
most that Richelieu could get from him was a promise to be back in the
spring. Richelieu remained with the forces in an agony of apprehension.
From Paris, his agents sent news of intrigues against him -news so
alarming, that on several occasions he was on the point of posting back
to rejoin the king. It was Father Joseph who kept him at La Rochelle. To
desert the army at this juncture would be, he insisted, an act of
treason against the Church. The Cardinal’s place was with the crusaders
against heresy. As for the intrigues in Paris, they would come to
nothing; for God would not allow them to succeed. Richelieu stayed on.

In April the king moved south again -very slowly, for he had to stop
several times on the way to hunt the stag-but in the end he arrived. The
siege dragged on. After a number of ineffectual attempts had been made
to cut off La Rochelle from the sea, it was decided to build a great dam
of stones across the outer harbour, beyond the range of the defenders’
cannon. It was a tremendous undertaking, for the channel at this point
was more than a mile across. But in spite of all that the pessimists
could say, the work was begun. It progressed slowly -so slowly, indeed,
that in the summer of 1628 Richelieu lost courage and talked of
abandoning the campaign against the Huguenots. The king was growing
impatient; the foreign situation was becoming ever more menacing; most
of the Cardinal’s advisers were convinced that La Rochelle was
impregnable; and all the time the expedition was costing money, taxes
had had to be increased and the people were murmuring. To raise the
siege now, he argued weakly, would be humiliating, indeed, but not
fatal; to stay on and be compelled to raise it later would be a
catastrophe, from which he could not hope to recover. Once again Father
Joseph intervened. To the Cardinal’s wavering purpose he brought the
reinforcement of a will that no reverses could shake. La Rochelle, he
insisted, must be taken, and the king and Cardinal must be present in
person when it was surrendered. Sustained by the inflexibility of his
friend’s purpose, Richelieu recovered his strength; and meanwhile
Ezechiely’s eloquence was thundering to good effect in the council
chamber and the royal apartments. The siege went on, and the king and
his minister remained with the army. Later, when the town was captured,
Louis XIII publicly acknowledged the debt that was owing to the
Capuchin, affirming that ‘he was the only man to stand firm in the hope
of reducing the town to obedience, and that it was he who had confirmed
the others.’

In his almost single-handed struggle against the obstinate heroism of
the Protestants on the one side and, on the other, against the
Cardinal’s temporary loss of nerve and the impatience and discouragement
of the king and the great nobles, Father Joseph made use of all the
resources at his disposal, both human and divine. Among the latter must
be listed his Calvarian nuns. These communities of cloistered
contemplatives he regarded as (among other things) powerful praying
machines, capable, if put into high gear and worked for twenty-four
hours a day, seven days a week, of precipitating, so to speak, out of
the ether, very considerable quantities of the divine favour. The
letters he wrote to the Calvarians at this period contain, along with
much exhortation, instruction and advice, accounts of the principal
strategic and political problems of the moment, with requests that the
nuns should devote all their energies to praying for their auspicious
solution. And what a host of things there were to be prayed for. Let
them pray, for example, for the success of Father Joseph’s pet plan for
entering the town by night through an underground sewer and taking the
garrisont by surprise; (it failed). For the conversion of the Protestant
Duke of La Tremoille; (it came off). For an amelioration in the
behaviour of the king’s brother, Gaston; (his conduct was to remain as
base and despicable as it had always been). For the defeat of the second
English expedition; (Lord Denbigh’s fleet came, tacked about for a few
days within sight of the town, then sailed away again). And so on. In
common usage, the word ‘precarious’ carries the idea of riskiness and
uncertainty; etymologically, it means ‘contingent upon the answer to
prayer.’

In view of his mystical training, it seems surprising that Father Joseph
should have laid such stress on petitionary prayer. Petitionary prayer
is appropriate enough in men and women whose religion is
anthropocentric; in the life of those who have learnt, not only to
think, but to feel and live, theocentrically, it is obviously out of
place. The theocentric position finds its most emphatic statement in the
writings of Meister Eckhart. ‘I tell you by the eternal truth, so long
as you have wills to fulfil God’s will, and so long as you have any
longing for eternal life and God, for just so long you are not truly
poor in spirit. For he alone is poor, who wishes nothing, knows nothing,
desires nothing.’ Here is total annihilation, passive in contemplation,
active in the affairs of daily life annihilation such as Benet of
Canfield taught and such as Father Joseph himself strenuously tried to
practise. But Father Joseph was now in politics, and the nature of
politics is such that even the most devout and spiritual politician must
constantly be exercising the personal will, either on behalf of himself
or of some social organization. But when the personal will is exercised
by one who is religious, petitionary prayers for success are felt to be
entirely natural and in order. Hence the anomalous nature of Father
Joseph’s spiritual life, one side of it centred in God, the other in all
too human cravings; hence those communities of pure contemplatives, whom
he so lovingly instructed in the art of meditation and at the same time
treated as praying machines for the materialization of concrete
benefits.

Meanwhile, within the city, the people were slowly starving. The horses,
the cats, the dogs -all had been killed and devoured; even the supply of
rats was running low. From splendid silver dishes the old Duchess of
Rohan was eating mice and drinkihg a bouillon prepared from the harness
in her stables. The poor were boiling ‘their old boots and their leather
hats. But still, under the leadership of Jean Guiton, its indomitable
mayor, the city held out. Through his secret agents, Father Joseph
worked away at the morale of the defenders. Broadsheets were printed,
smuggled into the town and distributed. In these, the mayor and his
abettors were denounced for their tyranny -a tyranny doubly odious,
because it infringed the ancient constitution of La Rochelle, and
because it could result only in the exhaustion of the king’s clemency
and an appalling punishment for all within the city walls, innocent and
guilty alike. Other leaflets accused the rich of food hoarding and
profiteering. This propaganda had its effects. Several attempts were
made on Guiton’s life; suspected profiteers were mobbed many deserters
slipped out of the town at night in the hope of obtaining food, pardon
and safety. It was a vain hope, for those who were caught were promptly
hanged.

For purposes of negotiation with the city authorities, Father Joseph
made use of his cousin, Fuquieres, a man of some importance in the royal
service, who had been captured in a skirmish outside the walls and was
held by the Huguenots as a prisoner of war. (It is worth recording that,
during the whole of his captivity, Feuquieres’ dinner was brought to him
every day from the royal table. Roast ducklings, dishes of green peas
and strawberries, pastries, copious helpings of beef and lamb and
venison were carried through the lines under a flag of truce and
delivered to his gaolers, who passed them on unfailingly to the Marquis.
All this, at a time when the Rochellois were dying inch-meal of hunger.
To us, the whole episode seems almost unthinkably odd; but in the
seventeenth century, we must remember, it was axiomatic that a person of
quality was different in kind from ordinary people and must be treated
accordingly.) Through Feuquieres, Father Joseph tried to persuade the
rebel leaders to throw themselves on the king’s mercy; but faith in
their Calvinist God and the hope of English succour made them deaf to
all talk of surrender. The siege went on. By the end of the summer, most
of the old in La Rochelle and most of the very young were already dead,
and the men and women in their prime were dying every day by scores and,
as the autumn advanced, hundreds.

Fasting, penances and unremitting labour had lowered Father Joseph’s
resistance and, in August, he caught a fever and fell very seriously
ill. His condition was aggravated by his obstinate refusal to take the
rest he needed. From his bed, he continued to write memoranda on policy
and to direct the secret service. As it turned out, this last activity
was almost the death of him. Coming, as they were forced to do, at
night, the spies kept the sick man from sleep. The fever mounted and, in
spite of all his desperate efforts to remain lucid and concentrated,
external reality slipped away from him and was merged in the
phantasmagoria of delirium. For days he fluctuated between life and
death; then gradually and painfully re-emerged into the light. When the
third and final English expedition came and failed, he was beginning to
recover, and three weeks later, when the town at last surrendered, he
was well enough to follow the victorious troops and to assist the
Cardinal at the solemn mass, now celebrated for the first time for more
than fifty years, in the Cathedral. Immediately afterwards, La Rochelle
was proclaimed the see of a new Catholic diocese, and to Father Joseph,
in recognition of his services during the siege, the king offered the
honour of becoming the town’s first bishop. The Capuchin declined.
Nothing, he said, could induce him to divest the habit of St. Francis or
give up his blessed rule of poverty and humility. Nevertheless he was
deeply sensible of the king’s kindness and, to express his gratitude, he
dashed off a pamphlet entitled ‘The King Victorious, dedicated to the
Queen Mother.’

It was a rousing piece of eloquence that concluded with the reflection
that, now that La Rochelle had fallen, His Majesty would be free to turn
his arms against another enemy of holy Church-the abominable Turk. In
the eleventh year of the Thirty Years’ War this was, as of course Father
Joseph knew only too well, merely a piece of wishful thinking. But what
of that? He loved his Crusade, with a love that was

“of a birth as rare
As ‘twas, for object, strange and high;
It was begotten by Despair
Upon Impossibility.”

Loving thus, he claimed the right to strew an occasional verbal tribute
on the grave in which the object of his passion was now so deeply
buried.

With the fall of La Rochelle, the political power of the Huguenots in
France was at an end. Protestant strongholds, it was true, still held
out in Languedoc and the Cevennes; but their reduction would be an easy
matter, for they were far from the sea and could hope for no assistance
from a foreign enemy. At the beginning of the siege, La Rochelle had
counted twenty-five thousand inhabitants; five thousand remained alive
when the city was surrendered. Such, however, was the violence of
theological hatred that there were many among the Catholic party who
clamoured for further and yet more frightful punishment. To his
everlasting credit, the Cardinal would not hear of reprisals. The
surviving Rochellois were pardoned, confirmed in the enjoyment of their
property and granted freedom of worship. His reward was the Protestants’
unswerving loyalty to the crown. Half a century later, Louis XIV
reversed the Cardinal’s policy, persecuted the Huguenots and finally
revoked the Edict of Nantes. His reward was the loss to France, by
emigration, of a large number of its most productive citizens. In
matters of religious policy, Father Joseph, as I have already had
occasion to mention, was completely in accord with the Cardinal. He knew
that an orthodoxy accepted under duress will save no souls, and he was
therefore opposed to forced conversions. The true faith, he believed,
should be propagated by missionaries, not dragoons. On certain
occasions, however, he was prepared, in order to obtain a much-desired
conversion, to use means that were not entirely spiritual. To give an
example, in the autumn of 1629, when the king followed up his victory at
La Rochelle by an expedition into the Protestant territories of
south-central France, Father Joseph accompanied the armies and took
charge of the conversion of the heretics. His policy was to concentrate
first of all on the nobles and the other leading men of the various
communities concerned. If these went over to Rome, he calculated (not
quite correctly, as the event was to prove) the common people would
follow. To obtain these key conversions, he employed the usual spiritual
weapons, exhortation, argument, and the edifying example of a devoted
life; but when occasion demanded, he supplemented these with the other,
more mundane forms of persuasion-the offer of gifts from the royal
exchequer, pensions, honours, positions in the administration. Astute
Protestant noblemen saw their chance and drove shrewd bargains. No
gentleman, they protested, no man of conscience could be expected to
change his religious convictions for a paltry six thousand livres a
year. But if the Reverend Father would make it ten, well, perhaps … A
compromise would be reached at eight, and, with all the traditional
pomps and ceremonies, Mother Church would open her arms to yet another
erring sheep.

[]


LA ROCHELLE

CHAPTER VIII

The Diet of Ratisbon

In the years that had elapsed since Richelieu’s rise to power, the
affairs of Europe had taken no dramatic turn for the worse. The full
horrors of the Thirty Years’ War were yet to come. For the moment, it
seemed as though the devil were content to mark time. In 1625 Denmark
entered the war against the Emperor. England had promised the Danes
financial help; but the subsidies were never paid, for Parliament, after
forcing James to break off his negotiations with Spain and encouraging
Charles to support his Protestant brotherin-law, the Elector Palatine,
refused to vote any supplies for the carrying on of the war. To
disentangle himself from his financial difficulties, Charles had to
adopt unconstitutional measures, and these unconstitutional measures
resulted at last in the great rebellion. Evil is contagious; the Civil
War, Charles’s execution and Cromwell’s tyranny were due, at least in
part, to an infection brought over from war-fevered Germany. Meanwhile,
the Danes, disappointed of their money, were unable to make much headway
against the enemy. Christian IV collected a considerable army and was
joined by Mansfeld and his marauding troops. To the Emperor Ferdinand,
the situation seemed threatening -so threatening that, in order to meet
it, he was induced to give Wallenstein authority to raise and command a
great imperial army. In this way a new instrument of tyranny and
oppression was forged, an instrument that was destined to inflict
incalculable miseries upon the German people. With a greater air of
legality than Mansfeld, but more efficiently and just as ruthlessly,
Wallenstein stripped the various provinces through which he marched of
all their reserves of coin, food, and any supplies that might be useful
for his army. And the pillage went on, year after year, long after
Wallenstein’s death, to the very end of the war.

In the campaigns of 1625 and 1626, Christian IV and Mansfeld were
separated. Wallenstein followed the latter into Silesia, where he had
joined forces with Bethlen Gabor, and forced him to accept a truce,
shortly after which Mansfeld died. Desperately in need of food for the
troops he had raised but (for lack of the English subsidies) could not
pay, Christian IV advanced into Brunswick, pillaged the country for a
little and was then defeated by Tilly, at Lutter. After that the war
died down for a time into a succession of sieges of Danish fortresses.
Returning from Silesia in 1611, Wallenstein devoted himself to two
tasks; the subjugation of his new duchy of Mecklenburg, forfeited by its
rightful owner for his share in the Danish war and presented by
Ferdinand to his commander-in-chief; and the conquest, in the Emperor’s
name, of the whole Baltic coast. Jealous of their liberties, the Hanse
towns refused tn open their gates to him and, at the beginning of 1628,
Wallenstein sat down to the siege of one of them, the second-rate city
of Stralsund. At this same moment, hundreds of miles to the south-west,
Richelieu and his army were encamped outside the walls of La Rochelle.
But whereas, thanks to Father Joseph, the siege of La Rochelle was
continued to the bitter end, Wallenstein lost patience and, after six
months, abandoned the attempt on Stralsund, cut his losses and marched
away. The result, as time was to show, was that Richelieu’s position was
greatly improved, while that of the Hapsburgs was correspondingly
weakened. The victory at La Rochelle united France and closed a breach
through which hostile powers might intervene in the country’s internal
affairs; the defeat at Stralsund left the Baltic coast open to invasion
from Scandinavia, but at the same time it had come near enough to
victory to frighten the Northern Protestants into a more determined
resistance to the centralizing policy of the Hapsburgs.

In the following year, 1629, the Emperor did a thing which positively
guaranteed the continuance and intensification of Protestant hostility;
he issued the Edict of Restitution, which claimed for the Roman Church
all lands which had been ecclesiastical property before 1552. The
prospect of losing more than a hundred and fifty rich bishoprics united
the Protestant princes of the North, while the prospect of being
persecuted by the Jesuits united their peoples in a stand against what
they regarded as naked religious and political aggression. Meanwhile,
trouble had broken out in Italy. At the end of 1627 Vincenzo II of
Mantua died without issue, leaving a will by which he bequeathed his
duchy to Father Joseph’s old friend, Charles Palaeologus Gonzaga, Duke
of Nevers. The new sovereign hurried off to Italy and proceeded to
instal himself among the splendid and long-accumulated treasures of the
Mantuan palaces. Many of these treasures-among them Mantegna’s ‘Triumph
of Caesar,’ now at Hampton Court, Nevers was faced soon afterwards to
sell to Charles I of England; for he was in desperate need of money with
which to buy the means for defending his inheritance. Even before
Vincenzo’s death, the validity of his will had been disputed, and within
a very short time of his accession the new duke found himself assailed
on all sides by rival Gonzagas -the Duke of Guastalla, the Dowager
Duchess of Lorraine and, more menacing than either, the Duke of Savoy,
who demanded the Mantuan-owned duchy of Monferrato for his nephew’s
wife, a daughter of Vincenzo II’s elder brother and predecessor on the
ducal throne. Lying as it did on the road from Turin to Alessandria and
Genoa, Monferrato, with its strong fortress of Casale, was a territory
of much strategic importance. Charles Emanuel of Savoy had no wish to
see a French prince, backed by French arms and money, installed so close
to his capital. The prospect was even more distasteful to the Court of
Madrid, for Monferrato lay across the line of communications between the
Spanish province of Milan and the sea. Early in 1628 Charles Emanuel and
Philip IV’s ambassador at Turin signed an agreement stipulating that the
two powers should take joint military action against Monferrato, which
was then to be partitioned between them. Troops were collected and
equipped and, later in the year, Charles Emanuel overran that part of
the duchy which lay on the left bank of the Po, while the Spanish
governor of Milan addressed himself to the more difficult and laborious
task of reducing the fortress of Casale.

So long as La Rochelle held out, it was impossible for Richelieu to do
anything to relieve the French outpost which the accidents of heredity
had now so conveniently established on the further side of the Alps. The
surrender of the Huguenots left him free to act. He moved with as much
dispatch as the winter weather, bad organization and court intrigues
would permit. In the first days of March 1629, a French army of
thirty-five thousand men, with the King and Cardinal at their head,
crossed the Alps, defeated the troops of Savoy and captured the
stronghold of Suss. A few days later Charles Emanuel signed a dictated
peace and, on March 15th, the siege of Casale was raised and the Spanish
army marched back to Milan. Richelieu provisioned the town against the
renewed attack which he knew would come the moment French forces had
been withdrawn, strengthened the fortifications and left a substantial
garrison under Thoiras, the commander who had so valiantly resisted
Buckingham on the island of Rhé. Meanwhile Father Joseph was in Mantua,
telling the Duke exactly what was expected of him by the Cardinal and
exactly what he might expect in the way of French support. Richelieu was
a hard taskmaster, and the Duke complained of his severity; but fear of
the Hapsburgs and the persuasive eloquence of his old friend and fellow
crusader brought him at last to the acceptance of all the Cardinal’s
conditions-an acceptance which (though: Mantua was sacked by the
imperial troops in 1630) permitted him to keep his title and transmit
it, at his death in 1637, to an infant grandchild. This grandchild grew
up a profligate and left the duchy in due course to an almost imbecile
son who finally lost it to the Austrians in 1708. It is a dismal and
vaguely cautionary, tale-cautionary, like all history, against the
consequences of merely behaving like human beings, of existing
unregenerately as natural men. We may wish sincerely to avoid the crimes
and follies of past generations; but at the same time we wish to live
that natural life which (along with its quota of goodness and beauty)
produces the very crimes and follies we wish to avoid. That is why, to
all but the saints, who anyhow have no need of them, the lessons of
history are totally unavailing. From Italy, Father Joseph followed the
royal armies back to France, where they spent the spring and summer of
1629 crushing out the political power of the Huguenots of Provence and
Languedoc. It was a savage campaign, with much slaughtering of the
inhabitants of captured cities, much hanging of rebels, much condemning
of men to slavery in the galleys. Father Joseph did his best to mitigate
these horrors; but the King and, above all, Condé, who was in command of
part of the forces, were ruthless. By the end of July the royal arms
were completely victorious, and the Cardinal was able to ride from city
to Protestant city, making triumphal entries, receiving the submission
of the magistrates, appointing royal intendants to govern in the King’s
name, supervising the demolition of walls and towers. Returning to Paris
to cope with the ever more menacing intrigues of Marie de Medicis, he
left Father Joseph in southern France, with the difficult task of
initiating the reconversion of the people to Catholicism. Of the methods
he sometimes used to accomplish this end I have already spoken. They
were a bit shady, to say the least of it; but then it was a matter of
performing God’s exterior will as rapidly and efficiently as possible.

Early in 1630, trouble broke out again in Italy. Disregarding the terms
of the peace treaty he had signed the year before, Charles Emanuel once
more threw in his lot with the Spaniards. Spanish power was a menace to
all the princes of Italy; but for the present at least, Madrid had an
interest in preserving Savoy as a buffer state between France and its
own possessions in Lombardy. The French attitude towards Savoy was
uncertain and equivocal. Better a known than an unknown evil. Besides,
Charles Emanuel wanted his slice of Monferrato. Once more a Spanish army
sat down to the siege of Casale. It was commanded by Ambrose Spinola,
the Genoese soldier who survives for us in Velasquez’s ‘Surrender of
Breda’-a great master of siege-craft, who had served the Spanish crown
not only in the field, but also by the sacrifice (in order to keep his
unpaid troops from mutiny) of his entire personal fortune, only to be
treated in the last years of his life with the most shameless
ingratitude. The injuries and insults heaped upon him by Olivares during
this campaign so preyed upon his mind that in September of 1630 he fell
sick and died at his post before the walls of Casale.

To relieve Casale was necessary in 1630 as it had been in 1629 ; but
this time Richelieu found himself paralysed by opposition within the
royal family and the ranks of his own cabinet. Mainly because of her
personal grudge against the Cardinal, but also because she believed in a
specifically Catholic foreign policy, a policy of collaboration with the
Hapsburgs in the extermination of heresy, Marie de Medicis was firmly
set against the Italian campaign. The young Queen, Anne of Austria, had
been a Spanish Infanta and, on this point at least, was in accord with
her mother-in-law. Their strongest supporter in the Council of State was
Marillac, the Keeper of the Great Seal. Another supporter had been
Cardinal Berulle, who, until his death in 1629, had used all the
authority conferred upon him by his position and the extraordinary
sanctity of his life to back up the Queen Mother in her opposition to
Richelieu. His talk was of the seamless robe of Christ, of a western
world purged of heresy and reunited under the three great Catholic
powers, France, Spain and Austria. One wonder if he ever used his fancy
to trace out in pictorial terms the implications of his metaphor. His
aim was to transform a seamy robe into a seamless one. To achieve this
end, he proposed that Bourbons and Hapsburgs should unite, their forces
for the purpose of gashing and cauterizing the body within the robe. At
some point in the proceedings the seams were automatically to disappear,
and all Christendom would find itself united. For Berulle’s own sake,
one can only be thankful that he died when he did. Had he lived on, had
his policy been adopted, he would have become, like his old
schoolfellow, Father Joseph, more and more deeply involved in
large-scale iniquity, would have known the bitterness of seeing the
disastrous consequences of his good intentions, would at last have
realized that between his policy and Richelieu’s there was little or
nothing to choose; for both had proposed the employment of means, whose
consequences could never be the improvement of the existing state of
things.

Between his mother and the Cardinal, Louis XIII vacillated in an agony
of uncertainty. He disliked Richelieu and felt himself humiliated by the
man’s superiority; but at the same time he recognized his ability, he
was grateful to him for all he had done for the glory of the monarchy,
he knew that there was nobody who could take his place. Over against
Richelieu stood Marie de Medicis, florid and fairly bulging with female
energy, vulgar, loud-voiced, rancorous and obstinately stupid. Ever
since his unhappy childhood, the King hated and feared her, but always
with a guilty sense that he ought to love her and listen to what she
said. What she said now was that the war must be stopped at once and the
Cardinal dismissed. And though he felt sure that Richelieu was right,
that he would go on doing great things for the house of Bourbon, Louis
listened to his mother’s words, and was half persuaded. The spring and
summer of 1630 were wasted, from a military point of view, because the
King was unable to make up his mind whether to prosecute the war or to
make peace, whether to accompany his armies into Italy, or to stay at
home. Always sickly and delicate, he had several sharp attacks of
illness, which the treatment prescribed by his physicians-daily purgings
and weekly bleedings threatened to make chronic. Away from the court, a
soldier among his soldiers, he always felt stronger for a time; but
sooner or later his mother’s letters would bring back the old
neurasthenia, and he would insist on taking the Cardinal back from the
frontier to where the two queens were quartered, at Lyons. There, in the
council chamber, Richelieu had to set forth, yet once more, his reasons
for going on with the war in Italy. The council gave him a vote of
confidence, and Louis was reassured. Three times this proceeding was
repeated; and meanwhile time was passing, plague had broken out in the
army and thousands of soldiers were deserting. At Casale, however,
Thoiras still held out.

In this predicament Richelieu did his best to compensate for his
enforced inactivity in the field by redoubling his efforts on the
diplomatic front. His first system of Protestant alliances had failed
him. It was in vain that Louis XIII had given his sister in marriage to
Charles I; instead of collaborating with France, England had gone to war
on behalf of the Huguenots. Meanwhile Denmark had been decisively
defeated by the imperialists.

Holland was too weak to do anything effective on land. There remained
only Sweden. In the autumn of Richelieu had sent an agent to Gustavus
Adolphus, offering French mediation between the king and his cousin,
Sigismund of Poland, with whom he had for years been at war. Peace was
quickly restored between the two sovereigns, who agreed to a six-years’
truce. Having thus secured his flank, Gustavus was now free to invade
Germany : a plan which he had long been meditating, partly for religious
reasons (for he was an ardent Protestant who regarded the Hapsburgs’
Counter-Reformation as diabolic), and partly because he was ambitious to
transform the Baltic into a Swedish lake. But Sweden was a poor country
and, though Gustavus had the best army in Europe, he lacked the sinews
of war. Richelieu now offered him a subsidy of six hundred thousand
livres -less than one-eighth of his own income- on condition that
Gustavus should invade Germany, beat the imperialists, but respect the
rights of the Catholic princes. Gustavus, who had no wish to respect
Catholics, rejected the offer; and in the summer of 1630 boldly invaded
Pomerania, without a subsidy. Richelieu bided his time and continued to
dangle the golden bait, knowing very well that the Swedish King would
sooner or later be forced by mere poverty to accept his terms.

Meanwhile, at the other end of Germany, Ferdinand had summoned an
imperial Diet to meet at Ratisbon. His intention was to persuade the
seven Electors of the Empire to appoint his son King of the Romans, a
title which would officially consecrate him as his father’s successor to
the imperial throne. For this favour he expected to have to pay-in what
way and precisely how much would be settled by a long-drawn process of
haggling at the Diet. The summoning of the Diet gave Richelieu an excuse
for sending a special embassy to Ratisbon nominally to discuss the
question of the Mantuan succession, but in fact to make trouble between
the Emperor and the Electors. A professional diplomat, Brulart de Leon,
was officially the King’s ambassador; but the real representative of
France, as everyone knew, was the humble Capuchin who accompanied him on
his mission. Father Joseph had no official position, and his credentials
to the Emperor attributed to him no powers; he was just an observer,
nothing more. As a mere observer, he was able to act and speak with a
freedom that would have been impossible in an ambassador; as the
right-hand man of Cardinal Richelieu, he was listened to with an
attention and a deference which a mere civil servant, like Brulart,
could not command. From the General of the Capuchins Father Joseph had
received an’ obedience’ which permitted him so far to infringe the rules
of his order as to ride in a carriage and handle money. Armed with this
and his letters of credence, he rejoined Brulart in Switterland, where
the latter had been acting as French ambassador, and together, in the
month of July 1630, they set out with all the pomp befitting a King’s
representative, for Ratisbon.

There was not much active fighting going on at the moment and, as there
was still something to eat in southern Germany, Wallenstein had
established his headquarters at Memmingen, about half-way between
Augsburg and the Swiss frontier. Hearing of the approach of the French
envoy and his interesting companion, the commander of the imperial army
drove out of the town to meet them, accompanied by ‘eighteen coaches,
filled with princes, dukes and palatines of Hungary and Bohemia.’

One can imagine the scene on that hot July afternoon: trains of coaches
halted in the dusty road; the coming and going, between ambassador and
generalissimo, of emissaries to discuss the delicate and, for
seventeenth century noblemen, infinitely important question of
precedence; the happy solution of the problem by a decision that both
parties should alight simultaneously and greet one another at a point
exactly half-way between the two foremost carriages; then the solemn
approach and beautifully stylized salutation -the low bow, with the
right foot advanced and pointed slightly outwards in the first position
of the dance, the elaborate flourish of the plumed hat, followed by the
handshake, the few well-chosen words, the enormous compliments. And when
the two protagonists have gone through their ritual, there is a similar
baroque exchange of courtesies between Brulart’s suite and the eighteen
carriage-loads of princes, dukes and palatines. In the background,
meanwhile, conspicuously grey and tattered in the midst of so much
crimson velvet, so much lace and jewelry, stands the Capuchin, his bare
horny feet sunk in the dust. To those who salute him, he inclines his
head and raises his right hand in benediction. When Wallenstein invites
him to join the ambassador and himself in his huge gilded coach, Father
Joseph protests that the honour is too great; but the general insists,
and in the end he climbs in after the others, and away they roll towards
Memmingen and an official banquet, of which it will be impossible for
him to partake as he is in the midst of one of his four annual Lents.
Next day, during a lull in the festivities, Wallenstein invited the
friar to his quarters for a long confidential talk, the gist of which
was communicated to the Cardinal in Father Joseph’s next dispatch. It
was an interesting conversation and one which any casual eavesdropper
would have found extremely odd. For what the two men chiefly discussed
was Byzantium and the Holy Places, Turkish power and joint expeditions
from the West. Not since those happy days with the Duke of Nevers and
Paul V had Father Joseph had the joy of talking crusades with so ardent
an enthusiast. Wallenstein was as keen to smash the infidels as St.
Louis had been, albeit, as Father Joseph came little by little to
discover, not for quite the same reasons. For one who had been sent to
school, first with the Moravians, then with the Jesuits, who had
exchanged Lutheranism for Romanism out of personal interest, and who
believed with conviction only in astrology, the triumph of the Church
Militant was not of the smallest interest. Crusading, for Wallenstein,
was merely an excuse for the Drang nach Osten. That he talked of his
vast projects in terms of the Cross and Crescent was merely a historical
accident and a matter of convenience. If steam engines had existed in
the seventeenth century, he would have talked just as enthusiastically
about the Berlin-to-Baghdad railway. His ambition was to create a great
federated empire, stretching from the Baltic to the Bosphorus and
beyond, into Asia Minor and Syria. Such an empire could be ruled either
by the Hapsburgs, with himself, Albrecht von Wallenstein, as their
generalissimo and mayor of the palace, or else (and at this point that
dark and horribly sinister face of his, the face of a bloated
Mephistopheles, the face of a devil who is not a gentleman, lit up with
inward exultation as he leaned confidentially towards the friar) or else
why not? -by Albrecht von Wallenstein himself ruling in his own name, by
virtue of an irresistible military force. Coming as they did from the
Emperor’s commander-in-chief, and addressed as they were to the man who
was travelling to Ratisbon, among other reasons, for the express purpose
of undermining Wallenstein’s position with the Emperor, these remarks
were, to say the least of it, surprising. But along with his cunning and
caution, Wallenstein had the recklessness of one who knows that all
things are predestined, that fate is written in the stars and cannot be
changed. Let them all know what he planned-Emperor, Cardinal, Pope, King
of Spain, the whole lot of them I What did it matter, so long as, from
their heavenly houses, the planets looked down on him with favour?

From crusades the conversation shifted, by way of the Palaeologi, to
Mantua; and with the same astonishing frankness Wallenstein declared
himself entirely opposed to the Hapsburg policy in Italy. He knew Nevers
and liked him; besides, as the last of the Palaeologi, the man might
come in useful one day. And anyhow, it was senseless for the Emperor to
add to his troubles by going to war with France over a piddling little
duchy that mattered to nobody except the Spaniards. In these sentiments
Father Joseph most heartily concurred and went on to express the hope
that His Highness would do all he could to bring His Imperial Majesty to
the same opinion. Not that Wallenstein would have much time or
opportunity to influence the Emperor, he reflected inwardly; for he felt
pretty certain of being able to persuade the Electors to force the
general’s resignation. Which was a pity in some ways; for Wallenstein
would be a most useful ally in the Mantuan affair. But mean; while
Gustavus Adolphus was already on German soil, and it was essential that
before the campaign started, the imperial armies should be weakened by
the loss of their commander. Later on, perhaps, when the King of Sweden
had done his work, Wallenstein might be called back to power, might be
encouraged in his wild ambitions for personal rule-encouraged just
sufficiently to make him a paralysing embarrassment to the Emperor, but
not enough, of course, to permit him to become the military dictator of
all the Germanies.

Refreshed and considerably enlightened by his stay at Memmingen, Father
Joseph drove on with Brulart and their following to Ratisbon, where the
Diet was already in session. The Emperor and the five Catholic Electors
were present in person; the two Protestant Electors had sent only their
representatives. To his surprise-for he persisted in regarding himself
as what in fact he was in private life, a humble Capuchin friar -Father
Joseph found himself the man most talked about, most in view, most
generally notorious in all Ratisbon. Six years of close association with
Richelieu had given him already an international reputation. Every
well-informed person in Europe had heard of the bare-footed friar who
had left his convent to become the collaborator of the most astute and,
so far as Hapsburg sympathizers were concerned, the most dangerous
politician of his century. Universally known, Father Joseph was almost
universally reprobated. This follower of St. Francis who had betrayed
the Lady Poverty to live among princes, this dedicated servant of the
Church who had conspired with the heretics to thwart the Counter
Reformation what was he but a renegade, an enemy of God and man? At
Ratisbon, Father Joseph discovered for the first time what his
contemporaries thought of him. The first revelation came to him one day,
early in the proceedings, when he had gone to pay his respects on Tilly,
the old general to whom, in the Turciad, he had devoted two graceful
lines of praise:

“Tilli, etenim te nostra canet testudo, nee unquam
Egregium nomen gelidi teget umbra sepulcri.”²⁰

The compliment had been penned at a time when Father Joseph was still an
ardent imperialist; now that he had become convinced that Hapsburg power
must be destroyed, if true religion, under Bourbon leadership, was to
flourish, he would have written rather differently. But whatever his
present opinions of Tilly, etiquette demanded that he should call on
him. When the interview was over, Tilly accompanied his guest to the
door of the reception room, and from there the friar was escorted by a
group of the general’s aides to the foot of the steps leading into the
street. On the way out, one of the gentlemen called de Flame turned to
the friar, asked him if he was really Father Joseph and, on receiving an
affirmative answer, continued: ‘Then you are a Capuchin; that is to say
you are obliged by your profession to do what you can to foster peace in
Christendom. And yet you are the man who starts a bloody war between the
Catholic sovereigns-between the Emperor, the King of Spain and the King
of France. You ought to blush with shame.’

Reacting, not to the offence against his personal honour, but to the
insult offered a representative of His Most Christian Majesty, Father
Joseph demanded an apology. Tilly tendered excuses and had the offender
clapped in irons; but in spite of all this, Father Joseph had reason to
believe that the affront was premeditated and that the whole incident on
the steps had been carefully staged by Tilly himself. Well, calumny was
what the servants of Christ had been taught to expect yes, and even
rejoice in; for to be tried by calumny was a sign, if one were following
the way of perfection, that God considered one ripe for the hardest
lessons. To suffer slander without resentment or bitterness was possible
only to souls that had lost themselves in God. At Ratisbon, Father
Joseph redoubled his exercises of passive and active annihilation.

He had need to do so; for what happened at Tilly’s headquarters was only
the first of a long series of similar trials to his patience. Pamphlets
were hawked about the streets of Ratisbon, in which he and his master,
the Cardinal, were denounced with that savage intemperance of language
characteristic of all controversial writing in the seventeenth century.
The pamphlets were in Latin and unsigned. Rumour had it that they were
composed by two Spanish ecclesiastics; but the fact that the authors
were Father Joseph’s political enemies did not prevent them from saying
some very just and sensible things about him, things that were being
said by men of ordinary intelligence and decent feeling in every part of
Europe. People everywhere were wondering, like Flamel, how a Capuchin
could reconcile his profession with the framing and execution of
policies that resulted, as anyone with eyes in his head could see, in
the increase of misery and crime. To them it seemed as though he were
deliberately using the reputation of his order to whiten the sepulchre
of Richelieu’s iniquities. In the epigrammatic Latin of the
pamphleteers, ‘huic ille tegendo sceleri cucullum praebet.’ (He, Joseph,
offers him, Richelieu, a friar’s hood to hide his crimes in.) Richelieu
himself knew very well how important it was for a politician to cover
his actions with the prestige of religion and high morality. In his
dealings with foreign countries, he always took enormous pains never to
seem the aggressor, always to have the appearance of legality and right
on his side. Nor was this all; for, in the words of an Italian diplomat
of the period, ‘it is said that when Cardinal Richelieu wishes to play
some clever trick, not to say some piece of knavery, he always makes use
of men of piety.’ Bad men could never do the harm they actually
accomplish, unless they were able to induce good men to become, first
their dupes, and then their more or less willing, more or less conscious
accomplices. ‘Huie ille tegendo sceleri cucullum praebet.’

What happens when good men go into power politics in the hope of
forcibly shoving humanity into the kingdom of God? Echoing the wisdom of
common men, the pamphleteers of Ratisbon had their neatly pointed answer
in the best Senecan manner. ‘Sacrilega sunt arma quae sacra tractantur
manu Miles mitrae imperat cum mitra militibus imperat.’ (Sacrilegious
are the arms wielded by a sacred hand. When the mitre commands the
soldier, it is the soldier who commands the mitre.)

The whole political history of the Church is summed up in those phrases.
Again and again ecclesiastics and pious laymen have become statesmen in
the hope of raising politics to their own high moral level, and again
and again politics have dragged them down to the low moral level upon
which statesmen, in their political capacity, are compelled to live.
That the Ratisbon pamphleteers should have chosen to wrap up a great
moral and political truth in a tissue of lies and scurrility was
unfortunate; for by so doing they made it absolutely certain that Father
Joseph would pay no attention to what they had to say. Father Joseph’s
performance at Ratisbon was a miracle of diplomatic virtuosity. His
first task was to allay the suspicions of the Emperor, who had been
repeatedly warned by Richelieu’s enemies in France-Marillac, the Queen
Mother, the great nobles, the extreme Catholic partisans of
collaboration with Spain-that the Cardinal was plotting nothing less
than the overthrow of Hapsburg power. This happened, of course, to be
true; all the more reason, therefore, for persuading Ferdinand that it
was false. This Father Joseph accomplished more or less successfully by
discrediting the people from whom the Emperor had received these
warnings. They were people, he explained, whose personal ambitions had
been thwarted by the Cardinal’s rise to power, or who objected to the
Cardinal’s efforts to achieve what His Imperial Majesty was so wisely
and benevolently trying to achieve in Germany: the union of a divided
country under a single centralized authority. It was true that France
had been forced to protect itself against Spanish aggression; but to
pretend that the Cardinal or his master had any designs against Austria
was a malicious falsehood ….

From his interviews with the Emperor, Father Joseph padded away on his
bare feet to Maximilian of Bavaria and his fellow Electors. To these he
spoke of His Most Christian Majesty’s extreme concern for the liberties
of his cousins, the German princes. He was shocked to observe the way in
which these liberties were now being menaced; his heart bled for the
unhappy victims of the Emperor’s tyranny. The imperial army, under that
arrogant upstart, Wallenstein, had been raised to fight the heretics;
but it was being used even more effectively to subjugate the Catholic
Electors. With Wallenstein quartered at Memmingen, this solemn Diet was
nothing but a farce. Under the threat of overwhelming force the Electors
were no longer ‘free agents; it was the end of that grand old German
Constitution, to which His Most Christian Majesty and the Cardinal were
so deeply and unshakably attached. Their only hope lay in acting at
once, while the Emperor had need of them to nominate his son King of the
Romans. Let them refuse even to discuss the question so long as
Wallenstein remained in power. If there should be any trouble, Their
Highnesses could rely on the Cardinal to come to their aid. The Electors
listened and took heart to do what the Emperor’s military successes and
his high-handed Edict of Restitution had secretly made them wish to do
for some time past. They demanded the dismissal of Wallenstein and a
reduction in the size of the imperial army.

Ferdinand had no great love for Wallenstein, whose loyalty he suspected
and of whose vast personal ambitions he had been fully informed. At the
same time he was loath at this particular juncture to get rid of him.
After all, Gustavus was busy up there in the North, consolidating his
position and preparing for attack. Father Joseph hastened to reassure
him. Gustavus, he cried contemptuously, who was Gustavus? A
twopenny-halfpenny little princeling at the head of a troop of starving
barbarians. No, Gustavus simply didn’t count; pitted against the
imperial army, he would be swept off the face of the earth. And, of
course, if by some unlucky chance he should happen to give trouble, the
Emperor could always call Wallenstein back to his command and recruit a
few more regiments. Meanwhile with regard to the election, His Imperial
Majesty need have no fears. Once Wallenstein was out of the way, the
grateful princes would do what they were asked, and the fact that they
had voted freely would redound enormously to the glory of the Emperor
and enhance his moral authority through the Germanies.

All this was sound enough and, feeling that Wallenstein was a moderate
price to pay for his son’s election, Ferdinand consented to dismiss his
general. In September emissaries were sent to Memmingen ordering
Wallenstein to resign. Father Joseph, meanwhile, had sent a letter to
the general, reminding him of their delightful conversation about the
infidels and advising him to submit without demur to the Emperor’s
bidding. After all, he pointed out, Gustavus Adolphus was in Pomerania.
With his magnificent army he was bound to win some victories, and the
moment that happened the Emperor would be forced to come hat in hand to
the only soldier in Europe capable of dealing with so formidable an
enemy. His Highness would then be able to demand practically anything he
liked; to allow himself to be dismissed now would be a stroke of the
most consummate policy. Wallenstein accepted the advice, which was in
accord with what his horoscopists (Johann Kepler at their head) had
discovered in the stars. Obediently and without protest, he resigned his
command, and with him were dismissed eighteen thousand cavalry and not
less than twice that number of foot soldiers. Merely by talking, Father
Joseph had won the equivalent of a major military victory.

Now that Wallenstein had been dismissed and his army cut in half, the
Emperor turned to the Electors for his reward. But Tenebroso-Cavernoso
had slipped up the back stairs and into their private council chambers
before him. Their Highnesses, he whished, had scored a signal victory;
but the fruits of that victory would be wasted unless it were followed
up by a second. Now that they had weakened the Emperor, they ought
quickly to strike again -strike at the most vulnerable chink in the
Hapsburg’s armour: the imperial succession. By refusing to nominate
Ferdinand’s son as his successor, by merely hinting at the possibility
that they might elect an Emperor from some other royal house, they could
put the fear of God into those tyrants of Vienna and Madrid. And if the
tyrants should bluster and threaten, the Electors had only to appeal to
His Most Christian Majesty; all the resources of France would be at
their disposal. This was the moment for Their Highnesses to assert
themselves, to remind these Hapsburgs that they were Emperors, not by
hereditary right, but only by the grace of the Electors and the grand
old German Constitution.

When the Emperor formally asked for the title of King of the Romans for
his son, the Electors voted him down, Wallenstein and the army had been
sacrificed for nothing. Looking back over the causes of his defeat,
Ferdinand perceived, at every turn of the tortuous diplomatic road, a
grey-cowled figure, hurrying in silence through the shadows. To his
ministers, the Emperor ruefully admitted that ‘a poor Capuchin had
beaten them with his rosary, and that, narrow as was the friar’s hood,
he had contrived to stuff into it six electoral bonnets.’

Meanwhile, however, the war of negotiation had been going badly for
Father Joseph on some of the other diplomatic fronts, where events in
France had placed him in an inextricably difficult and precarious
situation. Vacillating between his mother and the Cardinal, Louis XIII
had sunk through neurasthenia into physical sickness. On September 22nd,
at Lyons, he fell ill of a fever so violent that, a week later, his
condition was despaired of and the last rites of the Church were
administered. Then, on the first of October, the physicians reported
that an abscess in the King’s body had burst; the fever dropped; it
seemed possible that Louis would recover. Richelieu’s situation during
these last days of September was like that of a man suspended over a
precipice by a rope whose fibres, one by one, are snapping under his
weight. If the King died, he was infallibly lost. Gaston, who would
succeed his childless brother as King, detested the Cardinal; so did the
Queen Mother; so did the great magnates whose power he had sought to
curb; so did the common people, who knew him only as the ruthless
tax-gatherer, the instigator of this gratuitous and incomprehensible
war, which might at any moment spread from Italy to every corner of
Europe and even into France itself. As soon as the King’s condition
became serious, a group of nobles secretly met and decided, if he died,
to deal with Richelieu as Concini had been dealt with, thirteen years
before. Remembering that eviscerated carcase hanging by the heels from
the gibbet of the Pont Neuf, the Cardinal made plans to flee for safety
to the papal city of Avignon. It would be a race between the murderers
and their victim. Then, at the very moment when the race was timed to
start, the King began to recover. For Richelieu it was a respite from
his mortal apprehensions-but only a respite, not yet definitive and
enduring liberation. The King was out of immediate danger, but he was
still a sick man, and at his bedside sat the Queen Mother and Anne of
Austria. As Louis emerged again into convalescence, the two women
prolonged and intensified their persuasions. They were all devotion, all
sweetness, all love and forgiveness; but they were determined to badger
the unhappy man into doing what they and their political friends
desired. Day and night, relaying one another, like a pair of examining
magistrates putting a recalcitrant prisoner through the third degree,
they pressed the young King to make the decisive move-dismiss his
minister, stop the war, reverse his policy. Louis had no strength to
argue with them; but he was able at last to summon up enough will power
to say, quite definitely, that he would make no decision till he was
well again and back in Paris. The Cardinal’s respite had been prolonged
for a few more weeks.

Receiving word of what was happening at Lyons, Father Joseph found
himself in a most painful predicament. His secret mission, which was to
drive a wedge between the Emperor and the Electors, had been
accomplished; but there was also an ostensible mission, which was to
come to terms over the question of Mantua. The Emperor, as had been
foreseen, was pressing for a general settlement of all outstanding
differences between France and Austria; but as Richelieu’s campaign
against the Hapsburgs had only just begun, such a general settlement
would be premature and must therefore be avoided.

Hitherto Father Joseph had succeeded in parrying all the Emperor’s
attempts to link up Mantua with the European situation as a whole. It
was a policy of delay and evasion, deliberately framed to prolong the
struggle between the Hapsburgs and France and her allies. Such a policy
could be pursued only on condition that Richelieu remained sufficiently
powerful at home to override popular and aristocratic opposition to the
war. But now Richelieu was in danger of dismissal, even of death; the
prime condition of France’s anti-Hapsburg policy -the Cardinal’s
absolute power-was ceasing to exist. To Father Joseph, at Ratisbon, it
seemed clear that the only hope for Richelieu lay in regaining
popularity and conciliating the great nobles. But there was only one way
for the Cardinal to regain popularity and conciliate the great nobles,
and that was through an immediate reversal of his foreign policy. To
take such a step was a very serious matter, and, before doing so, he had
written urgently for precise instructions. Owing partly to the
Cardinal’s procrastination, partly to bad weather which had held up the
courier, no answering dispatch had been received; and, on October 13th,
acting on his own responsibility, he instructed Brulart to sign a
document which provided for a general settlement of Franco-Austrian
differences. As a mere observer, he declined at first to append his own
signature to the treaty; but the Emperor insisted on it, and in the end
he had to give way.

As he looked on at the ceremony, Ferdinand gleefully reflected that he
had succeeded in pulling out of that grey Franciscan hood political
advantages which far outweighed the six electoral bonnets which the
friar had so recently stuffed into it. But the Emperor’s triumph was
short-lived. News that an agreement had been signed was brought to
Richelieu on October 19th, as he and the convalescent King were
returning to Paris. Meanwhile, the full text of the treaty had been sent
to the Court at Lyons, where it obtained the approval of all who read
it.

The news that the war was over and that there would be no more foreign
adventures spread like wild-fire across the country, causing, as Father
Joseph had foreseen, universal rejoicing. Next day a copy of the treaty
was brought to Richelieu at Roanne. He read it; then angrily tore it up.
The ambassadors had exceeded their instructions, he said; the treaty
would not be ratified. It was an act on his part of quite extraordinary
courage. By repudiating the treaty, Richelieu invited the hatred of the
masses and made more implacable the hostility of the Queen Mother and
the nobles. He had been given a chance to save his neck, and he had
refused it. If the King were to fail him now -and, at court, the betting
was ten to one in favour of the Queen Mother-he was infallibly done for.

Events were to justify Richelieu in taking the risks he did.

Three weeks after his refusal to ratify Father Joseph’s treaty, there
took place that decisive interview between Louis and his mother-the
interview from which Marie de Medicis confidently expected to emerge
victorious over the Cardinal. Stealing through an unbolted back door,
Richelieu broke in upon this interview, and at the sight of him the
Queen Mother lost her self-control and began to scream at him, like a
fishwife. Her vulgarity was her undoing. The seventeenth-century
absolute monarch was a sacred person, in whose presence all, even his
closest intimates, were expected to behave with the restraint of a stoic
philosopher, a positively Confucian decorum. His mother’s proletarian
outburst was an insult to the royal dignity.

Outraged and revolted, Louis extricated himself from the distasteful
situation as quickly as he could, and retired to Versailles. Marie was
left in the exultant illusion that she had triumphed. That evening,
Louis sent for the Cardinal and confirmed him in his position. Marillac
was arrested and, at the news, Gaston of Orleans, who had been closeted
with his mother, hastened to Versailles to assure the King of his
loyalty and the Cardinal of his henceforth unwavering affection. For
Marie, this ‘Day of Dupes’ marked a decisive defeat. After giving
trouble for a few months more, she was skillfully manoeuvred by the
Cardinal into making an irretrievable mistake; she fled the country.
From this voluntary exile Louis never allowed her to return, and the
Queen Mother spent the last twelve years of her life wandering from
court to court, an ever less welcome guest, chronically short of money,
and dependent upon the humiliating charity of the man who had once been
her obsequious protege and was now the master of France and the arbiter
of all Europe.

Returning to Paris shortly after the ‘Day of Dupes,’ Father Joseph was
welcomed by his chief with the utmost cordiality. Richelieu bore him no
grudge for having exceeded his instructions. Promptly repudiated, the
treaty had done no harm. For the rest, Father Joseph’s expedition had
been entirely successful. Wallenstein had been dismissed and his army
weakened; the Electors had asserted their independence of the Emperor
and were showing signs of turning towards France, and (hardly less
important) time had been gained- time for Gustavus to prepare his next
year’s campaign, time for the Cardinal himself to overthrow his domestic
enemies and consolidate his position. Time in the present juncture was
on the side of the Bourbons and against the Hapsburgs, who could only
suffer from the prolongation of the German chaos, whereas their rivals
to the west of the Rhine stood only to gain by the progressive
exhaustion of the imperial resources.

In a memorandum on the affairs of Germany, which he wrote in January
1631, for the instruction of the King, Father Joseph insisted that
French policy should be directed to the systematic exploitation of time
as the deadliest of all weapons in the Bourbons’ armoury. To this end,
the negotiations which he had begun at Ratisbon were to he continued,
unremittingly. Through his agents the King was to go on offering French
protection to the Electors, on condition that all, Protestant and
Catholic alike, should band themselves together in a specifically
German, anti-Spanish bloc, independent of the Emperor. Such a bloc would
he strong enough to negotiate on equal terms with the Hapsburgs, and if
the King of France were to act as mediator, the Electors could feel
certain of reaching a final settlement favourable to themselves.

If such propositions were not made at once, and made, what was more,
with every appearance of sincerity, the Electors would he driven back
into the Emperor’s camp through fear of Gustavus. Should this happen,
Father Joseph went on, the Emperor would find himself in a position to
bring about an immediate settlement of all disputes. Which would he
disastrous for the Bourbons; for it would leave the Hapsburgs free to
turn all their military power against France. Every effort towards an
early peace within the Empire and between the Emperor and his foreign
enemies must therefore be uncovered and promptly scotched. But how?
Father Joseph had his answer. His Most Christian Majesty could avert the
catastrophe of an early peace by offering to become a peacemaker.
‘Assuming the office of mediator and arbitrator, and promising to help
the Electors if they have need, the King can spin out matters
indefinitely, counterbalance the authority of the Emperor, and retard
the coming of peace in Germany until such time as we can be sure of the
security of a general pacification’ -a general pacification, of course,
favourable to Bourbon interests.

While the imperial Diet was in session, there had poured into Ratisbon,
from every corner of Germany, an unending stream of supplicants, seeking
redress from the assembled princes for the wrongs inflicted upon them
during the campaigns of the preceding years. Nothing, of course, was
ever done for them, and they either returned, embittered, to their
devastated homes, or else, like Kepler, who had ridden all the way from
Silesia to ask for the arrears of his salary as Imperial Mathematician,
they quietly died and were stowed away in one of the churchyards of
Ratisbon. Among these supplicants was a group of delegates from
Pomerania. Humbly, but none the less insistently, they begged the
Emperor and the Electors to consider the lamentable state of their
province. In the preceding year, Wallenstein’s armies had stripped the
country so effectively that the people had been starving ever since.
Very many had died, and those who survived were eating grass and
roots-yes, and young children and the sick and even the newly buried
dead.

This seems to have been one of the first occasions,’ during the Thirty
Years’ War, when public attention was called to the enforced cannibalism
which was to become so horrifyingly common in Germany of those
disastrous years. Emperor and Electors listened sympathetically to the
Pomeranians, assured them of their deep concern and left the matter at
that. Given the political system within which they lived and performed
their functions, given the habits of thought and feeling then current in
princely circles, that was all they could be expected to do besides,
during the whole of the Thirty Years’ War, no German ruler ever went
hungry. For dukes and prince-bishops there was always more than enough.
The common people might be dying of hunger or living obscenely on human
carrion; but in the imperial, electoral and episcopal banqueting halls,
the grand old German custom of gorging and swilling was never abrogated.
Full of beef and wine, the princes were able to bear their subjects’
affictions with the utmost fortitude.

But what about Father Joseph? He had lived among the poor and like the
poor. He knew their sufferings, and he was the member of a religious
order, vowed, among other things, to their service. And yet here he was,
pursuing, patiently and with consummate skill, a policy which could only
increase the sufferings of the poor he had promised to serve. With full
knowledge of what had already happened in Pomerania, he continued to
advocate a course of action that must positively guarantee the spread of
cannibalism to other provinces. One wonders what went on in the friar’s
mind during those daily periods of recollection when, examining his
thoughts and actions, he prepared himself for what his master in
mysticism called the ‘passive annihilation’ of mental prayer. First, no
doubt, and all the time, he reminded himself that, in working for
France, he was doing God’s external will. Gesta Dei por Francos was an
axiom, from which it followed that France was divine, that those who
worked for French greatness were God’s instruments, and that the means
they employed could not but be in accord with God’s will. When he angled
for Father Joseph’s soul, Satan baited his hook with the noblest
temptations: patriotic duty and self-sacrifice. Father Joseph swallowed
the hook, and gave himself to France with as much ardour as he had given
himself to God. But a man cannot serve two masters, God is jealous and
the consequences of idolatry are disastrous. Because he still persisted
in identifying the French monarchy with the ultimate reality apprehended
in contemplation, Father Joseph failed to connect the plight of the
Pomeranian cannibals with his own and all the other European statesmen’s
infringement of the first two Commandments.

Sometimes, during his self-examination, it certainly struck him that he
had resorted, during his negotiations, to methods of a sometimes rather
questionable nature. (It was Father Joseph’s contemporary, Sir Henry
Wotton, who defined an ambassador as ‘an honest man sent to lie abroad
for the good of his country.’ In the seventeenth century an envoy was
expected not merely to lie, but also to conduct espionage in the country
to which he was accredited.) Father Joseph was able to justify his
diplomatic activities in two ways: in the first place, it was his
patriotic duty to do these things ; and in the second, he always tried
his hardest to practise ‘active annihilation’ in God, while he was doing
them. Tilly and de Flamel and the anonymous Spanish pamphleteers might
accuse him of criminal conduct; but what they did not and could not know
was that all his actions were performed by one who strenuously
cultivated the supreme, allcomprehending virtue which St. François de
Sales described as ‘holy indifference.’

The earliest literary reference to ‘holy indifference’ occurs in the
Bhagavad Gita, where Krishna assures Arjuna that it is right for him to
slaughter his enemies, provided always that he does so in a spirit of
non-attachment. When the same doctrine was used by the Illumines of
Picardy to justify sexual promiscuity, all right-thinking men, including
Father Joseph, were properly horrified. But for some strange reason
murder has always seemed more respectable than fornication. Few people
are shocked when they hear God described as the God of Battles; but what
an outcry there would be if anyone spoke of him as the God of Brothels.
Father Joseph conducted a small crusade against the Illumines, who
asserted that they could go to bed with one another in a spirit of holy
indifference; but there seemed to him nothing in the least improper in
his own claim to be a non-attached intriguer, spy and maker of wars. The
truth is, of course, that non-attachment can be practised only in regard
to actions intrinsically good or ethically neutral. In spite of anything
that Krishna or anyone else may say, bad actions are unannihilatable.
They are unannihilatable because, as a matter of brute psychological
fact, they enhance the separate, personal ego of those who perform them.
But ‘the more of the creature,’ as Tauler puts it, ‘the less of God.’
Any act which enhances the separate, personal ego automatically
diminishes the actor’s chance of establishing contact with reality. He
may try very hard to annihilate himself in God, to practise God’s
presence, even while he is acting. But the nature of what he is doing
condemns his efforts to frustration. Father Joseph’s activities at
Ratisbon and as Richelieu’s foreign minister were essentially
incompatible with the unitive life to which, as a young man, he had
dedicated himself and which he was now so desperately struggling to
combine with power politics. He could excuse himself for his more
questionable acts by the thought that he was doing his best to perform
them in a condition of active annihilation in God. The fact that his
best efforts were not very successful he attributed, not to the
intrinsically unannihilatable nature of what he was doing, but to his
own personal imperfections -imperfections for which the cure was more
austerity, severer self-discipline.

Returning to his self-examination, he was able to discover a kind of
cosmic and metaphysical justification for his schemes in the thought
that what seemed bad from a merely human viewpoint might really and
actually be good. ‘Il faut aimer Dieu vengeur,’ he told his nuns, ‘aussi
bien que Dieu misericordieux.’ God, the avenger, might have his reasons
for wishing to destroy large numbers of Central Europeans. Indeed, since
history was assumed by Father Joseph to be an expression of the
intentions of divine providence, and since, as a matter of historical
fact, large numbers of Central Europeans were in process of being
starved and slaughtered, it was manifest that God, the avenger, did
desire their destruction. Therefore, the policy of prolonging the war
was not wrong.

Here, his vicarious ambition for France made him forget what had been
said in the Gospels to the effect that scandals will always arise, but
woe unto those through whom they come. There is an observable
correlation between certain undesirable modes of thought and courses of
action on the one hand and, on the other, certain catastrophes, such as
the Thirty Years’ War. But it most certainly does not follow that,
because in this sense, a war may be described as the will of God, the
individual who labours to prolong it is doing God’s will. Threading the
mazes of his own voluntary ignorance, it was thus, explicitly or by
implication, that Father Joseph reasoned to himself, as he knelt each
night and morning before his crucifix. From justificatory argument, his
mind would slip into meditation on the Passion of the Saviour, whose
tortured body hung there in image before his eyes. And sometimes, this
meditation would give place in its turn to a timeless and ecstatic
contemplation of divine suffering -contemplation profound to the verge
of trance. Father Joseph had been rapt away to that place which had
been, ever since he was a tiny boy, the home of his strange spirit; he
was on Calvary, at the foot of the cross, with the beloved disciple and
the holy women.

One would imagine, a priori, that those whose religious life is centred
upon the sufferings of a divine Saviour would be peculiarly
compassionate, scrupulous beyond all others in the avoidance of actions
calculated to give or prolong pain. ‘But no a priori principles
determine or limit the possibilities of experience. Experience is
determined only by experience.’ As a matter of historical fact, those
whose religious life is centred upon the sufferings of a divine Saviour
have not been preeminently compassionate, have not been more careful
than all others to avoid the infliction of pain. As a matter of
historical fact, the record of Buddhism is, in this respect, a good deal
better than that of Christianity. Let us examine some of the reasons for
the positive cruelty on the one hand and, on the other, the negative
indifference to suffering, which have too often characterized the
actions of ardent Christians.

Considered merely as an account of the way in which a good man was
trapped, tortured and unjustly put to death, the story of the Passion is
already sufficiently moving; and, for those who accept them as true, its
theological overtones enrich it with a much profounder significance. The
good Christian’s emotional reactions to this story are always intense,
but, unfortunately, not always desirable. Consider, first of all, that
common type of reaction so vividly illustrated by the anecdote about
Father Joseph’s older contemporary, Louis de Crillon, surnamed Le Brave.
In his retirement at Avignon, the aged warrior was listening one day to
a sermon. The theme was the Passion of Christ, the preitcher, full of
fire and eloquence. Suddenly, in the middle of a pathetic description of
the crucifixion, the old man sprang to his feet, drew the sword he had
used so peroically at Lepanto and against the Huguenots, and,
brandishing it above his head, with the gesture of one springing to
defence of persecuted innocence, shouted: ‘Ou etais-tu, Crillon?’

Movingly told, the story of a cruel injustice has power to drive men
forth to commit retaliatory injustices either against. the original
authors of the crime, or, if these should be dead or distant, upon the
men and women who, by means of some fatally common abuse of language,
are temporarily identified with the criminals. The motives actuating
anti-Semites, crusaders, inquisitors and other Christian persecutors
have been many and various ; but among them there has almost invariably
figured a desire to take vengeance, in some entirely symbolic and
Pickwickian way, for the wrong committed on Calvary. Emotional
Christianity is two-sided. On the obverse of the medal are stamped the
cross and the types of compassionate adoration; all too often in the
course of history, its reverse face had displayed the hideous emblems of
war and cold-blooded cruelty.

The idea of vicarious suffering is closely associated with the story of
the Passion, and in the minds of Christians has produced effects no less
ambivalent. Gratitude to a God who assumed humanity and suffered that
men might be saved from their merited doom carries with it, as a kind of
illegitimate corollary, the thesis that suffering is good in itself and
that, because voluntary self-sacrifice is meritorious and ennobling,
there must be something splendid even about involuntary self-sacrifice
imposed from without. The following lines are taken from a letter
addressed to a west-country newspaper by a clergyman of the Church of
England, and published in the spring of 1936. ‘The principle of
vicarious suffering pervades history, some suffering and dying for the
sake of others. The mother for her sick child, the doctor in his
laboratory, the missionary among the heathen, the soldier on the
battlefield-these suffer and sometimes die, that others may live and be
happy and well. Is it not in accordance with this great principle that
animals should play their part by sometimes suffering and dying to help
in keeping Britons hardy, healthy and brave?’ From which it follows, of
course, that fox-hunting is something entirely admirable and
Christ-like.

That such lines could have been penned in all seriousness by a minister
of religion may seem to many almost unbelievable. But the fact that they
actually were penned is of the deepest significance; for it shows how
dangerous the idea of vicarious suffering can become, what iniquities it
can be made, in all good faith, to justify. God took upon himself the
sins of humanity and died that men might be saved. Therefore (so runs
the implied argument) we can make war, exploit the poor, enslave the
coloured races, and all without the smallest qualm of conscience; for
our victims are illustrating the great principle of vicarious suffering
and, so far from wronging them, we are actually doing them a service by
making it possible for them to ‘suffer and die,’ that others (by a happy
coincidence, ourselves) may live and be happy and well.’ Another point:
the sufferings of mere humans and, a fortiori, of animals are as nothing
compared with the sufferings of a God who has assumed human form, taken
upon himself the sins of the world and chosen to expiate them all in a
single act of self-sacrifice. This being so, the sufferings of human
beings and animals are not really of much account. A constant dwelling
on the sufferings of Christ and of the martyrs may produce in the
emotional Christian an altogether admirable indifference to his own
pains; but unless he is very careful to cultivate a compassion
commensurate with his courage, he may end by becoming indifferent to the
pains of others. The child who had sobbed so bitterly because they had
hurt and killed poor Jesus was father of the man who, fifty years later,
did everything in his power to prolong a war which had already caused
the death of hundreds of thousands of his fellow-creatures and was
reducing the survivors to cannibalism.


CHAPTER IX

Nothing Fails Like Success

The ‘Day of Dupes’ had left Richelieu in a position of undisputed
authority. He was now permanently the King first minister, and Father
Joseph, who about this time was given an official place on the Council
of State, was his permanent foreign secretary and, from 1634 onwards,
his designated sucessor in the event of the Cardinal’s death. Of the
friar’s mode of life during these years of his greater political power,
we have the most detailed information. He had his cell at the Capuchin
convent of the rue Saint-Honoré and a room assigned to him at the
Louvre. But for the convenience of the Cardinal, who liked to consult
with his old friar on all important matters, Father Joseph passed most
of his time in the apartments reserved for him at Richelieu’s country
house of Rueil, six miles west of Paris, or in Paris itself, at the
Palace Cardinal, now the Palais Royal. Here amid the more than regular
splendours of Richelieu’s Court, he lived as though in the convent, a
life of the austerest simplicity and regularity.

Every morning, summer and winter alike, he rose at four. The first hour
of his day was given to mental prayer-acts, the intention,
self-abasement, adoration, followed by periods, fit of discursive
meditation on some divine perfection, then the passive annihilation in
the suffering Christ and the Godhead that he incarnated. Rising from
before his crucifix, Father Joseph rejoined his secretary and, since
1619, his constant companion Father Angelus of Mortagne, and together
they read the breviaries. The day’s work began at six. Father Angelus
would read aloud, decoding, when necessary, the day’s dispatch from
French ambassadors and the less avowable agents of Father Joseph’s fifth
columns in foreign countries. When the reading was over, Father Joseph
dictated suitable replies. This went on for three hours. At nine, the
doors of the apartment were thrown open and the friar gave audience to
the high officials of the government and the ambassadors of foreign
powers. In cases of a particularly thorny and delicate nature, he took
his visitors to see the Cardinal, to whose apartments he could descend
unseen by means of a private staircase. These interviews were continued
till noon or a little later, when he retired to one of the chapels of
whatever palace he happened to be living in, to say mass. (The Cardinal
heard mass at the same hour, but, curiously enough, in a different
chapel.) Returning from his devotions, Father Joseph would find his
antechamber crowded with ‘visitors of every sort and condition-courtiers
who had come to beg a favour, friars bearing reports of their missionary
labours among the Huguenots, officials in disgrace, distraught ladies
with husbands in the Bastille. None of these was ever sent away
uninterviewed, and it was after one o’clock when Father Joseph finally
sat down to his first meal of the day, which consisted of soup, followed
by’ only one dish of butcher’s meat, without ragout or roast.’ Such
claustral simplicity of diet profoundly impressed his contemporaries,
who were astonished that a man in his position should content himself
with so little. (Parenthetically, what an extraordinary fuss our
ancestors made about their food! Throughout the Middle Ages and long
after, almost to our own day, a man who drank no wine and lived on a
vegetarian or low meat diet was regarded as a person of positively
heroic virtue. Conditions have changed, and today millions of people go
without meat and alcohol and, so far from regarding themselves as
martyrs, are perfectly content and would be most reluctant to change
their way of life. If our ancestors suffered and felt virtuous under a
lenten regimen, which many now regard as ample and delicious, it was
because of the faith that was in them. They believed in meat and
alcohol; consequently the lack of meat and alcohol was felt as a
dreadful privation.)

[]

 

Occasionally, Father Joseph dined at the Cardinal’s table; but on most
days he took his meals in his own apartment, along with his secretary
and sometimes one or two intimate friends ecclesiastics or literary men,
of whom (especially of the more edifying and boring ones) the author of
the Turciad was a steady patron. When he ate alone, Father Angelus or
another friar would read aloud to him from some book of devotion or
volume of church history. Father Joseph had no money of his own and
received no salary. His victuals were paid for out of a special
allowance granted by the King. This allowance was sufficient to provide
him, as well as his food, with a coach, in which he had now been given
an ‘obedience’ to ride whenever his business required it, together with
horses, a coachman and four lackeys, who were dressed in a
distinguishing livery of grey and yellow. After dinner, if there was a
great press of business, he would be sent for by the Cardinal. More
often, however, he was free for a couple of hours to give audience. It
was at this time that people of the great world were accustomed to pay
their respects and ask their favours of him.

At four, he bowed out the last of his visitors and, accompanied by
Father Angelus, went into the garden or, if it were raining, into one of
the galleries of the palace to recite the remainder of his office, after
which he generally found time for another period of mental prayer. At
five, he went back to work; the doors were shut and the next three hours
were spent in dictating memoranda to the King, political pamphlets or
letters to the agents of the crown in foreign parts. At eight he had
supper. The bill of fare for this meal has not come down to us. All we
can discover about it is that ‘for dessert he always had gingerbread,
either because he liked gingerbread, or else because he wished in this
matter to follow the taste of the King, who frequently ate it.’ When
supper was over, the friar slipped down the private staircase into
Richelieu’s apartments, where the two remained closeted until bed-time,
discussing affairs of state. Sometimes, when the business of power
politics was slack, a few courtiers might be called in, and there would
be general conversation about the new French Academy, about those three
unities which M. Chapelain was so keen on getting into French drama,
about the war in Germany, about the latest cases of sorcery, and
diabolic possession.

The bed to which Father Joseph finally retired was a thin hard mattress,
laid on planks. There were no sheets and he slept in the hair shirt he
had worn all day beneath his stained and ragged habit. Penitential
scourgings kept the broad back and shoulders almost permanently covered
with unhealed wounds, and the first contact with the mattress, as he lay
down, must always have been acutely painful. But Father Joseph was
schooled to such discomforts and had learnt not merely to bear in
patience, but actually to rejoice in them; for they were pains imposed
and endured for the greater glory of God and the salvation of his soul.
Long habit had made his power of endurance so great that, in later life,
he chose to add to his religious mortifications a torture prescribed by
his physicians. This torture, which consisted in periodically
cauterizing the back of the head with a hot iron, was supposed to
stimulate his failing sight. Whenever he pushed back his cowl, the scar
of that repeated burn could be seen, red and angry, below the tonsure.

Such was the routine of Father Joseph’s life as a politician. But this
Minister for Foreign Affairs had other duties, which he regarded as no
less important than those of his ministry. Once or twice a week he left
the Cardinal’s palace to spend the day among the Capuchins of the rue
Saint-Honore, or else in the convent of the Calvarian nuns in the
Marais. At the rue Saint-Honoré he dealt with the business of that great
organization of foreign and domestic missions, of which, since 1625, he
had been the head. At the convent in the Marais he preached, he
delivered lectures on scholastic philosophy and psychology, he gave
instruction in the art of mental prayer, listened to accounts of
spiritual progress and advised the nuns in regard to all the problems of
the spiritual life.

It is worth remarking that here in Paris, as at Ratisbon, Father
Joseph’s reputation was very bad -so bad that contemporaries would never
accept the true explanation of his weekly absences from court. It was
whispered that, during the time when he was supposed to be with the
Capuchins or the Calvarians, he was really prowling about the town in
disguise, spying for the Cardinal, or giving bribes and instructions to
agents so secret and so sinister that they could not be interviewed
except by night, at street corners or in the back rooms of disreputable
taverns. Romance is always poorer and less strange than the facts it
distorts and oversimplifies. This imaginary Father Joseph, who is the
prototype of the ridiculously villainous figure bearing his name in
Vigny’s Cinq Mars, is just a bore, whereas the real Father Joseph moves
through history as the most fascinating of enigmas.

Those who knew the Capuchin will never, of course, made the mistake that
was made by the gossips of the day. Here, for example, is the brief
account of him left by Avaux, a reliable witness who was much in contact
with the man. After describing Father Joseph’s extraordinary power of
concentration and capacity for work, Avaux writes as follows: ‘By nature
and by deliberate study, he was a character shut in on himself, one who,
except under necessity, took little relaxation in the common life of the
senses and who, besides observing the rule of his order, seemed to have
prescribed for himself a special rule of his own. Being thus in full
enjoyment of all the faculties of his soul, which was never occupied
with all those distractions which make up the half of our lives, and
having regularly practised meditation, he could judge in a more orderly
fashion of things and affairs.’ This is Father Joseph, the man of
affairs, brought by self-discipline and the habit of mental
concentration to a pitch of efficiency surpassing that of other men. For
a contemporary account of some of the other facets of the friar’s
personality, we may turn to Dom Tarisse, an eminent Benedictine, who
often saw him and who, like Avaux, was amazed by the way in which a man
with so many and such important things to do could concentrate on any
given piece of business, however trifling, as though it were the only
one he had to deal with. With this capacity for intellectual
concentration there went ‘so great a control over his passions that, if
it ever happened that, in the midst of so many thorny interviews, he was
surprised into saying something harsh or too emphatic, the words were
not out of his mouth before you would hear him moderate the tone of his
voice and see him smile.’ Dom Tarisse then goes on to speak of the
austerity of his life, and describes the ‘ recollection incroyable’ with
which he received the sacrament. At the height of his business, we are
told, when he was most pressed, if it happened that the conversation
turned to spiritual matters, his face would light up and he would
discuss the life of prayer for an hour at a stretch, with ‘so much
contentment, feeling and knowledge that you would have imagined him to
be a hermit, a man engaged in continual orison.’ Yet more astonishing to
Dom Tarisse was the way in which the friar directed the nuns of his
order. This foreign minister, this second-in-command of a great state,
instructed them in the spiritual life ‘with so much fervour and
knowledge, such a high mystical doctrine, that the most learned
contemplative and spiritual could not have done as much.’

This austere and busy life was lived out against a background of
ever-deepening popular misery, ever-increasing governmental
ruthlessness. In France, the huge sums required to finance the foreign
policy of Father Joseph and his master, the Cardinal, were being
extorted, sou by sou, from those least able to pay. ‘Money,’ Richelieu
remarked in the lordly tone of one who is living sumptuously at other
people’s expense, ‘money is nothing, if we accomplish our ends.’ Caring
as he did only for foreign policy, only for the great game of
negotiation and war, played between princes for the prize of personal
glory and dynastic prestige, he was ready to go to any lengths at home.
To the privileged, so long as they did not presume to set themselves up
against the central authority, Richelieu was always and on principle
very indulgent. Those who felt the full weight of his fiscal tyranny
were the poor artisans and small tradesmen in the towns, and, in the
country, the dumb millions of the peasantry. At the end of the reign of
Henri IV, the taille, a tax levied on commoners as commoners, amounted
to about ten million livres annually; at the end of Richelieu’s tenure
of office, a very slightly increased population was paying the
government four and a half times as much. So intense was the hardship
inflicted by the Cardinal’s fiscal policy that its despairing victims
rose repeatedly in revolts, which they knew in advance to be futile, and
from which they could expect only the gibbet, the wheel, the branding
iron, the galleys and, for those who remained unpunished, a yet more
ruthless treatment at the hands of the tax gatherers. In spite of which,
rebellion followed rebellion. There were outbreaks in Burgundy in 1630,
in Provence in 1631, at Lyons and Paris in 1632, at Bordeaux in 1635,
throughout all the provinces of the South-West in 1636, in Normandy in
1639.

Richelieu sent his troops to put down the disorders and continued
regularly to decree fresh increases in taxation. He felt sorry for the
poor; but, as he wrote philosophically, ‘only God can make something out
of nothing, and extortions which are intolerable in their nature, become
excusable from the necessities of war.’ Whether the war itself was a
necessity, he did not pause to inquire. He just took it for granted that
it was.

Beyond France’s eastern frontiers conditions were, of course,
incomparably worse. In 1633 there appeared at Paris, avec Privilege du
Roy, a series of etchings, preceded by a decorative title-page bearing
the words: Les Miseres et les Malheurs de la Guerre, Representes par
Jacques Callot, Noble Lorrain, et mis en lumiere par Israel, son amy.
Like Goya’s ‘Los Desastres de la Guerra,’ Callot’s Miseres et Malheurs
are pieces of first-hand reporting. Each series is the portrait of a
war, taken from the life -but taken in one case by an artist of
passionate temperament and possessed of an unrivalled gift for the
pictorial expression of his indignations and his pities, in the other by
a man whose gift as an illustrator was a gift for complete emotional
detachment paradoxically combined with a gift for realistic
representation of actuality in all its aspects, the horrible and the
pleasant, the tragic and the farcical. Goya was, of course, by far the
greater artist of the two; but there are qualities in the art of Callot
which make it possible for one to return again and again to his
etchings, to pore over them with a fascinated and bewildered, a
half-amused and half-horrified admiration. There is nothing quite like
these small, crowded, minutely detailed and yet perfectly composed and
organized illustrations -illustrations of Florentine masques and
festivals, of the figures of the Commedia dell’ Arte, of fairs and
carnivals, of soldiers on parade, of the intricacies of siege-craft, of
the horrors and atrocities of war. There is nothing quite like them,
because no other artist has approached his subject in a spirit of such
complete neutrality, with so much imperturbability, such a degree of
Pyrrhonic ataraxia. Callot’s art is the aesthetic analogue of the
personal conduct of François de Sales, concerning whom it was said that
it was a matter of indifference to him whether he was in a state of
consolation or of desolation. To infer, however, from his art that
Callot himself was emotionally neutral to the scenes he represented is,
of course, unjustifiable. Indeed, the fact that he chose to depict the
miseries of war is a sufficient indication that he found those miseries
distressing. Callot’s imperturbability is in his style; and style is by
no means always or completely the man. In art, sincerity depends on
talent. A man without talent is incapable of ‘honestly’ expressing his
feelings and thoughts; for his daubs and doggerel fail utterly to
correspond with his mental processes. Similarly, heredity and training
may equip a man with a certain kind of talent, which permits him to
express one class of ideas, but is not adapted to the expression of
other classes. Intrinsically, the dry and elegant precision of Callot’s
style was most consonant with decorative or topographical subjects. He
chose, however, to apply his talent to the delineation of wild merriment
and of a wilder horror to Francatrippa and his companions capering in
their carnival masks and fancy dress, to the atrocities of a peculiarly
savage war. The result is inexpressibly curious. It is as though the
theme of ‘For Whom the Bell Tolls’ had been treated by Jane Austen in
the style of’ Emma.’ Decorously, impassibly, with a meticulous care for
detail and a steady preoccupation with formal elegance, he sets before
us, first the handsome preliminaries to a campaign-the troops in
parade-ground order under their standards -then the campaign
itself-battles between opposing armies and, at greater length and in
more detail, the sufferings of the civil population at the hands of
marauding soldiers, the ferocious attempts of their commanders to
enforce discipline. From etching to etching we follow the artist’s
record of pillage, murder, arson, rape, torture and execution. The
little figures in their slouched hats, their baggy pantaloons, their
high boots turned hack below the knee in a loose, wide cuff of leather
stand there frozen in the midst of the most atrocious activity, but
always (thanks to Callot’s supremely unexpressionistic manner) with the
air of dancers holding a pose in a ballet. In one plate it is an inn
that is being robbed. In another the soldiers have turned highwaymen. A
third shows the hall of a great house; half a dozen of the ruffians are
breaking open the chests and closets, and in the background, another
holds down a lady, while his companion, without troubling to remove his
hat, prepares to violate her; to the right, a group is standing around a
bonfire made of broken furniture, above which the master of the house
has been hung head downwards from a hook in the ceiling, while a son,
perhaps, or a too faithful servant, sits on the floor, tightly hound,
his feet roasting in the flames and the swords of his tormentors at his
back. It is horrible; but the horror is sterilized by Callot’s style
into the choreographic symbol of horror. In the next etching we are
shown a burning church and soldiers loading the sacred ornaments into a
waggon, while from a neighbouring convent, in the words of the rhymed
caption which accompanies the plates, others

“tirent des saints lieux les vierges désolées,
Qu’ils osent enlever pour estre violées.¹³”

About twenty of these nuns are being marched off to be raped at leisure
round the camp-fire, in the evening. One -the youngest no doubt, and the
prettiest of the novices -is being hoisted by a couple of privates into
the arms of an officer mounted high oh his tall charger. A year or two
from now, these nuns-such of them as have survived-will have joined the
hordes of male and female camp-followers, who followed the armies hither
and thither across the face of Germany. Half starved, covered only with
a few stinking rags, verminous and syphilitic, with burdens on their
back and naked pot-bellied children trailing after them, they will march
all summer long behind their masters, they will cower in the rains and
frosts of interminable winters, until finally, long before the war is
over, the God who has forsaken them once more takes pity and they die,
to be eaten by dogs or perhaps by their famished companions. Such, if
they had happened to live on the other side of the Rhine, might easily
have been the fate of Father Joseph’s Calvarians. From violated nuns,
Callot goes on to peasants murdered or led away to slavery, to
travellers waylaid in a forest, robbed for profit and butchered for
pleasure. Then comes condign punishment at the order of the general.
(Callot seems, incidentally, to forget that the generals were often the
accomplices of their men, that rapine, arson, and murder were not always
the consequences of anarchy, but were used deliberately for reasons of
strategy and as instruments of policy.) To the punishments meted out to
disobedient soldiers, Callot devotes five of his best plates. In the
first they are merely being tortured, before a large crowd of interested
spectators. But this is only a beginning. Turning to the second, we see
at the centre of the plate a noble oak tree, from whose boughs
twenty-one corpses are already limply dangling. On a ladder a
twenty-second victim is about to be turned off by the hangman, while,
three or four rungs below, a friar holds up the crucifix before his
eyes. A second friar gives his benediction to a twenty-third at the foot
of the ladder; a twenty-fourth is playing dice on a drum-head against a
group of halberdiers, and in the foreground yet another friar is busy
with the twenty-fifth. Far off, one can see the tents of the encampment,
and in the middle distance the pikes of two regiments of infantry stand
up like long bristles against the sky.

In the next etching, two musketeers, with bunches of ribbons hanging
from the knees of their baggy knickerbockers, are taking aim at a
malefactor tied to a post. Three or four corpses litter the ground
behind the post, and a friar, whom we recognize by his pointed hood as a
Capuchin, is talking to another prisoner who will soon be lying with
them. Several officers and a large emaciated sporting dog are looking
on. More friars appear in the next plate, preparing more prisoners to
rejoin a companion who, this time, is being burnt alive. Their crime is
sacrilege; for it is they who have fired the churches which we see
blazing in the background. Callot concludes his rhymed caption with two
lines that might find their place in one of the Cautionary Stories of
Jane and Ann Taylor. “Mais pour punition de les avoir brulez, ils sont
eux-mesmes enfin aux flammes immolez.²³” After which we pass on to the
most elaborate and the most impassively frightful of all the
executions-that of a voleur inhumain, who, on a high scaffold, is being
broken on the wheel. The executioner stands over him, his crowbar raised
above his head, ready to shatter one of the victim’s shins; and at the
other end of the wheel’s diameter an ecclesiastic in a biretta bends
over the naked man, holding a little crucifix close to the upturned face
and praying inaudibly through the reiterated screams. At one corner of
the scaffold, in a neat little heap, as though left there by a man who
has gone for a swim and will be back in a moment, lie the victim’s
clothes and broadbrimmed hat.

From executions Callot passes to the workings of a providential and
poetic justice. In the first of the three plates devoted to this
subject, we see a number of mutilated veterans dragging themselves over
the ground on the stumps of limbs. The second shows a pleasant suburban
walk during a time of truce. The local army has been disbanded and civil
law and order temporarily restored. Unemployed and lacking the means to
steal their living, the soldiers are reduced to begging for alms. But
their mendicite faict rire le passant, and some of them have already
lain down to die upon the dunghills at the side of the road. More
dramatically frightful is the bad end to which the soldiers come in the
next etching. Here the enraged peasants have turned against their
despoilers, of whom an isolated company has been ambushed by the
country-people and is in process of being massacred. At the centre of
the plate lies the body of an infantryman, half naked ; for he has been
already stripped of his shirt and doublet. Over him stand two peasants,
one of whom is pulling off his boots, while the other, with a great
flail, threshes the corpse -again and again in a frenzy of accumulated
hatred for all soldiers, in an insane and senseless effort to be
revenged, if only symbolically and on dead flesh, for all the outrages
suffered through the long years of warfare. That evening, no doubt, the
thresher returned in triumph to his family and his pillaged hovel. The
burden of loot was heavy on his back twenty pounds of flour, two or
three shirts, ragged, it was true, and much stained with blood, but
still very wearable, a whole ham, a pair of boots, two pistols and a
flask of distilled liquor. There was a feast after sunset, and everyone
was happy and full of hope. Peace, they were all convinced, would come
now at almost any moment; the soldiers would vanish and the nightmare be
at an end. But the thresher and his neighbours were poor ignorant boors;
they knew nothing of those two men, hundreds of miles to the West, in
Paris, one dressed in scarlet, the other in tattered grey, and both of
them working, working all day long and far into the night, to make quite
sure that there should be no peace, that the soldiers should go on
marching and the nightmare be prolonged. In 1633, when Callot drew that
dry and unimpassinoned portrait of the Man with the Flail, the Thirty
Years’ War had run exactly half its course. There were still fifteen
years of miseres et malheurs to go.

It is necessary now to turn again to the political and military events
which were the immediate cause of those miseries and misfortunes of the
early sixteen-thirties. In the first weeks of 1631, Gustavus Adolphus
finally accepted the golden bait, which Richelieu had extorted from the
despairing peasants of France, and, along with the bait, accepted the
Cardinal’s conditions. By the Treaty of Barwalde the King of Sweden was
hired to act, not as the espada of the European bull-fight, but rather
as banderillero and picador. Richelieu and Father Joseph had no desire
to see the Hapsburg monster killed, above all by a Protestant matador;
Gustavus’s function was to wound and exhaust, not only the bull, but
himself and all the Protestants as well. After which the French were to
step in and occupy the entire bull-ring. This policy of playing both
ends against the middle had been employed in the previous century by the
Papacy, which had encouraged Charles V against those enemies of Catholic
unity, the Protestants, and the Protestants against that menace to papal
sovereignty, Charles V. It was an ingenious policy, but not of the sort
best calculated to make an appeal to French taxpayers or the German
victims of military atrocities.

Primed with French money, Gustavus was ready to go into action; but the
Protestants, and especially John George, the powerful Elector of Saxony,
were still reluctant to join him. With the opening of the campaigning
season of 1631, Tilly marched into north-eastern Germany and, in the
latter part of March, annihilated a Swedish garrison at New Brandenburg.
A fortnight later Gustavus captured Frankfort-on-the-Oder and, by way of
retaliation, killed exactly as many Catholic prisoners as Tilly had
slaughtered Swedes. Meanwhile, Tilly’s lieutenant, Pappenheim, was
besieging Magdeburg. The city was stormed on May 10, set on fire and the
greater number of its thirty-odd thousand inhabitants massacred.
Catholic Germany rang bells, said Te Deums and got drunk in honour of
its conquering heroes. The Protestants nursed a hatred which their fear
of the Emperor and their scepticism in regard to Gustavus’s military
ability did not allow them to express. Flushed with triumph, Ferdinand
now made the mistake of peremptorily refusing Saxony’s appeal that he
should withdraw the Edict of Restitution, and proceeded to invade the
Elector’s territories. Thereupon, John George finally made up his mind
to join the Swedes. Tilly fought two indecisive engagements with
Gustavus, then marched away to fall upon Leipzig. Gustavus followed him
and compelled him to give battle at Breitenfeld, where on September 17th
he utterly defeated him. From Leipzig, the Swedes marched south-west to
the Rhineland, and there, in a part of the country that had for some
years been spared the horrors of war and military occupation, they
wintered in luxury, while their leader organized the now triumphant
Protestants into an evangelical league under Swedish control.

Meanwhile, from his palaces at Prague and Gitschin, Wallenstein kept
sending mysterious emissaries to the conqueror, offering to join with
Gustavus in building up a new and greater German empire free from
French, Spanish and Hapsburg influences and united by the sword under
the dictatorship of the two greatest commanders of the age. That wild,
enormous dream of which he had talked a year before with Father Joseph
-perhaps the auspicious, star-predicted moment had arrived when it could
be made to come true. But Gustavus was not inclined to ally himself with
a man to whom the betrayal of old friends and an indulgent master meant
so little, and the offers from Bohemia were politely declined. Against
his will, Wallenstein was compelled to retain the dubious semblance of
loyalty to the Emperor.

In March 1632, Gustavus moved against Bavaria. The imperial armies were
once more defeated on the River Lech, and Tilly received wounds, of
which he soon after died. Augsburg and Munich were now occupied by the
Swedes, and the peasants who, a few years before, had been driven to
ineffectual revolt by the domestic tyranny of their own government, now
found themselves at the mercy of a conquering army.

In despair, the Emperor was forced, as Father Joseph and the planets had
prophesied that he would be, to turn once more to Wallenstein, who now
emerged from retirement and, in a few weeks, by the mere magic of his
name, raised a large army of miscellaneous mercenaries -Scots,
Hungarian, German, Irish, Croatian, Polish, Spanish, Italian -all
professional soldiers out of a job, and all

Indifferent what their banner,
whether it was The Double Eagle, Lily or the Lion,

indifferent to everything save the prospect of pay, plunder, women and
the chance of serving under a competent and hitherto supremely fortunate
commander. The fourteen years of war, and before them the long period of
rearmament, had created all over Europe a class of military adventurers,
landless, homeless, without family, without any of the natural pieties,
without religion or scruple, without knowledge of any trade but war and
incapable of anything but destruction. To these men the Thirty Years’
War seemed deplorably brief. They had worked up a vested interest in it,
and to any hint of peace they reacted with all the dismay and fury of
bishops threatened by disestablishment, or of mill-owners at the
prospect of a law to regulate child labour. In 1648, when the Peace of
Westphalia was finally signed, many of the armies mutinied, and it was
with the greatest difficulty that their commanders were able to induce
them to accept the fait accompli. Demobilization was gradual and had to
be drawn out over a period of years; but even so there was much trouble,
and many of the mercenaries were never reabsorbed into the body politic,
but retained, as bandits and pimps and professional assassins, the
parasitic character they had acquired during the long years of warfare.

With this motley army Wallenstein drove the Saxons out of Bohemia, then
moved against Gustavus. For weeks they faced one another in the
neighbourhood of Nuremberg. Then, starved out in a completely devastated
country, the Swedes marched off in search of food. Wallenstein thereupon
entered Saxony and proceeded to lay waste to the land with a quite
extraordinary thoroughness. Gustavus doubled back and, in November,
forced him to give battle at Lutzen. The imperialist army was defeated;
but Gustavus was killed in the action.

To Richelieu and Father Joseph the news of Gustavus’s death came as an
immense relief. As a faithful son of the Church Militant, Father Joseph
had accepted the Swedish pact with a reluctance, which had been overcome
only by the conviction that there was no other way of securing the
victory of what he regarded as true Catholic principles. Of Protestant
alliances in general he remarked that ‘ one should make use of these
things as of a drug, of which a small dose acts as an antidote and a
large one kills outright.’ The trouble with Gustavus was that, being a
military genius of the first order, he had been able to force his French
allies to swallow doses of Protestantism far longer than were good for a
Catholic stomach. Or, to revert to an earlier metaphor, the picador had
turned espada and, when Lutzen happily put an end to him, was on the
point of administering the final death-blow to Austrian power. But, as
we have seen, Richelieu did not desire the death of the Hapsburg
monarchy. All he wanted was, in the words of a French historian, ‘to
break the ring of Catholic states united around the House of Austria and
to draw them under the patronage and protection of France.’ His
sympathies were not with the Evangelical League, but with ‘the German
Catholic party, and their leader, Maximilian of Bavaria.’ If he made use
of Protestant England, Protestant Holland, Protestant Denmark and,
finally, Protestant Sweden, it was because the only persuasions to which
the German Catholic princes would listen were those brought to them by
Anglican, Lutheran and Calvinist armies. Gustavus had made the grievous
mistake of leading these armies all too well, and so becoming, within a
few months, the master of almost the whole of Germany. His death
redressed the balance between Catholics and Protestants, restored the
equilibrium of mutually destructive forces. To those who understood the
foreign policy of France, the event seemed providential-so very
providential, indeed, that there were many who refused to regard it as
an accident. It was whispered that Gustavus had been killed, not by
Wallenstein’s soldiers, but by assassins in the ranks of his own army.
And who had hired the assassins?

Who had given them their instructions and found them a place near
Gustavus’s person? Why, naturally, the head of Richelieu’s secret
service, the ubiquitously sinister Father Joseph. Such was the friar’s
reputation that people now connected his name with every strange and
questionable occurrence of the time. Thus, not only had he planned the
killing of Gustavus Adolphus; he was also deeply implicated in that
cause celebre which for long months was the favourite topic of
conversation at court, among the burgesses of Paris and all the
provincial towns, in every .monastery, convent and vicarage throughout
the country the case of Father Urbain Grandier of Loudun and the nuns he
was said to have bewitched. Bogus demoniac possession, artfully faked by
a whole convent of hysterical Ursulines, under the coaching of their
spiritual directors; monks plotting with lawyers to bear false witness
against a hated professional and sexual rival; a fornicating priest,
enmeshed in the toils of his own lust and vanity and at last judicially
murdered on a false charge and with every refinement of cruelty -it is a
story that takes a high place in the annals of human beastliness in
general and religious beastliness in particular. Gossip incriminated
both the Eminences, the scarlet and the grey. Richelieu was supposed to
have engineered the burning of Grandier to revenge himself for a satire
of which the latter was reputedly the author. Father Joseph was said to
have egged on the protagonists of the iniquitous drama from motives of
mere vanity. When exorcised, the Ursulines of Loudun had visions of St.
Joseph, and these visitations from his divine namesake were supposed to
be taken by the Capuchin as a graceful compliment to himsel Both
accusations were unfounded. In the Loudun affair, neither Richelieu nor
Father Joseph exhibited anything worse than weakness. Thinking to win a
little popularity by getting himself associated with a case that had
aroused so much excitement and (in its earlier phases) fanatical
enthusiasm, Richelieu gave money to the exorcists, who had been summoned
in 1633 to work upon the nuns. It was a regrettable move, which seemed
to lend a certain official sanction to the proceedings. As for Father
Joseph’s intervention, this consisted in a visit paid to Loudun, a brief
first-hand examination into what was happening there, and a hasty
retreat to Paris. Loudun was a hornets’ nest; the case was suffered to
take its horrible course. On the 18th of August 1634, Grandier was duly
burned alive.

Meanwhile, in Germany, things were rapidly going from bad to worse. A
new Franco-Protestant alliance, the League of Heilbronn, was formed in
the spring of 1633, with armies commanded by Bernard of Saxe-Weimar, Hom
and Baner. A royal adventurer in search of a country to rule, Bernard
now set to work to steal himself a duchy. Reversing the Emperor’s policy
of re-catholicizing the Protestants, he seized large areas of episcopal
territory in the Rhineland, made himself their ruler and started to
impose Protestantism on their Catholic population. Upon imperialists the
effect of this action was the same as had been the effect upon the
Protestants of the Edict of Restitution four years before; it revived
their will to war. Bernard’s short-lived essay in forcible conversion
threw the Emperor into the arms of the Spanish and extreme Catholic
party.

[]

 

Wallenstein, meanwhile, was working for the fulfillment of his old dream
of a Germany united under a central authority controlled by himself.
Making a private peace with the Elector of Saxony, whom he hoped to use
as an ally, he advanced northwards, defeated the Swedes at Steinau,
captured a number of towns in which Gustavus had left garrisons, and
advancing almost to the Baltic, thoroughly devastated a part of the
country which, for more than two years, had enjoyed some measure of
freedom from military outrage. While Wallenstein was busy in the North,
the Swedes and German Protestants were similarly occupied in Southern
Germany.

Bernard’s capture of Ratisbon led to the recall of Wallenstein, who
abandoned Mecklenburg and Pomerania without achieving any result beyond
their devastation. Bad weather now paralysed both armies. The men were
billeted out in winter quarters, to eat their way through the meagre
stocks accumulated by the civil population. Wallenstein meanwhile
pursued his plans for making peace and unifying Germany under his own
sway. At the same time, with the help of Father Joseph’s agents and a
number of Czech nobles, he was plotting to have himself crowned King of
Bohemia. Alarmed, the Emperor dismissed him for a second time.
Wallenstein appealed to his officers and openly sought Swedish support.
The Swedes were shy, and most of the officers remained faithful to the
Emperor. Wallenstein was outlawed, took flight and, on February 25th,
1634, was murdered at Eger by two Scots Presbyterians and an Irish
papist, all three of them officers in his polyglot army. Wallenstein’s
place was taken by Gallas, under the nominal command of Ferdinand’s son
and heir, the King of Hungary.

Ratisbon was recaptured, and Augsburg, which had been taken in 1632 by
Gustavus, was now besieged by the imperialists. It surrendered in the
following year, having lost four-fifths of its population by hunger and
disease. In the summer of 1634, the Cardinal-Infante, at the head of
fifteen thousand picked Spanish veterans, came over the Alps from Italy
and joined forces with his cousin, the King of Hungary. Rubens has left
us a handsome composition representing the dark-haired King and the
flaxen Infante saluting one another, with mutually deferential
affection, in the midst of their troops and a large number of
allegorical eagles, crowns of laurel, river gods and muses-or are they
cardinal virtues? Who knows? One pearly masterpiece of flesh painting is
singularly like another, and there is never even a birth-mark to
distinguish Pasiphae, say, from Temperance, or Bellona from Helene
Fourment. The picture illustrates a fact all too frequently ignored by
‘philosophic’ historians -namely, that art can be almost completely
irrelevant to life, and that the study of the masterpieces of painting
and poetry and music throws very little light upon the actual character
of the age in which they were produced. From a collection of
fifteenth-century Italian paintings, who could possibly infer the
society described by Machiavelli? More often than not, the work of even
the most ‘representative’ artists shows at best what their
contemporaries would have liked to be, not what they were. If such
creators as Rubens, say, and Corneille are historically significant, it
is not because they tell us anything about the concrete facts of real
characters of their time; it is because their pictures and dramas so
vividly illustrate certain aspects of the bovaristic dreams by which the
seventeenth-century mind was haunted -the dream of superhuman splendour
and the dream of superhuman nobility, the desire for a more than Persian
magnificence impossibly combined with a more than Spartan heroism.

For a little while the King and the Cardinal-Infante almost succeeded in
living up to the glories of Peter Paul’s imaginary picture of them. On
September 6th, at Nordlingen, they met the main Swedish army under
Bernard of Saxe-Weimar and overwhelmingly defeated it. Eger put an end
to Wallenstein’s dream of a Germany united under military dictatorship;
Nordlingen put an end to Gustavus’s dream of a great Protestant German
empire, ruled from Stockholm. Paradoxically enough, Nordlingen also put
an end to Ferdinand’s dream of a Catholic, Counter-Reformation empire
under the authority of the Hapsburgs. Gallas’s all too decisive victory
precipitated the active intervention of France; and that active
intervention was to result in the final ruin of Spain and the permanent
exclusion of Austria from western and northern Germany.

In France, the months that followed Nordlingen were spent in preparing
the men and munitions for an immense campaign on several fronts -in
Italy, in the Valtelline, on the Rhine, in Flanders. Two hundred
thousand troops were raised, taxes yet again increased and the
oppression of the poor intensified. In his bare, cold rooms at Rueil or
in the Palais Cardinal, Father Joseph worked harder than ever at the
execution of policies, which it was becoming increasingly difficult for
him to ‘annihilate’ in the consciously realized will of God. One in
particular must have strained all his powers, not merely as a
contemplative, but even as a casuist. This convinced crusader was now
trying, through the Prince of Transylvania, to negotiate an agreement
with the Turks, who were to be subsidized to attack the Austrian
Hapsburgs by land and the Spanish Hapsburgs with galleys and a military
expedition across the Mediterranean. To himself and other scrupulous
Catholics Father Joseph justified his scheme by arguments similar to
those he had used in defence of the Protestant alliances. A small dose
of Turks, he claimed, would prove an antidote, not merely to Hapsburg
power, but also (surprisingly enough) to the power of Turkey. How did
Father Joseph expect to achieve this feat of political homeopathy? The
answer is best given in the words used by Louis XIII in a statement made
to his confessor, Father Gaussin. ‘I should like the Turk to be in
Madrid,’ said the King, expounding in abbreviated form the ingenious
projects of his minister, ‘so as to force the Spaniards to make peace
with me; and afterwards I would join the Spaniards to make war on the
Turk.’ It is the reductio ad absurdum of Machiavellian power politics;
Tenebroso-Cavernoso had really excelled himself. Fortunately, perhaps,
for the French no less than for the Hapsburgs, the Turks fought shy of
the proposed alliance. The negotiations with the Prince of Transylvania
and, through him, with the Porte were continued to the time of Father
Joseph’s death and were spasmodically renewed for years afterwards.
Before they could give any concrete results, the signing of the Peace of
Westphalia made the Turkish alliance unnecessary, and the whole plan was
quietly dropped.

While Richelieu and Father Joseph were moving towards an open
declaration of war against Austria, the Emperor was, for the first time,
seriously trying to make peace. Withdrawing from the extreme
Counter-Reformation position, he now agreed with John George of Saxony
to compromise on the question of the Edict of Restitution. The Elector
and any other Protestant prince who so desired might make peace with the
Empire on the basis of a return to the status quo in 1627. This peace
treaty, which was finally concluded at Prague in the middle of May 1635,
provided a solid and reasonably just basis for a general pacification.
Unfortunately, one week before it was signed, a French herald made his
appearance in the Grand’ Place at Brussels and, with elaborate medieval
ceremonies, announced that His Most Christian Majesty was now at war
with the House of Austria.

A day or two before this declaration of war, Father Joseph wrote to
d’Avaux that ‘The King’s intention is to bring about as soon as he can a
general peace with guarantees for the future -a peace which will be a
golden age, and, as it were, a new era of Augustus. His means for
achieving this are as follows: to back up by the action of several
armies every promising negotiation and opening for peace.’ In other
words, war was to be made in order that the world might be delivered
from the Hapsburgs and made safe for Bourbon autocracy, with Louis XIII
playing the name part, not indeed in a drama (for dramas are dynamic,
and Father Joseph cherished the illusion, common to almost all
politicians, of a definitive and lasting settlement), but of a
magnificent and unchanging tableau vivant of the Augustan Age.

Both Richelieu and Father Joseph believed that the war would he short
and decisive. The French strategical plan of simultaneous attack on
several fronts (a plan, incidentally, conceived on a scale
unprecedentedly vast) was nicely designed to shatter the Austro-Spanish
power at a single stroke. One summer’s campaign was to bring decisive
victory. That it failed so lamentably to do so was due to a combination
of causes -the undisciplined state of the French armies and the high
efficiency of the Spanish infantry, which was still (though its
commanders made war in a rather old-fashioned way) incomparably the best
in Europe; the difficulty, given the inadequate organizations at
Richelieu’s disposal, of supplying widely scattered forces; and finally,
the chronic shortage of money. Except in the Valtelline, the anticipated
successes were not achieved. The only considerable result of the
campaign of 1635 was the reduction of Alsace to a condition almost worse
than that of Pomerania in 1630. Father Joseph’s policy at Ratisbon bore
its fruit in a famine that killed its tens of thousands and transformed
many of the surviyors into cannibals. Executed malefactors were cut down
from the gibbets to serve as butcher’s meat, and the recently bereaved
were forced to guard the cemeteries against the ghoulish activities of
body-snatchers. After Nordlingen, many thousands of the defeated
Protestants’ camp-followers went wandering in great troops, like
foraging baboons, desperately looking for something to eat. Unprotected
villages were overrun and looted; the larger towns closed their gates
and sent out troops of soldiers to drive them away. Strasburg left its
gates open, and thirty thousand of the almost sub-human creatures
entered the town and, having exhausted the charity of the burghers,
began to die by hundreds in the streets. Thereupon the city fathers had
the survivors herded out at the point of the pike to die in the country.
To these camp-followers were ‘added the uncounted victims of military
outrage-peasants who had been robbed of everything, down to their means
of livelihood, ruined artisans, destitute shop-keepers and professional
men. For a time they managed to subsist on carrion and grass.

Then they died; or else, if they met with soldiers from either camp,
they were killed -not for what they had, for they possessed nothing;
just for fun. ‘He who had money,’ wrote a contemporary, ‘was the
soldiers’ enemy. He who had none was tortured because he had
none’-because, too, the habit of committing atrocities had developed a
general taste for atrocities. With cruelty, as with lust, avarice,
gluttony and the love of power, l’appetit vient en mangeant. Hence the
importance of preserving at any cost the unreasoned tradition of
civilized conduct, the social convention of ordinary decency. Destroy
these, and immediately large numbers of men and women discovering within
themselves no obvious reasons why they should not behave like devils, do
behave like devils, and go on doing so until such time as they
physically destroy themselves, or grow weary of the strain and
uncertainty of diabolic life, or else, for whatever providential reason,
discover deep in their own souls the hidden springs of compassion, the
potential goodness, latent even in the worst of men and, by the best,
fully actualized in the superhuman splendour of saintliness. In 1635 the
war-time reaction from common decency was coming to its height, and for
several years thereafter the conduct of the armies was even more
diabolic than it had been at the time when Callot was collecting his
impressions for the Miseres et Malheurs de la Guerre. As the stock of
goods and provisions diminished, owing to previous depredations, the
methods of extortion became more savage; and the longer this savagery
was drawn out, the more there were, on both sides, who contracted a
taste for savagery. Soldiers amused themselves by taking pot-shots at
passing civilians; by setting their mastiffs, not on bears or bulls, but
on human beings; by trying, experimentally, how often and how deeply a
man could be cut without dying; by lashing people to trestles and sawing
them apart, as though they were logs of wood. Such, then, were the first
fruits of Richelieu’s entry into the war. In the second year of the
campaign the well laid plans of the Cardinal and the Capuchin resulted
in the invasion of France and, very nearly, the capture of Paris. The
failure of an expedition into Belgium by Richelieu’s Dutch allies and
the arrival of reinforcements from Germany made it possible for the
Cardinal-Infante to break through the defences of the north-western
frontier. Corbie and La Capelle were taken, the Somme was crossed and
the Spaniards advanced as far as Compiegne. Inadequately fortified and
practically undefended (for all the French armies were far away on the
borders or abroad), Paris seemed to lie at their mercy. There was
general panic and, along with terror, a violent uprush of anger against
its cause. All the popular hatred of Richelieu, accumulated during
eleven years of a rule that had brought hardship to almost everyone in
the country, suddenly burst out. People remembered the oppressive taxes
and the Cardinal’s own fabulous wealth, the ostentatious magnificence in
which he lived. They remembered, too, the senseless war in Italy, the
chance to make peace, the refusal to ratify the treaty of Ratisbon -a
refusal which public opinion attributed not to its real cause, the
patriotic conviction that the French monarchy would be best served by
war, but to the Cardinal’s personal ambition, to his desire to make
himself indispensable by plunging the country into a war which he alone
could direct. Well, he had had his war; and what had happened? The
Spaniards were at Compiegne and in a few days more would be in Paris.
The people remembered what had happened five years before at Magdeburg
and, remembering, they hated the Cardinal with yet more passionate fury.

Richelieu had been ill and was suffering under the strain of overwork
and unremitting anxiety. Unforeseen disaster, the terrible burden of
responsibility and now the openly expressed detestation of the people
were too much for him. His nerve failed. He talked of resigning, of
going into retirement and leaving others to negotiate a peace with
Spain. Once again, as at La Rochelle, Father Joseph stepped in.
Eloquently, in the prophetic tones of Ezechiely, he told the Cardinal
that, if he now resigned, he would be shirking the task to which a
manifest providence had called him, he would be rejecting his cross,
flouting the will of God, surrendering to the powers of evil. Listening,
the Cardinal felt himself warmed and strengthened by Father Joseph’s
words. The deity about whom as a young man he had written catechisms and
theological treatises, whom he had defended against the heretics and
daily read about in his breviary, heard about and even, he did not doubt
it, substantially perceived at mass, seemed, while Ezechiely talked, to
take on a new reality and saving power. ‘With God’s help’ how often (and
how mechanically) he had spoken and written the words! Standing there
before him in his dirty old habit, his eyes shining with the light of
inspiration, his deep voice vibrant with a passionate zeal, Ezechiely
made him actually feel that the words possessed a meaning. For
Richelieu, the friar was a living conduit, through which there flowed
into his own soul a power from somewhere beyond the world of time and
contingency. From the general, Father Joseph passed in his exhortations
to the particular. It was not enough, he insisted, to resist the
temptation of resigning; it was not enough to go back to work in the
well-guarded recesses of his palace. He must go out and show himself to
the people; by his words and example he must revive their courage, give
them back their confidence in the destinies of France. Let him offer to
lead them to the defence of their country, and they would follow
enthusiastically. At the thought of the Parisian mob -the mob that had
dug Concini from his grave and danced in obscene glee about the
mutilated carcase, the mob that now hated him at least as bitterly as it
had loathed the Italian favourite twenty years before -Richelieu’s sense
of the saving power of God began to leave him. He demurred, he started
to argue, he suggested alternative and less distressing courses of
action. Father Joseph noted the signs of this moral relapse, and
suddenly dropping the prophetic tone, assumed the almost brutal liberty
of an old friend, a fellow soldier, an equal in birth. Curtly, he told
the Cardinal that he was behaving comme une poule mouillée. It was an
insult for, in popular language, that ‘wet hen’ was an emblem of
cowardice -but the insult of a friend, who meant, not to hurt only, but,
by hurting, to arouse and tonify. The words had the effect which Father
Joseph had hoped for. Richelieu pulled himself together. Ordering his
carriage, he drove out, unguarded, into the streets of Paris. Halting
where the crowds were thickest, he leaned out of the window of the coach
and addressed the people, exhorting them to take heart, to remain calm,
to enlist for the defence of the town. The Parisians cheered him to the
echo. Admiring the courage of a man who, from being a wet hen, had
transformed himself into the dryest of lions, the people forgot their
hatred. For a little while the Cardinal enjoyed something like
popularity.

Paris was saved by a combination of the ardour of its civilian defenders
and the incompetence of the invading generals. Instead of attacking at
once, the Spaniards lingered at Compiegne, giving time for the Parisian
militia to be organized and for reinforcements of professional troops to
be brought from distant fronts. Then, having missed their opportunity,
they turned northward again without a battle, leaving only a garrison to
hold the town of Corbie, which finally surrendered in November, after
much prophesying on the subject by Father Joseph’s inspired Calvarians.

After this the war settled down to a dreary see-saw of indecisive
successes and reverses. In northern Germany, Swedes fought against
imperialists and Saxons. Dutch fought against Spaniards in the
Netherlands and at sea. French armies fought Spaniards and imperialists
and Bavarians in the Rhineland. Bernard of Saxe-Weimar advanced and
retreated from his base in Alsace, a province of which (though the
Cardinal had other plans) he optimistically hoped to make himself the
ruling Duke. In Italy, French troops collaborated with Savoyards to
operate rather ineffectively against the Spanish Milanese. And from
Bayonne and Perpignan yet other French armies alternately invaded, and
were pushed out of, Spain. The first significant French success did not
come until a day or two before Father Joseph’s death, when Bernard of
Saxe-Weimar captured Breisach, the fortress commanding the Spanish line
of communications between Italy and the Netherlands. (A few months later
Bernard providentially died of a fever, which settled the inconvenient
question of his dukedom and left his hitherto quasi-independent army to
be incorporated into the French forces.) But Breisach was only a
beginning, and it was not until 1643, when the Cardinal himself was
dead, that the war which was to have been so brief and so crushingly
decisive really turned in favour of France. At Rocroi, the Duke of
Enghien completely annihilated that veteran army of the Netherlands,
which was the keystone of Spanish power. From that time, the great arch
of Hapsburg empire erected by Charles V and Philip II began to collapse.
The Treaty of Westphalia, in 1648, put an end to Austrian pretensions,
and that of the Pyrenees, in 1660, marked the final disintegration of
Spain and the rise of France to European hegemony. But all this was far
away in the future. For the last years of their lives, Father Joseph and
the Cardinal were directing a war which, without being disastrous, was
also very far from being successful.

During the years that followed his return from Ratisbon, Father Joseph’s
political power had been steadily growing. Not only was he the
Cardinal’s right-hand man; he was also in high favour with the King.
Louis admired his talents, respected his integrity in all personal
relationships, and had for many years been grateful for what the friar
had done in trying, sometimes with success, to promote harmony and
discipline within the intolerable royal family. Nor was this all. Pious
to the point of superstition, Louis XIII felt something akin to awe in
the presence of a foreign minister who was also a contemplative, a
prophet, and the founder of one of the austerest orders in the whole
Catholic Church. He admired the effortless serenity of the man who, by
incessant meditations, had schooled himself into a perfect self-control.
Still more profoundly was he impressed by the sudden vehemences of the
Old Testament prophet, the inspirations, sometimes personal, sometimes
vouchsafed to one of the Calvarians under his direction, of the ecstatic
visionary. Like most uneducated men, the King took the keenest interest
in this spiritually shady but spectacular side of the contemplative
life. He was deeply impressed by any manifestation of the siddhis, as
the Indians call them, the psychic powers which may be aroused by
meditation to which the wiser mystics pay as little attention as
possible. In this respect Father Joseph was not so far advanced as some
of his younger contemporaries, such as Oilier, whose opinion of visions
and prophetic revelations has already been cited. Even in the early and
happiest days of his mystical life, Father Joseph had remained intensely
orthodox; and orthodox Christianity has always tended to overvalue
supernormal occurrences, to identify the unusual with the divine, to
confound the merely psychic with the spiritual. This worship of the odd
is a phenomenon observable on two levels, the primitive and the highly
intellectual on the level of simple credulous people like Louis XIII and
the average peasant, and on the level of scientists impressed by the
evidence of things that cannot be explained in terms of the current
hypotheses, of a Pascal, for example, arguing from miracles to the truth
of Christian theology, of a Descartes dallying in his youth with
Rosicrucianism, of an Oliver Lodge building a religion on the foundation
of evidence suggesting the survival after death of a certain psychic
factor, of a Carrel impressed by supernormal healing and the power of
prayer.

Trained as they are to concentrate upon the events of the world of space
and time, men of science are peculiarly liable, when they turn
religious, to revert to that primitive kind of religion in which
‘miracles’ play an important part. They are concerned less with the
‘kingdom of heaven within’ than with external ‘signs,’ less with the
knowledge of eternity than with power in space-time. Their religion, in
a word, is not mystical, but a kind of occultism. Occultism and
mysticism are present in all historical religions -a great deal of the
first, a very little of the second. As a matter of biographical fact,
many men and women of great spiritual insight have begun their religious
career as occultists, much interested in ‘signs,’ and have ended as pure
mystics, mainly or exclusively interested in the kingdom of heaven, the
beatific vision, the knowledge of eternal reality. Many more have
started out upon the mystical road, but have never completely rid
themselves of the occultism in which they were brought up. Of these
Father Joseph was one. He undertook passive and active annihilation,
that his soul might be fit to be united with the imageless, eternal
godhead; but he also attached great importance to siddhis and, indeed,
to any unusual psychic phenomena which might turn up in the course of
his meditations. What he practised himself, he taught his nuns. The
Calvarians were minutely instructed in the art of mental prayer, but
were also encouraged to cultivate their siddhis and pay close attention
to the workings of their subconscious. As we have already seen, Father
Joseph used the convents under his charge, not only as praying machines
for the materialization of divine favours, but also as prophesying
machines for sharpening political and military foresight. Nor was this
all. In response to the letters he wrote regarding the generally very
unsatisfactory situation at court, his nuns would receive from on high
admonishments addressed to the exalted personage who happened at the
moment to be giving most trouble.

Reports of these revelations were written out and forwarded to Father
Joseph, who passed them on, with suitable comments from Ezedriely, to
the party concerned. Here, for example, is a message for Louis XIII,
transmitted by Christ, picked up by one of the Calvarians and, by Father
Joseph, read aloud to his royal master. ‘At this time’ (these are the
very words of the Second Person of the Trinity) ‘it is essential that
the King should apply his whole mind to the war, taking care to let his
servants know that he will reward and punish them according to their
achievements.’ And so on, with much useful advice on the conduct of
monarchs in war-time. The revelation concludes with the admonition that
Louis must work harder and cease to indulge in his black moods of
depression and self-pity. To communications such as this and to the
commentaries, with which the friar accompanied them, Louis listened
humbly and with the awed sense of being very near the source of all
goodness, power and knowledge. Resolving to amend his ways, he would
record his good intentions in a formal document, signed, sealed and
witnessed. It was a contract entered into with his better self, an IOU
made out to heaven. Fully determined to meet his obligations, he would
address himself with all his might to obeying the divine commands. But,
alas, in a few days his poor neurotic temperament had proved too much
for his resolutions. The old indecision paralysed his efforts at hard
work; the old pathological boredom prevented him from taking an interest
even in the war; the old sense of guilt and personal inferiority
darkened his world again and made it horrible and utterly wearisome.
Ezechiely would have to come to the rescue with another revelation,
another burst of prophetic eloquence.

As early as 1632 it had been unofficially decided that, if Richelieu
died, Father Joseph should succeed him as President of the Council of
State. That he might speak with the necessary authority, it was
necessary for him to be made a Prince of the Church. Through his
ambassador at Rome, Louis requested that, at the next promotion of
cardinals, a hat might be reserved for his Capuchin. In the course of
the next six years the request was repeated several times and with
growing insistence. But, in spite of his admiration for the Turciad and
a personal liking for its author, Urban VIII was not inclined to do what
the King desired. There were several reasons why he did not want to make
Father Joseph a cardinal. To begin with, there was already one Capuchin
cardinal and this gentleman was strongly opposed to any move that would
give him a rival and competitor within the Sacred College. Then there
was the Emperor Ferdinand, who remembered his encounter with Father
Joseph at Ratisbon and had no wish to see so powerful an enemy promoted
to a position in which he could be even more dangerous to Austrian
interests. Similar objections were raised in Madrid. And finally, there
was the fact, which no Counter-Reformation Pope could safely ignore,
that Father Joseph enjoyed the worst possible reputation among the rank
and file of the Catholic laity and clergy. Notorious even before the
Diet of Ratisbon, he had climbed since 1630 to even higher eminences of
ill-fame. All things considered, it was not at all surprising that the
Pope should have so long refused to grant His Most Christian Majesty’s
petition. The surprising thing is that, in the end, he finally gave way.
In 1638 the hat was definitely promised-too late; for the friar died
before he could receive it. The man whom Father Joseph was to have
succeeded survived him by four years, a sick man, it is true, but to the
very end in fullest possession of the intelligence and that inflexible
will which had brought him to power and for eighteen years had kept him
in the saddle. In Richelieu’s life, as in that of all chronic invalids,
there were periodical ups and downs, alternations of better and worse.
In 1632, the year in which the first request for Father Joseph’s hat was
made, Richelieu suffered severely from the aggravation of a disorder
which had first begun to afflict him ten years before. Piles-for it was
from piles that the Cardinal suffered-can be a very painful, exhausting
and mentally depressing complaint. Combined with his other ailments,
they brought the Cardinal to a very low ebb.

In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries no event in the life of an
eminent personage was entirely private. Even the act of excretion was
often performed in public, and for those whose rank entitled them to
this privilege, Kings and Princesses were at home and made conversation
while seated on the chaise percée. Diseases and the most intimate forms
of medical treatment were no less public. Louis XIV’s enemas were
discussed by the whole court, and his fistula, or fissure of the
fundament, was a matter of national concern. A generation earlier, it
had been the same with the Cardinal’s piles. There was not a corner of
the kingdom to which the news of them had not penetrated. Sympathizers
expressed their condolences and many reputedly infallible remedies were
sent in -among others a powder invented by a Capuchin monk and
guaranteed to cure, not only the Cardinal’s hemorrhoids, but also the
King’s childlessness. When all of these had failed, a deputation of
clergy proceeded to the Cathedral of Meaux and returned with the relics
of that seventh-century Irish hermit, who is the patron saint of Brie
and has left his name to the hackney cab, St. Fiacre. The relics were
applied; but, in spite of his high reputation as a healer, St. Fiacre
was no more successful than anyone else. One regrets the fact, not only
for the sake of poor Richelieu, but also because St. Fiacre’s failure
has lost us some curious literature and perhaps some splendid works of
art. One can imagine, if the miracle had occurred, the volume of odes,
by several hands, in honour of the event. These would have been more odd
than good. Not so the enormous composition by Rubens, that would have
been a thing of unqualified beauty and magnificence.

Robed in great cataracts of red silk, Richelieu kneels in the right
foreground and rolls up his dark impassive eyes towards a heaven in
which, in the top left-hand corner and at an altitude of about two
hundred and fifty feet, the Holy Trinity and the Virgin look down from
their soft cloud, considerably foreshortened, but with an expression of
the liveliest benevolence. Poised only a foot or two above the
Cardinal’s head, St. Fiacre descends, much bearded and in the ragged
homespun appropriate to anchorites. One hand is raised in benediction,
and in the crook of his other arm he carries his emblems -a slice of
Brie cheese, a shillelagh and a miniature four-wheeler. From aloft, he
is followed by a squadron of cherubs, nose-diving and banking above a
delightful landscape where, in the distance, the siege of La Rochelle is
in full swing. Immediately above and behind the Cardinal, Louis XIII
stands at the head of a flight of steps, his left hand on his hip, his
right supported by a long malacca cane. Trailing pink draperies, Victory
hovers over him, while the livid form of Heresy grovels in the middle
distance. At the bottom of the canvas, immediately below the Trinity and
a plane or two behind the nearest foreground, we see a group consisting
of Father Joseph at prayer, Sacred Theology in blue and white satin and,
representing Literae Humaniores, a young woman from Antwerp, with no
clothes on, pointing at a marble slab, upon which we read a Latin
inscription alluding to the foundation of the Academie Française … ‘ .
But, alas, this splendid work was never painted; the bones of St. Fiacre
were taken back to Meaux and the unhappy Cardinal continued to suffer
the tortures of the damned.

The lowering effects of this and his other diseases were responsible in
part for Richelieu’s failure of nerve in 1636. Father Joseph’s
intervention helped the Cardinal to overcome the psychological symptom,
but did nothing, of course, to remove its physical cause. After as
before the crisis, Richelieu remained a sick man, much depressed by his
ailments and in constant need of moral support, no less than of medical
care. For the former he turned to Father Joseph, who combated his
friend’s discouragement by frequent talks about religion and
exhortations to a better way of life. Under the influence of these
talks, Richelieu began to display an unwanted piety. He gave much money
to religious institutions. He confessed often and regularly, and
received communion every week.

Yet more surprisingly, he composed between 1636 and 1639 a Treatise of
Christian Perfection, in which he advocated what Father Joseph and his
master, Benet Fitch, called ‘active annihilation,’ and what Brother
Lawrence and most other mystics have described as ‘ the practice of the
presence of God.’ ‘It is enough,’ wrote Richelieu, ‘to establish oneself
several times a day in the divine presence and to perform no action
which can destroy it; for it is certain that the divine presence is held
to persist until we perform an action contrary to it.’ It is to be
presumed that, to some extent at least, he practised what he preached.
The effects were evidently consoling; for, though the Cardinal had
always been afraid of hell, he faced his death without a qualm and, in
the evident conviction that he had done nothing that merited damnation.
The priest who attended him during his last hours admonished him to
prepare his soul to meet its creator by forgiving all his enemies. From
his death-bed, the Cardinal serenely answered that ‘he had never had any
enemies, save only those of the State.’ There is something almost
awe-inspiring about a self-complacency so enormous and expressed at such
a moment. When the news of his passing was brought to Urban VIII, the
old Pope sat for a moment in pensive silence. ‘Well,’ he said at last,
‘if there is a God, Cardinal Richelieu will have much to answer for. If
not, he has done very well.’

Meanwhile the man to whom Richelieu had turned for moral support (‘ ou
est mon appui?’ he cried when he was told of Father Joseph’s death;
‘j’ai perdu mon appui’) was himself in need of consolation. The effort
to make the best of both worlds -to be simultaneously a power politician
concerned to forward the interests of the Bourbons and a contemplative
concerned to worship God ‘in spirit and in truth’ had failed, and he was
becoming ever more acutely conscious of the failure. Because he was
quite unaware of the true nature of God, Richelieu could blandly say
that ‘it was enough to establish oneself several times a day in the
divine presence and to perform no action that can destroy it.’ Father
Joseph knew something about God and therefore that this was not enough,
and that actions which might not destroy what a man like Richelieu
fondly imagined to be the divine presence were absolutely fatal to the
presence of reality as it is in itself. He had tried to ‘annihilate’ his
activities as foreign minister, negotiator, master of spies, political
pamphleteer; but these activities had been too many and intrinsically of
too bad a nature to suffer such annihilation. ‘In all the conditions of
life,’ he had written twenty years before, ‘it is necessary that every
individual should be able, at the height of the tempest, to cast his
eyes, when the need arises, towards the sovereign good, as towards a
flaming torch that beckons to him from afar and to which he strives to
come by this act of union, not indeed as one of the perfect and not in
their eminent degree-not with all sails set and on the open sea of total
denudation, a complete abandonment of all the ordinary means, in the
manner of the great ocean-going ships, but hugging the well-known shore,
without giving up meditation and the other aids described in this
Method, which lead to union.’ Well, he had been a beginner, hugging the
shore of vocal prayer and discursive meditation; then, growing more
proficient in pure contemplation, he had launched out further and
further into the boundless sea of divine reality. And then Richelieu had
appeared, and it had seemed his duty to do the exterior will of God by
serving that instrument of Providence called the French monarchy. At the
beginning he had not doubted his capacity to do his political duties and
still remain at sea, in the presence of God. But as time went on he had
found himself forced back towards the coast, and his glimpses of that
bright torch of the sovereign good became more and more infrequent. As a
young man, he had described the experience of union with an eloquence
whose passionate ardour seems to prove two things; first, that he had
himself experienced union, and second, that that experience of union was
not of the highest order; for mystical experiences of the highest order
do not lend themselves to expression in terms of the violently emotional
language employed by Father Joseph. ‘God designs,’ he had written, ‘to
enter unto us and grants us the favour of entering into him by a mutual
immersion and reciprocal flowing together, which is expressed in Holy
Scripture, when God bids us open our mouth and promises to fill it.

This dilatation means that the soul should enlarge the whole capacity of
her free will, that is to say, should produce acts of the greatest and
most whole-hearted love she can conceive. And it is not enough to open
one’s mouth in an ordinary way, as one does for eating, speaking and
breathing; one must be like a man who, after having run long and
violently after something he desperately longs to catch, stands
breathless, opens his mouth and feels his heart beating, as though he
were ready to die. Some open their will to God as if to eat, that is to
say, as if they were to receive some inward sweetness; others as though
to talk and make discourses of God ; others again as if to breathe, in
order to give refreshment to a spirit suffocated by this world’s cares.
To do this is not to love God perfectly. One must expel the life of
self-will in every panting breath, one must hunt down one’s nature in an
implacable course towards perfection, to the end that one may exhale and
infuse one’s whole being, open mouthed, into the mouth of God…. Thus the
Scripture says, according to the Hebrew, that Moses died upon the mouth
of God… Oh, sacred resting place of happy lassitudes, Oh, treasure of
eternal repose, of which our soul bears within it all the depths and
breadths, since God opens himself unto her to exactly the same extent as
she is willing to open herself unto him.’

Only Father Joseph’s worldly side, only Tenebroso-Cavernoso was calm.
Ezechiely, the religious side of him, lived in a kind of chronic
passion, almost a frenzy of zeal. To Ezechiely it was the most natural
thing in the world to talk violently about the prayer of quiet, to
compare the contemplative to a frantically panting runner. All the
practical mystics, including Benet of Canfield, have warned would-be
contemplatives against an excess of zeal. Uncontrolled, the hunger and
thirst after God may become an obstacle, cutting off the soul from what
it desires. If a man would travel far along the mystic road, he must
learn to desire God intensely but in stillness, passively and yet with
all his heart and mind and strength. Father Joseph himself speaks of the
state of inner confusion awaiting the soul ‘that has not been taught to
control its inclinations by the virtue of Grace, which one receives in
large measure during the act of union, when one is given the sceptre of
the spirit to dominate one’s feelings.’ It may be doubted, however,
whether he himself was ever granted this sceptre of the spirit. That he
had a very complete control of all his lower passions is certain; but we
have the evidence of his passionate and explosive writings, as well as
of his recorded taste for sudden revelations, visions and raptures, to
show that he never succeeded in overcoming his all too natural desire to
take the kingdom of heaven by violence. It is permissible to believe
that, if he had overcome it, if his experience of union had been more
tranquil, freer of his own intense feelings about God and fuller of God
himself, he would never have consented to imperil this genuine awareness
of reality for the sake of political duties hardly compatible even with
his monastic vows and certainly incompatible with the life of
contemplation.

Father Joseph’s experience of union may have been incomplete and not of
the highest order; but on its own level, it was ‘undoubtedly authentic.
With the passage of the years, however, even this experience became
rarer. Given over to unannihilatable activities, he came to be
possessed, in spite of his daily practice of mental prayer, by a sense
of bitterness and frustration. Visions, it was true, and prophetic
revelations were still vouchsafed to him; but the unitive life of his
early manhood was at an end ; he had the dreadful certainty that God had
moved away from him. It was a dark night of the soul-but not that
salutary dark night described by St. John of the Cross, not the dark
night of those who are undergoing the final and excruciating purgation
from self-will; no, it was that much more terrible, because fruitless
and degrading, dark night, which is the experience of those who have
seen God and then, by their own fault, lost him again. That Father
Joseph knew what had happened to him is proved by the following passage
from a letter written in this latest period of his life to one of the
Calvarian Abbesses. ‘I know,’ he says, ‘by personal experience -I who,
in punishment for my faults and for having misused the time God gave me,
have now so little leisure to think of my inward being and am for ever
distracted by a host of different occupations-I know how bad it is not
to be united to God, not to give one’s soul into the possession of the
spirit of Jesus, to be led according to his will; and I know too how
necessary it is for this to keep good company, in which the faithful can
help and strengthen one another. When I think thus and then look and see
how I and the most part of creatures live our lives, I come to believe
that this world is but a fable, and that we have all lost our senses-for
I make no difference, except for a few externals, between ourselves, the
pagans and the Turks.’ These are despairing words, words that make one
wonder whether the unhappy man had come to doubt of his salvation. And
having penned them, back he had to go to the hideous work to which his
duty to the Bourbons had harnessed him, the work of spreading famine and
cannibalism and unspeakable atrocities across the face of Europe. Back
he had to go to the distracting cares which cut him off from the vision
of reality; to the bad company of King and Cardinal, ambassadors and
spies; back finally to all the criminal follies of high statesmanship;
to the Satanic struggle for power in a world, which he knew to be a
fable, a mere nightmarish illusion, to the orgies of violence and
cunning; to the dreary battles of force and fraud, waged by two parties
of madmen, between whom, as he had now come to perceive, there was
nothing whatever to choose. And as a reward for turning his back upon
God, they had promised to give him a red hat.


CHAPTER X

Politics and Religion

The nature of Father Joseph’s life is such that the record of it can
hardly fail to raise, in an inquiring mind, a number of questions not
directly related to that biography. These questions are all more or less
puzzling, but so intrinsically important that the historian of this
strange career would be doing less than his duty if he failed at least
to try to answer them. The first question concerns facts. What were the
historical consequences of the policy which Father Joseph assisted
Richelieu to carry out? The others are of a more speculative nature and
involve problems in morals. What ought to have been the attitude of a
man in Father’s Joseph’s position towards politics? What, if anything,
can a contemplative do for his fellow-men outside the field of politics?
And, conversely, what can politicians do for their fellow-men within
that field, and with no assistance from the contemplative? Let us
consider these questions in order.

Of the immediate results of Richelieu’s foreign policy, as measured in
terms of human misery, I have already spoken. Statistically speaking,
what was the total sum of this misery? Popular tradition in Germany has
tended to exaggerate the figures. In the later seventeenth and during
the eighteenth century there grew up a myth of the Thirty Years’ War -a
myth more dramatically frightful even than the reality, and for that
very reason more potent in its effects upon the minds of those who
believed it. Recent research has shown that the old mythical statistics
must be considerably scaled down. But even when all the necessary
discounts have been made, the figures are sufficiently appalling. In
1618 the population of Germany was about twenty-one millions. In 1648 it
had shrunk to about thirteen millions. At a period of history when the
population curve for Europe in general was turning upwards, these lands
east of the Rhine lost above one-third of their inhabitants by massacre,
famine, exposure and disease. More than any other war in recent European
history, the Thirty Years’ War was a people’s war, in the sense that it
involved non-combatants equally with professional soldiers.

Material destruction was relatively less than the destruction of human
life. In the seventeenth century explosives were not manufactured in
bulk and were relatively inefficient. But, without a plentiful supply of
explosives, it is difficult to destroy solidly built structures of
stone. What perished, therefore, was only what could be readily
burned-that is to say, dwelling houses, especially the flimsy hovels of
the poor. Town and country suffered almost equally. The burghers were
stripped of their money and lost their trade. The peasants were stripped
of their produce and lost their homes, implements, seed and animals. The
loss of cattle, sheep and swine was particularly serious. As we have
seen in the case of revolutionary Russia, a depleted stock of animals
can only be replaced over a long period of time. Two or three
generations passed before the natural rate of increase had made up for
the depredations of Wallenstein and Mansfeld, Tilly and Gustavus, the
Spanish and the French.

On the structure of German society the Thirty Years’ War produced
certain undesirable effects, which have proved to be of great historical
significance. Here again the myth which has helped to mould the modern
German mind fails at many points to correspond to reality. It has been
customary in Germany to attribute all the country’s ills to the Thirty
Years’ War. But the truth is that even before the war began, Germany was
in a bad way. German prosperity was based on commerce and had been bound
up with that of Venice. During the sixteenth century, the trade routes
had changed their course. The Mediterranean lost its commercial
significance, and the economic basis, upon which the urban life of
Germany had been built, began to crumble away. Meanwhile the production
of agricultural wealth declined owing to the Peasants’ War, which left
the defeated party an oppressed majority implacably hostile to its
masters. Agriculture does not flourish when a state of latent civil war
exists between owners and workers. Confusion was worse confounded by
religious and political division. Two thousand sovereign states, most of
them surrounded by tariff walls and many with independent currencies
more or less seriously debased, created so much internal friction that
the exchange of goods and services between one part of the country and
another became a matter of the greatest difficulty. At the same time the
Reformation had divided the people, first into two, and then, with the
advent of Calvinism, into three mutually hostile camps. Into this dismal
Germany of the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries no
outstanding figures were born. The intellectual life of the country was
stagnant and the prevailing standards of morals and manners were
brutishly low. Foreign travellers in Germany were struck by only one
thing -the revolting gluttony and intemperance of the inhabitants. The
Germans, or at any rate the more prosperous of them, ate and drank more
than any other people in Europe, and were extremely proud of the fact.
At this particular moment of history, they had nothing else to be proud
of.

The Thirty Years’ War completed the ruin of which the discovery of
America, the Reformation and the Peasants’ War had begun. Commerce and
industry came to a standstill, with the result that a large proportion
of the burghers lost their economic independence and became petty civil
servants in the pay of one or other of the two hundred independent
sovereigns who ruled the country after the Peace of Westphalia. That
great instrument of governmental tyranny, the German bureaucracy, was
forged in the seventeenth century.

A ruling bureaucracy cannot function efficiently without its proper
complement, a docile population resigned to being ruled. This docile
German population was also a product of the Thirty Years’ War. The
Peasants’ War had ended in a victory for the landowners; but in spite of
this, the later sixteenth century had witnessed a certain relaxation in
the old feudal restraints. During and immediately after the Thirty
Years’ War, those peasants who survived the massacres and the famines
found themselves, owing to the extreme shortage of labour, in a position
to demand better social and economic conditions. It looked for a moment
as though the catastrophe might have at least one good result, the
liberation of the German peasantry. Actually, it had a precisely
contrary effect. The Peace of Westphalia strengthened the independent
princes and their nobility-strengthened them so much that they were able
to reverse the trend towards the modernization of German society and to
reimpose the old feudal servitudes with a strictness and effectiveness
unknown for generations. So far as the agricultural population of
Germany was concerned, the most important consequence of French foreign
policy was the creation of a new, monstrous kind of artificial Middle
Age. When the time came for the rise of a new German power, the
Prussians found an elaborate bureaucracy and a cowed and regimented
population all ripe and ready to their hands.

Within Germany itself, the political consequences of the Thirty Years’
War were almost entirely bad. Modelling themselves on Louis XIV, the
post-Westphalian princes either stultified or abolished outright the
local diets by means of which their fathers’ tyranny had to some extent
been mitigated. Autocracy became the tradition of the country.
Meanwhile, Austrian power had been finally and for ever excluded from
western and northern Germany. The states which still nominally formed
part of the Empire were in fact independent of the Hapsburgs
-independent enough to be, as Richelieu and Father Joseph had intended
them to be, under the influence of the Bourbons. So far as France was
concerned, this was an admirable arrangement; but it was an arrangement
that could persist only on two conditions: first, that French monarchy
should remain stable, neither unduly declining nor unduly expanding its
power, and second, that the Germans themselves should not be reunited,
either voluntarily or under compulsion. By the beginning of the
nineteenth century both these conditions had ceased to be fulfilled. The
French monarchy had declined and collapsed, to be replaced by an
aggressive military dictatorship that scared all Europe into opposition;
and the Prussian monarchy had arisen and was in a position to create a
new unified German state. By breaking the power of Austria, Richelieu
and Father Joseph had made sure that, when Germany came to be united, it
should not be united as a federated, non-national and not wholly German
empire, but as a highly centralized, purely Teutonic nation. The final
blow to the federal idea -the only political philosophy with any chance
of working, under modern conditions, in central and eastern Europe was
delivered in 1919 when, instead of reforming and strengthening the
Hapsburg empire, the allied politicians broke it up into half a dozen
independent, but entirely non-viable, national states.

Richelieu’s policy had been directed to the weakening of Spain and
Austria, the disintegration of Germany and the substitution of Bourbon
for Hapsburg predominance in Europe. That policy was successful -so
successful, indeed, that when Louis XIV carried it to its insanely
logical conclusion, perpetual aggressive warfare against everybody, all
Europe united against the Bourbons, just as on earlier occasions all
Europe, including France, had united against the Hapsburgs. By the end
of the long reign France was bankrupt, her trade and industry almost
ruined, her oppressed peasantry in a state of latent rebellion, and
large stretches of her territory almost depopulated. In the economic
field, private enterprise had been discouraged; in the religious and
political, freedom of worship and all the traditional autonomies and
checks on tyranny had been abolished. The ground had been prepared for
the Revolution; and out of the Revolution was to come, along with the
‘progress through catastrophe’ of which political optimists are fond of
speaking, Napoleonic imperialism and, by reaction, German nationalism,
the Prussian empire and the disasters of the twentieth century. About
politics one can make only one completely unquestionable generalization,
which is that it is quite impossible for statesmen to foresee, for more
than a very short time, the results of any course of large-scale
political action. Many of them, it is true, justify their actions by
pretending to themselves and others that they can see a long way ahead;
but the fact remains that they can’t. If they were completely honest
they would say, with Father Joseph,

“J’ignore où mon dessein, qui surpasse ma vue,
Si vite me conduit;
Mais comme un astre ardent qui brille dans la nue,
II me guide en la nuit.”²³

If hell is paved with good intentions, it is, among other reasons,
because of the impossibility of calculating consequences. Bishop Stubbs
therefore condemns those historians who amuse themselves by fixing on
individuals or groups of men responsibility for the remoter consequences
of their actions. ‘It strikes me,’ he writes, ‘as not merely unjust, but
as showing an ignorance of the plainest aphorisms of common sense, … to
make an historical character responsible for evils and crimes, which
have resulted from his actions by processes which he could not foresee.’
This is sound so far as it goes; but it does not go very far. Besides
being a moralist, the historian is one who attempts to formulate
generalizations about human events. It is only by tracing the relations
between acts and their consequences that such generalizations can be
made. When they have been made, they are available to politicians, when
framing plans of action. In this way past records of the relation
between acts and consequences enter the field of ethics as relevant
factors in a situation of choice. And here it may be pointed out that,
though it is impossible to foresee the remoter consequences of any given
course of action, it is by no means impossible to foresee, in the light
of past historical experience, the sort of consequences that are likely,
in a general way, to follow certain sorts of acts. Thus, from the
records of past experience, it seems sufficiently clear that the
consequences attendant on a course of action involving such things as
large-scale war, violent revolution, unrestrained tyranny and
persecution are likely to be bad. Consequently, any politician who
embarks on such courses of action cannot plead ignorance as an excuse.
Father Joseph, for example, had read enough history to know that
policies like that which Richelieu and he were pursuing are seldom, even
when nominally successful, productive of lasting good to the parties by
whom they were framed. But his passionate ambition for the Bourbons made
him cling to a voluntary ignorance, which he proceeded to justify by
speculations about the will of God.

Here it seems worth while to comment briefly on the curious time sense
of those who think in political terms. Courses of action are recommended
on the ground that, if carried out, they cannot fail to result in a
solution to all outstanding problems a solution either definitive and
everlasting, like that which Marx foresaw as the result of the setting
up of a classless society, or else of very long duration, like the
thousand-year futures foretold for their regimes by Mussolini and
Hitler, or like the more modest five-hundred-year Pax Americana of which
Miss Dorothy Thompson has spoken. Richelieu’s admirers envisaged a
Bourbon golden age longer than the hypothetical Nazi or Fascist era, but
shorter (since it had a limit) than the final, classless stage of
Communism. In a contemporary defence of the Cardinal’s policy against
the Huguenots, Voiture justifies the great expenditures involved by
saying that ‘the capture of La Rochelle alone has economized millions;
for La Rochelle would have raised rebellion at every royal minority,
every revolt of the nobles during the next two thousand years.’ Such are
the illusions cherished by the politically minded when they reflect on
the consequences of a policy immediately before or immediately after it
has been put in action. But when the policy has begun to show its
fruits, their time sense undergoes a radical change. Gone are the
calculations in terms of centuries or millennia. A single victory is now
held to justify a Te Deum, and if the policy yields apparently
successful results for only a few years, the statesman feels satisfied
and his sycophants are lavish in their praise of his genius. Even sober
historians writing long after the event tend to express themselves in
the same vein. Thus, Richelieu is praised by modern writers as a very
great and far-sighted statesman, even though it is perfectly clear that
the actions he undertook for the aggrandisement of the Bourbon dynasty
created the social and economic and political conditions, which led to
the downfall of that dynasty, the rise of Prussia and the catastrophes
of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. His policy is praised as if
it had been eminently successful, and those who objected to it are
blamed for their shortsighted views. Here, for example, is what Gustave
Fagniez has to say of the French peasants and burgesses who opposed the
Cardinal’s war policy -a policy for which they had to pay with their
money, their privations and their blood. ‘Always selfish and
unintelligent, the masses cannot be expected to put up for a long time
with hardships, of which future generations are destined to reap the
fruits.’ And this immediately after a passage setting forth the nature
of these particular fruits -the union of all Europe against Louis XIV
and the ruin of the French people. Such extraordinary inconsistency can
only be explained by the fact that, when people come to talk of their
nation’s successes, they think in terms of the very briefest periods of
time. A triumph is to be hymned and gloated over, even if it lasts no
more than a day. Retrospectively, men like Richelieu and Louis XIV and
Napoleon are more admired for the brief glory they achieved than hated
for the long-drawn miseries which were the price of that glory.

Among the sixteen hundred-odd ladies whose names were set down in the
catalogue of Don Giovanni’s conquests, there were doubtless not a few
whose favours made it necessary for the hero to consult his physician.
But pox or no pox, the mere fact that the favours had been given was a
thing to feel proud of, a victory worth recording in Leporello’s
chronicle of successes. The history of the nations is written in the
same spirit. So much for our first question, regarding the consequences
of the policy which Father Joseph helped to frame and execute. Now for
the questions of ethics. Ethically, Father Joseph’s position was not the
same as that of an ordinary politician. It was not the same because,
unlike ordinary politicians, he was an aspirant to sanctity, a
contemplative with a considerable working knowledge of mysticism, one
who knew the nature of spiritual religion and had actually made some
advance along the ‘way of perfection’ towards union with God.
Theologians agree that all Christians are called to union with God, but
that few are willing to make the choice which qualifies them to be
chosen. Father Joseph was one of those few. But having made the choice,
he went on, some years later, to make another; he chose to go into
politics, as Richelieu’s collaborator. As we have seen, Father Joseph’s
intention was to combine the life of political activity with that of
contemplation, to do what power politics demanded and to annihilate it
in God’s will even while it was being done. In practice, the things
which had to be done proved unannihilatable, and with one part of his
being Father Joseph came to be bitterly sorry that he had ever entered
politics. But there was also another part of him, a part that craved for
action, that yearned to do something heroic for the greater glory of
God. Looking back over his life, Father Joseph, the contemplative, felt
that he had done wrong, or at any rate been very unwise, to enter
politics. But if he had not done so, if he had remained the evangelist,
teacher and religious reformer, he would probably have felt to the end
of his days that he had done wrong to neglect the opportunity of doing
God’s will in the great world of international politics -gesta Dei per
Francos Father Joseph’s dilemma is one which confronts all spirituals
and contemplatives, all who aspire to worship God theocentrically and
for his own sake, all who attempt to obey the commandment to be perfect
as their Father in heaven is perfect. In order to think clearly about
this dilemma, we must learn first of all to think clearly about certain
matters of more general import. Catholic theologians had done a great
deal of this necessary clear thinking, and, if he had cared to make use
of them, Father Joseph could have found in the teachings of his
predecessors and contemporaries most of the materials for a sound
philosophy of action and a sound sociology of contemplation. That he did
not make use of them was due to the peculiar nature of his temperament
and talents and, above all, to his intense vicarious ambition for the
French monarchy. He was lured away from the path of perfection by the
most refined of all temptations, the baits of loyalty and
self-sacrifice, but of a loyalty to a cause inferior to the supreme
good, a sacrifice of self undertaken in the name of something less than
God. Let us begin by a consideration of the theory of action which was
current in the speculative writings available to Father Joseph. The
first thing we have to remember is that, when theologians speak of the
active life as contrasted with that of contemplation, they do not refer
to what contemporary, non-theologian writers call by the same name. To
us, ‘life of action’ means the sort of life led by movie heroes,
business executives, war correspondents, cabinet ministers and the like.
To the theologians, all these are merely worldly lives, lived more or
less unregenerately by people who have done little or nothing to get rid
of their Old Adams. What they call active life is the life of good
works. To be active is to follow the way of Martha, who spent her time
ministering to the material needs of the master, while Mary (who in all
mystical literature stands for the contemplative) sat and listened to
his words. When Father Joseph chose the life of politics, he knew very
well that it was not the life of action in the theological sense, that
the way of Richelieu was not identical with the way of Martha. True,
France was, ex hypothesi and almost by definition, the instrument of
divine providence. Therefore any policy tending to the aggrandisement of
France must be good in its essence. But though its essence might be good
and entirely accordant with God’s will, its accidents were often
questionable. This was where the practice of active annihilation came
in. By means of it, Father Joseph hoped to be able to sterilize the
rather dirty things he did and to make them harmless, at any rate to
himself.

Most people at the present time probably take for granted the validity
of the pragmatists’ contention, that the end of thought is action. In
the philosophy which Father Joseph had studied and made his own, this
position is reversed. Here contemplation is the end, and action (in
which is included discursive thought) is valuable only as a means to the
beatific vision of God. In the words of St. Thomas Aquinas, ‘action
should be something added to the life of prayer, not something taken
away from it.’ To the man of the world, this statement is almost totally
devoid of meaning. To the contemplative, whose concern is with spiritual
religion, with the kingdom of God rather than the kingdom of selves, it
seems axiomatic. Starting from this fundamental principle of theocentric
religion, the practical mystics have critically examined the whole idea
of action and have laid down, in regard to it, a set of rules for the
guidance of those desiring to follow the mystical path towards the
beatific vision. One of the best formulations of the traditional
mystical doctrine in regard to action was made by Father Joseph’s
contemporary, Louis Lallemant. Lallemant was a Jesuit, who, in spite of
the prevailing anti-mystical tendencies of his order, was permitted to
teach a very advanced (but entirely orthodox) kind of spirituality to
the men entrusted to his care.

Whenever we undertake any action, Father Lallemant insists, we must
model ourselves upon God himself, who creates and sustains the world
without in any way modifying his essential existence. But we cannot do
this unless we learn to practise formal contemplation and a constant
awareness of God’s presence. Both are difficult, especially the latter,
which is possible only to those very far advanced along the way of
perfection. So far as beginners are concerned, even the doing of good
works may distract the soul from God. Action is not safe, except for
proficients in the art of mental prayer. ‘If we have gone far in
orison,’ says Lallemant, ‘we shall give much to action; if we are but
middlingly advanced in the inward life, we shall give ourselves only
moderately to outward life; if we have only a very little inwardness, we
shall give nothing at all to what is external, unless our vow of
obedience commands the contrary.’ To the reasons already given for this
injunction we may add others of a strictly utilitarian nature. It is a
matter of experience and observation that actions undertaken by ordinary
unregenerate people, sunk in their selfhood and without spiritual
insight, seldom do much good. A generation before Lallemant, St. John of
the Cross had put the whole matter in a single question and answer.
Those who rush headlong into good works without having acquired through
contemplation the power to act well-what do they accomplish? ‘Poco mas
que nada, y a veces nada, y aun a veces dano.’ (Little more than
nothing, and sometimes nothing at all, and sometimes even harm.) One
reason for hell being paved with good intentions has already been
mentioned, and to this, the impossibility of foreseeing the consequences
of actions, we must now add another, the intrinsically unsatisfactory
nature of actions performed by the ordinary run of average unregenerate
men and women. This being so, Lallemant recommends the least possible
external activity until such time as, by contemplation and the
unremitting practice of the presence, the soul has been trained to give
itself completely to God. Those who have travelled only a little way
along the road to union ‘should not go out of themselves for the service
of their neighbours, except by way of trial and experiment. We must be
like those hunting dogs that are still half held upon the leash. When we
shall have come by contemplation to possess God, we shall be able to
give greater freedom to our zeal.’ External activity causes no
interruption in the orison of the proficient; on the contrary, it is a
means for bringing them nearer to reality. Those for whom it is not such
a means should as far as possible refrain from action. Once again Father
Lallemant justifies himself by the appeal to experience and a purely
utilitarian consideration of consequences. In all that concerns the
saving of souls and the improving of the quality of people’s thoughts
and feelings and behaviour, ‘a man of orison will accomplish more in one
year than another man in all his life.’

What is true of good works is true, a fortiori, of merely worldly
activity, particularly when it is activity on a large scale, involving
the collaboration of great numbers of individuals in every stage of
unenlightenment. Good is a product of the ethical and spiritual artistry
of individuals; it cannot be mass produced. All Catholic theologians
were well aware of this truth, and the Church has acted upon it since
its earliest days. The monastic orders and preeminently that to which
Father Joseph himself belonged, were living demonstrations of the
traditional doctrine of action. This doctrine affirmed that goodness of
more than average quantity and quality could be practically realized
only on a small scale, by self-dedicated and specially trained
individuals. In his own work of religious reform and spiritual
instruction, Father Joseph always acted on this same principle. The art
of mental prayer was taught by him only to individuals or small groups;
the Calvarian rule was given as a way of life to only a very few of the
nuns of Fontevrault, the order as a whole being much too large to be
capable of realizing that peculiar spiritual good which the reform was
intended to produce. And yet, in spite of his theoretical and
experimental knowledge that good cannot be mass-produced in an
unregenerate society, Father Joseph went into power politics, convinced
not only that by so doing he was fulfilling the will of God, but also
that great and lasting material and spiritual benefits would result from
the war which he did his best to prolong and exacerbate. He knew that it
was useless to try to compel the good ladies of Fontevrault to be more
virtuous and spiritual than they wanted to be; and yet he believed that
active French intervention in the Thirty Years’ War would result in ‘a
new golden age.’ This strange inconsistency was, as we have often
insisted, mainly a product of the will that will which Father Joseph
thought he had succeeded in subordinating to the will of God, but which
remained, in certain important respects, unregenerately that of the
natural man. In part, however, it was also due to intellectual causes,
specifically to his acceptance of a certain theory of providence, widely
held in the Church and itself inconsistent with the theories of action
and the good outlined above. According to this theory, all history is
providential and its interminable catalogue of crimes and insanities is
an expression of the divine will. As the most spectacular crimes and
insanities of history are perpetrated at the orders of governments, it
follows that these and the states they rule are also embodiments of
God’s will. Granted the truth of this providential theory of history and
the state, Father Joseph was justified in believing that the Thirty
Years’ War was a good thing and that a policy which disseminated
cannibalism, and universalized the practice of torture and murder, might
be wholly accordant with God’s will, provided only that it was
advantageous to France. This condition was essential; for as a
politician, one was justified by the providential theory of history in
believing that God performs his gesta per Francos, even though, as a
practical reformer and spiritual directory, one knew very well that the
deeds of God get done, not by the Franks at large, but by one Frank here
and another there, even by occasional Britons, such as Benet Fitch, and
occasional Spaniards, such as St. Teresa.

Mystical philosophy can be summed up in a single phrase: ‘The more of
the creature, the less of God.’ The large-scale activities of
unregenerate men and women are almost wholly creaturely; therefore they
almost wholly exclude God. If history is an expression of the divine
will, it is so mainly in a negative sense. The crimes and insanities of
large-scale human societies are related to God’s will only in so far as
they are acts of disobedience to that will, and it is only in this sense
that they and the miseries resulting from them can properly be regarded
as providential. Father Joseph justified the campaigns he planned by an
appeal to the God of Battles. But there is no God of Battles; there is
only an ultimate reality, expressing itself in a certain nature of
things, whose harmony is violated by such events as battles, with
consequences more or less disastrous for all directly or indirectly
concerned in the violation. This brings us to the heart of that great
paradox of politics -the fact that political action is necessary and at
the same time incapable of satisfying the needs which called it into
existence.

Only static and isolated societies, whose way of life is determined by
an unquestioned tradition, can dispense with politics. In unstable,
unisolated, technologically progressive societies, such as ours,
large-scale political action is unavoidable. But even when it is
well-intentioned (which it very often is not) political action is always
foredoomed to a partial, sometimes even a complete, self-stultification.
The intrinsic nature of the human instruments with which, and the human
materials upon which, political action must be carried out, is a
positive guarantee against the possibility that such action shall yield
the results that were expected from it. This generalization could be
illustrated by an indefinite number of instances drawn from history.
Consider, for example, the results actually achieved by two reforms upon
which well-intentioned people have placed the most enormous hopes,
universal education and public ownership of the means of production.
Universal education has proved to be the state’s most effective
instrument of universal regimentation and militarization, and has
exposed millions, hitherto immune, to the influence of organized lying
and the allurements of incessant, imbecile and debasing distractions.
Public ownership of the means of production has been put into effect on
a large scale only in Russia, where the results of the reform have been,
not the elimination of oppression, but the replacement of one kind of
oppression by another, of money power by political and bureaucratic
power, of the tyranny of rich men by a tyranny of the police and the
party.

For several thousands of years now men have been experimenting with
different methods for improving the quality of human instruments and
human material. It has been found that a good deal can be done by such
strictly humanistic methods as the improvement of the social and
economic environment, and the various techniques of character training.
Among men and women of a certain type, startling results can be obtained
by means of conversion and catharsis. But though these methods are
somewhat more effective than those of the purely humanistic variety,
they work only erratically and they do not produce the radical and
permanent transformation of personality, which must take place, and take
place on a very large scale, if political action is ever to produce the
beneficial results expected from it. For the radical and permanent
transformation of personality only one effective method has been
discovered that of the mystics. It is a difficult method, demanding from
those who undertake it a great deal more patience, resolution,
self-abnegation and awareness than most people are prepared to give,
except perhaps in times of crisis, when they are ready for a short while
to make the most enormous sacrifices. But unfortunately the amelioration
of the world cannot be achieved by sacrifices in moments of crisis; it
depends on the efforts made and constantly repeated during the humdrum,
uninspiring periods, which separate one crisis from another, and of
which normal lives mainly consist. Because of the general reluctance to
make such efforts during uncritical times, very few people are prepared,
at any given moment of history, to undertake the method of the mystics.
This being so, we shall be foolish if we expect any political action,
however well-intentioned and however nicely planned, to produce more
than a fraction of the general betterment anticipated.

The history of any nation follows an undulatory course. In the trough of
the wave we find more or less complete anarchy; but the crest is not
more or less complete Utopia, but only, at best, a tolerably humane,
partially free and fairly just society that invariably carries within
itself the seeds of its own decadence. Large-scale organizations are
capable, it would seem, of going down a good deal further than they can
go up. We may reasonably expect to reach the upper limit once again; but
unless a great many more people than in the past are ready to undertake
the only method capable of transforming personality, we may not expect
to rise appreciably above it. At the beginning of this chapter we asked
ourselves what the politicians could do for their fellows by actions
within the political field, and without the assistance of the
contemplatives. The answer would seem to be: not very much. Political
reforms cannot be expected to produce much general betterment, unless
large numbers of individuals undertake the transformation of their
personality by the only known method which really works that of the
contemplatives. Moreover, should the amount of mystical, theocentric
leaven in the lump of humanity suffer a significant decrease,
politicians may find it impossible to raise the societies they rule even
to the very moderate heights realized in the past.

Meanwhile, politicians can do something to create a social environment
favourable to contemplatives. Or perhaps it is better to put the matter
negatively and say that they can refrain from doing certain things and
making certain arrangements which are specially unfavourable. The
political activity that seems to be least compatible with theocentric
religion is that which aims at increasing a certain special type of
social efficiency -the efficiency required for waging or threatening
large-scale war. To achieve this kind of efficiency, politicians always
aim at some kind of totalitarianism. Acting like the man of science who
can only deal with the complex problems of real life by arbitrarily
simplifying them for experimental purposes, the politician in search of
military efficiency arbitrarily simplifies the society with which he has
to deal. But whereas the scientist simplifies by a process of analysis
and isolation, the politician can only simplify by compulsion, by a
Procrustean process of chopping and stretching designed to make the
living social organism conform to a certain easily understood and
readily manipulated mechanical pattern. Planning a new kind of national,
military efficiency, Richelieu set himself to simplify the complexity of
French society. That complexity was largely chaotic, and a policy of
simplification, judiciously carried out by desirable means, would have
been fully justified. But Richelieu’s policy was not judicious and, when
continued after his death, resulted in the totalitarianism of Louis XIV
-a totalitarianism which was intended to be as complete as anything we
see in the modern world, and which only failed to be so by reason of the
wretched systems of communication and organization available to the
Grand Monarque’s secret police. The tyrannical spirit was very willing,
but, fortunately for the French, the technological flesh was weak. In an
era of telephones, finger-printing, tanks and machine guns, the task of
a totalitarian government is easier than it was.

Totalitarian politicians demand obedience and conformity in every sphere
of life, including, of course, the religious. Here, their aim is to use
religion as an instrument of social consolidation, an increaser of the
country’s military efficiency. For this reason, the only kind of
religion they favour is strictly anthropocentric, exclusive and
nationalistic. Theocentric religion, involving the worship of God for
his own sake, is inadmissible in a totalitarian state. All the
contemporary dictators, Russian, Turkish, Italian and German, have
either discouraged or actively persecuted any religious organization
whose members advocated the worship of God, rather than the worship of
the deified state or the local political boss. Louis XIV was what is
called ‘a good Catholic’; but his attitude towards religion was
characteristically totalitarian. He wanted religious unity, therefore he
revoked the Edict of Nantes and persecuted the Huguenots.

He wanted an exclusive, nationalistic religion; therefore he quarrelled
with the Pope and insisted on his own spiritual supremacy in France. He
wanted state-worship and king worship; therefore he sternly discouraged
those who taught theocentric religion, who advocated the worship of God
alone and for his sake. The decline of mysticism at the end of the
seventeenth century was due in part, as has been pointed out in an
earlier chapter, to the fatal over-orthodoxy of Berulie and his school,
but partly also to a deliberate persecution of mystics at the hands of
ecclesiastics, who could say, with Bossuet, that they worshipped God
under the forms of the King, Jesus Christ and the Church. The attack on
quietism was only partly the thing it professed to be a punitive
expedition against certain rather silly heretical views and certain
rather undesirable practices. It was also and more significantly a
veiled assault upon mysticism itself. The controversial writings of
Nicole, who worked in close collaboration with Bossuet, make it quite
clear that the real enemy was spiritual religion as such. Unfortunately
for Nicole, the Church had given its approval to the doctrines and
practices of earlier mystics, and it was therefore necessary to proceed
with caution; but this caution was not incompatible with a good deal of
anti-mystical violence. Consciously, or unconsciously, Nicole and the
other enemies of contemplation and theocentric religion were playing the
game of totalitarianism.

The efficiency of a pre-industrial totalitarian state, such as that
which Richelieu planned and Louis XIV actually realized, can never be so
high as that of an industrial state, possessed of modern weapons,
communications and organizing methods. Conversely, it does not need to
be so high. A national industrial system is something so complicated
that, if it is to function properly and compete with other national
systems, it must be controlled in all its details by a centralized state
authority. Even if the intentions of the various centralized state
authorities were pacific, which they are not, industrialism would tend
of its very nature to transform them into totalitarian governments. When
the need for military efficiency is added to the need for industrial
efficiency, totalitarianism becomes inevitable. Technological progress,
nationalism and war seem to guarantee that the immediate future of the
world shall belong to various forms of totalitarianism. But a world made
safe for totalitarianism is a world, in all probability, made very
unsafe for mysticism and theocentric religion. And a world made unsafe
for mysticism and theocentric religion is a world where the only proved
method of transforming personality will be less and less practised, and
where fewer and fewer people will possess any direct, experimental
knowledge of reality to set up against the false doctrine of
totalitarian anthropocentrism and the pernicious ideas and practices of
nationalistic pseudo-mysticism. In such a world there seems little
prospect that any political reform, however well-intentioned, will
produce the results expected of it.

The quality of moral behaviour varies in inverse ratio to the number of
human beings involved. Individuals and small groups do not always and
automatically behave well. But at least they can be moral and rational
to a degree unattainable by large groups. For, as numbers increase,
personal relations between members of the group, and between its members
and those of other groups, become more difficult, and finally, for the
vast majority of the individuals concerned, impossible. Imagination has
to take the place of direct acquaintance, behaviour motivated by a
reasoned and impersonal benevolence, the place of behaviour motivated by
personal affection and a spontaneous and unreflecting compassion. But in
most men and women, reason, sympathetic imagination and the impersonal
view of things are very slightly developed. That is why, among other
reasons, the ethical standards prevailing within large groups, between
large groups, and between the rulers and the ruled in a large group, are
generally lower than those prevailing within and among small groups. The
art of what may be called ‘goodness politics,’ as opposed to power
politics, is the art of organizing on a large scale without sacrificing
the ethical values which emerge only among individuals and small groups.
More specifically, it is the art of combining decentralization of
government and industry, local and functional autonomy and smallness of
administrative units with enough over-all efficiency to guarantee the
smooth running of the federated whole. Goodness politics have never been
attempted in any large society, and it may be doubted whether such an
attempt, if made, could achieve more than a partial success, so long as
the majority of individuals concerned remain unable or unwilling to
transform their personalities by the only method known to be effective.
But though the attempt to substitute goodness politics for power
politics may never be completely successful, it still remains true that
the methods of goodness politics combined with individual training in
theocentric theory and contemplative practice alone provide the means
whereby human societies can become a little less unsatisfactory than
they have been up to the present. So long as they are not adopted, we
must expect to see an indefinite continuance of the dismally familiar
alternations between extreme evil and a very imperfect, self-stultifying
good, alternations which constitute the history of all civilized
societies. In a world inhabited by what the theologians call
unregenerate, or natural men, church and state can probably never become
appreciably better than the best of the states and churches of which the
past has left us the record. Society can never be greatly improved,
until such time as most of its members choose to become theocentric
saints. Meanwhile, the few theocentric saints who exist at any given
moment are able in some slight measure to qualify and mitigate the
poisons which society generates within itself by its political and
economic activities.

In the gospel phrase, theocentric saints are the salt which preserves
the social world from breaking down into irremediable decay.

This antiseptic and antidotal function of the theocentrics is performed
in a variety of ways. First of all, the mere fact that he exists is
profoundly salutary and important. The potentiality of knowledge of, and
union with, God is present in all men and women. In most of them,
however, it is covered, as Eckhart puts it, ‘by thirty or forty skins or
hides, like an ox’s or a bear’s, so thick and hard.’ But beneath all
this leather, and in spite of its toughness, the divine more-than-self,
which is the quick and principle of our being, remains alive, and can
and does respond to the shining manifestation of the same principle in
the theocentric saint. The ‘old man dressed all in leather’ meets the
new man, who has succeeded in stripping off the carapace of his thirty
or forty ox-hides, and walks through the world, a naked soul, no longer
opaque to the radiance immanent within him. From this meeting, the old
man is likely to come away profoundly impressed by the strangeness of
what he has seen, and with the nostalgic sense that the world would be a
better place if there were less leather in it. Again and again in the
course of history, the meeting with a naked and translucent spirit, even
the reading about such spirits, has sufficed to restrain the leather men
who rule over their fellows from using their power to excess. It is
respect for theocentric saints that prompts the curious hypocrisy which
accompanies and seeks to veil the brutal facts of political action. The
preambles of treaties are always drawn up in the choicest Pecksniffian
style, and the more sinister the designs of a politician, the more
high-flown, as a rule, becomes the nobility of his language. Cant is
always rather nauseating; but before we condemn political hypocrisy, let
us remember that it is the tribute paid by men of leather to men of God,
and that the acting of the part of someone better than oneself may
actually commit one to a course of behaviour perceptibly less evil than
what would be normal and natural in an avowed cynic.

The theocentric saint is impressive, not only for what he is, but also
for what he does and says. His actions and all his dealings with the
world are marked by disinterestedness and serenity, invariable
truthfulness and a total absence of fear. These qualities are the fruits
of the doctrine he preaches, and their manifestation in his life
enormously reinforces that doctrine and gives him a certain strange kind
of uncoercive but none the less compelling authority over his
fellow-men. The essence of this authority is that it is purely spiritual
and moral, and is associated with none of the ordinary social sanctions
of power, position or wealth. It was here, of course, that Father Joseph
made his gravest and most fatal mistake. Even if his mysticism had
proved to be compatible with his power politics, which it did not, he
would still have been wrong to accept the position of Richelieu’s
collaborator; for by accepting it he automatically deprived himself of
the power to exercise a truly spiritual authority, he cut himself off
from the very possibility of being the apostle of mysticism.

True, he could still be of use to his Calvarian nuns, as a teacher of
contemplation; but this was because he entered their convent, not as the
foreign minister of France, but as a simple director. Outside the
convent, he was always the Grey Eminence. People could not speak to him
without remembering that he was a man from whom there was much to hope
or fear; between themselves and this friar turned politician, there
could no longer be the direct contact of soul with naked soul. For them,
his authority was temporal, not spiritual. Moreover, they remembered
that this was the man who had organized the secret service, who gave
instructions to spies, who had outwitted the Emperor at Ratisbon, who
had worked his hardest to prolong the war; and remembering these things,
they could be excused for having their doubts about Father Joseph’s
brand of religion. The tree is known by its fruits, and if these were
the fruits of mental prayer and the unitive life; why, then, they saw no
reason why they shouldn’t stick to wine and women, tempered by church on
Sundays, confession once a quarter and a communion at Christmas and
Easter.

It is a fatal thing, say the Indians, for the members of one caste to
usurp the functions that properly belong to another. Thus when the
merchants trespass upon the ground of the kshatriyas and undertake the
business of ruling, society is afflicted by all the evils of capitalism;
and when the kshatriyas do what only the theocentric brahmin has a right
to do, when they presume to lay down the law on spiritual matters, there
is totalitarianism, with its idolatrous religions, its deifications of
the nation, the party, the local political boss. Effects no less
disastrous occur when the brahmins go into politics or business; for
then they lose their spiritual insight and authority, and the society
which it was their business to enlighten remains wholly dark, deprived
of all communication with divine reality, and consequently an easy
victim to preachers of false doctrines. Father Joseph is an eminent
example of this last confusion of the castes. Abandoning seership for
rulership, he gradually, despite his most strenuous efforts to retain
it, lost the mystical vision which had given him his spiritual
authority-but not, unfortunately, before he had covered with that
authority many acts and policies of the most questionable nature.
(Richelieu was a good psychologist, and it will be remembered that
‘whenever he wanted to perform some piece of knavery, he always made use
of men of piety.’) In a very little while, the last vestiges of Father
Joseph’s spiritual authority disappeared, and he came, as we have seen,
to be regarded with general horror, as a man capable of every crime and
treachery.

The politically minded Jesuits, who practised the same disastrous
confusion of castes, came to have a reputation as bad as Father
Joseph’s. The public was wrong in thinking of these generally virtuous
and well-intentioned men as fairy-tale monsters; but in condemning the
fundamental principle of their work in the world, it was profoundly
right. The business of a seer is to see; and if he involves himself in
the kind of God-eclipsing activities which make seeing impossible, he
betrays the trust which his fellows have tacitly placed in him. Mystics
and theocentrics are not always loved or invariably listened to; far
from it. Prejudice and the dislike of what is unusual may blind their
contemporaries to the virtues of these men and women of the margin, may
cause them to be hated as enemies of society. But should they leave
their margin, should they take to competing for place and power within
the main body of society, they are certain to be generally hated and
despised as traitors to their seership.

To be a seer is not the same thing as to be a mere spectator. Once the
contemplative has fitted himself to become, in Lallemant’s phrase, ‘a
man of much orison,’ he can undertake work in the world with no risk of
being thereby distracted from his vision of reality, and with fair hope
of achieving an appreciable amount of good. As a matter of historical
fact, many of the great theocentrics have been men and women of enormous
and beneficent activity. The work of the theocentrics is always
marginal, is always started on the smallest scale and, when it expands,
the resulting organization is always subdivided into units sufficiently
small to be capable of a shared spiritual experience and of moral and
rational conduct.

The first aim of the theocentrics is to make it possible for any one who
desires it to share their own experience of ultimate reality. The groups
they create are organized primarily for the worship of God for God’s
sake. They exist in order to disseminate various methods (not all of
equal value) for transforming the ‘natural man,’ and for learning to
know the more than personal reality immanent within the leathery casing
of selfhood. At this point, many theocentrics are content to stop. They
have their experience of reality and they proceed to impart the secret
to a few immediate disciples, or commit it to writing in a book that
will be read by a wider circle removed from them by great stretches of
space and time. Or else, more systematically, they establish small
organized groups, a self-perpetuating order of contemplatives living
under a rule. In so far as they may be expected to maintain or possibly
increase the number of seers and theocentrics in a given community,
these proceedings have a considerable social importance. Many
theocentrics, however, are not content with this, but go on to employ
their organizations to make a direct attack upon the thorniest social
problems. Such attacks are always launched from the margin, not the
centre, always (at any rate in their earlier phases) with the sanction
of a purely spiritual authority, not with the coercive power of the
state. Sometimes the attack is directed against economic evils, as when
the Benedictines addressed themselves to the revival of agriculture and
the draining of swamps. Sometimes the evils are those of ignorance and
the attack is through various kinds of education. Here again the
Benedictines were pioneers. (It is worth remarking that the Benedictine
order owed its existence to the apparent folly of a young man who,
instead of doing the proper, sensible thing, which was to go through the
Roman schools and become an administrator under the Gothic emperors,
went away and, for three years, lived alone in a hole in the mountains.
When he had become ‘a man of much orison,’ he emerged, founded
monasteries and composed a rule to fit the needs of a self-perpetuating
order of hard-working contemplatives. In the succeeding centuries, the
order civilized north-western Europe, introduced or re-established the
best agricultural practice of the time, provided the only educational
facilities then available, and preserved and disseminated the treasures
of ancient literature. For generations Benedictinism was the principal
antidote to barbarism. Europe owes an incalculable debt to the young man
who, because he was more interested in knowing God than in getting on,
or even ‘doing good,’ in the world, left Rome for that burrow in the
hillside above Subiaco.)

Work in the educational field has been undertaken by many theocentric
organizations other than the Benedictine order all too often, unhappily,
under the restrictive influence of the political, state-supported and
state-supporting church. More recently the state has everywhere assumed
the role of universal educator -a position that exposes government to
peculiar temptations, to which sooner or later they all succumb, as we
see at the present time, when the school system is used in almost every
country as an instrument of regimentation, militarization and
nationalistic propaganda. In any state that pursued goodness politics
rather than power politics, education would remain a public charge, paid
for out of the truces, but would be returned, subject to the fulfilment
of certain conditions, to private hands. Under such an arrangement, most
schools would probably be little or no better than they are at present;
but at least their badness would be variegated, while educators of
exceptional originality or possessed of the gift of seership would be
given opportunities for teaching at present denied them.

Philanthropy is a field in which many men and women of the margin have
laboured to the great advantage of their fellows. We may mention the
truly astounding work accomplished by Father Joseph’s contemporary, St.
Vincent de Paul, a great theocentric, and a great benefactor to the
people of seventeenth-century France. Small and insignificant in its
beginnings, and carried on, as it expanded, under spiritual authority
alone and upon the margin of society, Vincent’s work among the poor did
something to mitigate the sufferings imposed by the war and by the
ruinous fiscal policy which the war made necessary. Having at their
disposal all the powers and resources of the state, Richelieu and Father
Joseph were able, of course, to do much more harm than St. Vincent and
his little band of theocentrics could do good. The antidote was
sufficient to offset only a part of the poison.

It was the same with another great seventeenth-century figure, George
Fox. Born at the very moment when Richelieu was made president of the
council and Father Joseph finally committed himself to the political
life, Fox began his ministry the year before the Peace of Westphalia was
signed. In the course of the next twenty years the Society of Friends
gradually crystallized into its definitive form. Fanatically
marginal-for when invited, he refused even to dine at Cromwell’s table,
for fear of being compromised -Fox was never corrupted by success, but
remained to the end the apostle of the inner light. The society he
founded has had its ups and downs, its long seasons of spiritual torpor
and stagnation, as well as its times of spiritual life; but always the
Quakers have clung to Fox’s intransigent theocentrism, and along with
it, to his conviction that, if it is to remain at all pure and unmixed,
good must be worked for upon the margin of society, by individuals and
by organizations small enough to be capable of moral, rational and
spiritual life. That is why, in the two hundred and seventy-five years
of its existence, the Society of Friends has been able to accomplish a
sum of useful and beneficent work entirely out of proportion to its
numbers. Here again the antidote has always been insufficient to offset
more than a part of the poison injected into the body politic by the
statesmen, financiers, industrialists, ecclesiastics and all the
undistinguished millions who fill the lower ranks of the social
hierarchy. But though not enough to counteract more than some of the
effects of ‘the poison, the leaven of theocentrism is the thing which,
hitherto, has saved the civilized world from total self-destruction.
Father Joseph’s hope of leading a whole national community along a
political short-cut into the kingdom of heaven on earth is illusory, so
long as the human instruments and material of political action remain
untransformed. His place was with the antidote-makers, not with those
who brew the poisons.


CHAPTER XI

The Final Scene

In May 1638, Father Joseph had a stroke, and for a time he lay partly
paralysed and unable to speak. Rest, however, soon restored him to
health -the somewhat precarious health of an ageing man, incessantly
under strain, burdened with responsibilities and enormously overworked.
During the summer, he returned to his ministerial duties; but, knowing
that the end could not be very far away, he arranged to delegate a good
deal of his work to others, so that he might have more time to ‘keep
good company.’ During these last months of his life he was much with his
spiritual daughters, the Calvarians, at their convent in the Marais.
Here he worked incessantly, preaching, giving lectures on religious and
philosophical subjects, instructing in the art of mental prayer,
offering spiritual direction to those who needed it. At this period he
was often heard to say that ‘he thought more of contributing to the
perfection of the humblest Calvarian nun than of all the kingdoms of the
world.’ One can only wish that he had always been of this opinion. In
this last year of Father Joseph’s life things had not gone too well for
the French armies. Condé had failed ignominiously in northern Spain. In
Italy, the forces of France and Savoy had had to retreat before the
Spaniards. An offensive in the Low Countries had been halted by the
imperialists. The only good news came from Alsace. Here, in a starving
and half-depopulated country, Bernard of Saxe-Weimar had defeated
successively the armies of De Weert, Goetz and Charles of Lorraine, and
was now, in the autumn of 1638, besieging Breisach, the fortress which
dominated the Spanish lines of communication between Italy and the
Netherlands. Moving between the convent in the Marais and Rueil or the
Palais Cardinal, Father Joseph followed the fluctuations of the distant
campaign with an interest that, for all his words about the kingdom of
the earth, was at least as eager and anxious as his concern for the
perfection of his nuns. In spite of his stroke and the imminence of
death, he was still the foreign minister of France, the designated
successor of Richelieu, and co-author with the Cardinal of the policy
for which Bernard and his savage adventurers were fighting at Breisach.

On Saturday, December 8th, Father Joseph left the cell that was his
office and moved into the cell reserved for him, as spiritual director
of the Calvarians, in the Marais. Over the week-end he intended to
deliver three long lectures on the proper use of that modified version
of Benet Fitch’s spiritual exercises, in which the nuns were being
trained. The Saturday and Sunday lectures were given without mishap or
undue fatigue. But in the middle of the third lecture, which began at
six o’clock on the morning of Monday, December 13th, he was interrupted
by a sudden paroxysm of retching and vomiting. He retired for a little,
but would not allow the nuns to be dismissed, and when the attack was
over, went on with his discourse, which lasted in all for two hours and
a half. His sense of physical weakness was extreme, and he kept
imagining that his voice would not carry to the back of the hall. When
this happened, he would interrupt himself to ask if all could hear him.
The nuns replied that they could, and replied quite truthfully; for
Father Joseph was making such prodigious effort of will to overcome his
weakness that his voice was actually louder than usual.

When the lecture was over, Father Joseph retired to his quarters and,
spent the rest of the day in prayer, which he interrupted only to
receive the priest who acted as confessor to the convent. Feeling his
end to be near, he made a general confession.

In the evening he emerged from his cell and had an interview with the
Abbess and the senior nuns, who acted as her assistants. The
conversation turned on what had once been Father Joseph’s favourite
subject -crusades. One of the nuns remarked that it was certain that the
Holy Places would be recovered very soon; for Father Joseph had had
revelations to that effect. To this the friar answered that she was
mistaken. It had never been revealed to him that the Holy Places would
soon be recovered. All he had received in his visions and raptures was a
divine command ‘to do all I could to rescue Jesus from captivity.’ The
next morning Father Joseph said mass at seven in the convent chapel, and
afterwards had his final interview with the Abbess and her assistants.
He spoke to them of their duties and of that spiritual perfection, that
condition of continual union with God, to the attainment of which they
had dedicated their lives. When he finally took his leave, the words of
farewell were pronounced on either side with a special solemnity, a more
than ordinary emotion.

From the Marais Father Joseph travelled in a horse litter to Rueil,
where he had an appointment with the Cardinal. He talked with Richelieu
that night, and again on the following day. On Thursday, December 16th,
he rose, as usual, before dawn, and after making his devotions,
addressed himself to the day’s business. A long letter had just come in
from the Capuchin missionaries in Abyssinia. Father Joseph listened to
the reading of it with the keenest interest and at once dictated a
reply. At ten he left his room, said mass and, after giving a few
interviews, sat down to dinner. He ate with appetite and seemed in
better health than he had been for some time. When dinner was over, he
was visited by the papal nuncio, Cardinal Bichi, with whom he had a long
conversation on matters of ecclesiastical policy perhaps, too, on the
subject of his red hat, which had now been so definitely promised that
the announcement of his promotion was expected any day. When the
interview was over, Father Joseph respectfully accompanied the nuncio as
far as the main entrance of the palace. On the way back he had to cross
the great hall, which was being got ready for the performance of a play.
Here he found Richelieu, who had come out of his apartment to see how
the work was going forward. The Cardinal was in good spirits and
banteringly invited his old friend to come that evening and see the
show, assuring him that he could do so with a clear conscience; for the
play was written on a most serious theme, and was highly edifying. In
the same vein, Father Joseph replied that unfortunately he had a prior
engagement to ‘do some play-acting with his breviary’; and taking leave
of the Cardinal, he returned to his room. Here he said his office,
passed some time in prayer, then sat down to supper.

While he was eating, his secretary, Father Angelus of Mortagne, read
aloud to him from a chronicle of the crusades. These strange tales of
heroism and brutality, of devotion and greed, of single-mindedness and
the most cynical double-dealing, were the last messages which came
through to Father Joseph from the world of politics. As he rose from the
table, he was suddenly struck down by another attack of apoplexy.
Speechless and almost completely paralysed, he was laid on his bed.
Messengers ran to summon a priest and the Cardinal’s physicians.

On the stage in the great hall, the actors were mouthing their
alexandrines into the darkness, where sat the Cardinal and his
courtiers. Suddenly there was a little stir in the audience. The captain
of the guard was bringing a friar, who had something urgently important
to say to His Eminence. Richelieu frowned angrily at the interruption,
began a sharp phrase of rebuke; then, hearing what the friar was
whispering, uttered what was almost a cry of pain and sprang to his
feet. The actors were silenced in mid-harangue. Staring open-mouthed
into the auditorium, now suddenly alive with lights, they saw the
Cardinal hurrying out between two lines of obsequiously bowing and
curtseying ladies and gentlemen.

Greatly distressed, Richelieu went up to the friar’s room and, sitting
down beside the narrow bed, took the sick man’s hand and felt it
lifeless and unresponding in his own. ‘Mon appui,’ he was thinking, ‘ou
est mon appui?’ The doctors came and bled their patient. Then it was the
turn of the priest. All knelt ; extreme unction was administered.

Father Joseph lived throughout the night, and next morning seemed
slightly better. The news of his second stroke had been carried to
Paris, where a prudent secretary immediately drew up, for the King’s
signature, a letter to the Pope, in which His Holiness was informed of
the sad event and begged not to proceed with the announcement of Father
Joseph’s promotion. His Most Christian Majesty had the right to ask for
only a limited number of promotions to the Sacred College; for this
reason, a Hat inadvertently presented to a dying man would be a total
loss to the French monarchy.

Meanwhile, from the Capuchin convent of the rue Saint-Honoré, three of
the friar’s colleagues had posted down to Reuil -Pascal of Abbeville,
the Warden of the convent, the Provincial of Paris, and the General of
the Capuchin order, an Italian, who happened at the moment to be in
France. They were shown into the friar’s room, and the General asked in
Italian: ‘Do you know me?’ Father Joseph was able to press his hand to
signify that he did. The General then went on to explain that, if the
sick man were to be given absolution and a plenary indulgence according
to the rules of the order, he must make some sign of repentance. With an
immense effort of will, Father Joseph lifted his right hand and feebly
struck it several times against his breast. Then, pausing a long time to
rest, he made the sign of the Cross. His eyes filled with tears.
Absolution was given, and the General and Provincial retired, leaving
Father Pascal, who remained with the sick man to the last. Later in the
day an even more eminent and wholly unexpected visitor presented
himself, no less a person than Gaston of Orleans. For the last fifteen
years Gaston had been leading and betraying conspiracies against the
royal authority, and on several of these occasions Father Joseph had
played the part of an intermediary between the King and his despicable
young brother. In the course of these encounters, Gaston had conceived a
great liking and respect for the friar. This death-bed visit was
motivated by a genuine affection.

Towards evening came the priest who had received Father Joseph’s general
confession at the Marais, four days before. Taking his place at the
bedside, he told his penitent that the time had now come for him to put
aside all thought of creatures and to set his mind solely upon God-the
God to whom he would so soon be required to render an account of all his
acts. As he spoke of repentance, the friar’s eyes filled once again with
tears, and suddenly, to the amazement of the physicians, who thought for
a moment that this might be a sign of recovery, he found his voice.
‘Render an account,’ he whispered, echoing the confessor’s final phrase.
‘Yes,’ the priest insisted, ‘you will have to render an account; for God
is your judge, and will weigh you in the balance.’ Still weeping, Father
Joseph continued to repeat the same three words. ‘Render an account,’ he
said again and again, ‘render an account.’

Hopeful now of saving their patient, the doctors redoubled their
efforts. Opening a vein, they let a great quantity of blood; but the
effect was contrary to what they had expected. The ability to move his
limbs, which in some slight measure he had recovered during the day,
began, as night advanced, to leave him.

Father Angelus, whom as a youth Father Joseph had converted and who, for
almost twenty years, had been his constant companion, knelt beside the
bed and, with the patience of one who teaches a child, helped the dying
man to make a few last little gestures of contrition, little signs of
love for God and confidence in the divine mercy. A crucifix was placed
in Father Joseph’s hands, and he was able once or twice to bring it to
his lips. In spite of the creeping advance of paralysis, the power of
speech still remained -just enough power to permit of the continued
repetition of the same single phrase: ‘Render an account, render an
account.’

Towards midnight the hands lost their ability to hold the crucifix.
Seeing that the end was very near, Father Angelus asked his old friend
to give him his blessing. For a time there was no movement in the
stiffening body; then, slowly, one finger of the right hand was lifted a
little way from the sheet, and after a few seconds dropped back, never
to move again. The death agony lasted through the night, and it was not
till the early morning of Saturday, December 18th, that the heart
finally stopped beating. In the interval between the friar’s death and
his interment, Charles de Condren, the man who had succeeded Berulle as
General of the Oratory and one of the most beautifully saintly figures
of his age, was asked if he would preach the funeral sermon. To the
highly placed personage who brought the invitation Condren answered that
he could not, with a good conscience, praise a man who had been the
instrument of the Cardinal’s passions, and who was hated by the whole of
France. Father Joseph’s body was buried in the church of the Capuchins,
in a grave near the steps of the altar next to that of the great
gentleman-friar who had received him into the order, Ange de Joyeuse. A
few days after the funeral, all Paris was chuckling over the exploit of
an anonymous practical joker. On the slab which covered what remained of
the man who had once been called the perfect Capuchin, an unknown hand
had chalked this distich :

“Passant, n’est-ce pas chose etrange
Qu’un demon soit pres d’un ange” ²⁴

It is always easier to make an epigram about a man than to understand
him.


APPENDIX

The posthumous history of Father Joseph is so odd and improbable that it
deserves to be made the subject of a full-length study. Within ten years
of his death a long and detailed biography of the Grey Eminence was
written by a certain Lepre-Balin, who was a friend of Father Angelus of
Mortagne and had access to all the relevant documents in the possession
of the Capuchins, as well as to the entire collection of Father Joseph’s
state papers.

These last he put together and edited under the title of Supplement to
the History of France. For some unexplained reason, neither the
biography nor the Supplement was ever published. The manuscript of the
first remained in the archives of the Calvarian nuns, whence it passed
into the keeping of the Capuchins of Paris. That of the second
disappeared for two hundred and fifty years and was discovered, about
1890, by Gustave Fagniez in the library of the British Museum. How it
originally found its way to England is not clear; all that is known for
certain is that early in the nineteenth century it belonged to the Earl
of Bridgewater, and that from his collection it passed to that of Tom
Moore.

Meanwhile the only biographies of Father Joseph to be published were the
three put out in the first years of the eighteenth century by a singular
personage called the Abbe Richard. An unbeneficed priest in sore straits
for money, Richard had his eye on a certain canonry of Notre-Dame of
Paris, which was in the gift of a M. du Tremblay, who was the grandson
of Father Joseph’s younger brother, Charles. To ingratiate himself with
the nephew, Richard conceived the plan of writing a flattering biography
of the great-uncle. Obtaining access to the manuscript of Lepre-Balin’s
Life, he quickly turned out a little book which, so far as it goes, is
tolerably accurate. It was duly published, and the Abbe waited for his
reward. It did not come. Furious, Richard decided to take his revenge.
In the text of his first eulogistic biography he interpolated a number
of new paragraphs, in which Father Joseph was accused of every crime
from murder to simony.

The new version was published anonymously under the alluring title of Le
Veritable Père Joseph. Needless to say, this ‘true’ Father Joseph sold a
great deal better than Father Joseph tout court. But the sums which
could be picked up from the booksellers were paltry in comparison with
the income from that delicious canonry. The Abbe had an idea of genius.
Rushing to his desk he penned an impassioned refutation of his own
calumnies. This refutation was duly printed, and excited a certain
interest in the public, but left the Du Tremblay family unmoved. The
Reverend Richard died in penury.

For more than a century and a half historians were content to take
Richard’s flattery, calumny and refutation, add them together and divide
by three. The result of this operation was supposed to be a true picture
of the Grey Eminence. In the middle of the nineteenth century, a learned
archivist, called M. Pelletier, became interested in Father Joseph and
spent years collecting the materials for a new and adequate biography.
This huge preliminary labour was practically completed when Napoleon III
went to war with Prussia. During the Commune of 1871, the building in
which M. Pelletier had stored the vast accumulations of his notes was
burnt to the ground. It began to look as though some higher power were
concerned to keep the world in ignorance of Father Joseph. This
impression, it must be confessed, was not dispelled even in 1894, when
Gustave Fagniez published his huge work, Le Père Joseph et Richelieu.
For though Fagniez had made extensive researches, though he had been the
happy discoverer of Lepre-Balin’s Supplement, his book cannot be said to
do much to illuminate its subject. Not light, but darkness visible, is
what it sheds on the scene. Le Père Joseph et Richelieu consists of
twelve hundred pages of miscellaneous historical documents, .very badly
arranged and published without an index. The book is not a biography
(for Fagniez’s concern was with political history, and he was hardly
even aware of Father Joseph as a living man); it is a collection of raw
materials for a biography and as such it must, unfortunately, be read by
anyone who is interested in the Grey Eminence.

At the time when Fagniez published his book, a learned young
ecclesiastic, the Abbe (afterwards Canon) Dedouvres, had just begun what
was to be a lifetime of research on Father Joseph. Dedouvres, who died
about 1929, was professor of Latin at a Catholic university in the west
of France, a post which he combined with the duties of almoner to the
Congregation of Our Lady of Calvary, in whose archives are preserved its
founder’s unpublished papers-three or four million words of diversified
documentation, at which, from 1638 to the present day, no scholar, with
the exception of Dedouvres, has ever so much as glanced.

The relations between the two historians of Father Joseph were anything
but cordial. Fagniez felt that he had a right to an absolute monopoly of
Grey Eminences, a corner in political Capuchins. So acute was his sense
of proprietorship that for years he absolutely refused to divulge the
whereabouts of Lepre-Balin’s precious Supplement, which he had had the
luck to discover in the British Museum. The cream of Lepre-Balin went
into his Le Père Joseph et Richelieu; but he was determined that no
other historian should get a drop even of the milk. To all requests for
information he returned a blank refusal. What, then, was his rage when
young Dedouvres rediscovered the Supplement on his own account and
published the fact to the whole learned world! A few years later the
Abbe added insult to injury. Fagniez had declared that the Turciad was
irretrievably lost. Dedouvres, by a process of pure inductive
ratiocination, came to the conclusion that the poem must be extant and
in the Barberini library at Rome. A postcard to the librarian brought
back the answer that there, in effect, it was. The rules of the game
demanded that Fagniez should congratulate his rival on this triumph; but
his real feelings found vent in the ferocious review he wrote of the
Abbe’s next brochure.

Up to this time the story is like something out of Balzac, Le Balzac of
Le Cure de Tours. But from now on it becomes pure Anatole France. For
about forty years the Abbe worked away at Father Joseph, and in the
course of those years he published fully twenty articles and pamphlets
about his hero. But the articles appeared in parish magazines and
provincial Catholic quarterlies; the pamphlets were issued in editions
of two or three hundred by country printers in obscure subprefectures.
At the time of their author’s death only four of these twenty items had
found their way even into the Bibliotheque Nationale. Lord Acton himself
hardly provides a finer example of learning for learning’s sake and not
for the public’s. In the later years of his life Canon Dedouvres decided
to work up his notes and articles into a continuous biography of Father
Joseph. I need hardly add that death interrupted him long before his
task was finished. Here, if one were writing a novel, one would conclude
with a delightful little chapter describing the gradual annihilation of
the old scholar’s life-work. Father Joseph’s childhood gnawed up by mice
to line their nests, his spiritual directions to the Calvarians serving
as toilet paper, the Diet of Ratisbon used by the cat’s-meat man to wrap
his wares. And so on. But history is rarely so definitive as fiction. In
1932 the two volumes which Dedouvres had actually completed were
published. In them the biography of Father Joseph was brought down, in
great detail, to the siege of La Rochelle. But the powers which for so
long had been so careful to preserve a darkness round the memory of the
Capuchin, saw to it that even this partial lifting of the veil should
enlighten only the smallest possible number of readers. Like the
pamphlets and articles, the unfinished book was published in the
provinces and in a very small edition. Even among professional
historians few have read or even heard of it. And yet the book deserves
to be known; for though it is by no means what one would call a great
biography, it succeeds in giving the reader some impression of the
enigmatic figure about whom it is written. Which is more than can be
said of Fagniez’s Le Père Joseph et Richelieu.

The present volume is based, in the main, upon the materials contained
in the two thousand pages of Fagniez and Dedouvres. Many things have
been omitted as intrinsically without much interest and, above all, as
irrelevant to the dominant theme of this book, which is the history of a
man who tried to reconcile politics with spiritual religion. Thus, I
have made no mention of Father Joseph’s dealings with the extreme
Gallicans of his day; nor of his collision with Saint-Cyran, the
fascinating, pathetic and absurd pseudo-saint of Port-Royal; nor of his
campaigns against those precursors of the Quietists, the Illumines. Nor
has it seemed to me necessary to reproduce the details, still extant, of
Father Joseph’s negotiations or the minutes of his despatches. In
themselves, these accounts of diplomatic haggling and chicanery are
about as interesting as would be the shorthand record of the discussion
between two peasants over the merits and price of a broken-winded horse.
In such dismal transactions there is nothing historically significant
except their outcome and its generally disastrous consequences. For the
religious history of Father Joseph’s time I have relied on the first
five volumes of Bremond’s Histoire du Sentiment Religieux en France.

This book, which is at once an historical narrative, a critical
commentary and an anthology culled from a practically inaccessible
literature, ranks as one of the most valuable works of scholarship
produced in the present century. To anyone who is interested in the
psychology of human beings as they normally are and as they might be if
they chose, Bremond’s volumes constitute an indispensable source book.
They are no less indispensable to those who, more modestly, take an
interest in French seventeenth century history. Only a few of the
significant religious writings of our period have been reprinted and, of
most of them, the early editions are hard to find even in important
libraries. I count myself very fortunate in having been able to lay my
hands on a copy of the seventeenth-century Italian translation of Benet
Fitch’s Rule of Perfection. Extremely interesting in itself, this book
is also of great historical significance; for from it, as I have tried
to show, Berulle and his followers derived the principles of their
personalistic pseudo-mysticism, and Father Joseph learned that technique
of ‘active annihilation,’ by means of which he hoped to be able to
disinfect his politics.

No attempt has been made in this book to depict in any detail the
political and social background to Father Joseph’s career. Historical
events and conditions have been described as briefly as possible and
only in so far as they were strictly relevant to the main theme. In
conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude for much valuable
assistance rendered by the Librarian and staff of the library of the
University of California at Los Angeles.


TRANSLATIONS

1. When, at day’s hottest hour,
the burning Dog Star makes a furnace of the air,
my roving feet affront the swarthy regions of the earth,
though I be streaming with sweat.

2. The aspiring crests of the snowy Alps and Pyrenees
have not sufficed to limit my long marches
that aim at the very heavens.
Dear Lord, if it is Thy hand which has penetrated me with the wound of
this piercing design,
I have the right to show Thee my tender hurt
and to unveil my breast.

3. He who cleaves to God, is one spirit with God.

4. In peace is his place established.

5. Thy will be done.

6. Love, and do what thou wilt.

7. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man.

8. Dost Thou wash my feet?

9. Not my will be done, but Thine.

10. In peace is his place established.

11. O nobility and clergy,
you elder sons of France,
since you so ill maintain the King’s honour,
since the Third Estate surpasses you in this point,
your juniors must now become your elders.

12. In a thousand turns he fashions the long windings of his voice,
so that the sky resounds with consummate singing.
Of this song that continues night and day it is hard to say whether it
dies,
or swoons, whether it sighs with torment, bliss or love.
And when, walking in the fields,
I lift up my heart in some hymn of praise,
this envious singer also tries to raise his voice to heaven.
But in mid-music, the violent sweetness of the angelic harmony
makes answer to the voices of my heart.
These little birds, that join their various accents in a single theme,
are like the choir of the saints united throughout the world.

13. God’s deeds by means of the French.

14. The deeds of the French are the deeds of God.

15. If, in order to succour thee,
I overturn the whole world, it is all too little for my wishes;
to quench the fires of my ardour,
I must drown me in a sea of blood.

16. I know not whither my design,
whose end I cannot see,
is leading me so swiftly;
but like a bright star blazing in the sky,
it guides me through the night.

17. For cognate things stick together,
France and Francis, names fatal to the Turks.

18. Skilful Hunyadi and Scanderbeg the Terrible.

19. To be a good man according to God is one thing;
to be a good man according to men is quite another.

20. Tilly! thee too my lyre shall sing,
and may the Shade of the cold sepulchre ne’er hide dune egregious name!

21. We must love God the avenger as much as we love God the merciful.

22. drag from the consecrated places the weeping virgins, whom they dare
to carry off to be violated.

23. But as a punishment for having burnt them, they themselves are
immolated in the flames.

24. Passer-by, is it not a strange thing that a demon should be next to
an angel?
