PUBLISHED BY

Chatto & Windus

LONDON

*

Oxford University Press TORONTO

Applications regarding translation rights in any

work by Aldous Huxley should be addressed

to Chatto & Windus, 40 William IV Street,

London, W.C. 2

FIRST PUBLISHED 1946

SECOND IMPRESSION 1947

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

IN COMPLETE CONFORMITY WITH

THE AUTHORIZED ECONOMY STANDARDS

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

Contents

Introduction • page i

Chapter i That Art Thou 7

ii The Nature of the Ground 29

in Personality, Sanctity, Divine Incarnation 45

iv God in the World 69

v Charity 95

vi Mortification, Non-Attachment, Right

Livelihood 113

vii Truth 145

vin Religion and Temperament 168

ix Self-Knowledge 185

x Grace and Free Will 190

xi Good and Evil 202

xn Time and Eternity 212

xin Salvation, Deliverance, Enlightenment 230

xiv Immortality and Survival 242

xv Silence 247

xvi Prayer 251

xvn Suffering 260

xvm Faith 268

Chapter xx Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum page 279

xxi Idolatry 287

xxn Emotionalism 292

xxni The Miraculous 298

xxiv Ritual, Symbol, Sacrament 301

xxv Spiritual Exercises 314

xxvi Perseverance and Regularity 334

xxvn Contemplation, Action and Social Utility 337

Bibliography 346

Index 353

Acknowledgments

For permission to use the following selections, grateful acknowledgment
and thanks are extended to the following authors and publishers:

George Allen & Unwin Ltd.: MONKEY and THE WAY AND ITS POWER, translated
by Arthur Waley; LETTERS, by Spinoza.

Burns, Oates & Washbourne Ltd.: THE CLOUD OF UNKNOWING, edited by
McCann; THE WORKS OF ST. JOHN OF THE CROSS, translated by Allison Piers.

Cambridge University Press: STUDIES IN ISLAMIC MYSTICISM, by R. A.
Nicholson.

/. M. Dent & Sons Ltd.: ADORNMENT OF THE SPIRITUAL

MARRIAGE, by Ruysbroeck, translated by Winschenk Dom.

P. J. and A. E. Dobell: CENTURIES OF MEDITATION, by Thomas Traherne.

Dwight Goddard Estate: A BUDDHIST BIBLE, by Dwight Goddard.

Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. Ltd.: MASNAVI, by Jalal-uddin Rumi,
translated by Whinfield.

Longmans, Green & Co. Ltd.: THE SPIRIT OF ST. FRANCIS DE SALES, by Jean
Pierre Camus, translated by Lear; CATHERINE OF SIENA, by Johannes
Jorgensen.

Macmillan & Co. Ltd.: THEOLOGIA GERMANICA, translated by Winkworth; THE
SPIRITUAL REFORMERS, by Rufus Jones; MYSTICISM EAST AND WEST, by Rudolph
Otto; ONE HUNDRED POEMS OF KABiR, by Rabindranath Tagore.

John Murray and Mr. Lionel Giles : MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC, from THE
WISDOM OF THE EAST series, translated by Herbert Giles.

Oxford University Press and Harvard University Press: THE TRANSFORMATION
OF NATURE IN ART, by Amanda K. Coomaraswamy.

Oxford University Press and The Pali Text Society: THE PATH OF PURITY,
by Buddhaghosha.

Oxford University Press: THE TIBETAN BOOK OF THE DEAD, translated by Dr.
Evans-Wentz.

Paramananda and the publishers of BHAGAVAD-GITA.

George Routledge & Sons Ltd.: STUDIES IN THE LANKAVATARA SUTRA, by
Suzuki.

Skeed & Ward Ltd.: THE MYSTICAL THEOLOGY OF ST. BERNARD, by Etienne
Gilson.

The Society far Promoting Christian Knowledge: DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE,
translated b^ C. E. Rolt.

John M. Watkins: WORKS OF MEISTER ECKHART, translated by Evans; THE
CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM, by Shankara, translated by Charles Johnston.

INTRODUCTION

PHILOSOPHIA PERENNIS—the phrase was coined JL by Leibniz; but the
thing—the metaphysic that recognizes a divine Reality substantial to the
world of things and lives and minds; the psychology that finds in the
soul something similar to, or even identical with, divine Reality; the
ethic that places man's final end in the knowledge of the immanent and
transcendent Ground of all being—the thing is immemorial and universal.
Rudiments of the Perennial Philosophy may be found among the
traditionary lore of primitive peoples in every region of the world, and
in its fully developed forms it has a place in every one of the higher
religions. A version of this Highest Common Factor in all preceding and
subsequent theologies was first committed to writing more than
twenty-five centuries ago, and since that time the inexhaustible theme
has been treated again and again, from the standpoint of every religious
tradition and in all the principal languages of Asia and Europe. In the
pages that follow I have brought together a number of selections from
these writings, chosen mainly for their significance—because they
effectively illustrated some particular point in the general system of
the Perennial Philosophy—but also for their intrinsic beauty and
memorableness. These selections are arranged under various heads and
embedded, so to speak, in a commentary of my own, designed to illustrate
and connect, to develop and, where necessary, to elucidate.

Knowledge is a function of being. When there is a change in the being of
the knower, there is a corresponding change in the nature and amount of
knowing. For example, the being of a child is transformed by growth and
education into that of a man; among the results of this transformation
is a revolutionary change in the way of knowing and the amount and
character of the things known. As the individual grows up, his knowledge
becomes more conceptual and systematic in form, and its

factual, utilitarian content is enormously increased. But these gains
are offset by a certain deterioration in the quality of immediate
apprehension, a blunting and a loss of intuitive power. Or consider the
change in his being which the scientist is able to induce mechanically
by means of his instruments. Equipped with a spectroscope and a
sixty-inch reflector an astronomer becomes, so far as eyesight is
concerned, a superhuman creature; and, as we should naturally expect,
the knowledge possessed by this superhuman creature is very different,
both in quantity and quality, from that which can be acquired by a
star-gazer with unmodified, merely human eyes.

Nor are changes in the knower's physiological or intellectual being the
only ones to affect his knowledge. What we know depends also on what, as
moral beings, we choose to make ourselves. * Practice,' in the words of
William James,' may change our theoretical horizon, and this in a
twofold way: it may lead into new worlds and secure new powers.
Knowledge we could never attain, remaining what we are, may be
attainable in consequence of higher powers and a higher life, which we
may morally achieve.' To put the matter more succinctly, * Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God.' And the same idea has been
expressed by the Sufi poet, Jalal-uddin Rumi, in terms of a scientific
metaphor: ' The astrolabe of the mysteries of God is love.'

This book, I repeat, is an anthology of the Perennial Philosophy; but,
though an anthology, it contains but few extracts from the writings of
professional men of letters and, though illustrating a philosophy,
hardly anything from the professional philosophers. The reason for this
is very simple. The Perennial Philosophy is primarily concerned with the
one, divine Reality substantial to the manifold world of things and
lives and minds. But the nature of this one Reality is such that it
cannot be directly and immediately apprehended except by those who have
chosen to fulfil certain conditions, making themselves loving, pure in
heart, and poor in spirit. Why should this be so ? We do not know. It is
just one of those facts which we have to accept, whether we like them or
not and

however implausible and unlikely they may seem. Nothing in our everyday
experience gives us any reason for supposing that water is made up of
hydrogen and oxygen; and yet when we subject water to certain rather
drastic treatments, the nature of its constituent elements becomes
manifest. Similarly, nothing in our everyday experience gives us much
reason for supposing that the mind of the average sensual man has, as
one of its constituents, something resembling, or identical with, the
Reality substantial to the manifold world; and yet, when that mind is
subjected to certain rather drastic treatments, the divine element, of
which it is in part at least composed, becomes manifest, not only to the
mind itself, but also, by its reflection in external behaviour, to other
minds. It is only by making physical experiments that we can discover
the intimate nature of matter and its potentialities. And it is only by
making psychological and moral experiments that we can discover the
intimate nature of mind and its potentialities. In the ordinary
circumstances of average sensual life these potentialities of the mind
remain latent and unmanifested. If we would realize them, we must fulfil
certain conditions and obey certain rules, which experience has shown
empirically to be valid.

In regard to few professional philosophers and men of letters is there
any evidence that they did very much in the way of fulfilling the
necessary conditions of direct spiritual knowledge. When poets or
metaphysicians talk about the subject matter of the Perennial
Philosophy, it is generally at second hand. But in every age there have
been some men and women who chose to fulfil the conditions upon which
alone, as a matter of brute empirical fact, such immediate knowledge can
be had; and of these a few have left accounts of the Reality they were
thus enabled to apprehend and have tried to relate, in one comprehensive
system of thought, the given facts of this experience with the given
facts of their other experiences. To such firsthand exponents of the
Perennial Philosophy those who knew them have generally given the name
of 'saint' or 'prophet/ ' sage' or' enlightened one/ And it is mainly to
these, because there is good reason for supposing that they knew what
they

were talking about, and not to the professional philosophers or men of
letters, that I have gone for my selections.

In India two classes of scripture are recognized: the Shruti, or
inspired writings which are their own authority, since they are the
product of immediate insight into ultimate Reality; and the Smriti,
which are based upon the Shruti and from them derive such authority as
they have. ' The Shruti,' in Shankara's words, 'depends upon direct
perception. The Smriti plays a part analogous to induction, since, like
induction, it derives its authority from an authority other than
itself.' This book, then, is an anthology, with explanatory comments, of
passages drawn from the Shruti and Smriti of many times and places.
Unfortunately, familiarity with traditionally hallowed writings tends to
breed, not indeed contempt, but something which, for practical purposes,
is almost as bad—namely a kind of reverential insensibility, a stupor of
the spirit, an inward deafness to the meaning of the sacred words. For
this reason, when selecting material to illustrate the doctrines of the
Perennial Philosophy, as they were formulated in the West, I have gone
almost always to sources other than the Bible. This Christian Smriti,
from which I have drawn, is based upon the Shruti of the canonical
books, but has the great advantage of being less well known and
therefore more vivid and, so to say, more audible than they are.
Moreover, much of this Smriti is the work of genuinely saintly men and
women, who have qualified themselves to know at first hand what they are
talking about. Consequently it may be regarded as being itself a form of
inspired and self-validating Shruti—and this in a much higher degree
than many of the writings now included in the Biblical canon.

In recent years a number of attempts have been made to work out a system
of empirical theology. But in spite of the subtlety and intellectual
power of such writers as Sorley, Oman and Tennant, the effort has met
with only a partial success. Even in the hands of its ablest exponents
empirical theology is not particularly convincing. The reason, it seems
to me, must be sought in the fact that the empirical theologians have
confined their attention more or less exclusively to the

experience of those whom the theologians of an older school called 'the
unregenerate'—that is to say, the experience of people who have not gone
very far in fulfilling the necessary conditions of spiritual knowledge.
But it is a fact, confirmed and re-confirmed during two or three
thousand years of religious history, that the ultimate Reality is not
clearly and immediately apprehended, except by those who have made
themselves loving, pure in heart and poor in spirit. This being so, it
is hardly surprising that a theology based upon the experience of nice,
ordinary, unregenerate people should carry so little conviction. This
kind of empirical theology is on precisely the same footing as an
empirical astronomy, based upon the experience of naked-eye observers.
With the unaided eye a small, faint smudge can be detected in the
constellation of Orion, and doubtless an imposing cosmological theory
could be based upon the observation of this smudge. But no amount of
such theorizing, however ingenious, could ever tell us as much about the
galactic and extra-galactic nebulae as can direct acquaintance by means
of a good telescope, camera and spectroscope. Analogously, no amount of
theorizing about such hints as may be darkly glimpsed within the
ordinary, unregenerate experience of the manifold world can tell us as
much about divine Reality as can be directly apprehended by a mind in a
state of detachment, charity and humility. Natural science is empirical;
but it does not confine itself to the experience of human beings in
their merely human and unmodified condition. Why empirical theologians
should feel themselves obliged to submit to this handicap, goodness only
knows. And of course, so long as they confine empirical experience
within these all too human limits, they are doomed to the perpetual
stultification of their best efforts. From the material they have chosen
to consider, no mind, however brilliantly gifted, can infer more than a
set of possibilities or, at the very best, specious probabilities. The
self-validating certainty of direct awareness cannot in the very nature
of things be achieved except by those equipped with the moral 'astrolabe
of God's mysteries/ If one is not oneself a sage or saint, the

best thing one can do, in the field of metaphysics, is to study the
works of those who were, and who, because they had modified their merely
human mode of being, were capable of a more than merely human kind and
amount of knowledge.

Chapter i THAT ART THOU

IN studying the Perennial Philosophy we can begin either at the bottom,
with practice and morality; or at the top, with a consideration of
metaphysical truths; or, finally, in the middle, at the focal point
where mind and matter, action and thought have their meeting place in
human psychology.

The lower gate is that preferred by strictly practical teachers —men
who, like Gautama Buddha, have no use for speculation and whose primary
concern is to put out in men's hearts the hideous fires of greed,
resentment and infatuation. Through the upper gate go those whose
vocation it is to think and speculate—the born philosophers and
theologians. The middle gate gives entrance to the exponents of what has
been called * spiritual religion*—the devout contemplatives of India,
the Sufis of Islam, the Catholic mystics of the later Middle Ages, and,
in the Protestant tradition, such men as Denk and Franck and Castellio,
as Everard and John Smith and the first Quakers and William Law.

It is through this central door, and just because it is central, that we
shall make our entry into the subject matter of this book. The
psychology of the Perennial Philosophy has its source in metaphysics and
issues logically in a characteristic way of life and system of ethics.
Starting from this mid-point of doctrine, it is easy for the mind to
move in either direction.

In the present section we shall confine our attention to but a single
feature of this traditional psychology—the most important, the most
emphatically insisted upon by all exponents of the Perennial Philosophy
and, we may add, the least psychological. For the doctrine that is to be
illustrated in this section belongs to autology rather than
psychology—to the science, not of the personal ego, but of that eternal
Self in the depth of particular, individualized selves, and identical
with, or at least akin to, the

divine Ground. Based upon the direct experience of those who have
fulfilled the necessary conditions of such knowledge, this teaching is
expressed most succinctly in the Sanskrit formula, tat tvam asi ('That
art thou'); the Atman, or immanent eternal Self, is one with Brahman,
the Absolute Principle of all existence; and the last end of every human
being is to discover the fact for himself, to find out Who he really is.

The more God is in all things, the more He is outside them. The more He
is within, the more without.

Eckhart

Only the transcendent, the completely other, can be immanent without
being modified by the becoming of that in which it dwells. The Perennial
Philosophy teaches that it is desirable and indeed necessary to know the
spiritual Ground of things, not only within the soul, but also outside
in the world and, beyond world and soul, in its transcendent
otherness—'in heaven.'

Though GOD is everywhere present, yet He is only present to thee in the
deepest and most central part of thy soul. The natural senses cannot
possess God or unite thee to Him; nay, thy inward faculties of
understanding, will and memory can only reach after God, but cannot be
the place of His habitation in thee. But there is a root or depth of
thee from whence all these faculties come forth, as lines from a centre,
or as branches from the body of the tree. This depth is called the
centre, the fund or bottom of the soul. This depth is the unity, the
eternity—I had almost said the infinity—of thy soul; for it is so
infinite that nothing can satisfy it or give it rest but the infinity of
God.

William Law

This extract seems to contradict what was said above; but the
contradiction is not a real one. God within and God without —these are
two abstract notions, which can be entertained by the understanding and
expressed in words. But the facts to which these notions refer cannot be
realized and experienced

except in ' the deepest and most central part of the soul/ And this is
true no less of God without than of God within. But though the two
abstract notions have to be realized (to use a spatial metaphor) in the
same place, the intrinsic nature of the realization of God within is
qualitatively different from that of the realization of God without, and
each in turn is different from that of the realization of the Ground as
simultaneously within and without—as the Self of the perceiver and at
the same time (in the words of the Bhagavad-Gita) as 'That by which all
this world is pervaded.'

When Svetaketu was twelve years old he was sent to a teacher, with whom
he studied until he was twenty-four. After learning all the Vedas, he
returned home full of conceit in the belief that he was consummately
well educated, and very censorious.

His father said to him, ' Svetaketu, my child, you who are so full of
your learning and so censorious, have you asked for that knowledge by
which we hear the unbearable, by which we perceive what cannot be
perceived and know what cannot be known ?'

'What is that knowledge, sir?' asked Svetaketu.

His father replied, 'As by knowing one lump of clay all that is made of
clay is known, the difference being only in name, but the truth being
that all is clay—so, my child, is that knowledge, knowing which we know
all.'

' But surely these venerable teachers of mine are ignorant of this
knowledge; for if they possessed it they would have imparted it to me.
Do you, sir, therefore give me that knowledge.'

' So be it,' said the father.... And he said,' Bring me a fruit of the
nyagrodha tree.'

'Here is one, sir.'

'Break it.'

'It is broken, sir.'

'What do you see there?'

c Some seeds, sir, exceedingly small.'

' Break one of these.'

'It is broken, sir.'

'What do you see there?'

'Nothing at all.'

The father said, 'My son, that subtle essence which you do not perceive
there—in that very essence stands the being of the huge nyagrodha tree.
In that which is the subtle essence all that exists has its self. That
is the True, that is the Self, and thou, Svetaketu, art That.'

'Pray, sir/ said the son, 'tell me more/

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied; and he said, 'Place this salt
in water, and come to me tomorrow morning.'

The son did as he was told.

Next morning the father said,' Bring me the salt which you put in the
water.'

The son looked for it, but could not find it; for the salt, of course,
had dissolved.

The father said,' Taste some of the water from the surface of the
vessel. How is it?'

'Salty.'

' Taste some from the middle. How is it ?'

'Salty.'

'Taste some from the bottom. How is it?'

'Salty.'

The father said, 'Throw the water away and then come back to me again/

The son did so; but the salt was not lost, for salt exists for ever.

Then the father said, 'Here likewise in this body of yours, my son, you
do not perceive the True; but there in fact it is. In that which is the
subtle essence, all that exists has its self. That is the True, that is
the Self, and thou, Svetaketu, art That/

From the Chandogya Upanishad

The man who wishes to know the 'That' which is 'thou' may set to work in
any one of three ways. He may begin by looking inwards into his own
particular thou and, by a process of'dying to self—self in reasoning,
self in willing, self in feeling—come at last to a knowledge of the
Self, the Kingdom of God that is within. Or else he may begin with the
tkous exist-

THAT ART THOU n

ing outside himself, and may try to realize their essential unity with
God and, through God, with one another and with his own being. Or,
finally (and this is doubtless the best way), he may seek to approach
the ultimate That both from within and from without, so that he comes to
realize God experimentally as at once the principle of his own thou and
of all other thous, animate and inanimate. The completely illuminated
human being knows, with Law, that God' is present in the deepest and
most central part of his own soul'; but he is also and at the same time
one of those who, in the words of Plotinus,

see all things, not in process of becoming, but in Being, and see
themselves in the other. Each being contains in itself the whole
intelligible world. Therefore All is everywhere. Each is there All, and
All is each. Man as he now is has ceased to be the All. But when he
ceases to be an individual, he raises himself again and penetrates the
whole world.

It is from the more or less obscure intuition of the oneness that is the
ground and principle of all multiplicity that philosophy takes its
source. And not alone philosophy, but natural science as well. All
science, in Meyerson's phrase, is the reduction of multiplicities to
identities. Divining the One within and beyond the many, we find an
intrinsic plausibility in any explanation of the diverse in terms of a
single principle.

The philosophy of the Upanishads reappears, developed and enriched, in
the Bhagavad-Gita and was finally systematized, in the ninth century of
our era, by Shankara. Shankara's teaching (simultaneously theoretical
and practical, as is that of all true exponents of the Perennial
Philosophy) is summarized in his versified treatise, Viveka-Chudamani
('The Crest-Jewel of Wisdom'). All the following passages are taken from
this conveniently brief and untechnical work.

The Atman is that by which the universe is pervaded, but which nothing
pervades; which causes all things to shine, but which all things cannot
make to shine. . . .

The nature of the one Reality must be known by one's own clear spiritual
perception; it cannot be known through a pandit (learned man). Similarly
the form of the moon can only be known through one's own eyes. How can
it be known through others ?

Who but the Atman is capable of removing the bonds of ignorance, passion
and self-interested action ? . ..

Liberation cannot be achieved except by the perception of the identity
of the individual spirit with the universal Spirit. It can be achieved
neither by Yoga (physical training), nor by Sankhya (speculative
philosophy), nor by the practice of religious ceremonies, nor by mere
learning. . . .

Disease is not cured by pronouncing the name of medicine, but by taking
medicine. Deliverance is not achieved by repeating the word ' Brahman,'
but by directly experiencing Brahman. . . .

The Atman is the Witness of die individual mind and its operations. It
is absolute knowledge. .. .

The wise man is one who understands that the essence of Brahman and of
Atman is Pure Consciousness, and who realizes their absolute identity.
The identity of Brahman and Atman is affirmed in hundreds of sacred
texts. . . .

Caste, creed, family and lineage do not exist in Brahman. Brahman has
neither name nor form, transcends merit and demerit, is beyond time,
space and the objects of sense-experience. Such is Brahman, and ' thou
art That.' Meditate upon this truth within your consciousness.

Supreme, beyond the power of speech to express, Brahman may yet be
apprehended by the eye of pure illumination. Pure, absolute and eternal
Reality—such is Brahman, and 'thou art That.' Meditate upon this truth
within your consciousness. . . .

Though One, Brahman is the cause of the many. There is no other cause.
And yet Brahman is independent of the law of causation. Such is Brahman,
and' thou art That.' Meditate upon this truth within your consciousness.
. . .

The truth of Brahman may be understood intellectually. But (even in
those who so understand) the desire for personal separ-ateness is
deep-rooted and powerful, for it exists from beginning-less time. It
creates the notion, 'I am the actor, I am he who experiences.' This
notion is the cause of bondage to conditional existence, birth and
death. It can be removed only by the earnest effort to live constantly
in union with Brahman. By the sages, the eradication of this notion and
the craving for personal separ-ateness is called Liberation.

It is ignorance that causes us to identify ourselves with the body, the
ego, the senses, or anything that is not the Atman. He is a wise man who
overcomes this ignorance by devotion to the Atman. . . .

When a man follows the way of the world, or the way of the flesh, or the
way of tradition (i.e. when he believes in religious rites and the
letter of the scriptures, as though they were intrinsically sacred),
knowledge of Reality cannot arise in him.

The wise say that this threefold way is like an' iron chain, binding the
feet of him who aspires to escape from the prison-house of this world.
He who frees himself from the chain achieves Deliverance.

Shankara

In the Taoist formulations of the Perennial Philosophy there is an
insistence, no less forcible than in the Upanishads, the Gita and the
writings of Shankara, upon the universal immanence of the transcendent
spiritual Ground of all existence. What follows is an extract from one
of the great classics of Taoist literature, the Book of Chuang Tzu, most
of which seems to have

been written around the turn of the fourth and third centuries B.C.

Do not ask whether the Principle is in this or in that; it is in all
beings. It is on this account that we apply to it the epithets of
supreme, universal, total.... It has ordained that all things should be
limited, but is Itself unlimited, infinite. As to what pertains to
manifestation, the Principle causes the succession of its phases, but is
not this succession. It is the author of causes and effects, but is not
the causes and effects. It is the author of condensations and
dissipations (birth and death, changes of state), but is not itself
condensations and dissipations. All proceeds from It and is under its
influence. It is in all things, but is not identical with beings, for it
is neither differentiated nor limited.

Chuang T%u

From Taoism we pass to that Mahayana Buddhism which, in the Far East,
came to be so closely associated with Taoism, borrowing and bestowing
until the two came at last to be fused in what is known as Zen. The
Lankavatara Sutra, from which the following extract is taken, was the
scripture which the founder of Zen Buddhism expressly recommended to his
first disciples.

Those who vainly reason without understanding the truth are lost in the
jungle of the Vijnanas (the various forms of relative knowledge),
running about here and there and trying to justify their view of
ego-substance.

The self realized in your inmost consciousness appears in its purity;
this is the Tathagata-garbha (literally, Buddha-womb), which is not the
realm of those given over to mere reasoning....

Pure in its own nature and free from the category of finite and
infinite, Universal Mind is the undefiled Buddha-womb, which is wrongly
apprehended by sentient beings.

Lankavatara Sutra

One Nature, perfect and pervading, circulates in all natures, One
Reality, all-comprehensive, contains within itself all realities. The
one Moon reflects itself wherever there is a sheet of water,

And all the moons in the waters are embraced within the one

Moon. The Dharma-body '(the Absolute) of all the Buddhas enters into

my own being.

And my own being is found in union with theirs. . . . The Inner Light is
beyond praise and blame; Like space it knows no boundaries, Yet it is
even here, within us, ever retaining its serenity and

fullness.

It is only when you hunt for it that you lose it; You cannot take hold
of it, but equally you cannot get rid of it, And while you can do
neither, it goes on its own way. You remain silent and it speaks; you
speak, and it is dumb; The great gate of charity is wide open, with no
obstacles before it.

Ywig-chia Ta-shih

I am not competent, nor is this the place to discuss the doctrinal
differences between Buddhism and Hinduism. Let it suffice to point out
that, when he insisted that human beings are by nature 'non-Atman/ the
Buddha was evidently speaking about the personal self and not the
universal Self. The Brahman controversialists, who appear in certain of
the Pali scriptures, never so much as mention the Vedanta doctrine of
the identity of Atman and Godhead and the non-identity of ego and Atman.
What they maintain and Gautama denies is the substantial nature and
eternal persistence of the individual psyche. 'As an unintelligent man
seeks for the abode of music in the body of the lute, so does he look
for a soul within the skandhas (the material and psychic aggregates, of
which the individual mind-body is composed).' About the existence of the
Atman that is Brahman, as about most other metaphysical matters, the
Buddha declines to speak, on the ground that such discussions do not
tend to edification or spiritual progress among the members of a
monastic order, such as he had founded. But though it has its dangers,
though it may become the most absorbing, because the most serious and
noblest, of distractions, metaphysical thinking is unavoidable and
finally

necessary. Even the Hinayanists found this, and the later Mahayanists
were to develop, in connection with the practice of their religion, a
splendid and imposing system of cosmo-logical, ethical and psychological
thought. This system was based upon the postulates of a strict idealism
and professed to dispense with the idea of God. But moral and spiritual
experience was too strong for philosophical theory, and under the
inspiration of direct experience, the writers of the Mahayana sutras
found themselves using all their ingenuity to explain why the Tathagata
and the Bodhisattvas display an infinite charity towards beings that do
not really exist. At the same time they stretched the framework of
subjective idealism so as to make room for Universal Mind; qualified the
idea of soullessness with the doctrine that, if purified, the individual
mind can identify itself with the Universal Mind or Buddha-womb; and,
while maintaining godlessness, asserted that this realizable Universal
Mind is the inner consciousness of the eternal Buddha and that the
Buddha-mind is associated with 'a great compassionate heart' which
desires the liberation of every sentient being and bestows divine grace
on all who make a serious effort to achieve man's final end. In a word,
despite their inauspicious vocabulary, the best of the Mahayana sutras
contain an authentic formulation of the Perennial Philosophy—a
formulation which in some respects (as we shall see when we come to the
section, 'God in the World') is more complete than any other.

In India, as in Persia, Mohammedan thought came to be enriched by the
doctrine that God is immanent as well as transcendent, while to
Mohammedan practice were added the moral disciplines and ' spiritual
exercises,' by means of which the soul is prepared for contemplation or
the unitive knowledge of the Godhead. It is a significant historical
fact that the poet-saint Kabir is claimed as a co-religionist both by
Moslems and Hindus. The politics of those whose goal is beyond time are
always pacific; it is the idolaters of past and future, of reactionary
memory and Utopian dream, who do the persecuting and make the wars.

Behold but One in all things; it is the second that leads you astray.

Kabir

That this insight into the nature of things and the origin of good and
evil is not confined exclusively to the saint, but is recognized
obscurely by every human being, is proved by the very structure of our
language. For language, as Richard Trench pointed out long ago, is often
' wis"er, not merely than the vulgar, but even than the wisest of those
who speak it. Sometimes it locks up truths which were once well known,
but have been forgotten. In other cases it holds the germs of truths
which, though they were never plainly discerned, the genius of its
framers caught a glimpse of in a happy moment of divination.' For
example, how significant it is that in the Indo-European languages, as
Darmsteter has pointed out, the root meaning' two' should connote
badness. The Greek prefix dys-(as in dyspepsia) and the Latin dis- (as
in dishonourable) are both derived from 'duo.' The cognate bis- gives a
pejorative sense to such modern French words as bevue ('blunder/
literally 'two-sight 5 ). Traces of that 'second which leads you astray'
can be found in 'dubious,' 'doubt' and Zweifel —for to doubt is to be
double-minded. Bunyan has his Mr. Facing-both-ways, and modern American
slang its ' two-timers.' Obscurely and unconsciously wise, our language
confirms the findings of the mystics and proclaims the essential badness
of division—a word, incidentally, in which our old enemy 'two* makes
another decisive appearance.

Here it may be remarked that the cult of unity on the political level is
only an idolatrous ersat^ for the genuine religion of unity on the
personal and spiritual levels. Totalitarian regimes justify their
existence by means of a philosophy of political monism, according to
which the state is God on earth, unification under the heel of the
divine state is salvation, and all means to such unification, however
intrinsically wicked, are right and may be used without scruple. This
political monism leads in practice to excessive privilege and power for
the few

r8 THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

and oppression for the many, to discontent at home and war abroad. But
excessive privilege and power are standing temptations to pride, greed,
vanity and cruelty; oppression results in fear and envy; war breeds
hatred, misery and despair. All such negative emotions are fatal to the
spiritual life. Only the pure in heart and poor in spirit can come to
the unitive knowledge of God. Hence, the attempt to impose more unity
upon societies than their individual members are ready for makes it
psychologically almost impossible for those individuals to realize their
unity with the divine Ground and with one another.

Among the Christians and the Sufis, to whose writings we now return, the
concern is primarily with the human mind and its divine essence.

My Me is God, nor do I recognize any other Me except my God Himself.

St. Catherine of Genoa

In those respects in which the soul is unlike God, it is also unlike
itself.

St. Bernard

I went from God to God, until they cried from me in me, ' O' thoul!'

Bayazid of Bis tun

Two of the recorded anecdotes about this Sufi saint deserve to be quoted
here. 'When Bayazid was asked how old he was, he replied, "Four years."
They said, "How can that be?" He answered, "I have been veiled from God
by the world for seventy years, but I have seen Him during the last four
years. The period during which one is veiled does not belong to one's
life.'" On another occasion someone knocked at the saint's door and
cried, 'Is Bayazid here?' Bayazid answered, 'Is anybody here except
God?'

To gauge the soul we must gauge it with God, for the Ground of God and
the Ground of the Soul are one and the same.

Eckhart

The spirit possesses God essentially in naked nature, and God the
spirit.

Ruysbroeck

For though she sink all sinking in the oneness of divinity, she never
touches bottom. For it is of the very essence of the soul that she is
powerless to plumb the depths of her creator. And here one cannot speak
of the soul any more, for she has lost her nature yonder in the oneness
of divine essence. There she is no more called soul, but is called
immeasurable being.

Eckhart

The knower and the known are one. Simple people imagine that they should
see God, as if He stood there and they here. This is not so. God and I,
we are one in knowledge.

Eckhart

'I live, yet not I, but Christ in me.' Or perhaps it might be more
accurate to use the verb transitively and say, 'I live, yet not I; for
it is the Logos who lives me 9 —lives me as an actor lives his part. In
such a case, of course, the actor is always infinitely superior to the
role. Where real life is concerned, there are no Shakespearean
characters^ there are only Addi-sonian Catos or, more often, grotesque
Monsieur Perrichons and Charley's Aunts mistaking themselves for Julius
Caesar or the Prince of Denmark. But by a merciful dispensation it is
always in the power of every dramatis persona to get his low, stupid
lines pronounced and supernaturally transfigured by the divine
equivalent of a Garrick.

O my God, how does it happen in this poor old world that Thou art so
great and yet nobody finds Thee, that Thou callest so loudly and nobody
hears Thee, that Thou art so near and nobody

feels Thee, that Thou givest Thyself to everybody and nobody knows Thy
name? Men flee from Thee and say they cannot find Thee; they turn their
backs and say they cannot see Thee; they stop their ears and say they
cannot hear Thee.

Hans Denk

Between the Catholic mystics of the fourteenth and fifteenth, centuries
and the Quakers of the seventeenth there yawns a wide gap of time made
hideous, so far as religion is concerned, with interdenominational wars
and persecutions. But the gulf was bridged by a succession of men, whom
Rufus Jones, in the only accessible English work devoted to their lives
and teachings, has called the ' Spiritual Reformers. 5 Denk, Franck,
Castellio, Weigel, Everard, the Cambridge Platonists—in spite of the
murdering and the madness, the apostolic succession remains unbroken.
The truths that had been spoken in the Theologia Germanica —that book
which Luther professed to love so much and from which, if we may judge
from his career, he learned so singularly little—were being uttered once
again by Englishmen during the Civil War and under the Cromwellian
dictatorship. The mystical tradition, perpetuated by the Protestant
Spiritual Reformers, had become diffused, as it were, in the religious
atmosphere of the time when George Fox had his first great 'opening' and
knew by direct experience:

that Every Man was enlightened by the Divine Light of Christ, and I saw
it shine through all; And that they that believed in it came out of
Condemnation and came to the Light of Life, and became the Children of
it; And that they that hated it and did not believe in it, were
condemned by it, though they made a profession of Christ. This I saw in
the pure Openings of Light, without the help of any Man, neither did I
then know where to find it in the Scriptures, though afterwards,
searching the Scriptures, I found it.

From Fox's Journal

The doctrine of the Inner Light achieved a clearer formulation in the
writings of the second generation of Quakers. * There is,' wrote William
Penn, 'something nearer to us than Scriptures, to wit, the Word in the
heart from which all Scriptures come.' And a little later Robert Barclay
sought to explain the direct experience of tat tvam asi in terms of an
Augustinian theology that had, of course, to be considerably stretched
and trimmed before it could fit the facts. Man, he declared in his
famous theses, is a fallen being, incapable of good, unless united to
the Divine Light. This Divine Light is Christ within the human soul, and
is as universal as the seed of sin. All men, heathen as well as
Christian, are endowed with the Inward Light, even though they may know
nothing of the outward history of Christ's life. Justification is for
those who do not resist the Inner Light and so permit of a new birth of
holiness within them.

Goodness needeth not to enter into the soul, for it is there already,
only it is unperceived.

Theologia Germanica

When the Ten Thousand things are viewed in their oneness, we return to
the Origin and remain where we have always been.

Sen T'sen

It is because we don't know Who we are, because we are unaware that the
Kingdom of Heaven is within us, that we behave in the generally silly,
the often insane, the sometimes criminal ways that are so
characteristically human. We are saved, we are liberated and
enlightened, by perceiving the hitherto unperceived good that is already
within us, by returning to our eternal Ground and remaining where,
without knowing it, we have always been. Plato speaks in the same sense
when he says, in the Republic, that * the virtue of wisdom more than
anything else contains a divine element which always remains.' And in
the Theaetetus he makes the point, so frequently insisted upon by those
who have practised spirit-

ual religion, that it is only by becoming Godlike that we can know
God—and to become Godlike is to identify ourselves with the divine
element which in fact constitutes our essential nature, but of which, in
our mainly voluntary ignorance, we choose to remain unaware.

They are on the way to truth who apprehend God by means of the divine,
Light by the light.

Philo

Philo was the exponent of the Hellenistic Mystery Religion which grew
up, as Professor Goodenough has shown, among the Jews of the Dispersion,
between about 200 B.C. and 100 A.D. Reinterpreting the Pentateuch in
terms of a metaphysical system derived from Platonism,
Neo-Pythagoreanism and Stoicism, Philo transformed the wholly
transcendental and almost anthropomorphically personal God of the Old
Testament into the immanent-transcendent Absolute Mind of the Perennial
Philosophy. But even from the orthodox scribes and Pharisees of that
momentous century which witnessed, along with the dissemination of
Philo's doctrines, the first beginnings of Christianity and the
destruction of the Temple at Jerusalem, even from the guardians of the
Law we hear significantly mystical utterances. Hillel, the great rabbi
whose teachings on humility and the love of God and man read like an
earlier, cruder version of some of the Gospel sermons, is reported to
have spoken these words to an assemblage in the courts of the Temple. '
If I am here' (it is Jehovah who is speaking through the mouth of his
prophet).' everyone is here. If I am not here, no one is here.'

The Beloved is all in all; the lover merely veils Him; The Beloved is
all that lives, the lover a dead thing.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

There is a spirit in the soul, untouched by time and flesh, flowing from
the Spirit, remaining in the Spirit, itself wholly spiritual. In

this principle is God, ever verdant, ever flowering in all the joy and
glory of His actual Self. Sometimes I have called this principle the
Tabernacle of the soul, sometimes a spiritual Light, anon I say it is a
Spark. But now I say that it is more exalted over this and that than the
heavens are exalted above the earth. So now I name it in a nobler
fashion.... It is free of all names and void of all-forms. It is one and
simple, as God is one and simple, and no man can in any wise behold it.

Eckhart

Crude formulations of some of the doctrines of the Perennial Philosophy
are to be found in the thought-systems of the uncivilized and so-called
primitive peoples of the world. Among the Maoris, for example, every
human being is regarded as a compound of four elements—a divine eternal
principle, known as the toiora; an ego, which disappears at death; a
ghost-shadow, or psyche, which survives death; and finally a body. Among
the Oglala Indians the divine element is called the sican, and this is
regarded as identical with the ton, or divine essence of the world.
Other elements of the self are the nagi, or personality, and niya, or
vital soul. After death the sican is reunited with the divine Ground of
all things, the nagi survives in the ghost world of psychic phenomena
and the niya disappears into the material universe.

In regard to no twentieth-century 'primitive' society can we rule out
the possibility of influence by, or borrowing from, some higher culture.
Consequently, we have no right to argue from the present to the past.
Because many contemporary savages have an esoteric philosophy that is
monotheistic with a monotheism that is sometimes of the 'That art thou'
variety, we are not entitled to infer offhand that neolithic or
palaeolithic men held similar views.

More legitimate and more intrinsically plausible are the inferences that
may be drawn from what we know about our own physiology and psychology.
We know that human minds have proved themselves capable of everything
from imbecility to Quantum Theory, from Mein Kampfand sadism to the

sanctity of Philip Neri, from metaphysics to crossword puzzles, power
politics and the Missa Solemnis. We also know that human minds are in
some way associated with human brains, and we have fairly good reasons
for supposing that there have been no considerable changes in the size
and conformation of human brains for a good many thousands of years.
Consequently it seems justifiable to infer that human minds- in the
remote past were capable of as many and as various kinds and degrees of
activity as are minds at the present time.

It is, however, certain that many activities undertaken by some minds at
the present time were not, in the remote past, undertaken by any minds
at all. For this there are several obvious reasons. Certain thoughts are
practically unthinkable except in terms of an appropriate language and
within the framework of an appropriate system of classification. Where
these necessary instruments do not exist, the thoughts in question are
not expressed and not even conceived. Nor is this all : the incentive to
develop the instruments of certain kinds of thinking is not always
present. For long periods of history and prehistory it would seem that
men and women, though perfectly capable of doing so, did not wish to pay
attention to problems which their descendants found absorbingly
interesting. For example, there is no reason to suppose that, between
the thirteenth century and the twentieth, the human mind underwent any
kind of evolutionary change, comparable to the change, let us say, in
the physical structure of the horse's foot during an incomparably longer
span of geological time. What happened was that men turned their
attention from certain aspects of reality to certain other aspects. The
result, among other things, was the development of the natural sciences.
Our perceptions and our understanding are directed, in large measure, by
our will. We are aware of, and we think about, the things which, for one
reason or another, we want to see and understand. Where there's a will
there is always an intellectual way. The capacities of the human mind
are almost indefinitely great. Whatever we will to do, whether it be to
come to the unitive knowledge of the Godhead, or to manu-

facture self-propelled flame-throwers—that we are able to do, provided
always that the willing be sufficiently intense and sustained. It is
clear that many of the things to which modern men have chosen to pay
attention were ignored by their predecessors. Consequently the very
means for thinking clearly and fruitfully about those things remained
uninvented, not merely during prehistoric times, but even to the opening
of the modern era.

The lack of a suitable vocabulary and an adequate frame of reference,
and the absence of any strong and sustained desire to invent these
necessary instruments of thought—here are two sufficient reasons why so
many of the almost endless potentialities of the human mind remained for
so long unactualized. Another and, on its own level, equally cogent
reason is this: much of the world's most original and fruitful thinking
is done by people of poor physique and of a thoroughly unpractical turn
of mind. Because this is so, and because the value of pure thought,
whether analytical or integral, has everywhere been more or less clearly
recognized, provision was and still is made by every civilized society
for giving thinkers a measure of protection from the ordinary strains
and stresses of social life. The hermitage, the monastery, the college,
the academy and the research laboratory; the begging bowl, the
endowment, patronage and the grant of taxpayers' money—such are the
principal devices that have been used by actives to conserve that rare
bird, the religious, philosophical, artistic or scientific
contemplative. In many primitive societies conditions are hard and there
is no surplus wealth. The born contemplative has to face the struggle
for existence and social predominance without protection. The result, in
most cases, is that he either dies young or is too desperately busy
merely keeping alive to be able to devote his attention to anything
else. When this happens the prevailing philosophy will be that of the
hardy, extraverted man of action.

All this sheds some light—dim, it is true, and merely inferential—on the
problem of the perennialness of the Perennial Philosophy. In India the
scriptures were regarded, not as

revelations made at some given moment of history, but as eternal
gospels, existent from everlasting to everlasting, inasmuch as coeval
with man, or for that matter with any other kind of corporeal or
incorporeal being possessed of reason. A similar point of view is
expressed by Aristotle, who regards the fundamental truths of religion
as everlasting and indestructible. There have been ascents and falls,
periods (literally 'roads around' or cycles) of progress and regress;
but the great fact of God as the First Mover of a universe which
partakes of his divinity has always been recognized. In the light of
what we know about prehistoric man (and what we know amounts to nothing
more than a few chipped stones, some paintings, drawings and sculptures)
and of what we may legitimately infer from other, better documented
fields of knowledge, what are we to think of these traditional doctrines
? My own view is that they may be true. We know that born contemplatives
in the realm both of analytic and of integral thought have turned up in
fair numbers and at frequent intervals during recorded history. There is
therefore every reason to suppose that they turned up before history was
recorded. That many of these people died young or were uiiable to
exercise their talents is certain. But a few of them must have survived.
In this context it is highly significant that, among many contemporary
primitives, two thought-patterns are found— an exoteric pattern for the
unphilosophic many and an esoteric pattern (often monotheistic, with a
belief in a God not merely of power, but of goodness and wisdom) for the
initiated few. There is no reason to suppose that circumstances were any
harder for prehistoric men than they are for many contemporary savages.
But if an esoteric monotheism of the kind that seems to come natural to
the born thinker is possible in modern savage societies, the majority of
whose members accept the sort of polytheistic philosophy that seems to
come natural to men of action, a similar esoteric doctrine might have
been current in prehistoric societies. True, the modern esoteric
doctrines may have been derived from higher cultures. But the
significant fact remains that, if so derived, they yet had a meaning for

certain members of the primitive society and were considered valuable
enough to be carefully preserved. We have seen that many thoughts are
unthinkable apart from an appropriate vocabulary and frame of reference.
But the fundamental ideas of the Perennial Philosophy can be formulated
in a very simple vocabulary, and the experiences to which the ideas
refer can and indeed must be had immediately and apart from any
vocabulary whatsoever. Strange openings and theophanies are granted to
quite small children, who are often profoundly and permanently affected
by these experiences. We have no reason to suppose that what happens now
to persons with small vocabularies did not happen in remote antiquity.
In the modern world (as Vaughan and Traherne and Wordsworth, among
others, have told us) the child tends to grow out of his direct
awareness of the one Ground of things; for the habit of analytical
thought is fatal to the intuitions of integral thinking, whether on the
'psychic* or the spiritual level. Psychic preoccupations may be and
often are a major obstacle in the way of genuine spirituality. In
primitive societies now (and, presumably, in the remote past) there is
much preoccupation with, and a widespread talent for, psychic thinking.
But a few people may have worked their way through psychic into
genuinely spiritual experience—just as, even in modern industrialized
societies, a few people work their way out of the prevailing
preoccupation with matter and through the prevailing habits of
analytical thought into the direct experience of the spiritual Ground of
things.

Such, then, very briefly are the reasons for supposing that the
historical traditions of oriental and our own classical antiquity may be
true. It is interesting to find that at least one distinguished
contemporary ethnologist is in agreement with Aristotle and the
Vedantists. 'Orthodox ethnology,' writes Dr. Paul Radin in his Primitive
Man as Philosopher, 'has been nothing but an enthusiastic and quite
uncritical attempt to apply the Darwinian theory of evolution to the
facts of social experience.' And he adds that 'no progress in ethnology
will be achieved until scholars rid themselves once and for all of

y

the curious notion that everything possesses a history; until they
realize that certain ideas and certain concepts are as ultimate for man,
as a social being, as specific physiological reactions are ultimate for
him, as a biological being.' Among these ultimate concepts, in Dr.
Radin's view, is that of monotheism. Such monotheism is often no more
than the recognition of a single dark and numinous Power ruling the
world. But it may sometimes be genuinely ethical and spiritual.

The nineteenth century's mania for history and prophetic Utopianism
tended to blind the eyes of even its acutest thinkers to the timeless
facts of eternity. Thus we find T. H. Green writing of mystical union as
though it were an evolutionary process and not, as all the evidence
seems to show, a state which man, as man, has always had it in his power
to realize. * An animal organism, which has its history in time,
gradually becomes the vehicle of an eternally complete consciousness,
which in itself can have no history, but a history of the process by
which the animal organism becomes its vehicle.' But in actual fact it is
only in regard to peripheral knowledge that there has been a genuine
historical development. Without much lapse of time and much accumulation
of skills and information, there can be but an imperfect knowledge of
the material world. But direct awareness of the' eternally complete
consciousness,' which is the ground of the material world, is a
possibility occasionally actualized by some human beings at almost any
stage of their own personal development, from childhood to old age, and
at any period of the race's history.

Chapter 2 THE NATURE OF THE GROUND

OUR starting point has been the psychological doctrine, 'That art thou/
The question that now quite naturally presents itself is a metaphysical
one: What is the That to which the thou can discover itself to be akin ?

To this the fully developed Perennial Philosophy has at all times and in
all places given fundamentally the same answer. The divine Ground of all
existence is a spiritual Absolute, ineffable in terms of discursive
thought, but (in certain circumstances) susceptible of being directly
experienced and realized by the human being. This Absolute is the
God-without-form of Hindu and Christian mystical phraseology. The last
end of man, the ultimate reason for human existence, is unitive
knowledge of the divine Ground—the knowledge that can come only to those
who are prepared to 'die to self and so make room, as it were, for God.
Out of any given generation of men and women very few will achieve the
final end of human existence; but the opportunity for coming to unitive
knowledge will, in one way or another, continually be offered until all
sentient beings realize Who in fact they are.

The Absolute Ground of all existence has a personal aspect. The activity
of Brahman is Isvara, and Isvara is further manifested in the Hindu
Trinity and, at a more distant remove, in the other deities or angels of
the Indian pantheon. Analogously, for Christian mystics, the ineffable,
attributeless Godhead is manifested in a Trinity of Persons, of whom it
is possible to predicate such human attributes as goodness, wisdom,
mercy and love, but in a supereminent degree.

Finally there is an incarnation of God in a human being, who possesses
the same qualities of character as the personal God, but who exhibits
them under the limitations necessarily

imposed by confinement within a material body born into the

world at a given moment of time. For Christians there has been and, ex
hypothesi, can be but one such divine incarnation; for Indians there can
be and have been many. In Christendom as well as in the East,
contemplatives who follow the path of devotion conceive of, and indeed
directly perceive, the incarnation as a constantly renewed fact of
experience. Christ is for ever being begotten within the soul by the
Father, and the play of Krishna is the pseudo-historical symbol of an
everlasting truth of psychology and metaphysics — the fact that, in
relation to God, the personal soul is always feminine and passive.

Mahayana Buddhism teaches these same metaphysical doctrines in terms of
the 'Three Bodies' of Buddha—the absolute Dharmakaya, known also as the
Primordial Buddha, or Mind, or the Clear Light of the Void; the
Sambhogakaya, corresponding to Isvara or the personal God of Judaism,
Christianity and Islam; and finally the Nirmanakaya, the material body,
in which the Logos is incarnated upon earth as a living, historical
Buddha.

Among the Sufis, Al Haqq, the Real, seems to be thought of as the abyss
of Godhead underlying the personal Allah, while the Prophet is taken out
of history and regarded as the incarnation of the Logos.

Some idea of the inexhaustible richness of the divine nature can be
obtained by analysing, word by word, the invocation with which the
Lord's Prayer begins—' Our Father who art in heaven.' God is ours—ours
in the same intimate sense that our consciousness and life are ours. But
as well as immanently ours, God is also transcendently the personal
Father, who loves his creatures and to whom love and allegiance are owed
by them in return. 'Our Father who art': when we come to consider the
verb in isolation, we perceive that the immanent-transcendent personal
God is also the immanent-transcendent One, the essence and principle of
all existence. And finally God's being is 'in heaven'; the divine nature
is other than, and incommensurable with, the nature of the creatures in
whom God is immanent. That is why we can attain to the unitive

THE NATURE OF THE GROUND 31

knowledge of God only when we become in some measure Godlike, only when
we permit God's kingdom to come by making our own creaturely kingdom go.

God may be worshipped and contemplated in any of his aspects. But to
persist in worshipping only one aspect to the exclusion of all the rest
is to run into grave spiritual peril. Thus, if we approach God with the
preconceived idea that He is exclusively the personal, transcendental,
all-powerful ruler of the world, we run the risk of becoming entangled
in a religion of rites, propitiatory sacrifices (sometimes of the most
horrible nature) and legalistic observances. Inevitably so; for if God
is an unapproachable potentate out there, giving mysterious orders, this
kind of religion is entirely appropriate to the cosmic situation. The
best that can be said for ritualistic legalism is that it improves
conduct. It does little, however, to alter character and nothing of
itself to modify consciousness.

Things are a great deal better when the transcendent, omnipotent
personal God is regarded as also a loving Father. The sincere worship of
such a God changes character as well as conduct, and does something to
modify consciousness. But the complete transformation of consciousness,
which is 'enlightenment/ 'deliverance,' 'salvation,' comes only when God
is thought of as the Perennial Philosophy affirms Him to be— immanent as
well as transcendent, supra-personal as well as personal—and when
religious practices are adapted to this conception.

When God is regarded as exclusively immanent, legalism and external
practices are abandoned and there is a concentration on the Inner Light.
The dangers now are quietism and antinomianism, a partial modification
of consciousness that is useless or even harmful, because it is not
accompanied by the transformation of character which is the necessary
prerequisite of a total, complete and spiritually fruitful
transformation of consciousness.

Finally it is possible to think of God as an exclusively supra-personal
being. For many persons this conception is too 'philosophical' to
provide an adequate motive for doing any-

thing practical about their beliefs. Hence, for them, it is of no value.

It would be a mistake, of course, to suppose that people who worship one
aspect of God to the exclusion of all the rest must inevitably run into
the different kinds of trouble described above. If they are not too
stubborn in their ready-made beliefs, if they submit with docility to
what happens to them in the process of worshipping, the God who is both
immanent and transcendent, personal and more than personal, may reveal
Himself to them in his fullness. Nevertheless, the fact remains that it
is easier for us to reach our goal if we are not handicapped by a set of
erroneous or inadequate beliefs about the right way to get there and the
nature of what we are looking for.

Who is God ? I can think of no better answer than. He who is. Nothing is
more appropriate to the eternity which God is. If you call God good, or
great, or blessed, or wise, or anything else of this sort, it is
included in these words, namely, He is.

St. Bernard

The purpose of all words is to illustrate the meaning of an object. When
they are heard, they should enable the hearer to understand this
meaning, and this according to the four categories of substance, of
activity, of quality and of relationship. For example, cow and horse
belong to the category of substance. He cooks or he prays belongs to the
category of activity. White and black belong to the category of quality.
Having money or possessing cows belongs to the category of relationship.
Now there is no class of substance to which the Brahman belongs, no
common genus. It cannot therefore be denoted by words which, like
'being' in the ordinary sense, signify a category of things. Nor can it
be denoted by quality, for it is without qualities; nor yet by activity,
because it is without activity—'at rest, without parts or activity,'
according to the Scriptures. Neither can it be denoted by relationship,
for it is 'without a second' and is not the object of anything but its
own self. Therefore it cannot be defined by word or idea; as the
Scripture says, it is the One 'before whom words recoil/

Shankara

THE NATURE OF THE GROUND 33

It was from the Nameless that Heaven and Earth sprang;

The named is but the mother that rears the ten thousand creatures,

each after its kind. Truly, ' Only he that rids himself forever of
desire can see the

Secret Essences.'

He that has never rid himself of desire can see only the Outcomes.

Lao T^u

One of the greatest favours bestowed on the soul transiently in this
life is to enable it to see so distinctly and to feel so profoundly that
it cannot comprehend God at all. These souls are herein somewhat like
the saints in heaven, where they who know Him most perfectly perceive
most clearly that He is infinitely incomprehensible; for those who have
the less clear vision do not perceive so clearly as do these others how
greatly He transcends their vision.

St. John of the Cross

When I came out of the Godhead into multiplicity, then all things
proclaimed, * There is a God' (the personal Creator). Now this cannot
make me blessed, for hereby I realize myself as creature. But in the
breaking through I am more than all creatures; I am neither God nor
creature; I am that which I was and shall remain, now and for ever more.
There I receive a thrust which carries me above all angels. By this
thrust I become so rich that God is not sufficient for me, in so far as
He is only God in his divine works. For in thus breaking through, I
perceive what God and I are in common. There I am what I was. There I
neither increase nor decrease. For there I am the immovable which moves
all things. Here man has won again what he is eternally and ever shall
be. Here God is received into the soul.

Eckhart

The Godhead gave all things up to God. The Godhead is poor, naked and
empty as though it were not; it has not, wills not, wants not, works
not, gets not. It is God who has the treasure and the bride in him, the
Godhead is as void as though it were not.

Eckhart

We can understand something of what lies beyond our experience by
considering analogous cases lying within our experience. Thus, the
relations subsisting between the world and God and between God and the
Godhead seem to be analogous, in some measure at least, to those that
hold between the body (with its environment) and the psyche, and between
the psyche and the spirit. In the light of what we know about the
second—and what we know is not, unfortunately, very much—we may be able
to form some not too hopelessly inadequate notions about the first.

Mind affects its body in four ways—subconsciously, through that
unbelievably subtle physiological intelligence, which Driesch
hypostatized under the name of the entelechy; consciously, by deliberate
acts of will; subconsciously again, by the reaction upon the physical
organism of emotional states having nothing to do with the organs or
processes reacted upon; and, either consciously or subconsciously, in
certain 'supernormal' manifestations. Outside the body matter can be
influenced by the mind in two ways—first, by means of the body, and
second, by a'supernormal' process, recently studied under laboratory
conditions and described as ' the PK effect.' Similarly, the mind can
establish relations with other minds either indirectly, by willing its
body to undertake symbolic activities, such as speech or writing; or
'supernormally,' by the direct approach of mind-reading, telepathy,
extra-sensory perception.

Let us now consider these relationships a little more closely. In some
fields the physiological intelligence works on its own initiative, as
when it directs the never-ceasing processes of breathing, say, or
assimilation. In others it acts at the behest of the conscious mind, as
when we will to accomplish some action, but do not and cannot will the
muscular, glandular, nervous and vascular means to the desired end. The
apparently simple act of mimicry well illustrates the extraordinary
nature of the feats performed by the physiological intelligence. When a
parrot (making use, let us remember, of the beak, tongue and throat of a
bird) imitates the sounds produced by

THE NATURE OF THE GROUND 35

the lips, teeth, palate and vocal cords of a man articulating words,
what precisely happens? Responding in some as yet entirely
uncomprehended way to the conscious mind's desire to imitate some
remembered or immediately perceived event, the physiological
intelligence sets in motion large numbers of muscles, co-ordinating
their efforts with such exquisite skill that the result is a more or
less perfect copy of the original* Working on its own level, the
conscious mind not merely of a parrot, but of the most highly gifted of
human beings, would find itself completely baffled by a problem of
comparable complexity.

As an example of the third way in which our minds affect matter, we may
cite the all-too-familiar phenomenon of'nervous indigestion.' In certain
persons symptoms of dyspepsia make their appearance when the conscious
mind is troubled by such negative emotions as fear, envy, anger or
hatred. These emotions are directed towards events or persons in the
outer environment; but in some way or other they adversely affect the
physiological intelligence and this derangement results, among other
things, in 'nervous indigestion/ From tuberculosis and gastric ulcer to
heart disease and even dental caries, numerous physical ailments have
been found to be closely correlated with certain undesirable states of
the conscious mind. Conversely, every physician knows that a calm and
cheerful patient is much more likely to recover than one who is agitated
and depressed.

Finally we come to such occurrences as faith healing and
levitation—occurrences 'supernormally' strange, but nevertheless
attested by masses of evidence which it is hard to discount completely.
Precisely how faith cures diseases (whether at Lourdes or in the
hypnotist's consulting room), or how St. Joseph of Cupertino was able to
ignore the laws of gravitation, we do not know. (But let us remember
that we are no less ignorant of the way in which minds and bodies are
related in the most ordinary of everyday activities.) In the same way we
are unable to form any idea of the modus operandi of what Professor
Rhine has called the PK effect. Neverthe*

less the fact that the fall of dice can be influenced by the mental
states of certain individuals seems now to have been established beyond
the possibility of doubt. And if the PK effect can be demonstrated in
the laboratory and measured by statistical methods, then, obviously, the
intrinsic credibility of the scattered anecdotal evidence for the direct
influence of mind upon matter, not merely within the body, but outside
in the external world, is thereby notably increased. The same is true of
extra-sensory perception. Apparent examples of it are constantly turning
up in ordinary life. But science is almost impotent to cope with the
particular case, the isolated instance. Promoting their methodological
ineptitude to the rank of a criterion of truth, dogmatic scientists have
often branded everything beyond the pale of their limited competence as
unreal and even impossible. But when tests for ESP can be repeated under
standardized conditions, the subject comes under the jurisdiction of the
law of probabilities and achieves (in the teeth of what passionate
opposition!) a measure of scientific respectability.

Such, very baldly and briefly, are the most important things we know
about mind in regard to its capacity to influence matter. From this
modest knowledge about ourselves, what are we entitled to conclude in
regard to the divine object of our nearly total ignorance ?

First, as to creation: if a human mind can directly influence matter not
merely within, but even outside its body, then a divine mind, immanent
in the universe or transcendent to it, may be presumed to be capable of
imposing forms upon a pre-existing chaos of formless matter, or even,
perhaps, of thinking substance as well as forms into existence.

Once created or divinely informed, the universe has to be sustained. The
necessity for a continuous re-creation of the world becomes manifest,
according to Descartes, 'when we consider the nature of time, or the
duration of things; for this is of such a kind that its parts are not
mutually dependent and never co-existent; and, accordingly, from the
fact that we are now it does not necessarily follow that we shall be a
moment

THE NATURE OF THE GROUND 37

afterwards, unless some cause, viz. that which first produced us, shall,
as it were, continually reproduce us, that is, conserve us.' Herewe seem
to have something analogous, on the cosmic level, to that physiological
intelligence which, in men and the lower animals, unsleepingly performs
the task of seeing that bodies behave as they should. Indeed, the
physiological intelligence may plausibly be regarded as, a special
aspect of the general re-creating Logos. In Chinese phraseology it is
the Tao as it manifests itself on the level of living bodies.

The bodies of human beings are affected by the good or bad states of
their minds. Analogously, the existence at the heart of things of a
divine serenity and goodwill may be regarded as one of the reasons why
the world's sickness, though chronic, has not proved fatal. And if, in
die psychic universe, there should be other and more than human
consciousnesses obsessed by thoughts of evil and egotism and rebellion,
this would account, perhaps, for some of the quite extravagant and
improbable wickedness of human behaviour.

The acts willed by our minds are accomplished either through the
instrumentality of the physiological intelligence and the body, or, very
exceptionally, and to a limited extent, by direct supernormal means of
the PK variety. Analogously the physical situations willed by a divine
Providence may be arranged by the perpetually creating Mind that
sustains the universe—in which case Providence will appear to do its
work by wholly natural means; or else, very exceptionally, the divine
Mind may act directly on the universe from the outside, as it were—in
which case the workings of Providence and the gifts of grace will appear
to be miraculous. Similarly, the divine Mind may choose to communicate
with finite minds either by manipulating the world of men and things in
ways which the particular mind to be reached at that moment will find
meaningful; or else there may be direct communication by something
resembling thought transference.

In Eckhart's phrase, God, the creator and perpetual re-creator of the
world, 'becomes and disbecomes/ In other words He is, to some extent at
least, in time. A temporal God

might have the nature of the traditional Hebrew God of the Old
Testament; or He might be a limited deity of the kind described by
certain philosophical theologians of the present century; or
alternatively He might be an emergent God, starting unspiritually at
Alpha and becoming gradually more divine as the aeons rolled on towards
some hypothetical Omega. (Why the movement should be towards more and
better rather than less and worse, upwards rather than downwards or in
undulations, onwards rather than round and round, one really doesn't
know. There seems to be no reason why a God who is exclusively
temporal—a God who merely becomes and is ungrounded in eternity—should
not be as completely at the mercy of time as is the individual mind
apart from the spirit. A God who becomes is a God who also disbecomes,
and it is the disbecoming which may ultimately prevail, so that the last
state of emergent deity may be worse than the first.)

The ground in which the multifarious and time-bound psyche is rooted is
a simple, timeless awareness. By making ourselves pure in heart and poor
in spirit we can discover and be identified with this awareness. In the
spirit we not only have, but are, the unitive knowledge of the divine
Ground.

Analogously, God in time is grounded in the eternal now of the modeless
Godhead. It is in the Godhead that things, lives and minds have their
being; it is through God that they have their becoming—a becoming whose
goal and purpose is to return to the eternity of the Ground.

Meanwhile, I beseech you by the eternal and imperishable truth, and by
my soul, consider; grasp the unheard-of. God and Godhead are as distinct
as heaven and earth. Heaven stands a thousand miles above the earth, and
even so the Godhead is above God. God becomes and disbecomes. Whoever
understands this preaching, I wish him well. But even if nobody had been
here, I must still have preached this to the poor-box.

Eckhan

Like St. Augustine, Eckhart was to some extent the victim of

THE NATURE OF THE GROUND 39

his own literary talents. Le style cest Vhomme. No doubt. But the
converse is also partly true. L'homme c'est le style. Because we have a
gift for writing in a certain way, we find ourselves, in some sort,
becoming our way of writing. We mould ourselves in the likeness of our
particular brand of eloquence. Eckhart was one of the inventors of
German prose, and he was tempted by his new-found mastery of forceful
expression to commit himself to extreme positions—to be doctrinally the
image of his powerful and over-emphatic sentences. A statement like the
foregoing would lead one to believe that he despised what the Vedantists
call the 'lower knowledge' of Brahman, not as the Absolute Ground of all
things, but as the personal God. In reality he, like the Vedantists,
accepts the lower knowledge as genuine knowledge and regards devotion to
the personal God as the best preparation for the unitive knowledge of
the Godhead. Another point to remember is that the attributeless Godhead
of Vedanta, of Mahayana Buddhism, of Christian and Sufi mysticism is the
Ground of all the qualities possessed by the personal God and the
Incarnation. ' God is not good, I am good,' says Eckhart in his violent
and excessive way. What he really meant was, 'I am just humanly good;
God is supereminently good; the Godhead w, and his "isness" (istigkeit^
in Eckhart's German) contains goodness, love, wisdom and all the rest in
their essence and principle.' In consequence, the Godhead is never, for
the exponent of the Perennial Philosophy, the mere Absolute of academic
metaphysics, but something more purely perfect, more reverently to be
adored than even the personal God or his human incarnation—a Being
towards whom it is possible to feel the most intense devotion and in
relation to whom it is necessary (if one is to come to that unitive
knowledge which is man's final end) to practise a discipline more
arduous and unremitting than any imposed by ecclesiastical authority.

There is a distinction and differentiation, according to our reason,
between God and the Godhead, between action and rest. The

fruitful nature of the Persons ever worketh in a living differentiation.
But the simple Being of God, according to the nature thereof, is an
eternal Rest of God and of all created things.

Ruysbroeck

(In the Reality unitively known by the mystic), we can speak no more of
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, nor of any creature, but only one Being,
which is the very substance of the Divine Persons. There were we all one
before our creation, for this is our super-essence. There the Godhead is
in simple essence without activity.

• Ruysbroeck

The holy light of faith is so pure that, compared with it, particular
lights are but impurities; and even ideas of the saints, of the Blessed
Virgin, and the sight of Jesus Christ in his humanity are impediments in
the way of the sight of God in His purity.

J. J. Olier

Coming as it does from a devout Catholic of the Counter-Reformation,
this statement may seem somewhat startling. But we must remember that
Olier (who was a man of saintly life and one of the most influential
religious teachers of the seventeenth century) is speaking here about a
state of consciousness, to which few people ever come. To those on the
ordinary levels of being he recommends other modes of knowledge. One of
his penitents, for example, was advised to read, as a corrective to St.
John of the Cross and other exponents of pure mystical theology, St.
Gertrude's revelations of the incarnate and even physiological aspects
of the deity. In Olier's opinion, as in that of most directors of souls,
whether Catholic or Indian, it was mere folly to recommend the worship
of God-without-form to persons who are in a condition to understand only
the personal and the incarnate aspects of the divine Ground. This is a
perfectly sensible attitude, and we are justified in adopting a policy
in accordance with it—provided always that we clearly remember that its
adoption may

be attended by certain spiritual dangers and disadvantages. The nature
of these dangers and disadvantages will be illustrated and discussed in
another section. For the present it will suffice to quote the warning
words of Philo: 'He who thinks that God has any quality and is not the
One, injures not God, but himself.'

Thou must love God as not-God, not-Spirit, not-person, not-image, but as
He is, a sheer, pure absolute One, sundered from all two-ness, and in
whom we must eternally sink from nothingness to nothingness.

Eckhart

What Eckhart describes as the pure One, the absolute not-God in whom we
must sink from nothingness to nothingness is called in Mahayana Buddhism
the Clear Light of the Void. What follows is part of a formula addressed
by the Tibetan priest to a person in the act of death.

O nobly born, the time has now come for thee to seek the Path. Thy
breathing is about to cease. In the past thy teacher hath set thee face
to face with the Clear Light; and now thou art about to experience it in
its Reality in the Bar do state (the * intermediate state* immediately
following death, in which the soul is judged— or rather judges itself by
choosing, in accord with the character formed during its life on earth,
what sort of an after-life it shall have). In this Bardo state all
things are like the cloudless sky, and the naked, immaculate Intellect
is like unto a translucent void without circumference or centre. At this
moment know thou thyself and abide in that state. I, too, at this time,
am setting thee face to face.

The Tibetan Book of the Dead

Going back further into the past, we find in one of the earliest
Upanishads the classical description of the Absolute One as a
Super-Essential No-Thing.

The significance of Brahman is expressed by neti neti (not so, not so);
for beyond this, that you say it is not so, there is nothing further.
Its name, however, is 'the Reality of reality.' That is to say, the
senses are real, and the Brahman is their Reality.

Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad

In other words, there is a hierarchy of the real. The manifold world of
our everyday experience is real with a relative reality that is, on its
own level, unquestionable; but this relative reality has its being
within and because of the absolute Reality, which, on account of the
incommensurable otherness of its eternal nature, we can never hope to
describe, even though it is possible for us directly to apprehend it.

The extract which follows next is of great historical significance,
since it was mainly through the 'Mystical Theology' and the 'Divine
Names' of the fifth-century author who wrote under the name of Dionysius
the Areopagite that mediaeval Christendom established contact with
Neoplatonism and thus, at several removes, with the metaphysical thought
and discipline of India. In the ninth century Scbtus Erigena translated
the two books into Latin, and from that time forth their influence upon
the philosophical speculations and the religious life of the West was
wide, deep and beneficent. It was to the authority of the Areopagite
that the Christian exponents of the Perennial Philosophy appealed,
whenever they were menaced (and they were always being menaced) by those
whose primary interest was in ritual, legalism and ecclesiastical
organization. And because Dionysius was mistakenly identified with St.
Paul's first Athenian convert, his authority was regarded as all but
apostolic; therefore, according to the rules of the Catholic game, the
appeal to it could not lightly be dismissed, even by those to whom the
books meant less than nothing. In spite of their maddening eccentricity,
the men and women who followed the Dionysian path had to be tolerated.
And once left free to produce the fruits of the spirit, a number of them
arrived at such a conspicuous degree of sanctity that it became
impossible even for the heads of the Spanish

THE NATURE OF THE GROUND 43

Inquisition to condemn the tree from which such fruits had sprung.

The simple, absolute and immutable mysteries of divine Truth are hidden
in the super-luminous darkness of that silence which revealeth in
secret. For this darkness, though of deepest obscurity, is yet radiantly
clear; and, though beyond touch and sight, it more than fills our
unseeing minds with splendours of transcendent beauty. . . . We long
exceedingly to dwell in this translucent darkness and, through not
seeing and not knowing, to see Him who is beyond both vision and
knowledge—by the very fact of neither seeing Him nor knowing Him. For
this is truly to see and to know and, through the abandonment of all
things, to praise Him who is beyond and above all things. For this is
not unlike the art of those who carve a life-like image from stone:
removing from around it all that impedes clear vision of the latent
form, revealing its hidden beauty solely by taking away. For it is, as I
believe, more fitting to praise Him by taking away than by ascription;
for we ascribe attributes to Him, when we start from universals and come
down through the intermediate to the particulars. But here we take away
all things from Him going up from particulars to universals, that we may
know openly the unknowable, which is hidden in and under all things that
may be known. And we behold that darkness beyond being, concealed under
all natural light.

Dionysius the Areopagite

The world as it appears to common sense consists of an indefinite number
of successive and presumably causally connected events, involving an
indefinite number of separate, individual things, lives and thoughts,
the whole constituting a presumably orderly cosmos. It is in order to
describe, discuss and manage this common-sense universe that human
languages have been developed.

Whenever, for any reason, we wish to think of the world, not as it
appears to common sense, but as a continuum, we find that our
traditional syntax and vocabulary are quite inade-

quate. Mathematicians have therefore been compelled to invent radically
new symbol-systems for this express purpose. But the divine Ground of
all existence is not merely a continuum, it is also out of time, and
different, not merely in degree, but in kind from the worlds to which
traditional language and the languages of mathematics are adequate.
Hence, in all expositions of the Perennial Philosophy, the frequency of
paradox, of verbal extravagance, sometimes even of seeming blasphemy.
Nobody has yet invented a Spiritual Calculus, in terms of which we may
talk coherently about the divine Ground and of the world conceived as
its manifestation. For the present, therefore, we must be patient with
the linguistic eccentricities of those who are compelled to describe one
order of experience in terms of a symbol-system, whose relevance is to
the facts of another and quite different order.

So far, then, as a fully adequate expression of the Perennial Philosophy
is concerned, there exists a problem in semantics that is finally
insoluble. The fact is one which must be steadily borne in mind by all
who read its formulations. Only in this way shall we be able to
understand even remotely what is being talked about. Consider, for
example, those negative definitions of the transcendent and immanent
Ground of being. In statements such as Eckhart's, God is equated with
nothing. And in a certain sense the equation is exact; for God is
certainly no thing. In the phrase used by Scotus Erigena God is not a
what; He is a That. In other words, the Ground can be denoted as being
there, but not defined as having qualities. This means that discursive
knowledge about the Ground is not merely, like all inferential
knowledge, a thing at one remove, or even at several removes, from the
reality of immediate acquaintance; it is and, because of the very nature
of our language and our standard patterns of thought, it must be,
paradoxical knowledge. Direct knowledge of the Ground cannot be had
except by union, and union can be achieved only by the annihilation of
the self-regarding ego, which is the barrier separating the 'thou' from
the 'That/

Chapter 3

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, DIVINE INCARNATION

TN English, words of Latin origin tend to carry overtones of
JLintellectual, moral and aesthetic 'classiness'—overtones which are not
carried, as a rule, by their Anglo-Saxon equivalents. 'Maternal,' for
instance, means the same as 'motherly,' 'intoxicated' as 'drunk'—but
with what subtly important shades of difference! And when Shakespeare
needed a name for a comic character, it was Sir Toby Belch that he
chose, not Cavalier Tobias Eructation.

The word 'personality' is derived from the Latin, and its upper partials
are in the highest degree respectable. For some odd philological reason,
the Saxon equivalent of'personality' is hardly ever used. Which is a
pity. For if it were used— used as currently as 'belch' is used for
'eructation'—would people make such a reverential fuss about the thing
connoted as certain English-speaking philosophers, moralists and
theologians have recently done? 'Personality,' we are constantly being
assured, is the highest form of reality with which we are acquainted.
But surely people would think twice about making or accepting this
affirmation if, instead of 'personality,' the word employed had been its
Teutonic synonym, 'selfness.' For 'selfness,' though it means precisely
the same, carries none of the high-class overtones that go with
'personality.' On the contrary, its primary meaning comes to us
embedded, as it were, in discords, like the note of a cracked bell. For,
as all exponents of the Perennial Philosophy have constantly insisted,
man's obsessive consciousness of, and insistence on being, a separate
self is the final and most formidable obstacle to the unitive knowledge
of God. To be a self is, for them, the original sin, and to die to self,
in feeling, will and intellect, is the final and all-inclusive virtue.
It is die memory of these

utterances that calls up the unfavourable overtones with which the word
'selfness' is associated. The all too favourable overtones of
'personality* are evoked in part by its intrinsically solemn Latinity,
but also by reminiscences of what has been said about the * persons' of
the Trinity. But the persons of the Trinity have nothing in common with
the flesh-and-blood persons of our everyday acquaintance—nothing, that
is to say, except that indwelling Spirit, with which we ought and are
intended to identify ourselves, but which most of us prefer to ignore in
favour of our separate selfness. That this God-eclipsing and
anti-spiritual selfness should have been given the same name as is
applied to the God who is a Spirit, is, to say the least of it,
unfortunate. Like all such mistakes it is probably, in some obscure and
subconscious way, voluntary and purposeful. We love our selfness; we
want to be justified in our love; therefore we christen it with the same
name as is applied by theologians to Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

But now thou askest me how thou mayest destroy this naked knowing and
feeling of thine own being. For peradventure thou thinkest that if it
were destroyed, all other hindrances were destroyed ; and if thou
thinkest thus, thou thinkest right truly. But to this I answer thee and
I say, that without a full special grace full freely given by God, and
also a full according ableness on thy part to receive this grace, this
naked knowing and feeling of thy being may in nowise be destroyed. And
this ableness is nought else but a strong and a deep ghostly sorrow. ...
All men have matter of sorrow; but most specially he feeleth matter of
sorrow that knoweth and feeleth that he is. All other sorrows in
comparison to this be but as it were game to earnest. For he may make
sorrow earnestly that knoweth and feeleth not only what he is, but that
he is. And whoso felt never this sorrow, let him make sorrow; for he
hath never yet felt perfect sorrow. This sorrow, when it is had,
cleanseth the soul, not only of sin, but also of pain that it hath
deserved for sin; and also it maketh a soul able to receive that joy,
the which reaveth from a man all knowing and feeling of his being.

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 47

This sorrow, if it be truly conceived, is full of holy desire; and else
a man might never in this life abide it or bear it. For were it not that
a soul were somewhat fed with a manner of comfort by his right working,
he should not be able to bear that pain that he hath by the knowing and
feeling of his being. For as oft as he would have a true knowing and a
feeling of his God in purity of spirit (as it may be here), and then
feeleth that he may not—for he findeth evermore his knowing and his
feeling as it were occupied and filled with a foul stinking lump of
himself, the which must always be hated and despised and forsaken, if he
shall be God's perfect disciple, taught by Himself in the mount of
perfection— so oft he goeth nigh mad for sorrow. . . .

This sorrow and this desire must every soul have and feel in itself
(either in this manner or in another), as God vouchsafed! to teach his
ghostly disciples according to his good will and their according
ableness in body and in soul, in degree and disposition, ere the time be
that they may perfectly be oned unto God in perfect charity—such as may
be had here, if God vouchsafed!.

The Cloud of Unknowing

What is the nature of this * stinking lump' of selfness or personality,
which has to be so passionately repented of and so completely died to,
before there can be any 'true knowing of God in purity of spirit' ? The
most meagre and non-committal hypothesis is that of Hume. 'Mankind/ he
says, 'are nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions,
which succeed each other with an inconceivable rapidity and are in a
perpetual flux and movement/ An almost identical answer is given by the
Buddhists, whose doctrine of anatta is the denial of any permanent soul,
existing behind the flux of experience and the various psycho-physical
skandhas (closely corresponding to Hume's 'bundles'), which constitute
the more enduring elements of personality. Hume and the Buddhists give a
sufficiently realistic description of selfness in action; but they fail
to explain how or why the bundles ever became bundles. Did their
constituent atoms of experience come together of their own accord ? And,
if so, why, or by what means, and within

what kind of a non-spatial universe? To give a plausible answer to these
questions in terms ofanatta is so difficult that we are forced to
abandon the doctrine in favour of the notion that, behind the flux and
within the bundles, there exists some kind of permanent soul, by which
experience is organized and which in turn makes use of that organized
experience to become a particular and unique personality. This is the
view of the orthodox Hinduism, from which Buddhist thought parted
company, and of almost all European thought from before the time of
Aristotle to the present day. But whereas most contemporary thinkers
make an attempt to describe human nature in terms of a dichotomy of
interacting psyche and physique, or an inseparable wholeness of these
two elements within particular embodied selves, all the exponents of the
Perennial Philosophy make, in one form or another, the affirmation that
man is a kind of trinity composed of body, psyche and spirit. Selfness
or personality is a product of the first two elements. The third element
(that quidquid increatum et increabile, as Eckhart called it) is akin
to, or even identical with, the divine Spirit that is the Ground of all
being. Man's final end, the purpose of his existence, is to love, know
and be united with the immanent and transcendent Godhead. And this
identification of self with spiritual not-self can be achieved only by *
dying to 5 selfness and living to spirit.

What could begin to deny self, if there were not something in man
different from self?

William Law

What is man ? An angel, an animal, a void, a world, a nothing surrounded
by God, indigent of God, capable of God, filled with God, if it so
desires.

Btntll*

The separate creaturely life, as opposed to life in union with God, is
only a life of various appetites, hungers and wants, and cannot possibly
be anything else. God Himself cannot make a creature

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 49

to be in itself, or in its own nature, anything else but a state of
emptiness. The highest life that is natural and creaturely can go no
higher than this; it can only be a bare capacity for goodness and cannot
possibly be a good and happy life but by the life of God dwelling in and
in union with it. And this is the twofold life that, of all necessity,
must be united in every good and perfect and happy creature.

William Law

The Scriptures say of human beings that there is an outward man and
along with him an inner man.

To the outward man belong those things that depend on the soul, but are
connected with the flesh and are blended with it, and the co-operative
functions of the several members, such as the eye, the ear, the tongue,
the hand and so on.

The Scripture speaks of all this as the old man, the earthy man, the
outward person, the enemy, the servant.

Within us all is the other person, the inner man, whom the Scripture
calls the new man, the heavenly man, the young person, the friend, the
aristocrat.

Eckhart

The seed of God is in us. Given an intelligent and hard-working farmer,
it will thrive and grow up to God, whose seed it is; and accordingly its
fruits will be God-nature. Pear seeds grow into pear trees, nut seeds
into nut trees, and God seed into God.

Eckhart

The will is free and we are at liberty to identify our being either
exclusively with our selfness and its interests, regarded as independent
of indwelling Spirit and transcendent Godhead (in which case we shall be
passively damned or actively fiendish), or exclusively with the divine
within us and without (in which case we shall be saints), or finally
with self at one moment or in one context and with spiritual not-self at
other moments and in other contexts (in which case we shall be average
citizens, too theocentric to be wholly lost, and too

D

egocentric to achieve enlightenment and a total deliverance). Since
human craving can never be satisfied except by the unitive knowledge of
God and since the mind-body is capable of an enormous variety of
experiences, we are free to identify ourselves with an almost infinite
number of possible objects—with the pleasures of gluttony, for example,
or intemperance, or sensuality; with money, power or fame; with our
family, regarded as a possession or actually an extension and projection
of our own selfness; with our goods and chattels, our hobbies, our
collections; with our artistic or scientific talents; with some
favourite branch of knowledge, some fascinating 'special subject'; with
our professions, our political parties, our churches; with our pains and
illnesses; with our memories of success or misfortune, our hopes, fears
and schemes for the future; and finally with the eternal Reality within
which and by which all the rest has its being. And we are free, of
course, to identify ourselves with more than one of these things
simultaneously or in succession. Hence the quite astonishingly
improbable combination of traits making up a complex personality. Thus a
man can be at once the craftiest of politicians and the dupe of his own
verbiage, can have a passion for brandy and money, and an equal passion
for the poetry of George Meredith and under-age girls and his mother,
for horse-racing and detective stories and the good of his country—the
whole accompanied by a sneaking fear of hell-fire, a hatred of Spinoza
and an unblemished record for Sunday church-going. A person born with
one kind of psycho-physical constitution will be tempted to identify
himself with one set of interests and passions, while a person with
another kind of temperament will be tempted to make very different
identifications. But these temptations (though extremely powerful, if
the constitutional bias is strongly marked) do not have to be succumbed
to; people can and do resist them, can and do refuse to identify
themselves with what it would be all too easy and natural for them to
be; can and do become better and quite other than their own selves. In
this context the following brief article on 'How Men Behave in Crisis'
(published in a recent issue of

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 51

Harper's Magazine) is highly significant. 'A young psychiatrist, who
went as a medical observer on five combat missions of the Eighth Air
Force in England, says that in times of great stress and danger men are
likely to react quite uniformly, even though under normal circumstances
they differ widely in personality. He went on one mission, during which
the 6-17 plane and crew were so severely damaged that survival seemed
impossible. He had already studied the "on the ground" personalities of
the crew and had found that they represented a great diversity of human
types. Of their behaviour in crisis he reported:

'" Their reactions were remarkably alike. During the violent combat and
in the acute emergencies that arose during it, they were all quietly
precise on the interphone and decisive in action. The tail gunner, right
waist gunner and navigator were severely wounded early in the fight, but
all three kept at their duties efficiently and without cessation. The
burden of emergency work fell on the pilot, engineer and ball turret
gunner, and all functioned with rapidity, skilful effectiveness and no
lost motion. The burden of the decisions, during, but particularly after
the combat, rested essentially on the pilot and, in secondary details,
on the co-pilot and bombardier. The decisions, arrived at with care and
speed, were unquestioned once they were made, and proved excellent. In
the period when disaster was momentarily expected, the alternative plans
of action were made clearly and with no thought other than the safety of
the entire crew. All at this point were quiet, unobtrusively cheerful
and ready for anything. There was at no time paralysis, panic, unclear
thinking, faulty or confused judgment, or self-seeking in any one of
them.

*" One could not possibly have inferred from their behaviour that this
one was a man of unstable moods and that that one was a shy, quiet,
introspective man. They all became outwardly calm, precise in thought
and rapid in action.

*" Such action is typical of a crew who know intimately what fear is, so
that they can use, without being distracted by, its physiological
concomitants; who are well trained, so that they

ji THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

can direct their action with clarity; and who have all the more than
personal trust inherent in a unified team/"

We see then that, when the crisis came, each of these young men forgot
the particular personality which he had built up out of the elements
provided by his heredity and the environment in which he had grown up;
that one resisted the normally irresistible temptation to identify
himself with his mood of the moment, another the temptation to identify
himself with his private day-dreams, and so on with the rest; and that
all of them behaved in the same strikingly similar and wholly admirable
way. It was as though the crisis and the preliminary training for crisis
had lifted them out of their divergent personalities and raised them to
the same higher level.

Sometimes crisis alone, without any preparatory training, is sufficient
to make a man forget to be his customary self and become, for the time
being, something quite different. Thus the most unlikely people will,
under the influence of disaster, temporarily turn into heroes, martyrs,
selfless labourers for the good of their fellows. Very often, too, the
proximity of death produces similar results. For example, Samuel Johnson
behaved in one way during almost the whole of his life and in quite
another way during his last illness. The fascinatingly complex
personality, in which six generations of Boswellians have taken so much
delight—the learned boor and glutton, the kind-hearted bully, the
superstitious intellectual, the convinced Christian who was a fetishist,
the courageous man who was terrified of death—became, while he was
actually dying, simple, single, serene and God-centred.

Paradoxical as it may seem, it is, for very many persons, much easier to
behave selflessly in time of crisis than it is when life is taking its
normal course in undisturbed tranquillity. When the going is easy, there
is nothing to make us forget our precious selfness, nothing (except our
own will to mortification and the knowledge of God) to distract our
minds from the distractions with which we have chosen to be identified;
we are at perfect liberty to wallow in our personality to our heart's
content. And how we wallow! It is for this reason

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 53

that all the masters of the spiritual life insist so strongly upon the
importance of little things.

God requires a faithful fulfilment of the merest trifle given us to do,
rather than the most ardent aspiration to things to which we are not
called.

St. Franfois de Sales

There is no one in the world who cannot arrive without difficulty at the
most eminent perfection by fulfilling with love obscure and common
duties.

/. P. de Caussade

Some people measure the worth of good actions only by their natural
qualities or their difficulty, giving the preference to what is
conspicuous or brilliant. Such men forget that Christian virtues, which
are God's inspirations, should be viewed from the side of grace, not
that of nature. The dignity and difficulty of a good action certainly
affects what is technically called its accidental worth, but all its
essential worth comes from love alone.

Jean Pierre Camus (quoting St. Franfois de Sales)

The saint is one who knows that every moment of our human life is a
moment of crisis; for at every moment we are called upon to make an
all-important decision—to choose between the way that leads to death and
spiritual darkness and the way that leads towards light and life;
between interests exclusively temporal and the eternal order; between
our personal will, or the will of some projection of our personality,
and the will of God. In order to fit himself to deal with the
emergencies of his way of life, the saint undertakes appropriate
training of mind and body, just as the soldier does. But whereas the
objectives of military training are limited and very simple, namely, to
make men courageous, cool-headed and co-operatively efficient in the
business of killing other men, with whom, personally, they have no
quarrel, the objectives of spiritual training

are much less narrowly specialized. Here the aim is primarily to bring
human beings to a state in which, because there are no longer any
God-eclipsing obstacles between themselves and Reality, they are able to
be aware continuously of the divine Ground of their own and all other
beings; secondarily, as a means to this end, to meet all, even the most
trivial circumstances of daily living, without malice, greed,
self-assertion or voluntary ignorance, but consistently with love and
understanding. Because its objectives are not limited, because, for the
lover of God, every moment is a moment of crisis, spiritual training is
incomparably more difficult and searching than military training. There
are many good soldiers, few saints.

We have seen that, in critical emergencies, soldiers specifically
trained to cope with that kind of thing tend to forget the inborn and
acquired idiosyncrasies with which they normally identify their being
and, transcending selfness, to behave in the same, one-pointed,
better-than-personal way. What is true of soldiers is also true of
saints, but with this important difference —that the aim of spiritual
training is to make people become selfless in every circumstance of
life, while the aim of military training is to make them selfless only
in certain very special circumstances and in relation to only certain
classes of human beings. This could not be otherwise; for all that we
are and will and do depends, in the last analysis, upon what we believe
the Nature of Things to be. The philosophy that rationalizes power
politics and justifies war and military training is always (whatever the
official religion of the politicians and war makers) some wildly
unrealistic doctrine of national, racial or ideological idolatry,
having, as its inevitable corollaries, the notions of Herrenvolk and
'the lesser breeds without the Law.'

The biographies of the saints testify unequivocally to the fact that
spiritual training leads to a transcendence of personality, not merely
in the special circumstances of battle, but in all circumstances and in
relation to all creatures, so that the saint 'loves his enemies' or, if
he is a Buddhist, does not even recog-

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 55

nize the existence of enemies, but treats all sentient beings, sub-human
as well as human, with the same compassion and disinterested goodwill.
Those who win through to the unitive knowledge of God set out upon their
course from the most diverse starting points. One is a man, another a
woman; one a born active, another a born contemplative. No two of them
inherit the same temperament and physical constitution, and their lives
are passed in material, moral and intellectual environments that are
profoundly dissimilar. Nevertheless, in so far as they are saints, in so
far as they possess the unitive knowledge that makes them 'perfect as
their Father which is in heaven is perfect, 3 they are all astonishingly
alike. Their actions are uniformly selfless and they are constantly
recollected, so that at every moment they know who they are and what is
their true relation to the universe and its spiritual Ground. Of even
plain average people it may be said that their name is Legion— much more
so of exceptionally complex personalities, who identify themselves with
a wide diversity of moods, cravings and opinions. Saints, on the
contrary, are neither double-minded nor half-hearted, but single and,
however great their intellectual gifts, profoundly simple. The
multiplicity of Legion has given place to one-pointedness—not to any of
those evil one-pointednesses of ambition or covetousness, or lust for
power and fame, not even to any of the nobler, but still all too human
one-pointednesses of art, scholarship and science, regarded as ends in
themselves, but to the supreme, more than human one-pointedness that is
the very being of those souls who consciously and consistently pursue
man's final end, the knowledge of eternal Reality. In one of the Pali
scriptures there is a significant anecdote about the Brahman Drona who,
'seeing the Blessed One sitting at the foot of a tree, asked him, "Are
you a deva?" And the Exalted One answered, "I am not." "Are you a
ganJharva?" "I am not." "Areyouayafo^z?" "I am not." "Are you a man?" "
I am not a man." On the Brahman asking what he might be, the Blessed One
replied, "Those evil influences, those cravings, whose non-destruction
would have individualized me as a

deva,) agand/iarva, zyaksha (three types of supernatural being), or a
man, I have completely annihilated. Know therefore that I am Buddha." 5

Here we may remark in passing that it is only the one-pointed who are
truly capable of worshipping one God. Monotheism as a theory can be
entertained even by a person whose name is Legion. But when it comes to
passing from theory to practice, from discursive knowledge about to
immediate acquaintance with the one God, there cannot be monotheism
except wherp there is singleness of heart. Knowledge is in the knower
according to the mode of the knower. Where the knower is poly-psychic
the universe he knows by immediate experience is polytheistic. The
Buddha declined to make any statement in regard to the ultimate divine
Reality. All he would talk about was nirvana^ which is the name of the
experience that comes to the totally selfless and one-pointed. To this
same experience others have given the name of union with Brahman, with
Al Haqq, with the immanent and transcendent Godhead. Maintaining, in
this matter, the attitude of a strict operationalist, the Buddha would
speak only of the spiritual experience, not of the metaphysical entity
presumed by the theologians of other religions, as also of later
Buddhism, to be the object and (since in contemplation the knower, the
known and the knowledge are all one) at the same time the subject and
substance of that experience.

When a man lacks discrimination, his will wanders in all directions,
after innumerable aims. Those who lack discrimination may quote the
letter of the scripture; but they are really denying its inner truth.
They are full of worldly desires and hungry for the rewards of heaven.
They use beautiful figures of speech; they teach elaborate rituals,
which are supposed to obtain pleasure and power for those who practise
them. But, actually, they understand nothing except the law of Karma
that chains men to rebirth.

Those whose discrimination is stolen away by such talk grow deeply
attached to pleasure and power. And so they are unable

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 57

to develop that one-pointed concentration of the will, which leads a man
to absorption in God.

Bhagavad-Gita

Among the cultivated and mentally active, hagiography is now a very
unpopular form of literature. The fact is not at all surprising. The
cultivated and the mentally active have an insatiable appetite for
novelty, diversity and distraction. But the saints, however commanding
their talents and whatever the nature of their professional activities,
are all incessantly preoccupied with only one subject—spiritual Reality
and the means by which they and their fellows can come to the unitive
knowledge of that Reality. And as for their actions—these are as
monotonously uniform as their thoughts; for in all circumstances they
behave selflessly, patiently and with indefatigable charity. No wonder,
then, if the biographies of such men and women remain unread. For one
well-educated person who knows anything about William Law there are two
or three hundred who have read Bosweirs life of his younger
contemporary. Why? Because, until he actually lay dying, Johnson
indulged himself in the most fascinating of multiple personalities ;
whereas Law, for all the superiority of his talents, was almost absurdly
simple and single-minded. Legion prefers to read about Legion. It is for
this reason that, in die whole repertory of epic, drama and the novel,
there are hardly any representations of true theocentric saints.

O Friend, hope for Him whilst you live, know whilst you live, understand
whilst you live; for in life deliverance abides.

If your bonds be not broken whilst living, what hope of deliverance in
death ?

It is but an empty dream that the soul shall have union with Him because
it has passed from the body;

If He is found now, He is found then;

If not, we do but go to dwell in the City of Death.

Kabir

This figure in the form of a sun (the description is of the engraved

j8 THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

frontispiece to the first edition of The Rule of Perfection) represents
the will of God. The faces placed here in the sun represent souls living
in the divine will. These faces are arranged in three concentric
circles, showing the three degrees of this divine will. The first or
outermost degree signifies the souls of the active life; the second,
those of the life of contemplation; the third, those of the life of
supereminence. Outside the first circle are many tools, such as pincers
and hammers, denoting the active life. But round the second circle we
have placed nothing at all, in order to signify that in this kind of
contemplative life, without any other speculations or practices, one
must follow the leading of the will of God. The tools are on the ground
and in shadow, inasmuch as outward works are in themselves full of
darkness. These tools, however, are touched by a ray of the sun, to show
that works may be enlightened and illuminated by the will of God.

The light of the divine will shines but little on the faces of the first
circle; much more on those of the second; while those of the third or
innermost circle are resplendent. The features of the first show up most
clearly; the second, less; the third, hardly at all. This signifies that
the souls of the first degree are much in themselves; those of the
second degree are less in themselves and more in God; those in the third
degree are almost nothing in themselves and all in God, absorbed in his
essential will. All these faces have their eyes fixed on the will of
God.

Benet ofCanfield

It is in virtue of his absorption in God and just because he has not
identified his being with the inborn and acquired elements of his
private personality, that the saint is able to exercise his entirely
non-coercive and therefore entirely beneficent influence on individuals
and even on whole societies. Or, to be more accurate, it is because he
has purged himself of selfness that divine Reality is able to use him as
a channel of grace and power. *I live, yet not I, but Christ—the eternal
Logos— liveth in me.' True of the saint, this must a fortiori be true of
the Avatar, or incarnation of God. If, in so far as he was a saint, St.
Paul was 'not I/ then certainly Christ was 'not P;

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 59

and to talk, as so many liberal churchmen now do, of worshipping 'the
personality of Jesus/ is an absurdity. For, obviously, had Jesus
remained content merely to have a personality, like the rest of us, he
would never have exercised the kind of influence which in fact he did
exercise, and it would never have occurred to anyone to regard him as a
divine incarnation and to identify him with the Logos. That he came to
be thought of as the Christ was due to the fact that he had passed
beyond selfness and had become the bodily and mental conduit through
which a more than personal, supernatural life flowed down into the
world.

Souls which have come to the unitive knowledge of God are, in Benet of
Canfield's phrase, 'almost nothing in themselves and all in God.' This
vanishing residue of selfness persists because, in some slight measure,
they still identify their being with some innate psycho-physical
idiosyncrasy, some acquired habit of thought or feeling, some convention
or un-analysed prejudice current in the social environment. Jesus was
almost wholly absorbed in the essential will of God; but in spite of
this, he may have retained some elements of self-ness. To what extent
there was any T associated with the more-than-personal, divine 'Not-I,'
it is very difficult, on the basis of the existing evidence, to judge.
For example, did Jesus interpret his experience of divine Reality and
his own spontaneous inferences from that experience in terms of those
fascinating apocalyptic notions current in contemporary Jewish circles ?
Some eminent scholars have argued that the doctrine of the world's
imminent dissolution was the central core of his teaching. Others,
equally learned, have held that it was attributed to him by the authors
of the Synoptic Gospels, and that Jesus himself did not identify his
experience and his theological thinking with locally popular opinions.
Which party is right? Goodness knows. On this subject, as on so many
others, the existing evidence does not permit of a certain and
unambiguous answer.

The moral of all this is plain. The quantity and quality of the
surviving biographical documents are such that we have

no means of knowing what the residual personality of Jesus was really
like. But if the Gospels tell us very little about the 'P which was
Jesus, they make up for this deficiency by telling us inferentially, in
the parables and discourses, a good deal about the spiritual 'not-I,'
whose manifest presence in the mortal man was the reason why his
disciples called him the Christ and identified him with the eternal
Logos.

The biography of a saint or avatar is valuable only in so far as it
throws light upon the means by which in the circumstances of a
particular human life, the T was purged away so as to make room for the
divine 'not-I.' The authors of the Synoptic Gospels did not choose to
write such a biography, and no amount of textual criticism or ingenious
surmise can call it into existence. In the course of the last hundred
years an enormous sum of energy has been expended on the attempt to make
documents yield more evidence than in fact they contain. However
regrettable may be the Synoptists' lack of interest in biography, and
whatever objections may be raised against the theologies of Paul and
John, there can still be no doubt that their instinct was essentially
sound. Each in his own way wrote about the eternal 'not-P of Christ
rather than the historical T; each in his own way stressed that element
in the life of Jesus, in which, because it is more-than-personal, all
persons can participate. (The nature of selfness is such that one person
cannot be a part of another person. A self can contain or be contained
by something that is either less or more than a self, it can never
contain or be contained by a self.)

The doctrine that God can be incarnated in human form is found in most
of the principal historic expositions of the Perennial Philosophy—in
Hinduism, in Mahayana Buddhism, in Christianity and in the Mohammedanism
of the Sufis, by whom the Prophet was equated with the eternal Logos.

When goodness grows weak, When evil increases, I make myself a body.

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 61

In every age I come back To deliver the holy, To destroy the sin of the
sinner, To establish righteousness.

He who knows the nature Of my task and my holy birth Is not reborn

When he leaves this body; He comes to Me.

Flying from fear,

From lust and anger,

He hides in Me,

His refuge and safety.

Burnt clean in the blaze of my being,

In Me many find home.

Bhagavad-Gita

Then the Blessed One spoke and said: 'Know, Vasetha, that from time to
time a Tathagata is born into the world, a fully Enlightened One,
blessed and worthy, abounding in wisdom and goodness, happy with
knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to erring mortals, a
teacher of gods and men, a Blessed Buddha. He thoroughly understands
this universe, as though he saw it face to face. . . . The Truth does he
proclaim both in its letter and in its spirit, lovely in its origin,
lovely in its progress, lovely in its consummation. A higher life doth
he make known in all its purity and in all its perfectness.

Tevigga Sutta

Krishna is an incarnation of Brahman, Gautama Buddha of what the
Mahayanists called the Dharmakaya, Suchness, Mind, the spiritual Ground
of all being. The Christian doctrine of the incarnation of the Godhead
in human form differs from that of India and the Far East inasmuch as it
affirms that there has been and can be only one Avatar.

What we do depends in large measure upon what we think, and if what we
do is evil, there is good empirical reason for supposing that our
thought-patterns are inadequate to material, mental or spiritual
reality. Because Christians believed that there had been only one
Avatar, Christian history has been disgraced by more and bloodier
crusades, interdenominational wars, persecutions and proselytizing
imperialism than has the history of Hinduism and Buddhism. Absurd and
idolatrous doctrines, affirming the quasi-divine nature of sovereign
states and their rulers, have led oriental, no less than Western,
peoples into innumerable political wars; but because they have not
believed in an exclusive revelation at one sole instant of time, or in
the quasi-divinity of an ecclesiastical organization, oriental peoples
have kept remarkably clear of the mass murder for religion's sake, which
has been so dreadfully frequent in Christendom. And while, in this
important respect, the level of public morality has been lower in the
West than in the East, the levels of exceptional sanctity and of
ordinary individual morality have not, so far as one can judge from the
available evidence, been any higher. If the tree is indeed known by its
fruits, Christianity's departure from the norm of the Perennial
Philosophy would seem to be philosophically unjustifiable.

The Logos passes out of eternity into time for no other purpose than to
assist the beings, whose bodily form he takes, to pass out of time into
eternity. If the Avatar's appearance upon the stage of history is
enormously important, this is due to the fact that by his teaching he
points out, and by his being a channel of grace and divine power he
actually is, the mejns by which human beings may transcend the
limitations of history. The author of the Fourth Gospel affirms that the
Word became flesh; but in another passage he adds that the flesh
profiteth nothing—nothing, that is to say, in itself, but a great deal,
of course, as a means to the union with immanent and transcendent
Spirit. In this context it is very interesting to consider the
development of Buddhism. ' Under the forms of religious or mystical
imagery,' writes R. E. Johnston in his Buddhist China^ * the Mahayana
expresses the universal, whereas

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 63

Hinayana cannot set itself free from the domination of historical fact.'
In the words of an eminent orientalist, Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, 'The
Mahayanist believer is warned—precisely as the worshipper of Krishna is
warned in the Vaishna-vite scriptures that the Krishna Lila is not a
history, but a process for ever unfolded in the heart of man—that
matters of historical fact are without religious significance' (except,
we should add, in so far as they point to or themselves constitute the
means—whether remote or proximate, whether political, ethical or
spiritual—by which men may come to deliverance from selfness and the
temporal order.)

In the West, the mystics went some way towards liberating Christianity
from its unfortunate servitude to historic fact (or, to be more
accurate, to those various mixtures of contemporary record with
subsequent inference and phantasy, which have, at different epochs, been
accepted as historic fact). From the writings of Eckhart, Tauler and
Ruysbroeck, of Boehme, William Law and the Quakers, it would be possible
to extract a spiritualized and universalized Christianity, whose
narratives should refer, not to history as it was, or as someone
afterwards thought it ought to be, but to ' processes forever unfolded
in the heart of man.' But unfortunately the influence of the mystics was
never powerful enough to bring about a radical Mahayanist revolution in
the West. In spite of them, Christianity has remained a religion in
which the pure Perennial Philosophy has been overlaid, now more, now
less, by an idolatrous preoccupation with events and things in time—
events and things regarded not merely as useful means, but as ends,
intrinsically sacred and indeed divine. Moreover, such improvements on
history as were made in the course of centuries were, most imprudently,
treated as though they themselves were a part of history—a procedure
which put a powerful weapon into the hands of Protestant and, later, of
Rationalist controversialists. How much wiser it would have been to
admit the perfectly avowable fact that, when the sternness of Christ the
Judge had been unduly emphasized, men and women felt the need of
personifying the divine compassion in a new

form, with the result that the figure of the Virgin, mediatrix to the
mediator, came into increased prominence. And when, in course of time,
the Queen of Heaven was felt to be too awe-inspiring, compassion was
re-personified in the homely figure of St. Joseph, who thus became
mediator to the mediatrix to the mediator. In exactly the same way
Buddhist worshippers felt that the historic Sakyamuni, with his
insistence on recol-lectedness, discrimination and a total dying to self
as the principal means of liberation, was too stern and too
intellectual. The result was that the love and compassion which
Sakyamuni had also inculcated came to be personified in Buddhas such as
Amida and Maitreya—divine characters completely removed from history,
inasmuch as their temporal career was situated somewhere in the distant
past or distant future. Here it may be remarked that the vast numbers of
Buddhas and Bodhis-attvas, of whom the Mahayanist theologians speak, are
commensurate with the vastness of their cosmology. Time, for them, is
beginningless, and the innumerable universes, every one of them
supporting sentient beings of every possible variety, are born, evolve,
decay and die, only to repeat the same cycle—again and again, until the
final inconceivably remote consummation, when every sentient being in
all the worlds shall have won to deliverance out of time into eternal
Suchness or Buddhahood. This cosmological background to Buddhism has
affinities with the world picture of modern astronomy—especially with
that version of it offered in the recently published theory of Dr.
Weiszacker regarding the formation of planets. If the Weiszacker
hypothesis is correct, the production of a planetary system would be a
normal episode in the life of every star. There are forty thousand
million stars in our own galactic system alone, and beyond our galaxy
other galaxies, indefinitely. If, as we have no choice but to believe,
spiritual laws governing consciousness are uniform throughout the whole
planet-bearing and presumably life-supporting universe, then certainly
there is plenty of room, and at the same time, no doubt, the most
agonizing and desperate need, for those innumerable redemptive
incarnations of Such-

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 65

ness, upon whose shining multitudes the Mahayanists love to dwell.

For my part, I think the chief reason which prompted the invisible God
to become visible in the flesh and to hold converse with men was to lead
carnal men, who are only able to love carnally, to the healthful love of
his flesh, and afterwards, little by little, to spiritual love.

St. Bernard

St. Bernard's doctrine of 'the carnal love of Christ' has been admirably
summed up by Professor Etienne Gilson in his book, The Mystical Theology
of St. Bernard. 'Knowledge of self already expanded into social carnal
love of the neighbour, so like oneself in misery, is now a second time
expanded into a carnal love of Christ, the model of compassion, since
for our salvation He has become the Man of Sorrows. Here then is the
place occupied in Cistercian mysticism by the meditation on the visible
Humanity of Christ. It is but a beginning, but an absolutely necessary
beginning Charity, of course, is essentially spiritual, and a love of
this kind can be no more than its first moment. It is too much bound up
with the senses, unless we know how to make use of it with prudence, and
to lean on it only as something to be surpassed. In expressing himself
thus, Bernard merely codified the teachings of his own experience ; for
we have it from him that he was much given to the practice of this
sensitive love at the outset of his "conversion"; later on he was to
consider it an advance to have passed beyond it; not, that is to say, to
have forgotten it, but to have added another, which outweighs it as the
rational and spiritual outweigh the carnal. Nevertheless, this beginning
is already a summit.

' This sensitive affection for Christ was always presented by St.
Bernard as love of a relatively inferior order. It is so precisely on
account of its sensitive character, for charity is of a purely spiritual
essence. In right the soul should be able to enter directly into union,
in virtue of its spiritual powers, with

a God Who is pure spirit. The Incarnation, moreover, should be regarded
as one of the consequences of man's transgression, so that love for the
Person of Christ is, as a matter of fact, bound up with the history of a
fall which need not, and should not, have happened. St. Bernard
furthermore, and in several places, notes that this affection cannot
stand safely alone, but needs to be supported by what he calls
"science." He had examples before him of the deviations into which even
the most ardent devotion can fall, when it is not allied with, and ruled
by, a sane theology.'

Can the many fantastic and mutually incompatible theories of expiation
and atonement, which have been grafted on to the Christian doctrine of
divine incarnation, be regarded as indispensable elements in a 'sane
theology'? I find it difficult to imagine how anyone who has looked into
a history of these notions, as expounded, for example, by the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, by Athanasius and Augustine, by Anselm and
Luther, by Calvin and Grotius, can plausibly answer this question in the
affirmative. In the present context, it will be enough to call attention
to one of the bitterest of all the bitter ironies of history. For the
Christ of the Gospels, lawyers seemed further from the Kingdom of
Heaven, more hopelessly impervious to Reality, than almost any other
class of human beings except the rich. But Christian theology,
especially that of the Western churches, was the product of minds imbued
with Jewish and Roman legalism. In all too many instances the immediate
insights of the Avatar and the theocentric saint were rationalized into
a system, not by philosophers, but by speculative barristers and
metaphysical jurists. Why should what Abbot John Chapman calls 'the
problem of reconciling (not merely uniting) Mysticism and Christianity'
be so extremely difficult? Simply because so much Roman and Protestant
thinking was done by those very lawyers whom Christ regarded as being
peculiarly incapable of understanding the true Nature of Things. * The
Abbot (Chapman is apparently referring to Abbot Marmion) says St. John
of the Cross is like a sponge full of Christianity. You can squeeze it
all out, and the

PERSONALITY, SANCTITY, INCARNATION 67

full mystical theory (in other words, the pure Perennial Philosophy)
remains. Consequently for fifteen years or so I hated St. John of the
Cross and called him a Buddhist. I loved St. Teresa and read her over
and over again. She is first a Christian, only secondarily a mystic.
Then I found I had wasted fifteen years, so far as prayer was concerned/

Now see the meaning of these two sayings of Christ's. The one, 'No man
cometh unto the Father but by me,' that is through my life. The other
saying, 'No man cometh unto me except the Father draw him*; that is, he
does not take my life upon him and follow after me, except he is moved
and drawn of my Father, that is, of the Simple and Perfect Good, of
which St. Paul saith, 'When that which is perfect is come, that which is
in part shall be done away/

Theologia Germanica

In other words, there must be imitation of Christ before there can be
identification with the Father; and there must be essential identity or
likeness between the human spirit and the God who is Spirit in order
that the idea of imitating the earthly behaviour of the incarnate
Godhead should ever cross anybody's mind. Christian theologians speak of
the possibility of ' deification,' but deny that there is identity of
substance between spiritual Reality and the human spirit. In Vedanta and
Maha-yana Buddhism, as also among the Sufis, spirit and Spirit are held
to be the same substance; Atman is Brahman; That art thou.

When not enlightened, Buddhas are no other than ordinary beings; when
there is enlightenment, ordinary beings at once turn into Buddhas.

Hid Neng

Every human being can thus become an Avatar by adoption, but not by his
unaided efforts. He must be shown the way, and he must be aided by
divine grace. That men and women

may be thus instructed and helped, the Godhead assumes the form of an
ordinary human being, who has to earn deliverance and enlightenment in
the way that is prescribed by the divine Nature of Things—namely, by
charity, by a total dying to self and a total, one-pointed awareness.
Thus enlightened, the Avatar can reveal the way of enlightenment to
others and help them actually to become what they already potentially
are. Tel quen Lui-meme enfin Veternitt le change. And of course the
eternity which transforms us into Ourselves is not the experience of
mere persistence after bodily death. There will be no experience of
timeless Reality then, unless there is the same or a similar knowledge
within the world of time and matter. By precept and by example, the
Avatar teaches that this transforming knowledge is possible, that all
sentient beings are called to it and that, sooner or later, in one way
or another, all must finally come to it.

Chapter 4 GOD IN THE WORLD

'HPHAT art thou': 'Behold but One in all things'—God X within and God
without. There is a way to Reality in and through the soul, and there is
a way to Reality in and through the world. Whether the ultimate goal can
be reached by following either of these ways to the exclusion of the
other is to be doubted. The third, best and hardest way is that which
leads to the divine Ground simultaneously in the perceiver and in that
which is perceived.

The Mind is no other than the Buddha, and Buddha is no other than
sentient being. When Mind assumes the form of a sentient being, it has
suffered no decrease; when it has become a Buddha, it has added nothing
to itself.

Huang-Po

All creatures have existed eternally in the divine essence, as in their
exemplar. So far as they conform to the divine idea, all beings were,
before their creation, one thing with the essence of God. (God creates
into time what was and is in eternity.) Eternally, all creatures are God
in God.... So far as they are in God, they are the same life, the same
essence, the same power, the same One, and nothing less.

Suso

The image of God is found essentially and personally in all mankind.
Each possesses it whole, entire and undivided, and all together not more
than one alone. In this way we are all one, intimately united in our
eternal image, which is the image of God and the source in us of all our
life. Our created essence and our life are attached to it without
mediation as to their eternal cause.

Ruysbroeck

When is a man in mere understanding ? I answer,' When a man sees one
thing separated from another.' And when is a man above mere
understanding? That I can tell you: ' When a man sees All in all, then a
man stands beyond mere understanding/

Eckhart

There are four kinds of Dhyana (spiritual disciplines). What are these
four ? They are, first, the Dhyana practised by the ignorant; second,
the Dhyana devoted to the examination of meaning; third, the Dhyana with
Suchness for its object; fourth, the Dhyana of the Tathagatas (Buddhas).

What is meant by the Dhyana practised by the ignorant ? It is the one
resorted to by the Yogins who exercise themselves in the disciplines of
Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas (contemplatives and 'solitary Buddhas' of
the Hinayana school), who perceiving that there is no ego substance,
that the body is a shadow and a skeleton which is transient, impure and
full of suffering, persistently cling to these notions, which are
regarded as just so and not otherwise, and who, starting from them,
advance by stages until they reach the cessation, where there are no
thoughts. This is called the Dhyana practised by the ignorant.

What then is the Dhyana devoted to the examination of meaning? It is the
one practised by those who, having gone beyond the egolessness of
things, beyond individuality and generality, beyond the untenability of
such ideas as 'self,'' other* and 'both/ which are held by the
philosophers, proceed to examine and follow up the meaning of the
various aspects of Bodhisattvahood. This is the Dhyana devoted to the
examination of meaning.

When followers of Zen fail to go beyond the world of their senses and
thoughts, all their doings and movements are of no significance. But
when the senses and thoughts are annihilated, all the passages to
Universal Mind are blocked, and no entrance then becomes possible. The
original Mind is to be recognized along with the working of the senses
and thoughts—only it does not belong to them, nor yet is it independent
of them. Do not build up your views upon your senses and thoughts, do
not base your understanding upon your senses and thoughts; but at the
same time do not seek the Mind away from your senses and thoughts, do
not try to grasp Reality by rejecting your senses and thoughts. When you
are neither attached to, nor detached from, them, then you enjoy your
perfect unobstructed freedom, then you have your seat of enlightenment.

Huang-Po

Every individual being, from the atom up to the most highly organized of
living bodies and the most exalted of finite minds, may be thought of,
in Rene Guenon's phrase, as a point where a ray of the primordial
Godhead meets one of the differentiated, creaturely emanations of that
same Godhead's creative energy. The creature, as creature, may be very
far from God, in the sense that it lacks the intelligence to discover
the nature of the divine Ground of its being. But the creature in its

eternal essence—as the meeting place of creatureliness and primordial
Godhead—is one of the infinite number of points where divine Reality is
wholly and eternally present. Because of this, rational beings can come
to the unitive knowledge of the divine Ground, non-rational and
inanimate beings may reveal to rational beings the fullness of God's
presence within their material forms. The poet's or the painter's vision
of the divine in nature, the worshipper's awareness of a holy presence
in the sacrament, symbol or image—these are not entirely subjective.
True, such perceptions cannot be had by all per-ceivers, for knowledge
is a function of being; but the thing known is independent of the mode
and nature of the knower. What the poet and painter see, and try to
record for us, is actually there, waiting to be apprehended by anyone
who has the right kind of faculties. Similarly, in the image or the
sacramental object the divine Ground is wholly present. Faith and
devotion prepare the worshipper's mind for perceiving the ray of Godhead
at its point of intersection with the particular fragment of matter
before him. Incidentally, by being worshipped, such symbols become the
centres of a field offeree. The longings, emotions and imaginations of
those who kneel and, for generations, have knelt before the shrine
create, as it were, an enduring vortex in the psychic medium, so that
the image lives with a secondary, inferior divine life projected on to
it by its worshippers, as well as with the primary divine life which, in
common with all other animate and inanimate beings, it possesses in
virtue of its relation to the divine Ground. The religious experience of
sacramentalists and image worshippers may be perfectly genuine and
objective; but it is not always or necessarily an experience of God or
the Godhead. It may be, and perhaps in most cases it actually is, an
experience of the field of force generated by the minds of past and
present worshippers and projected on to the sacramental object where it
sticks, so to speak, in a condition of what may be called second-hand
objectivity, waiting to be perceived by minds suitably attuned to it.
How desirable this kind of experience really is will have to be
discussed in another section. All that

need be said here is that the iconoclast's contempt for sacraments and
symbols, as being nothing but mummery with stocks and stones, is quite
unjustified.

The workmen still in doubt what course to take. Whether I'd best a saint
or hog-trough make, After debate resolved me for a saint; And so famed
Loyola I represent.

The all too Protestant satirist forgot that God is in the hog-trough no
less than in the conventionally sacred image. 'Lift the stone and you
will find me/ affirms the best known of the Oxyrhinchus Logia of Jesus,
' cleave the wood, and I am there.' Those who have personally and
immediately realized the truth of this saying and, along with it, the
truth of Brahmanism's 'That art thou' are wholly delivered.

The Sravaka (literally 'hearer,' the name given by Mahayana Buddhists to
contemplatives of the Hinayana school) fails to perceive that Mind, as
it is in itself, has no stages, no causation. Disciplining himself in
the cause, he has attained the result and abides in the samadhi
(contemplation) of Emptiness for ever so many aeons. However enlightened
in this way, the Sravaka is not at all on the right track. From the
point of view of the Bodhisattva, this is like suffering the torture of
hell. The Sravaka has buried himself in Emptiness and does not know how
to get out of his quiet contemplation, for he has no insight into the
Buddha-nature itself.

Mo Tsu

When Enlightenment is perfected, a Bodhisattva is free from the bondage
of things, but does not seek to be delivered from things. Samsara (the
world of becoming) is not hated by him, nor is Nirvana loved. When
perfect Enlightenment shines, it is neither bondage nor deliverance.

Prunabuddha-sutra

The touch of Earth is always reinvigorating to the son of Earth, even
when he seeks a supraphysical Knowledge. It may even be said that the
supraphysical can only be really mastered in its fullness—to its heights
we can always reach—when we keep our feet firmly on the physical. 'Earth
is His footing/ says the Upani-shad, whenever it images the Self that
manifests in the universe.

Sri Aurobtndo

'To its heights we can always come/ For those of us who are still
splashing about in the lower ooze, the phrase has a rather ironical
ring. Nevertheless, in the light of even the most distant acquaintance
with the heights and the fullness, it is possible to understand what its
author means. To discover the Kingdom of God exclusively within oneself
is easier than to discover it, not only there, but also in the outer
world of minds and things and living creatures. It is easier because the
heights within reveal themselves to those who are ready to exclude from
their purview all that lies without. And though this exclusion may be a
painful and mortificatory process, the fact remains that it is less
arduous than the process of inclusion, by which we come to know the
fullness as well as the heights of spiritual life. Where there is
exclusive concentration on the heights within, temptations and
distractions are avoided and there is a general denial and suppression.
But when the hope is to know God inclusively—to realize the divine
Ground in the world as well as in the soul, temptations and distractions
must not be avoided, but submitted to and used as opportunities for
advance; there must be no suppression of outward-turning activities, but
a transformation of them so that they become sacramental. Mortification
becomes more searching and more subtle; there is need of unsleeping
awareness and, on the levels of thought, feeling and conduct, the
constant exercise of something like an artist's tact and taste.

It is in the literature of Mahayana and especially of Zen Buddhism that
we find the best account of the psychology of the man for whom samsara
and nirvana, time and eternity, are one and the same. More
systematically perhaps than any

other religion, the Buddhism of the Far East teaches the way to
spiritual Knowledge in its fullness as well as in its heights, in and
through the world as well as in and through the soul. In this context we
may point to a highly significant fact, which is that the incomparable
landscape painting of China and Japan was essentially a religious art,
inspired by Taoism and Zen Buddhism; in Europe, on the contrary,
landscape painting and the poetry of 'nature worship' were secular arts
which arose when Christianity was in decline, and derived little or no
inspiration from Christian ideals.

'Blind, deaf, dumb!

Infinitely beyond the reach of imaginative contrivances!' In these lines
Seccho has swept everything away for you—what you see together with what
you do not see, what you hear together with what you do not hear, and
what you talk about together with what you cannot talk about. All these
are completely brushed off, and you attain the life of the blind, deaf
and dumb. Here all your imaginations, contrivances and calculations are
once and for all put an end to; they are no more made use of. This is
where lies the highest point of Zen, this is where we have true
blindness, true deafness and true dumbness, each in its artless and
effectless aspect.

'Above the heavens and below the heavens!

How ludicrous, how disheartening!'

Here Seccho lifts up with one hand and with the other puts down. Tell me
what he finds to be ludicrous, what he finds to be disheartening. It is
ludicrous that this dumb person is not dumb after all, that this deaf
person is not after all deaf; it is disheartening that the one who is
not at all blind is blind for all that, and that the one who is not at
all deaf is deaf for all that.

'Li-lou does not know how to discriminate right colour.' Li-lou lived in
the reign of the Emperor Huang. He is said to have been able to
distinguish the point of a soft hair at a distance of one hundred paces.
His eyesight was extraordinary. When the Emperor Huang took a pleasure
cruise on the River Ch'ih, he dropped his precious jewel in the water
and made Li fetch it up.

But he failed. The Emperor made Ch'ih-kou search for it; but he also
failed to find it. Later Hsiang-wang was ordered to get it, and he got
it. Hence,

'When Hsiang-wang goes down, the precious gem shines

most brilliantly; But where Li-lou walks about, the waves rise even to
the

sky.'

When we come to these higher spheres, even the eyes of Li-lou are
incapable of discriminating the right colour.

'How can Shih-kuang recognize the mysterious tune?' Shih-kuang was the
son of Ching-kuang of Chin in the province of Chiang under the Chou
dynasty. His other name was Tzu-yeh. He could thoroughly distinguish the
five sounds and the six notes; he could even hear the ants fighting on
the other side of a hill. When Chin and Ch'u were at war, Shih-kuang
could tell, just by softly fingering the strings of his lute, that the
engagement would surely be unfavourable for Ch'u. In spite of his
extraordinary sensitiveness Seccho declares that he is unable to
recognize the mysterious time. After all, one who is not at all deaf is
really deaf. The most exquisite note in the higher spheres is beyond the
hearing of Shih-kuang. Says Seccho, I am not going to be a Li-lou, nor a
Shih-kuang; for

'What life can compare with this? Sitting quietly by the

window, I watch the leaves fall and the flowers bloom, as the seasons

come and go.'

When one reaches this stage of realization, seeing is no-seeing, hearing
is no-hearing, preaching is no-preaching. When hungry one eats, when
tired one sleeps. Let the leaves fall, let the flowers bloom as they
like. When the leaves fall, I know it is the autumn; when the flowers
bloom, I know it is the spring.

Having swept everything clean before you, Seccho now opens a
passage-way, saying:

' Do you understand, or not ? An iron bar without a hole!'

He has done all he could for you; he is exhausted—only able to turn
round and present you with this iron bar without a hole. It

is a most significant expression. Look and see with your own eyes! If
you hesitate, you miss the mark for ever.

Yengo (the author of this commentary) now raised his staff and said, 'Do
you see?' He then struck his chair and said, 'Do you hear?' Coming down
from the chair, he said, 'Was anything talked about?'

What precisely is the significance of that iron bar without a hole ? I
do not pretend to know. Zen has always specialized in nonsense as a
means of stimulating the mind to go forward to that which is beyond
sense; so perhaps the point of the bar resides precisely in its
pointlessness and in our disturbed, bewildered reaction to that
pointlessness.

In the root divine Wisdom is all-Brahman; in the stem she is
all-Illusion; in the flower she is all-World; and in the fruit,
all-Liberation.

Tantra Tattva

The Sravakas and the Pratyekabuddhas, when they reach the eighth stage
of the Bodhisattva's discipline, become so intoxicated with the bliss of
mental tranquillity that they fail to realize that the visible world is
nothing but the Mind. They are still in the realm of individuation;
their insight is not yet pure. The Bodhisattvas, on the other hand, are
alive to their original vows, flowing out of the all-embracing love that
is in their hearts. They do not enter into Nirvana (as a state separate
from the world of becoming); they know that the visible world is nothing
but a manifestation of Mind itself.

Condensed from the Lankavatara Sutra

A conscious being alone understands what is meant bj^saaoftgU To those
not endowed with consciousness the moyiftg ^f@if^

ligible. If you exercise yourself in the practice of £eeni\«f vonr mind

unmoved, The immovable you gain is

If you are desirous for the truly immovable,

The immovable is in the moving itself,

And this immovable is the truly immovable one.

There is no seed of Buddhahood where there is no consciousness.

Mark well how varied are the aspects of the immovable one,

And know that the first reality is immovable.

Only when this reality is attained

Is the true working of Suchness understood.

Hui Neng

These phrases about the unmoving first mover remind one of Aristotle.
But between Aristotle and the exponents of the Perennial Philosophy
within the great religious traditions there is this vast difference:
Aristotle is primarily concerned with cosmology, the Perennial
Philosophers are primarily concerned with liberation and enlightenment:
Aristotle is content to know about the unmoving mover, from the outside
and theoretically; the aim of the Perennial Philosophers is to become
directly aware of it, to know it unitively, so that they and others may
actually become the unmoving One. This unitive knowledge can be
knowledge in the heights, or knowledge in the fullness, or knowledge
simultaneously in the heights and the fullness. Spiritual knowledge
exclusively in the heights of the soul was rejected by Mahayana Buddhism
as inadequate. The similar rejection of quietism within the Christian
tradition will be touched upon in the section,' Contemplation and
Action/ Meanwhile it is interesting to find that the problem which
aroused such acrimonious debate throughout seventeenth-century Europe
had arisen for the Buddhists at a considerably earlier epoch. But
whereas in Catholic Europe the outcome of the battle over Molinos, Mme
Guyon and Fenelon was to all intents and purposes the extinction of
mysticism for the best part of two centuries, in Asia the two parties
were tolerant enough to agree to differ. Hinayana spirituality continued
to explore the heights within, while the Mahayanist masters held up the
ideal not of the Arhat, but of

the Bodhisattva, and pointed the way to spiritual knowledge in its
fullness as well as in its heights. What follows is a poetical account,
by a Zen saint of the eighteenth century, of the state of those who have
realized the Zen ideal.

Abiding with the non-particular which is in particulars, Going or
returning, they remain for ever unmoved. Taking hold of the not-thought
which lies in thoughts, In their every act they hear the voice of Truth.
How boundless the sky of contemplation! How transparent the moonlight of
the four-fold Wisdom! As the Truth reveals itself in its eternal
tranquillity, This very earth is the Lotus-Land of Purity, And this body
is the body of the Buddha.

Hakuin

Nature's intent is neither food, nor drink, nor clothing, nor comfort,
nor anything else from which God is left out. Whether you like it or
not, whether you know it or not, secretly Nature seeks and hunts and
tries to ferret out the track in which God may be found.

Eckhart

Any flea as it is in God is nobler than the highest of the angels in
himself.

Eckhart

My inner man relishes things not as creatures but as the gift of God.
But to my innermost man they savour not of God's gift, but of ever and
aye.

Eckhart

Pigs eat acorns, but neither consider the sun that gave them life, nor
the influence of the heavens by which they were nourished, nor the very
root of the tree from whence they came.

Thomas Traherne

Your enjoyment of the world is never right till every morning you awake
in Heaven; see yourself in your Father's palace; and look upon the
skies, the earth and the air as celestial joys; having such a reverend
esteem of all, as if you were among the Angels. The bride of a monarch,
in her husband's chamber, hath no such causes of delight as you.

You never enjoy the world aright till the sea itself floweth in your
veins, till you are clothed with the heavens and crowned with the stars;
and perceive yourself to be the sole heir of the whole world, and more
than so, because men are in it who are every one sole heirs as well as
you. Till you can sing and rejoice and delight in God, as misers do in
gold, and kings in sceptres, you can never enjoy the world.

Till your spirit filleth the whole world, and the stars are your jewels;
till you are as familiar with the ways of God in all ages as with your
walk and table; till you are intimately acquainted with that shady
nothing out of which the world was made; till you love men so as to
desire their happiness with a thirst equal to the zeal of your own; till
you delight in God for being good to all; you never enjoy the world.
Till you more feel it than your private estate, and are more present in
the hemisphere, considering the glories and the beauties there, than in
your own house; till you remember how lately you were made, and how
wonderful it was when you came into it; and more rejoice in the palace
of your glory than if it had been made today morning.

Yet further, you never enjoyed the world aright, till you so love the
beauty of enjoying it, that you are covetous and earnest to persuade
others to enjoy it. And so perfectly hate the abominable corruption of
men in despising it that you had rather suffer the flames of hell than
willingly be guilty of their error.

The world is a mirror of Infinite Beauty, yet no man sees it. It is a
Temple of Majesty, yet no man regards it. It is a region of Light and
Peace, did not men disquiet it. It is the Paradise of God. It is more to
man since he is fallen than it was before. It is the place of Angels and
the Gate of Heaven. When Jacob waked out of his dream, he said, God is
here, and I wist it not.

How dreadful is this place! This is none other than the House of God and
the Gate of Heaven.

Thomas Traherne

Before going on to discuss the means whereby it is possible to come to
the fullness as well as the height of spiritual knowledge, let us
briefly consider the experience of those who have been privileged to
'behold the One in all things,' but have made no efforts to perceive it
within themselves. A great deal of interesting material on this subject
may be found in Buck's Cosmic Consciousness. All that need be said here
is that such 'cosmic consciousness' may come unsought and is in the
nature of what Catholic theologians call a 'gratuitous grace.' One may
have a gratuitous grace (the power of healing, for example, or
foreknowledge) while in a state of mortal sin, and the gift is neither
necessary to, nor sufficient for, salvation. At the best such sudden
accessions of 'cosmic consciousness' as are described by Buck are merely
unusual invitations to further personal effort in the direction of the
inner height as well as the external fullness of knowledge. In a great
many cases the invitation is not accepted; the gift is prized for the
ecstatic pleasure it brings; its coming is remembered nostalgically and,
if the recipient happens to be a poet, written about with eloquence—as
Byron, for example, wrote in a splendid passage of Childe Harold, as
Wordsworth wrote in Tintern Abbey and The Prelude. In these matters no
human being may presume to pass definitive judgment upon another human
being; but it is at least permissible to say that, on the basis of the
biographical evidence, there is no reason to suppose that either
Wordsworth or Byron ever seriously did anything about the theo-phanies
they described; nor is there any evidence that these theophanies were of
themselves sufficient to transform their characters. That enormous
egotism, to which De Quincey and Keats and Haydon bear witness, seems to
have remained with Wordsworth to the end. And Byron was as fascinatingly
and tragi-comically Byronic after he had beheld the One in all things as
he was before.

F

In this context it is interesting to compare Wordsworth with another
great nature lover and man of letters, St. Bernard. 'Let Nature be your
teacher/ says the first; and he goes on to affirm that

One impulse from the vernal wood Will tell you more of man, Of moral
evil and of good, Than all the sages can.

St. Bernard speaks in what seems a similar strain. 'What I know of the
divine sciences and Holy Scripture, I learnt in woods and fields. I have
had no other masters than the beeches and the oaks.' And in another of
his letters he says: 'Listen to a man of experience: thou wilt learn
more in the woods than in books. Trees and stones will teach thee more
than thou canst acquire from the mouth of a magister.' The phrases are
similar; but their inner significance is very different. In Augustine's
language, God alone is to be enjoyed; creatures are not to be enjoyed
but used—used with love and compassion and a wondering, detached
appreciation, as means to the knowledge of that which may be enjoyed.
Wordsworth, like almost all other literary Nature-worshippers, preaches
the enjoyment of creatures rather than their use for the attainment of
spiritual ends—a use which, as we shall see, entails much
self-discipline for the user. For Bernard it goes without saying that
his correspondents are actively practising this self-discipline and that
Nature, though loved and heeded as a teacher, is only being used as a
means to God, not enjoyed as though she were God. The beauty of flowers
and landscape is not merely to be relished as one 'wanders lonely as a
cloud' about the countryside, is not merely to be pleasurably remembered
when one is lying 'in vacant or in pensive mood' on the sofa in the
library, after tea. The reaction must be a little more strenuous and
purposeful. 'Here, my brothers,' says an ancient Buddhist author, 'are
the roots of trees, here are empty places; meditate/ The truth is, of
course, that the world is only for those

who have deserved it; for, in Philo's words, 'even though a man may be
incapable of making himself worthy of the creator of the cosmos, yet he
ought to try to make himself worthy of the cosmos. He ought to transform
himself from being a man into the nature of the cosmos and become, if
one may say so, a little cosmos.' For those who have not deserved the
world, either by making themselves worthy of its creator (that is to
say, by non-attachment and a total self-naughting), or, less arduously,
by making themselves worthy of the cosmos (by bringing order and a
measure of unity to the manifold confusion of undisciplined human
personality), the world is, spiritually speaking, a very dangerous
place.

That nirvana and samsara are one is a fact about the nature of the
universe; but it is a fact which cannot be fully realized or directly
experienced, except by souls far advanced in spirituality. For ordinary,
nice, unregenerate people to accept this truth by hearsay, and to act
upon it in practice, is merely to court disaster. All the dismal story
of antinomianism is there to warn us of what happens when men and women
make practical applications of a merely intellectual and unrealized
theory that all is God and God is all. And hardly less depressing than
the spectacle of antinomianism is that of the earnestly respectable
'well-rounded life' of good citizens who do their best to live
sacramentally, but don't in fact have any direct acquaintance with that
for which the sacramental activity really stands. Dr. Oman, in his The
Natural and the Super-natural, writes at length on the theme that
'reconciliation to the evanescent is revelation of the eternal'; and in
a recent volume, Science, Religion and the Future, Canon Raven applauds
Dr. Oman for having stated the principles of a theology in which there
could be no ultimate antithesis between nature and grace, science and
religion, in which, indeed, the worlds of the scientist and the
theologian are seen to be one and the same. All this is in full accord
with Taoism and Zen Buddhism and with such Christian teachings as St.
Augustine's Ama et fac quod vis and Father Lallemant's advice to
theocentric con-templatives to go out and act in the world, since their
actions

are the only ones capable of doing any real good to the world. But what
neither Dr. Oman nor Canon Raven makes sufficiently clear is that nature
and grace, samsara and nirvana, perpetual perishing and eternity, are
really and experientially one only to persons who have fulfilled certain
conditions. Fac quod vis in the temporal world—but only when you have
learnt the infinitely difficult art of loving God with all your mind and
heart and your neighbour as yourself. If you haven't learnt this lesson,
you will either be an antinomian eccentric or criminal or else a
respectable well-rounded-lifer, who has left himself no time to
understand either nature or grace. The Gospels are perfectly clear about
the process by which, and by which alone, a man may gain the right to
live in the world as though he were at home in it: he must make a total
denial of selfhood, submit to a complete and absolute mortification. At
one period of his career, Jesus himself seems to have undertaken
austerities, not merely of the mind, but of the body. There is the
record of his forty days' fast and his statement, evidently drawn from
personal experience, that some demons cannot be cast out except by those
who have fasted much as well as prayed. (The Cure d'Ars, whose knowledge
of miracles and corporal penance was based on personal experience,
insists on the close correlation between severe bodily austerities and
the power to get petitionary prayer answered in ways that are sometimes
supernormal.) The Pharisees reproached Jesus because he 'came eating and
drinking,' and associated with 'publicans and sinners'; they ignored, or
were unaware of, the fact that this apparently worldly prophet had at
one time rivalled the physical austerities of John the Baptist and was
practising the spiritual mortifications which he consistently preached.
The pattern of Jesus' life is essentially similar to that of the ideal
sage, whose career is traced in the ' Oxherding Pictures,' so popular
among Zen Buddhists. The wild ox, symbolizing the unregenerate self, is
caught, made to change its direction, then tamed and gradually
transformed from black to white. Regeneration goes so far that for a
time the ox is completely lost, so that nothing remains to be pic-

tured but the full-orbed moon, symbolizing Mind, Suchness, the Ground.
But this is not the final stage. In the end, the herdsman comes back to
the world of men, riding on the back of his ox. Because he now loves,
loves to the extent of being identified with the divine object of his
love, he can do what he likes ; for what he likes is what the Nature of
Things likes. He is found in company with wine-bibbers and butchers; he
and they are all converted into Buddhas. For him, there is complete
reconciliation to the evanescent and, through that reconciliation,
revelation of the eternal. But for nice ordinary unregenerate people the
only reconciliation to the evanescent is that of indulged passions, of
distractions submitted to and enjoyed. To tell such persons that
evanescence and eternity are the same, and not immediately to qualify
the statement, is positively fatal — for, in practice, they are not the
same except to the saint; and there is no record that anybody ever came
to sanctity who did not, at the outset of his or her career, behave as
if evanescence and eternity, nature and grace, were profoundly different
and in many respects incompatible. As always, the path of spirituality
is a knife-edge between abysses. On one side is the danger of mere
rejection and escape, on the other the danger of mere acceptance and the
enjoyment of things which should only be used as instruments or symbols.
The versified caption which accompanies the last of the ' Ox-herding
Pictures' runs as follows:

Even beyond the ultimate limits there extends a passage-way,

By which he comes back to the six realms of existence.

Every worldly affair is now a Buddhist work,

And wherever he goes he finds his home air.

Like a gem he stands out even in the mud,

Like pure gold he shines even in the furnace.

Along the endless road (of birth and death) he

unto himself. In all circumstances he moves tranquil and

The means wherebv man's final end is to ibnfttainechwSlI x l5i

described and illustrated at length in the section on 'Mortification and
Non-attachment.' This section, however, is mainly concerned with the
disciplining of the will. But the disciplining of the will must have as
its accompaniment a no less thorough disciplining of the consciousness.
There has to be a conversion, sudden or otherwise, not merely of the
heart, but also of the senses and of the perceiving mind. What follows
is a brief account of this metanoia, as the Greeks called it, this total
and radical 'change of mind.'

It is in the Indian and Far Eastern formulations of the Perennial
Philosophy that this subject is most systematically treated. What is
prescribed is a process of conscious discrimination between the personal
self and the Self that is identical with Brahman, between the individual
ego and the Buddha-womb or Universal Mind. The result of this
discrimination is a more or less sudden and complete 'revulsion' of
consciousness, and the realization of a state of * no-mind/ which may be
described as the freedom from perceptual and intellectual attachment to
the ego-principle. This state of 'no-mind' exists, as it were, on a
knife-edge between the carelessness of the average sensual man and the
strained over-eagerness of the zealot for salvation. To achieve it, one
must walk delicately and, to maintain it, must learn to combine the most
intense alertness with a tranquil and self-denying passivity, the most
indomitable determination with a perfect submission to the leadings of
the spirit. 'When no-mind is sought after by a mind,' says Huang-Po,'
that is making it a particular object of thought. There is only
testimony of silence; it goes beyond thinking.' In other words, we, as
separate individuals, must not try to think it, but rather permit
ourselves to be thought by it. Similarly, in the Diamond Sutra we read
that if a Bodhisattva, in his attempt to realize Suchness, 'retains the
thought of an ego, a person, a separate being, or a soul, he is no
longer a Bodhisattva.' Al-Ghazzali, the philosopher of Sufism, also
stresses the need for intellectual humbleness and docility. 'If the
thought that he is effaced from self occurs to one who is in fana (a
term roughly corresponding to Zen's

"no-mind," or mushin\ that is a defect. The highest state is to be
effaced from effacement.' There is an ecstatic
effacement-from-effacement in the interior heights of the Atman-Brahman;
and there is another, more comprehensive effacement-from-effacement, not
only in the inner heights, but also in and through the world, in the
waking, everyday knowledge of God in his fullness.

A man must become truly poor and as free from his own crea-turely will
as he was when he was born. And I tell you, by the eternal truth, that
so long as you desire to fulfil the will of God and have any hankering
after eternity and God, for just so long you are not truly poor. He
alone has true spiritual poverty who wills nothing, knows nothing,
desires nothing.

Eckhart

The Perfect Way knows no difficulties, Except that it refuses to make
preferences. Only when freed from hate and love Does it reveal itself
fully and without disguise.

A tenth of an inch's difference,

And heaven and earth are set apart.

If you wish to see it before your own eyes,

Have no fixed thoughts either for or against it.

To set up what you like against what you dislike— This is the disease of
the mind.

When the deep meaning of the Way is not understood, Peace of mind is
disturbed to no purpose. . . .

Pursue not the outer entanglements, Dwell not in the inner void; Be
serene in the oneness of things, And dualism vanishes of itself.

When you strive to gain quiescence by stopping motion, The quiescence so
gained is ever in motion. So long as you tarry in such dualism, How can
you realize oneness ?

And when oneness is not thoroughly grasped. Loss is sustained in two
ways: The denying of external reality is the assertion of it. And the
assertion of Emptiness (the Absolute) is the denying of it. . . .

Transformations going on in the empty world that confronts us Appear to
be real because of Ignorance. Do not strive to seek after the True, Only
cease to cherish opinions.

The two exist because of the One;

But hold not even to this One.

When a mind is not disturbed,

The ten thousand things offer no offence. . . .

If an eye never falls asleep,

All dreams will cease of themselves;

If the Mind retains its absoluteness,

The ten thousand things are of one substance.

When the deep mystery of one Suchness is fathomed, All of a sudden we
forget the external entanglements; When the ten thousand things are
viewed in their oneness, We return to the origin and remain where we
have always been.. . .

One in all,

All in One—

If only this is realized,

No more worry about not being perfect!

When Mind and each believing mind are not divided, And undivided are
each believing mind and Mind, This is where words fail, For it is not of
the past, present or future.

The Third Patriarch of Zen

Do what you are doing now, suffer what you are suffering now; to do all
this with holiness, nothing need be changed but your hearts. Sanctity
consists in willing what happens to us by God's order.

dc Caussade

The seventeenth-century Frenchman's vocabulary is very different from
that of the seventh-century Chinaman's. But the advice they give is
fundamentally similar. Conformity to the will of God, submission,
docility to the leadings of the Holy Ghost—in practice, if not verbally,
these are the same as conformity to the Perfect Way, refusing to have
preferences and cherish opinions, keeping the eyes open so that dreams
may cease and Truth reveal itself.

The world inhabited by ordinary, nice, unregenerate people is mainly
dull (so dull that they have to distract their minds from being aware of
it by all sorts of artificial 'amusements'), sometimes briefly and
intensely pleasurable, occasionally or quite often disagreeable and even
agonizing. For those who have deserved the world by making themselves
fit to see God within it as well as within their own souls, it wears a
very different aspect.

The corn was orient and immortal wheat, which never should be reaped,
nor was ever sown. I thought it had stood from everlasting to
everlasting. The dust and stones of the street were as precious as gold.
The gates at first were the end of the world. The green trees, when I
saw them first through one of the gates, transported and ravished me;
their sweetness and unusual beauty made my heart to leap, and almost mad
with ecstasy, they were such strange and wonderful things. The Men 1 O
what vener-

the light of the day, and something infinite behind everything appeared;
which talked with my expectation and moved my desire. The city seemed to
stand in Eden, or to be built in Heaven. The streets were mine, the
temple was mine, the people were mine, their clothes and gold and silver
were mine, as much as their sparkling eyes, fair skins and ruddy faces.
The skies were mine, and so were the sun and moon and stars, and all the
world was mine; and I the only spectator and enjoyer of it. . . . And so
it was that with much ado I was corrupted and made to learn the dirty
devices of the world. Which now I unlearn, and become as it were a
little child again, that I may enter into the Kingdom of God.

Thomas Traherne

Therefore I give you still another thought, which is yet purer and more
spiritual: In the Kingdom of Heaven all is in all, all is one, and all
is ours.

Eckhart

The doctrine that God is in the world has an important practical
corollary—the sacredness of Nature, and the sinfulness and folly of
man's overweening efforts to be her master rather than her intelligently
docile collaborator. Sub-human lives and even things are to be treated
with respect and understanding, not brutally oppressed to serve our
human ends.

The ruler of the Southern Ocean was Shu, the ruler of the Northern Ocean
was Hu, and the ruler of the Centre was Chaos. Shu and Hu were
continually meeting in the land of Chaos, who treated them very well.
They consulted together how they

might repay his kindness, and said: 'Men all have seven orifices for the
purpose of seeing, hearing, eating and breathing, while this ruler alone
has not a single one. Let us try to make them for him/ Accordingly they
dug one orifice in him every day. At the end of seven days Chaos died.

Chuong T%u

In this delicately comic parable Chaos is Nature in the state of wu-wei
—non-assertion or equilibrium. Shu and Hu are the living images of those
busy persons who thought they would improve on Nature by turning dry
prairies into wheat fields, and produced deserts; who proudly proclaimed
the Conquest of the Air, and then discovered that they had defeated
civilization ; who chopped down vast forests to provide the newsprint
demanded by that universal literacy which was to make the world safe for
intelligence and democracy, and got wholesale erosion, pulp magazines
and the organs of Fascist, Communist, capitalist and nationalist
propaganda. In brief, Shu and Hu are devotees of the apocalyptic
religion of Inevitable Progress, and their creed is that the Kingdom of
Heaven is outside you, and in the future. Chuang Tzu, on the other hand,
like all good Taoists, has no desire to bully Nature into subserving
ill-considered temporal ends, at variance with the final end of men as
formulated in the Perennial Philosophy. His wish is to work with Nature,
so as to produce material and social conditions in which individuals may
realize Tao on every level from the physiological up to the spiritual.

Compared with that of the Taoists and Far Eastern Buddhists, the
Christian attitude towards Nature has been curiously insensitive and
often downright domineering and violent. Taking their cue from an
unfortunate remark in Genesis, Catholic moralists have regarded animals
as mere things which men do right to exploit for their own ends. Like
landscape painting, the humanitarian movement in Europe was an almost
completely secular affair. In the Far East both were essentially
religious.

The Greeks believed that hubris was always followed by nemesis, that if
you went too far you would get a knock on the

head to remind you that the gods will not tolerate insolence on the part
of mortal men. In the sphere of human relations, the modern mind
understands the doctrine of hubris and regards it as mainly true. We
wish pride to have a fall, and we see that very often it does fall.

To have too much power over one's fellows, to be too rich, too violent,
too ambitious—all this invites punishment, and in the long run, we
notice, punishment of one sort or another duly comes. But the Greeks did
not stop there. Because they regarded Nature as in some way divine, they
felt that it had to be respected and they were convinced that a
hubristic lack of respect for Nature would be punished by avenging
nemesis. In 'The Persians,' Aeschylus gives the reasons—the ultimate,
metaphysical reasons—for the barbarians' defeat. Xerxes was punished for
two offences—overweening imperialism directed against the Athenians, and
overweening imperialism directed against Nature. He tried to enslave his
fellow-men, and he tried to enslave the sea, by building a bridge across
the Hellespont.

Atossa. From shore to shore he bridged the Hellespont. Ghost of Darius.
What, could he chain the mighty Bosphorus ? Atossa. Even so, some god
assisting his design. Ghost of Darius. Some god of power to cloud his
better sense.

Today we recognize and condemn the first kind of imperialism; but most
of us ignore the existence and even the very possibility of the second.
And yet the author of Erewhon was certainly not a fool, and now that we
are paying the appalling price for our much touted 'conquest of Nature 5
his book seems more than ever topical. And Butler was not the only
nineteenth-century sceptic in regard to Inevitable Progress. A
generation or more before him, Alfred de Vigny was writing about the new
technological marvel of his days, the steam engine—writing in a tone
very different from the enthusiastic roarings and trumpetings of his
great contemporary, Victor Hugo.

Sur le taureau defer, quifume^ souffle et beugle? L'homme est monte trap
tot. Nul ne connatt encor Quels or ages en luiporte ce rude aveugle, Et
le gat voyageur lui livre son tresor.

And a little later in the same poem he adds :

Tous se sont dit : * Allans J mats aucun nest le maitre D'un dragon
mugissant quun savant a fait naitre. Nous nous sommes joues a plus fort
que nous tous.

Looking backwards across the carnage and the devastation, we can see
that Vigny was perfectly right. None of those gay travellers, of whom
Victor Hugo was the most vociferously eloquent, had the faintest notion
where that first, funny little Puffing Billy was taking them. Or rather
they had a very clear notion, but it happened to be entirely false. For
they were convinced that Puffing Billy was hauling them at full speed
towards universal peace and the brotherhood of man; while the newspapers
which they were so proud of being able to read, as the train rumbled
along towards its Utopian destination not more than fifty years or so
away, were the guarantee that liberty and reason would soon be
everywhere triumphant. Puffing Billy has now turned into a four-motored
bomber loaded with white phosphorus and high explosives, and the free
press is everywhere the servant of its advertisers, of a pressure group,
or of the government. And yet, for some inexplicable reason, the
travellers (now far from gay) still hold fast to the religion of
Inevitable Progress—which is, in the last analysis, the hope and faith
(in the teeth of all human experience) that one can get something for
nothing. How much saner and more realistic is the Greek view that every
victory has to be paid for, and that, for some victories, the price
exacted is so high that it outweighs any advantage that may be obtained!
Modern man no longer regards Nature as being in any sense divine and
feels perfectly free to behave towards her as an overweening conqueror
and tyrant. The spoils of recent techno-

logical imperialism have been enormous; but meanwhile nemesis has seen
to it that we get our kicks as well as halfpence. For example, has the
ability to travel in twelve hours from New York to Los Angeles given
more pleasure to the human race than the dropping of bombs and fire has
given pain ? There is no known method of computing the amount of
felicity or goodness in the world at large. What is obvious, however, is
that the advantages accruing from recent technological advances—or, in
Greek phraseology, from recent acts of hubris directed against
Nature—are generally accompanied by corresponding disadvantages, that
gains in one direction entail losses in other directions, and that we
never get something except for something. Whether the net result of
these elaborate credit and debit operations is a genuine Progress in
virtue, happiness, charity and intelligence is something we can never
definitely determine. It is because the reality of Progress can never be
determined that the nineteenth and twentieth centuries have had to treat
it as an article of religious faith. To the exponents of the Perennial
Philosophy, the question whether Progress is inevitable or even real is
not a matter of primary importance. For them, the important thing is
that individual men and women should come to the unitive knowledge of
the divine Ground, and what interests them in regard to the social
environment is not its progressiveness or non-progressiveness (whatever
those terms may mean), but the degree to which it helps or hinders
individuals in their advance towards man's final end.

Chapter 5 CHARITY

He that loveth not knoweth not God, for God is love.

z John iv

By love may He be gotten and holden, but by thought never.

The Cloud of Unknowing

Whosoever studies to reach contemplation (i.e. unitive knowledge) should
begin by searchmgly enquiring of himself how much he loves. For love is
the motive power of the mind (machina mentis) , which draws it out of
the world and raises it on high.

St. Gregory the Great

The astrolabe of the mysteries of God is love.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

Heavens, deal so still! Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man That
slaves your ordinance, that will not see Because he doth not feel, feel
your power quickly.

Shakespeare

Love is infallible; it has no errors, for all errors are the want of
love.

William Law

"\V7~E can only love what we know, and we can never know W completely
what we do not love. Love is a mode of knowledge, and when the love is
sufficiently disinterested and sufficiently intense, the knowledge
becomes unitive knowledge and so takes on the quality of infallibility.
Where there is no disinterested love (or, more briefly,* no charity),
there is only

biased self-love, and consequently only a partial and distorted
knowledge both of the self and of the world of things, lives, minds and
spirit outside the self. The lust-dieted man 'slaves the ordinances of
Heaven'—that is to say, he subordinates the laws of Nature and the
spirit to his own cravings. The result is that 'he does not feel' and
therefore makes himself incapable of knowledge. His ignorance is
ultimately voluntary; if he cannot see, it is because 'he will not see.'
Such voluntary ignorance inevitably has its negative reward. Nemesis
follows hubris —sometimes in a spectacular way, as when the self-blinded
man (Macbeth, Othello, Lear) falls into the trap which his own ambition
or possessiveness or petulant vanity has prepared for him; sometimes in
a less obvious way, as in the cases where power, prosperity and
reputation endure to the end but at the cost of an ever-increasing
imperviousness to grace and enlightenment, an ever completer inability
to escape, now or hereafter, from the stifling prison of selfness and
separateness. How profound can be the spiritual ignorance by which such
'enslavers of Heaven's ordinances' are punished is indicated by the
behaviour of Cardinal Richelieu on his death-bed. The priest who
attended him urged the great man to prepare his soul for its coming
ordeal by forgiving all his enemies. 'I have never had any enemies,' the
Cardinal replied with the calm sincerity of an ignorance which long
years of intrigue and avarice and ambition had rendered as absolute as
had been his political power, 'save only those of the State.' Like
Napoleon, but in a different way, he was 'feeling heaven's power,'
because he had refused to feel charity and therefore refused to know the
whole truth about his own soul or anything else.

Here on earth the love of God is better than the knowledge of God, while
it is better to know inferior things than to love them. By knowing them
we raise them, in a way, to our intelligence, whereas by loving them we
stoop towards them and may become subservient to them, as the miser to
his gold.

St. Thomas Aquinas (paraphrased)

This remark seems, at first sight, to be incompatible with what precedes
it. But in reality St. Thomas is merely distinguishing between the
various forms of love and knowledge. It is better to love-know God than
just to know about God, without love, through the reading of a treatise
on theology. Gold, on the other hand, should never be known with the
miser's love, or rather concupiscence, but either abstractly, as the
scientific investigator knows it, or else with the disinterested
love-knowledge of the artist in metal, or of the spectator, who
love-knows the goldsmith's work, not for its cash value, not for the
sake of possessing it, but just because it is beautiful. And the same
applies to all created things, lives and minds. It is bad to love-know
them with self-centred attachment and cupidity; it is somewhat better to
know them with scientific dispassion; it is best to supplement abstract
knowledge-without-cupidity with true disinterested love-knowledge,
having the quality of aesthetic delight, or of charity, or of both
combined.

We make an idol of truth itself; for truth apart from charity is not
God, but his image and idol, which we must neither love nor worship.

Pascal

By a kind of philological accident (which is probably no accident at
all, but one of the more subtle expressions of man's deep-seated will to
ignorance and spiritual darkness), the word 'charity' has come, in
modern English, to be synonymous with 'almsgiving,' and is almost never
used in its original sense, as signifying the highest and most divine
form of love. Owing to this impoverishment of our, at the best of times,
very inadequate vocabulary of psychological and spiritual terms, the
word 'love' has had to assume an added burden. 'God is love/ we repeat
glibly, and that we must 'love our neighbours as ourselves' ; but
'love,' unfortunately, stands for everything from what happens when, on
the screen, two close-ups rapturously collide to what happens when a
John Woolman or a Peter Claver feels a concern about Negro slaves,
because they are

temples of the Holy Spirit — from what happens when crowds shout and
sing and wave flags in the Spon-Palast or the Red Square to what happens
when a solitary contemplative becomes absorbed in the prayer of simple
regard. Ambiguity in vocabulary leads to confusion of thought ; and, in
this matter of love, confusion of thought admirably serves the purpose
of an un-regenerate and divided human nature that is determined to make
the best of both worlds — to say that it is serving God, while in fact
it is serving Mammon, Mars or Priapus.

Systematically or in brief aphorism and parable, the masters of the
spiritual life have described the nature of true charity and have
distinguished it from the other, lower forms of love. Let us consider
its principal characteristics in order. First, charity is disinterested,
seeking no reward, nor allowing itself to be diminished by any return of
evil for its good. God is to be loved for Himself, not for his gifts,
and persons and things are to be loved for God's sake, because they are
temples of the Holy Ghost. Moreover, since charity is disinterested, it
must of necessity be universal.

Love seeks no cause beyond itself and no fruit ; it is its own fruit,
its own enjoyment. I love because I love; I love in order that I may
love ---- Of all the motions and affections of the soul, love is the
only one by means of which the creature, though not on equal terms, is
able to treat with the Creator and to give back something resembling
what has been given to it. ... When God loves, He only desires to be
loved, knowing that love will render all those who love Him happy.

St. Bernard

For as love has no by-ends, wills nothing but its own increase, so
everything is as oil to its flame; it must have that which it wills and
cannot be disappointed, because everything (including un-kindness on the
part of those loved) naturally helps it to live in its own way and to
bring forth its own work.

William Law

Those who speak ill of me are really my good friends. When, being
slandered, I cherish neither enmity nor preference, There grows within
me the power of love and humility, which is born of the Unborn.

Kung-chia Ta-shih

Some people want to see God with their eyes as they see a cow, and to
love Him as they love their cow—for the milk and cheese and profit it
brings them. This is how it is with people who love God for the sake of
outward wealth or inward comfort. They do not rightly love God, when
they love Him for their own advantage. Indeed, I tell you the truth, any
object you have in your mind, however good, will be a barrier between
you and the inmost Truth.

Eckhart

A beggar, Lord, I ask of Thee

More than a thousand kings could ask.

Each one wants something, which he asks of Thee.

I come to ask Thee to give me Thyself.

Ansari of Herat

I will have nothing to do with a love which would be for God or •in God.
This is a love which pure love cannot abide; for pure love is God
Himself.

St. Catherine of Genoa

As a mother, even at the risk of her own life, protects her son, her
only son, so let there be good will without measure between all beings.
Let good will without measure prevail in the whole world, above, below,
around, unstinted, unmixed with any feeling of differing or opposing
interests. If a man remain steadfastly in this state of mind all the
time he is awake, then is come to pass the saying, 'Even in this world
holiness has been found.'

Metta Sutta

Learn to look with an equal eye upon all beings, seeing the one Self in
all.

Srimad Bhagavatam

The second distinguishing mark of charity is that, unlike the lower
forms of love, it is not an emotion. It begins as an act of the will and
is consummated as a purely spiritual awareness, a unitive love-knowledge
of the essence of its object.

Let everyone understand that real love of God does not consist in
tear-shedding, nor in that sweetness and tenderness for which usually we
long, just because they console us, but in serving God in justice,
fortitude of soul and humility.

St. Teresa

The worth of love does not consist in high feelings, but in detachment,
in patience under all trials for the sake of God whom we love.

St. John of the Cross

By love I do not mean any natural tenderness, which is more or less in
people according to their constitution; but I mean a larger principle of
the soul, founded in reason and piety, which makes us tender, kind and
gentle to all our fellow creatures as creatures of God, and for his
sake.

William Law

The nature of charity, or the love-knowledge of God, is defined by
Shankara, the great Vedantist saint and philosopher of the ninth
century, in the thirty-second couplet of his Viveka-Chudamani.

Among the instruments of emancipation the supreme is devotion.
Contemplation of the true form of the real Self (the Atman which is
identical with Brahman) is said to be devotion.

In other words, the highest form of the love of God is an immediate
spiritual intuition, by which 'knower, known and knowledge are made
one.' The means to, and earlier stages of, this supreme love-knowledge
of Spirit by spirit are described by Shankara in the preceding verses of
his philosophical poem,

and consist in acts of a will directed towards the denial of self-ness
in thought, feeling and action, towards desirelessness and
non-attachment or (to use the corresponding Christian term) 'holy
indifference/ towards a cheerful acceptance of affliction, without
self-pity and without thought of returning evil for evil, and finally
towards unsleeping and one-pointed mindful-ness of the Godhead who is at
once transcendent and, because transcendent, immanent in every soul.

It is plain that no distinct object whatever that pleases the will can
be God; and, for that reason, if the will is to be united with Him, it
must empty itself, cast away every disorderly affection of the desire,
every satisfaction it may distinctly have, high and low, temporal and
spiritual, so that, purified and cleansed from all unruly satisfactions,
joys and desires, it may be wholly occupied, with all its affections, in
loving God. For if the will can in any way comprehend God and be united
with Him, it cannot be through any capacity of the desire, but only by
love; and as all the delight, sweetness and joy, of which the will is
sensible, is not love, it follows that none of these pleasing
impressions can be the adequate means of uniting the will to God. These
adequate means consist in an act of the will. And because an act of the
will is quite distinct from feeling, it is by an act that the will is
united with God and rests in Him; that act is love. This union is never
wrought by feeling or exertion of the desire; for these remain in the
soul as aims and ends. It is only as motives of love that feelings can
be of service, if the will is bent on going onwards, and for nothing
else. . . .

He, then, is very unwise who, when sweetness and spiritual delight fail
him, thinks for that reason that God has abandoned him; and when he
finds them again, rejoices and is glad, thinking that he has in that way
come to possess God.

More unwise still is he who goes about seeking for sweetness in God,
rejoices in it, and dwells upon it; for in so doing he is not seeking
after God with the will grounded in the emptiness of faith and charity,
but only in spiritual sweetness and delight, which is a created thing,
following herein in his own will and

fond pleasure. ... It is impossible for the will to attain to the
sweetness and bliss of the divine union otherwise than in detachment, in
refusing to the desire every pleasure in the things of heaven and earth.

St. John of the Cross

Love (the sensible love of the emotions) does not unify. True, it unites
in act; but it does not unite in essence.

Eckhart

The reason why sensible love even of the highest object cannot unite the
soul to its divine Ground in spiritual essence is that, like all other
emotions of the heart, sensible love intensifies that selfness, which is
the final obstacle in the way of such union. 'The damned are in eternal
movement without any mixture of rest; we mortals, who are yet in this
pilgrimage, have now movement, now rest Only God has repose without
movement/ Consequently it is only if we abide in the peace of God that
passes all understanding that we can abide in the knowledge and love of
God. And to the peace that passes understanding we have to go by way of
the humble and very ordinary peace which can be understood by
everybody—peace between nations and within them (for wars and violent
revolutions have the effect of more or less totally eclipsing God for
the majority of those involved in them); peace between individuals and
within the individual soul (for personal quarrels and private fears,
loves, hates, ambitions and distractions are, in their petty way, no
less fatal to the development of the spiritual life than are the greater
calamities). We have to will the peace that it is within our power to
get for ourselves and others, in order that we may be fit to receive
that other peace, which is a fruit of the Spirit and the condition, as
St. Paul implied, of the unitive knowledge-love of God.

It is by means of tranquillity of mind that you are able to transmute
this false mind of death and rebirth into the clear Intuitive

Mind and, by so doing, to realize the primal and enlightening Essence of
Mind, You should make this your starting point for spiritual practices.
Having harmonized your starting point with your goal, you will be able
by right practice to attain your true end of perfect Enlightenment.

If you wish to tranquillize your mind and restore its original purity,
you must proceed as you would do if you were purifying a jar of muddy
water. You first let it stand, until the sediment setdes at the bottom,
when the water will become clear, which corresponds with the state of
the mind before it was troubled by defiling passions. Then you carefully
strain off the pure water. ... When the mind becomes tranquillized and
concentrated into perfect unity, then all things will be seen, not in
their separate-ness, but in their unity, wherein there is no place for
the passions to enter, and which is in full conformity with the
mysterious and indescribable purity of Nirvana.

Surangama Sutra

This identity out of the One into the One and with the One is the source
and fountainhead and breaking forth of glowing Love.

Eckhart

Spiritual progress, as we have had occasion to discover in several other
contexts, is always spiral and reciprocal. Peace from distractions and
emotional agitations is the way to charity; and charity, or unitive
love-knowledge, is the way to the higher peace of God. And the same is
true of humility, which is the third characteristic mark of charity.
Humility is a necessary condition of the highest form of love, and the
highest form of love makes possible the consummation of humility in a
total self-naughting.

Would you become a pilgrim on the road of Love ? The first condition is
that you make yourself humble as dust and ashes.

Ans&ri of Herat

I have but one word to say to you concerning love for your neighbour,
namely that nothing save humility can mould you to it; nothing but the
consciousness of your own weakness can make you indulgent and pitiful to
that of others. You will answer, I quite understand that humility should
produce forbearance towards others, but how am I first to acquire
humility ? Two things combined will bring that about; you must never
separate them. The first is contemplation of the deep gulf, whence God's
all-powerful hand has drawn you out, and over which He ever holds you,
so to say, suspended. The second is the presence of that all-penetrating
God. It is only in beholding and loving God that we can learn
forgetfulness of self, measure duly the nothingness which has dazzled
us, and accustom ourselves thankfully to decrease beneath that great
Majesty which absorbs all things. Love God and you will be humble; love
God and you will throw off the love of self; love God and you will love
all that He gives you to love for love of Him.

Ftnelon

Feelings, as we have seen, may be of service as motives of charity; but
charity as charity has its beginning in the will— will to peace and
humility in oneself, will to patience and kindness towards one's
fellow-creatures, will to that disinterested love of God which 'asks
nothing and refuses nothing.' But the will can be strengthened by
exercise and confirmed by perseverance. This is very clearly brought out
in the following record—delightful for its Boswellian vividness—of a
conversation between the young Bishop of Belley and his beloved friend
and master, Francis de Sales.

I once asked the Bishop of Geneva what one must do to attain perfection.
* You must love God with all your heart,' he answered, 'and your
neighbour as yourself/

'I did not ask wherein perfection lies,' I rejoined, 'but how to attain
it.' ' Charity,' he said again, * that is both the means and the end,
the only way by which we can reach that perfection

which is, after all, but Charity itself. . . . Just as the soul is the
life of the body, so charity is the life of the soul.'

' I know all that,' I said. ' But I want to know how one is to love God
with all one's heart and one's neighbour as oneself.'

But again he answered, 'We must love God with all our hearts, and our
neighbour as ourselves.'

'I am no further than I was,' I replied. 'Tell me how to acquire such
love.'

' The best way, the shortest and easiest way of loving God with all
one's heart is to love Him wholly and heartily!'

He would give no other answer. At last, however, the Bishop said, 'There
are many besides you who want me to tell them of methods and systems and
secret ways of becoming perfect, and I can only tell them that the sole
secret is a hearty love of God, and the only way of attaining that love
is by loving. You learn to speak by speaking, to study by studying, to
run by running, to work by working; and just so you learn to love God
and man by loving. All those who think to learn in any other way deceive
themselves. If you want to love God, go on loving Him more and more.
Begin as a mere apprentice, and the very power of love will lead you on
to become a master in the art. Those who have made most progress will
continually press on, never believing themselves to have reached their
end; for charity should go on increasing until we draw our last breath.'

Jean Pierre Camus

The passage from what St. Bernard calls the 'carnal love* of the sacred
humanity to the spiritual love of the Godhead, from the emotional love
that can only unite lover and beloved in act to the perfect charity
which unifies them in spiritual substance, is reflected in religious
practice as the passage from meditation, discursive and affective, to
infused contemplation. All Christian writers insist that the spiritual
love of the Godhead is superior to the carnal love of the humanity,
which serves as introduction and means to man's final end in unitive
love-knowledge of the divine Ground; but all insist no less strongly
that carnal love is a necessary introduction and an indispensable

means. Oriental writers would agree that this is true for many persons,
but not for all, since there are some born contem-platives who are able
to 'harmonize their starting point with their goal' and to embark
directly upon the Yoga of Knowledge. It is from the point of view of the
born contemplative that the greatest of Taoist philosophers writes in
the following passage.

Those men who in a special way regard Heaven as Father and have, as it
were, a personal love for it, how much more should they love what is
above Heaven as Father! Other men in a special way regard their rulers
as better than themselves and they, as it were, personally die for them.
How much more should they die for what is truer than a ruler! When the
springs dry up, the fish are all together on dry land. They then moisten
each other with their dampness and keep each other wet with their slime.
But this is not to be compared with forgetting each other in a river or
lake.

Chuang T^u

The slime of personal afnd emotional love is remotely similar to the
water of the Godhead's spiritual being, but of inferior quality and
(precisely because the love is emotional and therefore personal) of
insufficient quantity. Having, by their voluntary ignorance, wrong-doing
and wrong being, caused the divine springs to dry up, human beings can
do something to mitigate the horrors of their situation by 4 keeping one
another wet with their slime.' But there can be no happiness or safety
in time and no deliverance into eternity, until they give up thinking
that slime is enough and, by abandoning themselves to what is in fact
their element, call back the eternal waters. To those who seek first the
Kingdom of God, all the rest will be added. From those who, like the
modern idolaters of progress, seek first all the rest in the expectation
that (after the harnessing of atomic power and the next revolution but
three) the Kingdom of God will be added, everything will be taken away.
And yet we continue to trust in progress, to regard

personal slime as the highest form of spiritual moisture and to prefer
an agonizing and impossible existence on dry land to love, joy and peace
in our native ocean.

The sect of lovers is distinct from all others; Lovers have a religion
and a faith all their own.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

The soul lives by that which it loves rather than in the body which it
animates. For it has not its life in the body, but rather gives it to
the body and lives in that which it loves.

St. John of the Cross

Temperance is love surrendering itself wholly to Him who is its object;
courage is love bearing all things gladly for the sake of Him who is its
object; justice is love serving only Him who is its object, and
therefore rightly ruling; prudence is love making wise distinctions
between what hinders and what helps itself.

St. Augustine

The distinguishing marks of charity are disinterestedness, tranquillity
and humility. But where there is disinterestedness there is neither
greed for personal advantage nor fear for personal loss or punishment;
where there is tranquillity, there is neither craving nor aversion, but
a steady will to conform to the divine Tao or Logos on every level of
existence and a steady awareness of the divine Suchness and what should
be one's own relations to it; and where there is humility there is no
censoriousness and no glorification of the ego or any projected
alter-ego at the expense of others, who are recognized as having the
same weaknesses and faults, but also the same capacity for transcending
them in the unitive knowledge of God, as one has oneself. From all this
it follows that charity is the root and substance of morality, and that
where there is little charity there will be much avoidable evil. All
this has been summed up in Augustine's formula: 'Love, and do what you
like.' Among the later elaborations of the Augustinian theme

we may cite the following from the writings of John Everard, one of
those spiritually minded seventeenth-century divines whose teachings
fell on die deaf ears of warring factions and, when the revolution and
the military dictatorship were at an end, on the even deafer ears of
Restoration clergymen and their successors in the Augustan age. (Just
how deaf those ears could be we may judge by what Swift wrote of his
beloved and morally perfect Houyhnhnms. The subject matter of their
conversations, as of their poetry, consisted of such things as
'friendship and benevolence, the visible operations of nature or ancient
traditions; the bounds and limits of virtue, the unerring rules of
reason/ Never once do the ideas of God, or charity, or deliverance
engage their minds. Which shows sufficiently clearly what the Dean of
St. Patrick's thought of the religion by which he made his money.)

Turn the man loose who has found the living Guide within him, and then
let him neglect the outward if he can! Just as you would say to a man
who loves his wife with all tenderness, "You are at liberty to beat her,
hurt her or kill her, if you want to/

John Everard

From this it follows that, where there is charity, there can be no
coercion.

God forces no one, for love cannot compel, and God's service, therefore,
is a thing of perfect freedom.

Hans Denk

But just because it cannot compel, charity has a kind of authority, a
non-coercive power, by means of which it defends itself and gets its
beneficent will done in the world—not always, of course, not inevitably
or automatically (for individuals and, still more, organizations can be
impenetrably armoured against divine influence), but in a surprisingly
large number of cases.

Heaven arms with pity those whom it would not see destroyed.

Lao T%u

'He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me, he robbed me*—in those who
harbour such thoughts hatred will never cease.

'He abused me, he beat me, he defeated me, he robbed me'— in those who
do not harbour such thoughts hatred will cease.

For hatred does not cease by hatred at any time—this is an old rule.

Dhammapada

Our present economic, social and international arrangements are based,
in large measure, upon organized lovelessness. We begin by lacking
charity towards Nature, so that instead of trying to co-operate with Tao
or the Logos on the inanimate and sub-human levels, we try to dominate
and exploit, we waste the earth's mineral resources, ruin its soil,
ravage its forests, pour filth into its rivers and poisonous fumes into
its air. From lovelessness in relation to Nature we advance to
lovelessness in relation to art—a lovelessness so extreme that we have
effectively killed all the fundamental or useful arts and set up various
kinds of mass-production by machines in their place. And of course this
lovelessness in regard to art is at the same time a lovelessness in
regard to the human beings who have to perform the fool-proof and
grace-proof tasks imposed by our mechanical art-surrogates and by the
interminable paper work connected with mass-production and
mass-distribution. With mass-production and mass-distribution go
mass-financing, and the three have conspired to expropriate
ever-increasing numbers of small owners of land and productive
equipment, thus reducing the sum of freedom among the majority and
increasing the power of a minority to exercise a coercive control over
the lives of their fellows. This coercively controlling minority is
composed of private capitalists or governmental bureaucrats or of both
classes of bosses acting in collaboration—and, of course, the coercive
and therefore essentially loveless nature of the control remains the
same, whether the bosses call them-

no THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

selves' company directors * or * civil servants.' The only difference
between these two kinds of oligarchical rulers is that the first derive
more of their power from wealth than from position within a
conventionally respected hierarchy, while the second derive more power
from position than from wealth. Upon this fairly uniform groundwork of
loveless relationships are imposed others, which vary widely from one
society to another, according to local conditions and local habits of
thought and feeling. Here are a few examples: contempt and exploitation
of coloured minorities living among white majorities, or of coloured
majorities governed by minorities of white imperialists; hatred of Jews,
Catholics, Freemasons or of any other minority whose language, habits,
appearance or religion happens to differ from those of the local
majority. And the crowning superstructure of uncharity is the organized
loveless-ness of the relations between state and sovereign state—a
love-lessness that expresses itself in the axiomatic assumption that it
is right and natural for national organizations to behave like thieves
and murderers, armed to the teeth and ready, at the first favourable
opportunity, to steal and kill. (Just how axiomatic is this assumption
about the nature of nationhood is shown by the history of Central
America. So long as the arbitrarily delimited territories of Central
America were called provinces of the Spanish colonial empire, there was
peace between their inhabitants. But early in the nineteenth century the
various administrative districts of the Spanish empire broke from their
allegiance to the 'mother country' and decided to become nations on the
European model. Result: they immediately went to war with one another.
Why? Because, by definition, a sovereign national state is an
organization that has the right and duty to coerce its members to steal
and kill on the largest possible scale.)

'Lead us not into temptation' must be the guiding principle of all
social organization, and the temptations to be guarded against and, so
far as possible, eliminated by means of appropriate economic and
political arrangements are temptations against charity, that is to say,
against the disinterested love of

God, Nature and man. First, the dissemination and general acceptance of
any form of the Perennial Philosophy will do something to preserve men
and women from the temptation to idolatrous worship of things in
time—church-worship, state-worship, revolutionary future-worship,
humanistic self-worship, all of them essentially and necessarily opposed
to charity. Next come decentralization, widespread private ownership of
land and the means of production on a small scale, discouragement of
monopoly by state or corporation, division of economic and political
power (the only guarantee, as Lord Acton was never tired of insisting,
of civil liberty under law). These social rearrangements would do much
to prevent ambitious individuals, organizations and governments from
being led into the temptation of behaving tyrannously; while
co-operatives, democratically controlled professional organizations and
town meetings would deliver the masses of the people from the temptation
of making their decentralized individualism too rugged. But of course
none of these intrinsically desirable reforms can possibly be carried
out, so long as it is thought right and natural that sovereign states
should prepare to make war on one another. For modern war cannot be
waged except by countries with an over-developed capital goods industry;
countries in which economic power is wielded either by the state or by a
few monopolistic corporations which it is easy to tax and, if necessary,
temporarily to nationalize; countries where the labouring masses, being
without property, are rootless, easily transferable from one place to
another, highly regimented by factory discipline. Any decentralized
society of free, uncoerced small owners, with a properly balanced
economy must, in a war-making world such as ours, be at the mercy of one
whose production is highly mechanized and centralized, whose people are
without property and therefore easily coercible, and whose economy is
lop-sided. This is why the one desire of industrially undeveloped
countries like Mexico and China is to become like Germany, or England,
or the United States. So long as the organized lovelessness of war and
preparation for war remains, there can be no mitiga-

tion, on any large, nation-wide or world-wide scale, of the organized
lovelessness of our economic and political relationships. War and
preparation for war are standing temptations to make the present bad,
God-eclipsing arrangements of society progressively worse as technology
becomes progressively more efficient.

Chapter 6

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT, RIGHT LIVELIHOOD

This treasure of the Kingdom of God has been hidden by time and
multiplicity and the soul's own works, or briefly by its creaturely
nature. But in the measure that the soul can separate itself from this
multiplicity, to that extent it reveals within itself the Kingdom of
God. Here the soul and the Godhead are one.

Eckhart

U R kingdom go' is the necessary and unavoidable corol-ry of 'Thy
kingdom come.' For the more there is of self, the less there is of God.
The divine eternal fullness of life can be gained only by those who have
deliberately lost the partial, separative life of craving and
self-interest, of egocentric thinking, feeling, wishing and acting.
Mortification or deliberate dying to self is inculcated with an
uncompromising firmness in the canonical writings of Christianity,
Hinduism, Buddhism and most of the other major and minor religions of
the world, and by every theocentric saint and spiritual reformer who has
ever lived out and expounded the principles of the Perennial Philosophy.
But this 'self-naughting' is never (at least by anyone who knows what he
is talking about) regarded as an end in itself. It possesses merely an
instrumental value, as the indispensable means to something else. In the
words of one whom we have often had occasion to cite in earlier
sections, it is necessary for all of us to ' learn the true nature and
worth of all self-denials and mortifications.'

As to their nature, considered in themselves, they have nothing of
goodness or holiness, nor are any real part of our sanctification, they
are not the true food or nourishment of the Divine Life in our souls,
they have no quickening, sanctifying power in them;

their only worth consists in this, that they remove .the impediments of
holiness, break down that which stands between God and us, and make way
for the quickening, sanctifying spirit of God to operate on our souls,
which operation of God is the one only thing that can raise the Divine
Life in the soul, or help it to

the smallest degree of real holiness or spiritual life Hence we

may learn the reason why many people not only lose the benefit, but are
even the worse for all their mortifications. It is because they mistake
the whole nature and worth of them. They practise them for their own
sakes, as things good in themselves; they think them to be real parts of
holiness, and so rest in them and look no further, but grow full of
self-esteem and self-admiration for their own progress in them. This
makes them self-sufficient, morose, severe judges of all those that fall
short of their mortifications. And thus their self-denials do only that
for them which indulgences do for other people: they withstand and
hinder the operation of God upon their souls, and instead of being
really self-denials, they strengthen and keep up the kingdom of self.

William Law

The rout and destruction of the passions, while a good, is not the
ultimate good; the discovery of Wisdom is the surpassing good. When this
is found, all the people will sing.

Philo

Living in religion (as I can speak by experience) if one is not in a
right course of prayer and other exercises between God and our soul,
one's nature groweth much worse than ever it would have been, if one had
lived in the world. For pride and self-love, which are rooted in the
soul by sin, find means to strengthen themselves exceedingly in
religion, if the soul is not in a course that may teach her and procure
her true humility. For by the corrections and contradictions of the will
(which cannot be avoided by any living in a religious community) I find
my heart grown, as I may say, as hard as a stone; and nothing would have
been able to soften it but by being put into a course of

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 115

prayer, by which the soul tendeth towards God and learneth of Him the
lesson of truly humbling herself,

Dame Gertrude More

Once, when I was grumbling over being obliged to eat meat and do no
penance, I heard it said that sometimes there was more of self-love than
desire of penance in such sorrow.

St. Teresa

That the mortified are, in some respects, often much worse than the
unmortified is a commonplace of history, fiction and descriptive
psychology. Thus, the Puritan may practise all the cardinal
virtues—prudence, fortitude, temperance and chastity —and yet remain a
thoroughly bad man; for, in all too many cases, these virtues of his are
accompanied by, and indeed causally connected with, the sins of pride,
envy, chronic anger and an uncharitableness pushed sometimes to the
level of active cruelty. Mistaking the means for the end, the Puritan
has fancied himself holy because he is stoically austere. But stoical
austerity is merely the exaltation of the more creditable side of the
ego at the expense of the less creditable. Holiness, on the contrary, is
the total denial of the separative self, in its creditable no less than
its discreditable aspects, and the abandonment of the will to God. To
the extent that there is attachment to 'I,' 'me,' 'mine/ there is no
attachment to, and therefore no unitiye knowledge of, the divine Ground.
Mortification has to be carried to the pitch of non-attachment or (in
the phrase of St. Fran$ois de Sales) 'holy indifference'; otherwise it
merely transfers self-will from one channel to another, not merely
without decrease in the total volume of that self-will, but sometimes
with an actual increase. As usual, the corruption of the best is the
worst. The difference between the mortified but still proud and
self-centred stoic and the unmortified hedonist consists in this: the
latter, being flabby, shiftless and at heart rather ashamed of himself,
lacks the energy and the motive to do much harm except to his own body,
mind and spirit; the former, because he has all the secondary virtues
and looks

down on those who are not like himself, is morally equipped to wish and
to be able to do harm on the very largest scale and with a perfectly
untroubled conscience. These are obvious facts; and yet, in the current
religious jargon of our day the word 'immoral' is reserved almost
exclusively for the carnally self-indulgent. The covetous and the
ambitious, the respectable toughs and those who cloak their lust for
power and place under the right sort of idealistic cant, are not merely
unblamed; they are even held up as models of virtue and godliness. The
representatives of the organized churches begin by putting haloes on die
heads of the people who do most to make wars and revolutions, then go
on, rather plaintively, to wonder why the world should be in such a
mess.

Mortification is not, as many people seem to imagine, a matter,
primarily, of severe physical austerities. It is possible that, for
certain persons in certain circumstances, the practice of severe
physical austerities may prove helpful in advance towards man's final
end. In most cases, however, it would seem that what is gained by such
austerities is not liberation, but something quite different—the
achievement of 'psychic' powers. The ability to get petitionary prayer
answered, die power to heal and work other miracles, the knack of
looking into the future or into other people's minds—these, it would
seem, are often related in some kind of causal connection with fasting,
watching and the self-infliction of pain. Most of the great theocentric
saints and spiritual teachers have admitted the existence of supernormal
powers, only, however, to deplore them. To think that such Siddhis, as
the Indians call them, have anything to do with liberation is, they say,
a dangerous illusion. These things are either irrelevant to the main
issue of life, or, if too much prized and attended to, an obstacle in
die way of spiritual advance. Nor are these the only objections to
physical austerities. Carried to extremes, they may be dangerous to
health—and without health the steady persistence of effort required by
the spiritual life is very difficult of achievement. And being
difficult, painful and generally conspicuous, physical austerities are a
standing temptation to vanity and the competitive

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 117

spirit of record breaking. ' When thou didst give thyself up to physical
mortification, thou wast great, thou wast admired.' So writes Suso of
his own experiences—experiences which led him, just as Gautama Buddha
had been led many centuries before, to give up his course of bodily
penance. And St. Teresa remarks how much easier it is to impose great
penances upon oneself than to suffer in patience, charity and humbleness
the ordinary everyday crosses of family life (which did not prevent her,
incidentally, from practising, to the very day of her death, the most
excruciating forms of self-torture. Whether these austerities really
helped her to come to the unitive knowledge of God, or whether they were
prized and persisted in because of the psychic powers they helped to
develop, there is no means of determining.)

Our dear Saint (Francois de Sales) disapproved of immoderate fasting. He
used to say that the spirit could not endure the body when overfed, but
that, if underfed, the body could not endure the spirit.

Jean Pierre Camus

When the will, the moment it feels any joy in sensible things rises
upwards in that joy to God, and when sensible things move it to pray, it
should not neglect them, it should make use of them for so holy an
exercise; because sensible things, in these conditions, subserve the end
for which God created them, namely to be occasions for making Him better
known and loved.

St. John of the Cross

He who is not conscious of liberty of spirit among the things of sense
and sweetness—things which should serve as motives to prayer—and whose
will rests and feeds upon them, ought to abstain from the use of them;
for to him they are a hindrance on the road to God.

St. John of the Cross

One man may declare that he cannot fast; but can he declare that he
cannot love God ? Another may affirm that he cannot preserve virginity
or sell all his goods in order to give the price to the poor; but can he
tell me that he cannot love his enemies? All that is necessary is to
look into one's own heart; for what God asks of us is not found at a
great distance.

St. Jerome

Anybody who wishes to do so can get all, and indeed more than all, the
mortification he wants out of the incidents of ordinary, day-to-day
living, without ever resorting to harsh bodily penance. Here are the
rules laid down by the author of Holy Wisdom for Dame Gertrude More.

First, that she should do all that belonged to her to do by any law,
human or Divine. Secondly, that she was to refrain from doing those
things that were forbidden her by human or Divine Law, or by Divine
inspiration. Thirdly, that she should bear with as much patience or
resignation as possible all crosses and contradictions to her natural
will, which were inflicted by the hand of God. Such, for instance, were
aridities, temptations, afflictions or bodily pain, sickness and
infirmity; or again, the loss of friends or want of necessaries and
comforts. All this was to be endured patiently, whether the crosses came
direct from God or by means of His creatures.... These indeed were
mortifications enough for Dame Gertrude, or for any other soul, and
there was no need for anyone to advise or impose others.

Augustine Baker

To sum up, that mortification is the best which results in the
elimination of self-will, self-interest, self-centred thinking, wishing
and imagining. Extreme physical austerities are not likely to achieve
this kind of mortification. But the acceptance of what happens to us
(apart, of course, from our own sins) in the course of daily living is
likely to produce this result. If specific exercises in self-denial are
undertaken, they should

be inconspicuous, non-competitive and uninjurious to health. Thus, in
the matter of diet, most people will find it sufficiently mortifying to
refrain from eating all the things which the experts in nutrition
condemn as unwholesome. And where social relations are concerned,
self-denial should take the form, not of showy acts of would-be
humility, but of control of the tongue and the moods—in refraining from
saying anything uncharitable or merely frivolous (which means, in
practice, refraining from about fifty per cent, of ordinary
conversation), and in behaving calmly and with quiet cheerfulness when
external circumstances or the state of our bodies predisposes us to
anxiety, gloom or an excessive elation.

When a man practises charity in order to be reborn in heaven, or for
fame, or reward, or from fear, such charity can obtain no pure effect.

Sutra on the Distinction and Protection of the Dharma

When Prince Wen Wang was on a tour of inspection in Tsang, he saw an old
man fishing. But his fishing was not real fishing, for he did not fish
in order to catch fish, but to amuse himself. So Wen Wang wished to
employ him in the administration of government, but feared lest his own
ministers, uncles and brothers might object. On the other hand, if he
let the old man go, he could not bear to think of the people being
deprived of

such an influence.

Chuang T%u

God, if I worship Thee in fear of hell, burn me in hell. And if I
worship Thee in hope of Paradise, exclude me from Paradise; but if I
worship Thee for Thine own sake, withhold not Thine

everlasting Beauty.

Rabi'a

Rabi'a, the Sufi woman-saint, speaks, thinks and feels in terms of
devotional theism; the Buddhist theologian, in terms of im-

no THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

personal moral Law; the Chinese philosopher, with characteristic humour,
in terms of politics; but all three insist on the need for
non-attachment to self-interest—insist on it as strongly as does Christ
when he reproaches the Pharisees for their egocentric piety, as does the
Krishna of the Bhagavad-Gita when he tells Arjuna to do his divinely
ordained duty without personal craving for, or fear of, the fruits of
his actions.

St. Ignatius Loyola was once asked what his feelings would be if the
Pope were to suppress the Company of Jesus. 'A quarter of an hour of
prayer/ he answered, ' and I should think no more about it.'

This is, perhaps, the most difficult of all mortifications—to achieve a
'holy indifference' to the temporal success or failure of the cause to
which one has devoted one's best energies. If it triumphs, well and
good; and if it meets defeat, that also is well and good, if only in
ways that, to a limited and time-bound mind, are here and now entirely
incomprehensible.

By a man without passions I mean one who does not permit good or evil to
disturb his inward economy, but rather falls in with what happens and
does not add to the sum of his mortality.

Chuang T^u

The fitting disposition for union with God is not that the soul should
understand, feel, taste or imagine anything on the subject of the nature
of God, or any other thing whatever, but should remain in that pureness
and love which is perfect resignation and complete detachment from all
things for God alone.

St. John of the Cross

Disquietude is always vanity, because it serves no good. Yes, even if
the whole world were thrown into confusion and all things in it,
disquietude on that account would be vanity.

St. John of the Cross

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 121

Sufficient not only unto the day, but also unto the place, is the evil
thereof. Agitation over happenings which we are powerless to modify,
either because they have not yet occurred, or else are occurring at an
inaccessible distance from us, achieves nothing beyond the inoculation
of here and now with the remote or anticipated evil that is the object
of our distress. Listening four or five times a day to newscasters and
commentators, reading the morning papers and all the weeklies and
monthlies—nowadays, this is described as' taking an intelligent interest
in politics. 5 St. John of the Cross would have called it indulgence in
idle curiosity and the cultivation of disquietude for disquietude's
sake.

I want very little, and what I do want I have very little wish for. I
have hardly any desires, but if I were to be born again, I should have
none at all. We should ask nothing and refuse nothing, but leave
ourselves in the arms of divine Providence without wasting time in any
desire, except to will what God wills of us.

St. Franfois de Sales

Push far enough towards the Void,

Hold fast enough to Quietness,

And of the ten thousand things none but can be worked on by you.

I have beheld them, whither they go back.

See, all things howsoever they flourish

Return to the root from which they grew.

This return to the Root is called Quietness;

Quietness is called submission to Fate;

What has submitted to Fate becomes part of the always-so;

To know the always-so is to be illumined;

Not to know it means to go blindly to disaster.

Lao T%u

I wish I could join the 'Solitaries' (on Caldey Island), instead of
being Superior and having to write books. But I don't wish to have what
I wish, of course.

Abbot John Chapman

We must not wish anything other than what happens from moment to moment,
all the while, however, exercising ourselves in goodness.

St. Catherine of Genoa

In the practice of mortification as in most other fields, advance is
along a knife-edge. On one side lurks the Scylla of egocentric
austerity, on the other the Charybdis of an uncaring quietism. The holy
indifference inculcated by the exponents of the Perennial Philosophy is
neither stoicism nor mere passivity. It is rather an active resignation.
Self-will is renounced, not that there may be a total holiday from
willing, but that the divine will may use the mortified mind and body as
its instrument for good. Or we may say, with Kabir, that 'the devout
seeker is he who mingles in his heart the double currents of love and
detachment, like the mingling of the streams of Ganges and Jumna.' Until
we put an end to particular attachments, there can be no love of God
with the whole heart, mind and strength and no universal charity towards
all creatures for God's sake. Hence the hard sayings in the Gospels
about the need to renounce exclusive family ties. And if the Son of Man
has nowhere to lay his head, if the Tathagata and the Bodhi-sattvas
'have their thoughts awakened to the nature of Reality without abiding
in anything whatever,' this is because a truly Godlike love which, like
the sun, shines equally upon the just and the unjust, is impossible to a
mind imprisoned in private preferences and aversions.

The soul that is attached to anything, however much good there may be in
it, will not arrive at the liberty of divine union. For whether it be a
strong wire rope or a slender and delicate thread that holds the bird,
it matters not, if it really holds it fast; for, until the cord be
broken, the bird cannot fly. So the soul, held by the bonds of human
affections, however slight they may be, cannot, while they last, make
its way to God.

St. John of the Cross

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 123

There are some who are newly delivered from their sins and so, though
they are resolved to love God, they are still novices and apprentices,
soft and weak. . . . They love a number of superfluous, vain and
dangerous things at the same time as Our Lord. Though they love God
above all things, they yet continue to take pleasure in many things
which they do not love according to God, but besides Him—things such as
slight inordinations in word, gesture, clothing, pastimes and
frivolities.

St. Franfois de Sales

There are souls who have made some progress in divine love, and have cut
off" all the love they had for dangerous things; yet they still have
dangerous and superfluous loves, because they love what God wills them
to love, but with excess and too tender and passionate a love.... The
love of our relations, friends and benefactors is itself according to
God, but we may love them excessively ; as also our vocations, however
spiritual they be; and our devotional exercises (which we should yet
love very greatly) may be loved inordinately, when we set them above
obedience and the more general good, or care for them as an end, when
they are only means.

St. Franfois de Sales

The goods of God, which are beyond all measure, can only be contained in
an empty and solitary heart.

St. John of the Cross

Suppose a boat is crossing a river and another boat, an empty one, is
about to collide with it. Even an irritable man would not lose his
temper. But suppose there was someone in the second boat. Then the
occupant of the first would shout to him to keep clear. And if he did
not hear the first time, nor even when called to three times, bad
language would inevitably follow. In the first case there was no anger,
in the second there was—because in the first case the boat was empty, in
the second it was occupied. And so it is with man. If he could only pass
empty through life, who would be able to injure him ?

Chuang TIU

When the heart weeps for what it has lost, the spirit laughs for what it
has found.

Anonymous Sufi Aphorism

It is by losing the egocentric life that we save the hitherto latent and
undiscovered life which, in the spiritual part of our being, we share
with the divine Ground. This new-found life is 'more abundant' than the
other, and of a different and higher kind. Its possession is liberation
into the eternal, and liberation is beatitude. Necessarily so; for the
Brahman, who is one with the Atman, is not only Being and Knowledge, but
also Bliss, and, after Love and Peace, the final fruit of the Spirit is
Joy. Mortification is painful, but that pain is one of the
pre-conditions of blessedness. This fact of spiritual experience is
sometimes obscured by the language in which it is described. Thus, when
Christ says that the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be entered except by those
who are as little children, we are apt to forget (so touching are the
images evoked by the simple phrase) that a man cannot become childlike
unless he chooses to undertake the most strenuous and searching course
of self-denial. In practice the command to become as little children is
identical with the command to lose one's life. As Traherne makes clear
in the beautiful passage quoted in the section on * God in the World,'
one cannot know created Nature in all its essentially sacred beauty,
unless one first unlearns the, dirty devices of adult humanity. Seen
through the dung-coloured spectacles of self-interest, the universe
looks singularly like a dung-heap; and as, through long wearing, the
spectacles have grown on to the eyeballs, the process of 'cleansing the
doors of perception' is often, at any rate in the earlier stages of the
spiritual life, painfully like a surgical operation. Later on, it is
true, even self-naughting may be suffused with the joy of the Spirit. On
this point the following passage from the fourteenth-century Scale of
Perfection is illuminating.

Many a man hath the virtues of humility, patience and charity towards
his neighbours, only in the reason and will, and hath no

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT i2f

spiritual delight nor love in them; for ofttimes he feeleth grudging,
heaviness and bitterness for to do them, but yet nevertheless he doth
them, but 'tis only by stirring of reason for dread of God, This man
hath these virtues in reason and will, but not the love of them in
affection. But when, by the grace of Jesus and by ghostly and bodily
exercise, reason is turned into light and will into love, then hath he
virtues in affection; for he hath so gnawn on the bitter bark or shell
of the nut that at length he hath broken it and now feeds on the kernel;
that is to say, the virtues which were first heavy for to practise are
now turned into a very delight and savour.

Walter Hilton

As long as I am this or that, or have this or that, I am not all things
and I have not all things. Become pure till you neither are nor have
either this or that; then you are omnipresent and, being neither this
nor that, are all things.

Eckhart

The point so dramatically emphasized by Eckhart in these lines is one
that has often been made by the moralists and psychologists of the
spiritual life. It is only when we have renounced our preoccupation with
'I,' 'me,' 'mine' that we can truly possess the world in which we live.
Everything is ours, provided that we regard nothing as our property. And
not only is everything ours; it is also everybody else's.

True love in this differs from dross and clay, That to divide is not to
take away.

There can be no complete communism except in the goods of the spirit
and, to some extent also, of the mind, and only when such goods are
possessed by men and women in a state of non-attachment and self-denial.
Some degree of mortification, it should be noted, is an indispensable
prerequisite for the creation and enjoyment even of merely intellectual
and aesthetic goods. Those who choose the profession of artist,
philosopher or man of science, choose, in many cases, a fife of

poverty and unrewarded hard work. But these are by no means the only
mortifications they have to undertake. When he looks at the world, the
artist must deny his ordinary human tendency to think of things in
utilitarian, self-regarding terms. Similarly, the critical philosopher
must mortify his common sense, while the research worker must
steadfastly resist the temptations to over-simplify and think
conventionally, and must make himself docile to the leadings of
mysterious Fact. And what is true of the creators of aesthetic and
intellectual goods is also true of the enjoyers of such goods, when
created. That these mortifications are by no means trifling has been
shown again and again in the course of history. One thinks, for example,
of the intellectually mortified Socrates and the hemlock with which his
unmodified compatriots rewarded him. One thinks of the heroic efforts
that had to be made by Galileo and his contemporaries to break with the
Aristotelian convention of thought, and the no less heroic efforts that
have to be made today by any scientist who believes that there is more
in the universe than can be discovered by employing the time-hallowed
recipes of Descartes. Such mortifications have their reward in a state
of consciousness that corresponds, on a lower level, to spiritual
beatitude. The artist—and the philosopher and the man of science are
also artists—knows the bliss of aesthetic contemplation, discovery and
non-attached possession.

The goods of the intellect, the emotions and the imagination are real
goods; but they are not the final good, and when we treat them as ends
in themselves, we fall into idolatry. Mortification of will, desire and
action is not enough; there must also be mortification in the fields of
knowing, thinking, feeling and fancying.

Man's intellectual faculties are by the Fall in a much worse state than
his animal appetites and want a much greater self-denial. And when own
will, own understanding and own imagination have their natural strength
indulged and gratified, and are made seemingly rich and honourable with
the treasures acquired from

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 127

a study of the Belles Lettres^ they will just as much help poor fallen
man to be like-minded with* Christ as the art of cookery, well and duly
studied, will help a professor of the Gospel to the spirit and practice
of Christian abstinence.

William Law

Because it was German and spelt with a K, Kultur was an object, during
the First World War, of derisive contempt. All this has now been
changed. In Russia, Literature, Art and Science have become the three
persons of a new humanistic Trinity. Nor is the cult of Culture confined
to the Soviet Union. It is practised by a majority of intellectuals in
the capitalist democracies. Clever, hard-boiled journalists, who write
about everything else with the condescending cynicism of people who know
all about God, Man and the Universe, and have seen through the whole
absurd caboodle, fairly fall over themselves when it comes to Culture.
With an earnestness and enthusiasm that are, in the circumstances,
unutterably ludicrous, they invite us to share their positively
religious emotions in the face of High Art, as represented by the latest
murals or civic centres; they insist that so long as Mrs. X goes on
writing her inimitable novels and Mr. Y his more than Coleridgean
criticism, the world, in spite of all appearances to the contrary, makes
sense. The same over-valuation of Culture, the same belief that Art and
Literature are ends in themselves and can flourish in isolation from a
reasonable and realistic philosophy of life, have even invaded the
schools and colleges. Among 'advanced' educationists there are many
people who seem to think that all will be well so long as adolescents
are permitted to 'express themselves,' and small children are encouraged
to be 'creative' in the art class. But, alas, plasticine and
self-expression will not solve the problems of education. Nor will
technology and vocational guidance; nor the classics and the Hundred
Best Books. The following criticisms of education were made more than
two and a half centuries ago; but they are as relevant today as they
were in the seventeenth century.

He knoweth nothing as he ought to know, who thinks he know-eth anything
without seeing its place and the manner how it relateth to God, angels
and men, and to all the creatures in earth, heaven and hell, time and
eternity.

Thomas Traherne

Nevertheless some things were defective too (at Oxford under the
Commonwealth). There was never a tutor that did professly teach
Felicity, though that be the mistress of all the other sciences. Nor did
any of us study these things but as aliens, which we ought to have
studied as our own enjoyments. We studied to inform our knowledge, but
knew not for what end we studied. And for lack of aiming at a certain
end, we erred in the manner.

Thomas Traherne

In Traherne's vocabulary 'felicity' means 'beatitude,' which is
identical in practice with liberation, which, in its turn, is the
unitive knowledge of God in the heights within and in the fullness
without as well as within.

What follows is an account of the intellectual mortifications which must
be practised by those whose primary concern is with the knowledge of the
Godhead in the interior heights of the soul.

Happy is the man who, by continually effacing all images and through
introversion and the lifting up of his mind to God, at last forgets and
leaves behind all such hindrances. For by such means only, he operates
inwardly, with his naked, pure, simple intellect and affections, about
the most pure and simple object, God. Therefore see that thy whole
exercise about God within thee may depend wholly and only on that naked
intellect, affection and will. For indeed, this exercise cannot be
discharged by any bodily organ, or by the external senses, but only by
that which constitutes the essence of man—understanding and love. If,
therefore, thou desirest a safe stair and short path to arrive at the
end of true bliss, then, with an intent mind, earnestly desire and
aspire after continual cleanness of heart and purity of mind. Add

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 129

to this a constant calm and tranquillity of the senses, and a
recollecting of the affections of the heart, continually fixing them
above. Work to simplify the heart, that being immovable and at peace
from any invading vain phantasms, thou mayest always stand fast in the
Lord within thee, to that degree as if thy soul had already entered the
always present now of eternity—that is, the state of the deity. To mount
to God is to enter into oneself. For he who so mounts and enters and
goes above and beyond himself, he truly mounts up to God. The mind must
then raise itself above itself and say, 'He who above all I need is
above all I know.' And so carried into the darkness of the mind,
gathering itself into that all-sufficient good, it learns to stay at
home and with its whole affection it cleaves and becomes habitually
fixed in the supreme good within. Thus continue, until thou becomest
immutable and dost arrive at that true life which is God Himself,
perpetually, without any vicissitude of space or time, reposing in that
inward quiet and secret mansion of the deity.

Albertus Magnus (?)

Some men love knowledge and discernment as the best and most excellent
of all things. Behold, then knowledge and discernment come to be loved
more than that which is discerned; for the false natural light loveth
its knowledge and powers, which are itself, more than what is known. And
were it possible that this false natural light should understand the
simple Truth, as it is in God and in truth, it still would not lose its
own property, that is, it could not depart from itself and its own
things.

Theologia Germanica

The relationship between moral action and spiritual knowledge is
circular, as it were, and reciprocal. Selfless behaviour makes possible
an accession of knowledge, and the accession of knowledge makes possible
the performance of further and more genuinely selfless actions, which in
their turn enhance the agent's capacity for knowing. And so on, if all
goes well and there is perfect docility and obedience, indefinitely. The
process is summed up in a few lines of the Maitrayana Upanishad,

A man undertakes right action (which includes, of course, right
recollectedness and right meditation), and this enables him to catch a
glimpse of the Self that underlies his separate individuality. 'Having
seen his own self as the Self, he becomes selfless (and therefore acts
selflessly) and in virtue of selflessness he is to be conceived as
unconditioned. This is the highest mystery, betokening emancipation;
through selflessness he has no part in pleasure or pain (in other words,
he enters a state of non-attachment or holy indifference), but achieves
absoluteness* (or as Albertus Magnus phrases it, 'becomes immutable and
arrives at that true life which is God Himself).

When mortification is perfect, its most characteristic fruit is
simplicity.

A simple heart will love all that is most precious on earth, husband or
wife, parent or child, brother or friend, without marring its
singleness; external things will have no attraction save inasmuch as
they lead souls to Him; all exaggeration or unreality, affectation and
falsehood must pass away from such a one, as the dews dry up before the
sunshine. The single motive is to please God, and hence arises total
indifference as to what others say and think, so that words and actions
are perfectly simple and natural, as in his sight only. Such Christian
simplicity is the very perfection of interior life—God, his will and
pleasure, its sole object.

N. Grou

And here is a more extended account of the matter by one of the greatest
masters of psychological analysis.

In the world, when people call anyone simple, they generally mean a
foolish, ignorant, credulous person. But real simplicity, so far from
being foolish, is almost sublime. All good men like and admire it, are
conscious of sinning against it, observe it in others and know what it
involves; and yet they could not precisely define it. I should say that
simplicity is an uprightness of soul which prevents self-consciousness.
It is not the same as sincerity, which is a much humbler virtue. Many
people are sin-

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 131

cere who are not simple. They say nothing but what they believe to be
true, and do not aim at appearing anything but what they are. But they
are for ever thinking about themselves, weighing their every word and
thought, and dwelling upon themselves in apprehension of having done too
much or too little. These people are sincere but they are not simple.
They are not at their ease with others, nor others with them. There is
nothing easy, frank, unrestrained or natural about them. One feels that
one would like less admirable people better, who were not so stiff.

To be absorbed in the world around and never turn a thought within, as
is the blind condition of some who are carried away by what is pleasant
and tangible, is one extreme as opposed to simplicity. And to be
self-absorbed in all matters, whether it be duty to God or man, is the
other extreme, which makes a person wise in his own conceit—reserved,
self-conscious, uneasy at the least thing which disturbs his inward
self-complacency. Such false wisdom, in spite of its solemnity, is
hardly less vain and foolish than the folly of those who plunge headlong
into worldly pleasures. The one is intoxicated by his outward
surroundings, the other by what he believes himself to be doing
inwardly; but both are in a state of intoxication, and the last is a
worse state than the first, because it seems to be wise, though it is
not really, and so people do not try to be cured. Real simplicity lies
in a juste milieu equally free from thoughtlessness and affectation, in
which the soul is not overwhelmed by externals, so as to be unable to
reflect, nor yet given up to the endless refinements, which
self-consciousness induces. That soul which looks where it is going
without losing time arguing over every step, or looking back
perpetually, possesses true simplicity. Such simplicity is indeed a
great treasure. How shall we attain to it? I would give all I possess
for it; it is the costly pearl of Holy Scripture.

The first step, then, is for the soul to put away outward things and
look within so as to know its own real interest; so far all is right and
natural; thus much is only a wise self-love, which seeks to avoid the
intoxication of the world.

In the next step the soul must add the contemplation of God, whom it
fears, to that of self. This is a faint approach to the real wisdom, but
the soul is still greatly self-absorbed: it is not satisfied with
fearing God; it wants to be certain that it does fear Him and fears lest
it fear Him not, going round in a perpetual circle of
self-consciousness. All this restless dwelling on self is very far from
the peace and freedom of real love; but that is yet in the distance; the
soul must needs go through a season of trial, and were it suddenly
plunged into a state of rest, it would not know how to use it.

The third step is that, ceasing from a restless self-contemplation, the
soul begins to dwell upon God instead, and by degrees forgets itself in
Him. It becomes full of Him and ceases to feed upon self. Such a soul is
not blinded to its own faults or indifferent to its own errors; it is
more conscious of them than ever, and increased light shows them in
plainer form, but this self-knowledge comes from God, and therefore it
is not restless or uneasy.

Fenelon

How admirably acute and subtle this is! One of the most extraordinary,
because most gratuitous, pieces of twentieth-century vanity is the
assumption that nobody knew anything about psychology before the days of
Freud. But the real truth is that most modern psychologists understand
human beings less well than did the ablest of their predecessors.
Fenelon and La Rochefoucauld knew all about the surface rationalization
of deep, discreditable motives in the subconscious, and were fully aware
that sexuality and the will to power were, all too often, the effective
forces at work under the polite mask of thepersona. Machiavelli had
drawn Pareto's distinction between 'residues' and 'derivations'—between
the real, self-interested motives for political action and the fancy
theories, principles and ideals in terms of which such action is
explained and justified to the credulous public. Like Buddha's and St.
Augustine's, Pascal's view of human virtue and rationality could not
have been more realistically low. But all these men, even La
Rochefoucauld,

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 133

even Machiavelli, were aware of certain facts which twentieth-century
psychologists have chosen to ignore—the fact that human nature is
tripartite, consisting of a spirit as well as of a mind and body; the
fact that we live on the border-line between two worlds, the temporal
and the eternal, the physical-vital-human and the divine; the fact that,
though nothing in himself, man is 'a nothing surrounded by God, indigent
of God, capable of God and filled with God, if he so desires/

The Christian simplicity, of which Grou and Fenelon write, is the same
thing as the virtue so much admired by Lao Tzu and his successors.
According to these Chinese sages, personal sins and social
maladjustments are all due to the fact that men have separated
themselves from their divine source and live according to their own will
and notions, not according to Tao —which is the Great Way, the Logos,
the Nature of Things, as it manifests itself on every plane from the
physical, up through the animal and the mental, to the spiritual.
Enlightenment comes when we give up self-will and make ourselves docile
to the workings of Tag in the world around us and in our own bodies,
minds and spirits. Sometimes the Taoist philosophers write as though
they believed in Rousseau's Noble Savage, and (being Chinese and
therefore much more concerned with the concrete and the practical than
with the merely speculative) they are fond of prescribing methods by
which rulers may reduce the complexity of civilization and so preserve
their subjects from the corrupting influences of man-made and therefore
Tao-eclipsing conventions of thought, feeling and action. But the rulers
who are to perform this task for the masses must themselves be sages;
and to become a sage, one must get rid of all the rigidities of
unregenerate adulthood and become again as a little child. For only that
which is soft and docile is truly alive; that which conquers and
outlives everything is that which adapts itself to everything, that
which always seeks the lowest place—not the hard rock, but the water
that wears away the everlasting hills. The simplicity and spontaneity of
the perfect sage are the fruits of mortification— mortification of the
will and, by recollectedness and medita-

tion, of the mind. Only the most highly disciplined artist can
recapture, on a higher level, the spontaneity of the child with its
first paint-box. Nothing is more difficult than to be simple.

'May I ask/ said Yen Hui, 'in what consists the fasting of the heart?'

'Cultivate unity,' replied Confucius. 'You do your hearing, not with
your ears, but with your mind; not with your mind, but with your very
soul. But let the hearing stop with the ears. Let the working of the
mind stop with itself. Then the soul will be a negative existence,
passively responsive to externals. In such a negative existence, only
Tao can abide. And that negative state is the fasting of the heart.'

'Then,' said Yen Hui, 'the reason I could not get the use of this method
is my own individuality. If I could get the use of it, my individuality
would have gone. Is this what you mean by the negative state?'

'Exactly so,' replied the Master. 'Let me tell you. If you can enter the
domain of this prince (a bad ruler whom Yen Hui was ambitious to reform)
without offending his amour propre, cheerful if he hears you, passive if
he does not; without science, without drugs, simply living there in a
state of complete indifference —you will be near success.... Look at
that window. Through it an empty room becomes bright with scenery; but
the landscape stops outside. In this sense you may use your ears and
eyes to communicate within, but shut out all wisdom (in the sense of
conventional, copybook maxims) from your mind. This is the method for
regenerating all creation.'

Chuang T%u

Mortification may be regarded, in this context, as the process of study,
by which we learn at last to have unstudied reactions to
events—reactions in harmony with Tao, Suchness, the Will of God. Those
who have made themselves docile to the divine Nature of Things, those
who respond to circumstances, not with craving and aversion, but with
the love that permits them

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 135

to do spontaneously what they like; those who can truthfully say, Not I,
but God in me—such men and women are compared by the exponents of the
Perennial Philosophy to children, to fools and simpletons, even
sometimes, as in the following passage, to drunkards.

A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though he may suffer, does not
die. His bones are the same as other people's; but he meets his accident
in a different way. His spirit is in a condition of security. He is not
conscious of riding in the cart; neither is he conscious of falling out
of it. Ideas of life, death, fear and the like cannot penetrate his
breast; and so he does not suffer from contact with objective existence.
If such security is to be got from wine, how much more is it to be got
from God ?

Chuang T^u

It is by long obedience and hard work that the artist comes to unforced
spontaneity and consummate mastery. Knowing that he can never create
anything on his own account, out of the top layers, so to speak, of his
personal consciousness, he submits obediently to the workings
of'inspiration*; and knowing that the medium in which he works has its
own self-nature, which must not be ignored or violently overriden, he
makes himself its patient servant and, in this way, achieves perfect
freedom of expression. But life is also an art, and the man who would
become a consummate artist in living must follow, on all the levels of
his being, the same procedure as that by which the painter or the
sculptor or any other craftsman comes to his own more limited
perfection.

Prince Hui's cook was cutting up a bullock. Every blow of his knife,
every heave of his shoulders, every tread of his foot, every whshh of
rent flesh, every chhk of the chopper, was in perfect harmony—rhythmical
like the Dance of the Mulberry Grove, simultaneous like the chords of
the Ching Shou. ' Well done!' cried the Prince. ' Yours is skill indeed/

'Sire,' replied the cook, 'I have always devoted myself to Tao. It is
better than skill. When I first began to cut up bullocks, I saw before
me simply whole bullocks. After three years' practice I saw no more
whole animals. And now I work with my mind and not with my eye. When my
senses bid me stop, but my mind urges me on, I fall back upon eternal
principles. I follow such openings or cavities as there may be,
according to the natural constitution of the animal. I do not attempt to
cut through joints, still less through large bones.

'A good cook changes his chopper once a year—because he cuts. An
ordinary cook, once a month—because he hacks. But I have had this
chopper nineteen years, and though I have cut up many thousands of
bullocks, its edge is as if fresh from the whetstone. For at the joints
there are always interstices, and the edge of a chopper being without
thickness, it remains only to insert that which is without thickness
into such an interstice. By these means the interstice will be enlarged,
and the blade will find plenty of room. It is thus that I have kept my
chopper for nineteen years, as though fresh from the whetstone.

'Nevertheless, when I come upon a hard part, where the blade meets with
a difficulty, I am all caution. I fix my eyes on it. I stay my hand, and
gently apply the blade, until with a kwah the part yields like earth
crumbling to the ground. Then I withdraw the blade and stand up and look
around; and at last I wipe my chopper and put it carefully away.'

'Bravo!' cried the Prince. 'From the words of this cook I have learnt
how to take care of my life/

Chuang T^u

In the first seven branches of his Eightfold Path the Buddha describes
the conditions that must be fulfilled by anyone who desires to come to
that right contemplation which is the eighth and final branch. The
fulfilment of these conditions entails the undertaking of a course of
the most searching and comprehensive mortification—mortification of
intellect and will, craving and emotion, thought, speech, action and,
finally, means of livelihood. Certain professions are more or less
completely

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 137

incompatible with the achievement of man's final end; and there are
certain ways of making a living which do so much physical and, above
all, so much moral, intellectual and spiritual harm that, even if they
could be practised in a non-attached spirit (which is generally
impossible), they would still have to be eschewed by anyone dedicated to
the task of liberating, not only himself, but others. The exponents of
the Perennial Philosophy are not content to avoid and forbid the
practice of criminal professions, such as brothel-keeping, forgery,
racketeering and the like; they also avoid themselves, and warn others
against, a number of ways of livelihood commonly regarded as legitimate.
Thus, in many Buddhist societies, the manufacture of arms, the
concoction of intoxicating liquors and the wholesale purveying of
butcher's meat were not, as in contemporary Christendom, rewarded by
wealth, peerages and political influence; they were deplored as
businesses which, it was thought, made it particularly difficult for
their practitioners and for other members of the communities in which
they were practised to achieve enlightenment and liberation. Similarly,
in mediaeval Europe, Christians were forbidden to make a living by the
taking of interest on money or by cornering the market. As Tawney and
others have shown, it was only after the Reformation that
coupon-clipping, usury and gambling in stocks and commodities became
respectable and received ecclesiastical approval.

For the Quakers, soldiering was and is a form of wrong livelihood—war
being, in their eyes, anti-Christian, not so much because it causes
suffering as because it propagates hatred, puts a premium on fraud and
cruelty, infects whole societies with anger, fear, pride and
uncharitableness. Such passions eclipse the Inner Light, and therefore
the wars by which they are aroused and intensified must be regarded,
whatever their immediate political outcome, as crusades to make the
world safe for spiritual darkness.

It has been found, as a matter of experience, that it is dangerous to
lay down detailed and inflexible rules for right livelihood—dangerous,
because most people see no reason for

being righteous overmuch and consequently respond to the imposition of
too rigid a code by hypocrisy or open rebellion. In the Christian
tradition, for example, a distinction is made between the precepts,
which are binding on all and sundry, and the counsels of perfection,
binding only upon those who feel drawn towards a total renunciation of
'the world.' The precepts include the ordinary moral code and the
commandment to love God with all one's heart, strength and mind, and
one's neighbour as oneself. Some of those who make a serious effort to
obey this last and greatest commandment find that they cannot do so
whole-heartedly unless they follow the counsels and sever all
connections with the world. Nevertheless it is possible for men and
women to achieve that 'perfection,' which is deliverance into the
unitive knowledge of God, without abandoning the married state and
without selling all they have and giving the price to the poor.
Effective poverty (possessing no money) is by no means always affective
poverty (being indifferent to money). One man may be poor, but
desperately concerned with what money can buy, full of cravings, envy
and bitter .self-pity. Another may have money, but no attachment to
money or the things, powers and privileges that money can buy. '
Evangelical poverty' is a combination of effective with affective
poverty; but a genuine poverty of spirit is possible even in those who
are not effectively poor. It will be seen, then, that the problems of
right livelihood, in so far as they lie outside the jurisdiction of the
common moral code, are strictly personal. The way in which any
individual problem presents itself and the nature of the appropriate
solution depend upon the degree of knowledge, moral sensibility and
spiritual insight achieved by the individual concerned. For this reason
no universally applicable rules can be formulated except in the most
general terms. 'Here are my three treasures,' says Lao Tzu. ' Guard and
keep them! The first is pity, the second frugality, the third refusal to
be foremost of all things under heaven.' And when Jesus is asked by a
stranger to settle a dispute between himself and his brother over an
inheritance, he refuses (since he does not know the

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 139

circumstances) to be a judge in the case and merely utters a general
warning against covetousness.

Ga-San instructed his adherents one day: 'Those who speak against
killing, and who desire to spare the lives of all conscious beings, are
right. It is good to protect even animals and insects. But what about
those persons who kill time, what about those who destroy wealth, and
those who murder the economy of their society? We should not overlook
them. Again, what of the one who preaches without enlightenment? He is
killing Buddhism.'

From * One Hundred and One Zen Stories 9

Once the noble Ibrahim, as he sat on his throne,

Heard a clamour and noise of cries on the roof,

Also heavy footsteps on the roof of his palace.

He said to himself, 'Whose heavy feet are these?'

He shouted from the window, 'Who goes there?'

The guards, filled with confusion, bowed their heads, saying,

'It is we, going the rounds in search.'

He said, 'What seek ye?' They said, 'Our camels.'

He said, 'Who ever searched for camels on a housetop?'

They said, 'We follow thy example,

Who seekest union with God, while sitting on a throne.'

Jalal-uddin Rumi

Of all social, moral and spiritual problems that of power is the most
chronically urgent and the most difficult of solution. Craving for power
is not a vice of the body, consequently knows none of the limitations
imposed by a tired or satiated physiology upon gluttony, intemperance
and lust. Growing with every successive satisfaction, the appetite for
power can manifest itself indefinitely, without interruption by bodily
fatigue or sickness. Moreover, the nature of society is such that the
higher a man climbs in the political, economic or religious hierarchy,
the greater are his opportunities and resources for exercising power.
But climbing the hierarchical ladder is ordinarily a slow process, and
the ambitious rarely reach the

top till they are well advanced in life. The older he grows, the more
chances does the power lover have for indulging his besetting sin, the
more continuously is he subjected to temptations and the more glamorous
do those temptations become. In this respect his situation is profoundly
different from that of the debauchee. The latter may never voluntarily
leave his vices, but at least, as he advances in years, he finds his
vices leaving him; the former neither leaves his vices nor is left by
them. Instead of bringing to the power lover a merciful respite from his
addictions, old age is apt to intensify them by making it easier for him
to satisfy his cravings on a larger scale and in a more spectacular way.
That is why, in Acton's words, ' all great men are bad.' Can we
therefore be surprised if political action, undertaken, in all too many
cases, not for the public good, but solely or at least primarily to
gratify the power lusts of bad men, should prove so often either
self-stultifying or downright disastrous ?

'L'etat cest moi* says the tyrant; and this is true, of course, not only
of the autocrat at the apex of the pyramid, but of all the members of
the ruling minority through whom he governs and who are, in fact, the
real rulers of the nation. Moreover, so long as the policy which
gratifies the power lusts of the ruling class is successful, and so long
as the price of success is not too high, even the masses of the ruled
will feel that the state is themselves—a vast and splendid projection of
the individual's intrinsically insignificant ego. The little man can
satisfy his lust for power vicariously through the activities of the
imperialistic state, just as the big man does; the difference between
them is one of degree, not of kind.

No infallible method for controlling the political manifestations of the
lust for power has ever been devised. Since power is of its very essence
indefinitely expansive, it cannot be checked except by colliding with
another power. Hence, any society that values liberty, in the sense of
government by law rather than by class interest or personal decree, must
see to it that the power of its rulers is divided. National unity means
national servitude to a single man and his supporting oli-

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 141

garchy. Organized and balanced disunity is the necessary condition of
liberty. His Majesty's Loyal Opposition is the loyalest, because the
-most genuinely useful section of any liberty-loving community.
Furthermore, since the appetite for power is purely mental and therefore
insatiable and impervious to disease or old age, no community that
values liberty can afford to give its rulers long tenures of office. The
Carthusian Order, which was 'never reformed because never deformed/ owed
its long immunity from corruption to the fact that its abbots were
elected for periods of only a single year. In ancient Rome the amount of
liberty under law was in inverse ratio to the length of the magistrates'
terms of office. These rules for controlling the lust for power are very
easy to formulate, but very difficult, as history shows, to enforce in
practice. They are particularly difficult to enforce at a period like
the present, when time-hallowed political machinery is being rendered
obsolete by rapid technological change and when the salutary principle
of organized and balanced disunity requires to be embodied in new and
more appropriate institutions.

Acton, the learned Catholic historian, was of opinion that all great men
are bad; Rumi, the Persian poet and mystic, thought that to seek for
union with God while occupying a throne was an undertaking hardly less
senseless than looking for camels among the chimney-pots. A slightly
more optimistic note is sounded by St. Frangois de Sales, whose views on
the matter were recorded by his Boswellizing disciple, the young Bishop
ofBelley.

* Mon PereJ I said one day, 'how is it possible for those who are
themselves high in office to practise the virtue of obedience ?*

Frangois de Sales replied,' They have greater and more excellent ways of
doing so than their inferiors/

As I did not understand this reply, he went on to say,' Those who are
bound by obedience are usually subject to one superior only. . . . But
those who are themselves superiors have a wider field for obedience,
even while they command; for if they bear

in mind that it is God who has placed them over other men, and gives
them the rule they have, they will exercise it out of obedience to God,
and thus, even while commanding, they will obey. Moreover, there is no
position so high but that it is subject to a spiritual superior in what
concerns the conscience and the soul. But there is a yet higher point of
obedience to which all superiors may aspire, even that to which St. Paul
alludes, when he says, "Though I be free from all men, yet have I made
myself servant unto all." It is by such universal obedience to everyone
that we become "all things to all men"; and serving everyone for Our
Lord's sake, we esteem all to be our superiors.'

In accordance with this rule, I have often observed how Fran-gois de
Sales treated everyone, even the most insignificant persons who
approached him, as though he were the inferior, never repulsing anyone,
never refusing to enter into conversation, to speak or to listen, never
betraying the slightest sign of weariness, impatience and annoyance,
however importunate or ill-timed the interruption. To those who asked
him why he thus wasted his time his constant reply was, 'It is God's
will; it is what He requires of me; what more need I ask ? While I am
doing this, I am not required to do anything else. God's Holy Will is
the centre from which all we do must radiate; all else is mere weariness
and excitement/

Jean Pierre Camus

We see, then, that a 'great man' can be good—good enough even to aspire
to unitive knowledge of the divine Ground— provided that, while
exercising power, he fulfils two conditions. First, he must deny himself
all the personal advantages of power and must practise the patience and
recollectedness without which there cannot be love either of man or God.
And, second, he must realize that the accident of possessing temporal
power does not give him spiritual authority, which belongs only to those
seers, living or dead, who have achieved a direct insight into the
Nature of Things. A society, in which the boss is mad enough to believe
himself a prophet, is a society doomed to destruction. A viable society
is one in which those

MORTIFICATION, NON-ATTACHMENT 143

who have qualified themselves to see indicate the goals to be aimed at,
while those whose business it is to rule respect the authority and
listen to the advice of the seers. In theory, at least, all this was
well understood in India and, until the Reformation, in Europe, where
'no position was so high but that it was subject to a spiritual superior
in what concerned the conscience and the soul.' Unfortunately the
churches tried to make the best of both worlds—to combine spiritual
authority with temporal power, wielded either directly or at one remove,
from behind the throne. But spiritual authority can be exercised only by
those who are perfectly disinterested and whose motives are therefore
above suspicion. An ecclesiastical organization may call itself the
Mystical Body of Christ; but if its prelates are slave-holders and the
rulers of states, as they were in the past, or if the corporation is a
large-scale capitalist, as is the case today, no titles, however
honorific, can conceal the fact that, when it passes judgment, it does
so as an interested party with some political or economic axe to grind.
True, in matters which do not directly concern the temporal powers of
the corporation, individual churchmen can be, and have actually proved
themselves, perfectly disinterested—consequently can possess, and have
possessed, genuine spiritual authority. St. Philip Neri's is a case in
point. Possessing absolutely no temporal power, he yet exercised a
prodigious influence over sixteenth-century Europe. But for that
influence, it may be doubted whether the efforts of the Council of Trent
to reform the Roman church from within would have met with much success.

In actual practice how many great men have ever fulfilled, or are ever
likely to fulfil, the conditions which alone render power innocuous to
the ruler as well as to the ruled ? Obviously, very few. Except by
saints, the problem of finally insoluble. 'But since genuine
self-government is' sible only in very small groups, societies on a
national or -sj national scale will always be ruled by
oligarchij^j^irforities whose members come to power because they&a^a
lust power. This means that the problem of

arise and, since it cannot be solved except by people like Fran-£ois de
Sales, will always make trouble. And this, in its turn, means that we
cannot expect the large-scale societies of the future to be much better
than were the societies of the past during the brief periods when they
were at their best.

Chapter 7 TRUTH

Why dost thou prate of God ? Whatever thou sayest of Him is untrue.

Eckhart

IN religious literature the word 'truth' is used indiscriminately in at
least three distinct and very different senses. Thus, it is sometimes
treated as a synonym for 'fact/ as when it is affirmed that God is
Truth—meaning that He is the primordial Reality. But this is clearly not
the meaning of the word in such a phrase as 'worshipping God in spirit
and in truth/ Here, it is obvious, 'truth' signifies direct apprehension
of spiritual Fact, as opposed to second-hand knowledge about Reality,
formulated in sentences and accepted on authority or because an argument
from previously granted postulates was logically convincing. And finally
there is the more ordinary meaning of the word, as in such a sentence
as, 'This statement is the truth/ where we mean to assert that the
verbal symbols of which the statement is composed correspond to the
facts to which it refers. When Eckhart writes that 'whatever thou sayest
of God is untrue,' he is not affirming that all theological statements
are false. In so far as there can be any correspondence between human
symbols and divine Fact, some theological statements are as true as it
is possible for us to make them. Himself a theologian, Eckhart would
certainly have admitted this. But besides being a theologian, Eckhart
was a mystic. And being a mystic, he understood very vividly what the
modern semanticist is so busily (and, also, so unsuccessfully) trying to
drum into contemporary minds—namely, that words are not the same as
things and that a knowledge of words about facts is in no sense
equivalent to a direct and immediate apprehension of the facts
themselves. What Eck-

hart actually asserts is this: whatever one may say about God can never
in any circumstances be the 'truth' in the first two meanings of that
much abused and ambiguous word. By implication St. Thomas Aquinas was
saying exactly the same thing when, after his experience of infused
contemplation, he refused to go on with his theological work, declaring
that everything he had written up to that time was as mere straw
compared with the immediate knowledge, which had been vouchsafed to him.
Two hundred years earlier, in Bagdad, the great Mohammedan theologian,
Al-Ghazzali, had similarly turned from the consideration of truths about
God to the contemplation and direct apprehension of Truth-the-Fact, from
the purely intellectual discipline of the philosophers to the moral and
spiritual discipline of the Sufis.

The moral of all this is obvious. Whenever we hear or read about
'truth,' we should always pause long enough to ask ourselves in which of
the three senses listed above the word is, at the moment, being used. By
taking this simple precaution (and to take it is a genuinely virtuous
act of intellectual honesty) we shall save ourselves a great deal of
disturbing and quite unnecessary mental confusion.

Wishing to entice the blind,

The Buddha playfully let words escape from his golden mouth; Heaven and
earth are filled, ever since, with entangling briars.

Dai-o Kokushi

There is nothing true anywhere,

The True is nowhere to be found.

If you say you see the True,

This seeing is not the true one.

When the True is left to itself,

There is nothing false in it, for it is Mind itself.

When Mind in itself is not liberated from the false,

There is nothing true; nowhere is the True to be found.

Hui Neng

The truth indeed has never been preached by the Buddha, seeing that one
has to realize it within oneself.

Sutralamkara

The further one travels, the less one knows.

Lao T^u

'Listen to this ! ' shouted Monkey. 'After all the trouble we had
getting here from China, and after you specially ordered that we were to
be given the scriptures, Ananda and Kasyapa made a fraudulent delivery
of goods. They gave us blank copies to take away; I ask you, what is the
good of that to us?'

' You needn't shout,' said the Buddha, smiling. ' ... As a matter of
fact, it is such blank scrolls as these that are the true scriptures.
But I quite see that the people of China are too foolish and ignorant to
believe this, so there is nothing for it but to give them copies with
some writing on.'

Wu Ch'eng-ln

The philosophers indeed are clever enough, but wanting in

wisdom ;

As to the others, they are either ignorant or puerile ! They take an
empty fist as containing something real and the

pointing finger as the object pointed at. Because the finger is adhered
to as though it were the Moon, all

their efforts are lost.

Yoka Datshi

What is known as the teaching of the Buddha is not the teaching of the
Buddha.

Diamond Sutra

'What is the ultimate teaching of Buddhism?' 'You won't understand it
until you have it.'

The subject matter of the Perennial Philosophy is the nature of eternal,
spiritual Reality; but the language in which it must be formulated was
developed for the purpose of dealing with

phenomena in time. That is why, in all these formulations, we find an
element of paradox. The nature of Truth-the-Fact cannot be described by
means of verbal symbols that do not adequately correspond to it. At best
it can be hinted at in terms of non sequiturs and contradictions.

To these unavoidable paradoxes some spiritual writers Have chosen to add
deliberate and calculated enormities of language —hard sayings,
exaggerations, ironic or humorous extravagances, designed to startle and
shock the reader out of that self-satisfied complacency which is the
original sin of the intellect. Of this second kind of paradox the
masters of Taoism and Zen Buddhism were particularly fond. The latter,
indeed, made use of paralogisms and even of nonsense as a device for '
taking the kingdom of heaven by violence. 5 Aspirants to the life of
perfection were encouraged to practise discursive meditation on some
completely non-logical formula. The result was a kind of reductio ad
absurdum of the whole self-centred and world-centred discursive process,
a sudden breaking through from 'reason' (in the language of scholastic
philosophy) to intuitive 'intellect,' capable of a genuine insight into
the divine Ground of all being. This method strikes us as odd and
eccentric: but the fact remains that it worked to the extent of
producing in many persons the final metanoia, or transformation of
consciousness and character.

Zen's use of almost comic extravagance to emphasize the philosophic
truths it regarded as most important is well illustrated in the first of
the extracts cited above. We are not intended seriously to imagine that
an Avatar preaches in order to play a practical joke on tjie human race.
But meanwhile what the author has succeeded in doing is to startle us
out of our habitual complacency about the home-made verbal universe in
which we normally do most of our living. Words are not facts, and still
less are they the primordial Fact. If we take them too seriously, we
shall lose our way in a forest of entangling briars. But if, on the
contrary, we don't take them seriously enough, we shall still remain
unaware that there is a way to lose or a goal to be reached. If the
Enlightened did not

preach, there would be no deliverance for anyone. But because human
minds and human languages are what they are, this necessary and
indispensable preaching is beset with dangers. The history of all the
religions is similar in one important respect; some of their adherents
are enlightened and delivered, because they have chosen to react
appropriately to the words which the founders have let fall; others
achieve a partial salvation by reacting with partial appropriateness;
yet others harm themselves and their fellows by reacting with a total
inap-propriateness—either ignoring the words altogether or, more often,
taking them too seriously and treating them as though they were
identical with the Fact to which they refer.

That words are at once indispensable and, in many cases, fatal has been
recognized by all the exponents of the Perennial Philosophy. Thus, Jesus
spoke of himself as bringing into the world something even worse than
briars—a sword. St. Paul* distinguished between the letter that kills
and the spirit that gives life. And throughout the centuries that
followed, the masters of Christian spirituality have found it necessary
to harp again and again upon a theme which has never been outdated
because homo loquax^ the talking animal, is still as naively delighted
by his chief accomplishment, still as helplessly the victim of his own
words, as he was when the Tower of Babel was being built. Recent years
have seen the publication of numerous works on semantics and of an ocean
of nationalistic, racialistic and militaristic propaganda. Never have so
many capable writers warned mankind against the dangers of wrong
speech—and never have words been used more recklessly by politicians or
taken more seriously by the public. The fact is surely proof enough
that, under changing forms, the old problems remain what they always
were—urgent, unsolved and, to all appearances, insoluble.

All that the imagination can imagine and the reason conceive and
understand in this life is not, and cannot be, a proximate means of
union with God.

St. John of the Cross

Jejune and barren speculations may unfold the plicatures of Truth's
garment, but they cannot discover her lovely face.

John Smith, the Platonist

In all faces is shown the Face of faces, veiled and in a riddle.
Howbeit, unveiled it is not seen, until, above all faces, a man enter
into a certain secret and mystic silence, where there is no knowing or
concept of a face. This mist, cloud, darkness or ignorance, into which
he that seeketh thy Face entereth, when he goeth beyond all knowledge or
concept, is the state below which thy Face cannot be found, except
veiled; but that very darkness revealeth thy Face to be there beyond all
veils. Hence I observe how needful it is for me to enter into the
darkness and to admit the coincidence of opposites, beyond all the grasp
of reason, and there to seek the Truth, where impossibility meeteth us.

Nicholas ofCusa

As the Godhead is nameless, and all naming is alien to Him, so also the
soul is nameless; for it is here the same as God.

Eckhart

God being, as He is, inaccessible, do not rest in the consideration of
objects perceptible to the senses and comprehended by the understanding.
This is to be content with what is less than God; so doing, you will
destroy the energy of the soul, which is necessary for walking with Him.

St. John of the Cross

To find or know God in reality by any outward proofs, or by anything but
by God Himself made manifest and self-evident in you, will never be your
case either here or hereafter. For neither God, nor heaven, nor hell,
nor the devil, nor the flesh, can be any otherwise knowable in you or by
you but by their own existence and manifestation in you. And all
pretended knowledge of any of these things, beyond and without this
self-evident sensibility of their birth within you, is only such
knowledge of them as the blind man hath of the light that hath never
entered into him.

William Law

What follows is a summary by an eminent scholar of the Indian doctrines
concerningy'mz/za, the liberating knowledge of Brahman or the divine
Ground.

Jnana is eternal, is general, is necessary and is not a personal
knowledge of this man or that man. It is there, as knowledge in the
Atman itself, and lies there hidden under all avidya
(ignorance)—irremovable, though it may be obscured, unprovable, because
self-evident, needing no proof, because itself giving to all proof the
ground of possibility. These sentences come near to Eckhart's
'knowledge' and to the teaching of Augustine on the Eternal Truth in the
soul which, itself immediately certain, is the ground of all certainty
and is a possession, not of A or B, but of 'the soul/

RudolfOtto

The science of aesthetics is not the same as, nor even a proximate means
to, the practice and appreciation of the arts. How can one learn to have
an eye for pictures, or to become a good painter? Certainly not by
reading Benedetto Croce. One learns to paint by painting, and one learns
to appreciate pictures by going to picture galleries and looking at
them.

But this is not to say that Croce and his fellows have wasted their
time. We should be grateful to them for their labours in building up a
system of thought, by means of which the immediately apprehended
significance and value of art can be assessed in the light of general
knowledge, related to other facts of experience and, in this way and to
this extent, 'explained/

What is true of aesthetics is also true of theology. Theological
speculation is valuable in so far as it enables those who have had
immediate experience of various aspects of God to form intelligible
ideas about the nature of the divine Ground, and of their own experience
of the Ground in relation to other experiences. And when a coherent
system of theology has been worked out, it is useful in so far as it
convinces those who study it that there is nothing inherently
self-contradictory about the postulate of the divine Ground and that,
for those who are

ready to fulfil certain conditions, the postulate may become a realized
Fact. In no circumstances, however, can the study of theology or the
mind's assent to theological propositions take the place of what Law
calls 'the birth of God within.' For theory is not practice, and words
are not the things for which they stand.

Theology as we know it has been formed by the great-mystics, especially
St. Augustine and St. Thomas. Plenty of other great
theologians—especially St. Gregory and St. Bernard, even down to
Suarez—would not have had such insight without mystic super-knowledge.

Abbot John Chapman

Against this we must set Dr. Tennant's view—namely, that religious
experience is something real and unique, but does not add anything to
the experiencer's knowledge of ultimate Reality and must always be
interpreted in terms of an idea of God derived from other sources. A
study of the facts would suggest that both these opinions are to some
degree correct. The facts of mystical insight (together with the facts
of what is taken to be historic revelation) are rationalized in terms of
general knowledge and become the basis of a theology. And, reciprocally,
an existing theology in terms of general knowledge exercises a profound
influence upon those who have undertaken the spiritual life, causing
them, if it is low, to be content with a low form of experience, if it
is high, to reject as inadequate the experience of any form of reality
having characteristics incompatible with those of the God described in
the books. Thus mystics make theology, and theology makes mystics.

A person who gives assent to untrue dogma, or who pays all his attention
and allegiance to one true dogma in a comprehensive system, while
neglecting the others (as many Christians concentrate exclusively on the
humanity of the Second Person of the Trinity and ignore the Father and
the Holy Ghost), runs the risk of limiting in advance his direcj
apprehension of Reality. In religion as in natural science, experience

is determined only by experience. It is fatal to prejudge it, to compel
it to fit the mould imposed by a theory which either does not correspond
to the facts at all, or corresponds to only some of the facts. * Do not
strive to seek after the true,' writes a Zen master, 'only cease to
cherish opinions.' There is only one way to cure the results of belief
in a false or incomplete theology and it is the same as the only known
way of passing from belief in even the truest theology to knowledge or
primordial Fact—selflessness, docility, openness to the datum of
Eternity. Opinions are things which we make and can therefore
understand, formulate and argue about. But 'to rest in the consideration
of objects perceptible to the sense or comprehended by the understanding
is to be content,' in the words of St. John of the Cross,' with what is
less than God.' Unitive knowledge of God is possible only to those who
'have ceased to cherish opinions'—even opinions that are as true as it
is possible for verbalized abstractions to be.

Up then, noble soul! Put on thy jumping shoes which are intellect and
love, and overleap the worship of thy mental powers, overleap thine
understanding and spring into the heart of God, into his hiddenness
where thou art hidden from all creatures.

Eckhart

With the lamp of word and discrimination one must go beyond word and
discrimination and enter upon the path of realization.

Lankavatara Sutra

The word 'intellect' is used by Eckhart in the scholastic sense of
immediate intuition. 'Intellect and reason,' says Aquinas, 'are not two
powers, but distinct as the perfect from the imperfect. . . . The
intellect means, an intimate penetration of truth; the reason, enquiry
and discourse.' It is by following, and then abandoning, the rational
and emotional path of'word and discrimination* that one is enabled to
enter upon the

intellectual or intuitive 'path of realization.' And yet, in spite of
the warnings pronounced by those who, through selflessness, have passed
from letter to spirit and from theory to immediate knowledge, the
organized Christian churches have persisted in the fatal habit of
mistaking means for ends. The verbal statements of theology's more or
less adequate rationalizations of experience have been taken too
seriously and treated with the reverence that is due only to the Fact
they are intended to describe. It has been fancied that souls are saved
if assent is given to what is locally regarded as the correct formula,
lost if it is withheld. The two words, filioque, may not have been the
sole cause of the schism between the Eastern and Western churches; but
they were unquestionably the pretext and casus belli.

The over-valuation of words and formulae may be regarded as a special
case of that over-valuation of the things of time, which is so fatally
characteristic of historic Christianity. To know Truth-as-Fact and to
know it unitively, 'in spirit and in
truth-as-immediate-apprehension'—this is deliverance, in this 'standeth
our eternal life.' To be familiar with the verbalized truths, which
symbolically correspond to Truth-as-Fact in so far as it can be known
in, or inferred from, truth-as-immediate-apprehension, or
truth-as-historic-revelation—this is not salvation, but merely the study
of a special branch of philosophy. Even the most ordinary experience of
a thing or event in time can never be fully or adequately described in
words. The experience of seeing the sky or having neuralgia is
incommunicable; the best we can do is to say 'blue' or 'pain,' in the
hope that those who hear us may have had experiences similar to our own
and so be able to supply their own version of the meaning. God, however,
is not a thing or event in time, and the time-bound words which cannot
do justice even to temporal matters are even more inadequate to the
intrinsic nature and our own unitive experience of that which belongs to
an incommensurably different order. To suppose that people can be saved
by studying and giving assent to formulae is like supposing that one can
get to Timbuctoo by poring over a map

of Africa. Maps are symbols, and even the best of them are inaccurate
and imperfect symbols. But to anyone who really wants to reach a given
destination, a map is indispensably useful as indicating the direction
in which the traveller should set out and the roads which he must take.

In later Buddhist philosophy words are regarded as one of the prime
determining factors in the creative evolution of human beings. In this
philosophy five categories of being are recognized—Name, Appearance,
Discrimination, Right Knowledge, Suchness. The first three are related
for evil, the last two for good. Appearances are discriminated by the
sense organs, then reified by naming, so that words are taken for things
and symbols are used as the measure of reality. According to this view,
language is a main source of the sense of separateness and the
blasphemous idea of individual self-sufficiency, with their inevitable
corollaries of greed, envy, lust for power, anger and cruelty. And from
these evil passions there springs the necessity of an indefinitely
protracted and repeated separate existence under the same,
self-perpetuated conditions of craving and infatuation. The only escape
is through a creative act of the will, assisted by Buddha-grace, leading
through selflessness to Right Knowledge, which consists, among other
things, in a proper appraisal of Names, Appearances and Discrimination.
In and through Right Knowledge, one emerges from the infatuating
delusion of 'I,' 'me,' 'mine,' and, resisting the temptation to deny the
world in a state of premature and one-sided ecstasy, or to affirm it by
living like the average sensual man, one comes at last to the
transfiguring awareness that samsara and nirvana are one, to the unitive
apprehension of pure Suchness—the ultimate Ground, which can only be
indicated, never adequately described in verbal symbols.

In connection with the Mahayanist view that words play an important and
even creative part in the evolution of unregener-ate human nature, we
may mention Hume's arguments against the reality of causation. These
arguments start from the postulate that all events are 'loose and
separate' from one another and proceed with faultless logic to a
conclusion that makes com-

plete nonsense of all organized thought or purposive action. The
fallacy, as Professor Stout has pointed out, lies in the preliminary
postulate. And when we ask ourselves what it was that induced Hume to
make this odd and quite unrealistic assumption that events are 'loose
and separate,' we see that his only reason for flying in the face of
immediate experience was the fact that things and happenings are
symbolically represented in our thought by nouns, verbs and adjectives,
and that these words are, in effect, 'loose and separate* from one
another in a way which the events and things they stand for quite
obviously are not. Taking words as the measure of things, instead of
using things as the measure of words, Hume imposed the discrete and, so
to sxy^pointilliste pattern of language upon the continuum of actual
experience—with the impossibly paradoxical results with which we are all
familiar. Most human beings are not philosophers and care not at all for
consistency in thought or action. Thus, in some circumstances they take
it for granted that events are not 'loose and separate,' but coexist or
follow one another within the organized and organizing field of a cosmic
whole. But on other occasions, where the opposite view is more nearly in
accord with their passions or interests, they adopt, all unconsciously,
the Humian position and treat events as though they were as independent
of one another and the rest of the world as the words by which they are
symbolized. This is generally true of all occurrences involving 'I,'
'me,' 'mine.' Reifying the 'loose and separate' names, we regard the
things as also loose and separate—not subject to law, not involved in
the network of relationships, by which in fact they are so obviously
bound up with their physical, social and spiritual environment. We
regard as absurd the idea that there is no causal process in nature and
no organic connection between events and things in the lives of other
people; but at the same time we accept as axiomatic the notion that our
own sacred ego is 'loose and separate' from the universe, a law unto
itself above the moral dharma and even, in many respects, above the
natural law of causality. Both in Buddhism and Catholicism, monks and
nuns were encouraged

to avoid the personal pronoun and to speak of themselves in terms of
circumlocutions that clearly indicated their real relationship with the
cosmic reality and their fellow-creatures. The precaution was a wise
one. Our responses to familiar words are conditioned reflexes. By
changing the stimulus, we can do something to change the response. No
Pavlov bell, no salivation; no harping on words like 'me' and 'mine/ no
purely automatic and unreflecting egotism. When a monk speaks of
himself, not as 'I,' but as 'this sinner' or 'this unprofitable
servant,' he tends to stop taking his 'loose and separate' selfhood for
granted, and makes himself aware of his real, organic relationship with
God and his neighbours.

In practice words are used for other purposes than for making statements
about facts. Very often they are used rhetorically, in order to arouse
the passions and direct the will towards some course of action regarded
as desirable. And sometimes, too, they are used poetically—that is to
say, they are used in such a way that, besides making a statement about
real or imaginary things and events, and besides appealing rhetorically
to the will and the passions, they cause the reader to be aware that
they are beautiful. Beauty in art or nature is a matter of relationships
between things not in themselves intrinsically beautiful. There is
nothing beautiful, for example, about the vocables 'time,' or
'syllable.' But when they are used in such a phrase as 'to the last
syllable of recorded time,' the relationship between the sound of the
component words, between our ideas of the things for which they stand,
and between the overtones of association with which each word and the
phrase as a whole are charged, is apprehended, by a direct and immediate
intuition, as being beautiful.

About the rhetorical use of words nothing much need be said. There is
rhetoric for good causes and there is rhetoric for bad causes—rhetoric
which is tolerably true to facts as well as emotionally moving, and
rhetoric which is unconsciously or deliberately a lie. To learn to
discriminate between the different kinds of rhetoric is an essential
part of intellectual morality; and intellectual morality is as necessary
a pre-condition of the

spiritual life as is the control of the will and the guard of heart and
tongue.

We have now to consider a more difficult problem. How should the
poetical use of words be related to the life of the spirit? (And,'of
course, what applies to the poetical use of words applies equally to the
pictorial use of pigments, the musical use of sounds, the sculptural use
of clay or stone—in a word, to all the arts.)

'Beauty is truth, truth beauty.' But unfortunately Keats failed to
specify in which of its principal meanings he was using the word '
truth.' Some critics have assumed that he was using it in the third of
the senses listed at the opening of this section, and have therefore
dismissed the aphorism as nonsensical. Zn+ H 2 SO 4 = ZnSO 4 + H 2 .
This is a truth in the third sense of the word—and, manifestly, this
truth is not identical with beauty. But no less manifestly Keats was not
talking about this kind of 'truth.' He was using the word primarily in
its first sense, as a synonym for ' fact,' and secondarily with the
significance attached to it in the Johannine phrase, 'to worship God in
truth.' His sentence, therefore, carries two meanings. 'Beauty is the
Primordial Fact, and the Primordial Fact is Beauty, the principle of all
particular beauties'; and ' Beauty is an immediate experience, and this
immediate experience is identical with Beauty-as-Principle,
Beauty-as-Primordial-Fact.' The first of these statements is fully in
accord with the doctrines of the Perennial Philosophy. Among the
trinities in which the ineffable One makes itself manifest is the
trinity of the Good, the True, and the Beautiful. We perceive beauty in
the harmonious intervals between the parts of a whole. In this context
the divine Ground might be paradoxically defined as Pure Interval,
independent of what is separated and harmonized within the totality.

With Keats's statement in its secondary meaning the exponents of the
Perennial Philosophy would certainly disagree. The experience of beauty
in art or in nature may be qualitatively akin to the immediate, unitive
experience of the divine Ground or Godhead; but it is not the same as
that experience,

and the particular beauty-fact experienced, though partaking in some
sort of the divine nature, is at several removes from the Godhead. The
poet, the nature lover, the aesthete are granted apprehensions of
Reality analogous to those vouchsafed to the selfless contemplative; but
because they have not troubled to make themselves perfectly selfless,
they are incapable of knowing the divine Beauty in its fullness, as it
is in itself. The poet is born with the capacity of arranging words in
such a way that something of the quality of the graces and inspirations
he has received can make itself felt to other human beings in the white
spaces, so to speak, between the lines of his verse. This is a great and
precious gift; but if the poet remains content with his gift, if he
persists in worshipping the beauty in art and nature without going on to
make himself capable, through selflessness, of apprehending Beauty as it
is in the divine Ground, then he is only an idolater. True, his idolatry
is among the highest of which human beings are capable; but an idolatry,
none the less, it remains.

The experience of beauty is pure, self-manifested, compounded equally of
joy and consciousness, free from admixture of any other perception, the
very twin brother of mystical experience, and the very life of it is
supersensuous wonder.... It is enjoyed by those who are competent
thereto, in identity, just as the form of God is itself the joy with
which it is recognized.

Visvanatha

What follows is the last composition of a Zen nun, who had been in her
youth a great beauty and an accomplished poetess.

Sixty-six times have these eyes beheld the changing scenes of

Autumn.

I have said enough about moonlight, Ask me no more.

Only listen to the voice of pines and cedars, when no wind stirs.

Ryo-Nen

The silence under windless trees is what Mallarme would call a creux
neont musician. But whereas the music for which die poet listened was
merely aesthetic and imaginative, it was to pure Suchness that the
self-naughted contemplative was laying herself open. 'Be still and know
that I am God/

This truth is to be lived, it is not to be merely pronounced with

the mouth. ...

There is really nothing to argue about in this teaching; Any arguing is
sure to go against the intent of it. Doctrines given up to controversy
and argumentation lead of

themselves to birth and death.

Hui Neng

Away, then, with the fictions and workings of discursive reason, either
for or against Christianity! They are only the wanton spirit of the
mind, whilst ignorant of God and insensible of its own nature and
condition. Death and life are the only things in question; life is God
living and working in the soul; death is the soul living and working
according to the sense and reason of bestial flesh and blood. Both this
life and this death are of their own growth, growing from their own seed
within us, not as busy reason talks and directs, but as the heart turns
either to the one or to the other.

William Law

Can I explain the Friend to one for whom He is no Friend ?

Jalal-uddin Rumi

When a mother cries to her sucking babe, * Come, O son, I am

thy mother!'

Does the child answer,' O mother, show a proof That I shall find comfort
in taking thy milk'?

Jalal-uddin Rumi

Great truths do not take hold of the hearts of the masses. And now, as
all the world is in error, how shall I, though I know

the true path, how shall I guide ? If I know that I cannot succeed and
yet try to force success, this would be but another source of error.
Better then to desist and strive no more. But if I do not strive, who
will ?

Chuang T%u

Between the horns of Chuang Tzu's dilemma there is no way but that of
love, peace and joy. Only those who manifest their possession, in
however small a measure, of the fruits of the Spirit can persuade others
that the life of the spirit is worth living. Argument and controversy
are almost useless; in many cases, indeed, they are positively harmful.
But this, of course, is a thing that clever men with a gift for
syllogisms and sarcasm find it peculiarly hard to admit. Milton, no
doubt, genuinely believed that he was working for truth, righteousness
and the glory of God by exploding in torrents of learned scurrility
against the enemies of his favourite dictator and his favourite brand of
nonconformity. In actual fact, of course, he and the other
controversialists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries did nothing
but harm to the cause of true religion, for which, on one side or the
other, they fought with an equal learning and ingenuity and with the
same foul-mouthed intemperance of language. The successive controversies
went on, with occasional lucid intervals, for about two hundred
years—Papists arguing with anti-Papists, Protestants with other
Protestants, Jesuits with Quietists and Jansenists. When the noise
finally died down, Christianity (which, like any other religion, can
survive only if it manifests the fruits of the Spirit) was all but dead;
the real religion of most educated Europeans was now nationalistic
idolatry. During the eighteenth century this change to idolatry seemed
(after the atrocities committed in the name of Christianity by
Wallenstein and Tilly) to be a change for the better. This was because
the ruling classes were determined that the horrors of the wars of
religion should not be repeated and therefore deliberately tempered
power politics with gentlemanliness., Symptoms of gentlemanliness can
still be observed in the Napoleonic and

Crimean wars. But the national Molochs were steadily devouring the
eighteenth-century ideal. During the First and Second World Wars we have
witnessed the total elimination of die old checks and self-restraints.
The consequences of political idolatry now display themselves without
the smallest mitigation either of humanistic honour and etiquette or of
transcendental religion. By its internecine quarrels over words, forms
of organization, money and power, historic Christianity consummated the
work of self-destruction, to which its excessive preoccupation with
things in time had from die first so tragically committed it.

Sell your cleverness and buy bewilderment; Cleverness is mere opinion,
bewilderment is intuition.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

Reason is like an officer when the King appears; The officer then loses
his power and hides himself. Reason is the shadow cast by God; God is
the sun.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

Non-rational creatures do not look before or after, but live in the
animal eternity of a perpetual present; instinct is their animal grace
and constant inspiration; and they are never tempted to live otherwise
than in accord with their own animal dharma, or immanent law. Thanks to
his reasoning powers and to the instrument of reason, language, man (in
his merely human condition) lives nostalgically, apprehensively and
hopefully in the past and future as well as in the present; has no
instincts to tell him what to do; must rely on personal cleverness,
rather than on inspiration from the divine Nature of Things; finds
himself in a condition of chronic civil war between passion and prudence
and, on a higher level of awareness and ethical sensibility, between
egotism and dawning spirituality. But this 'wearisome condition of
humanity' is the indispensable prerequisite of enlightenment and
deliver-

ance. Man must live in time in order to be able to advance into
eternity, no longer on the animal, but on the spiritual level; he must
be conscious of himself as a separate ego in order to be able
consciously to transcend separate selfhood; he must do battle with the
lower self in older that he may become identified with that higher Self
within him, which is akin to the divine Not-Self; and finally he must
make use of his cleverness in order to pass beyond cleverness to the
intellectual vision of Truth, the immediate, unitive knowledge of the
divine Ground. Reason and its works 'are not and cannot be a proximate
means of union with God.' The proximate means is 'intellect,' in the
scholastic sense of the word, or spirit. In the last analysis the use
and purpose of reason is to create the internal and external conditions
favourable to its own transfiguration by and into spirit. It is the lamp
by which it finds the way to go beyond itself. We see, then, that as a
means to a proximate means to an End, discursive reasoning is of
enormous value. But if, in our pride and madness, we treat it as a
proximate means to the divine End (as so many religious people have done
and still do), or if, denying the existence of an eternal End, we regard
it as at once the means to Progress and its ever-receding goal in time,
cleverness becomes the enemy, a source of spiritual blindness, moral
evil and social disaster. At no period in history has cleverness been so
highly valued or, in certain directions, so widely and efficiently
trained as at the present time. And at no time have intellectual vision
and spirituality been less esteemed, or the End to which they are
proximate means less widely and less earnestly r "jght for. Because
technology advances, we fancy *V v'fre are making corresponding progress
all along v * lint; because we have considerable power over inanimate
nature, we are convinced that we are the self-sufficient masters of our
fate and captains of our souls; and because cleverness has given us
technology and power, we believe, in spite of all the evidence to the
contrary, that we have only to go on being yet cleverer in a yet more
systematic way to achieve social order, international peace and personal
happiness.

In Wu Ch'eng-en's extraordinary masterpiece (so admirably translated by
Mr. Arthur Waley) there is an episode, at once comical and profound, in
which Monkey (who, in the allegory, is the incarnation of human
cleverness) gets to heaven and there causes so much trouble that at last
Buddha has to be called in to deal with him. It ends in the following
passage:

Til have a wager with you,' said Buddha. 'If you are really so clever,
jump off the palm of my right hand. If you succeed, I'll tell the Jade
Emperor to come and live with me in the Western Paradise, and you shall
have his throne without more ado. But if you fail, you shall go back to
earth and do penance there for many a kalpa before you come back to me
with your talk.'

'This Buddha,' Monkey thought to himself, 'is a perfect fool. I can jump
a hundred and eight thousand leagues, while his palm cannot be as much
as eight inches across. How could I fail to jump clear of it?'

'You're sure you're in a position to do this for me?' he asked.

' Of course I am,' said Buddha.

He stretched out his right hand, which looked about the size of a lotus
leaf. Monkey put his cudgel behind his ear, and leapt with all his
might. ' That's all right,' he said to himself. ' I'm right off it now.'
He was whizzing so fast that he was almost invisible, and Buddha,
watching him with the eye of wisdom, saw a mere whirligig shoot along.

Monkey came at last to five pink pillars, sticking up into the air. '
This is the end of the World,' said Monkey to himself. 'All I have got
to do is to go back to Buddha and claim my forfeit. The Thfone.is mine.'

' Wait a minute,' ne said presently,' I'd better just leave a record of
some kind, in case I have trouble with Buddha.' He plucked a hair and
blew on it with magic breath, crying 'Change!' It changed at once into a
writing brush charged with heavy ink, and at the base of the central
pillar he wrote,' The Great Sage Equal to Heaven reached this place.'
Then, to mark his disrespect, he relieved nature at the bottom of the
first pillar, and somersaulted back to where he had come from. Standing
on Buddha's palm,

he said, 'Well, I've gone and come back. You can go and tell the Jade
Emperor to hand over the palaces of Heaven.'

'You stinking ape/ said Buddha, 'you've been on the palm of my hand all
the time.'

'You're quite mistaken,' said Monkey. 'I got to the end of the World,
where I saw five flesh-coloured pillars sticking up into the sky. I
wrote something on one of them. I'll take you there and show you, if you
like.'

'No need for that,' said Buddha. 'Just look down.'

Monkey peered down with his fiery, steely eyes, and there at the base of
the middle finger of Buddha's hand he saw written the words, 'The Great
Sage Equal to Heaven reached this place,' and from the fork between the
thumb and first finger came a smell of monkey's urine.

From Monkey

And so, having triumphantly urinated on the proffered hand of Wisdom,
the Monkey within us turns back and, full of a bumptious confidence in
his own omnipotence, sets out to refashion the world of men and things
into something nearer to his heart's desire. Sometimes his intentions
are good, sometimes consciously bad. But, whatever the intentions may
be, the results of action undertaken by even the most brilliant
cleverness, when it is unenlightened by the divine Nature of Things,
unsubordinated to the Spirit, afe generally evil. That this has always
been clearly understood by humanity at large is proved by the usages of
language. 'Cunning' and 'canny' are equivalent to ' knowing,' and all
three adjectives pass a more or less unfavourable moral judgment on
those to whom they are applied. 'Conceit' is just 'concept'; but what a
man's mind conceives most clearly is the supreme value of his own ego. '
Shrewd,' which is the participial form of' shrew,' meaning malicious,
and is connected with 'beshrew,' to curse, is now applied, by way of
rather dubious compliment, to astute business men and attorneys. Wizards
are so called because they are wise—wise, of course, in the sense that,
in American slang, a 'wise guy' is wise. Conversely, an idiot was once

popularly known as an innocent. ' This use of innocent/ says Richard
Trench, 'assumes that to hurt and harm is the chief employment, towards
which men turn their intellectual powers; that where they are wise, they
are oftenest wise to do evil. 5 Meanwhile it goes without saying that
cleverness and accumulated knowledge are indispensable, but always as
means to proximate means, and never as proximate means or, what is even
worse, as ends in themselves. Quid faceret eruditio sine dilecticne ?
says St. Bernard. Inflaret. Quid^ absque eruditione dilectio? Erraret.
What would learning do without love? It would puff up. And love without
learning? It would go astray.

Such as men themselves are, such will God Himself seem to them to be.

John Smith, the Platonlst

Men's minds perceive second causes,

But only prophets perceive the action of the First Cause.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

The amount and kind of knowledge we acquire depends first upon the will
and, second, upon our psycho-physical constitution and the modifications
imposed upon it by environment and our own choice. Thus, Professor
Burkitt has pointed out that, where technological discovery is concerned
'man's desire has been the important factor. Once something is
definitely wanted, again and again it has been produced in an extremely

short time Conversely, nothing will teach the Bushmen of

South Africa to plant and herd. They have no desire to do so.' The same
is true in regard to ethical and spiritual discoveries. 'You are as holy
as you wish to be/ was the motto given by Ruysbroeck to the students who
came to visit him. And he might have added, 'You can therefore know as
much of Reality as you wish to know*—for knowledge is in the knower
according to the mode of the knower, and the mode of the knower is, in
certain all-important respects, within the knower's control.

Liberating knowledge of God comes to the pure in heart and poor in
spirit; and though such purity and poverty are enormously difficult of
achievement, they are nevertheless possible to all.

She said, moreover, that if one would attain to purity of mind it was
necessary to abstain altogether from any judgment on one's neighbour and
from all empty talk about his conduct. In creatures one should always
seek only for the will of God. With great force she said: * For no
reason whatever should one judge the actions of creatures or their
motives. Even when we see that it is an actual sin, we ought not to pass
judgment on it, but have holy and sincere compassion and offer it up to
God with humble and devout prayer/

From the Testament of St. Catherine of Siena, written down by Tommaso di
Petra

This total abstention from judgment upon one's fellows is only one of
the conditions of inward purity. The others have already been described
in the section on 'Mortification.'

Learning consists in adding to one's stock day by day. The practice of
Tao consists in subtracting day by day: subtracting and yet again
subtracting until one has reached inactivity.

Lao T%u

It is the inactivity of self-will and ego-centred cleverness that makes
possible the activity within the emptied and purified soul of the
eternal Suchness. And when eternity is known in the heights within, it
is also known in the fullness of experience, outside in the world.

Didst thou ever descry a glorious eternity in a winged moment of time ?
Didst thou ever see a bright infinite in the narrow point of an object?
Then thou knowest what spirit means—the spire-top, whither all things
ascend harmoniously, where they meet and sit contented in an unfathomed
Depth of Life.

Peter Sterry

Chapter 8 RELIGION AND TEMPERAMENT

IT seems best at this point to turn back for a moment from ethics to
psychology, where a very important problem awaits us—a problem to which
the exponents of the Perennial Philosophy have given a great deal of
attention. What precisely is the relation between individual
constitution and temperament on the one hand and the kind and degree of
spiritual knowledge on the other? The materials for a comprehensively
accurate answer to this question are not available—except, perhaps, in
the form of that incommunicable science, based upon intuition and long
practice, that exists in .the minds of experienced 'spiritual directors.
5 But the answer that can be given, though incomplete, is highly
significant.

All knowledge, as we have seen, is a function of being. Or, to phrase
the same idea in scholastic terms, the thing known is in the knower
according to the mode of the knower. In the Introduction reference was
made to the effect upon knowledge of changes of being along what may be
called its vertical axis, in the direction of sanctity or its opposite.
But there is also variation in the horizontal plane. Congenitally by
psycho-physical constitution, each one of us is born into a certain
position on this horizontal plane. It is a vast territory, still
imperfectly explored, a continent stretching all the way from imbecility
to genius, from shrinking weakness to aggressive strength, from cruelty
to Pickwickian kindliness, from self-revealing sociability to taciturn
misanthropy and love of solitude, from an almost frantic lasciviousness
to an almost un-tempted continence. From any point on this huge expanse
of possible human nature an individual can move almost indefinitely up
or down, towards union with the divine Ground of his own and all other
beings, or towards the last, the infernal extremes of separateness and
selfhood. But where horizontal

movement is concerned there is far less freedom. It is impossible for
one kind of physical constitution to transform itself into another kind;
and the particular temperament associated with a given physical
constitution can be modified only within narrow limits. With the best
will in the world and the best social environment, all that anyone can
hope to do is to make the best of his congenital psycho-physical
make-up; to change the fundamental patterns of constitution and
temperament is beyond his power.

In the course of the last thirty centuries many attempts have been made
to work out a classification system in terms of which human differences
could be measured and described. For example, there is the ancient Hindu
method of classifying people according to the psycho-physico-social
categories of caste. There are the primarily medical classifications
associated with the name of Hippocrates, classifications in terms of two
main 'habits'—the phthisic and the apoplectic—or of the four humours
(blood, phlegm, black bile and yellow bile) and the four qualities (hot,
cold, moist and dry). More recently there have been the various
physiognomic systems of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries;
the crude and merely psychological dichotomy of introversion and
extra-version; the more complete, but still inadequate, psycho-physical
classifications proposed by Kretschmer, Stockard, Viola and others; and
finally the system, more comprehensive, more flexibly adequate to the
complex facts than all those which preceded it, worked out by Dr.
William Sheldon and his collaborators.

In the present section our concern is with classifications of human
differences in relation to the problems of the spiritual life.
Traditional systems will be described and illustrated, and the findings
of the Perennial Philosophy will be compared with the conclusions
reached by the most recent scientific research/

In the West, the traditional Catholic classification of human beings is
based upon the Gospel anecdote of Martha and Mary. The way of Martha is
the way of salvation through action, the way of Mary is the way through
contemplation. Following

Aristotle, who in this as in many other matters was in accord with the
Perennial Philosophy, Catholic thinkers have regarded contemplation (the
highest term of which is the unitive knowledge of the Godhead) as man's
final end, and therefore have always held that Mary's was indeed the
better way.

Significantly enough, it is in essentially similar terms that Dr. Radin
classifies and (by implication) evaluates primitive human beings in so
far as they are philosophers and religious devotees. For him there is no
doubt that the higher monotheistic forms of primitive religion are
created (or should one rather say, with Plato, discovered?} by people
belonging to the first of the two great psycho-physical classes of human
beings —the men of thought. To those belonging to the other class, the
men of action, is due the creation or discovery of the lower,
unphilosophical, polytheistic kinds of religion.

This simple dichotomy is a classification of human differences that is
valid so far as it goes. But like all such dichotomies, whether physical
(like Hippocrates' division of humanity into those of phthisic and those
of apoplectic habit) or psychological (like Jung's classification in
terms of introvert and extravert), this grouping of the religious into
those who think and those who act, those who follow the way of Martha
and those who follow the way of Mary, is inadequate to the facts. And of
course no director of souls, no head of a religious organization, is
ever, in actual practice, content with this all too simple system.
Underlying the best Catholic writing on prayer and the best Catholic
practice in the matter of recognizing vocations and assigning duties, we
sense the existence of an implicit and unformulated classification of
human differences more complete and more realistic than the explicit
dichotomy of action and contemplation.

In Hindu thought the outlines of this completer and more adequate
classification are clearly indicated. The ways leading to the delivering
union with God are not two, but three—the way of works, the way of
knowledge and the way of devotion. In the Bhagavad-Gita Sri Krishna
instructs Arjuna in all three paths—liberation through action without
attachment; libera-

tion through knowledge of the Self and the Absolute Ground of all being
with which it is identical; and liberation through intense devotion to
the personal God or the divine incarnation.

Do without attachment the work you have to do; for a man who does his
work without attachment attains the Supreme Goal verily. By action alone
men like Janaka attained perfection.

But there is also the way of Mary.

Freed from passion, fear and anger, absorbed in Me, taking refuge in Me,
and purified by the fires of Knowledge, many have become one with my
Being.

And again:

Those who have completely controlled their senses and are of even mind
under all conditions and thus contemplate the Imperishable, the
Ineffable, the Unmanifest, the Omnipresent, the Incomprehensible, the
Eternal—they, devoted to the welfare of all beings, attain Me alone and
none else.

But the path of contemplation is not easy.

The task of those whose minds are set on the Unmanifest is the more
difficult; for, to those who are in the body, the realization of the
Unmanifest is hard. But those who consecrate all their actions to Me (as
the personal God, or as the divine Incarnation), who regard Me as the
supreme Goal, who worship Me and meditate upon Me with single-minded
concentration—for those whose minds are thus absorbed in Me, I become
ere long the Saviour from the world's ocean of mortality.

These three ways of deliverance are precisely correlated with the three
categories, in terms of which Sheldon has worked out what is, without
question, the best and most adequate classification of human
differences. Human beings, he has

shown, vary continuously between the viable extremes of a tri-polar
system; and physical and psychological measurements can be devised,
whereby any given individual may be accurately located in relation to
the three co-ordinates. Or we can put the matter differently and say
that any given individual is a mixture, in varying proportions, of three
physical and three closely related psychological components. The
strength of each component can be measured according to empirically
determined procedures. To the three physical components Sheldon gives
the names of endomorphy, mesomorphy and ectomorphy. The individual with
a high degree of endomorphy is predominantly soft and rounded and may
easily become grossly fat. The high mesomorph is hard, big-boned and
strong-muscled. The high ectomorph is slender and has small bones and
stringy, weak, unemphatic muscles. The endomorph has a huge gut, a gut
that may be more than twice as heavy and twice as long as that of the
extreme ectomorph. In a real sense his or her body is built around the
digestive tract. The centrally significant fact of mesomorphic physique,
on the other hand, is the powerful musculature, while that of the
ectomorph is the over-sensitive and (since the ratio of body surface to
mass is higher in ectomorphs than in either of the other types)
relatively unprotected nervous system.

With endomorphic constitution is closely correlated a temperamental
pattern, which Sheldon calls viscerotonia. Significant among the
viscerotonic traits are love of food and, characteristically, love of
eating in common; love of comfort and luxury; love of ceremoniousness;
indiscriminate amiability and love of people as such; fear of solitude
and craving for company; uninhibited expression of emotion; love of
childhood, in the form of nostalgia towards one's own past and in an
intense enjoyment of family life; craving for affection and social
support, and need of people when in trouble. The temperament that is
related to mesomorphy is called somatotonia. In this the dominating
traits are love of muscular activity, aggressiveness and lust for power;
indifference to pain; callousness in regard to other people's feelings;
a love

of combat and competitiveness; a high degree of physical courage; a
nostalgic feeling, not for childhood, but for youth, the period of
maximum muscular power; a need for activity when in trouble.

From the foregoing descriptions it will be seen how inadequate is the
Jungian conception of extraversion, as a simple antithesis to
introversion. Extraversion is not simple; it is of two radically
different kinds. There is the emotional, sociable extraversion of the
viscerotonic endomorph—the person who is always seeking company and
telling everybody just what he feels. And there is the extraversion of
the big-muscled soma-totonic—the person who looks outward on the world
as a place where he can exercise power, where he can bend people to his
will and shape things to his heart's desire. One is the genial
extraversion of the salesman, the Rotarian good mixer, the liberal
Protestant clergyman. The other is the extraversion of the engineer who
works off his lust for power on things, of the sportsman and the
professional blood-and-iron soldier, of the ambitious business executive
and politician, of the dictator, whether in the home or at the head of a
state.

With cerebrotonia, the temperament that is correlated with ectomorphic
physique, we leave the genial world of Pickwick, the strenuously
competitive world of Hotspur, and pass into an entirely different and
somewhat disquieting kind of universe —that of Hamlet and Ivan
Karamazov. The extreme cerebro-tonic is the over-alert, over-sensitive
introvert, who is more concerned with what goes on behind his eyes—with
the constructions of thought and imagination, with the variations of
feeling and consciousness—than with that external world, to which, in
their different ways, the viscerotonic and the soma-totonic pay their
primary attention and allegiance. Cerebro-tonics have little or no
desire to dominate, nor do they feel the viscerotonic's indiscriminate
liking for people as people; on the contrary they want to live and let
live, and their passion for privacy is intense. Solitary confinement,
the most terrible punishment that can be inflicted on the soft, round,
genial person, is, for the cerebrotonic, no punishment at all. For

the ultimate horror is the boarding school and the barracks. In company
cerebrotonics are nervous and shy, .tensely inhibited and unpredictably
moody. (It is a significant fact that no extreme cerebrotonic has ever
been a good actor or actress.) Cerebrotonics hate to slam doors or raise
their voices, and suffer acutely from the unrestrained bellowing and
trampling of the somatotonic. Their manner is restrained, and when it
comes to expressing their feelings they are extremely reserved. The
emotional gush of the viscerotonic strikes them as offensively shallow
and even insincere, nor have they any patience with viscerotonic
ceremoniousness and love of luxury and magnificence. They do not easily
form habits and find it hard to adapt their lives to the routines which
come so naturally to somatotonics. Owing to their over-sensitiveness,
cerebrotonics are often extremely, almost insanely sexual; but they are
hardly ever tempted to take to drink—for alcohol, which heightens the
natural aggressiveness of the somatotonic and increases the relaxed
amiability of the viscerotonic, merely makes them feel ill and
depressed. Each in his own way, the viscerotonic and the somatotonic are
well adapted to the world they live in; but the introverted cerebrotonic
is in some sort incommensurable with the things and people and
institutions that surround him. Consequently a remarkably high
proportion of extreme cerebrotonics fail to make good as normal citizens
and average pillars of society. But if many fail, many also become
abnormal on the higher side of the average. In universities, monasteries
and research laboratories —wherever sheltered conditions are provided
for those whose small guts and feeble muscles do not permit them to eat
or fight their way through the ordinary rough and tumble—the percentage
of outstandingly gifted and accomplished cerebrotonics will almost
always be very high. Realizing the importance of this extreme,
over-evolved and scarcely viable type of human being, all civilizations
have provided in one way or another for its protection.

In the light of these descriptions we can understand more clearly the
Bhagavad-Gita's classification of paths to salvation.

The path of devotion is the path naturally followed by the person in
whom the viscerotonic component is high. His inborn tendency to
externalize the emotions he spontaneously feels in regard to persons can
be disciplined and canalized, so that a merely animal gregariousness and
a merely human kindliness become transformed into charity—devotion to
the personal God and universal goodwill and compassion towards all
sentient beings.

The path of works is for those whose extraversion is of the somatotonic
kind, those who in all circumstances feel the need to 'do something/ In
the unregenerate somatotonic this craving for action is always
associated with aggressiveness, self-assertion and the lust for power.
For the born Kshatriya, or warrior-ruler, the task, as Krishna explains
to Arjuna, is to get rid of those fatal accompaniments to the love of
action and to work without regard to the fruits of work, in a state of
complete non-attachment to self. Which is, of course, like everything
else, a good deal easier said than done.

Finally, there is the way of knowledge, through the modification of
consciousness, until it ceases to be ego-centred and Becomes centred in
and united with the divine Ground. This is the way to which the extreme
cerebrotonic is naturally drawn. His special discipline consists in the
mortification of his innate tendency towards introversion for its own
sake, towards thought and imagination and self-analysis as ends in
themselves rather than as means towards the ultimate transcendence of
phantasy and discursive reasoning in the timeless act of pure
intellectual intuition.

Within the general population, as we have seen, variation is continuous,
and in most people the three components are fairly evenly mixed. Those
exhibiting extreme predominance of any one component are relatively
rare. And yet, in spite of their rarity, it is by the thought-patterns
characteristic of these extreme individuals that theology and ethics, at
any rate on the theoretical side, have been mainly dominated. The reason
for this is simple. Any extreme position is more uncompromisingly clear
and therefore more easily recognized and understood

than the intermediate positions, which are the natural thought-pattern
of the person in whom the constituent components of personality are
evenly balanced. These intermediate positions, it should be noted, do
not in any sense contain or reconcile the extreme positions; they are
merely other thought-patterns added to the list of possible systems. The
construction of an all-embracing system of metaphysics, ethics and
psychology is a task that can never be accomplished by any single
individual, for the sufficient reason that he is an individual with one
particular kind of constitution and temperament and therefore capable of
knowing only according to the mode of his own being. Hence the
advantages inherent in what may be called the anthological approach to
truth.

The Sanskrit dharma —one of the key words in Indian formulations of the
Perennial Philosophy—has two principal meanings. The dharma of an
individual is, first of all, his essential nature, the intrinsic law of
his being and development. But dharma also signifies the law of
righteousness and piety. The implications of this double meaning are
clear: a man's duty, how he ought to live, what he ought to believe and
what he ought to do about his beliefs—these things are conditioned by
his essential nature, his constitution and temperament. Going a good
deal further than do the Catholics, with their doctrine of vocations,
the Indians admit the right of individuals with different dharmas to
worship different aspects or conceptions of the divine. Hence the almost
total absence, among Hindus and Buddhists, of bloody persecutions,
religious wars and proselytizing imperialism.

It should, however, be remarked that, within its own ecclesiastical
fold, Catholicism has been almost as tolerant as Hinduism and Mahayana
Buddhism. Nominally one, each of these religions consists, in fact, of a
number of very different religions, covering the whole gamut of thought
and behaviour from fetishism, through polytheism, through legalistic
monotheism, through devotion to the sacred humanity of the Avatar, to
the profession of the Perennial Philosophy and the practice of a purely
spiritual religion that seeks the unitive knowledge

of the Absolute Godhead. These tolerated religions-within-a-religion are
not, of course, regarded as equally valuable or equally true. To worship
polytheistically may be one's dharma ; nevertheless the fact remains
that man's final end is the unitive knowledge of the Godhead, and all
the historical formulations of the Perennial Philosophy are agreed that
every human being ought, and perhaps in some way or other actually will,
achieve that end. 'All souls,' writes Father Garrigou-Lagrange, 'receive
a general remote call to the mystical life; and if all were faithful in
avoiding, as they should, not merely mortal but venial sin, if they
were, each according to his condition, docile to the Holy Ghost, and if
they lived long enough, a day would come when they would receive the
proximate and efficacious vocation to a high perfection and to the
mystical life properly so called.' With this statement Hindu and
Buddhist theologians would probably agree; but they would add that every
soul will in fact eventually attain this 'high perfection.' All are
called, but in any given generation few are chosen, because few choose
themselves. But the series of conscious existences, corporeal or
incorporeal, is indefinitely long; there is therefore time and
opportunity for everyone to learn the necessary lessons. Moreover, there
will always be helpers. For periodically there are 'descents' of the
Godhead into physical form; and at all times there are future Buddhas
ready, on the threshold of reunion with the Intelligible Light, to
renounce the bliss of immediate liberation in order to return as
saviours and teachers again and again into the world of suffering and
time and evil, until at last every sentient being shall have been
delivered into eternity.

The practical consequences of this doctrine are clear enough. The lower
forms of religion, whether emotional, active or intellectual, are never
to be accepted as final. True, each of them comes naturally to persons
of a certain kind Q tion and temperament; but the dharma or dutjr of j
individual is not to remain complacently fix6^i^^r religion that happens
to suit him; it is raftnst ft> transcend not by impossibly denying the
modes

M

[picture0]

and feeling that are natural to him, but by making use of them, so that
by means of nature he may pass beyond nature. Thus the introvert uses
'discrimination* (in the Indian phrase), and so learns to distinguish
the mental activities of the ego from the principial consciousness of
the Self, which is akin to, or identical with, the divine Ground. The
emotional extravert learns to 'hate his father and mother' (in other
words, to give up his selfish attachment to the pleasures of
indiscriminately loving and being loved), concentrates his devotion on
the personal or incarnate aspect of God, and comes at last to love the
Absolute Godhead by an act, no longer of feeling, but of will
illuminated by knowledge. And finally there is that other kind of
extravert, whose concern is not with the pleasures of giving or
receiving affection, but with the satisfaction of his lust for power
over things, events and persons. Using his own nature to transcend his
own nature, he must follow the path laid down in the Bhagavad-Gita for
the bewildered Arjuna—the path of work without attachment to the fruits
of work, the path of what St. Franjois de Sales calls 'holy
indifference,' the path that leads through the forgetting of self to the
discovery of the Self.

In the course of history it has often happened that one or other of the
imperfect religions has been taken too seriously and regarded as good
and true in itself, instead of as a means to the ultimate end of all
religion. The effects of such mistakes are often disastrous. For
example, many Protestant sects have insisted on the necessity, or at
least the extreme desirability, of a violent conversion. But violent
conversion, as Sheldon has pointed out, is a phenomenon confined almost
exclusively to persons with a high degree of somatotonia. These persons
are so intensely extraverted as to be quite unaware of what is happening
in the lower levels of their minds. If for any reason their attention
comes to be turned inwards, the resulting self-knowledge, because of its
novelty and strangeness, presents itself with the force and quality of a
revelation and their metanoia, or change of mind, is sudden and
thrilling. This change may be to religion, or it may be to something
else—

for example, to psycho-analysis. To insist upon the necessity of violent
conversion as the only means to salvation is about as sensible as it
would be to insist upon the necessity of having a large face, heavy
bones and powerful muscles. To those naturally subject to this kind of
emotional upheaval, the doctrine that makes salvation dependent on
conversion gives a complacency that is quite fatal to spiritual growth,
while those who are incapable of it are filled with a no less fatal
despair. Other examples of inadequate theologies based upon
psychological ignorance could easily be cited. One remembers, for
instance, the sad case of Calvin, the cerebrotonic who took his own
intellectual constructions so seriously that he lost all sense of
reality, both human and spiritual. And then there is our liberal
Protestantism, that predominantly viscerotonic heresy, which seems to
have forgotten the very existence of the Father, Spirit and Logos and
equates Christianity with an emotional attachment to Christ's humanity
or (to use the currently popular phrase) ' the personality of Jesus,'
worshipped idola-trously as though there were no other God. Even within
all-comprehensive Catholicism we constantly hear complaints of the
ignorant and self-centred directors, who impose upon the souls under
their charge a religious dharma wholly unsuited to their nature—with
results which writers such as St. John of the Cross describe as wholly
pernicious. We see, then, that it is natural for us to think of God as
possessed of the qualities which our temperament tends to make us
perceive in Him; but unless nature finds a way of transcending itself by
means of itself, we are lost. In the last analysis Philo is quite right
in saying that those who do not conceive God purely and simply as the
One injure, not God of course, but themselves and, along with
themselves, their fellows.

The way of knowledge comes most naturally to persons whose temperament
is predominantly cerebrotonic. By this I do not mean that the following
of this way is easy for the cerebrotonic. His specially besetting sins
are just as difficult to overcome as are the sins which beset the
power-loving soma-totonic and the extreme viscerotonic with his gluttony
for food

and comfort and social approval. Rather I mean that the idea that such a
way exists and can be followed (either by discrimination, or through
non-attached work and one-pointed devotion) is one which spontaneously
occurs to the cerebrotonic. At all levels of culture he is the natural
monotheist; and this natural monotheist, as Dr. Radin's examples of
primitive theology clearly show, is often a monotheist of the tat tvam
asi, inner-light school. Persons committed by their temperament to one
or other of the two kinds of extraversion are natural polytheists. But
natural polytheists can, without much difficulty, be convinced of the
theoretical superiority of monotheism. The nature of human reason is
such that there is an intrinsic plausibility about any hypothesis which
seeks to explain the manifold in terms of unity, to reduce apparent
multiplicity to essential identity. And from this theoretical monotheism
the half-converted polytheist can, if he chooses, go on (through
practices suitable to his own particular temperament) to the actual
realization of the divine Ground of his own and all other beings. He
can, I repeat, and sometimes he actually does. But very often he does
not. There are many theoretical monotheists whose whole life and every
action prove that in reality they are still what their temperament
inclines them to be—polytheists, worshippers not of the one God they
sometimes talk about, but of the many gods, nationalistic and
technological, financial and familial, to whom in practice they pay all
their allegiance.

In Christian art the Saviour has almost invariably been represented as
slender, small-boned, unemphatically muscled. Large, powerful Christs
are a rather shocking exception to a very ancient rule. Of Rubens'
crucifixions William Blake contemptuously wrote:

I understood Christ was a carpenter And not a brewer's servant, my good
sir.

In a word, the traditional Jesus is thought of as a man of predominantly
ectomorphic physique and therefore, by implication, of predominantly
cerebrotonic temperament. The

central core of primitive Christian doctrine confirms the essential
correctness of the iconographic tradition. The religion of the Gospels
is what we should expect from a cerebrotonic— not, of course, from any
cerebrotonic, but from one who had used the psycho-physical
peculiarities of his own nature to transcend nature, who had followed
his particular dharma to its spiritual goal. The insistence that the
Kingdom of Heaven is within; the ignoring of ritual; the slightly
contemptuous attitude towards legalism, towards the ceremonial routines
of organized religion, towards hallowed days and places; the general
other-worldliness; the emphasis laid upon restraint, not merely of overt
action, but even of desire and unexpressed intention; the indifference
to the splendours of material civilization and the love of poverty as
one of the greatest of goods; the doctrine that non-attachment must be
carried even into the sphere of family relationships and that even
devotion to the highest goals of merely human ideals, even the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, may be idolatrous
distractions from the love of God—all these are characteristically
cerebrotonic ideas, such as would never have occurred spontaneously to
the extraverted power lover or the equally extraverted viscerotonic.

Primitive Buddhism is no less predominantly cerebrotonic than primitive
Christianity, and so is Vedanta, the metaphysical discipline which lies
at the heart of Hinduism. Confucianism, on the contrary, is a mainly
viscerotonic system—familial, ceremonious and thoroughly this-worldly.
And in Mohammedanism we find a system which incorporates strongly
soma-totonic elements. Hence Islam's black record of holy wars and
persecutions—a record comparable to that of later Christianity, after
that religion had so far compromised with unregener-ate somatotonia as
to call its ecclesiastical organization 'the Church Militant/

So far as the achievement of man's final end is concerned, it is as much
of a handicap to be an extreme cerebrotonic or an extreme viscerotonic
as it is to be an extreme somatotonic. But whereas the cerebrotonic and
the viscerotonic cannot do much harm except to themselves and those in
immediate con-

tact with them, the extreme somatotonic, with his native aggressiveness,
plays havoc with whole societies. From one point of view civilization
may be defined as a complex of religious, legal and educational devices
for preventing extreme somatotonics from doing too much mischief, and
for directing their irrepressible energies into socially desirable
channels. Confucianism and Chinese culture have sought to achieve this
end by inculcating filial piety, good manners and an amiably
viscero-tonic epicureanism—the whole reinforced somewhat incongruously
by the cerebrotonic spirituality and restraints of Buddhism and
classical Taoism. In India the caste system represents an attempt to
subordinate military, political and financial power to spiritual
authority; and the education given to all classes still insists so
strongly upon the fact that man's final end is unitive knowledge of God
that even at the present time, even after nearly two hundred years of
gradually accelerating Europeanization, successful somatotonics will, in
middle life, give up wealth, position and power to end their days as
humble seekers after enlightenment. In Catholic Europe, as in India,
there was an effort to subordinate temporal power to spiritual
authority; but since the Church itself exercised temporal power through
the agency of political prelates and mitred business men, the effort was
never more than partially successful. After the Reformation even the
pious wish to limit temporal power by means of spiritual authority was
completely abandoned. Henry VIII made himself, in Stubbs's words, ' the
Pope, the whole Pope, and something more than the Pope, 5 and his
example has been followed by most heads of states ever since. Power has
been limited only by other powers, not by an appeal to first principles
as interpreted by those who are morally and spiritually qualified to
know what they are talking about. Meanwhile, the interest in religion
has everywhere declined and even among believing Christians the
Perennial Philosophy has been to a great extent replaced by a metaphysic
of inevitable progress and an evolving God, by a passionate concern, not
with eternity, but with future time. And almost suddenly, within the
last quarter of a century,

there has been consummated what Sheldon calls a 'somatotonic
revolution,' directed against all that is characteristically
cerebro-tonic in the theory and practice of traditional Christian
culture. Here are a few symptoms of this somatotonic revolution.

In traditional Christianity, as in all the great religious formulations
of the Perennial Philosophy, it was axiomatic that contemplation is the
end and purpose of action. Today the great majority even of professed
Christians regard action (directed towards material and social progress)
as the end, and analytic thought (there is no question any longer of
integral thought, or contemplation) as the means to that end.

In traditional Christianity, as in the other formulations of the
Perennial Philosophy, the secret of happiness and the way to salvation
were to be sought, not in the external environment, but in the
individual's state of mind with regard to the environment. Today the
all-important thing is not the state of the mind, but the state of the
environment. Happiness and moral progress depend, it is thought, on
bigger and better gadgets and a higher standard of living.

In traditional Christian education the stress was all on restraint; with
the recent rise of the 'progressive school' it is all on activity and
'self-expression.'

Traditionally Christian good manners outlawed all expressions of
pleasure in the satisfaction of physical appetites. 'You may love a
screeching owl, but you must not love a roasted fowl'—such was the rhyme
on which children were brought up in the nurseries of only fifty years
ago. Today the young unceasingly proclaim how much they 'love' and
'adore' different kinds of food and drink; adolescents and adults talk
about the 'thrills' they derive from the stimulation of their sexuality.
The popular philosophy of life has ceased to be based on the classics of
devotion and the rules of aristocratic good breeding, and is now moulded
by the writers of advertising copy, whose one idea is to persuade
everybody to be as extraverted and uninhibitedly greedy as possible,
since of course it is only the possessive, the restless, the distracted,
who spend money on the things that advertisers want to sell.
Technological progress

is in part the product of the somatotonic revolution, in part the
producer and sustainer of that revolution. The extraverted attention
results in technological discoveries. (Significantly enough, a high
degree of material civilization has always been associated with the
large-scale and officially sanctioned practice of polytheism.) In their
turn, technological discoveries have resulted in mass-production; and
mass-production, it is obvious, cannot be kept going at full blast
except by persuading the whole population to accept the somatotonic
Weltanschauung and act accordingly.

Like technological progress, with which it is so closely associated in
so many ways, modern war is at once a cause and a result of the
somatotonic revolution. Nazi education, which was specifically education
for war, had two principal aims: to encourage the manifestation of
somatotonia in those most richly endowed with that component of
personality, and to make the rest of the population feel ashamed of its
relaxed amiability or its inward-looking sensitiveness and tendency
towards self-restraint and tender-mindedness. During the war the enemies
of Nazism have been compelled, of course, to borrow from the Nazis'
educational philosophy. All over the world millions of young men and
even of young women are being systematically educated to be 'tough' and
to value 'toughness' beyond every other moral quality. With this system
of somatotonic ethics is associated the idolatrous and polytheistic
theology of nationalism—a pseudo-religion far stronger at the present
time for evil and division than is Christianity, or any other
monotheistic religion, for unification and good. In the past most
societies tried systematically to discourage somatotonia. This was a
measure of self-defence; they did not want to be physically destroyed by
the power-loving aggressiveness of their most active minority, and they
did not want to be spiritually blinded by an excess of extra-version.
During the last few years all this has been changed. What, we may
apprehensively wonder, will be the result of the current world-wide
reversal of an immemorial social policy ? Time alone will show.

Chapter 9 SELF-KNOWLEDGE

In other living creatures ignorance of self is nature; in man it is
vice.

Boethius

T 7ICE may be defined as a course of behaviour consented to V by the
will and having results which are bad, primarily because they are
God-eclipsing and, secondarily, because they are physically or
psychologically harmful to the agent or his fellows. Ignorance of self
is something that answers to this description. In its origins it is
voluntary; for by introspection and by listening to other people's
judgments of our character we can all, if we so desire, come to a very
shrewd understanding of our flaws and weaknesses and the real, as
opposed to the avowed and advertised, motives of our actions. If most of
us remain ignorant of ourselves, it is because self-knowledge is painful
and we prefer the pleasures of illusion. As for the consequences of such
ignorance, these are bad by every criterion, from the utilitarian to the
transcendental. Bad because self-ignorance leads to unrealistic
behaviour and so causes every kind of trouble for everyone concerned;
and bad because, without self-knowledge, there can be no true humility,
therefore no effective self-naughting, therefore no unitive knowledge of
the divine Ground underlying the self and ordinarily eclipsed by it.

The importance, the indispensable necessity, of self-knowledge has been
stressed by the saints and doctors of every one of the great religious
traditions. To us in the West, the most familiar voice is that of
Socrates. More systematically than Socrates the Indian exponents of the
Perennial Philosophy harped on the same theme. There is, for example,
the Buddha, whose discourse on 'The Setting-Up of Mindfulness'expounds

(with that positively inexorable exhaustiveness characteristic of the
Pali scriptures) the whole art of self-knowledge in all its
branches—knowledge of one's body, one's senses, one's feelings, one's
thoughts. This art of self-knowledge is practised with two aims in view.
The proximate aim is that 'a brother, as to the body, continues so to
look upon the body, that he remains ardent, self-possessed and mindful,
having overcome both the hankering and dejection common in the world.
And in the same way as to feelings, thoughts and ideas, he so looks upon
each that he remains ardent, self-possessed and mindful, without
hankering or dejection.' Beyond and through this desirable psychological
condition lies the final end of man, knowledge of that which underlies
the individualized self. In their own vocabulary, Christian writers
express the same ideas.

A man has many skins in himself, covering the depths of his heart. Man
knows so many things; he does not know himself. Why, thirty or forty
skins or hides, just like an ox's or a bear's, so thick and hard, cover
the soul. Go into your own ground and learn to know yourself there.

Eckhart

Fools regard themselves as awake now—so personal is their knowledge. It
may be as a prince or it may be as a herdsman, but so cock-sure of
themselves!

Chuang T%u

This metaphor of waking from dreams recurs again and again in the
various expositions of the Perennial Philosophy. In this context
liberation might be defined as the process of waking up out of the
nonsense, nightmares and illusory pleasures of what is ordinarily called
real life into the awareness of eternity. The ' sober certainty of
waking bliss'—that wonderful phrase in which Milton described the
experience of the noblest kind of music—comes, I suppose, about as near
as words can get to enlightenment and deliverance.

Thou (the human being) art that which is not. I am that I am. If thou
perceivest this truth in thy soul, never shall the enemy deceive thee;
thou shalt escape all his snares.

St. Catherine of Siena

Knowledge of ourselves teaches us whence we come, where we are and
whither we are going. We come from God and we are in exile; and it is
because our potency of affection tends towards God that we are aware of
this state of exile.

Ruysbroeck

Spiritual progress is through the growing knowledge of the self as
nothing and of the Godhead as all-embracing Reality. (Such knowledge, of
course, is worthless if it is merely theoretical; to be effective, it
must be realized as an immediate, intuitive experience and appropriately
acted upon.) Of one great master of the spiritual life Professor
fitienne Gilson writes: 'The displacement of fear by Charity by way of
the practice of humility—in that consists the whole of St. Bernard's
ascesis, its beginning, its development and its term.' Fear, worry,
anxiety—these form the central core of individualized selfhood. Fear
cannot be got rid of by personal effort, but only by the ego's
absorption in a cause greater than its own interests. Absorption in any
cause will rid the mind of some of its fears; but only absorption in the
loving and knowing of the divine Ground can rid it of all fear. For when
the cause is less than the highest, the sense of fear and anxiety is
transferred from the self to the cause—as when heroic self-sacrifice for
a loved individual or institution is accompanied by anxiety in regard to
that for which the sacrifice is made. Whereas if the sacrifice is made
for God, and for others for God's sake, there can be no fear or abiding
anxiety, since nothing can be a menace to the divine Ground and even
failure and disaster are to be accepted as being in accord with the
divine will. In few men and women is the love of God intense enough to
cast out this projected fear and anxiety for

cherished persons and institutions. The reason is to be sought in the
fact that few men and women are humble enough to be capable of loving as
they should. And they lack the necessary humility because they are
without the fully realized knowledge of their own personal nothingness.

Humility does not consist in hiding our talents and virtues, in thinking
ourselves worse and more ordinary than we are, but in possessing a clear
knowledge of all that is lacking in us and in not exalting ourselves for
that which we have, seeing that God has freely given it us and that,
with all His gifts, we are still of infinitely little importance.

Lacordaire

As the light grows, we see ourselves to be worse than we thought. We are
amazed at our former blindness as we see issuing from our heart a whole
swarm of shameful feelings, like filthy reptiles crawling from a hidden
cave. But we must be neither amazed nor disturbed. We are not worse than
we were; on the contrary, we are better. But while our faults diminish,
the light we see them by waxes brighter, and we are filled with horror.
So long as there is no sign of cure, we are unaware of the depth of our
disease; we are in a state of blind presumption and hardness, the prey
of self-delusion. While we go with the stream, we are unconscious of its
rapid course; but when we begin to stem it ever so little, it makes
itself felt.

Fenelon

My daughter, build yourself two cells. First a real cell, so that you do
not run about much and talk, unless it is needful, or you can do it out
of love for your neighbour. Next build yourself a spiritual cell, which
you can always take with you, and that is the cell of true
self-knowledge; you will find there the knowledge of God's goodness to
you. Here there are really two cells in one, and if you live in one you
must also live in the other; otherwise the soul will either despair or
be presumptuous. If you dwelt in

self-knowledge alone, you would despair; if you dwelt in the knowledge
of God alone, you would be tempted to presumption. One must go with the
other, and thus you will reach perfection.

St. Catherine of Siena

Chapter i o GRACE AND FREE WILL

DELIVERANCE is out of time into eternity, and is achieved by obedience
and docility to the eternal Nature of Things. We have been given free
will, in order that we may will our self-will out of existence and so
come to live continuously in a 'state of grace.' All our actions must be
directed, in the last analysis, to making ourselves passive in relation
to the activity and the being of divine Reality. We are, as it were,
aeolian harps, endowed with the power either to expose themselves to the
wind of the Spirit or to shut themselves away from it.

The Valley Spirit never dies.

It is called the Mysterious Female.

And the doorway of the Mysterious Female

Is the base from which Heaven and Earth spring.

It is there within us all the time.

Draw upon it as you will, it never runs dry.

Lao T^u

In every exposition of the Perennial Philosophy the human soul is
regarded as feminine in relation to the Godhead, the personal God and
even the Order of Nature. Hubris, which is the original sin, consists in
regarding the personal ego as self-sufficiently masculine in relation to
the Spirit within and to Nature without, and in behaving accordingly.

St. Paul drew a very useful and illuminating distinction between the
psyche and thepneuma. But the latter word never achieved any degree of
popularity, and the hopelessly ambiguous term, psyche, came to be used
indifferently for either the personal consciousness or the spirit. And
why, in the Western church, did devotional writers choose to speak of
man's anima (which for the Romans signified the lower, animal soul)
instead

of using the word traditionally reserved for the rational soul, namely
animus? The answer, I suspect, is that they were anxious to stress by
every means in their power the essential femininity of the human spirit
in its relations with God. Pneuma, being grammatically neuter,and
animus,being masculine, were felt to be less suitable than anima and
psyche. Consider this concrete example; given the structure of Greek and
Latin, it would have been very difficult for the speakers of these
languages to identify anything but a grammatically feminine soul with
the heroine of the Song of Songs—an allegorical figure who, for long
centuries, played the same part in Christian thought and sentiment as
the Gopi Maidens played in the theology and devotion of the Hindus.

Take note of this fundamental truth. Everything that works in nature and
creature, except sin, is the working of God in nature and creature. The
creature has nothing else in its power but the free use of its will, and
its free will hath no other power but that of concurring with, or
resisting, the working of God in nature. The creature with its free will
can bring nothing into being, nor make any alteration in the working of
nature; it can only change its own state or place in the working of
nature, and so feel or find something in its state that it did not feel
or find before.

William Law

Defined in psychological terms, grace is something other than our
self-conscious personal self, by which we are helped. We have experience
of three kinds of such helps—animal grace, human grace and spiritual
grace. Animal grace comes when we are living in full accord with our own
nature on the biological level—not abusing our bodies by excess, not
interfering with the workings of our indwelling animal intelligence by
conscious cravings and aversions, but living wholesomely and laying
ourselves open to the 'virtue of the sun and the spirit of the air/ The
reward of being thus in harmony with Tao or the Logos in its physical
and physiological aspects is a sense of well-being, an awareness of life
as good, not for any

reason, but just because it is life. There is no question, when we are
in a condition of animal grace, ofpropter vitam vivendi perdere causas;
for in this state there is no distinction between the reasons for living
and life itself. Life, like virtue, is then its own reward. But, of
course, the fullness of animal grace is reserved for animals. Man's
nature is such that he must live a self-conscious life in time, not in a
blissful sub-rational eternity on the hither side of good and evil.
Consequently animal grace is something that he knows only spasmodically
in an occasional holiday from self-consciousness, or as an accompaniment
to other states, in which life is not its own reward but has to be lived
for a reason outside itself.

Human grace comes to us either from persons, or from social groups, or
from our own wishes, hopes and imaginings projected outside ourselves
and persisting somehow in the psychic medium in a state of what may be
called second-hand objectivity. We have all had experience of the
different types of human grace. There is, for example, tke grace which,
during childhood, comes from mother, father, nurse or beloved teacher.
At a later stage we experience the grace of friends; the grace of men
and women morally better and wiser than ourselves; the grace of the
guru, or spiritual director. Then there is the grace which comes to us
because of our attachment to country, party, church or other social
organization—a grace which has helped even the feeblest and most timid
individuals to achieve what, without it, would have been the impossible.
And finally there is the grace which we derive from our ideals, whether
low or high, whether conceived of in abstract terms or bodied forth in
imaginary personifications. To this last type, it would seem, belong
many of the graces experienced by the pious adherents of the various
religions. The help received by those who devotedly adore or pray to
some personal saint, deity or Avatar is often, we may guess, not a
genuinely spiritual grace, but a human grace, coming back to the
worshipper from the vortex of psychic power set up by repeated acts (his
own and other people's) of faith, yearning and imagination.

Spiritual grace cannot be received continuously or in its full-

ness, except by those who have willed away their self-will to the point
of being able truthfully to say, 'Not I, but God in me.' There are,
however, few people so irremediably self-condemned to imprisonment
within their own personality as to be wholly incapable of receiving the
graces which are from instant to instant being offered to every soul. By
fits and starts most of us contrive to forget, if only partially, our
preoccupation with 'I,' 'me, 5 'mine,' and so become capable of
receiving, if only partially, the graces which, in that moment, are
being offered us.

Spiritual grace originates from the divine Ground of all being, and it
is given for the purpose of helping man to achieve his final end, which
is to return out of time and selfhood to that Ground. It resembles
animal grace in being derived from a source wholly other than our
self-conscious, human selves; indeed, it is the same thing as animal
grace, but manifesting itself on a higher level of the ascending spiral
that leads from matter to the Godhead. In any given instance, human
grace may be wholly good, inasmuch as it helps the recipient in the task
of achieving the unitive knowledge of God; but because of its source in
the individualized self, it is always a little suspect and, in many
cases, of course, the help it gives is help towards the achievement of
ends very different from the true end of our existence.

All our goodness is a loan; God is the owner. God works and his work is
God.

St. John of the Cross

Perpetual inspiration is as necessary to the life of goodness, holiness
and happiness as perpetual respiration is necessary to animal life.

William Law

Conversely, of course, the life of goodness, holiness and beatitude is a
necessary condition of perpetual inspiration. The relations between
action and contemplation, ethics and

spirituality are circular and reciprocal. Each is at once cause and
effect.

It was when the Great Way declined that human kindness and morality
arose.

Lao T%u

Chinese verbs are tenseless. This statement as to a hypothetical event
in history refers at the same time to the present and the future. It
means simply this: that with the rise of self-consciousness, animal
grace is no longer sufficient for the conduct of life, and must be
supplemented by conscious and deliberate choices between right and
wrong—choices which have to be made in the light of a clearly formulated
ethical code. But, as the Taoist sages are never tired of repeating,
codes of ethics and deliberate choices made by the surface will are only
a second best. The individualized will and the superficial intelligence
are to be used for the purpose of recapturing the old animal relation to
Tao, but on a higher, spiritual level. The goal is perpetual inspiration
from sources beyond the personal self; and the means are * human
kindness and morality,' leading to the charity, which is unitive
knowledge of Tao, as at once the Ground and Logos.

Lord, Thou hast given me my being of such a nature that it can
continually make itself more able to receive thy grace and goodness. And
this power, which I have of Thee, wherein I have a living image of Thine
almighty power, is free will. By this I can either enlarge or restrict
my capacity for Thy grace.

Nicholas ofCusa

Shun asked Ch'eng, saying,' Can one get Tao so as to have it for

oneself?'

'Your very body,' replied Ch'eng, 'is not your own. How

should Tao be?'

'If my body,' said Shun, 'is not my own, pray whose is it?' 'It is the
delegated image of God,' replied Ch'eng. 'Your life

is not your own. It is the delegated harmony of God. Your individuality
is not your own. It is the delegated adaptability of God. Your posterity
is not your own. It is the delegated exuviae of God. You move, but know
not how. You are at rest, but know not why. You taste, but know not the
cause. These are the operations of God's laws. How then should you get
Tao so as to have it for your own ?'

Chuang T%u

It is within my power either to serve God, or not to serve Him. Serving
Him I add to my own good and the good of the whole world. Not serving
Him, I forfeit my own good and deprive the world of that good, which was
in my power to create.

Leo Tolstoy

God did not deprive thee of the operation of his love, but thou didst
deprive Him of thy cooperation. God would never have rejected thee, if
thou hadst not rejected his love. O all-good God, thou dost not forsake
unless forsaken, thou never takest away thy gifts until we take away our
hearts.

St. Franfois de Sales

Ch'ing, the chief carpenter, was carving wood into a stand for musical
instruments. When finished, the work appeared to those who saw it as
though of supernatural execution; and the Prince of Lu asked him,
saying, 'What mystery is there in your art?' 'No mystery, Your
Highness,' replied Ch'ing. 'And yet there is something. When I am about
to make such a stand, I guard against any diminution of my vital power.
I first reduce my mind to absolute quiescence. Three days in this
condition, and I become oblivious of any reward to be gained. Five days,
and I become oblivious of any fame to be acquired. Seven days, and I
become unconscious of my four limbs and my physical frame. Then, with no
thought of the Court present in my mind, my skill becomes concentrated,
and all disturbing elements from without are gone. I enter some mountain
forest, I search for a suitable tree. It contains the form required,
wliich is afterwards

elaborated. I see the stand in my mind's eye, and then set to work.
Beyond that there is nothing. I bring my own native capacity into
relation with that of the wood. What was suspected to be of supernatural
execution in my work was due solely to this/

Chuang r%u

The artist's inspiration may be either a human or a spiritual grace, or
a mixture of both. High artistic achievement is impossible without at
least those forms of intellectual, emotional and physical mortification
appropriate to the kind of art which is being practised. Over and above
this course of what may be called professional mortification, some
artists have practised the kind of self-naughting which is the
indispensable pre-condition of the unitive knowledge of the divine
Ground. Fra Angelico, for example, prepared himself for his work by
means of prayer and meditation; and from the foregoing extract from
Chuang Tzu we see how essentially religious (and not merely
professional) was the Taoist craftsman's approach to his art.

Here we may remark in passing that mechanization is incompatible with
inspiration. The artisan could do and often did do a thoroughly bad job.
But if, like Ch'ing, the chief carpenter, he cared for his art and were
ready to do what was necessary to make himself docile to inspiration, he
could and sometimes did do a job so good that it seemed 'as though of
supernatural execution.' Among the many and enormous advantages of
efficient automatic machinery is this: it is completely foolproof. But
every gain has to be paid for: The automatic machine is fool-proof; but
just because it is fool-proof it is also grace-proof. The man who tends
such a machine is impervious to every form of aesthetic inspiration,
whether of human or of genuinely spiritual origin. 'Industry without art
is brutality.' But actually Ruskin maligns the brutes. The industrious
bird or insect is inspired, when it works, by the infallible animal
grace of instinct—by Tao as it manifests itself on the level immediately
above the physiological. The industrial worker at his fool-proof and
grace-proof machine does

his job in a man-made universe of punctual automata—a universe that lies
entirely beyond the pale of Tao on any level, brutal, human or
spiritual.

In this context we may mention those sudden theophanies which are
sometimes vouchsafed to children and sometimes to adults, who may be
poets or Philistines, learned or unsophisticated, but who have this in
common, that they have done nothing at all to prepare for what has
happened to them. These gratuitous graces, which have inspired much
literary and pictorial art, some splendid and some (where inspiration
was not seconded by native talent) pathetically inadequate, seem
generally to belong to one or other of two main classes —sudden and
profoundly impressive perception of ultimate Reality as Love, Light and
Bliss, and a no less impressive perception of it as dark, awe-inspiring
and inscrutable Power. In memorable forms, Wordsworth has recorded his
own experience of both these aspects of the divine Ground.

There was a time when meadow, grove and stream, The earth and every
common sight,

To me did seem

Apparelled in celestial light.

And so on. But that was not the only vision.

Lustily

I dipped my oars into the silent lake, And, as I rose upon the stroke,
my boat Went heaving through the water like a swan; When, from behind
that craggy steep, till then The horizon's bound, a huge peak, black and
huge, As if with voluntary power instinct, Upreared its head. I struck
and struck again, And growing still in stature, the grim shape Towered
up between me and the stars. . . .

But after I had seen That spectacle, for many days my brain

Worked with a dim and undetermined sense Of unknown modes of being; o'er
my thoughts There hung a darkness, call it solitude, Or blank desertion.

Significantly enough, it is to this second aspect of Reality that
primitive minds seem to have been most receptive. The formidable God, to
whom Job at last submits, is an 'unknown mode of Being,' whose most
characteristic creations are Behemoth and Leviathan. He is the sort of
God who calls, in Kierkegaard's phrase, for' teleological suspensions of
morality,' chiefly in the form of blood sacrifices, even human
sacrifices. The Hindu goddess, Kali, in her more frightful aspects, is
another manifestation of the same unknown mode of Being. And by many
contemporary savages the underlying Ground is apprehended and
theologically rationalized as sheer, unmitigated Power, which has to be
propitiatively worshipped and, if possible, turned to profitable use by
means of a compulsive magic.

To think of God as mere Power, and not also, at the same time as Power,
Love and Wisdom, comes quite naturally to the ordinary, unregenerate
human mind. Only the totally selfless are in a position to know
experimentally that, in spite of everything, 'all will be well' and, in
some way, already is well. 'The philosopher who denies divine
providence,' says Rumi, 'is a stranger to the perception of the saints.'
Only those who have the perception of the saints can know all the time
and by immediate experience that divine Reality manifests itself as a
Power that is loving, compassionate and wise. The rest of us are not yet
in a spiritual position to do more than accept their findings on faith.
If it were not for the records they have left behind, we should be more
inclined to agree with Job and the primitives.

Inspirations prevent us, and even before they are thought of make
themselves felt; but after we have felt them it is ours either to
consent to them, so as to second and follow their attractions, or

else to dissent and repulse them. They make themselves felt without us,
but they do not make us consent without us.

St. Franfois de Sales

Our free will can hinder the course of inspiration, and when the
favourable gale of God's grace swells the sails of our soul, it is in
our power to refuse consent and thereby hinder the effect of the wind's
favour; but when our spirit sails along and makes its voyage
prosperously, it is not we who make the gale of inspiration blow for us,
nor we who make our sails swell with it, nor we who give motion to the
ship of our heart; but we simply receive the gale, consent to its motion
and let our ship sail under it, not hindering it by our resistance.

St. Franfois de Sales

Grace is necessary to salvation, free will equally so—but grace in order
to give salvation, free will in order to receive it. Therefore we should
not attribute part of the good work to grace and part to free will; it
is performed in its entirety by the common and inseparable action of
both; entirely by grace, entirely by free will, but springing from the
first in the second.

St. Bernard

St. Bernard distinguishes between volwitas communis and voluntaspropria.
Voluntas communis is common in two senses; it is the will to share, and
it is the will common to man and God. For practical purposes it is
equivalent to charity. Voluntas propria is the will to get and hold for
oneself, and is the root of all sin. In its cognitive aspect, voluntas
propria is the same as sensum proprium^ which is one's own opinion,
cherished because it is one's own and therefore always morally wrong,
even though it may be theoretically correct.

Two students from the University of Paris came to visit Ruys-broeck and
asked him to furnish them with a short phrase or motto, which might
serve them as a rule of life.

Vos estis tarn sancti sicut vultis^ Ruysbroeck answered. 'You are as
holy as you will to be/

God is bound to act, to pour Himself into thee as soon as He shall find
thee ready.

Eckhart

The will is that which has all power; it makes heaven and it makes hell;
for there is no hell but where the will of the creature is turned from
God, nor any heaven but where the will of the creature worketh with God.

William Law

O man, consider thyself! Here thou standest in the earnest perpetual
strife of good and evil; all nature is continually at work to bring
forth the great redemption; the whole creation is travailing in pain and
laborious working to be delivered from the vanity of time; and wilt thou
be asleep ? Everything thou hearest or seest says nothing, shows nothing
to thee but what either eternal light or eternal darkness has brought
forth; for as day and night divide the whole of our time, so heaven and
hell divide all our thoughts, words and actions. Stir which way thou
wilt, do or design what thou wilt, thou must be an agent with the one or
the other. Thou canst not stand still, because thou livest in the
perpetual workings of temporal and eternal nature; if thou workest not
with the good, the evil that is in nature carries thee along with it.
Thou hast the height and depth of eternity in thee and therefore, be
doing what thou wilt, either in the closet, the field, the shop or the
church, thou art sowing that which grows and must be reaped in eternity.

William Law

God expects but one thing of you, and that is that you should come out
of yourself in so far as you are a created being and let God be God in
you.

Eckhart

For those who take pleasure in theological speculations based upon
scriptural texts and dogmatic postulates, there are the thousands of
pages of Catholic and Protestant controversy

upon grace, works, faith and justification. And for students of
comparative religion there are scholarly commentaries on the
Bhagavad-Gita, on the works of Ramanuja and those later Vaishnavites,
whose doctrine of grace bears a striking resemblance to that of Luther;
there are histories of Buddhism which duly trace the development of that
religion from the Hinayanist doctrine that salvation is the fruit of
strenuous self-help to the Mahayanist doctrine that it cannot be
achieved without the grace of the Primordial Buddha, whose inner
consciousness and 'great compassionate heart' constitute the eternal
Suchness of things. For the rest of us, the foregoing quotations from
writers within the Christian and early Taoist tradition provide, it
seems to me, an adequate account of the observable facts of grace and
inspiration and their relation to the observable facts of free will.

Chapter 11 GOOD AND EVIL

DESIRE is the first datum of our consciousness; we are born into
sympathy and antipathy, wishing and willing. Unconsciously at first,
then consciously, we evaluate: ' This is good, that is bad.' And a
little later we discover obligation. 'This, being good, ought to be
done; that, being bad, ought not to be done.'

All evaluations are not equally valid. We are called upon to pass
judgment on what our desires and dislikes affirm to be good or bad. Very
often we discover that the verdict of the higher court is at variance
with the decision reached so quickly and light-heartedly in the court of
first instance. In the light of what we know about ourselves, our
fellow-beings and the world at large, we discover that what at first
seemed good may, in the long run or in the larger context, be bad; and
that what at first seemed bad may be a good which we feel ourselves
under obligation to accomplish.

When we say that a man is possessed of penetrating moral insight we mean
that his judgment of value-claims is sound; that he knows enough to be
able to say what is good in the longest run and the largest context.
When we say that a man has a strong moral character, we mean that he is
ready to act upon the findings of his insight, even when these findings
are unpleasantly or even excruciatingly at variance with his first,
spontaneous valuations.

In actual practice moral insight is never a strictly personal matter.
The judge administers a system of law and is guided by precedent. In
other words, every individual is the member of a community, which has a
moral code based upon past findings of what in fact is good in the
longer run and the wider context. In most circumstances most of the
members of any given society permit themselves to be guided by the
generally

accepted code of morals; a few reject the code, either in its entirety
or in part; and a few choose to live by another, higher and more
exacting code. In Christian phraseology, there are the few who
stubbornly persist in living in a state of mortal sin and antisocial
lawlessness; there are the many who obey the laws, make the.Precepts of
Morality their guide, repent of mortal sins when they commit them, but
do not make much effort to avoid venial sins; and finally there are the
few whose righteousness 'exceeds the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees,' who are guided by the Counsels of Perfection and have the
insight to perceive and the character to avoid venial sins and even
imperfections.

Philosophers and theologians have sought to establish a theoretical
basis for the existing moral codes, by whose aid individual men and
women pass judgment on their spontaneous evaluations. From Moses to
Bentham, from Epicurus to Calvin, from the Christian and Buddhist
philosophies of universal love to the lunatic doctrines of nationalism
and racial superiority—the list is long and the span of thought
enormously wide. But fortunately there is no need for us to consider
these various theories. Our concern is only with the Perennial
Philosophy and with the system of ethical principles which those who
believe in that philosophy have used, when passing judgment on their own
and other people's evaluations. The questions that we have to ask in
this section are simple enough, and simple too are the answers. As
always, the difficulties begin only when we pass from theory to
practice, from ethical principle to particular application.

Granted that the ground of the individual soul is akin to, or identical
with, the divine Ground of all existence, and granted that this divine
Ground is an ineffable Godhead that manifests itself as personal God or
even as the incarnate Logos, what is the ultimate nature of good and
evil, and what the true purpose and last end of human life ?

The answers to these questions will be given to a great extent in the
words of that most surprising product of the English eighteenth century,
William Law. (How very odd

our educational system is! Students of English literature are forced to
read the graceful journalism of Steele and Addison, are expected to know
all about the minor novels of Defoe and the tiny elegances of Matthew
Prior. But they can pass all their examinations summa cum laude without
having so much as looked into the writings of a man who was not only a
master of English prose, but also one of the most interesting thinkers
of his period and one of the most endearingly saintly figures in the
whole history of Anglicanism.) Our current neglect of Law is yet another
of the many indications that twentieth-century educators have ceased to
be concerned with questions of ultimate truth or meaning and (apart from
mere vocational training) are interested solely in the dissemination of
a rootless and irrelevant culture, and the fostering of the solemn
foolery of scholarship for scholarship's sake.

Nothing burns in hell but the self.

Theologia Germanica

The mind is on fire, thoughts are on fire. Mind-consciousness and the
impressions received by the mind, and the sensations that arise from the
impressions that the mind receives—these too are on fire.

And with what are they on fire? With the fire of greed, with the fire of
resentment, with the fire of infatuation; with birth, old age and death,
with sorrow and lamentation, with misery and grief and despair they are
on fire.

From the Buddha s Fire Sermon

If thou hast not seen the devil, look at thine own self.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

Your own self is your own Cain that murders your own Abel. For every
action and motion of self has the spirit of Anti-Christ and murders the
divine life within you.

William Law

The city of God is made by the love of God pushed to the con-

tempt of self; the earthly city, by the love of self pushed to the
contempt of God.

St. Augustine

The difference between a good and a bad man does not lie in this, that
the one wills that which is good and the other does not, but solely in
this, that the one concurs with the living inspiring spirit of God
within him, and the other resists it, and can be chargeable with evil
only because he resists it.

William Law

People should think less about what they ought to do and more about what
they ought to be. If only their being were good, their works would shine
forth brightly. Do not imagine that you can ground your salvation upon
actions; it must rest on what you are. The ground upon which good
character rests is the very same ground from which man's work derives
its value, namely a mind wholly turned to God. Verily, if you were so
minded, you might tread on a stone and it would be a more pious work
than if you, simply for your own profit, were to receive the Body of the
Lord and were wanting in spiritual detachment.

Eckhart

Man is made by his belief. As he believes, so he is.

Bhaga vad-Gita

It is mind which gives to things their quality, their foundation and
their being. Whoever speaks or acts with impure mind, him sorrow
follows, as the wheel follows the steps of the ox that draws the cart.

Dhammapada

The nature of a man's being determines the nature of his actions; and
the nature of his being comes to manifestation first of all in the mind.
What he craves and thinks, what he believes and feels—this is, so to
speak, the Logos, by whose agency an individual's fundamental character
performs its crea-

tive acts. These acts will be beautiful and morally good if the being is
God-centred, bad and ugly if it is centred in the personal self. ' The
stone/ says Eckhart,' performs its work without ceasing, day and night.'
For even when it is not actually falling the stone has weight. A man's
being is his potential energy directed towards or away from God; and it
is by this potential energy that he will be judged as good or evil—for
it is possible, in the language of the Gospel, to commit adultery and
murder in the heart, even while remaining blameless in action.

Covetousness, envy, pride and wrath are the four elements of self, or
nature, or hell, all of them inseparable from it. And die reason why it
must be thus, and cannot be otherwise, is because the natural life of
the creature is brought forth for the participation of some high
supernatural good in the Creator. But it could have no fitness, no
possible capacity to receive such good, unless it was in itself both an
extremity of want and an extremity of desire for some high good. When
therefore this natural life is deprived of or fallen from God, it can be
nothing else in itself but an extremity of want continually desiring,
and an extremity of desire continually wanting. And because it is that,
its whole life can be nothing else but a plague and torment of
covetousness, envy, pride and wrath, all which is precisely nature,
self, or hell. Now covetousness, pride and envy are not three different
things, but only three different names for the restless workings of one
and the same will or desire. Wrath, which is a fourth birth from these
three, can have no existence till one or all of these three are
contradicted, or have something done to them that is contrary to their
will. These four properties generate their own torment. They have no
outward cause, nor any inward power of altering themselves. And
therefore all self or nature must be in this state until some
supernatural good comes into it, or gets a birth in it. Whilst man
indeed lives among the vanities of time, his covetous-ness, envy, pride
and wrath may be in a tolerable state, may hold him to a mixture of
peace and trouble; they may have at times their gratifications as well
as their torments. But when death has

put an end to the vanity of all earthly cheats, the soul that is not
born again of the supernatural Word and Spirit of God, must find itself
unavoidably devoured or shut up in its own insatiable, unchangeable,
self-tormenting covetousness, envy, pride and wrath.

William Law

It is true that you cannot properly express the degree of your
sinfulness; but that is because it is impossible, in this life, to
represent sins in all their true ugliness; nor shall we ever know them
as they really are except in the light of God. God gives to some souls
an impression of the enormity of sin, by which He makes them feel that
sin is incomparably greater than it seems. Such souls must conceive
their sins as faith represents them (that is, as they are in
themselves), but must be content to describe them in such human words as
their mouth is able to utter.

Charles de Condren

Lucifer, when he stood in his natural nobility, as God had created him,
was a pure noble creature. But when he kept to self, when he possessed
himself and his natural nobility as a property, he fell and became,
instead of an angel, a devil. So it is with man. If he remains in
himself and possesses himself of his natural nobility as a property, he
falls and becomes, instead of a man, a devil.

The Following of Christ

If a delicious fragrant fruit had a power of separating itself from the
rich spirit, fine taste, smell and colour, which it receives from the
virtue of the air and the spirit of the sun, or if it could, in the
beginning of its growth, turn away from the sun and receive no virtue
from it, then it would stand in its own first birth of wrath, sourness,
bitterness, astringency, just as the devils do, who have turned back
into their own dark root and have rejected the Light and Spirit of God.
So that the hellish nature of a devil is nothing but its own first forms
of life withdrawn or separated from the heavenly Light and Love; just as
the sourness, bitterness and astringency of a fruit are nothing else but
the first form of its vegetable life, before it has reached the virtue
of the sun and the spirit

of the air. And as a fruit, if it had a sensibility of itself, would be
full of torment as soon as it was shut up in the first forms of its
life, in its own astringency, sourness and stinging bitterness, so the
angels, when they had turned back into these very same first forms of
their own life, and broke off from the heavenly Light and Love of God,
became their own hell. No hell was made for them, no new qualities came
into them, no vengeance or pains from the Lord of Love fell on them;
they only stood in that state of division and separation from the Son
and Holy Spirit of God, which by their own motion they had made for
themselves. They had nothing in them but what they had from God, the
first forms of a heavenly life; but they had them in a state of
self-torment, because they had separated them from birth of Love and
Light.

William Law

In all the possibility of things there is and can be but one happiness
and one misery. The one misery is nature and creature left to itself,
the one happiness is the Life, the Light, the Spirit of God, manifested
in nature and creature. This is the true meaning of the words of Our
Lord: There is but one that is good, and that is God.

William Law

Men are not in hell because God is angry with them; they are in wrath
and darkness because they have done to the light, which infinitely flows
forth from God, as that man does to the light of the sun, who puts out
his own eyes.

William Law

Though the light and comfort of the outward world keeps even the worst
of men from any constant strong sensibility of that wrathful, fiery,
dark and self-tormenting nature that is the very essence of every fallen
unregenerate soul, yet every man in the world has more or less frequent
and strong intimations given him that so it is with him in the inmost
ground of his soul. How many inventions are some people forced to have
recourse to in order to keep off a certain inward uneasiness, which they
are

afraid of and know not whence it comes ? Alas, it is because there is a
fallen spirit, a dark aching fire within them, which has never had its
proper relief and is trying to discover itself and calling out for help
at every cessation of worldly joy.

William Law

In the Hebrew-Christian tradition the Fall is subsequent to creation and
is due exclusively to the egocentric use of a free will, which ought to
have remained centred in the divine Ground and not in the separate
selfhood. The myth of Genesis embodies a very important psychological
truth, but falls short of being an entirely satisfactory symbol, because
it fails to mention, much less to account for, the fact of evil and
suffering in the non-human world. To be adequate to our experience the
myth would have to be modified in two ways. In the first place, it would
have to make clear that creation, the incomprehensible passage from the
unmanifested One into the manifest multiplicity of nature, from eternity
into time, is not merely the prelude and necessary condition of the
Fall; to some extent it is the Fall. And in the second place, it would
have to indicate that something analogous to free will may exist below
the human level.

That the passage from the unity of spiritual to the manifold-ness of
temporal being is an essential part of the Fall is clearly stated in the
Buddhist and Hindu renderings of the Perennial Philosophy. Pain and evil
are inseparable from individual existence in a world of time; and, for
human beings, there is an intensification of this inevitable pain and
evil when the desire is turned towards the self and the many, rather
than towards the divine Ground. To this we might speculatively add the
opinion that perhaps even sub-human existences may be endowed (both
individually and collectively, as kinds and species) with something
resembling the power of choice. There is the extraordinary fact that
'man stands alone*—that, so far as we can judge, every other species is
a species of living fossils, capable only of degeneration and
extinction, not of further evolutionary advance. In the phraseology of
Scholastic

Aristotelianism, matter possesses an appetite for form—not necessarily
for the best form, but for form as such. Looking about us in the world
of living things, we observe (with a delighted wonder, touched
occasionally, it must be admitted, with a certain questioning dismay)
the innumerable forms, always beautiful, often extravagantly odd and
sometimes even sinister, in which the insatiable appetite of matter has
found its satisfaction. Of all this living matter only that which is
organized as human beings has succeeded in finding a form capable, at
any rate on the mental side, of further development. All the rest is now
locked up in forms that can only remain what they are or, if they
change, only change for the worse. It looks as though, in the cosmic
intelligence test, all living matter, except the human, had succumbed,
at one time or another during its biological career, to the temptation
of assuming, not the ultimately best, but the immediately most
profitable form. By an act of something analogous to free will every
species, except the human, has chosen the quick returns of
specialization, the present rapture of being perfect, but perfect on a
low level of being. The result is that they all stand at the end of
evolutionary blind alleys. To the initial cosmic Fall of creation, of
multitudinous manifestation in time, they have added the obscurely
biological equivalent of man's voluntary Fall. As species, they have
chosen the immediate satisfaction of the self rather than the capacity
for reunion with the divine Ground. For this wrong choice, the non-human
forms of life are punished negatively, by being debarred from realizing
the supreme good, to which only the unspecialized and therefore freer,
more highly conscious human form is capable. But it must be remembered,
of course, that the capacity for supreme good is achieved only at the
price of becoming also capable of extreme evil. Animals do not suffer in
so many ways, nor, we may feel pretty certain, to the same extent as do
men and women. Further, they are quite innocent of that literally
diabolic wickedness which, together with sanctity, is one of the
distinguishing marks of the human species.

We see then that, for the Perennial Philosophy, good is the

separate self's conformity to, and finally annihilation in, the divine
Ground which gives it being; evil, the intensification of separateness,
the refusal to know that the Ground exists. This doctrine is, of course,
perfectly compatible with the formulation of ethical principles as a
series of negative and positive divine commandments, or even in terms of
social utility. The crimes which are everywhere forbidden proceed from
states of mind which are everywhere condemned as wrong; and these wrong
states of mind are, as a matter of empirical fact, absolutely
incompatible with that unitive knowledge of die divine Ground, which,
according to the Perennial Philosophy, is the supreme good.

Chapter 12 TIME AND ETERNITY

THE universe is an everlasting succession of events; but its ground,
according to the Perennial Philosophy, is the timeless now of the divine
Spirit. A classical statement of the relationship between time and
eternity may be found in the later chapters of the Consolations of
Philosophy, where Boethius summarizes the conceptions of his
predecessors, notably of Plotinus.

It is one thing to be carried through an endless life, another thing to
embrace the whole presence of an endless life together, which is
manifestly proper to the divine Mind.

The temporal world seems to emulate in part that which it cannot fully
obtain or express, tying itself to whatever presence there is in this
exiguous and fleeting moment—a presence which, since it carries a
certain image of that abiding Presence, gives to whatever may partake of
it the quality of seeming to have being. But because it could not stay,
it undertook an infinite journey of time; and so it came to pass that,
by going, it continued that life, whose plenitude it could not
comprehend by staying.

Boethius

Since God hath always an eternal and present state, His knowledge,
surpassing time's notions, remaineth in the simplicity of His presence
and, comprehending the infinite of what is past and to come, considered!
all things as though they were in the act of being accomplished.

Boethius

Knowledge of what is happening now does not determine the event. What is
ordinarily called God's foreknowledge is in reality a timeless
now-knowledge, which is compatible with the freedom of the human
creature's will in time.

The manifest world and whatever is moved in any sort take their causes,
order and forms from the stability of the divine Mind. This hath
determined manifold ways for doing things; which ways being considered
in the purity of God's understanding are named Providence; but being
referred to those things which He moveth and disposeth are called
Fate.... Providence is the very divine Reason itself, which disposeth
all things. But Fate is a disposition inherent in changeable things, by
which Providence connecteth all things in their due order. For
Providence equally embraceth all things together, though diverse, though
infinite; but Fate puts into motion all things, distributed by places,
forms and times; so that the unfolding of the temporal order, being
united in the foresight of the divine Mind, is Providence, and the same
uniting, being digested and unfolded in time, is called Fate. ... As a
workman conceiving the form of anything in his mind, taketh his work in
hand and executeth by order of time that which he had simply and in a
moment foreseen, so God by his Providence disposeth whatever is to be
done with simplicity and stability, and by Fate erTecteth by manifold
ways and in the order of time those very things which He disposeth....
All that is under Fate is also subject to Providence. But some things
which are under Providence are above the course of Fate. For they are
those things which, being stably fixed in virtue of their nearness to
the first divinity, exceed the order of Fate's mobility.

Boe thins

The concept of a clock enfolds all succession in time. In the concept
the sixth hour is not earlier than the seventh or eighth, although the
clock never strikes the hour, save when the concept biddeth.

Nicholas ofCusa

From Hobbes onwards, the enemies of the Perennial Philosophy have denied
the existence of an eternal now. According to these thinkers, time and
change are fundamental; there is no other reality. Moreover, future
events are completely indeterminate, and even God can have no knowledge
of them.

Consequently God cannot be described as Alpha and Omega— merely as Alpha
and Lambda, or whatever other intermediate letter of the temporal
alphabet is now in process of being spelled out. But the anecdotal
evidence collected by the Society for Psychical Research and the
statistical evidence accumulated during many thousands of laboratory
tests for extra-sensory perception point inescapably to the conclusion
that even human minds are capable of foreknowledge. And if a finite
consciousness can know what card is going to be turned up three seconds
from now, or what shipwreck is going to take place next week, then there
is nothing impossible or even intrinsically improbable in the idea of an
infinite consciousness that can know now events indefinitely remote in
what, for us, is future time. The 'specious present' in which human
beings live may be, and perhaps always is, something more than a brief
section of transition from known past to unknown future, regarded,
because of the vividness of memory, as the instant we call 'now'; it may
and perhaps always does contain a portion of the immediate and even of
the relatively distant future. For the Godhead, the specious present may
be precisely that interminabilis vitae tota simul et perpetua possessio,
of which Boethius speaks.

The existence of the eternal now is sometimes denied on the ground that
a temporal order cannot co-exist with another order which is
non-temporal; and that it is impossible for a changing substance to be
united with a changeless substance. This objection, it is obvious, would
be valid if the non-temporal order were of a mechanical nature, or if
the changeless substance were possessed of spatial and material
qualities. But according to the Perennial Philosophy, the eternal now is
a consciousness; the divine Ground is spirit; the being of Brahman is
chit, or knowledge. That a temporal world should be known and, in being
known, sustained and perpetually created by an eternal consciousness is
an idea which contains nothing self-contradictory.

Finally we come to the arguments directed against those who have
asserted that the eternal Ground can be unitively known by human minds.
This claim is regarded as absurd because it

involves the assertion,' At one time I am eternal, at another time I am
in time.' But this statement is absurd only if man is a being of a
twofold nature, capable of living on only one level. But if, as the
exponents of the Perennial Philosophy have always maintained, man is not
only a body and a psyche, but also a spirit, and if he can at will live
either on the merely human plane or else in harmony and even in union
with the divine Ground of his being, then the statement makes perfectly
good sense. The body is always in time, the spirit is always timeless
and the psyche is an amphibious creature compelled by the laws of man's
being to associate itself to some extent with its body, but capable, if
it so desires, of experiencing and being identified with its spirit and,
through its spirit, with the divine Ground. The spirit remains always
what it eternally is; but man is so constituted that his psyche cannot
always remain identified with the spirit. In the statement, 'At one time
I am eternal, at another time I am in time,' the word 'I' stands for the
psyche, which passes from time to eternity when it is identified with
the spirit and passes again from eternity to time, either voluntarily or
by involuntary necessity, when it chooses or is compelled to identify
itself with the body.

'The Sufi,' says Jalal-uddin Rumi, 'is the son of time present.'
Spiritual progress is a spiral advance. We start as infants in the
animal eternity of life in the moment, without anxiety for the future or
regret for the past; we grow up into the specifically human condition of
those who look before and after, who live to a great extent, not in the
present but in memory and anticipation, not spontaneously but by rule
and with prudence, in repentance and fear and hope; and we can continue,
if we so desire, up and on in a returning sweep towards a point
corresponding to our starting place in animal-ity, but incommensurably
above it. Once more life is lived in the moment—the life now, not of a
sub-human creature, but of a being in whom charity has cast out fear,
vision has taken the place of hope, selflessness has put a stop to the
positive egotism of complacent reminiscence and the negative egotism of
remorse. The present moment is the only aperture

through which the soul can pass out of time into eternity, through which
grace can pass out of eternity into the soul, and through which charity
can pass from one soul in time to another soul in time. That is why the
Sufi and, along with him, every other practising exponent of the
Perennial Philosophy is, or tries to be, a son of time present.

Past and future veil God from our sight;

Burn up both of them with fire. How long

Wilt thou be partitioned by these segments, like a reed ?

So long as a reed is partitioned, it is not privy to secrets,

Nor is it vocal in response to lip and breathing.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

This emptying of the memory, though the advantages of it are not so c
great as those of the state of union, yet merely because it delivers
souls from much sorrow, grief and sadness, besides imperfections and
sins, is in reality a great good.

St. John of the Cross

In the idealistic cosmology of Mahayana Buddhism memory plays the part
of a rather maleficent demiurge. 'When the triple world is surveyed by
the Bodhisattva, he perceives that its existence is due to memory that
has been accumulated since the beginningless past, but wrongly
interpreted ' (Lankavatara Sutra). The word here translated as * memory'
means literally 'perfuming. 5 The mind-body carries with it the
ineradicable smell of all that has been thought and done, desired and
felt, throughout its racial and personal past. The Chinese translate the
Sanskrit term by two symbols, signifying 'habit-energy/ The world is
what (in our eyes) it is, because of all the consciously or
unconsciously and physiologically remembered habits formed by our
ancestors or by ourselves, either in our present life or in previous
existences. These remembered bad habits cause us to believe that
multiplicity is the sole reality and that the idea of %' 'me/ 'mine'
represents the ultimate truth. Nirvana consists in 'seeing into the
abode of reality as

it is,' and not reality quoad nos, as it seems to us. Obviously, this
cannot be achieved so long as there is an 'us/ to which reality can be
relative. Hence the need, stressed by every exponent of the Perennial
Philosophy, for mortification, for dying to self. And this must be a
mortification not only of the appetites, the feelings and the will, but
also of the reasoning powers, of consciousness itself and of that which
makes our consciousness what it is—our personal memory and our inherited
habit-energies. To achieve complete deliverance, conversion from sin is
not enough; there must also be a conversion of the mind, aparavritti, as
the Mahayanists call it, or revulsion in the very depths of
consciousness. As the result of this revulsion, the habit-energies of
accumulated memory are destroyed and, along with them, the sense of
being a separate ego. Reality is no longer perceived quoad nos (for the
good reason that there is no longer a nos to perceive it), but as it is
in itself. In Blake's words, 'If the doors of perception were cleansed,
everything would be seen as it is, infinite.' By those who are pure in
heart and poor in spirit, samsara and nirvana^ appearance and reality,
time and eternity are experienced as one and the same.

Time is what keeps the light from reaching us. There is no greater
obstacle to God than time. And not only time but temporalities, not only
temporal things but temporal affections; not only temporal affections
but the very taint and smell of time.

Eckhan

Rejoice in God all the time, says St. Paul. He rejoices all the time who
rejoices above time and free from time. Three things prevent a man from
knowing God. The first is time, the second is corporeality, the third is
multiplicity. That God may come in, these things must go out—except thou
have them in a higher, better way: multitude summed up to one in thee.

Eckhan

Whenever God is thought of as being wholly in time, there

is a tendency to regard Him as a 'numinous' rather than a moral being, a
God of mere unmitigated Power rather than a God of Power, Wisdom and
Love, an inscrutable and dangerous potentate to be propitiated by
sacrifices, not a Spirit to be worshipped in spirit. All this is only
natural; for time is a perpetual perishing and a God who is wholly in
time is a God who destroys as fast as He creates. Nature is as
incomprehensibly appalling as it is lovely and bountiful. If the Divine
does not transcend the temporal order in which it is immanent, and if
die human spirit does not transcend its time-bound soul, then there is
no possibility of * justifying the ways of God to man.' God as
manifested in the universe is the irresistible Being who speaks to Job
out of the whirlwind, and whose emblems are Behemoth and Leviathan, the
war horse and the eagle. It is this same Being who is described in the
apocalyptic eleventh chapter of the Bhagavad-Gita. ' O Supreme Spirit,'
says Arjuna, addressing himself to the Krishna whom he now knows to be
the incarnation of the Godhead, 'I long to see your Isvara-form'—that is
to say, his form as God of the world, Nature, the temporal order.
Krishna answers, 'You shall behold the whole universe, with all things
animate and inanimate, within this body of mine.' Arjuna's reaction to
the revelation is one of amazement and fear.

Ah, my God, I see all gods within your body; Each in his degree, the
multitude of creatures; See Lord Brahma seated upon his lotus, See all
the sages and the holy serpents.

Universal Form, I see you without limit, Infinite of eyes, arms, mouths
and bellies— See, and find no end, midst or beginning.

There follows a long passage, enlarging on the omnipotence and
all-comprehensiveness of God in his Isvara-form. Then the quality of the
vision changes, and Arjuna realizes, with fear

and trembling, that the God of the universe is a God of destruction as
well as of creation.

Now with frightful tusks your mouths are gnashing, Flaring like the
fires of Doomsday morning— North, south, east and west seem all
confounded— Lord of devas, world's abode, have mercy! . . .

Swift as many rivers streaming to the ocean, Rush the heroes to your
fiery gullets, Moth-like to meet the flame of their destruction.
Headlong these plunge into you and perish. . . .

Tell me who you are, and were from the beginning,

You of aspect grim. O God of gods, be gracious.

Take my homage, Lord. From me your ways are hidden.

'Tell me who you are.' The answer is clear and unequivocal.

I am come as Time, the waster of the peoples, Ready for the hour that
ripens to their ruin.

But the God who comes so terribly as Time also exists time-lessly as the
Godhead, as Brahman, whose essence is Sat, Chit y Ananda^ Being,
Awareness, Bliss; and within and beyond man's time-tortured psyche is
his spirit, 'uncreated and uncreatable/ as Eckhart says, the Atman which
is akin to or even identical with Brahman. The Gita, like all other
formulations of the Perennial Philosophy, justifies God's ways to man by
affirming —and the affirmation is based upon observation and immediate
experience—that man can, if he so desires, die to his separate temporal
selfness and so come to union with timeless Spirit. It affirms, too,
that the Avatar becomes incarnate in order to assist human beings to
achieve this union. This he does in three ways—by teaching the true
doctrine in a world blinded by voluntary ignorance; by inviting souls to
a 'carnal love*

of his humanity, not indeed as an end in itself, but as the means to
spiritual love-knowledge of Spirit; and finally by serving as a channel
of grace.

God who is Spirit can only be worshipped in spirit and for his own sake;
but God in time is normally worshipped by material means with a view to
achieving temporal ends. God-in time is manifestly the destroyer as well
as the creator; and because this is so, it has seemed proper to worship
him by methods which are as terrible as the destructions he himself
inflicts. Hence, in India, the blood sacrifices to Kali, in her aspect
as Nature-the-Destroyer; hence those offerings of children to 'the
Molochs,' denounced by the Hebrew prophets; hence the human sacrifices
practised, for example, by the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, the
Druids, the Aztecs. In all such cases the divinity addressed was a god
in time, or a personification of Nature, which is nothing else but Time
itself, the devourer of its own offspring; and in all cases the purpose
of the rite was to obtain a future benefit or to avoid one of the
enormous evils which Time and Nature for ever hold in store. For this it
was thought to be worth while to pay a high price in that currency of
suffering, which the Destroyer so evidently valued. The importance of
the temporal end justified the use of means that were intrinsically
terrible, because intrinsically time-like. Sublimated traces of these
ancient patterns of thought and behaviour are still to be found in
certain theories of the Atonement, and in the conception of the Mass as
a perpetually repeated sacrifice of the God-Man.

In the modern world the gods to whom human sacrifice is offered are
personifications, not of Nature, but of man's own, home-made political
ideals. These, of course, all refer to events in time—actual events in
the past or the present, fancied events in the future. And here it
should be noted that the philosophy which affirms the existence and the
immediate realizableness of eternity is related to one kind of political
theory and practice; the philosophy which affirms that what goes on in
time is the only reality, results in a different kind of theory and
justifies quite another kind of political practice. This has been
clearly

recognized by Marxist writers,* who point out that when Christianity is
mainly preoccupied with events in time, it is a 'revolutionary religion/
and that when, under mystical influences, it stresses the Eternal
Gospel, of which the historical or pseudo-historical facts recorded in
Scripture are but symbols, it becomes politically 'static' and
'reactionary.'

This Marxian account of the matter is somewhat oversimplified. It is not
quite true to say that all theologies and philosophies whose primary
concern is with time, rather than eternity, are necessarily
revolutionary. The aim of all revolutions is to make the future
radically different from and better than the past. But some
time-obsessed philosophies are primarily concerned with the past, not
the future, and their politics are entirely a matter of preserving or
restoring the status quo and getting back to the good old days. But the
retrospective time-worshippers have one thing in common with the
revolutionary devotees of the bigger and better future; they are
prepared to use unlimited violence to achieve their ends. It is here
that we discover the essential difference between the politics of
eternity-philosophers and the politics of time-philosophers. For the
latter, the ultimate good is to be found in the temporal world—in a
future, where everyone will be happy because all are doing and, thinking
something either entirely new and unprecedented or, alternatively,
something old, traditional and hallowed. And because the ultimate good
lies in time, they feel justified in making use of any temporal means
for achieving it. The Inquisition burns and tortures in order to
perpetuate a creed, a ritual and an ecclesi-astico-politico-financial
organization regarded as necessary to men's eternal salvation.
Bible-worshipping Protestants figbt long and savage wars, in order to
make the world safe for what they fondly imagine to be the genuinely
antique Christianity of apostolic times. Jacobins and Bolsheviks are
ready to sacrifice millions of human lives for the sake of a political
and economic future gorgeously unlike the present. And now all

* See, for example, Professor J. B. S. Haldane's The Marxist Philosophy
and the

Europe and most of Asia has had to be sacrificed to a crystal-gazer's
vision of perpetual Co-Prosperity and the Thousand-Year Reich. From the
records of history it seems to be abundantly clear that most of the
religions and philosophies which take time too seriously are correlated
with political theories that inculcate and justify the use of
large-scale violence. The only exceptions are those simple Epicurean
faiths, in which the reaction to an all too real time is ' Eat, drink
and be merry, for tomorrow we die/ This is not a very noble, nor even a
very realistic kind of morality. But it seems to make a good deal more
sense than the revolutionary ethic: 'Die (and kill), for tomorrow
someone else will eat, drink and be merry/ In practice, of course, the
prospect even of somebody else's future merriment is extremely
precarious. For the process of wholesale dying and killing creates
material, social and psychological conditions that practically guarantee
the revolution against the achievement of its beneficent ends.

For those whose philosophy does not compel them to take time with an
excessive seriousness the ultimate good is to be sought neither in the
revolutionary's progressive social apocalypse, nor in the reactionary's
revived and perpetuated past, but in an eternal divine now which those
who sufficiently desire this good can realize as a fact of immediate
experience. The mere act of dying is not in itself a passport to
eternity; nor can wholesale killing do anything to bring deliverance
either to the slayers or the slain or their posterity. The peace that
passes all understanding is the fruit of liberation into eternity; but
in its ordinary eveiyday form peace is also the root of liberation. For
where there are violent passions and compelling distractions, this
ultimate good can never be realized. That is one of the reasons why the
policy correlated with eternity-philosophies is tolerant and
non-violent. The other reason is that the eternity, whose realization is
the ultimate good, is a kingdom of heaven within. Thou art That; and
though That is immortal and impassible, the killing and torturing of
individual 'thous' is a matter of cosmic significance, inasmuch as it
interferes with the normal and natural relationship between individual
souls

and the divine eternal Ground of all being. Every violence is, over and
above everything else, a sacrilegious rebellion against the divine
order.

Passing now from theory to historical fact, we find that the religions,
whose theology has been least preoccupied with events in time and most
concerned with eternity, have been consistently the least violent and
the most humane in political practice. Unlike early Judaism,
Christianity and Mohammedanism (all of them obsessed with time),
Hinduism and Buddhism have never been persecuting faiths, have preached
almost no holy wars and have refrained from that proselytizing religious
imperialism, which has gone hand in hand with the political and economic
oppression of the coloured peoples. For four hundred years, from the
beginning of the sixteenth century to the beginning of the twentieth,
most of the Christian nations of Europe have spent a good part of their
time and energy in attacking, conquering and exploiting their
non-Christian neighbours in other continents. In the course of these
centuries many individual churchmen did their best to mitigate the
consequences of such iniquities; but none of the major Christian
churches officially condemned them. The first collective protest against
the slave system, introduced by the English and the Spaniards into the
New World, was made in 1688 by the Quaker Meeting of Germantown. This
fact is highly significant. Of all Christian sects in the seventeenth
century, the Quakers were the least obsessed with history, the least
addicted to the idolatry of things in time. They believed that the inner
light was in all human beings and that salvation came to those who lived
in conformity with that light and was not dependent on the profession of
belief in historical or pseudo-historical events, nor on the performance
of certain rites, nor on the support of a particular ecclesiastical
organization. Moreover, their eternity-philosophy preserved them from
the materialistic apocalypticism of that progress-worship which in
recent times has justified every kind of iniquity from war and
revolution to sweated labour, slavery and the exploitation of savages
and children—has justified them on the ground that

the supreme good is in future time and that any temporal means, however
intrinsically horrible, may be used to achieve that good. Because Quaker
theology was a form of eternity-philosophy, Quaker political theory
rejected war and persecution as means to ideal ends, denounced slavery
and proclaimed racial equality. Members of other denominations had done
good work for the African victims of the white man's rapacity. One
thinks, for example, of St. Peter Claver at Cartagena. But this
heroically charitable 'slave of the slaves' never raised his voice
against the institution of slavery or the criminal trade by which it was
sustained; nor, so far as the extant documents reveal, did he ever, like
John Woolman, attempt to persuade the slave-owners to free their human
chattels. The reason, presumably, was that Claver was a Jesuit, vowed to
perfect obedience and constrained by his theology to regard a certain
political and ecclesiastical organization as being the mystical body of
Christ. The heads of this organization had not pronounced against
slavery or the slave trade. Who was he, Pedro Claver, to express a
thought not officially approved by his superiors ?

Another practical corollary of the great historical
eternity-philosophies, such as Hinduism and Buddhism, is a morality
inculcating kindness to animals. Judaism and orthodox Christianity
taught that animals might be used as things, for the realization of
man's temporal ends. Even St. Francis' attitude towards the brute
creation was not entirely unequivocal. True, he converted a wolf and
preached sermons to birds; but when Brother Juniper hacked the feet off
a living pig in order to satisfy a sick man's craving for fried
trotters, the saint merely blamed his disciple's intemperate zeal in
damaging a valuable piece of private property. It was not until the
nineteenth century, when orthodox Christianity had lost much of its
power over European minds, that the idea that it might be a good thing
to behave humanely towards animals began to make headway. This new
morality was correlated with the new interest in Nature, which had been
stimulated by the romantic poets and the men of science. Because it was
not founded upon

an eternity-philosophy, a doctrine of divinity dwelling in all living
creatures, the modern movement in favour of kindness to animals was and
is perfectly compatible with intolerance, persecution and systematic
cruelty towards human beings. Young Nazis are taught to be gentle with
dogs and cats, ruthless with Jews. That is because Nazism is a typical
time-philosophy, which regards the ultimate good as existing, not in
eternity, but in the future. Jews are, ex hypothesi, obstacles in the
way of the realization of the supreme good; dogs and cats are not. The
rest follows logically.

Selfishness and partiality are very inhuman and base qualities even in
the things of this world; but in the doctrines of religion they are of a
baser nature. Now, this is the greatest evil that the division of the
church has brought forth; it raises in every communion a selfish,
partial orthodoxy, which consists in courageously defending all that it
has, and condemning all that it has not. And thus every champion is
trained up in defence of their own truth, their own learning and their
own church, and he has the most merit, the most honour, who likes
everything, defends everything, among themselves, and leaves nothing
uncensored in those that are of a different communion. Now, how can
truth and goodness and union and religion be more struck at than by such
defenders of it ? If you ask why the great Bishop of Meaux wrote so many
learned books against all parts of the Reformation, it is because he was
born in France and bred up in the bosom of Mother Church. Had he been
born in England, had Oxford or Cambridge been his Alma Mater, he might
have rivalled our great Bishop Stillingfleet, and would have wrote as
many learned folios against the Church of Rome as he has done. And yet I
will venture to say that if each Church could produce but one man apiece
that had the piety of an apostle and the impartial love of the first
Christians in the first Church at Jerusalem, that a Protestant and a
Papist of this stamp would not want half a sheet of paper to hold their
articles of union, nor be half an hour before they were of one religion.
If, therefore, it should be said that churches are divided, estranged
and made unfriendly to one

another by a learning, a logic, a history, a criticism in the hands of
partiality, it would be saying that which each particular church too
much proves to be true. Ask why even the best amongst the Catholics are
very shy of owning the validity of the orders of our Church; it is
because they are afraid of removing any odium from the Reformation. Ask
why no Protestants anywhere touch upon the benefit or necessity of
celibacy in those who are separated from worldly business to preach the
gospel; it is because that would be seeming to lessen the Roman error of
not suffering marriage in her clergy. Ask why even the most worthy and
pious among the clergy of the Established Church are afraid to assert
the sufficiency of the Divine Light, the necessity of seeking only the
guidance and inspiration of the Holy Spirit; it is because the Quakers,
who have broke off from the church, have made this doctrine their
corner-stone. If we loved truth as such, if we sought for it for its own
sake, if we loved our neighbour as ourselves, if we desired nothing by
our religion but to be acceptable to God, if we equally desired the
salvation of all men, if we were afraid of error only because of its
harmful nature to us and our fellow-creatures, then nothing of this
spirit could have any place in us.

There is therefore a catholic spirit, a communion of saints in the love
of God and all goodness, which no one can learn from that which is
called orthodoxy in particular churches, but is only to be had by a
total dying to all worldly views, by a pure love of God, and by such an
unction from above as delivers the mind from all selfishness and makes
it love truth and goodness with an equality of affection in every man,
whether he is Christian, Jew or Gentile. He that would obtain this
divine and catholic spirit in this disordered, divided state of things,
and live in a divided part of the church without partaking of its
division, must have these three truths deeply fixed in his mind. First,
that universal love, which gives the whole strength of the heart to God,
and makes us love every man as we love ourselves, is the noblest, the
most divine, the Godlike state of the soul, and is the utmost perfection
to which the most perfect religion can raise us; and that no religion
does any man any good but so far as it brings this per-

fection of love into him. This truth will show us that true orthodoxy
can nowhere be found but in a pure disinterested love of God and our
neighbour. Second, that in this present divided state of the church,
truth itself is torn and divided asunder; and that, therefore, he can be
the only true catholic who has more of truth and less of error than is
hedged in by any divided part. This truth will enable us to live in a
divided part unhurt by its division, and keep us in a true liberty and
fitness to be edified and assisted by all the good that we hear or see
in any other part of the church. ... Thirdly, he must always have in
mind this great truth, that it is the glory of the Divine Justice to
have no respect of parties or persons, but to stand equally disposed to
that which is right and wrong as well in the Jew as in the Gentile. He
therefore that would like as God likes, and condemn as God condemns,
must have neither the eyes of the Papist nor the Protestant; he must
like no truth the less because Ignatius Loyola or John Bunyan were very
zealous for it, nor have the less aversion to any error, because Dr.
Trapp or George Fox had brought it forth.

William Law

Dr. Trapp was the author of a religious tract entitled ' On the Nature,
Folly, Sin and Danger of Being Righteous Overmuch/ One of Law's
controversial pieces was an answer to this work.

Benares is to the East, Mecca to the West; but explore your own heart,
for there are both Rama and Allah.

Kabir

Like the bee gatheimg honey from different flowers, the wise man accepts
the essence of different Scriptures and sees only the good in all
religions.

From the Srtmad Bhagavatam

His Sacred Majesty the King does reverence to men of all sects, whether
ascetics or householders, by gifts and various forms of reverence. His
Sacred Majesty, however, cares not so much for

gifts or external reverence as that there should be a growth in the
essence of the matter in all sects. The growth of the essence of the
matter assumes various forms, but the root of it is restraint of speech,
to wit, a man must not do reverence to his own sect or disparage that of
another without reason. Depreciation should be for specific reasons
only; for the sects of other people all deserve reverence for one reason
or another. ... He who does reverence to his own sect, while disparaging
the sects of others wholly from attachment to his own, with intent to
enhance the glory of his own sect, in reality by such conduct inflicts
the severest injury on his own sect. Concord therefore is meritorious,
to wit, hearkening and hearkening willingly to the Law of Piety, as
accepted by other people.

Edict ofAsoka

It would be difficult, alas, to find any edict of a Christian king to
match Asoka's. In the West the good old rule, the simple plan, was
glorification of one's own sect, disparagement and even persecution of
all others. Recently, however, governments have changed their policy.
Proselytizing and persecuting zeal is reserved for the political
pseudo-religions, such as Communism, Fascism and nationalism; and unless
they are thought to stand in the way of advance towards the temporal
ends professed by such pseudo-religions, the various manifestations of
the Perennial Philosophy are treated with a contemptuously tolerant
indifference.

The children of God are very dear but very queer, very nice but very
narrow.

Sadhu Sundar Singh

Such was the conclusion to which the most celebrated of Indian converts
was forced after some years of association with his fellow Christians.
There are many honourable exceptions, of course; but the rule even among
learned Protestants and Catholics is a certain blandly bumptious
provincialism which, if it did not constitute such a grave offence
against charity and

truth, would be just uproariously funny, A hundred years ago, hardly
anything was known of Sanskrit, Pali or Chinese. The ignorance of
European scholars was sufficient reason for their provincialism. Today,
when more or less adequate translations are available in plenty, there
is not only no reason for it, there is no excuse. And yet most European
and American authors of books about religion and metaphysics write as
though nobody had ever thought about these subjects, except the Jews,
the Greeks and the Christians of the Mediterranean basin and western
Europe. This display of what, in the twentieth century, is an entirely
voluntary and deliberate ignorance is not only absurd and discreditable;
it is also socially dangerous. Like any other form of imperialism,
theological imperialism is a menace to permanent world peace. The reign
of violence will never come to an end until, first, most human beings
accept the same, true philosophy of life; until, second, this Perennial
Philosophy is recognized as the highest factor common to all the world
religions; until, third, the adherents of every religion renounce the
idolatrous time-philosophies, with which, in their own particular faith,
the Perennial Philosophy of eternity has been overlaid; until, fourth,
there is a world-wide rejection of all the political pseudo-religions,
which place man's supreme good in future time and therefore justify and
commend the commission of every sort of present iniquity as a means to
that end. If these conditions are not fulfilled, no amount of political
planning, no economic blue-prints however ingeniously drawn, can prevent
the recrudescence of war and revolution.

Chapter 13

SALVATION, DELIVERANCE, ENLIGHTENMENT

OALVATION—but from what? Deliverance—out of O which particular situation
into what other situation? Men have given many answers to these
questions, and because human temperaments are of such profoundly
different kinds, because social situations are so various and fashions
of thought and feeling so compelling while they last, the answers are
many and mutually incompatible.

There is first of all material salvationism. In its simplest form this
is merely the will to live expressing itself in a formulated desire to
escape from circumstances that menace life. In practice, the effective
fulfilment of such a wish depends on two things: the application of
intelligence to particular economic and political problems, and the
creation and maintenance of an atmosphere of goodwill, in which
intelligence can do its work to the best advantage. But men are not
content to be merely kind and clever within the limits of a concrete
situation. They aspire to relate their actions, and the thoughts and
feelings accompanying those actions, to general principles and a
philosophy on the cosmic scale. When this directing and explanatory
philosophy is not the Perennial Philosophy or one of the historical
theologies more or less closely connected with the Perennial Philosophy,
it takes the form of a pseudo-religion, a system of organized idolatry.
Thus, the simple wish not to starve, the well-founded conviction that it
is very difficult to be good or wise or happy when one is desperately
hungry, comes to be elaborated, under the influence of the metaphysic of
Inevitable Progress, into prophetic Utopianism; the desire to escape
from oppression and exploitation comes to be explained and guided by a
belief in apocalyptic revolutionism, combined, not always in theory, but
invariably in practice, with

SALVATION, DELIVERANCE, ENLIGHTENMENT 231

the Moloch-worship of the nation as the highest of all goods. In all
these cases salvation is regarded as a deliverance, by means of a
variety of political and economic devices, out of the miseries and evils
associated with bad material conditions into another set of future
material conditions so much better than the present that, somehow or
other, they will cause everybody to be perfectly happy, wise and
virtuous. Officially promulgated in all the totalitarian countries,
whether of the right or the left, this confession of faith is still only
semi-official in the nominally Christian world of capitalistic
democracy, where it is drummed into the popular mind, not by the
representatives of state or church, but by those most influential of
popular moralists and philosophers, the writers of advertising copy (the
only authors in all the history of literature whose works are read every
day by every member of the population).

In the theologies of the various religions, salvation is also regarded
as a deliverance out of folly, evil and misery into happiness, goodness
and wisdom. But political and economic means are held to be subsidiary
to the cultivation of personal holiness, to the acquiring of personal
merit and to the maintenance of personal faith in some divine principle
or person having power, in one way or another, to forgive and sanctify
the individual soul. Moreover, the end to be achieved is not regarded as
existing in some Utopian future period, beginning, say, in the
twenty-second century or perhaps even a little earlier, if our favourite
politicians remain in power and make the right laws; the end exists 'in
heaven/ This last phrase has two very different meanings. For what is
probably the majority of those who profess the great historical
religions, it signifies and has always signified a happy posthumous
condition of indefinite personal survival, conceived of as a reward for
good behaviour and correct belief and a compensation for the miseries
inseparable from life in a body. But for those who, within the various
religious traditions, have accepted the Perennial Philosophy as a theory
and have done their best to live it out in practice, * heaven* is
something else. They aspire to be delivered out of separate selfhood in
time and into eternity as realized in

the unitive knowledge of the divine Ground. Since the Ground can and
ought to be unitively known in the present life (whose ultimate end and
purpose is nothing but this knowledge), ' heaven' is not an exclusively
posthumous condition. He only is completely * saved* who is delivered
here and now. As to the means to salvation, these are simultaneously
ethical, intellectual and spiritual and have been summed up with
admirable clarity and economy in the Buddha's Eightfold Path. Complete
deliverance is conditional on the following: first, Right Belief in the
all too obvious truth that the cause of pain and evil is craving for
separative, egocentred existence, with its corollary that there can be
no deliverance from evil, whether personal or collective, except by
getting rid of such craving and the obsession of'I,' 'me,' 'mine';
second, Right Will, the will to deliver oneself and others; third, Right
Speech, directed by compassion and charity towards all sentient beings;
fourth, Right Action, with the aim of creating and maintaining peace and
goodwill; fifth, Right Means of Livelihood, or the choice only of such
professions as are not harmful, in their exercise, to any human being
or, if possible, any living creature; sixth, Right Effort towards
Self-control; seventh, Right Attention or Recollectedness, to be
practised in all the circumstances of life, so that we may never do evil
by mere thoughtlessness, because 'we know not what we do'; and, eighth,
Right Contemplation, the unitive knowledge of the Ground, to which
recollectedness and the ethical self-naughting prescribed in the first
six branches of the Path give access. Such then are the means which it
is within the power of the human being to employ in order to achieve
man's final end and be ' saved.' Of the means which are employed by the
divine Ground for helping human beings to reach their goal, the Buddha
of the Pali scriptures (a teacher whose dislike of 'footless questions'
is no less intense than that of the severest experimental physicist of
the twentieth century) declines to speak. All he is prepared to talk
about is 'sorrow and the ending of sorrow'—the huge brute fact of pain
and evil and the other, no less empirical fact that there is a method by
which the individual can free himself

SALVATION, DELIVERANCE, ENLIGHTENMENT 233

from evil and do something to diminish the sum of evil in the world
around him. It is only in Mahayana Buddhism that the mysteries' of grace
are discussed with anything like the fullness of treatment accorded to
the subject in the speculations of Hindu and especially Christian
theology. The primitive, Hinayana teaching on deliverance is simply an
elaboration of the Buddha's last recorded words: 'Decay is inherent in
all component things. Work out your own salvation with diligence.' As in
the well-known passage quoted below, all the stress is upon personal
effort.

Therefore, Ananda, be ye lamps unto yourselves, be ye a refuge to
yourselves. Betake yourselves to no external refuge. Hold fast to the
Truth as a lamp; hold fast to the Truth as a refuge. Look not for a
refuge in anyone beside yourselves. And those, Ananda, who either now or
after I am dead shall be a lamp unto themselves, shall betake themselves
to no external refuge, but holding fast to the Truth as their lamp, and
holding fast to the Truth as their refuge, shall not look for refuge to
anyone beside themselves—it is they who shall reach the very topmost
Height. But they must be anxious to learn.

What follows is a passage freely translated from the Chan-dogya
Upanishad. The truth which this little myth is meant to illustrate is
that there are as many conceptions of salvation as there are degrees of
spiritual knowledge and that the kind of liberation (or enslavement)
actually achieved by any individual soul depends upon the extent to
which that soul chooses to dissipate its essentially voluntary
ignorance.

That Self who is free from impurities, from old age and death, from
grief and thirst and hunger, whose desire is true and whose desires come
true—that Self is to be sought after and enquired about, that Self is to
be realized.

The Devas (gods or angels) and the Asuras (demons or titans) both heard
of this Truth. They thought: ' Let us seek after and

realize this Self, so that we can obtain all worlds and the fulfilment
of all desires/

Thereupon Indra from the Devas and Virochana from the Asuras approached
Prajapati, the famous teacher. They lived with him as pupils for
thirty-two years. Then Prajapati asked them: ' For what reason have you
both lived here all this time ?'

They replied: 'We have heard that one who realizes the Self obtains all
the worlds and all his desires. We have lived here because we want to be
taught the Self.'

Prajapati said to them: * The person who is seen in the eye— that is the
Self. That is immortal, that is fearless and that is Brahman.'

* Sir,' enquired the disciples, ' who is seen reflected in water or in a
mirror ?'

'He, the Atman,' was the reply. 'He indeed is seen in all these.' Then
Prajapati added: 'Look at yourselves in the water, and whatever you do
not understand, come and tell me.'

Indra and Virochana pored over their reflections in the water, and when
they were asked what they had seen of the Self, they replied: 'Sir, we
see the Self; we see even the hair and nails.'

Then Prajapati ordered them to put on their finest clothes and look
again at their 'selves' in the water. This they did and when asked again
what they had seen, they answered: 'We see the Self, exactly like
ourselves, well adorned and in our finest clothes.'

Then said Prajapati: ' The Self is indeed seen in these. That Self is
immortal and fearless, and that is Brahman.' And the pupils went away,
pleased at heart.

But looking after them, Prajapati lamented thus: 'Both of them departed
without analysing or discriminating, and without comprehending the true
Self. Whoever follows this false doctrine of the Self must perish.'

Satisfied that he had found the Self, Virochana returned to the Asuras
and began to teach them that the bodily self alone is to be worshipped,
that the body alone is to be served, and that he who worships the ego
and serves the body gains both worlds,

SALVATION, DELIVERANCE, ENLIGHTENMENT 235

this and the next. And this in effect is the doctrine of the Asuras.

But Indra, on his way back to the Devas, realized the useless-ness of
this knowledge. 'As this Self/ he reflected, 'seems to be well adorned
when the body is well adorned, well dressed when the body is well
dressed, so too will it be blind if the body is blind, lame if the body
is lame, deformed if the body is deformed. Nay more, this same Self will
die when the body dies. I see no good in such knowledge.' So Indra
returned to Praja-pati for further instruction. Prajapati compelled him
to live with him for another span of thirty-two years; after which he
began to instruct him, step by step, as it were.

Prajapati said: 'He who moves about in dreams, enjoying and glorified—he
is the Self. That is immortal and fearless, and that is Brahman.'

Pleased at heart, Indra again departed. But before he had rejoined the
other angelic beings, he realized the uselessness of that knowledge
also. 'True it is,' he thought within himself, 'that this new Self is
not blind if the body is blind, not lame, nor hurt, if the body is lame
or hurt. But even in dreams the Self is conscious of many sufferings. So
I see no good in this teaching.'

Accordingly he went back to Prajapati for more instruction, and
Prajapati made him live with him for thirty-two years more. At the end
of that time Prajapati taught him thus: ' When a person is asleep,
resting in perfect tranquillity, dreaming no dreams, then he realizes
the Self. That is immortal and fearless, and that is Brahman.'

Satisfied, Indra went away. But even before he had reached home, he felt
the uselessness of this knowledge also. ' When one is asleep,' he
thought, 'one does not know oneself as "This is I." One is not in fact
conscious of any existence. That state is almost annihilation. I see no
good in this knowledge either.'

So Indra went back once again to be taught. Prajapati made him stay with
him for five years more. At the end of that time Prajapati taught him
the highest truth of the Self.

'This body,' he said, 'is mortal, for ever in the clutch of death. But
within it resides the Self, immortal, and without form. This

Self, when associated in consciousness with the body, is subject to
pleasure and pain; and so long as this association continues, no man can
find freedom from pains and pleasures. But when the association comes to
an end, there is an end also of pain and pleasure. Rising above physical
consciousness, knowing the Self as distinct from the sense-organs and
the mind, knowing Him in his true light, one rejoices and one is free.'

From the Chandogya Upanishad

Having realized his own self as the Self, a man becomes selfless; and in
virtue of selflessness he is to be conceived as unconditioned. This is
the highest mystery, betokening emancipation; through selflessness he
has no part in pleasure or pain, but attains absoluteness.

Maitrayana Upanishad

We should mark and know of a very truth that all manner of virtue and
goodness, and even that Eternal Good, which is God Himself, can never
make a man virtuous, good or happy so long as it is outside the soul,
that is, so long as the man is holding converse with outward things
through his senses and reason, and does not withdraw into himself and
learn to understand his own life, who and what he is.

Theologia Germanica

Indeed, the saving truth has never been preached by the Buddha, seeing
that one has to realize it within oneself.

Sutralamkara

In what does salvation consist ? Not in any historic faith or knowledge
of anything absent or distant, not in any variety of restraints, rules
and methods of practising virtue, not in any formality of opinion about
faith and works, repentance, forgiveness of sins, or justification and
sanctification, not in any truth or righteousness that you can have from
yourself, from the best of men and books, but solely and wholly from the
life of God, or Christ of God,

SALVATION, DELIVERANCE, ENLIGHTENMENT 237

quickened and born again in you, in other words in the restoration and
perfect union of the first twofold life in humanity.

William Law

Law is using here the phraseology of Boehme and those other 'Spiritual
Reformers/ whom the orthodox Protestants, Lutheran, Calvinistic and
Anglican, agreed (it was one of the very few points they were able to
agree on) either to ignore or to persecute. But it is clear that what he
and they call the new birth of God within the soul is essentially the
same fact of experience as that which the Hindus, two thousand and more
years before, described as the realization of the Self as within and yet
transcendentally other than the individual ego.

Not by the slothful, nor the fool, the undiscerning, is that Nirvana to
be reached, which is the untying of all knots.

hi-vuttaka

This seems sufficiently self-evident. But most of us take pleasure in
being lazy, cannot be bothered to be constantly recollected and yet
passionately desire to be saved from the results of sloth and
unawareness. Consequently there has been a widespread wish for and
belief in Saviours who will step into our lives, above all at the hour
of their termination, and, like Alexander, cut the Gordian knots which
we have been too lazy to untie. But God is not mocked. The nature of
things is such that the unitive knowledge of the Ground which is
contingent upon the achievement of a total selflessness cannot possibly
be realized, even with outside help, by those who are not yet selfless.
The salvation obtained by belief in the saving power of Amida, say, or
Jesus is not the total deliverance described in the Upanishads, the
Buddhist scriptures and the writings of the Christian mystics. It is
something not merely in degree, but in kind.

Talk as much philosophy as you please, worships iHktfy gods as you like,
observe all ceremonies, sing

number of divine beings—liberation never comes, even at the end of a
hundred aeons, without the realization of the Oneness of Self.

Shankara

This Self is not realizable by study nor even by intelligence and
learning. The Self reveals its essence only to him who applies himself
to the Self. He who has not given up the ways of vice, who cannot
control himself, who is not at peace within, whose mind is distracted,
can never realize the Self, though full of all the learning in the
world.

Katha Upanuhad

Nirvana is where there is no birth, no extinction; it is seeing into the
state of Suchness, absolutely transcending all the categories
constructed by mind; for it is the Tathagata's inner consciousness.

Lankavatara Sutra

The false or at best imperfect salvations described in the Chandogya
Upanishad are of three kinds. There is first the pseudo-salvation
associated with the belief that matter is the ultimate Reality.
Virochana, the demonic being who is the apotheosis of power-loving,
extraverted somatotonia, finds it perfectly natural to identify himself
with his body, and he goes back to the other Titans to seek a purely
material salvation. Incarnated in the present century, Virochana would
have been an ardent Communist, Fascist or nationalist. Indra sees
through material salvationism and is then offered dream-salvation,
deliverance out of bodily existence into the intermediate world between
matter and spirit—that fascinatingly odd and exciting psychic universe,
out of which miracles and foreknowledge,' spirit communications'and
extra-sensory perceptions make their startling irruptions into ordinary
life. But this freer kind of individualized existence is still all too
personal and egocentric to satisfy a soul conscious of its own incom-

SALVATION, DELIVERANCE, ENLIGHTENMENT 239

pleteness and eager to be made whole. Indra accordingly goes further and
is tempted to accept the undifferentiated consciousness of deep sleep,
of false samadhi and quietistic trance, as the final deliverance. But he
refuses, in Brahmananda's words, to mistake tamos for sattvas, sloth and
sub-consciousness for poise and super-consciousness. And so, by
discrimination, he comes to the realization of the Self, which is the
enlightenment of the darkness that is ignorance and the deliverance from
the mortal consequences of that ignorance.

The illusory salvations, against which we are warned in the other
extracts, are of a different kind. The emphasis here is upon idolatry
and superstition—above all the idolatrous worship of the analytical
reason and its notions, and the superstitious belief in rites, dogmas
and confessions of faith as being somehow magically efficacious in
themselves. Many Christians, as Law implies, have been guilty of these
idolatries and superstitions. For them, complete deliverance into union
with the divine Ground is impossible, either in this world or
posthumously. The best they can hope for is a meritorious but still
egocentric life in the body and some sort of happy posthumous
'longevity,' as the Chinese call it, some form of survival, paradisal
perhaps, but still involved in time, separateness and multiplicity.

The beatitude into which the enlightened soul is delivered is something
quite different from pleasure. What, then, is its nature ? The
quotations which follow provide at least a partial answer. Blessedness
depends on non-attachment and selflessness, therefore can be enjoyed
without satiety and without revulsion; is a participation in eternity,
and therefore remains itself without diminution or fluctuation.

Henceforth in the real Brahman, he (the liberated spirit) becomes
perfected and another. His fruit is the untying of bonds. Without
desires, he attains to bliss eternal and immeasurable, and therein
abides.

Maitrayana Upanlshad

God is to be enjoyed, creatures only used as means to That which is to
be enjoyed.

St. dugustine

There is this difference between spiritual and corporal pleasures, that
corporal ones beget a desire before we have obtained them and, after we
have obtained diem, a disgust; but spiritual pleasures, on the contrary,
are not cared for when we have them not, but are desired when we have
them.

St. Gregory the Great

When a man is in one of these two states (beatitude or dark night of the
soul) all is right with him, and he is as safe in hell as in heaven. And
so long as a man is on earth, it is possible for him to pass often-times
from the one to the other—nay, even within the space of a day and night,
and all without his own doing. But when a man is in neither of these two
states, he holds converse with the creatures, and wavereth hither and
thither and knoweth not what manner of man he is.

Theotogia Germanica

Much of the literature of Sufism is poetical. Sometimes this poetry is
rather strained and extravagant, sometimes beautiful with a luminous
simplicity, sometimes darkly and almost dis-quietingly enigmatic. To
this last class belong the utterances of that Moslem saint of the tenth
century, Niffari the Egyptian. This is what he wrote on the subject of
salvation,

God made me behold the sea, and I saw the ships sinking and the planks
floating; then the planks too were submerged. And God said to me, 'Those
who voyage are not saved.' And He said to me, 'Those who, instead of
voyaging, cast themselves into the sea, take a risk.' And He said to me,
'Those who voyage and take no risk shall perish.' And He said to me,
'The surface of the sea is a gleam that cannot be reached. And the
bottom is a darkness impenetrable. And between the two are great fishes,
which are to be feared.'

SALVATION, DELIVERANCE, ENLIGHTENMENT 141

The allegory is fairly clear. The ships that bear the individual
voyagers across the sea of life are sects and churches, collections of
dogmas and religious organizations. The planks which also sink at last
are all good works falling short of total self-surrender and all faith
less absolute than the unitive knowledge of God. Liberation into
eternity is the result of 'throwing oneself into the sea'; in the
language of the Gospels, one must lose one's life in order to save it.
But throwing oneself into the sea is a risky business—not so risky, of
course, as travelling in a vast Queen Mary^ fitted up with the very
latest in dogmatic conveniences and liturgical decorations, and bound
either for Davy Jones's locker or at best, the wrong port, but still
quite dangerous enough. For the surface of the sea—the divine Ground as
it is manifested in the world of time and multiplicity—gleams with a
reflected radiance that can no mo're be seized than the image of beauty
in a mirror; while the bottom, the Ground as it is eternally in itself,
seems merely darkness to the analytic mind, as it peers down into the
depths; and when the analytic mind decides to join the will in the final
necessary plunge into self-naughting it must run the gauntlet, as it
sinks down, of those devouring pseudo-salvations described in the
Chandogya Upanishad—dream-salvation into that fascinating psychic world,
where the ego still survives, but with a happier and more untrammelled
kind of life, or else the sleep-salvation of false samadhi, of unity in
sub-consciousness instead of unity in super-consciousness.

Niffari's estimate of any individual's chances of achieving man's final
end does not err on the side of excessive optimism. But then no saint or
founder of a religion, no exponent of the Perennial Philosophy, has ever
been optimistic. 'Many are called, but few are chosen.' Those who do not
choose to be chosen cannot hope for anything better than some form of
partial salvation under conditions that will permit them to advance
towards complete deliverance.

Chapter 14 IMMORTALITY AND SURVIVAL

IMMORTALITY is participation in the eternal now of the divine Ground;
survival is persistence in one of the forms of time. Immortality is the
result of total deliverance. Survival is the lot of those who are
partially delivered into some heaven, or who are not delivered at all,
but find themselves, by the law of their own untranscended nature,
compelled to choose some purgatorial or embodied servitude even more
painful than the one they have just left.

Goodness and virtue make men know and love, believe and delight in their
immortality. When the soul is purged and enlightened by true sanctity,
it is more capable of those divine irradiations, whereby it feels itself
in conjunction with God. It knows that almighty Love, by which it lives,
is stronger than death. It knows that God will never forsake His own
life, which He has quickened in the soul. Those breathings and gaspings
after an eternal participation of Him are but the energy of His own
breath within us.

John Smith, the Platonist

I have maintained ere this and I still maintain that I already possess
all that is granted to me in eternity. For God in the fullness of his
Godhead dwells eternally in his image—the soul.

Eckhart

Troubled or still, water is always water. What difference can embodiment
or disembodiment make to the Liberated ? Whether calm or in tempest, the
sameness of the Ocean suffers no change.

Yogavasistha

To the question * Where does the soul go, when the body dies?'

Jacob Boehme answered: * There is no necessity for it to go anywhere.'

The word Tathagata (one of the names of the Buddha) signifies one who
does not go to anywhere and does not come from anywhere ; and therefore
is he called Tathagata (Thus-gone), holy and fully enlightened.

Diamond Sutra

Seeing Him alone, one transcends death; there is no other way.

Svetasvatara Upanishad

God, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life. . ..

Book of Common Prayer

I died a mineral and became a plant.

I died a plant and rose an animal.

I died an animal and I was man.

Why should I fear ? When was I less by dying ?

Yet once more I shall die as man, to soar

With the blessed angels; but even from angelhood

I must pass on. All except God perishes.

When I have sacrificed my angel soul,

I shall become that which no mind ever conceived.

O, let me not exist! for Non-Existence proclaims,

'To Him we shall return.'

Jalal-uddin Rumi

There is a general agreement. East and West, that life in a body
provides uniquely good opportunities for achieving salvation or
deliverance. Catholic and Mahayana Buddhist doctrine is alike in
insisting that the soul in its disembodied state after death cannot
acquire merit, but merely suffers in purgatory the consequences of its
past acts. But whereas Catholic orthodoxy declares that there is no
possibility of progress in the next world, and that the degree of the
soul's beatitude is determined solely by what it has done and thought in
its earthly life, the

eschatologists of the Orient affirm that there are certain posthumous
conditions in which meritorious souls are capable of advancing from a
heaven of happy personal survival to genuine immortality in union with
the timeless, eternal Godhead. And, of course, there is also the
possibility (indeed, for most individuals, the necessity) of returning
to some form of embodied life, in which the advance towards complete
beatification, or deliverance through enlightenment, can be continued.
Meanwhile, the fact that one has been born in a human body is one of the
things for which, says Shankara, one should daily give thanks to God.

The spiritual creature which we are has need of a body, without which it
could nowise attain that knowledge which it obtains as the only approach
to those things, by knowledge of which it is made blessed.

St. Bernard

Having achieved human birth, a rare and blessed incarnation, the wise
man, leaving all vanity to those who are vain, should strive to know
God, and Him only, before life passes into death. •

Srimad Bhagavatam

Good men spiritualize their bodies; bad men incarnate their souls.

Benjamin Whichcote

More precisely, good men spiritualize their mind-bodies; bad men
incarnate and mentalize their spirits. The completely spiritualized
mind-body is a Tathagata, who doesn't go anywhere when he dies, for the
good reason that he is already, actually and consciously, where everyone
has always potentially been \/ithout knowing. The person who has not, in
this life, gone into Thusness, into the eternal principle of all states
of being, goes at death into some particular state, either purgatorial
or paradisal. In the Hindu scriptures and their com-

mentaries several different kinds of posthumous salvation are
distinguished. The 'thus-gone* soul is completely delivered into
complete union with the divine Ground; but it is also possible to
achieve other kinds of mukti, or liberation, even while retaining a form
of purified I-consciousness. The nature of any individual's deliverance
after death depends upon three factors: the degree of holiness achieved
by him while in the body, the particular aspect of the divine Reality to
which he gave his primary allegiance, and the particular path he chose
to follow. Similarly, in the Divine Comedy^ Paradise has its various
circles; but whereas in the oriental eschatologies the saved soul can go
out of even sublimated individuality, out of survival even in some kind
of celestial time, to a complete deliverance into the eternal, Dante's
souls remain for ever where (after passing through the unmeritorious
sufferings of purgatory) they find themselves as the result of their
single incarnation in a body. Orthodox Christian doctrine does not admit
the possibility, either in the posthumous state or in some other
embodiment, of any further growth towards the ultimate perfection of a
total union with the Godhead. But in the Hindu and Buddhist versions of
the Perennial Philosophy the divine mercy is matched by the divine
patience: both are infinite. For oriental theologians there is no
eternal damnation ; there are only purgatories and then an indefinite
series of second chances to go forward towards not only man's, but the
whole creation's final end—total reunion with the Ground of all being.

Preoccupation with posthumous deliverance is not one of the means to
such deliverance, and may easily, indeed, become an obstacle in the way
of advance towards it. There is not the slightest reason to suppose that
ardent spiritualists are more likely to be saved than those who have
never attended a seance or familiarized themselves with the literature,
speculative or evidential. My intention here is not to add to that
literature, but rather to give the baldest summary of what has been
written about the subject of survival within the various religious
traditions.

In oriental discussions of the subject, that which survives death is not
the personality. Buddhism accepts the doctrine of reincarnation; but it
is not a soul that passes on (Buddhism denies the existence of a soul);
it is the character. What we choose to make of our mental and physical
constitution in the course of our life on earth affects the psychic
medium within which individual minds lead a part at least of their
amphibious existence, and this modification of the medium results, after
the body's death, in the initiation of a new existence either in a
heaven, or a purgatory, or another body.

In the Vedanta cosmology there is, over and above the Atman or spiritual
Self, identical with the divine Ground, something in the nature of a
soul that reincarnates in a gross or subtle body, or manifests itself in
some incorporeal state. This soul is not the personality of the defunct,
but rather the particularized I-consciousness out of which a personality
arises.

Either one of these conceptions of survival is logically self-consistent
and can be made to ' save the appearances'—in other words, to fit the
odd and obscure facts of psychical research. The only personalities with
which we have any direct acquaintance are incarnate beings, compounds of
a body and some unknown x. But if x plus a body equals a personality,
then, obviously, it is impossible for x minus a body to equal the same
thing. The apparently personal entities which psychical research
sometimes seems to discover can only be regarded as temporary
pseudo-personalities compounded of x and the medium's body.

These two conceptions are not mutually exclusive, and survival may be
the joint product of a persistent consciousness and a modification of
the psychic medium. If this is so, it is possible for a given human
being to survive in more than one posthumous form. His 'soul'—the
non-personal ground and principle of past and future personalities—may
go marching on in one mode of being, while the traces left by his
thoughts and volitions in the psychic medium may become the origin of
new individualized existences, having quite other modes of being.

Chapter i5 SILENCE

The Father uttered one Word ; that Word is His Son, and He utters Him
for ever in everlasting silence ; and in silence the soul has to
hear.it.

St. John of the Cross

The spiritual life is nothing else but the working of the Spirit of God
within us, and therefore our own silence must be a great part of our
preparation for it, and much speaking or delight in it will be often no
small hindrance of that good which we can only have from hearing what
the Spirit and voice of God speaketh within us. ... Rhetoric and fine
language about the things of the spirit is a vainer babble than in other
matters ; and he that thinks to grow in true goodness by hearing or
speaking flaming words or striking expressions, as is now much the way
of the world, may have a great deal of talk, but will have little of his
conversation in heaven.

William. Law

He who knows does not speak; He who speaks does not know.

Lao

T T N R E STR A I N E D and indiscriminate talk is morally evil \*J and
spiritually dangerous. * But I say unto you, That every idle word that
men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment/
This may seem a very hard saying. And yet if we pass in review the words
we have given vent to in the. course of the average day, we shall find
that the greater number of them may be classified under three main heads
: words inspired by malice and uncharitableness towards

our neighbours; words inspired by greed, sensuality and self-love ;
words inspired by pure imbecility and uttered without rhyme or reason,
but merely for the sake of making a distracting noise. These are idle
words; and we shall find, if we look into the matter, that they tend to
outnumber the words that are dictated by reason, charity or necessity.
And if the unspoken words of our mind's endless, idiot monologue are
counted, the majority for idleness becomes, for most of us,
overwhelmingly large.

All these idle words, the silly no less than the self-regarding and the
uncharitable, are impediments in the way of the unitive knowledge of the
divine Ground, a dance of dust and flies obscuring the inward and the
outward Light. The guard of the tongue (which is also, of course, a
guard of the mind) is not only one of the most difficult and searching
of all mortifications ; it is also the most fruitful.

When the hen has laid, she must needs cackle. And what does she get by
it? Straightway comes the chough and robs her of her eggs, and devours
all that of which she should have brought forth her live birds. And just
so that wicked chough, the devil, beareth away from the cackling
anchoresses, and swalloweth up all the goods they have brought forth,
and which ought, as birds, to bear them up towards heaven, if it had not
been cackled.

Modernised from the Ancren Riwle

You cannot practise too rigid a fast from the charms of worldly talk.

Fenelon

What need of so much news from abroad, when all that concerns either
life or death is all transacting and at work within us ?

William Law

My dear Mother, heed well the precepts of the saints, who have all

warned those who would become holy to speak little of themselves and
their own affairs.

St. Franfois de Sales {in a letter to St. Jeanne de Chantal)

A dog is not considered a good dog because he is a good barker. A man is
not considered a good man because he is a good talker.

Chuang T%u

The dog barks; the Caravan passes.

Arabic Proverb

It was not from want of will that I have refrained from writing to you,
for truly do I wish you all good; but because it seemed to me that
enough has been said already to effect all that is needful, and that
what is wanting (if indeed anything be wanting) is not writing or
speaking—whereof ordinarily there is more than enough—but silence and
work. For whereas speaking distracts, silence and work collect the
thoughts and strengthen the spirit. As soon therefore as a person
understands what has been said to him for his good, there is no further
need to hear or to discuss; but to set himself in earnest to practise
what he has learnt with silence and attention, in humility, charity and
contempt of self.

St. John of the Cross

Molinos (and doubtless he was not the first to use this classification)
distinguished three degrees of silence—silence of the mouth, silence of
the mind and silence of the will. To refrain from idle talk is hard; to
quiet the gibbering of memory and imagination is much harder; hardest of
all is to still the voices of craving and aversion within the will.

The twentieth century is, among other things, the Age of Noise. Physical
noise, mental noise and noise of desire—we hold history's record for all
of them. And no wonder; for all the resources of our almost miraculous
technology have been thrown into the current assault against silence.
That most popular and influential of all recent inventions, the radio,
is

nothing but a conduit through which pre-fabricated din can flow into our
homes. And this din goes far deeper, of course, than the ear-drums. It
penetrates the mind, filling it with a babel of distractions—news items,
mutually irrelevant bits of information, blasts of corybantic or
sentimental music, continually repeated doses of drama that bring no
catharsis, but merely create a craving for daily or even hourly
emotional enemas. And where, as in most countries, the broadcasting
stations support themselves by selling time to advertisers, the noise is
carried from the ears, through the realms of phantasy, knowledge and
feeling to the ego's central core of wish and desire. Spoken or printed,
broadcast over the ether or on wood-pulp, all advertising copy has but
one purpose—to prevent the will from ever achieving silence.
Desirelessness is the condition of deliverance and illumination. The
condition of an expanding and technologically progressive system of
mass-production is universal craving. Advertising is the organized
effort to extend and intensify craving—to extend and intensify, that is
to say, the workings of that force, which (as all the saints and
teachers of all the higher religions have always taught) is the
principal cause of suffering and wrong-doing and the greatest obstacle
between the human soul and its divine Ground.

Chapter 16 PRAYER

HPHE word 'prayer* is applied to at least four distinct pro-JL
cedures—petition, intercession, adoration, contemplation. Petition is
the asking of something for ourselves. Intercession is the asking of
something for other people. Adoration is the use of intellect, feeling,
will and imagination in making acts of devotion directed towards God in
his personal aspect or as incarnated in human form. Contemplation is
that condition of alert passivity in which the soul lays itself open to
the divine Ground within and without, the immanent and transcendent
Godhead.

Psychologically, it is all but impossible for a human being to practise
contemplation without preparing for it by some kind of adoration and
without feeling the need to revert at more or less frequent intervals to
intercession and some form at least of petition. On the other hand, it
is both possible and easy to practise petition apart not only from
contemplation, but also from adoration and, in rare cases of extreme and
unmitigated egotism, even from intercession. Petitionary and
intercessory prayer may be used—and used, what is more, with what would
ordinarily be regarded as success—without any but the most perfunctory
and superficial reference to God in any of his aspects. To acquire the
knack of getting his petitions answered, a man does not have to know or
love God, or even to know or love the image of God in his own mind. All
that he requires is a burning sense of the importance of his own ego and
its desires, coupled with a firm conviction that there exists, out there
in the universe, something not himself which can be wheedled or
dragooned into satisfying those desires. If I repeat 'My will be done,'
with the necessary degree of faith and persistency, the chances are
that, sooner or later and somehow or other, I shall get what I want.
Whether my will coin-

cides with the will of God, and whether in getting what I want I shall
get what is spiritually, morally or even materially good for me, are
questions which I cannot answer in advance. Only time and eternity will
show. Meanwhile we shall be well advised to heed the warnings of
folk-lore. Those anonymous realists who wrote the world's fairy stories
knew a great deal about wishes and their fulfilment. They knew, first of
all, that in certain circumstances petitions actually get themselves
answered; but they also knew that God is not the only answerer and that
if one asks for something in the wrong spirit, it may in effect be
given—but given with a vengeance and not by a divine Giver. Getting what
one wants by means of self-regarding petition is a form of hubris, which
invites its condign and appropriate nemesis. Thus, the folk-lore of the
North American Indian is full of stories about people who fast and pray
egotistically, in order to get more than a reasonable man ought to have,
and who, receiving what they ask for, thereby bring about their own
downfall. From the other side of the world come all the tales of the men
and women who make use of some kind of magic to get their petitions
answered —always with farcical or catastrophic consequence. Hardly ever
do the Three Wishes of our traditional fairy lore lead to anything but a
bad end for the successful wisher.

Picture God as saying to you,' My son, why is it that day by day you
rise and pray, and genuflect, and even strike the ground with your
forehead, nay, sometimes even shed tears, while you say to Me: " My
Father, my God, give me wealth!" If I were to give it to you, you would
think yourself of some importance, you would fancy you had gained
something very great. Because you asked for it, you have it. But take
care to make good use of it. Before you had it you were humble; now that
you have begun to be rich you despise the poor. What kind of a good is
that which only makes you worse? For worse you are, since you were bad
already. And that it would make you worse you knew not; hence you asked
it of Me. I gave it you and I proved you; you have found—and you are
found out! Ask of Me better

things than these, greater things than these. Ask of Me spiritual
things. Ask of Me Myself.'

St. Augustine

0 Lord, I, a beggar, ask of Thee more than a thousand kings may ask of
Thee. Each one has something he needs to ask of Thee;

1 have come to ask Thee to give me Thyself.

Ansari of Herat

In the words of Aquinas, it is legitimate for us to pray for anything
which it is legitimate for us to desire. There are some things that
nobody has the right to desire—such as the fruits of crime or
wrong-doing. Other things may be legitimately desired by people on one
level of spiritual development, but should not be desired (and indeed
cease to be desired) by those on another, higher level. Thus, St.
Frangois de Sales had reached a point where he could say, * I have
hardly any desires, but if I were to be born again I should have none at
all. We should ask nothing and refuse nothing, but leave ourselves in
the arms of divine Providence without wasting time in any desire, except
to will what God wills of us.' But meanwhile the third clause of the
Lord's Prayer is repeated daily by millions, who have not the slightest
intention of letting any will be done, except their own.

The savour of wandering in the ocean of deathless life has rid me

of all my asking; As the tree is in the seed, so all diseases are in
this asking.

Kabir

Lord, I know not what to ask of thee. Thou only knowest what I need.
Thou lovest me better than I know how to love myself. Father, give to
thy child that which he himself knows not how to ask. Smite or heal,
depress me or raise me up: I adore all thy purposes without knowing
them. I am silent; I offer myself up in a sacrifice; I yield myself to
Thee; I would have no other

desire than to accomplish thy will. Teach me to pray. Pray Thyself in
me.

Fenelon

(A dervish was tempted by the devil to cease calling upon Allah, on the
ground that Allah never answered, 'Here am I.' The Prophet Khadir
appeared to him in a vision with a message from God.)

Was it not I who summoned thee to my service ?

Was it not I who made thee busy with my name?

Thy calling 'Allah!' was my 'Here am I.'

Jalal-uddin Rumi

I pray God the Omnipotent to place us in the ranks of his chosen, among
the number of those whom He directs to the path of safety; in whom He
inspires fervour lest they forget Him; whom He cleanses from all
defilement, that nothing may remain in them except Himself; yea, of
those whom He indwells completely, that they may adore none beside Him.

About intercession, as about so many other subjects, it is William Law
who writes most clearly, simply and to the point.

By considering yourself as an advocate with God for your neighbours and
acquaintances, you would never find it hard to be at peace with them
yourself. It would be easy for you to bear with and forgive those, for
whom you particularly implored the divine mercy and forgiveness.

William Law

Intercession is the best arbitrator of all differences, the best
promoter of true friendship, the best cure and preservative against all
unkind tempers, all angry and haughty passions.

William Law

\ou cannot possibly have any ill-temper, or show any unkind

behaviour to a man for whose welfare you are so much concerned, as to be
his advocate with God in private. For you cannot possibly despise and
ridicule that man whom your private prayers recommend to the love and
favour of God.

William Law

Intercession, then, is at once the means to, and the expression of, the
love of one's neighbour. And in the same way adoration is the means to,
and the expression of, the love of God—a love that finds its
consummation in the unitive knowledge of the Godhead which is the fruit
of contemplation. It is to these higher forms of communion with God that
the authors of the following extracts refer whenever they use the word *
prayer/

The aim and end of prayer is to revere, to recognize and to adore the
sovereign majesty of God, through what He is in Himself rather than what
He is in regard to us, and rather to love his goodness by the love of
that goodness itself than for what it sends us.

Bourgoing

In prayer he (Charles de Condren) did not stop at the frontiers of his
knowledge and his reasoning. He adored God and his mysteries as they are
in themselves and not as he understood them.

Amelote

'What God is in Himself,' 'God and his mysteries as they are in
themselves'—the phrases have a Kantian ring. But if Kant was right and
the Thing in itself is unknowable, Bourgoing, De Condren and all the
other masters of the spiritual life were engaged in a wild-goose chase.
But Kant was right only as regards minds that have not yet come to
enlightenment and deliverance. To such minds Reality, whether material,
psychic or spiritual, presents itself as it is darkened, tinged and
refracted by the medium of their own individual natures. But in those
who are pure in heart and poor in spirit there is no distortion

of Reality, because there is no separate selfhood to obscure or refract,
no painted lantern slide of intellectual beliefs and hallowed imagery to
give a personal and historical colouring to the' white radiance of
Eternity.' For such minds, as Olier says, 'even ideas of the saints, of
the Blessed Virgin, and the sight of Jesus Christ in his humanity are
impediments in the way of the sight of God in his purity/ The Thing in
itself can be perceived—but only by one who, in himself, is no-thing.

By prayer I do not understand petition or supplication which, according
to the doctrines of the schools, is exercised principally by the
understanding, being a signification of what the pefson desires to
receive from God. But prayer here specially meant is an offering and
giving to God whatsoever He may justly require from us.

Now prayer, in its general notion, may be defined to be an elevation of
the mind to God, or more largely and expressly thus: prayer is an
actuation of an intellective soul towards God, expressing, or at least
implying, an entire dependence on Him as the author and fountain of all
good, a will and readiness to give Him his due, which is no less than
all love, all obedience, adoration, glory and worship, by humbling and
annihilating the self and all creatures in his presence; and lastly, a
desire and intention to aspire to an union of spirit with Him.

Hence it appears that prayer is the most perfect and most divine action
that a rational soul is capable of. It is of all actions and duties the
most indispensably necessary.

Augustine Baker

Lord, teach me to seek Thee and reveal Thyself to me when I seek Thee.
For I cannot seek Thee except Thou teach me, nor find Thee except Thou
reveal Thyself. Let me seek Thee in longing, let me long for Thee in
seeking: let me find Thee in love and love Thee in finding. Lord, I
acknowledge and I thank Thee that Thou hast created me in this Thine
image, in order that I may be mindful of Thee, may conceive of Thee and
love Thee: but that image has been so consumed and wasted away

by vices and obscured by the smoke of wrong-doing that it cannot achieve
that for which it was made, except Thou renew it and create it anew. Is
the eye of the soul darkened by its infirmity, or dazzled by Thy glory ?
Surely, it is both darkened in itself and dazzled by Thee. Lord, this is
the unapproachable light in which Thou dwellest. Truly I see it not,
because it is too bright for me; and yet whatever I see, I see through
it, as the weak eye sees what it sees through the light of the sun,
which in the sun itself it cannot look upon. Oh supreme and
unapproachable light, oh holy and blessed truth, how far art Thou from
me who am so near to Thee, how far art Thou removed from my vision,
though I am so near to Thine! Everywhere Thou art wholly present, and I
see Thee not. In Thee I move and in Thee I have my being, and cannot
come to Thee, Thou art within me and about me, and I feel Thee not.

St. Anselm

Oh Lord, put no trust in me; for I shall surely fail if Thou uphold me
not.

St. Philip Neri

To pretend to devotion without great humility and renunciation of all
worldly tempers is to pretend to impossibilities. He that would be
devout must first be humble, have a full sense of his own miseries and
wants and the vanity of the world, and then his soul will be full of
desire after God. A proud, or vain, or worldly-minded man may use a
manual of prayers, but he cannot be devout, because devotion is the
application of an humble heart to God as its only happiness.

William Law

The spirit, in order to work, must have all sensible images, both good
and bad, removed. The beginner in a spiritual course commences with the
use of good sensible images, and it is impossible to begin in a good
spiritual course with the exercises of the spirit. . . . Those souls who
have not a propensity to the interior must abide always in the
exercises, in which sensible images are used,

and these souls will find the sensible exercises very profitable to
themselves and to others, and pleasing to God. And this is the way of
the active life. But others, who have the propensity to the interior, do
not always remain in the exercises of the senses, but after a time these
will give place to the exercises of the spirit, which are independent of
the senses and the imagination and consist simply in the elevation of
the will of the intellective soul to God.... The soul elevates her will
towards God, apprehended by the understanding as a spirit, and not as an
imaginary thing, the human spirit in this way aspiring to a union with
the Divine Spirit.

Augustine Baker

You tell me you do nothing in prayer. But what do you want to do in
prayer except what you are doing, which is, presenting and representing
your nothingness and misery to God ? When beggars expose their ulcers
and their necessities to our sight, that is the best appeal they can
make. But from what you tell me, you sometimes do nothing of this, but
lie there like a shadow or a statue. They put statues in palaces simply
to please the prince's eyes. Be content to be that in the presence of
God: He will bring the statue to life when He pleases.

St. Franfois de Sales

I have come to see that I do not limit my mind enough simply to prayer,
that I always want to do something myself in it, wherein I do very
wrong.... I wish most definitely to cut off and separate my mind from
all that, and to hold it with all my strength, as much as I can, to the
sole regard and simple unity. By allowing the fear of being ineffectual
to enter into the state of prayer, and by wishing to accomplish
something myself, I spoilt it all.

St. Jeanne Chantal

So long as you seek Buddhahood, specifically exercising yourself for it,
there is no attainment for you.

Yung-chia Ta-skih

' How does a man set himself in harmony with the Tao ?' ' I am already
out of harmony.'

Shih-t'ou

How shall I grasp it? Do not grasp it. That which remains when there is
no more grasping is the Self.

Panchadasi

I order you to remain simply either in God or close to God, without
trying to do anything there, and without asking anything of Him, unless
He urges it.

St. Franfois de Sales

Adoration is an activity of the loving, but still separate,
individuality. Contemplation is the state of union with the divine
Ground of all being. The highest prayer is the most passive. Inevitably;
for the less there is of self, the more there is of God. That is why the
path to passive or infused contemplation is so hard and, for many, so
painful—a passage through successive or simultaneous Dark Nights, in
which the pilgrim must die to the life of sense as an end in itself, to
the life of private and even of traditionally hallowed thinking and
believing, and finally to the deep source of all ignorance and evil, the
life of the separate, individualized will.

Chapter 17 SUFFERING

THE Godhead is impassible; for where there is perfection and unity,
there can be no suffering. The capacity to suffer arises where there is
imperfection, disunity and separation from an embracing totality; and
the capacity is actualized to the extent that imperfection, disunity and
separateness are accompanied by an urge towards the intensification of
these creaturely conditions. For the individual who achieves unity
within his own organism and union with the divine Ground, there is an
end of suffering. The goal of creation is the return of all sentient
beings out of separateness and that infatuating urge-to-separateness
which results in suffering, through unitive knowledge, into the
wholeness of eternal Reality.

The elements which make up man produce a capacity for pain. The cause of
pain is the craving for individual life. Deliverance from craving does
away with pain. The way of deliverance is the Eightfold Path.

The Four Noble Truths of Buddhism

The urge-to-separateness, or craving for independent and individualized
existence, can manifest itself on all the levels of life, from the
merely cellular and physiological, through the instinctive, to the fully
conscious. It can be the craving of a whole organism for an
intensification of its separateness from the environment and the divine
Ground. Or it can be the urge of a part within an organism for an
intensification of its own partial life as distinct from (and
consequently at the expense of) the life of the organism as a whole. In
the first case we speak of impulse, passion, desire, self-will, sin; in
the second, we describe what is happening as illness, injury, functional
or

organic disorder. In both cases the craving for separateness results in
suffering, not only for the craver, but also for the craver's sentient
environment—other organisms in the external world, or other organs
within the same organism. In one way suffering is entirely private; in
another, fatally contagious. No living creature is able to experience
the suffering of another creature. But the craving for separateness
which, sooner or later, directly or indirectly, results in some form of
private and unshareable suffering for the craver, also results, sooner
or later, directly or indirectly, in suffering (equally private and
unshareable) for others. Suffering and moral evil have the same source—a
craving for the intensification of the separate-ness which is the
primary datum of all creatureliness.

It will be as well to illustrate these generalizations by a few
examples. Let us consider first the suffering inflicted by living
organisms on themselves and on other living organisms in the mere
process of keeping alive. The cause of such suffering is the craving for
individual existence, expressing itself specifically in the form of
hunger. Hunger is entirely natural— a part of every creature's dharma.
The suffering it causes alike to the hungry and to those who satisfy
their hunger is inseparable from the existence of sentient creatures.
The existence of sentient creatures has a goal and purpose which is
ultimately the supreme good of every one of them. But meanwhile the
suffering of creatures remains a fact and is a necessary part of
creatureliness. In so far as this is the case, creation is the beginning
of the Fall. The consummation of the Fall takes place when creatures
seek to intensify their separateness beyond the limits prescribed by the
law of their being. On the biological level the Fall would seem to have
been consummated very frequently during the course of evolutionary
history. Every species, except the human, chose immediate, short-range
success by means of specialization. But specialization always leads into
blind alleys. It is only by remaining precariously generalized that an
organism can advance towards that rational intelligence which is its
compensation for not having a body and instincts perfectly adapted to
one particular kind of life in one particular

kind of environment. Rational intelligence makes possible unparalleled
worldly success on the one hand and, on the other, a further advance
towards spirituality and a return, through unitive knowledge, to the
divine Ground.

Because the human species refrained from consummating the Fall on the
biological level, human individuals now possess the momentous power of
choosing either selflessness and union with God, or the intensification
of separate selfhood in ways and to a degree, which are entirely beyond
the ken of the lower animals. Their capacity for good is infinite, since
they can, if they so desire, make room within themselves for divine
Reality. But at the same time their capacity for evil is, not indeed
infinite (since evil is always ultimately self-destructive and therefore
temporary), but uniquely great. Hell is total separation from God, and
the devil is the will to that separation. Being rational and free, human
beings are capable of being diabolic. This is a feat which no animal can
duplicate, for no animal is sufficiently clever, sufficiently
purposeful, sufficiently strong-willed or sufficiently moral to be a
devil. (We should note that, to be diabolic on the grand scale, one
must, like Milton's Satan, exhibit in a high degree all the moral
virtues, except only charity and wisdom.)

Man's capacity to crave more violently than any animal for the
intensification of his separateness results not only in moral evil and
the sufferings which moral evil inflicts, in one way or another, upon
the victims of evil and the perpetrators of it, but also in certain
characteristically human derangements of the body. Animals suffer mainly
from contagious diseases, which assume epidemic proportions whenever the
urge to reproduction combines with exceptionally favourable
circumstances to produce overcrowding, and from diseases due to
infestation by parasites. (These last are simply a special case of the
sufferings that must inevitably arise when many species of creatures
coexist and can only survive at one another's expense.) Civilized man
has been fairly successful in protecting himself against these plagues,
but in their place he has called up a formidable array of degenerative
diseases hardly known among the lower

animals. Most of these degenerative diseases are due to the feet that
civilized human beings do not, on any level of their being, live in
harmony with Tao, or the divine Nature of Things. They love to intensify
their selfhood through gluttony, therefore eat the wrong food and too
much of it; they inflict upon themselves chronic anxiety over money and,
because they crave excitement, chronic over-stimulation; they suffer,
during their working hours, from the chronic boredom and frustration
imposed by the sort of jobs that have to be done in order to satisfy the
artificially stimulated demand for the fruits of fully mechanized
mass-production. Among the consequences of these wrong uses of the
psycho-physical organism are degenerative changes in particular organs,
such as the heart, kidneys, pancreas, intestines and arteries. Asserting
their partial selfhood in a kind of declaration of independence from the
organism as a whole, the degenerating organs cause suffering to
themselves and their physiological environment. In exactly the same way
the human individual asserts his own partial selfhood and his
separateness from his neighbours, from Nature and from God—with
disastrous consequences to himself, his family, his friends and society
in general. And, reciprocally, a disordered society, professional group
or family, living by a false philosophy, influences its members to
assert their individual selfhood and separateness, just as the
wrong-living and wrong-thinking individual influences his own organs to
assert, by some excess or defect of function, their partial selfhood at
the expense of the total organism.

The effects of suffering may be morally and spiritually bad, neutral or
good, according to the way in which the suffering is endured and reacted
to. In other words, it may stimulate in the sufferer a conscious or
unconscious craving for the intensification of his separateness; or it
may leave the craving such as it was before the suffering; or, finally,
it may mitigate it and so become a means for advance towards
self-abandonment and the love and knowledge of God. Which of these three
alternatives shall be realized depends, in the last analysis, upon the
choice, This seems to be true even on die sub-

human level. The higher animals, at any rate, often seem to resign
themselves to pain, sickness and death with a kind of serene acceptance
of what the divine Nature of Things has decreed for them. But in other
cases there is panic fear and struggle, a frenzied resistance to those
decrees. To some extent, at least, the embodied animal self appears to
be free, in the face of suffering, to choose self-abandonment or
self-assertion. For embodied human selves, this freedom of choice is
unquestionable. The choice of self-abandonment in suffering makes
possible the reception of grace—grace on the spiritual level, in the
form of an accession of the love and knowledge of God, and grace in the
mental and physiological levels, in the form of a diminution of fear,
self-concern and even of pain.

When we conceive the love of suffering, we lose the sensibility of the
senses and dead, dead we will live in that garden.

St. Catherine of Siena

He who suffers for love does not suffer, for all suffering is forgot.

Eckhart

In this life there is not purgatory, but only heaven or hell; for he who
bears afflictions with patience has paradise, and he who does not has
hell.

St. Philip Neri

Many sufferings are the immediate consequence of moral evil, and these
cannot have any good effects upon the sufferer, so long as the causes of
his distress are not eradicated.

Each sin begetteth a special spiritual suffering. A suffering of this
kind is like unto that of hell, for the more you suffer, the worse you
become. This happeneth to sinners; the more they suffer through their
sins, the more wicked they become; and they fall continually more and
more into their sins in order to get free from their suffering.

The Following of Christ

The idea of vicarious suffering has too often been formulated in crudely
juridical and commercial terms. A has committed an offence for which the
law decrees a certain punishment; B voluntarily undergoes the
punishment; justice and the lawgiver's honour are satisfied;
consequently A may go free. Or else it is all a matter of debts and
repayments. A owes C a sum which he cannot pay; B steps in with the cash
and so prevents C from foreclosing on the mortgage. Applied to the facts
of man's suffering and his relations to the divine Ground, these
conceptions are neither enlightening nor edifying. The orthodox doctrine
of the Atonement attributes to God characteristics that would be
discreditable even to a human potentate, and its model of the universe
is not the product of spiritual insight rationalized by philosophic
reflection, but rather the projection of a lawyer's phantasy. But in
spite of these deplorable crudities in their formulation, the idea of
vicarious suffering and the other, closely related idea of the
transferability of merit are based upon genuine facts of experience. The
selfless and God-filled person can and does act as a channel through
which grace is able to pass into the unfortunate being who has made
himself impervious to the divine by the habitual craving for
intensifications of his own separateness and selfhood. It is because of
this that the saints are able to exercise authority, all the greater for
being entirely non-compulsive, over their fellow-beings. They' transfer
merit' to those who are in need of it; but that which converts the
victims of self-will and puts them on the path of liberation is not the
merit of the saintly individual—a merit that consists in his having made
himself capable of eternal Reality, as a pipe, by being cleaned out, is
made capable of water; it is rather the divine charge he carries, the
eternal Reality for which he has become the conduit. And similarly, in
vicarious suffering, it is not the actual pains experienced by the saint
which are redemptive—for to believe 'that God is angry at sin and that
his anger cannot be propitiated except by the offer of a certain sum of
pain is to blaspheme against the divine Nature. No, what saves is the
gift from beyond the temporal order, brought to those imprisoned in

selfhood by these selfless and God-filled persons, who have been ready
to accept suffering, in order to help their fellows. The Bodhisattva's
vow is a promise to forgo the immediate fruits of enlightenment and to
accept rebirth and its inevitable concomitants, pain and death, again
and again, until such time as, thanks to his labours and the graces of
which, being selfless, he is the channel, all sentient beings shall have
come to final and complete deliverance.

I saw a mass of matter of a dull gloomy colour between the North and the
East, and was informed that this mass was human beings, in as great
misery as they could be, and live; and that I was mixed up with them and
henceforth I must not consider myself as a distinct or separate being.

John Woolman

Why must the righteous and the innocent endure undeserved suffering ?
For anyone who conceives of human individuals as Hume conceived of
events and things, as ' loose and separate,' the question admits of no
acceptable answer. But, in fact, human individuals are not loose and
separate, and the only reason why we think they are is our own wrongly
interpreted self-interest. We want to 'do what we damned well like/ to
have 'a good time' and no responsibilities. Consequently, we find it
convenient to be misled by the inadequacies of language and to believe
(not always, of course, but just when it suits us) that things, persons
and events are as completely distinct and separate one from another as
the words by means of which we think about them. The truth is, of
course, that we are all organically related to God, to Nature and to our
fellow-men. If every human being were constantly and consciously in a
proper relationship with his divine, natural and social environments
there would be only so much suffering as Creation makes inevitable. But
actually most human beings are chronically in an improper relation to
God, Nature and some at least of their fellows. The results of these
wrong relationships are manifest on the social level as wars,
revolutions, exploitation and.

disorder; on the natural level, as waste and exhaustion of irreplaceable
resources; on the biological level, as degenerative diseases and the
deterioration of racial stocks; on the moral level, as an overweening
bumptiousness; and on the spiritual level, as blindness to divine
Reality and complete ignorance of the reason and purpose of human
existence. In such circumstances it would be extraordinary if the
innocent and righteous did not suffer—just as it would be extraordinary
if the innocent kidneys and the righteous heart were not to suffer for
the sins of a licorous palate and overloaded stomach, sins, we may add,
imposed upon those organs by the will of the gluttonous individual to
whom they belong, as he himself belongs to a society which other
individuals, his contemporaries and predecessors, have built up into a
vast and enduring incarnation of disorder, inflicting suffering upon its
members and infecting them with its own ignorance and wickedness. The
righteous man can escape suffering only by accepting it and passing
beyond it; and he can accomplish this only by being converted from
righteousness to total selflessness and God-centredness, by ceasing to
be just a Pharisee, or good citizen, and becoming * perfect as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect.' The difficulties in the way of
such a transfiguration are, obviously, enormous. But of those who 'speak
with authority/ who has ever said that the road to complete deliverance
was easy or the gate anything but * strait and narrow'?

Chapter 18 FAITH

r I 1 HE word 'faith* has a variety of meanings, which it is -L
important to distinguish. In some contexts it is used as a synonym for
'trust/ as when we say that we have faith in Dr. X's diagnostic skill or
in lawyer Y's integrity. Analogous to this is our 'faith' in
authority—the belief that what certain persons say about certain
subjects is likely, because of their special qualifications, to be true.
On other occasions 'faith' stands for belief in propositions which we
have not had occasion to verify for ourselves, but which we know that we
could verify if we had the inclination, the opportunity and the
necessary capacities. In this sense of the word we have ' faith,' even
though we may never have been to Australia, that there is such a
creature as a duck-billed platypus; we have 'faith' in the atomic
theory, even though we may never have performed the experiments on which
that theory rests, and be incapable of understanding the mathematics by
which it is supported. And finally there is the 'faith,' which is a
belief in propositions which we know we cannot verify, even if we should
desire to do so—propositions such as those of the Athanasian Creed or
those which constitute the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception. This
kind of 'faith' is defined by the Scholastics as an act of the intellect
moved to assent by the will.

Faith in the first three senses of the word plays a very important part,
not only in the activities of everyday life, but even in those of pure
and applied science. Credo ut intelligam —and also, we should add, ut
ogam and ut vivam. Faith is a pre-condition of all systematic knowing,
all purposive doing and all decent living. Societies are held together,
not primarily by the fear of the many for the coercive power of the few,
but by a widespread faith in the other fellow's decency. Such a faith
tends to create its own object, while the widespread

mutual mistrust, due, for example, to war or domestic dissension,
creates the object of mistrust. Passing now from the moral to the
intellectual sphere, we find faith lying at the root of all organized
thinking. Science and technology could not exist unless we had faith in
the reliability of the universe— unless, in Clerk Maxwell's words, we
implicitly believed that the book of Nature is really a book and not a
magazine, a coherent work of art and not a hodge-podge of mutually
irrelevant snippets. To this general faith in the reasonableness and
trustworthiness of the world the searcher after truth must add two kinds
of special faith—faith in the authority of qualified experts, sufficient
to permit him to take their word for statements which he personally has
not verified; and faith in his own working hypotheses, sufficient to
induce him to test his provisional beliefs by means of appropriate
action. This action may confirm the belief which inspired it.
Alternatively it may bring proof that the original working hypothesis
was ill founded, in which case it will have to be modified until it
becomes conformable to the facts and so passes from the realm of faith
to that of knowledge^

The fourth kind of faith is the thing which is commonly called
'religious faith.' The usage is justifiable, not because the other kinds
of faith are not fundamental in religion just as they are in secular
affairs, but because this willed assent to propositions which are known
to be unverifiable occurs in religion, and only in religion, as a
characteristic addition to faith as trust, faith in authority and faith
in unverified but verifiable propositions. This is the kind of faith
which, according to Christian theologians, justifies and saves. In its
extreme and most uncompromising form, such a doctrine can be very
dangerous. Here, for example, is a passage from one of Luther's letters.
Esto peccator, et pecca farther ,• sed fortius crede et gaude in Chris
to, qui victor est peccati, mortis et mundi. Peccandum est quam diu sic
sumus ; vita haec non est habitatio justitiae. (' Be a sinner and sin
strongly; but yet more strongly believe and rejoice in Christ, who is
the conqueror of sin, death and the world. So long as we are as we are,
there must

be sinning; this life is not the dwelling place of righteousness/) To
the danger that faith in the doctrine of justification by faith may
serve as an excuse for and even an invitation to sin must be added
another danger, namely, that the faith which is supposed to save may be
faith in propositions not merely unverifiable, but repugnant to reason
and the moral sense, and entirely at variance with the findings of those
who have fulfilled the conditions of spiritual insight into the Nature
of Things. ' This is the acme of faith/ says Luther in his De Servo
Arbitrio, 'to believe that God who saves so few and condemns so many, is
merciful; that He is just who, at his own pleasure, has made us
necessarily doomed to damnation, so that He seems to delight in the
torture of the wretched and to be more deserving of hate than of love.
If by any effort of reason I could conceive how God, who shows so much
anger and harshness, could be merciful and just, there would be no need
of faith/ Revelation (which, when it is genuine, is simply the record of
the immediate experience of those who are pure enough in heart and poor
enough in spirit to be able to see God) says nothing at all of these
hideous doctrines, to which the will forces the quite naturally and
rightly reluctant intellect to give assent. Such notions .are the
product, not of the insight of saints, but of the busy phantasy of
jurists, who were so far from having transcended selfness and the
prejudices of education that they had the folly and presumption to
interpret the universe in terms of the Jewish and Roman law with which
they happened to be familiar. 'Woe unto you lawyers/ said Christ. The
denunciation was prophetic and for all time.

The core and spiritual heart of all the higher religions is the
Perennial Philosophy; and the Perennial Philosophy can be assented to
and acted upon without resort to the kind of faith about which Luther
was writing in the foregoing passages. There must, of course, be faith
as trust—for confidence in one's fellows is the beginning of charity
towards men, and confidence not only in the material, but also the moral
and spiritual reliability of the universe, is the beginning of charity
or love-knowledge in relation to God. There must also be faith in

authority—the authority of those whose selflessness has qualified them
to know the spiritual Ground of all being by direct acquaintance as well
as by report. And finally there must be faith in such propositions about
Reality as are enunciated by philosophers in the light of genuine
revelation—propositions which the believer knows that he can, if he is
prepared to fulfil the necessary conditions, verify for himself. But, so
long as the Perennial Philosophy is accepted in its essential
simplicity, there is no need of willed assent to propositions known in
advance to be unverifiable. Here it is necessary to add that such
unverifiable propositions may become verifiable to the extent that
intense faith affects the psychic substratum and so creates an
existence, whose derived objectivity can actually be discovered 'out
there/ Let us, however, remember that an existence which derives its
objectivity from the mental activity of those who intensely believe in
it cannot possibly be the spiritual Ground of the world, and that a mind
busily engaged in the voluntary and intellectual activity, which is *
religious faith,' cannot possibly be in the state of selflessness and
alert passivity which is the necessary condition of the unitive
knowledge of the Ground. That is why the Buddhists affirm that Moving
faith leads to heaven; but obedience to the Dharma leads to Nirvana/
Faith in the existence and power of any supernatural entity which is
less than ultimate spiritual Reality, and in any form of worship that
falls short of self-naughting, will certainly, if the object of faith is
intrinsically good, result in improvement of character, and probably in
posthumous survival of the improved personality under 'heavenly'
conditions. But this personal survival within what is still the temporal
order is not the eternal life of timeless union with the Spirit. This
eternal life 'stands in the knowledge' of the Godhead, not in faith in
anything less than the Godhead.

The immortality attained through the acquisition of any objective
condition (e.g., the condition—merited through good works, which have
been inspired by love of, and faith in, something less than the supreme
Godhead—of being united in act to what is

worshipped) is liable to end; for it is distinctly stated in the
Scriptures that karma is never the cause of emancipation.

Shankara

Karma is the causal sequence in time, from which we are delivered solely
by 'dying to' the temporal self and becoming united with the eternal,
which is beyond time and cause. For 'as to the notion of a First Cause,
or a Causa Sui* (to quote the words of an eminent theologian and
philosopher, Dr. F. R. Tennant), 'we have, on the one hand, to bear in
mind that we refute ourselves in trying to establish it by extension of
the application of the causal category, for causality when universalized
contains a contradiction; and, on the other, to remember that the
ultimate Ground simply "is."' Only when the individual also * simply
is,' by reason of his union through love-knowledge with the Ground, can
there be any question of complete and eternal liberation.

Chapter 19 GOD IS NOT MOCKED

Why hast thou said, 'I have sinned so mucji,

And God in His mercy has not punished my sins'?

How many times do I smite thee, and thou knowest not!

Thou art bound in my chains from head to foot.

On thy heart is rust on rust collected

So that thou art blind to divine mysteries.

When a man is stubborn and follows evil practices,

He casts dust in the eyes of his discernment.

Old shame for sin and calling on God quit him;

Dust five layers deep settles on his mirror,

Rust spots begin to gnaw his iron,

The colour of his jewel grows less and less.

Jalal-uddin Rumi

IF there is freedom (and even Determinists consistently act as if they
were certain of it) and if (as everyone who has qualified himself to
talk about the subject has always been convinced) there is a spiritual
Reality, which it is the final end and purpose of consciousness to know;
then all life is in the nature of an intelligence test, and the higher
the level of awareness and the greater the potentialities of the
creature, the more searchingly difficult will be the questions asked.
For, in Bagehot's words, 'we could not be what we ought to be, if we
lived in the sort of universe we should expect. ... A latent Providence,
a confused life, an odd material world, an existence broken short in the
midst and on a sudden, are not real difficulties, but real helps; for
they, or something like them, are essential conditions of a moral life
in a subordinate being.' Because we are free, it is possible for us to
answer life's questions either well or badly. If we answer them badly,
we shall bring down upon ourselves self-stultification. Most often this
self-

stultification will take subtle and not immediately detectable forms, as
when our failure to answer properly makes it impossible for us to
realize the higher potentialities of our being. Sometimes, on the
contrary, the self-stultification is manifest on the physical level, and
may involve not only individuals as individuals, but entire societies,
which go down in catastrophe or sink more slowly into decay. The giving
of correct answers is rewarded primarily by spiritual growth and
progressive realization of latent potentialities, and secondarily (when
circumstances make it possible) by the adding of all the rest to the
realized kingdom of God. Karma exists; but its equivalence of act and
award is not always obvious and material, as the earlier Buddhist and
Hebrew writers ingenuously imagined that it should be. The bad man in
prosperity may, all unknown to himself, be darkened and corroded with
inward rust, while the good man under afflictions may be in the
rewarding process of spiritual growth. No, God is not mocked; but also,
let us always remember, He is not understood.

Pero nella giusti^ia sempiUrna

la vista che riceve vostro mondo,

comocchio per lo mar, dentro sinterna, ch&, benchk dalla proda veggia il
fondo,

in pelago nol vede, e nan di meno

I li, ma cela lui Vesser profondo.

(* Wherefore, in the eternal justice, such sight as your earth receives
is engulfed, like the eye in the sea; for though by the shore it can see
the bottom, in the ocean it cannot see it; yet none the less the bottom
is there, but the depth hides it/) Love is the plummet as well as the
astrolabe of God's mysteries, and the pure in heart can see far down
into the depths of the divine justice, to catch a glimpse, not indeed of
the details of the cosmic process, but at least of its principle and
nature. These insights permit them to say, with Juliana of Norwich, that
all shall be well, that, in spite of time, all is well, and that the
problem of evil has its solution in the eternity,

which men can, if they so desire, experience, but can never describe.

But, you urge, if men sin from the necessity of their nature, they are
excusable; you do not explain, however, what you would infer from this
fact. Is it perhaps that God will be prevented from growing angry with
them ? Or is it rather that they have deserved that blessedness which
consists in the knowledge and love of God ? If you mean the former, I
altogether agree that God does not grow angry and that all things happen
by his decree. But I deny that, for this reason, all men ought to be
happy. Surely men may be excusable and nevertheless miss happiness, and
be tormented in many ways. A horse is excusable for being a horse and
not a man; but nevertheless he must needs be a horse and not a man. One
who goes mad from the bite of a dog is excusable; yet it is right that
he should die of suffocation. So, too, he who cannot rule his passions,
nor hold them in check out of respect for the law, while he may be
excusable on the ground of weakness, is incapable of enjoying conformity
of spirit and knowledge and love of God; and he is lost inevitably.

Spinoza

Horizontally and vertically, in physical and temperamental kind as well
as in degree of inborn ability and native goodness, human beings differ
profoundly one from another. Why ? To what end and for what past causes
? * Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born
blind?' Jesus answered, ''Neither hath this man sinned nor his parents,
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. 5 The man of
science, on the contrary, would say that the responsibility rested with
the parents who had caused the blindness of their child either by having
the wrong kind of genes, or by contracting some avoidable disease. Hindu
or Buddhist believers in reincarnation according to the laws of karma
(the destiny which, by their actions, individuals and groups of
individuals impose upon themselves, one another and their descendants)
would give another answer and say that, owing to what he had

done in previous existences, the blind man had predestined himself to
choose the sort of parents from whom he would have to inherit blindness.

These three answers are not mutually incompatible. The parents are
responsible for making the child what, by heredity and upbringing, he
turns out to be. The soul or character incarnated in the child is of
such a nature, owing to past behaviour, that it is forced to select
those particular parents. And collaborating with the material and
efficient causes is the final cause, the teleological pull from in
front. This teleo-logical pull is a pull from the divine Ground of
things acting upon that part of the timeless now, which a finite mind
must regard as the future. Men sin and their parents sin; but the works
of God have to be manifested in every sentient being (either by
exceptional ways, as in this case of supernormal healing, or in the
ordinary course of events)—have to be manifested again and again, with
the infinite patience of eternity, until at last the creature makes
itself fit for the perfect and consummate manifestation of unitive
knowledge, of the state of 'not I, but God in me.'

'Karma,' according to the Hindus, 'never dispels ignorance, being under
the same category with it. Knowledge alone dispels ignorance, just as
light alone dispels darkness.'

In other words, the causal process takes place within time and cannot
possibly result in deliverance from time. Such a deliverance can only be
achieved as a consequence of the intervention of eternity in the
temporal domain; and eternity cannot intervene unless the individual
will makes a creative act of self-denial, thus producing, as it were, a
vacuum into which eternity can flow. To suppose that the causal process
in time can of itself result in deliverance from time is like supposing
that water will rise into a space from which the air has not been
previously exhausted.

The right relation between prayer and conduct is not that con-

duct is supremely important and prayer may help it, but that prayer is
supremely important and conduct tests it.

Archbishop Temple

The aim and purpose of human life is the unitive knowledge of God. Among
the indispensable means to that end is right conduct, and by the degree
and kind of virtue achieved, the degree of liberating knowledge may be
assessed and its quality evaluated. In a word, the tree is known by its
fruits; God is not mocked.

Religious beliefs and practices are certainly not the only factors
determining the behaviour of a given society. But, no less certainly,
they are among the determining factors. At least to some extent, the
collective conduct of a nation is a test of the religion prevailing
within it, a criterion by which we may legitimately judge the doctrinal
validity of that religion and its practical efficiency in helping
individuals to advance towards the goal of human existence.

In die past the nations of Christendom persecuted in the name of their
faith, fought religious wars and undertook crusades against infidels and
heretics ; today they have ceased to be Christian in anything but name,
and the only religion they profess is some brand of local idolatry, such
as nationalism, state-worship, boss-worship and revolutionism. From
these fruits of (among other things) historic Christianity, what
inferences can we draw as to the nature of the tree ? The answer lias
already been given in the section on 'Time and Eternity. 5 If Christians
used to be persecutors and are now no longer Christians, the reason is
that the Perennial Philosophy incorporated in their religion was
overlaid by wrong beliefs that led inevitably, since God is never
mocked, to wrong actions. These wrong beliefs had one element in
common—namely, an over-valuation of happenings in time and an
under-valuation of the everlasting, timeless fact of eternity. Thus,
belief in the supreme importance for salvation of remote historical
events resulted in bloody disputes over the interpretation of the not
very adequate and often conflicting records. And belief in the

sacredness,nay, the actual divinity, of the
ecclesiastico-politico-financial organizations, which developed after
the fall of the Roman Empire, not only added bitterness to the all too
human struggles for their control, but served to rationalize and'justify
the worst excesses of those who fought for place, wealth and power
within and through the Church. But this is not the whole story. The same
over-valuation of events in time, which once caused Christians to
persecute and fight religious wars, led at last to a widespread
indifference to a religion that, in spite of everything, was still in
part preoccupied with eternity. But nature abhors a vacuum, and into the
yawning void of this indifference there flowed the tide of political
idolatry. The practical consequences of such idolatry, as we now see,
are total war, revolution and tyranny.

Meanwhile, on the credit side of the balance sheet, we find such items
as the following: an immense increase in technical and governmental
efficiency and an immense increase in scientific knowledge—each of them
a result of the general shift of Western man's attention from the
eternal to the temporal order, first within the sphere of Christianity
and then, inevitably, outside it.

Chapter

20

TANTUM RELIGIO POTUIT SUADERE MALORUM

Would you know whence it is that so many false spirits have appeared in
the world, who have deceived themselves and others with false fire and
false light, laying claim to information, illumination and openings of
the divine Life, particularly to do wonders under extraordinary calls
from God ? It is this : they have turned to God without turning from
themselves; would be alive to God before they are dead to their own
nature. Now religion in the hands of self, or corrupt nature, serves
only to discover vices of a worse kind than in nature left to itself.
Hence are all the disorderly passions of religious men, which burn in a
worse flame than passions only employed about worldly matters ; pride,
self-exaltation, hatred and persecution, under a cloak of religious
zeal, will sanctify actions which nature, left to itself, would be
ashamed to own.

William Law

to God without turning from self— the JL formula is absurdly simple; and
yet, simple as it is, it explains all the follies and iniquities
committed in the name of religion. Those who turn to God without turning
from themselves are tempted to evil in several characteristic and easily
recognizable ways. They are tempted, first of all, to practise magical
rites, by means of which they hope to compel God to answer their
petitions and, in general, to serve their private or collective ends.
All the ugly business of sacrifice, incantation and what Jesus called
'vain repetition' is a product of this wish to treat God as a means to
indefinite self-aggrandizement, rather than as an end to be reached
through total self-denial. Next, they are tempted to use the name of God
to justify what they do in pursuit of place, power and wealth. And
because

they believe themselves to have divine justification for their actions,
they proceed, with a good conscience, to perpetrate abominations, 'which
nature, left to itself, would be ashamed to own.* Throughout recorded
history an incredible sum of mischief has been done by ambitious
idealists, self-deluded by their own verbiage and a lust for power into
a conviction that they were acting for the highest good of their
fellow-men. In the past, the justification for such wickedness was 'God'
or 'the Church,' or 'the True Faith'; today idealists kill and torture
and exploit in the name of 'the Revolution,' 'the New Order,' 'the World
of the Common Man,' or simply 'the Future.' Finally there are the
temptations which arise when the falsely religious begin to acquire the
powers which are the fruit of their pious and magical practices. For,
let there be no mistake, sacrifice, incantation and 'vain repetition'
actually do produce fruits, especially when practised in conjunction
with physical austerities. Men who turn towards God without turning away
from themselves do not, of course, reach God; but if they devote
themselves energetically enough to their pseudo-religion, they will get
results. Some of these results are doubtless the product of
auto-suggestion. (It was through 'vain repetition' that Coue got his
patients to cure themselves of their diseases.) Others are due,
apparently, to that 'something not ourselves' in the psychic medium—that
something which makes, not necessarily for righteousness, but always for
power. Whether this something is a piece of second-hand objectivity,
projected into the medium by the individual worshipper and his fellows
and predecessors; whether it is a piece of first-hand objectivity,
corresponding, on the psychic level, to the data of the material
universe; or whether it is a combination of both these things, it is
impossible to determine. All that need be said in this place is that
people who turn towards God without turning from themselves often seem
to acquire a knack of getting their petitions answered and sometimes
develop considerable supernormal powers, such as those of psychic
healing and extra-sensory perception. But, it may be asked: Is it
necessarily a good thing to be able to get one's

petitions answered in the way one wants them to be? And how far is it
spiritually profitable to be possessed of these 'miraculous' powers?
These are questions which were considered in the chapter on 'Prayer' and
will be further discussed in the chapter on 'The Miraculous.'

The Grand Augur, in his ceremonial robes, approached the shambles and
thus addressed the pigs. 'How can you object to die? I shall fatten you
for three months. I shall discipline myself for ten days and fast for
three. I shall strew fine grass and place you bodily upon a carved
sacrificial dish. Does not this satisfy you?'

Then, speaking from the pigs' point of view, he continued: 'It is better
perhaps, after all, to live on bran and escape from the shambles.'

'But then,' he added, speaking from his own point of view, 'to enjoy
honour when alive, one would readily die on a war-shield or in the
headsman's basket.'

So he rejected the pigs' point of view and adopted his own point of
view. In what sense, then, was he different from the

pigs?

Chuang Tqu

Anyone who sacrifices anything but his own person or his own interests
is on exactly the same level as Chuang Tzu's pigs. The pigs seek their
own advantage inasmuch as they prefer life and bran to honour and the
shambles; the sacrificers seek their own advantage inasmuch as they
prefer the magical, God-constraining death of pigs to the death of their
own passions and self-will. And what applies to sacrifice, applies
equally to incantations, rituals and vain repetitions, when these are
used (as they all too frequently are, even in the higher religions) as a
form of compulsive magic. Rites and vain repetitions have a legitimate
place in religion as aids to recollectedness, reminders of truth
momentarily forgotten in the turmoil of worldly distractions. When
spoken or performed as a kind of magic, their use is either completely
pointless; or else (and this is

worse) it may have ego-enhancing results, which do not in any way
contribute to the attainment of man's final, end.

The vestments of Isis are variegated to represent the cosmos; that of
Osiris is white, symbolizing the Intelligible Light beyond the cosmos.

Plutarch

So long as the symbol remains, in the worshipper's mind, firmly attached
and instrumental to that which is symbolized, the use of such things as
white and variegated vestments can do no harm. But if the symbol breaks
loose, as it were, and becomes an end in itself, then we have, at the
best, a futile aestheticism and sentimentality, at the worst a form of
psychologically effective magic.

All externals must yield to love; for they are for the sake of love, and
not love for them.

Hans Denk

Ceremonies in themselves are not sin; but whoever supposes that he can
attain to life either by baptism or by partaking of bread is still in
superstition.

Hans Denk

If you be always handling the letter of the Word, always licking the
letter, always chewing upon that, what great thing do you ? No marvel
you are such starvelings.

John Everard

While the Right Law still prevailed, innumerable were the converts who
fathomed the depths of the Dharma by merely listening to half a stanza
or even to a single phrase of the Buddha's teaching. But as we come to
the age of similitude and to these latter days of Buddhism, we are
indeed far away from the Sage.

People find themselves drowning in a sea of letters; they do not know
how to get at the one substance which alone is truth. This was what
caused the appearance of the Fathers (of Zen Buddhism) who, pointing
directly at the human mind, told us to see here the ultimate ground of
all things and thereby to attain Buddhahood. This is known as a special
transmission outside the scriptural teaching. If one is endowed with
superior talents or a special sharpness of mind, a gesture or a word
will suffice to give one an immediate knowledge of the truth. Hence,
since they were advocates of 'special transmission/ Ummon treated the
(historical) Buddha with the utmost irreverence and Yakusan forbade his
followers even to read the sutras.

Zen is the name given to this branch of Buddhism, which keeps itself
away from the Buddha. It is also called the mystical branch, because it
does not adhere to the literal meaning of the sutras. It is for this
reason that those who blindly follow the steps of Buddha are sure to
deride Zen, while those who have no liking for the letter are naturally
inclined towards the mystical approach. The followers of the two schools
know how to shake the head at each other, but fail to realize that they
are after all complementary. Is not Zen one of the six virtues of
perfection ? If so, how can it conflict with the teachings of the
Buddha? In my view, Zen is the outcome of the Buddha's teaching, and the
mystical issues from the letters. There is no reason why a man should
shun Zen because of the Buddha's teaching; nor need we disregard the
letters on account of the mystical teachings of Zen. . . . Students of
scriptural Buddhism run the risk of becoming sticklers for the
scriptures, the real meaning of which they fail to understand. By such
men ultimate reality is never grasped, and for them Zen would mean
salvation. Whereas those who study Zen are too apt to run into the habit
of making empty talks and practising sophistry. They fail to understand
the significance of letters. To save them, the study of Buddhist
scriptures is recommended. It is only when these one-sided views are
mutually corrected that there is a perfect appreciation of the Buddha's
teaching.

Chiang Chih-chi

It would be hard to find a better summing up of the conclusions, to
which any spiritually and psychologically realistic mind must sooner or
later come, than the foregoing paragraphs written in the eleventh
century by one of the masters of Zen Buddhism.

The extract that follows is a moving protest against the crimes and
follies perpetrated in the name of religion by those sixteenth-century
Reformers who had turned to God without turning away from themselves and
who were therefore far more keenly interested in the temporal aspects of
historic Christianity—the ecclesiastical organization, the
logic-chopping, the letter of Scripture—than in the Spirit who must be
worshipped in spirit, the eternal Reality in the selfless knowledge of
whom stands man's eternal life. Its author was Sebastian Castellio, who
was at one time Calvin's favourite disciple, but who parted company with
his master when the latter burned Servetus for heresy against his own
heresy. Fortunately Castellio was living in Basel when he made his plea
for charity and common decency; penned in Geneva, it would have earned
him torture and death.

If you, illustrious Prince (the words were addressed to the Duke of
Wiirtemberg) had informed your subjects that you were coming to visit
them at an unnamed time, and had requested them to be prepared in white
garments to meet you at your coming, what would you do if on arrival you
should find that, instead of robing themselves in white, they had spent
their time in violent debate about your person—some insisting that you
were in France, others that you were in Spain; some declaring that you
would come on horseback, others that you would come by chariot; some
holding that you would come with great pomp and others that you would
come without any train or following? And what especially would you say
if they debated not only with words, but with blows of fist and sword
strokes, and if some succeeded in killing and destroying others who
differed from them? 'He will come on horseback/ *No, he will not; it
will be by chariot/ 'You lie/ f I do not; you are the liar/ 'Take that'—

a blow with the fist. 'Take that' —a sword-thrust through the body.
Prince, what would you think of such citizens ? Christ asked us to put
on the white robes of a pure and holy life; but what occupies our
thoughts? We dispute not only of the way to Christ, but of his relation
to God the Father, of the Trinity, of predestination, of free will, of
the nature of God, of the angels, of the condition of the soul after
death—of a multitude of matters that are not essential to salvation;
matters, moreover, which can never be known until our hearts are pure;
for they are things which must be spiritually perceived.

Sebastian Castellio

People always get what they ask for; the only trouble is that they never
know, until they get it, what it actually is that they have asked for.
Thus, Protestants might, if they had so desired, have followed the lead
of Castellio and Denk; but they preferred Calvin and Luther—preferred
them because the doctrines of justification by faith and of
predestination were more exciting than those of the Perennial
Philosophy. And not only more exciting, but also less exacting; for if
they were true, one could be saved without going through that
distasteful process of self-naughting, which is the necessary
pre-condition of deliverance into the knowledge of eternal Reality. And
not only less exacting, but also more satisfying to the intellectual's
appetite for clear-cut formulae and the syllogistic demonstrations of
abstract truths. Waiting on God is a bore; but what fun to argue, to
score off opponents, to lose one's temper and call it 'righteous
indignation,' and at last to pass from controversy to blows, from words
to what St. Augustine so deli-ciously described as the 'benignant
asperity' of persecution and punishment!

Choosing Luther and Calvin instead of the spiritual reformers who were
their contemporaries, Protestant Europe got the kind of theology it
liked. But it also got, along with other unanticipated by-products, the
Thirty Years War, capitalism and the first rudiments of modern Germany.
'If we wish,' Dean Inge has recently written,' to find a scapegoat on
whose shoulders

we may lay the miseries which Germany has brought upon the world ... I
am more and more convinced that the worst evil genius of that country is
not Hitler or Bismarck or Frederick the Great, but Martin Luther.... It
(Lutheranism) worships a God who is neither just nor merciful.... The
Law of Nature, which ought to be the court of appeal against unjust
authority, is identified (by Luther) with the existing order of society,
to which absolute obedience is due.' And so on. Right belief is the
first branch of the Eightfold Path leading to deliverance; the root and
primal cause of bondage is wrong belief, or ignorance—an ignorance, let
us remember, which is never completely invincible, but always, in the
last analysis, a matter of will. If we don't know, it is because we find
it more convenient not to know. Original ignorance is the same thing as
original sin.

Chapter 21 IDOLATRY

TO educated persons the more primitive kinds of idolatry have ceased to
be attractive. They find it easy to resist the temptation to believe
that particular natural objects are gods, or that certain symbols and
images are the very forms of divine entities and as such must be
worshipped and propitiated. True, much fetishistic superstition survives
even today. But though it survives, it is not considered respectable.
Like drinking and prostitution, the primitive forms of idolatry are
tolerated, but not approved. Their place in the accredited hierarchy of
values is among the lowest.

How different is the case with the developed and more modern forms of
idolatry! These have achieved not merely survival, but the highest
degree of respectability. They are recommended by men of science as an
up-to-date substitute for genuine religion and by many professional
religious teachers are equated with the worship of God. All this may be
deplorable ; but it is not in the least surprising. Our education
disparages the more primitive forms of idolatry; but at the same time it
disparages, or at the best it ignores, the Perennial Philosophy and the
practice of spirituality. In place of mumbo-jumbo at the bottom and of
the immanent and transcendent Godhead at the top, it sets up, as objects
of admiration, faith and worship, a pantheon of strictly human ideas and
ideals. In academic circles and among those who have been subjected to
higher education, there are few fetishists and few devout
contemplatives; but the enthusiastic devotees of some form of political
or social idolatry are as common as blackberries. Significantly enough,
I have observed, when making use of university libraries, that books on
spiritual religion were taken out much less frequently than was the case
in public libraries,

patronized in the main by men and women who had not enjoyed the
advantages, or suffered under the handicaps, of prolonged academic
instruction.

The many varieties of higher idolatry may be classed under three main
heads: technological, political and moral. Technological idolatry is the
most ingenuous and primitive of the three; for its devotees, like those
of the lower idolatry, believe that their redemption and liberation
depend upon material objects—in this case gadgets. Technological
idolatry is the religion whose doctrines are promulgated, explicitly or
by implication, in the advertisement pages of our newspapers and
magazines—the source, we may add parenthetically, from which millions of
men, women and children in the capitalistic countries derive their
working philosophy of life. In Soviet Russia too, technological idolatry
was strenuously preached, becoming, during the years of that country's
industrialization, a kind of state religion. So whole-hearted is the
modern faith in technological idols that (despite all the lessons of
mechanized warfare) it is impossible to discover in the popular thinking
of our time any trace of the ancient and profoundly realistic doctrine
of hubris and inevitable nemesis. There is a very general belief that,
where gadgets are concerned, we can get something for nothing—can enjoy
all the advantages of an elaborate, top-heavy and constantly advancing
technology without having to pay for them by any compensating
disadvantages.

Only a little less ingenuous are the political idolaters. For the
worship of redemptive gadgets these have substituted the worship of
redemptive social and economic organizations. Impose the right kind of
organizations upon human beings, and all their problems, from sin and
unhappiness to nationalism and war, will automatically disappear. Most
political idolaters are also technological idolaters—and this in spite
of the fact that the two pseudo-religions are finally incompatible,
since technological progress at its present rate makes nonsense of any
political blue-print, however ingeniously drawn, within a matter, not of
generations, but of years and sometimes even of months. Further, the
human being is, unfortunately, a crea-

ture endowed with free will; and if, for any reason, individuals do not
choose to make it work, even the best organization will not produce the
results it was intended to produce.

The moral idolaters are realists inasmuch as they see that gadgets and
organizations are not enough to guarantee the triumph of virtue and the
increase of happiness, and that the individuals who compose societies
and use machines are the arbiters who finally determine whether there
shall be decency in personal relationship, order or disorder in society.
Material and organizational instruments are indispensable, and a good
tool is preferable to a bad one. But in listless or malicious hands the
finest instrument is either useless or a means to evil.

The moralists cease to be realistic and commit idolatry inasmuch as they
worship, not God, but their own ethical ideals, inasmuch as they treat
virtue as an end in itself and not as the necessary condition of the
knowledge and love of God—a knowledge and love without which that virtue
will never be made perfect or even socially effective.

What follows is an extract from a very remarkable letter written in 1836
by Thomas Arnold to his old pupil and future biographer, A. P. Stanley.
'Fanaticism is idolatry; and it has the moral evil of idolatry in it;
that is, a fanatic worships something which is the creation of his own
desire, and thus even his self-devotion in support of it is only an
apparent self-devotion; for in fact it is making the parts of his nature
or his mind, which he least values, offer sacrifice to that which he
most values. The moral fault, as it appears to me, is the idolatry—the
setting up of some idea which is most kindred to our own minds, and the
putting it in the place of Christ, who alone cannot be made an idol and
inspire idolatry, because He combines all ideas of perfection and
exhibits them in their just harmony and combination. Now in my own mind,
by its natural tendency—that is, taking my mind at its best— truth and
justice would be the idols I should follow; and they would be idols, for
they would not supply all the food which the mind wants, and whilst
worshipping them, reverence and

humility and tenderness might very likely be forgotten. But Christ
Himself includes at once truth and justice and all these other qualities
too.. . . Narrow-mindedness tends to wickedness, because it does not
extend its watchfulness to every part of our moral nature, and the
neglect fosters wickedness in the parts so neglected.'

As a piece of psychological analysis this is admirable. Its only defect
is one of omission; for it neglects to take into account those influxes
from the eternal order into the temporal, which are called grace or
inspiration. Grace and inspiration are given when, and to the extent to
which, a human being gives up self-will and abandons himself, moment by
moment, through constant recollectedness and non-attachment, to the will
of God. As well as the animal and spiritual graces, whose source is the
divine Nature of Things, there are human pseudo-graces—such as, for
example, the accessions of strength and virtue that follow self-devotion
to some form of political or moral idolatry. To distinguish the true
grace from the false is often difficult; but as time and circumstances
reveal the full extent of their consequences on the soul, discrimination
becomes possible even to observers having no special gifts of insight.
Where the grace is genuinely 'supernatural,' an amelioration in one
aspect of the total personality is not paid for by atrophy or
deterioration elsewhere. The virtue which is accompanied and perfected
by the love and knowledge of God is something quite different from the
'righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees' which, for Christ, was
among the worst of moral evils. Hardness, fanaticism, uncharitableness
and spiritual pride—these are the ordinary by-products of a course of
stoical self-improvement by means of personal effort, either unassisted
or, if assisted, seconded only by the pseudo-graces which are given when
the individual devotes himself to the achievement of an end which is not
his true end, when the goal is not God, but merely a magnified
projection of his own favourite ideas or moral excellences. The
idolatrous worship of ethical values in and for themselves defeats its
own object—

and defeats it not only because, as Arnold insists, there is a lack of
all-round development, but also and above all because even the highest
forms of moral idolatry are God-eclipsing and therefore guarantee the
idolater against the enlightening and liberating knowledge of Reality.

Chapter 22 EMOTIONALISM,

You have spent all your life in the belief that you are wholly devoted
to others, and never self-seeking. Nothing so feeds self-conceit as this
sort of internal testimony that one is quite free from self-love, and
always generously devoted to one's neighbours. But all this devotion
that seems to be for others is really for yourself. Your self-love
reaches to the point of perpetual self-congratulation that you are free
from it; all your sensitiveness is lest you might not be fully satisfied
with self; this is at the root of all your scruples. It is the T which
makes you so keen and sensitive. You want God as well as man to be
always satisfied with you, and you want to be satisfied with yourself in
all your dealings with God.

Besides, you are not accustomed to be contented with a simple good
will—your self-love wants a lively emotion, a reassuring pleasure, some
kind of charm or excitement. You are too much used to be guided by
imagination and to suppose that your mind and will are inactive, unless
you are conscious of their workings. And thus you are dependent upon a
kind of excitement similar to that which the passions arouse, or
theatrical representations. By dint of refinement you fall into the
opposite extreme—a real coarseness of imagination. Nothing is more
opposed, not only to the life of faith, but also to true wisdom. There
is no more dangerous illusion than the fancies by which people try to
avoid illusion. It is imagination which leads us astray; and the
certainty which we seek through imagination, feeling, and taste, is one
of the most dangerous sources from which fanaticism springs. This is the
gulf of vanity and corruption which God would make you discover in your
heart; you must look upon it with the calm and simplicity belonging to
true humility. It is mere self-love to be inconsolable at seeing one's
own imperfections; but to stand face to face with them, neither
flattering nor tolerating them,

seeking to correct oneself without becoming pettish—this is to desire
what is good for its own sake, and for God's.

Fdnelon

A LETTER from the Archbishop of Cambrai—what an JT1. event, what a
signal honour! Aiid yet it must have been with a certain trepidation
that one broke the emblazoned seal. To ask for advice and a frank
opinion of oneself from a man who combines the character of a saint with
the talents of a Marcel Proust, is to ask for the severest kind of shock
to one's self-esteem. And duly, in the most exquisitely lucid prose, the
shock would be administered—and, along with the shock, the spiritual
antidote to its excruciating consequences. Fenelon never hesitated to
disintegrate a correspondent's complacent ego; but the disintegration
was always performed with a view to reintegration on a higher,
non-egotistic level.

This particular letter is not only an admirable piece of character
analysis; it also contains some very interesting remarks on the subject
of emotional excitement in its relation to the life of the spirit.

The phrase, 'religion of experience,' has two distinct and mutually
incompatible meanings. There is the 'experience' of which the Perennial
Philosophy treats—the direct apprehension of the divine Ground in an act
of intuition possible, in its fullness, only to the selflessly pure in
heart. And there is the 'experience' induced by revivalist sermons,
impressive ceremonials, or the deliberate efforts of one's own
imagination. This 'experience' is a state of emotional excitement—an
excitement which may be mild and enduring or brief and epileptic-ally
violent, which is sometimes exultant in tone and sometimes despairing,
which expresses itself here in song and dance, there in uncontrollable
weeping. But emotional excitement, whatever its cause and whatever its
nature, is always excitement of that individualized self, which must be
died to by anyone who aspires to live to divine Reality. 'Experience' as
emotion about God (the highest form of this kind of excitement) is
incompatible with 'experience' as immediate awareness of God

by a pure heart which has mortified even its most exalted emotions. That
is why Fenelon, in the foregoing extract, insists upon the need for
'calm and simplicity/ why St. Fran-£ois de Sales is never tired of
preaching the serenity which he himself so consistently practised, why
all the Buddhist scriptures harp on tranquillity of mind as a necessary
condition of deliverance. The peace that passes all understanding is one
of the fruits of the spirit. But there is also the peace that does not
pass understanding, the humbler peace of emotional self-control and
self-denial; this is not a fruit of the spirit, but rather one of its
indispensable roots.

The imperfect destroy true devotion, because they seek sensible
sweetness in prayer.

St. John of the Cross

The fly that touches honey cannot use its wings; so the soul that clings
to spiritual sweetness ruins its freedom and hinders contemplation.

St. John of the Cross

What is true of the sweet emotions is equally true of the bitter. For as
some people enjoy bad health, so others enjoy a bad conscience.
Repentance is metanoia, or 'change of mind'; and without it there cannot
be even a beginning of the spiritual life—for the life of the spirit is
incompatible with the life of that 'old man,' whose acts, whose
thoughts, whose very existence are the obstructing evils which have to
be repented. This necessary change of mind is normally accompanied by
sorrow and self-loathing. But these emotions are not to be persisted in
and must never be allowed to become a settled habit of remorse. In
Middle English 'remorse' is rendered, with a literalness which to modern
readers is at once startling and stimulating, as 'again-bite.' In this
cannibalistic encounter, who bites whom ? Observation and self-analysis
provide the answer: the creditable aspects of the self bite the
discreditable and are themselves bitten, receiving wounds that fester
with

incurable shame and despair. But, in Fenelon's words, 'it is mere
self-love to be inconsolable at seeing one's own imperfections.'
Self-reproach is painful; but the very pain is a reassuring proof that
the self is still intact; so long as attention is fixed on the
delinquent ego, it cannot be fixed upon God and the ego (which lives
upon attention and dies only when that sustenance is withheld) cannot be
dissolved in the divine Light.

Eschew as though it were a hell the consideration of yourself and your
offences. No one should ever think of these things except to humiliate
himself and love Our Lord. It is enough to regard yourself in general as
a sinner, even as there are many saints in heaven who were such.

Charles de Condren

Faults will turn to good, provided we use them to our own humiliation,
without slackening in the effort to correct ourselves. Discouragement
serves no possible purpose; it is simply the despair of wounded
self-love. The real way of profiting by the humiliation of one's own
faults is to face them in their true hideousness, without ceasing to
hope in God, while hoping nothing from self.

Fenelon

Came she (Mary Magdalene) down from the height of her desire for God
into the depth of her sinful life, and searched in the foul stinking fen
and dunghill of her soul ? Nay, surely she did not do so. And why ?
Because God let her know by His grace in her soul that she should never
so bring it about. For so might she sooner have raised in herself an
ableness to have often sinned than have purchased by that work any plain
forgiveness of all her sins.

The Cloud of Unknowing

In the light of what has been said above, we can understand the peculiar
spiritual dangers by which every kind of pre-

dominantly emotional religion is always menaced. A hell-fire faith that
uses the theatrical techniques of revivalism in order to stimulate
remorse and induce the crisis of sudden conversion; a saviour cult that
is for ever stirring up what St. Bernard calls the amor carnalis or
fleshly love of the Avatar and personal God; a ritualistic
mystery-religion that generates high feelings of awe and reverence and
aesthetic ecstasy by means of its sacraments and ceremonials, its music
and its incense, its numinous darknesses and sacred lights—in its own
special way, each one of these runs the risk of becoming a form of
psychological idolatry, in which God is identified with the ego's
affective attitude towards God and finally the emotion becomes an end in
itself, to be eagerly sought after and worshipped, as the addicts of a
drug spend life in the pursuit of their artificial paradise. All this is
obvious enough. But it is no less obvious that religions that make no
appeal to the emotions have very few adherents. Moreover, when
pseudo-religions with a strong emotional appeal make their appearance,
they immediately win millions of enthusiastic devotees from among the
masses to whom the real religions have ceased to have a meaning or to be
a comfort. But whereas no adherent of a pseudo-religion (such as one of
our current political idolatries, compounded of nationalism and
revolutionism) can possibly go forward into the way of genuine
spirituality, such a way always remains open to the adherents of even
the most highly emotionalized varieties of genuine religion. Those who
have actually followed this way to its end in the unitive knowledge of
the divine Ground constitute a very small minority of the total. Many
are called; but, since few choose to be chosen, few are chosen. The
rest, say the oriental exponents of the Perennial Philosophy, earn
themselves another chance, in circumstances more or less propitious
according to their deserts, to take the cosmic intelligence test. If
they are 'saved,' their incomplete and undefinitive deliverance is into
some paradisal state of freer personal existence, from which (directly
or through further incarnations) they may go on to the final release
into eternity. If they are * lost,' their' hell' is a temporal

and temporary condition of thicker darkness and more oppressive bondage
to self-will, the root and principle of all evil.

We see, then, that if it is persisted in, the way of emotional religion
may lead, indeed, to a great good, but not to the greatest. But the
emotional way opens into the way of unitive knowledge, and those who
care to go on in this other way are well prepared for their task if they
have used the emotional approach without succumbing to the temptations
'which have beset them on the way. Only the perfectly selfless and
enlightened can do good that does not, in some way or other, have to be
paid for by actual or potential evils. The religious systems of the
world have been built up, in the main, by men and women who were not
completely selfless or enlightened. Hence all religions have had their
dark and even frightful aspects, while the good they do is rarely
gratuitous, but must, in most cases, be paid for, either on the nail or
by instalments. The emotion-rousing doctrines and practices, which play
so important a part in all the world's organized religions, are no
exception to this rule. They do good, but not gratuitously. The price
paid varies according to the nature of the individual worshippers. Some
of these choose to wallow in emotionalism and, becoming idolaters of
feeling, pay for the good of their religion by a spiritual evil that may
actually outweigh that good. Others resist the temptation to
self-enhancement and go forward to the mortification of self, including
the self's emotional side, and to the worship of God rather than of
their own feelings and fancies about God. The further they go in this
direction, the less they have to pay for the good which emotionalism
brought them and which, but for emotionalism, most of them might never
have had.

Chapter 23 THE MIRACULOUS

Revelations are the aberration of faith; they are an amusement that
spoils simplicity in relation to God, that embarrasses the soul and
makes it swerve from its directness in relation to God. They distract
the soul and occupy it with other things than God. Special
illuminations, auditions, prophecies and the rest are marks of weakness
in a soul that cannot support the assaults of temptation or of anxiety
about the future and God's judgment upon it. Prophecies are also marks
of creaturely curiosity in a soul to whom God is indulgent and to whom,
as a father to his importunate child, he gives a few trifling sweetmeats
to satisfy its appetite.

/. /. Otier

The slightest degree of sanctifying grace is superior to a miracle,
which is supernatural only by reason of its cause, by its mode of
production (quoad modum), not by its intimate reality; the life restored
to a corpse is only the natural life, low indeed in comparison with that
of grace.

R. Garngou-Lagrange

Can you walk on water? You have done no better than a straw. Can you fly
in the air ? You have done no better than a bluebottle. Conquer your
heart; then you may become somebody.

Ansari of Herat

TH E abnormal bodily states, by which the immediate awareness of the
divine Ground is often accompanied, are not, of course, essential parts
of that experience. Many mystics, indeed, deplored such things as being
signs, not of divine grace, but of the body's weakness. To levitate, to
go into trance, to lose the use of one's senses—in De Condren's words,

this is 'to receive the effects of God and his holy communications in a
very animal and carnal way/

"One ounce of sanctifying grace,' he (St. Frangois de Sales) used to
say, *is worth more than a hundredweight of those graces which
theologians call "gratuitous," among which is the gift of miracles. It
is possible to receive such gifts and yet to be in mortal sin; nor are
they necessary to salvation.'

Jean Pierre Camus

The Sufis regard miracles as Veils' intervening between the soul and
God. The masters of Hindu spirituality urge their disciples to pay no
attention to the siddhis, or psychic powers, which may come to them
unsought, as a by-product of one-pointed contemplation. The cultivation
of these powers, they warn, distracts the soul from Reality and sets up
insurmountable obstacles in the way of enlightenment and deliverance. A
similar attitude is taken by the best Buddhist teachers, and in one of
the Pali scriptures there is an anecdote recording the Buddha's own
characteristically dry comment on a prodigious feat of levitation
performed by one of his disciples. 'This,' he said, 'will not conduce to
the conversion of the unconverted, nor to the advantage of the
converted.' Then he went back to talking about deliverance.

Because they know nothing of spirituality and regard the material world
and their hypotheses about it as supremely significant, rationalists are
anxious to convince themselves and others that miracles do not and
cannot happen. Because they have had experience of the spiritual life
and its by-products, the exponents of the Perennial Philosophy are
convinced that miracles do happen, but regard them as things of little
importance, and that mainly negative and anti-spiritual.

The miracles which at present are in greatest demand, and of which there
is the steadiest supply, are those of psychic healing. In what
circumstances and to what extent the power of psychic healing should be
used has been clearly indicated in the Gospel: 'Whether is it easier to
say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say,
Arise, and take

up thy bed and walk?' If one can * forgive sins,' one can safely use the
gift of healing. But the forgiving of sins is possible, in its fullness,
only to those who * speak with authority,' in virtue of being selfless
channels of the divine Spirit. To these theocentric saints the ordinary,
unregenerate human being reacts with a mixture of love and awe—longing
to be close to them and yet constrained by their very holiness to say,
'Depart from me, for I am a sinful man/ . Such holiness makes holy to
the extent that the sins of those who approach it are forgiven and they
are enabled to make a new start, to face the consequences of their past
wrong-doings (for of course the consequences remain) in a new spirit
that makes it possible for them to neutralize the evil or turn it into
positive good. A less perfect kind of forgiveness can be bestowed by
those who are not themselves outstandingly holy, but who speak with the
delegated authority of an institution which the sinner believes to be in
some way a channel of supernatural grace. In this case the contact
between unregenerate soul and divine Spirit is not direct, but is
mediated through the sinner's imagination.

Those who are holy in virtue of being selfless channels of the Spirit
may practise psychic healing with perfect safety; for they will know
which of the sick are ready to accept forgiveness along with the mere
miracle of a bodily cure. Those who are not holy, but who can forgive
sins in virtue of belonging to an institution which is believed to be a
channel of grace, may also practise healing with a fair confidence that
they will not do more harm than good. But unfortunately the knack of
psychic healing seems in some persons to be inborn, while others can
acquire it without acquiring the smallest degree of holiness. ('It is
possible to receive such graces and yet be in mortal sin.') Such persons
will use their knack indiscriminately, either to show off or for profit.
Often they produce spectacular cures—but, lacking the power to forgive
sins or even to understand the psychological correlates, conditions or
causes of the symptoms they have so miraculously dispelled, they leave a
soul empty, swept and garnished against the coming of seven other devils
worse than the first.

Chapter 24 RITUAL, SYMBOL, SACRAMENT

ASWALA: Yajnavalkya, since everything connected with the sacrifice is
pervaded by death and is subject to death, by what means can the
sacrificer overcome death ?

YAJNAVALKYA : By the knowledge of the identity between the sacrificer,
the fire and the ritual word. For the ritual word is indeed the
sacrificer, and the ritual word is the fire, and the fire, which is one
with Brahman, is the sacrificer. This knowledge leads to liberation.
This knowledge leads one beyond death.

Brtkad Aranyaka Upanlshad

IN other words, rites, sacraments, and ceremonials are valuable to the
extent that they remind those who take part in them of the true Nature
of Things, remind them of what ought to be and (if only they would be
docile to the immanent and transcendent Spirit) of what actually might
be their own relation to the world and its divine Ground. Theoretically
any ritual or sacrament is as good as any other ritual or sacrament,
provided always that the object symbolized be in fact some aspect of
divine Reality and that the relation between symbol and fact be clearly
defined and constant. In the same way, one language is theoretically as
good as another. Human experience can be thought about as effectively in
Chinese as in English or French. But in practice Chinese is the best
language for those brought up in China, English for those brought up in
England and French for those brought up in France. It is, of course,
much easier to learn the order of a rite and to understand its doctrinal
significance than to master the intricacies of a foreign language.
Nevertheless what has been said of language is true, in large measure,
of religious ritual. For

persons who have been brought up to think of God by means

soi

of one set of symbols, it is very hard to think of Him in terms of other
and, in their eyes, unhallowed sets of words, ceremonies and images.

The Lord Buddha then warned Subhuti, saying,' Subhuti, do not think that
the Tathagata ever considers in his own mind: I ought to enunciate a
system of teaching for the elucidation of the Dharma. You should never
cherish such a thought. And why ? Because if any disciple harboured such
a thought he would not only be misunderstanding the Tathagata's
teaching, but he would be slandering him as well. Moreover, the
expression "a system of teaching" has no meaning; for Truth (in the
sense of Reality) cannot be cut up into pieces and arranged into a
system. The words can only be used as a figure of speech/

Diamond Sutra

But for all their inadequacy and their radical unlikeness to the facts
to which they refer, words remain the most reliable and accurate of our
symbols. Whenever we want to have a precise report of facts or ideas, we
must resort to words. A ceremony, a carved or painted image, may convey
more meanings and overtones of meaning in a smaller compass and with
greater vividness than can a verbal formula; but it is liable to convey
them in a form that is much more vague and indefinite. One often meets,
in modern literature, with the notion that mediaeval churches were the
architectural, sculptural and pictorial equivalents of a theological
summa^ and that mediaeval worshippers who admired the works of art
around them were thereby enlightened on the subject of doctrine. This
view was evidently not shared by the more earnest churchmen of the
Middle Ages. Coulton cites the utterances of preachers who complained
that congregations were getting entirely false ideas of Catholicism by
looking at the pictures in the churches instead of listening to sermons.
(Similarly, in our own day the Catholic Indians of Central America have
evolved the wildest heresies by brooding on the carved and painted
symbols with which the Conquistadors filled their churches.) St.
Bernard's

objection to the richness of Cluniac architecture, sculpture and
ceremonial was motivated by intellectual as well as strictly moral
considerations. 'So great and marvellous a variety of divers forms meets
the eye that one is tempted to read in the marbles rather than in the
books, to pass the whole day looking at these carvings one after another
rather than in meditating on the law of God/ It is in imageless
contemplation that the soul comes to the unitive knowledge of Reality;
consequently, for those who, like St. Bernard and his Cistercians, are
really concerned to achieve man's final end, the fewer distracting
symbols the better.

Most men worship the gods because they want success in their worldly
undertakings. This kind of material success can be gained very quickly
(by such worship), here on earth.

Bhagavad-Gita

Among those who are purified by their good deeds there are four kinds of
men who worship Me: the world-weary, the seeker for knowledge, the
seeker for happiness and the man of spiritual discrimination. The man of
discrimination is the highest of these. He is continually united with
Me. He devotes himself to Me always, and to no other. For I am very dear
to that man, and he to Me.

Certainly, all these are noble; But the man of discrimination I see as
my very Self. For he alone loves Me Because I am Myself, The last and
only goal Of his devoted heart.

Through many a long life His discrimination ripens; He makes Me his
refuge, Knows that Brahman is all. How rare are such great ones!

Men whose discrimination has been blunted by worldly desires, establish
this or that ritual or cult and resort to various deities, according to
the impulse of their inborn nature. But no matter what deity a devotee
chooses to worship, if he has faith, I make his faith unwavering.
Endowed with the faith I give him, he worships that deity and gets from
it everything he prays for. In reality, I alone am the giver.

But these men of small understanding pray only for what is transient and
perishable. The worshippers of the devas will go to the devas. Those who
worship Me will come to Me.

Bhagavad-Gita

If sacramental rites are constantly repeated in a spirit of faith and
devotion, a more or less enduring effect is produced in the psychic
medium, in which individual minds bathe and from which they have, so to
speak, been crystallized out into personalities more or less fully
developed, according to the more or less perfect development of the
bodies with which they are associated. (Of this psychic medium an
eminent contemporary philosopher, Dr. C. D. Broad, has written, in an
essay on telepathy contributed to the Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research^ as follows : 'We must therefore consider seriously
the possibility that a person's experience initiates more or less
permanent modifications of structure or process in something which is
neither his mind nor his brain. There is no reason to suppose that this
substratum would be anything to which possessive adjectives, such as
"mine" and "yours" and "his," could properly be applied, as they can be
to minds and animated bodies.... Modifications which have been produced
in the substratum by certain of M's past experiences are activated by
N's present experiences or interests, and they become cause factors in
producing or modifying N's later experiences.') Within this psychic
medium or non-personal substratum of individual minds, something which
we may think of metaphorically as a vortex persists as an independent
existence, possessing its own derived and secondary objectivity, so
that, wherever the rites are performed, those whose faith and

devotion are sufficiently intense actually discover something 'out
there, 5 as distinct from the subjective something in their own
imaginations. And so long as this projected psychic entity is nourished
by the faith and love of its worshippers, it will possess, not merely
objectivity, but power to get people's prayers answered. Ultimately, of
course, 'I alone am the giver,' in the sense that all this happens in
accordance with the divine laws governing the universe in its psychic
and spiritual, no less than in its material, aspects. Nevertheless, the
devas (those imperfect forms under which, because of their own voluntary
ignorance, men worship the divine Ground) may be thought of as
relatively independent powers. The primitive notion that the gods feed
on the sacrifices made to them is simply the crude expression of a
profound truth. When their worship falls off, when faith and devotion
lose their intensity, the devas sicken and finally die. Europe is full
of old shrines, whbse saints and Virgins and relics have lost the power
and the second-hand psychic objectivity which they once possessed. Thus,
when Chaucer lived and wrote, the deva called Thomas Becket was giving
to any Canterbury pilgrim, who had sufficient faith, all the boons he
could ask for. This once-powerful deity is now stone-dead; but there are
still certain churches in the West, certain mosques and temples in the
East, where even the most irreligious and un-psychic tourist cannot fail
to be aware of some intensely * numinous' presence. It would, of course,
be a mistake to imagine that this presence is the presence of that God
who is a Spirit and must be worshipped in spirit; it is rather the
psychic presence of men's thoughts and feelings about the particular,
limited form of God, to which they have resorted 'according to the
impulse of their inborn nature'— thoughts and feelings projected into
objectivity and haunting the sacred place in the same way as thoughts
and feelings of another kind, but of equal intensity, haunt the scenes
of some past suffering or crime. The presence in these consecrated
buildings, the presence evoked by the performance of traditional rites,
the presence inherent in a sacramental object, name or formula—all these
are real presences, but real presences, not

of God or the Avatar, but of something which, though it may reflect the
^divine Reality, is yet less and other than it.

Dulcis Jesu memoria dans vera cordi gaudia : sed super met et omnia ejus
dulcis praesentia.

'Sweet is the memory of Jesus, giving true joys to the heart; but
sweeter beyond honey and all else is his presence.' This opening stanza
of the famous twelfth-century hymn summarizes in fifteen words the
relations subsisting between ritual and real presence and the character
of the worshipper's reaction to each. Systematically cultivated memoria
(a thing in itself full of sweetness) first contributes to the
evocation, then results, for certain souls, in the immediate
apprehension of praesentia, which brings with it joys of a totally
different and higher kind. This presence (whose projected objectivity is
occasionally so complete as to be apprehensible not merely by the devout
worshipper, but by more or less indifferent outsiders) is always that of
tne divine being who has been previously remembered, Jesus here, Krishna
or Amitabha Buddha there.

The value of this practice (repetition of the name of Amitabha Buddha)
is this. So long as one person practises his method (of spirituality)
and another practises a different method, they counterbalance one
another and their meeting is just the same as their not meeting. Whereas
if two persons practise the same method, their mindfulness tends to
become deeper and deeper, and they tend to remember each other and to
develop affinities for each other, life after life. Moreover, whoever
recites the name of Amitabha Buddha, whether in the present time or in
future time, will surely see the Buddha Amitabha and never become
separated from him. By reason of that association, just as one
associating with a maker of perfumes becomes permeated with the same
perfumes, so he will become perfumed by Amitabha's compassion,

and will become enlightened without resort to any other expedient means.

Surangama Sutra

We see then that intense faith and devotion, coupled with perseverance
by many persons in the same forms of worship or spiritual exercise, have
a tendency to objectify the idea or memory which is their content and so
to create, in some sort, a numinous real presence, which worshippers
actually find 'out there' no less, and in quite another way, than 'in
here.' In so far as this is the case, the ritualist is perfectly correct
in attributing to his hallowed acts and words a power which, in another
context, would be called magical. The mantram works, the sacrifice
really does something, the sacrament confers grace exopere operatoi
these are, or rather may be, matters of direct experience, facts which
anyone who chooses to fulfil the necessary conditions can verify
empirically for himself. But the grace conferred ex opere operato is not
always spiritual grace and the hallowed acts and formulae have a power
which is not necessarily from God. Worshippers can, and very often do,
get grace and power from one another and from the faith and devotion of
their predecessors, projected into independent psychic existences that
are hauntingly associated with certain places, words and acts. A great
deal of ritualistic religion is not spirituality, but occultism, a
refined and well-meaning kind of white magic. Now, just as there is no
harm in art, say, or science, but a great deal of good, provided always
that these activities are not regarded as ends, but simply as means to
the final end of all life, so too there is no harm in white magic, but
the possibilities of much good, so long as it is treated, not as true
religion, but as one of the roads to true religion—an effective way of
reminding people with a certain kind of psycho-physical make-up that
there is a God, 'in knowledge of whom standeth their eternal life.' If
ritualistic white magic is regarded as being in itself true religion; if
the real presences it evokes are taken to*be God in Himself and not the
projections of human thoughts and feelings about God or even about

something less than God; and if the sacramental rites are performed and
attended for the sake of the Spiritual sweetness' experienced and the
powers and advantages conferred—then there is idolatry. This idolatry
is, at its best, a very lofty and, in many ways, beneficent kind of
religion. But the consequences of worshipping God as anything but Spirit
and in any way except in spirit and in truth are necessarily undesirable
in this sense—that they lead only to a partial salvation and delay the
soul's ultimate reunion with the eternal Ground.

That very large numbers of men and women have an ineradicable desire for
rites and ceremonies is clearly demonstrated by the history of religion.
Almost all the Hebrew prophets were opposed to ritualism. ' Rend your
hearts and not your garments. 5 'I desire mercy and not sacrifice.' 'I
hate, I despise your feasts; I take no delight in your solemn
assemblies.' And yet, in spite of the fact that what the prophets wrote
was regarded as divinely inspired, the Temple at Jerusalem continued to
be, for hundreds of years after their time, the centre of a religion of
rites, ceremonials and blood sacrifice. (It may be remarked in passing
that the shedding of blood, one's own or that of animals or other human
beings, seems to be a peculiarly efficacious way of constraining the
'occult' or psychic world to answer petitions and confer supernormal
powers. If this is a fact, as from the anthropological and antiquarian
evidence it appears to be, it would supply yet another cogent reason for
avoiding animal sacrifices, savage bodily austerities and even, since
thought is a form of action, that imaginative gloating over spilled
blood which is so common in certain Christian circles.) What the Jews
did in spite of their prophets, Christians have done in spite of Christ.
The Christ of the Gospels is a preacher and not a dispenser of
sacraments or performer of rites; he speaks against vain repetitions; he
insists on the supreme importance of private worship; he has no use for
sacrifices and not much use for the Temple. But this did not prevent
historic Christianity from going its own, all too human, way. A
precisely similar development took place in Buddhism. For the Buddha

of the Pali scriptures, ritual was one of the fetters holding back the
soul from enlightenment and liberation. Nevertheless, the religion he
founded has made full use of ceremonies, vain repetitions and
sacramental rites.

There would seem to be two main reasons for the observed developments of
the historical religions. First, most people do not want spirituality or
deliverance, but rather a religion that gives them emotional
satisfactions, answers to prayer, supernormal powers and partial
salvation in some sort of posthumous heaven. Second, some of those few
who do desire spirituality and deliverance find that, for them, the most
effective means to those ends are ceremonies, 'vain repetitions' and
sacramental rites. It is by participating in these acts and uttering
these formulae that they are most powerfully reminded of the eternal
Ground of all being; it is by immersing themselves in the symbols that
they can most easily come through to that which is symbolized. Every
thing, event or thought is a point of intersection between creature and
Creator, between a more or less distant manifestation of God and a ray,
so to speak, of the unmanifest Godhead; every thing, event or thought
can therefore be made the doorway through which a soul may pass out of
time into eternity. That is why ritualistic and sacramental religion can
lead to deliverance. But at the same time every human being loves power
and self-enhancement, and every hallowed ceremony, f6rm of words or
sacramental rite is a channel through which power can flow out of the
fascinating psychic universe into the universe of embodied selves. That
is why ritualistic and sacramental religion can also lead away from
deliverance.

There is another disadvantage inherent in any system of organized
sacramentalism, and that is that it gives to the priestly caste a power
which it is all too natural for them to abuse. In a society which has
been taught that salvation is exclusively or mainly through certain
sacraments, and that these sacraments can be administered effectively
only by a professional priesthood, that professional priesthood will
possess an enormous coercive power. The possession of such power

is a standing temptation to use it for individual satisfaction and
corporate aggrandizement. To a temptation of this kind, if repeated
often enough, most human beings who are not saints almost inevitably
succumb. That is why Christ taught his disciples to pray that they
should not be led into temptation. This is, or should be, the guiding
principle of all social reform —to organize the economic, political and
social relationships between human beings in such a way that there shall
be, for any given individual or group within the society, a minimum of
temptations to covetousness, pride, cruelty and lust for power. Men and
women being what they are, it is only by reducing the number and
intensity of temptations that human societies can be, in some measure at
least, delivered from evil. Now, the sort of temptations to which a
priestly caste is exposed in a society that accepts a predominantly
sacramental religion are such that none but the most saintly persons can
be expected consistently to resist them. What happens when ministers of
religion are led into these temptations is clearly illustrated by the
history of the Roman Church. Because Catholic Christianity taught a
version of the Perennial Philosophy, it produced a succession of great
saints. But because the Perennial Philosophy was overlaid with an
excessive amount of sacramental-ism and with an idolatrous preoccupation
with things in time, the less saintly members of its hierarchy were
exposed to enormous and quite unnecessary* temptations and, duly
succumbing to them, launched out into persecution, simony, power
politics, secret diplomacy, high finance and collaboration with despots.

I very much doubt whether, since the Lord by his grace brought me into
the faith of his dear Son, I have ever broken bread or drunk wine, even
in the ordinary course of life, without remembrance of, and some devout
feeling regarding, the broken body and the blood-shedding of my dear
Lord and Saviour.

Stephen GrelUt

We have seen that, when they are promoted to be the central

core of organized religious worship, ritualism and sacramental-ism are
by no means unmixed blessings. But that the whole of a man's workaday
life should be transformed by him into a kind of continuous ritual, that
every object in the world around him should be regarded as a symbol of
the world's eternal Ground, that all his actions should be performed
sacramentally —this would seem to be wholly desirable. All the masters
of the spiritual life, from the authors of the Upanishads to Socrates,
from Buddha to St. Bernard, are agreed that without self-knowledge there
cannot be adequate knowledge of God, that without a constant
recollectedness there can be no complete deliverance. The man who has
learnt to regard things as symbols, persons as temples of the Holy
Spirit and actions as sacraments, is a man who has learned constantly to
remind himself who he is, where he stands in relation to the universe
and its Ground, how he should behave towards his fellows and what he
must do to come to his final end.

* Because of this indwelling of the Logos,' writes Mr, Kenneth Saunders
in his valuable study of the Fourth Gospel, the Gita and the Lotus
Sutra,' all things have a reality. They are sacraments, not illusions
like the phenomenal word of the Vedanta.' That the Logos is in things,
lives and conscious minds, and they in the Logos, was taught much more
emphatically and explicitly by the Vedantists than by the author of the
Fourth Gospel; and the same idea is, of course, basic in the theology of
Taoism, But though all things in fact exist at the intersection between
a divine manifestation and a ray of the unmani-fest Godhead, it by no
means follows that everyone always knows that this is so. On the
contrary, the vast majority of human beings believe that their own
selfness and the objects around them possess a reality in themselves,
wholly independ^ ent of the Logos. This belief leads them to identify
their being with their sensations, cravings and private notions, and in
its turn this self-identification with what they are not effectively
walls them off from divine influence and the very possibility of
deliverance. To most of us on most occasions things arc not symbols and
actions are not sacramental; and we have to

teach ourselves, consciously and deliberately, to remember that they
are.

The world is imprisoned in its own activity, except when actions are
performed as worship of God. Therefore you must perform every action
sacramentally (as if it wereyajna, the sacrifice that, in its divine
Logos-essence, is identical with the Godhead to whom it is offered), and
be free from all attachment to results.

Bhagavad-Gita

Precisely similar teachings are found in Christian writers, who
recommend that persons and even things should be regarded as temples of
the Holy Ghost and that everything done or suffered should be constantly
'offered to God/

It is hardly necessary to add that this process of conscious
sacramentalization can be applied only to such actions as are not
intrinsically evil. Somewhat unfortunately, the Gita was not originally
published as an independent work, but as a theological digression within
an epic poem; and since, like most epics, the Mahabharata is largely
concerned with the exploits of warriors, it is primarily in relation to
warfare that the Gita's advice to act with non-attachment and for God's
sake only is given. Now, war is accompanied and followed, among other
things, by a widespread dissemination of anger and hatred, pride,
cruelty and fear. But, it may be asked, is it possible (the Nature of
Things being what it is) to sacramentalize actions whose psychological
by-products are so completely God-eclipsing as are these passions ? The
Buddha of die Pali scriptures would certainly have answered this
question in the negative. So would the Lao Tzu of the Tao Teh King. So
would the Christ of the Synoptic Gospels. The Krishna of the Gita (who
is also, by a kind of literary accident, the Krishna of the Mahabharata)
gives an affirmative answer. But this affirmative answer, it should be
remembered, is hedged around with limiting conditions. Non-attached
slaughter is recommended only to those who are warriors by caste, and to
whom warfare is a duty and vocation. But what is duty or dharma for the

Kshatriya is adharma and forbidden to the Brahman; nor is it any part of
the normal vocation or caste duty of the mercantile and labouring
classes. Any confusion of castes, any assumption by one man of another
man's vocation and duties of state, is always, say the Hindus, a moral
evil and a menace to social stability. Thus, it is the business of the
Brahmans to fit themselves to be seers, so that they may be able to
explain to their fellow-men the nature of the universe, of man's last
end and of the way to liberation. When soldiers or administrators, or
usurers, or manufacturers or workers usurp the functions of the Brahmans
and formulate a philosophy of life in accordance with their variously
distorted notions of the universe, then society is thrown into
confusion. Similarly, confusion reigns when the Brahman, the man of
non-coercive spiritual authority, assumes the coercive power of the
Kshatriya, or when the Kshatriya's job of ruling is usurped by bankers
and stockjobbers, or finally when the warrior caste's dharma of fighting
is imposed, by conscription, on Brahman, Vaisya and Sudra alike. The
history of Europe during the later Middle Ages and Renaissance is
largely a history of the social confusions that arise when large numbers
of those who should be seers abandon spiritual authority in favour of
money and political power. And contemporary history is the hideous
record of what happens when political bosses, business men or
class-conscious proletarians assume the Brahman's function of
formulating a philosophy of life; when usurers dictate policy and debate
the issues of war and peace; and when the warrior's caste duty is
imposed on. all and sundry, regardless of psycho-physical makeup and
vocation.

Chapter 25 SPIRITUAL EXERCISES

RtTES, sacraments, ceremonies, liturgies—all these belong to public
worship. They are devices, by means of which the individual members of a
congregation are reminded of the true Nature of Things and of their
proper relations to one another, the universe and God. What ritual is to
public worship, spiritual exercises are to private devotion. They are
devices to be used by the solitary individual when he enters into his
closet, shuts the door and prays to his Father which is in secret. Like
all other devices, from psalm-singing to Swedish exercises and from
logic to internal-combustion engines, spiritual exercises can be used
either well or badly. Some of those who use spiritual exercises make
progress in the life of the spirit; others, using the same exercises,
make no progress. To believe that their use either constitutes
enlightenment or guarantees it, is mere idolatry and superstition. To
neglect them altogether, to refuse to find out whether and in what way
they can help in the achievement of our final end, is nothing but
self-opinionatedness and stubborn obscurantism.

St. Fran9ois de Sales used to say, 'I hear of nothing but perfection on
every side, so far as talk goes; but I see very few people who really
practise it. Everybody has his own notion of perfection. One man thinks
it lies in the cut of his clothes, another in fasting, a third in
almsgiving, or in frequenting the Sacraments, in meditation, in some
special gift of contemplation, or in extraordinary gifts or graces—but
they are all mistaken, as it seems to me, because they confuse the
means, or the results, with the end and cause.

' For my part, the only perfection I know of is a hearty love of God,
and to love one's neighbour as oneself. Charity is the

su

only virtue which rightly unites us to God and man. Such union is our
final aim and end, and all the rest is mere delusion/

Jean Pierre Camus

St. Frangois himself recommended the use of spiritual exercises as a
means to the love of God and one's neighbours, and affirmed that such
exercises deserved to be greatly cherished; but this affection for the
set forms and hours of mental prayer must never, he warned, be allowed
to become excessive. To neglect any urgent call to charity or obedience
for the sake of practising one's spiritual exercises would be to neglect
the end and the proximate means for the sake of means which are not
proximate, but at several removes from the ultimate goal.

Spiritual exercises constitute a special class of ascetic practices,
whose purpose is, primarily, to prepare the intellect and emotions for
those higher forms of prayer in which the soul is essentially passive in
relation to divine Reality, and secondarily, by means of this
self-exposure to the Light and of the increased self-knowledge and
self-loathing resulting from it, to modify character.

In the Orient the systematization of mental prayer was carried out at
some unknown but certainly very early date. Both in India and China
spiritual exercises (accompanied or preceded by more or less elaborate
physical exercises, especially breathing exercises) are known to have
been used several centuries before the birth of Christ. In the West, the
monks of the Thebaid spent a good part of each day in meditation as a
means to contemplation or the unitive knowledge of God; and at all
periods of Christian history, more or less methodical mental prayer has
been largely used to supplement the vocal praying of public and private
worship. But the systematization of mental prayer into elaborate
spiritual exercises was not undertaken, it would seem, until near the
end of the Middle Ages, when reformers within the Church popularized
this new form of spirituality in an effort to revivify a decaying
monasti-cism and to reinforce the religious life of a laity that had
been bewildered by the Great Schism and profoundly shocked by

the corruption of the clergy. Among these early systematizers the most
effective and influential were the canons of Windes-heim, who were in
close touch with the Brethren of the Common Life. During the later
sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries spiritual exercises became,
one might almost say, positively fashionable. The early Jesuits had
shown what extraordinary transformations of character, what intensities
of will and devotion, could be achieved by men systematically trained on
the intellectual and imaginative exercises of St. Ignatius Loyola, and
as the prestige of the Jesuits stood very high, at this time, in
Catholic Europe, the prestige of spiritual exercises also stood high.
Throughout the first century of the Counter-Reformation numerous systems
of mental prayer (many of them, unlike the Ignatian exercises,
specifically mystical) were composed, published and eagerly bought.
After the Quietist controversy mysticism fell into disrepute and, along
with mysticism, many of the once popular systems, which their authors
had designed to assist the soul on the path towards contemplation. For
more detailed information on this interesting and important subject the
reader should consult Pourrat's Christian Spirituality, Bede Frost's The
Art of Mental Prayer, Edward Leen's Progress through Mental Prayer and
Aelfrida Tillyard's Spiritual Exercises. Here it is only possible to
give a few characteristic specimens from the various religious
traditions.

Know that when you learn to lose yourself, you will reach the Beloved.
There is no other secret to be learnt, and more than this is not known
to me.

Ansari of Herat

Six hundred years later, as we have seen, St. Fra^ois de Sales was
saying very much the same thing to young Camus and all the others who
came to him in the ingenuous hope that he could reveal some easy and
infallible trick for achieving the unitive knowledge of God. But to lose
self in the Beloved— there is no other secret. And yet the Sufis, like
their Christian

counterparts, made ample use of spiritual exercises—not, of course, as
ends in themselves, not even as proximate means, but as means to the
proximate means of union with God, namely selfless and loving
contemplation.

For twelve years I was the smith of my soul. I put it in the furnace of
austerity and burned it in the fire of combat, I laid it on the anvil of
reproach and smote it with the hammer of blame until I made of my soul a
mirror. Five years I was the mirror of myself and was ever polishing
that mirror with divers acts of worship and piety. Then for a year I
gazed in contemplation. On my waist I saw a girdle of pride and vanity
and self-conceit and reliance on devotion and approbation of my works. I
laboured for five years more until that girdle became worn out and I
professed Islam anew. I looked and saw that all created things were
dead. I pronounced four akbirs over them and returned from the funeral
of them all, and without intrusion of creatures, through God's help
alone, I attained unto God.

Bayard of Bis tun

The simplest and most widely practised form of spiritual exercise is
repetition of the divine name, or of some phrase affirming God's
existence and the soul's dependence upon Him.

And therefore, when thou purposes! thee to this work (of contemplation),
and feelest by grace that thou art called by God, lift up thine heart
unto God with a meek stirring of love. And mean God that made thee, and
bought thee, and graciously called thee to thy degree, and receive none
other thought of God. And yet not all these, except thou desirest; for a
naked intent directed unto God, without any other cause than Himself,
sufficeth wholly. And if thou desirest to have this intent lapped and
folden in one word, so that thou mayest have better hold thereupon, take
thee but a little word of one syllable, for so it is better than of two;
for the shorter the word, the better it accordeth with the work of the
spirit. And such a word is this word GOD or this word LOVE. Choose
whichever thou wilt, or another; whatever

word thou likest best of one syllable. And fasten this word to thy heart
that so it may never go thence for anything that befalleth.

The word shall be thy shield and thy spear, whether thou ridest on peace
or on war. With this word thou shalt beat on this cloud and this
darkness above thee. With this word thou shalt smite down all manner of
thought under the cloud of forgetting. Insomuch that, if any thought
press upon thee to ask what thou wouldst have, answer with no more words
than with this one word (GOD or LOVE). And if he offer of his great
learning to expound to thee that word, say to him that thou wilt have it
all whole, and not broken nor undone. And if thou wilt hold fast to this
purpose, be sure that that thought will no while bide.

The Cloud of Unknowing

In another chapter the author of the Cloud suggests that the word
symbolizing our final end should sometimes be alternated with a word
denoting our present position in relation to that end. The words to be
repeated in this exercise are SIN and GOD.

Not breaking or expounding these words with curiosity of wit,
considering the qualities of these words, as if thou wouldst by that
consideration increase thy devotion. I believe it should never be so in
this case and in this work. But hold them all whole, these words; and
mean by SIN a lump, thou knowest never what, none other thing but
thyself. . . . And because ever the whiles thou livest in this wretched
life, thou must always feel in some part this foul stinking lump of sin,
as it were oned and congealed with the substance of thy being, therefore
shalt thou alternately mean these two words— SIN and GOD. With this
general understanding that, if thou hadst God, then shouldst thou lack
sin; and mightest thou lack sin, then shouldst thou have God.

The Cloud of Unknowing

The shaykh took my hand and led me into the convent. I sat

down in the portico, and the shaykh picked up a book and began to read.
As is the way of scholars, I could not help wondering what the book was.

The shaykh perceived my thoughts. 'Abu Sa'id,' he said, 'all the hundred
and twenty-four thousand prophets were sent to preach one word. They
bade the people say," Allah," and devote themselves to Him. Those who
heard this word by the ear alone let it go out by the other ear; but
those who heard it with their souls imprinted it on their souls and
repeated it until it penetrated their hearts and souls, and their whole
beings became this word. They were made independent of the pronunciation
of the word; they were released from the sound of the letters. Having
understood the spiritual meaning of this word, they became so absorbed
in it that they were no more conscious of their own non-existence.'

Abu Said

Take a short verse of a psalm, and it shall be shield and buckler to you
against all your foes.

Cassian, quoting Abbot Isaac

In India the repetition of the divine name or the mantram (a short
devotional or doctrinal affirmation) is called japam and is a favourite
spiritual exercise among all the sects of Hinduism and Buddhism. The
shortest mantram is OM—a spoken symbol that concentrates within itself
the whole Vedanta philosophy* To this and other mantrams Hindus
attribute a kind of magical power. The repetition of them is a
sacramental act, conferring grace ex of ere operate. A similar
efficacity was and indeed still is attributed to sacred words and
formulae by Buddhists, Moslems, Jews and Christians. And, of course,
just as traditional religious rites seem to possess the power to evoke
the real presence of existents projected into psychic objectivity by the
faith and devotion of generations of worshippers, so too long-hallowed
words and phrases may become channels for conveying powers other and
greater than those belonging to ' the individual who happens at the
moment to be pronouncing

them. And meanwhile the constant repetition of 'this word GOD or this
word LOVE' may, in favourable circumstances, have a profound effect upon
the subconscious mind, inducing that selfless one-pointedness of will
and thought and feeling, without which the unitive knowledge of God is
impossible. Furthermore, it may happen that, if the word is simply
repeated 'all whole, and not broken up or undone' by discursive
analysis, die Fact for which the word stands will end by presenting
itself to the soul in the form of an integral intuition. When this
happens, * the doors of the letters of this word are opened' (to use the
language of the Sufis) and the soul passes through into Reality. But
though all this may happen, it need not necessarily happen. For there is
no spiritual patent medicine, no pleasant and infallible panacea for
souls suffering from separateness and the deprivation of God. No, there
is no guaranteed cure; and, if used improperly, the medicine of
spiritual exercises may start a new disease or aggravate the old. For
example, a mere mechanical repetition of the divine name can result in a
kind of numbed stupefaction that is as much below analytical thought as
intellectual vision is above it. And because the sacred word constitutes
a kind of prejudgment of the experience induced by its repetition, this
stupefaction, or some other abnormal state, is taken to be the immediate
awareness of Reality and is idolatrously cultivated and hunted after,
with a turning of the will towards what is supposed to be God before
there has been a turning of it away from the self.

The dangers which beset the practiser of japam^ who is insufficiently
mortified and insufficiently recollected and aware, are encountered in
the same or different forms by those who make use of more elaborate
spiritual exercises. Intense concentration on an image or idea, such as
is recommended by many teachers, both Eastern and Western, may be very
helpful for certain persons in certain circumstances, very harmful in
other cases. It is helpful when the concentration results in such mental
stillness, such a silence of intellect, will and feeling, that the
divine Word can be uttered within the soul. It is harmful when the image
concentrated upon becomes so hal-

lucinatingly real that it is taken for objective Reality and
idolatrously worshipped; harmful, too, when the exercise of
concentration produces unusual psycho-physical results, in which the
person experiencing them takes a personal pride, as being special graces
and divine communications. Of these unusual psycho-physical occurrences
the most ordinary are visions and auditions, foreknowledge, telepathy
and other psychic powers, and the curious bodily phenomenon of intense
heat. Many persons who practise concentration exercises experience this
heat occasionally. A number of Christian saints, of whom the best known
are St. Philip Neri and St. Catherine of Siena, have experienced it
continuously. In the East techniques have been developed whereby the
accession of heat resulting from intense concentration can be regulated,
controlled and put to do useful work, such as keeping the contemplative
warm in freezing weather. In Europe, where the phenomenon is not well
understood, many would-be con-templatives have experienced this heat,
and have imagined it to be some special divine favour, or even the
experience of union, and being insufficiently mortified and humble, have
fallen into idolatry and a God-eclipsing spiritual pride.

The following passage from one of the great Mahayana scriptures contains
a searching criticism of the kind of spiritual exercises prescribed by
Hinayanist teachers—concentration on symbolic objects, meditations on
transience and decay (to wean the soul away from attachment to earthly
things), on the different virtues which must be cultivated, on the
fundamental doctrines of Buddhism. (Many of these exercises are
described at length in The Path of Purity ', a book which has been
translated in full and published by the Pali Text Society. Mahayanist
exercises are described in the Surangama Sutra, translated by Dwight
Goddard, and in the volume on Tibetan Yoga, edited by Dr. Evans-Wentz.)

In his exercise the Yogin sees (imaginatively) the form of the sun or
moon, or something looking like a lotus, or the underworld, or various
forms, such as sky, fire and the like. All these appear-

jit THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

ances lead him in the way of the philosophers; they throw him down into
the state of Sravakahood, into the realm of the Prat-yekabuddhas. When
all these are put aside and there is a state of imagelessness, then a
condition in conformity with Suchness presents itself, and the Buddhas
will come together from all their countries and with their shining hands
will touch the head of this benefactor.

Lankavatara Sutra

In other words intense concentration on any image (even if the image be
a sacred symbol, like the lotus) or on any idea, from the idea of hell
to the idea of some desirable virtue or its apotheosis in one of the
divine attributes, is always concentration on something produced by
one's own mind. Sometimes, in mortified and recollected persons, the art
of concentration merges into the state of openness and alert passivity,
in which true contemplation becomes possible. But sometimes the fact
that the concentration is on a product of the concentrator's own mind
results in some kind of false or incomplete contemplation. Suchness, or
the divine Ground of all being, reveals itself to those in whom there is
no ego-centredness (nor even any alter-ego-centredness) either of will,
imagination, feeling or intellect.

I say, then, that introversion must be rejected, because extraver-sion
must never be admitted; but one must live continuously in the abyss of
the divine Essence and in the nothingness of things; and if at times a
man finds himself separated from them (the divine Essence and created
nothingness) he must return to them, not by introversion, but by
annihilation.

Benet ofCanfield

Introversion is the process condemned in the Lankavatara Sutra as the
way of the Yogin, the way that leads at worst to idolatry, at best to a
partial knowledge of God in the heights within, never to complete
knowledge in the fullness without as well as within, Annihilation (of
which Father Benet distin-

guishes two kinds, passive and active) is for the Mahayanist the 'state
of imagelessness' in contemplation and, in active life, the state of
total non-attachment, in which eternity can be apprehended within time,
and samsara is known to be one with nirvana.

And therefore, if thou wilt stand and not fall, cease never in thine
intent, but beat evermore on this cloud of unknowing that is betwixt
thee and thy God, with a sharp dart of longing love. And loathe to think
of aught under God. And go not thence for anything that befalleth. For
this only is that work that destroyeth the ground and the root of sin. .
. .

Yea, and what more? Weep thou never so much for sorrow of thy sins, or
of the passion of Christ, or have thou never so much thought of the joys
of heaven, what may it do to thee? Surely much good, much help, much
profit, much grace will it get thee. But in comparison of this blind
stirring of love, it is but little that it doth, or may do, without
this. This by itself is the Best part of Mary, without these other. They
without it profit but little or nought. It destroyeth not only the
ground and the root of sin, as it may be here, but also it getteth
virtues. For if it be truly conceived, all virtues shall be subtly and
perfecdy conceived, felt and comprehended in it, without any mingling of
thine intent. And have a man never so many virtues without it, all they
be mingled with some crooked intent, for the which they be imperfect.
For virtue is nought else but an ordered and measured affection, plainly
directed unto God for Himself.

The Cloud of Unknowing

If exercises in concentration, repetitions of the divine name, or
meditations on God's attributes or on imagined scenes in the life of
saint or Avatar help those who make use of them to come to selflessness,
openness and (to use Augustine Baker's phrase) that' love of the pure
divinity,' which makes possible the soul's union with the Godhead, then
such spiritual exercises are wholly good and desirable. If they have
other results—well, the tree is known by its fruits.

Benet of Canfield, the English Capuchin who wrote The Rule of Perfection
and was the spiritual guide of Mme Acarie and Cardinal Berulle, hints in
his treatise at a method by which concentration on an image may be made
to lead up to imageless contemplation, 'blind beholding/ 'love of the
pure divinity/ The period of mental prayer is to begin with intense
concentration on a scene of Christ's passion; then the mind is, as it
were, to abolish this imagination of the sacred humanity and to pass
from it to the formless and attributeless Godhead which that humanity
incarnates. A strikingly similar exercise is described in the Bar Jo
Thddol or Tibetan Book of the Dead (a work of quite extraordinary
profundity and beauty, now fortunately available in translation with a
valuable introduction and notes by Dr. Evans-Wentz).

Whosoever thy tutelary deity may be, meditate upon the form for much
time—as being apparent, yet non-existent in reality,

like a form produced by a magician Then let the visualization

of the tutelary deity melt away from the extremities, till nothing at
all remaineth visible of it; and put thyself in the state of the
Clearness and the Voidness—which thou canst not conceive as
something—and abide in that state for a little while. Again meditate
upon the tutelary deity; again meditate upon the Clear Light; do this
alternately. Afterwards allow thine own intellect to melt away
gradually, beginning from the extremities.

The Tibetan Book of the Dead

As a final summing up of the whole matter we may cite a sentence of
Eckhart's. 'He who seeks God under settled form lays hold of the form,
while missing the God concealed in it/ Here, the key word is ' settled/
It is permissible to seek God provisionally under a form which is from
the first recognized as merely a symbol of Reality, and a symbol which
must sooner or later be discarded in favour of what it stands for. To
seek Him under a settled form—settled because regarded as the very shape
of Reality—is to commit oneself to illusion and a kind of idolatry.

The chief impediments in the way of taking up the practice of some form
of mental prayer are ignorance of the Nature of Things (which has never,
of course, been more abysmal than in this age of free compulsory
education) and the absorption in self-interest, in positive and negative
emotions connected with the passions and with what is technically known
as a 'good time/ And when the practice has been taken up, the chief
impediments in the way of advance towards the goal of mental prayer are
distractions.

Probably all persons, even the most saintly, suffer to some extent from
distractions. But it is obvious that a person who, in the intervals of
mental prayer, leads a dispersed, unrecollected, self-centred life will
have more and worse distractions to contend with than one who lives
one-pointedly, never forgetting who he is and how related to the
universe and its divine Ground. Some of the most profitable spiritual
exercises actually make use of distractions, in such a way that these
impediments to self-abandonment, mental silence and passivity in
relation to God are transformed into means of progress.

But first, by way of preface to the description of these exercises, it
should be remarked that all teachers of the art of mental prayer concur
in advising their pupils never to use violent efforts of the surface
will against the distractions which arise in the mind during periods of
recollection. The reason for this has been succinctly stated by Benet of
Canfield in his Ride of Perfection. 'The more a man operates, the more
he is and exists. And the more he is and exists, the less of God is and
exists within him.' Every enhancement of the separate personal self
produces a corresponding diminution of that self's awareness of divine
Reality. But any violent reaction of the surface will against
distractions automatically enhances the separate, personal self and
therefore reduces the individual's chances of coming to the knowledge
and love of God. In the process of trying forcibly to abolish our
God-eclipsing daydreams, we merely deepen the darkness of our native
ignorance. This being so, we must give up the attempt to fight distrac-

THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

tions and find ways either of circumventing them, or of somehow making
use of them. For example, if we have already achieved a certain degree
of alert passivity in relation to Reality and distractions intervene, we
can simply 'look over the shoulder* of the malicious and concupiscent
imbecile who stands between us and the object of our 'simple regard.'
The distractions now appear in the foreground of consciousness; we take
notice of their presence, then, lightly and gently, without any
straining of the will, we shift the focus of attention to Reality which
we glimpse, or divine, or (by past experience or an act of faith) merely
know about, in the background. In many cases, this effortless shift of
attention will cause the distractions to lose their obsessive
'thereness' and, for a time at least, to disappear.

If the heart wanders or is distracted, bring it back to the point quite
gently and replace it tenderly in its Master's presence. And even if you
did nothing during the whole of your hour but bring your heart back and
place it again in Our Lord's presence, though it went away every time
you brought it back, your hour would be very well employed.

St Franfois de Sales

In this case the circumvention of distractions constitutes a valuable
lesson in patience and perseverance. Another and more direct method of
making use of the monkey in our heart is described in The Cloud of
Unknowing.

When thou feelest that thou mayest in no wise put them (distractions)
down, cower then down under them as a caitiff and a coward overcome in
battle, and think it is but folly to strive any longer with them, and
therefore thou yieldest thyself to God in, the hands of thine
enemies.... And surely, I think, if this device be truly conceived, it
is nought else but a true knowing and a feeling of thyself as thou art,
a wretch and a filthy thing, far worse than nought; the which knowing
and feeling is meekness (humility). And this meekness meriteth to have
God mightily descend-

ing to venge thee on thine enemies, so as to take thee up and
cherishingly dry thy ghostly eyes, as the father doth to the child that
is at the point to perish under the mouths of wild swine and mad biting
bears.

The Cloud of Unknowing

Finally, there is the exercise, much employed in India, which consists
in dispassionately examining the distractions as they arise and in
tracing them back, through the memory of particular thoughts, feelings
and actions, to their origins in temperament and character, constitution
and acquired habit. This procedure reveals to the soul the true reasons
for its separation from the divine Ground of its being. It comes to
realize that its spiritual ignorance is due to the inert recalcitrance
or positive rebelliousness of its selfhood, and it discovers,
specifically, the points where that eclipsing selfhood congeals, as it
were, into the hardest, densest clots. Then, having made the resolution
to do what it can, in the course of daily living, to rid itself of these
impediments to Light, it quietly puts aside the thought of them and,
empty, purged and silent, passively exposes itself to whatever it may Be
that lies beyond and within.

* Noverim me, noverim Te* St. Francis of Assisi used to repeat.
Self-knowledge, leading to self-hatred and humility, is the condition of
the love and knowledge of God. Spiritual exercises that make use of
distractions have this great merit, that they increase self-knowledge.
Every soul that approaches God must be aware of who and what it is. To
practise a form of mental or vocal prayer that is, so to speak, above
one's moral station is to act a lie: and the consequences of such lying
are wrong notions about God, idolatrous worship of private and
unrealistic phantasies and (for lack of the humility of self-knowledge)
spiritual pride.

It is hardly necessary to add that this method has, like every other,
its dangers as well as its advantages. For those who employ it there is
a standing temptation to forget the end in the all too squalidly
personal means—to become absorbed in

a whitewashing or remorseful essay in autobiography to the exclusion of
the pure Divinity, before whom the 'angry ape* played all the fantastic
tricks which he now so relishingly remembers.

We come now to what may be called the spiritual exercises of daily life.
The problem, here, is simple enough—how to keep oneself reminded, during
the hours of work and recreation, that there is a good deal more to the
universe than that which meets the eye of one absorbed in business or
pleasure? There is no single solution to this problem. Some kinds of
work and recreation are so simple and unexactive that they permit of
continuous repetition of sacred name or phrase, unbroken thought about
divine Reality, or, what is still better, uninterrupted mental silence
and alert passivity. Such occupations as were the daily task of Brother
Lawrence (whose 'practice of the presence of God' has enjoyed a kind of
celebrity in circles otherwise completely uninterested in mental prayer
or spiritual exercises) were almost all of this simple and unexact-ing
kind. But there are other tasks too complex to admit of this constant
recollectedness. Thus, to quote Eckhart, *a celebrant of the mass who is
over-intent on recollection is liable to make mistakes. The best way is
to try to concentrate the mind before and afterwards, but, when saying
it, to do so quite straightforwardly.' This advice applies to any
occupation demanding undivided attention. But undivided attention is
seldom demanded and is with difficulty sustained for long periods at a
stretch. There are always intervals of relaxation. Everyone is free to
choose whether these intervals shall be filled with day-dreaming or with
something better.

Whoever has God in mind, simply and solely God, in all things, such a
man carries God with him into all his works and into all places, and God
alone does all his works. He seeks nothing but God, nothing seems good
to him but God. He becomes one with God in every thought. Just as no
multiplicity can dissipate God, so nothing can dissipate this man or
make him multiple.

Eckhart

I do not mean that we ought voluntarily to put ourselves in the way of
dissipating influences; God forbid! That would be tempting God and
seeking danger. But such distractions as come in any way providentially,
if met with due precaution and carefully guarded hours of prayer and
reading, will turn to good. Often those things which make you sigh for
solitude are more profitable to your humiliation and self-denial than
the most utter solitude itself would be. ... Sometimes a stimulating
book of devotion, a fervent meditation, a striking conversation, may
flatter your tastes and make you feel self-satisfied and complacent,
imagining yourself far advanced towards perfection; and by filling you
with unreal notions, be all the time swelling your pride and making you
come from your religious exercises less tolerant of whatever crosses
your will. I would have you hold fast to this simple rule: seek nothing
dissipating, but bear quietly with whatever God sends without your
seeking it, whether of dissipation or interruption. It is a great
delusion to seek God afar off in matters perhaps quite unattainable,
ignoring that He is beside us in our daily annoyances, so long as we
bear humbly and bravely all those which arise from the manifold
imperfections of our neighbours and ourselves.

Flnelon

Consider that your life is a perpetual perishing, and lift up your mind
to God above all whenever the clock strikes, saying,' God, I adore your
eternal being; I am happy that my being should perish every moment, so
that at every moment it may render homage to your eternity/

/. /. Olier

When you are walking alone, or elsewhere, glance at the general will of
God, by which He wills all the works of his mercy and justice in heaven,
on earth, under the earth, and approve, praise and then love that
sovereign will, all holy, all just, all beautiful. Glance next at the
special will of God, by which He loves his own, and works in them in
divers ways, by consolation and tribulation. And then you should ponder
a little, considering the

variety of consolations, but especially of tribulations, that the good
suffer; and then with great humility approve, praise and love all this
will. Consider that will in your own person, in all the good or ill that
happens to you and may happen to you, except sin; then approve, praise
and love all that, protesting that you will ever cherish, honour and
adore that sovereign will, and submitting to God's pleasure and giving
Him all who are yours, amongst whom am I. End in a great confidence in
that will, that it will work all good for us and our happiness. I add
that, when you have performed this exercise two or three times in this
way, you can shorten it, vary it and arrange it, as you find best, for
it should often be thrust into your heart as an aspiration.

St. Franfois de Sales

Dwelling in the light, there is no occasion at all for stumbling, for
all things are discovered in the light. When thou art walking abroad it
is present with thee in thy bosom, thou needest not to say, Lo here, or
Lo there; and as thou lyest in thy bed, it is present to teach thee and
judge thy wandering mind, which wanders abroad, and thy high thoughts
and imaginations, and makes them subject. For following thy thoughts,
thou art quickly lost. By dwelling in this light, it will discover to
thee the body of sin and thy corruptions and fallen estate, where thou
art. In that light which shows thee all this, stand; go neither to the
right nor to the left.

George Fox

The extract which follows is taken from the translation by Waitao and
Goddard of the Chinese text of The Awakening of Faith, by Ashvaghosha—a
work originally composed in Sanskrit during the first century of our
era, but of which the original has been lost. Ashvaghosha devotes a
section of his treatise to the 'expedient means,' as they are called in
Buddhist terminology, whereby unitive knowledge of Thusness may be
achieved. The list of these indispensable means includes charity and
compassion towards all sentient beings, sub-human as well as human,
self-naughting or mortification,

personal devotion to the incarnations of the Absolute Buddha-nature, and
spiritual exercises designed to free the mind from its infatuating
desires for separateness and independent selfhood and so make it capable
of realizing the identity of its own essence with the universal Essence
of Mind, Of these various * expedient means' I will cite only the last
two—the Way of Tranquillity, and the Way of Wisdom.

The Way of Tranquillity. The purpose of this discipline is twofold : to
bring to a standstill all disturbing thoughts (and all discriminating
thoughts are disturbing), to quiet all engrossing moods and emotions, so
that it will be possible to concentrate the mind for the purpose of
meditation and realization. Secondly, when the mind is tranquillized by
stopping all discursive thinking, to practise 'reflection' or
meditation,not in a discriminating, analytical way, but in a more
intellectual way (cp. the scholastic distinction between reason and
intellect), by realizing the meaning and significances of one's thoughts
and experiences. By this twofold practice of'stopping and realizing'
one's faith, which has already been awakened, will be developed, and
gradually the two aspects of this practice will merge into one
another—the mind perfectly tranquil, but most active in realization. In
the past one naturally had confidence in one's faculty of discrimination
(analytical thinking), but this is now to be eradicated and ended. Those
who are practising 'stopping' should retire to some quiet place and
there, sitting erect, earnesdy seek to tranquillize and concentrate the
mind. While one may at first think of one's breathing, it is not wise to
continue this practice very long, nor to let the mind rest on any
particular appearances, or sights, or conceptions, arising from the
senses, such as the primal elements of earth, water, fire and ether
(objects on which Hinayanists were wont to concentrate at one stage of
their spiritual training), nor to let it rest on any of the mind's
perceptions, particularizations, discriminations, moods or emotions. All
kinds of ideation are to be discarded as fast as they arise; even the
notions of controlling and discarding are to be got rid of. One's mind
should become like a mirror, reflecting things, but not judging them or
retaining

them. Conceptions of themselves have no substance; let them arise and
pass away unheeded. Conceptions arising from the senses and lower mind
will not take form of themselves, unless they are grasped by the
attention; if they are ignored, there will be no appearing and no
disappearing. The same is true of conditions outside the mind; they
should not be allowed to engross one's attention and so to hinder one's
practice. The mind cannot be absolutely vacant, and as the thoughts
arising from the senses and the lower mind are discarded and ignored,
one must supply their place by right mentation. The question then
arises: what is right mentation ? The reply is: right mentation is the
realization of mind itself, of its pure undifferentiated Essence. When
the mind is fixed on its pure Essence, there should be no lingering
notions of the self, even of the self in the act of realizing, nor of
realization as a phenomenon. . . .

The Way of Wisdom. The purpose of this discipline is to bring a man into
the habit of applying the insight that has come to him as the result of
the preceding disciplines. When one is rising, standing, walking, doing
something, stopping, one should constantly concentrate one's mind on the
act and the doing of it, not on one's relation to the act, or its
character or value. One should think: there is walking, there is
stopping, there is realizing; not, I am walking, I am doing this, it is
a good thing, it is disagreeable, I am gaining merit, it is I who am
realizing how wonderful it is. Thence come vagrant thoughts, feelings of
elation or of failure and unhappiness. Instead of all this, one should
simply practise concentration of the mind on the act itself,
understanding it to be an expedient means for attaining tranquillity of
mind, realization, insight and Wisdom; and one should follow the
practice in faith, willingness and gladness. After long practice the
bondage of old habits becomes weakened and disappears, and in its place
appear confidence, satisfaction, awareness and tranquillity.

What is this Way of Wisdom designed to accomplish ? There are three
classes of conditions that hinder one from advancing along the path to
Enlightenment. First, there are the allurements arising from the senses,
from external conditions and from the

discriminating mind. Second, there are the internal conditions of the
mind, its thoughts, desires and mood. All these the earlier practices
(ethical and mortificatory) are designed to eliminate. In the third
class of impediments are placed the individual's instinctive and
fundamental (and therefore most insidious and persistent) urges—the will
to live and to enjoy, the will to cherish one's personality, the will to
propagate, which give rise to greed and lust, fear and anger,
infatuation, pride and egotism. The practice of the Wisdom Paramita is
designed to control and eliminate these fundamental and instinctive
hindrances. By means of it the mind gradually grows clearer, more
luminous, more peaceful. Insight becomes more penetrating, faith deepens
and broadens, until they merge into the inconceivable Samadhi of the
Mind's Pure Essence. As one continues the practice of the Way of Wisdom,
one yields less and less to thoughts of comfort or desolation; faith
becomes surer, more pervasive, beneficent and joyous; and fear of
retrogression vanishes. But do not think that the consummation is to be
attained easily or quickly; many rebirths may be necessary, many aeons
may have to elapse. So long as doubts, unbelief, slanders, evil conduct,
hindrances of karma, weakness of faith, pride, sloth and mental
agitation persist, so long as even their shadows linger, there can be no
attainment of the Samadhi of the Buddhas. But he who has attained to the
radiance of highest Samadhi, or unitive Knowledge, will be able to
realize, with all the Buddhas, the perfect unity of all sentient beings
with Buddhahood's Dharmakaya. In the pure Dharmakaya there is no
dualism, neither shadow of differentiation. All sentient beings, if only
they were able to realize it, are already in Nirvana. The Mind's pure
Essence is Highest Samadhi, is Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, is Prajna
Paramita^ is Highest Perfect Wisdom.

Ashvaghosha

Chapter 26 PERSEVERANCE AND REGULARITY

He who interrupts the course of his spiritual exercises and prayer is
like a man who allows a bird to escape from his hand; he can hardly
catch it again.

St. John of the Cross

Si volumus non redire, currendum est. (If we wish not to go backwards,
we must run.)

Pelagius

If thou shouldst say, 'It is enough, I have reached perfection,' all is
lost. For it is the function of perfection to make one know one's
imperfection.

St. Augustine

THHE Buddhists have a similar saying to the effect that, if an JL arhat
thinks to himself that he is an arhat, that is proof that he is not an
arhat.

I tell you that no one can experience this birth (of God realized in the
soul) without a mighty effort. No one can attain this birth unless he
can withdraw his mind entirely from things.

Eckhart

If a sharp penance had been laid upon me, I know of none that I would
not very often have willingly undertaken, rather than prepare myself for
prayer by self-recollection. And certainly the violence with which Satan
assailed me was so irresistible, or my evil habits were so strong, that
I did not betake myself to prayer; and the sadness I felt on entering
the oratory was so great that

PERSEVERANCE AND REGULARITY 335

it required all the courage I had to force myself in. They say of me
that my courage is not slight, and it is known that God has given me a
courage beyond that of a woman; but I have made a bad use of it. In the
end Our Lord came to my relief, and when I had done this violence to
myself, I found greater peace and joy than I sometimes had when I had a
desire to pray.

St. Teresa

To one of his spiritual children our dear father (St. Frangois de Sales)
said, ' Be patient with everyone, but above all with yourself. I mean,
do not be disheartened by your imperfections, but always rise up with
fresh courage. I am glad you make a fresh beginning daily; there is no
better means of attaining to the spiritual life than by continually
beginning again, and never thinking that we have done enough. How are we
to be patient in bearing with our neighbour's faults, if we are
impatient in bearing with our own ? He who is fretted by his own
failings will not correct them; all profitable correction comes from a
calm, peaceful mind.'

Jean Pierre Camus

There are scarce any souls that give themselves to internal prayer but
some time or other do find themselves in great indisposition thereto,
having great obscurities in the mind and great insensibility in their
affections, so that if imperfect souls be not well instructed and
prepared, they will be in danger, in case that such contradictions of
inferior nature continue long, to be dejected, yea, and perhaps deterred
from pursuing prayer, for they will be apt to think that their
recollections are to no purpose at all, since, for as much as seems to
them, whatsoever they think or actuate towards God is a mere loss of
time and of no worth at all; and therefore that it would be more
profitable for them to employ their time some other way.

Yea, some souls there are conducted by Almighty God by no other way, but
only by such prayer of aridity, finding no sensible contentment in any
recollection, but, on the contrary, continual

pain and contradiction, and yet, by a privy grace and courage •imprinted
deeply in the spirit, cease not for all that, but resolutely break
through all difficulties and continue, the best way they can, their
internal exercises to the great advancement of their spirit.

Augustine Baker

Chapter 27

CONTEMPLATION, ACTION AND SOCIAL UTILITY

IN all the historic formulations of the Perennial Philosophy it is
axiomatic that the end of human life is contemplation, or the direct and
intuitive awareness of God; that action is the means to that end; that a
society is good to the extent that it renders contemplation possible for
its members; and that the existence of at least a minority of
contemplatives is necessary for the well-being of any society. In the
popular philosophy of our own time it goes without saying that the end
of human life is action; that contemplation (above all in its lower
forms of discursive thought) is the means to that end; that a society is
good to the extent that the actions of its members make for progress in
technology and organization (a progress which is assumed to be causally
related to ethical and cultural advance); and that a minority of
contemplatives is perfectly useless and perhaps even harmful to the
community which tolerates it. To expatiate further on the modern
Weltanschauung is unnecessary; explicitly or by implication it is set
forth on every page of the advertising sections of every newspaper and
magazine. The extracts that follow have been chosen in order to
illustrate the older, truer, less familiar theses of the Perennial
Philosophy.

Work is for the purification of the mind, not for the perception of
Reality. The realization of Truth is brought about by discrimination,
and not in the least by ten millions of acts.

Shankara

Now, the last end of each thing is that which is intended by the first
author or mover of that thing; and the first author and mover of the
universe is an intellect. Consequently, the last end

of the universe must be the good of the intellect; and this is truth.
Therefore truth must be the last end of the whole universe, and the
consideration thereof must be the chief occupation of wisdom. And for
this reason divine Wisdom, clothed in flesh, declares that He came into
the world to make known the truth. ... Moreover Aristotle defines the
First Philosophy as being the knowledge of truth, not of any truth, but
of that truth which is the source of all truth, of that, namely, which
refers to the first principle of being of all things; wherefore its
truth is the principle of all truth, since the disposition of things is
the same in truth as in being.

St. Thomas Aquinas

A thing may belong to the contemplative life in two ways, essentially or
as a predisposition.... The moral virtues belong to the contemplative
life as a predisposition. For the act of contemplation, in which the
contemplative life essentially consists, is hindered both by the
impetuosity of the passions and by outward disturbances. Now the moral
virtues curb the impetuosity of the passions and quell the disturbance
of outward occupations. Hence moral virtues belong to the contemplative
life as a predisposition.

St. Thomas Aquinas

These works (of mercy), though they be but active, yet they help very
much, and dispose a man in the beginning to attain afterwards to
contemplation.

Walter Hilton

In Buddhism, as in Vedanta and in all but the most recent forms of
Christianity, right action is the means by which the mind is prepared
for contemplation. The first seven branches of the Eightfold Path are
the active, ethical preparation for unitive knowledge of Suchness. Only
those who consistently practise the Four Virtuous Acts, in which all
other virtues are included —namely, the requital of hatred by love,
resignation, 'holy indifference' or desirelessness, obedience to the
dharma or

CONTEMPLATION, ACTION, SOCIAL UTILITY 339

Nature of Things—can hope to achieve the liberating realization that
samsara and nirvana are one, that the soul and all other beings have as
their living principle the Intelligible Light or Buddha-womb.

A question now, quite naturally, presents itself: Who is called to that
highest form of prayer which is contemplation? The answer is
unequivocally plain. All are called to contemplation, because all are
called to achieve deliverance, which is nothing else but the knowledge
that unites the knower with what is known, namely the eternal Ground or
Godhead. The oriental exponents of the Perennial Philosophy would
probably deny that everyone is called here and now; in this particular
life, they would say, it may be to all intents and purposes impossible
for a given individual to achieve more than a partial deliverance, such
as personal survival in some kind of 'heaven,' from which there may be
either an advance towards total liberation or else a return to those
material conditions which, as all the masters of the spiritual life
agree, are so uniquely propitious for taking the cosmic intelligence
test that results in enlightenment. In orthodox Christianity it is
denied that the individual soul can have more than one incarnation, or
that it can make any progress in its posthumous existence. If it goes to
hell, it stays there. If it goes to purgatory, it merely expiates past
evil doing, so as to become capable of the beatific vision. And when it
gets to heaven, it has just so much of die beatific vision as its
conduct during its one brief life on earth made it capable of, and
everlastingly no more. Granted these postulates, it follows that, if all
are called to contemplation, they are called to it from that particular
position in the hierarchy of being, to which nature, nurture, free will
and grace have conspired to assign them. In the words of an eminent
contemporary theologian, Father Garrigou-Lagrange, 'all souls receive a
general remote call to the mystical life, and if all were faithful in
avoiding, as they should, not only mortal but venial sins, if they were,
each according to his condition, generally docile to the Holy Ghost, and
if they lived long enough, a day would come when they would receive the
proxi-

mate and efficacious vocation to a high perfection and to the mystical
life properly so called.' This view—that the life of mystical
contemplation is the proper and normal development of the 'interior
life' of recollectedness and devotion to God— is then justified by the
following considerations. First, the principle of the two lives is the
same. Second, it is only in the life of mystical contemplation that the
interior life finds its consummation. Third, their end, which is eternal
life, is the same; moreover, only the life of mystical contemplation
prepares immediately and perfectly for that end.

There are few contemplatives, because few souls are perfectly humble.

The Imitation of Christ

God does not reserve such a lofty vocation (that of mystical
contemplation) to certain souls only; on the contrary, He is willing
that all should embrace it. But He finds few who permit Him to work such
sublime things for them. There are many who, when He sends them trials,
shrink from the labour and refuse to bear with the dryness and
mortification, instead of submitting, as they must, with perfect
patience.

St. John of the Cross

This assertion that all are called to contemplation seems to conflict
with what we know about the inborn varieties of temperament and with the
doctrine that there are at least three principal roads to liberation—the
ways of works and devotion as well as the way of knowledge. But the
conflict is more apparent than real. If the ways of devotion and works
lead to liberation, it is because they lead into the way of knowledge.
For total deliverance comes only through unitive knowledge. A soul which
does not go on from the ways of devotion and works into the way of
knowledge is not totally delivered, but achieves at the best the
incomplete salvation of 'heaven.' Coming now to the question of
temperament, we find that, in effect, certain individuals are naturally
drawn to lay the main

CONTEMPLATION, ACTION, SOCIAL UTILITY 341

doctrinal and practical emphasis in one place, certain others elsewhere.
But though there may be born devotees, born workers, born
contemplatives, it is nevertheless true that even those at the extreme
limits of temperamental eccentricity are capable of making use of other
ways than that to which they are naturally drawn. Given the requisite
degree of obedience to the leadings of the Light, the born contemplative
can learn to purify his heart by work and direct his mind by one-pointed
adoration; the born devotee and the born worker can learn to ' be still
and know that I am God.' Nobody need be the victim of his peculiar
talents. Few or many, of this stamp or of that, they are given us to be
used for the gaining of one great end. We have the power to choose
whether to use them well or badly—in the easier, worse way or the harder
and better.

Those ^ho are more adapted to the active life can prepare themselves for
contemplation in the practice of the active life, while those who are
more adapted to the contemplative life can take upon themselves the
works of the active life so as to become yet more apt for contemplation.

St. Thomas Aquinas

He who is strong in faith, weak in understanding, will generally place
his confidence in good-for-nothing people and believe in the wrong
object. He who is strong in understanding, weak in faith, leans towards
dishonesty and is difficult to cure, like a disease caused by medicine.
One in whom both are equal believes in the right object.

He who is strong in concentration, weak in energy, is overcome by
idleness, since concentration partakes of the nature of idleness. He who
is strong in energy, weak in concentration, is overcome by distractions,
since energy partakes of the nature of distraction. Therefore they
should be made equal to one another, since from equality in both comes
contemplation and ecstasy... .

Mindfulness should be strong everywhere, for mindfulness keeps the mind
away from distraction, into which it might fall,

since faith, energy and understanding partake of the nature of
distraction: and away from idleness, into which it might fall, since
^concentration partakes of the nature of idleness.

Buddhaghosha

At this point it is worth remarking parenthetically that God is by no
means the only possible object of contemplation. There have been and
still are many philosophic, aesthetic and scientific contemplatives.
One-pointed concentration on that which is not the highest may become a
dangerous form of idolatry. In a letter to Hooker, Darwin wrote that 'it
is a cursed evil to any man to become so absorbed in any subject as I am
in mine/ It is an evil because such one-pointedness may result in the
more or less total atrophy of all but one side of the mind. Darwin
himself records that in later li£e he was unable to take the smallest
interest in poetry, art or religion. Professionally, in relation to his
chosen specialty, a man may be completely mature. Spiritually and
sometimes even ethically, in relation to God and his neighbours, he may
be hardly more than a foetus.

In cases where the one-pointed contemplation is of God there is also a
risk that the mind's unemployed capacities may atrophy. The hermits of
Tibet and the Thebaid were certainly one-pointed, but with a
one-pointedness of exclusion and mutilation. It may be, however, that if
they had been more truly 'docile to the Holy Ghost,' they would have
come to understand that the one-pointedness of exclusion is at best a
preparation for the one-pointedness of inclusion—the realization of God
in the fullness of cosmic being as well as in the interior height of the
individual soul. Like the Taoist sage, they would at last have turned
back into the world riding on their tamed and regenerate individuality;
they would have 'come eating and drinking,' would have associated with
'publicans and sinners' or their Buddhist equivalents, 'wine-bibbers and
butchers.' For the fully enlightened, totally liberated person, samsara
and nirvana, time and eternity, the phenomenal and the Real, are
essentially one. His whole life is an unsleeping and

CONTEMPLATION, ACTION, SOCIAL UTILITY 343

one-pointed contemplation of the Godhead in and through the things,
lives, minds and events of the world of becoming. There is here no
mutilation of the soul, no atrophy of any of its powers and capacities.
Rather, there is a general enhancement and intensification of
consciousness, and at the same time an extension and transfiguration. No
saint has ever complained that absorption in God was a 'cursed evil/

In the beginning was the Word; behold Him to whom Mary listened. And the
Word was made flesh; behold Him whom Martha served.

St. Augustine

God aspires us into Himself in contemplation, and then we must be wholly
His; but afterwards the Spirit of God expires us without, for the
practice of love and good works.

Ruysbroeck

Action, says Aquinas, should be something added to the life of prayer,
not something taken away from it. One of the reasons for this
recommendation is strictly utilitarian; action that is 'taken away from
the life of prayer* is action unenlightened by contact with Reality,
uninspired and unguided; consequently it is apt to be ineffective and
even harmful. ' The sages of old,' says Chuang Tzu, 'first got Tao for
themselves, then got it for others/ There can be no taking of motes out
of other people's eyes so long as the beam in our own eye prevents us
from seeing the divine Sun and working by its light. Speaking of those
who prefer immediate action to acquiring, through contemplation, the
power to act well, St. John of the Cross asks, 'What do they
accomplish?* And he answers, Poco mas que nada^y a veces nada y y aun a
veces dano ('Little more than nothing, and sometimes nothing at all, and
sometimes even harm'). Income must balance expenditure. This is
necessary not merely on the economic level, but also on the
physiological, the intellectual, the ethical and the spiritual. We
cannot put forth physical energy unless we stoke our body

with fuel in the form of food. We cannot hope to utter anything worth
saying, unless we read and inwardly digest the utterances of our
betters. We cannot act rightly and effectively unless we are in the
habit of laying ourselves open to leadings of the divine Nature of
Things. We must draw in the goods of eternity in order to be able to
give out the goods of time. But the goods of eternity cannot be had
except by giving up at least a little of our time to silently waiting
for them. This means that the life in which ethical expenditure is
balanced by spiritual income must be a life in which action alternates
with repose, speech with alertly passive silence. Otium sanctum quaerit
caritas veritatis ; negotium jus turn suscipit necessitas caritatis
('The love of Truth seeks holy leisure; the necessity of love undertakes
righteous action'). The bodies of men and animals are reciprocating
engines, in which tension is always succeeded by relaxation. Even the
unsleeping heart rests between beat and beat. There is nothing in living
Nature that even distantly resembles man's greatest technical invention,
the continuously revolving wheel. (It is this fact, no doubt, which
accounts for the boredom, weariness find apathy of those who, in modern
factories, are forced to adapt their bodily and mental movements to
circular motions of mechanically uniform velocity.) 'What a man takes in
by contemplation,' says Eckhart, 'that he pours out in love.' The
well-meaning humanist and the merely muscular Christian, who imagines
that he can obey the second of the great commandments without taking
time even to think how best he may love God with all his heart, soul and
mind, are people engaged in the impossible task of pouring unceasingly
from a container that is never replenished.

Daughters of Charity ought to love prayer as the body loves the soul.
And just as the body cannot live without the soul, so the soul cannot
live without prayer. And in so far as a daughter prays as she ought to
pray, she will do well. She will not walk, she will run in the ways of
the Lord, and will be raised to a high degree of the love of God.

St. Vincent de Paid

CONTEMPLATION, ACTION, SOCIAL UTILITY 345

Households, cities, countries and nations have enjoyed great happiness,
when a single individual has taken heed of the Good and Beautiful. . . .
Such men not only liberate themselves; they fill those they meet with a
free mind.

Phib

Similar views are expressed by Al-Ghazzali, who regards the mystics not
only as the ultimate source of our knowledge of the soul and its
capacities and defects, but as the salt which preserves human societies
from decay. 'In the time of the philosophers/ he writes, 'as at every
other period, there existed some of these fervent mystics. God does not
deprive this world of them, for they are its sustainers.' It is they
who, dying to themselves, become capable of perpetual inspiration and so
are made the instruments through which divine grace is mediated to those
whose unregenerate nature is impervious to the delicate touches of the
Spirit.

A LIST OF RECOMMENDED BOOKS

AL-GHAZZALI. Confessions. Translated by Claud Field (London, 1909).

ANSARI OF HERAT. The Invocations of Sheikh Abdullah Ansari of Herat.
Translated by Sardar Sir Jogendra Singh (London, I939)-

ATTAR. Selections. Translated by Margaret Smith (London, 1932).

AUGUSTINE, ST. Confessions (numerous editions). AUROBINDO, SRI. The Life
Divine, 3 vols. (Calcutta, 1939). BAKER, AUGUSTINE. Holy Wisdom (London,
1876).

BEAUSOBRE, JULIA DE. The Woman Who Could Not Die (London and New York,
1938).

BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX, ST. The Steps of Humility (Cambridge,

Mass., 1940).

On the Love of God (New York, 1937). Selected Letters (London, 1904). An
admirably lucid account of

St. Bernard's thought may be found in The Mystical Doctrine

of Saint Bernard, by Professor fitienne Gilson (London and

New York, 1940).

BERTOCCI, PETER A. The Empirical Argument for God in Late British
Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass., 1938).

Bhagavad-Gita. Among many translations of this Hindu scripture the best,
from a literary point of view, is that of Swami Prabhavananda and
Christopher Isherwood (Los Angeles, 1944). Valuable notes, based upon
the commentaries of Shankara, are to be found in Swami Nikhilananda's
edition (New York, 1944), and Professor Franklin Edgerton's literal
translation (Cambridge, Mass., 1944) is preceded by a long and scholarly
introduction.

BlNYON, L. The Flight of the Dragon (London, 1911).

BOEHME, JAKOB. Some good introduction is needed to the work of this
important but difficult mystic. On the theological and devotional side
the Danish Bishop H. L. Martensen's Jacob Boehme (trans., London, 1885)
is recommended; or from a more philosophical viewpoint A. Koyre's
splendid volume La Philosophic de Jacob Boehme (not yet translated,
Paris, 1929) or H. H. Brinton's The Mystic Will (New York, 1930).

BRAHMANANDA, SWAMI. Records of his teaching and a biography by Swami
Prabhavananda are contained in The Eternal Companion (Los Angeles,
1944).

CAMUS, JEAN PIERRE. The Spirit of St. Francois de Sales (London, n.d.).

CAUSSADE, J. P. DE. Abandonment (New York, 1887). Spiritual Letters, 3
vols. (London, 1937).

CHANTAL, ST. JEANNE FRANCHISE. Selected Letters (London and New York,
1918).

CHAPMAN, ABBOT JOHN. Spiritual Letters (London, 1935).

CHUANG Tzu. Chuang T^u, Mystic, Moralist and Social Reformer.

Translated by Herbert Giles (Shanghai, 1936). Musings of a Chinese
Mystic (London, 1920). Chinese Philosophy in Classical Times. Translated
by E. R.

Hughes (London, 1943).

The Cloud of Unknowing (with commentary by Augustine Baker). Edited with
an introduction by Justice McCann (London, 1924).

COOM ARASWAMY, ANANDA K. Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism

(New York, 1916).

The Transformation of Nature in Art (Cambridge, Mass., 1935). Hinduism
and Buddhism (New York, n.d.).

CURTIS, A. M. The Way of Silence (Burton Bradstock, Dorset,

J 937)-DEUSSEN, PAUL. The Philosophy of the Upanishads (London, 1906).

DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE. On the Divine Names and the Mystical Theology.
Translated with an introduction by C. E. Rolt (London, 1920).

ECKHART, MEISTER. Works, translated by C. B. Evans (London,

1924).

Meister Eckhart, A Modern Translation. By R. B. Blakney (New York,
1941).

EVANS-WENTZ, W. Y. The Tibetan Book of the Dead (New York,

1927).

Tibet's Great Yogi, Milarepa (New York, 1928). Tibetan Yoga and Secret
Doctrines (New York, 1935).

The Following of Christ. Unknown author, but mistakenly attributed to
Tauler in the first English edition (London, 1886).

Fox, GEORGE. Journal (London, 1911).

FROST, BEDE. The Art of Mental Prayer (London, 1940). Saint John of the
Cross (London, 1937).

GARRIGOU-LAGRANGE, R. Christian Perfection and Contemplation (London and
St. Louis, 1937).

GODDARD, DWIGHT. A Buddhist Bible (published by the editor, Thetford,
Maine, 1938). This volume contains translations of several Mahayana
texts not to be found, or to be found only with much difficulty,
elsewhere. Among these are ' The Diamond Sutra/' The Surangama Sutra,''
The Lankavatara Sutra/ 'The Awakening of Faith* and 'The Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch.'

Gu^NON, RfiNlL Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta

(London, n.d.).

East and West (London, 1941). The Crisis of the Modern World (London,
1942).

HEARD, GERALD. The Creed of Christ (New York, 1940). The Code of Christ
(New York, 1941). Preface to Prayer (New York, 1944).

HILTON, WALTER. The Scale of Perfection (London, 1927).

HUEGEL, FRIEDRICH VON. The Mystical Element in Religion as Studied in
Saint Catherine of Genoa and Her Friends (London, 1923).

IBN TUFAIL. The Awakening of the Soul. Translated by Paul Bronnle
(London, 1910).

The Imitation of Christ. Whitford's translation, edited by E. J. Klein
(New York, 1941).

INGE, W. R. Christian Mysticism (London, 1899).

Studies of English Mystics —including William Law (London, 1906).

JOHN OF THE CROSS, ST. Works, 3 vols. (London, 1934-1935).

JONES, RUFUS. Studies in Mystical Religion.

The Spiritual Reformers in the l6th and IJ'th Centuries (New

York, 1914). The Flowering of Mysticism (New York, 1939).

JORGENSEN, JOHANNES. Saint Catherine of Siena (London, 1938). JULIANA OF
NORWICH. Revelations of Divine Love (London, 1917).

LAO Tzu. There are many translations of the Tao Teh King. Consult and
compare those of Arthur Waley in The Way and Its Power (London, 1933),
of F. R. Hughes in Chinese Philosophy in Classical Times (Everyman's
Library) and of Ch'u Ta-Kao (London, 1927) reprinted in The Bible of the
World (New York, 1939).

LAW, WILLIAM. Several modern editions of his Serious Call are available.
But none of Law's still finer and much more distinctly mystical works,
such as The Spirit of Prayer and The Spirit ofLove, have been reprinted
in full in recent years. Long extacts from them may however be found in
Stephen Hobhouse's Selected Mystical Writings of William Law (London,
1939) (a work which also contains some useful ' Notes and Studies in the
mystical theology of William Law and Jacob Boehme') and in the same
writer's William Law and Eighteenth Century Quakerism (London, 1927).
Alexander Whyte also compiled a fine anthology, Characters and
Characteristics of William Law (4th ed. London, 1907); while for the
student there is Christopher Walton's extraordinary encyclopaedic
collection of Notes and Materials for an adequate biography of William
Law (London, 1856).

LEEN, EDWARD. Progress through Mental Prayer (London, 1940).

McKEON, RICHARD. Selections from Medieval Philosophers, 2 vols. (New
York, 1929).

The Mirror of Simple Souls. Author unknown (London, 1927).

NICHOLAS OF CUSA. The Idiot (San Francisco, 1940). The Vision of God
(London and New York, 1928).

NICHOLSON, R. The Mystics of Islam (London, 1914).

OMAN, JOHN. The Natural and the Supernatural (London, 1938).

OTTO, RUDOLF. India s Religion of Grace (London, 1930). Mysticism East
and West (London, 1932).

PATANJALI. Yoga Aphorisms. Translated with a commentary by Swami
Vivekananda (New York, 1899).

PLOTINUS. The Essence of Plotinus (G. H. Turnbull, New York, 1934). A
good anthology of this very important and voluminous mystic.

PONNELLE, L. and L. BORDET. St. Philip Neri and the Roman Society of His
Time (London, 1932).

POULAIN, A. The Graces of Interior Prayer (London, 1910). PouRRAT, P.
Christian Spirituality, 3 vols. (London, 1922). PRATT, J. B. The
Pilgrimage of Buddhism (New York, 1928).

QUAKERS. The Beginnings of Quakerism, by W. P. Braithwaite (London,
1912). See also George Fox, p. 348.

RADHAKRISHNAN, S. The Hindu View of Life (London and New

York, 1927).

Indian Philosophy (London and New York, 1923-1927). Eastern Religions
and Western Thought (New York, 1939).

RAMAKRISHNA, SRI. The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna. Translated from the
Bengali narrative of *M' by Swami Nikhilananda (New York, 1942).

RUMI, JALAL-UDDIN. Masnavi. Translated by E. H. Whinfield (London,
1898).

RUYSBROECK, JAN VAN. The Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage (London,
1916). Consult also the studies by Evelyn Underbill (London, 1915) and
Wautier d'Aygalliers (London, 1925).

SALES, ST. FRAN?OIS DE. Introduction to the Devout Life (numerous
editions). Treatise on the Love of God (new edition, Westminster, Md.,

1942).

Spiritual Conferences (London, 1868). See also J. P. Camus.

The Secret of the Golden Flower. Translated from the Chinese by Richard
Wilhelm. Commentary by Dr, C. G. Jung (London and New York, 1931).

SPURGEON, CAROLINE. Mysticism in English Literature (Cambridge, 1913).

STOCKS, J. L. Time, Cause and Eternity (London, 1938). STOUT, G. F. Mind
and Matter (London, 1931).

Sutra Spoken by the Sixth Patriarch, Hui Neng. Translated by Wung
Mou-lam (Shanghai, 1930). Reprinted in A Buddhist Bible (Thetford,
1938).

SUZUKI, B. L. Mahayana Buddhism (London, 1938).

SUZUKI, D. T. Studies in Zen Buddhism (London, 1927). Studies in the
Lankavatara Sutra (Kyoto and London, 1935). Manual of Zen Buddhism
(Kyoto, 1935).

TAGORE, RABINDRANATH. One Hundred Poems ofKabir (London, 1915).

TAULER, JOHANN. Life and Sermons (London, 1907). The Inner Way (London,
1909).

Consult Inge's Christian Mysticism^ Rufus Jones's Studies in Mystical
Religion and Pourrat's Christian Spirituality.

TENNANT, F. R. Philosophical Theology (Cambridge, 1923).

Theologia Germanica. Winkworth's translation (new edition, London,
1937).

TILLYARD, AELFRIDA. Spiritual Exercises (London, 1927).

TRAHERNE, THOMAS. Centuries of Meditation (London, 1908). Consult Thomas
Traherne, A Critical Biography^ by Gladys I. Wade (Princeton, 1944).

UNDERHILL, EVELYN. Mysticism (London, 1924). The Mystics of the Church
(London, 1925).

Upanishads. The Thirteen Principal Upanishads. Translated by

R. E. Hume (New York, 1931). The Ten Principal Upanishads. Translated by
Shree Purohit

and W. B. Yeats (London, 1937). The Himalayas of the Soul. Translated by
J. Mascaro (London,

1938).

WATTS, ALAN W. The Spirit of Zen (London, 1936).

WHITNEY, JANET. John Woolman^ American Quaker (Boston,

1942). Elizabeth Fry, Quaker Heroine (Boston, 1936).

Abu Sa'id, 319

Action, 53, 170, 183, 311, 343

Acton, 140

Adoration, 255

Advertising, 231, 250, 337

Aeschylus, 92

Al-Ghazzali, 86, 146, 254

Amelot, 255

Ancren Riwle, The, 248

Animals, kindness to, 224

Ansari of Herat, 99, 103, 253, 298, 316

Ansehh, St., 257

Aphorism, Sufi, 124

Aquinas, St. Thomas, 96, 146, 153, 338,

341

Aridity, 335 Aristotle, 26, 27, 78 Arnold, Thomas, 289 Art, artist, 135,
151, 158, 195 Ashvaghosha, 333 Asoka, 228

Atman, 8, 11-13, 15, 67, 151, 219 Atonement, 66, 220, 265 Attention, 332
Augustine, St., 82, 83, 107, 205, 240,

253,334,343 Aurobindo, Sri, 74 Avatar, 58, 61, 68, 148, 219

Bagehot, W., 273

Baker, Augustine, 118, 256, 258, 336

Barclay, Robert, 21

Bayazid of Bistun, 18, 317

Beatitude, 128, 239

Beauty, 158

Becket, Thomas, 305

Benet of Canfield, 58, 322, 324, 325

Bernard, St., 18, 32, 65, 70, 82, 98, 166,

187, 199, 244, 302 B^rulle, 48 Bhagavad-Gita, 9, u, 57, 61, 170, 174,

205, 218, 303, 304, 312 Bhagavatam, Srimad, 99, 227, 244 Blake, W., 217
Blood, 308

Bodhisattva, 73, 77, 79, 266 Body, 34

Boehme, Jacob, 63, 237, 243 Boethius, 185, 212, 213

Bourgoing, 255

Brahman, 8, 12, 13, 42, 67

Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad, 42, 301

Broad, C. D., 304

Buddha, 7, 15, 56, 61, 117, 136, 146, 147,

164, 185, 232, 299, 308, 312 Buddha's Fire Sermon, The, 204
Buddhaghosha, 342 Buder, S., 92 Byron, 81

Camus, Jean Pierre, 53, 105, 117, 142,

299,315,335 Carnal love, 219

of Christ, 65 Cassian, 319 Caste, 182

Castellio, Sebastian, 7, 20, 285 Catherine, St., of Genoa, 18, 99, 122
Catherine, St., of Siena, 167, 187, 189, 264

written down by Tommaso di Petra,

167

Catholicism, 176 Causation, 155 Caussade, J. P. de, 53, 89 Chandogya
Upanishad, 10, 236 Chantal, St. Jeanne, 258 Chapman, Abbot John, 121,
152 Charity, 65, 98, 100, 104, no, 119, 175,

187, 194, 199, 270, 314 Ch'eng-en, Wu, 147, 164 Chiang Chih-chi, 283
Chih-chi, Chiang, 283 Christ, 20, 58-60, 65-67, 124, 127, 180, 285, 289,
308, 310, 312

carnal love of, 65

following of, 207, 264

imitation of, 340 Chuang Tzu, 13, 14, 91, 106, 119, 120,

123, i34-*3 6 , l6l > l8<5 » I95» I9 6 »

249, 281, 343 Chudamani, Viveka, n Civilization, 181 Claver, St. Peter,
224 Cloud of Unknowing, The, 47, 295, 318,

323, 327

Condren, Charles de, 207, 295, 298 Constitution and temperament, 168,
177 . 851

THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

Contemplation, 105, 170, 183, 259, 303,

3", 337, 338, 344 Controversy, 160, 161 Conversion, 178 Coomaraswamy,
Ananda K., 63 Coue*, 280

Craving, desire, 55, 96, 260 Culture, 127 Curd d'Ars, 84

Daishi, Yoka, 147 D'Ars, Cure*, 84 Darwin, 342

De Caussade, J. P., 53, 89 Decentralization, in De Condren, Charles,
207, 295, 298 Deliverance, liberation, 12, 13, 31, 50, 57, 64, 106, 154,
217, 230, 245, 250 Denk, Hans, 7, 20, 108, 282 Descartes, 36 Desire, 33,
87, 101, 121, 165, 202, 250,

*S3

Detachment, 100, 102, 120, 122 De Vigny, Alfred, 92 Devotion, 100, 170,
175, 257 Dhammapada, 109, 205 Dharma, 162, 176, 179, 181, 261, 313
Dhyana, 70

Diamond Sutra, 147, 243, 302 Dionysius, the Areopagite, 42, 43 Disease,
262 Disquietude, 120 Distraction, 250, 325, 329

Eckhart, 8, 19, 23, 33, 37, 38, 41, 48, 49,

70, 79, 8 7> 90, 99» I02 » I0 3» "3> 125, 145, 150, 153, 186, 200, 205,
206, 217, 242, 264, 324, 329, 334,

344

Ectomorphy, 172 Education, 17, 287 Eightfold Path, 136 Emotion, feeling,
100, 292, 296 Endomorphy, 172 Enlightenment, 67-68, 71, 73, 103 Erigena,
Scotus, 44 Eternity, 38, 68, 90, 106, 162, 167, 274,

276, 277

Everard, John, 108, 282 Evil, 205, 209, 211, 232, 264, 274 Experience,
152-153* M**, 2 93 Extraversion, 173

Faith, 268

Fall, the, 209, 261

Fate, 213

Fear, 187

Feeling, emotion, 100, 101, 104, 292, 296

Fe-nelon, 104, 132, 188, 248, 254, 293,

295, 329 Folk-lore, 252

Following of Christ, The, 207, 264 Foreknowledge, 214 Form, 210, 218
Four Noble Truths of Buddhism, The,

260

Fox, George, 20, 330 Francis, St., of Assisi, 327 Frangois de Sales,
St., 53, 104, 115, 117,

121, 123, 141, 195, 199, 249, 253,

258,259,314-315,326,330 Freedom, 109

Garrigou-Lagrange, R., 177, 298, 339

Ghazzali, Al, 86, 146, 254

Gilson, Etienne, 187

Gita, Bhagavad, 9, n, 57, 61, 170, 174,

205, 218, 303, 304, 312 Godhead, 29, 33, 38-40, 48, 49, 68, 71-72,

101, 113, 128, 150, 158-159, 203,

260, 271, 309, 339 God, nature of, 29-32, 66-71, 83, 87, 97

see especially chapters II, III and IV Good, 205, 210, 211, 222, 262
Gopi maidens, 191 Gospels, Synoptic, 60 Grace, 81, 191, 266, 290

gratuitous, 81 Green, T. H., 28 Gregory, St., the Great, 95, 240
Grellet, Stephen, 310 Grou, N., 130 Gue"non, Rene", 71

Hakuin, 79

Healing, 299

Hillel, 22

Hilton, Walter, 125, 338

Hinayana, 16, 78

Hinayanists, 16

Hippocrates, 169

History, 63

Hobbes, 213

" How Men Behave in Crisis," 50

Huang-Po, 69, 71, 86

Hubris, 91, 190, 252, 288

Hugo, Victor, 92

Hui Neng, 67, 78, 146, 160

Humanitarianism, 91

Hume, 47, 155-156

Humility, 103-104, 114, 185-188, 257, 292, 340

Idealists, 280

Idolatrous, 17, in

Idolatry, 17, 54, 106, m, 126, 159, 161,

239* 277, 278, 287, 308, 324, 342 Ignorance, 185 Imagination, 292
Imitation of Christ, The, 340 Immanence, 8 Immanent, 8, 30, 31
Immortality, 242 Incarnation, 29, 58-59, 66 Incarnations, 64 Inge, Dean,
285 Inner Light, 21, 137, 223 Inquisition, the, 221 Inspiration, 135,
193, 196, 197 Intellect, 153, 163 Intercession, 254, 255 Introversion,
322 Introvert, 173 Iti-vuttaka, 237

James, William, 2

Japam, 320

Jerome, St., 118

Jesuits, 316

Jesus, 59, 84, 138, 149, 275 Logia of, 73

Jews, 308

Jnana, 151

Job,198

John, i:4,95

John, St., of the Cross, 33, 66-67, I0 °, 102, 107, 117, 120-122, 123,
149, 150, M3, 193, 216, 247, 249, 294, 334, 340, 343

Johnson, Samuel, 52, 57

Jones, Rufus, 20

Juliana of Norwich, 274

Jung, C., 170

Kabir, 17, 57, 122, 227, 253

Karma, 56, 272, 274, 275

Kierkegaard, S., 198

Kindness to animals, 224

Knowledge, i, 5, 19, 28, 31, 39, 44, 55, 56, 68, 94, 95, 96, 107, 115,
128, 129, 150-151, 153, 155, 166, 168, 170-171, 175, 212, 232, 260, 275,

3oi, 333, 339, 340 Kokushi, Dai-o, 146

Krishna, 61, 63 Kung*chia Ta-shih, 99

Lacordaire, 188

Lallement, Father L., 83

Landscape painting, 75

Language, 17, 24, 147-148, *5<>, 165, 266

Languages, 43

Lankavatara Sutra, 14, 71, 77, 153, 238,

322 Lao Tzu, 33, 109, 121, 133, 138, 147,

167, 190, 194, 247, 312 Lawrence, Brother, 328 Law, William, 7, 8, 48,
49, 57, 63, 95, 98,

loo, 114, 127, 150, 152, 160, 191,

193, 200, 203, 204, 207-209, 227,

237, 247, 248, 254, 255, 257, 279 Lawyers, 66, 270 Legalism, 31, 66
Leibniz, i

Liberal Protestantism, 179 Liberation, deliverance, 12, 13, 116, 124,

128, 138, 186, 238, 301 Liberty, 140 Logia of Jesus, 73 Logos, 19, 37,
58, 59, 62, 107, 109, 133,

191,311 Love, 2, 95-101, 103, 104, 122, 123, 153,

282, 323, 344 carnal, of Christ, 65 spiritual, 65

Loyola, St. Ignatius, 120 Luther, 269, 285-286.

Machinery, 196

Magic, 307

Magnus, Albertus, 129

Mahayana, 16, 30, 41, 62, 67, 74, 216,

321

Mahayanists, 16, 63, 64, 78 Maitrayana Upanishad, 129, 236, 239
Mallarme, 160

Man's final end, 94, 105, 137, 177 Mantram, 319 Maxwell, Clerk, 269
Meditation, 105 Memory, 216 Mental prayer, 315 Mesomorphy, 172 Meyerson,
E., 11 Milton, 161 Mind, 14, 16, 34, 69, 71, 73, 77, 87, 102,

146, 211

Mind and body, 34, 246 Miracles, 299

THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY

356

Monkey, 165

More, Dame Gertrude, 115, 118

Mortification, 84,113,116,125,126,133,

196, 217, 248 Mo Tsu, 73 Mysticism, 66

Nature, 82, 90, 91, 92, 93, 109, 124

Nemesis, 91, 94, 96

Neng, Hui, 67, 78, 146, 160

Neri, St. Philip, 257, 264

Nicholas of Cusa, 150, 194, 213

NifTari, 240

Nirvana, 56,73,74, 77, 83,103, 216, 217,

237, 238, 271, 333 No-mind, 86 Non-attachment, 120, 125, 175

Obedience, 141

Objections, 116

Olier, J. J., 40, 298, 329

Oman, Dr. J., 4, 83, 84

One Hundred and One Zen Stories, 139

One-pointedness, 342

Otto, Rudolf, 151

" Oxherding Pictures," 84

Panchadasi, 259

Pascal, 97

Patience, 335

Paul, St. Vincent de, 344

Paul, St., 58, 60, 67, 102, 149, 190, 217

Peace, 102, 103, 222

Pelagius, 334

Penn, William, 21

Perennial Philosophy, i, 4, 7, 8, 13, 23, 25, 27, 44, 45, 48, 60, 62,
78, 86, 91, 94, in, 113, 122, 135, 147, 158, 168, 190, 203, 209, 210,
213, 215, 217, 231, 245, 270, 277, 285, 287,

*93» 3i°, 337 Personality, 45, 47, 48, 52, 60, 193, 246

selfness, 45 Petition, 251

Philo, 22, 41, 83, 114, 179, 345 Plato, 21 Plotinus, xi Plutarch, 282
Po, Huang, 69, 71, 86 Poverty, 138

Power, 92, 109, in, 142, 143, 309, 313 Prayer, 115, 251,276, 343

mental, 315

Progress, 91, 92, 93, 94, 106, 163, 337 Prophecy, 298

Protestantism, liberal, 179 Providence, 213 Prunabuddha-sutra, 73
Psychic, 27

medium, 304 Psychism, 27, 116

Quakers, 7, 20, 137, 223, 224 Quietism, 78

Rabi'a, 119

Radin, Dr. Paul, 27, 28, 170 Raven, Canon, 83, 84 Reality, 2-5, 12, 50,
54, 57, 69, 166 Recollectedness, 311 Remorse, 294 Revolution, 221
Rhetoric, 157, 247 Richelieu, Cardinal, 96 Right livelihood, 136 Rites,
304 Ritual, 301

Rumi, Jalal-uddin, 2, 22, 95, 107, 139, 160, 162, 198, 204, 215, 216,
243,

Ruskin, 196

Ruysbroeck, 19, 40, 69, 166, 187, 199,

Ryo-Nen, 159

Sacraments, 72, 73, 301, 309

Sa'id, Abu, 319

St. Ajnselm, 257

St. Augustine, 66, 82, 85, 107, 205, 240,

*53» 334, 343 St. Bernard, 18, 32, 65, 70, 82, 98, 166,

187, 199, 244, 302 St. Catherine of Genoa, 18, 99, 122 St. Catherine of
Siena, 167, 187, 189, 264 written down by Tommaso di Petra,

167

St. Francis of Assisi, 327 St. Francois de Sales, 53, 104, 115, 117,

121, 123, 141, 195, 199, 249, 253,

258, 2 59» 3M-3I5, 3*6, 330 St. Gregory the Great, 95, 240 St. Ignatius
Loyola, 120 St. Jeanne Chantal, 258 St. Jerome, 118 St. John of the
Cross, 33, 66-67,100,102,

107, 117, 120-122, 123, 149, 150,

153, 193, 216, 247, 249, 294, 334,

340, 343

St. Paul, 58, 60, 67, 102, 149, 190, 217 St. Peter Claver, 224

357

St Philip Neri, 257, 264

St. Teresa, 67, 100, IT?, 335

St. Thomas Aquinas, 96, 146, 153, 338,

34i

St. Vincent de Paul, 344 Saints, 54

Sales, St. Francois de, 53, 104, 115, 117, 121, 123, 141, 195, 199, 249,
253, *58, 259> 3 I 4-3i*> 3 26 > 33° Salvation, 230, 236, 237 Samsara,
73, 74, 83 Saunders, Kenneth, 311 Saviours, 236 Scotus Erigena, 44
Scriptures, 4, 20, 21, 25, 147, 227 Seccho, 75 Self, 10, 114,204-207,279

-knowledge, 185, 188, 327

-will, 115

Selfness, personality, 45, 60 Sen T'sen, 21. Shakespeare, 95 Shankara,
4, u, 13, 32, 100, 238, 244,

272, 337

Sheldon, William, 169, 171, 172 Shih-t'ou, 147, 259 Shruti, 4

Silence, 86, 247, 249, 250 Simplicity, 130, 133 Sin, 207, 275, 318
Sincerity, 130 Singh, Sadhu Sundar, 228 Slavery, 223, 224 Smith, John,
150, 166, 242 Smriti, 4

Song of Songs, 191 Soul, 18, 19, 22, 105, 113, 122-123, 150,

208, 242

Specialization, 261 Spinoza, 275 Spirit, 46, 48, 62, 65, 67, 100, 133,
167,

214,257 Spiritual authority, 142, 182, 313

exercises, 314 Spirituality, 85 Sterry, Peter, 167 Stout, G. F., 156
Suchness, 64, 88, 107 Suffering, 260

vicarious, 265 Sufi, 215

aphorism, 124 Sufis, 7, 30, 67, 299, 316 Sufism, 86, 240 Superstition,
282

Survival, 242, 245, 246

Suso, 69, 117

Sutra, Diamond, 147, 243, 302

Sutralamkara, 147, 236

Sutra, Lankavatara, 14, 71, 77, 153, 238,

322

Sutra, Prunabuddha, 73 Sutra, Surangama, 103, 307 Sutra on the
Distinction and Protection

of the Dharma, 119 Sutta, Metta, 99 Swift, Dean, 108 Symbol, 282, 303,
309, 324 Synoptic Gospels, 59

Ta-shih, Kung-chia, 99

Tao, 37, 133, 134, 167, 194, 263

Taoism, 14, 311

Taoist, 13

Tathagata, 16, 71, 243

Tattva, Tantra, 77

Temperament and constitution, 166, 177

Temple, Archbishop, 277

Temptation, no, 310

Tennant, F. R., 4, 152, 272

Teresa, St., 67, 100, 115, 117, 335

Tevigga Sutta, 61

Theologia Germanica, 20, 21, 67, 129,

204, 236, 240

Theology, 66, 151, 152, 175 Third Patriarch of Zen, The, 89 Three
Bodies, The, 30 Tibetan Book of the Dead, 41, 324 Time, 63, 64, 106, in,
217, 219, 277 Tolstoy, Leo, 195

Traherne, Thomas, 79, 81, 90, 124, 128 Transcendence, 8, 30
Transcendent, 8, 30 Trench, Richard, 17, 166 Trinity, 29 Truth, 79, 88 >
8 9> 9<*, 99» I2 9> M5> M<5,

158, 163, 302, 338 true, 88, 146, 150, 151 T'sen, Sen, 21 Tsu, Mo, 73
Tzu, Chuang, 13, 14, 91, 106, 119, 120,

123, 134-136, 161, 186, 195, 196,

249, 281, 343

Upanishad, B;

Upanishad, ~

Upanishad,

Upanishad,

Upanishad,

Upanishadi

[picture1]

129,136,139

Vedanta, 39, 67, 311, 319 Will, 24, 49, 86, 87, 101, 114, 117, 155,
Vedantists, 39 191, 194, 199, 200, 210, 256, 286

Vicarious suffering, 265 Woolman, John, 224, 266

Vigny, Alfred de, 92 Words, 32, 89, 145, 148, 149, 153, 154, Violence,
222 155, 247, 302

Virtue, 323, 338 Wordsworth, 81, 197

Visvanatha, 159 Wu Ch'eng-en, 147, 164 Viveka-Chudamani) n

Yengo, 77

Yogavasistha, 242

Waley, Arthur, 164 Yung-chia Ta-shih, 15, 258 War, iii, 137,269

Whichcote, Benjamin, 244 Zen, 14, 71, 75, 77, 148, 159, 283

Printed in Great Britain

at Hopetoun Street, Edinburgh,

by T. and A. CONSTABLE LTD.

Printers to the University of Edinburgh
