[Note to readers: This is a raw OCR conversion from the included PDF
facsimile. If you could proof-read and format it I will be more than
grateful, as will all subsequent readers.

Please send your edited copy to architects.co@gmail.com.]

ALDOUS HUXLEY, EYELESS IN GAZA

Novels

CRHOME YELLOW

ANTIC HAY

THOSE BARREN LEAVES

POINT COUNTER POINT

BRAVE NEW WORLD

EYELESS IN GAZA

AFTER MANY A SUMMER

TIME MUST HAVE A STOP

APE AND ESSENCE

Short Stories

LIMBO

MORTAL COILS

LITTLE MEXICAN

TWO OR THREE GRACES

BRIEF CANDLE ¦

Biography

GREY EMINENCE *

Essays and Belles Lettres

ON THE MARGIN

ALONG THE ROAD

PROPER STUDIES

DO WHAT YOU WILL

MUSIC AT NIGHT &

VULGARITY IN LITERATURE *

TEXTS AND PRETEXTS (Allthologv)

THE OLIVE T^tEE

ends and means (An Enquiry into the Nature of Ideals)

THE ART OP SEEING *

THEMES AND VARIATIONS

THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY *

SCIENCE, LIBERTY AND PEACE *

Travel

jesting pilate (Illustrated)

beyond the Mexique bay (Illustrated)

Poetry and Drama

VERSES AND A COMEDY

('ncluding early poems, Leda, The Cicadas and The World of Light, a
Comedy) THE GOIOCONDA SMILE *

9 Not yet available in this Collected Edition

ALDOUS HUXLEY

Eyeless in Gaza

A Novel

*955 Chatto & Windus

LONDON

* Eyeless in Gaza at the Mill with slaves *

MILTON

CHAPTER ï

August jotk 193s

THE snapshots had become almost as dim as memories. This young woman who
had stood in a garden at the turn of the century was like a ghost at
cockcrow. His mother, Anthony Beavis recognized. A year or two, perhaps
only a month or two, before she died.

But fashion, as he peered at the brown phantom, fashion is a topiary
art. Those swan-like loins ! That long slanting cascade of bosom—without
any apparent relation to the naked body beneath ! And all that hair,
like an ornamental deformity on the skull ! Oddly hideous and repellent
it seemed in 1933. And yet, if he shut his eyes (as he could not resist
doing), he could see his mother languidly beautiful on her chaise-longue
; or, agile, playing tennis ; or swooping like a bird across the ice of
a far-off winter.

It was the same with these snapshots of Mary Amber-ley, taken ten years
later. The skirt was as long as ever, and within her narrower bell of
drapery woman stiil glided footless, as though on castors. The breasts,
it was true, had been pushed up a bit5 the redundant posterior pulled
in. But the general shape of the clothed body was still strangely
improbable. A crab shelled in whalebone. And this huge plumed hat of
1911 was simply a

1

EYELESS IN GAZA

French funeral of the first class. How could any man in his senses have
been attracted by so profoundly anti-aphrodisiac an appearance ? And
yet, in spite of the snapshots, he could remember her as the very
embodiment of desirability. At the sight of that feathered crab on
wheels his heart had beaten faster, his breathing had become oppressed.

Twenty years, thirty years after the event, the snapshots revealed only
things remote and unfamiliar. But the unfamiliar (dismal automatism!) is
always the absurd. What he remembered, on the contrary, was the emotion
felt when the unfamiliar was still the familiar, when the absurd, being
taken for granted, had nothing absurd about it. The dramas of memory are
always Hamlet in modern dress.

How beautiful his mother had been—beautiful under the convoluted wens of
hair and in spite of the jutting posterior, the long slant of bosom. And
Mary, how maddeningly desirable even in a carapace, even beneath
funereal plumes ! And in his little fawn-coloured coverl coat and
scarlet tarn o'-shanter; as Bubbles, in grass-green velveteen and
ruffles; at school in his Norfolk suit with the knickerbockers that
ended below the knees in two tight tubes of box-cloth ; in his starched
collar and his bowler, if it were Sunday, his red-and-black school-cap
on other days—he too, in his own memory, was always in modern dress,
never the absurd little figure of fun these snapshots revealed. No worse
off, so far as inner feeling was concerned, than the little boys

2


CHAPTER I

of thirty years later in their jerseys and shorts. A proof, Anthony
found himself reflecting impersonally, as he examined the top-hatted and
tail-coated image of himself at Eton, a proof that progress can only be
recorded, never experienced. He reached out for his note-book, opened it
and wrote : * Progress may, perhaps, be perceived by historians; it can
never be felt by those actually involved in the supposed advance. The
young are born into the advancing circumstances, the old take them for
granted within a few months or years.

Advances aren't felt as advances. There is no gratitude— only irritation
if, for any reason, the newly invented conveniences break down. Men
don't spend their time thanking God for cars ; they only curse when the
carburettor is choked.'

He closed the book and returned to the top-hat of 1907.

There was a sound of footsteps and, looking up, he saw Helen Ledwidge
approaching with those long springing strides of hers across the
terrace. Under the wide hat her face was bright with the reflection from
her flame-coloured beach pyjamas. As though she were in hell. And in
fact, he went on to think, she was there. The mind is its own place ;
she carried her hell about with her. The hell of her grotesque marriage
; other hells too, perhaps. But he had always refrained from enquiring
too closely into their nature, had always pretended not to notice when
she herself offered to be his guide through their intricacies. Enquiry
and exploration

3

EYELESS IN GAZA

would land him in heaven knew what quagmire of emotion, what sense of
responsibility.

And he had no time, no energy for emotions and responsibilities. His
work came first.

Suppressing his curiosity, he went on stubbornly playing the part he had
long since assigned himself—the part of the detached philosopher, of the
preoccupied man of science who doesn't see the things that to everyone
else are obvious. He acted as if he could detect in her face nothing but
its external beauties of form and texture. Whereas, of course, flesh is
never wholly opaque ; the soul shows through the walls of its
receptacle.

Those clear grey eyes of hers, that mouth with its delicately lifted
upper lip, were hard and almost ugly with a resentful sadness.

The hell-flush was quenched as she stepped out of the sunlight into the
shadow of the house ; but the sudden pallor of her face served only to
intensify the embittered melancholy of its expression. Anthony looked at
her, but did not rise, did not call a greeting. There was a convention
between them that there should never be any fuss ; not even the fuss of
saying good-morning. No fuss at all. As Helen stepped through the open
glass doors into the room, he turned back to the study of his
photographs.

' Well, here I am,' she said without smiling. She pulled off her hat and
with a beautiful impatient movement of the head shook back the
ruddy-brown curls of her hair. *

Hideously hot ! ' She threw the hat on to the sofa and crossed the room
to where Anthony was

4


CHAPTER I

sitting at his writing-table. ' Not working ? ' she asked in surprise.
It was so rare to find him otherwise than immersed in books and papers.

He shook his head. ' No sociology to-day.'

* What are you looking at ? ' Standing by his chair, she bent over the
scattered snapshots.

' At my old corpses.' He handed her the ghost of the dead Etonian.

After studying it for a moment in silence, ' You looked nice then/ she
commented.

' Merciy mon vieux / ' I le gave her an ironically affectionate pat on
the back of the thigh.

' At my private school they used to call me Benger.' Between his
finger-tips and the rounded resilience of her flesh the silk interposed
a dry sliding smoothness, strangely disagreeable to the touch. ' Short
for Benger's Food. Because I looked so babyish.'

' Sweet,' she went on, ignoring his interruption, ' you looked really
sweet then.

Touching.'

* But I still am/ Anthony protested, smiling up at her. She looked at
him for a moment in silence. Under

the thick dark hair the forehead was beautifully smooth and serene, like
the forehead of a meditative child. Childish too, in a more comical way,
was the short, slightly tilted nose.

Between their narrowed lids the eyes were alive with inner laughter, and
there was a smile also about the corners of the lips—a faint ironic
smile that in some sort contradicted what the lips seemed in their form
to express. They were full lips, finely cut ;

EYELESS IN GAZA

voluptuous and at the same time grave, sad, almost tremulously
sensitive. Lips as though naked in their brooding sensuality ; without
defence of their own and abandoned to their helplessness by the small,
unaggressive chin beneath.

' The worst of it is/ Helen said at last, ' that you're right. You are
sweet, you are touching.

God knows why. Because you oughtn't to be. It's all a swindle really, a
trick for getting people to like you on false pretences.'

* Come ! ' he protested.

' You make them give you something for nothing.'

* But at least I'm always perfectly frank about its being nothing. I
never pretend it's a Grand Passion.' He rolled the r and opened the a's
grotesquely. ' Not even a JVahlverwandschaft* he added, dropping into
German, so as to make all this romantic business of affinities and
violent emotions sound particularly ridiculous. ' Just a bit of fun.'

' Just a bit of fun,' Helen echoed ironically, thinking as she spoke, of
that period at the beginning of the afFair, when she had stood, so to
speak, on the threshold of being in love with him—on the threshold,
waiting to be called in. But how firmly (for all his silence and studied
gentleness), how definitely and decidedly he had shut the door against
her !

He didn't want to be loved. For a moment she had been on the verge of
rebellion ; then, in that spirit of embittered and sarcastic resignation
with which she had learned to face the world, she accepted

6


CHAPTER I

his conditions. They were the more acceptable since there was no better
alternative in sight ; since, after all, he was a remarkable man and,
after all, she was very fond of him ; since, also, he knew how to give
her at least a physical satisfaction. * Just a bit of fun,*

she repeated, and gave a little snort of laughter.

Anthony shot a glance at her, wondering uncomfortably whether she meant
to break the tacitly accepted agreement between them and refer to some
forbidden topic. But his fears were unjustified.

' Yes, I admit it,' she went on after a little silence. 'You're honest
all right. But that doesn't alter the fact that you're always getting
something for nothing. Call it an unintentional swindle. Your face is
your fortune, I suppose. Handsome is as handsome doesn't, in your case/
She bent down once more over the photographs. ' Who's that ? *

He hesitated a moment before replying ; then, with a smile, but feeling
at the same time rather uncomfortable, * One of the not-grand passions,'
he answered. 1 Her name was Gladys/

' It would have been ! ' Helen wrinkled up her nose contemptuously. '
Why did you throw her over ? *

* I didn't. She preferred someone else. Not that I very much minded,' he
was adding, when she interrupted him.

' Perhaps the other man sometimes talked to her when they were in bed/

Anthony flushed. ' What do you mean ? *

7

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Some women, oddly enough, like being talked to in bed. And seeing that
you didn't . - .

You never do, after all.' She threw Gladys aside and picked up the woman
in the clothes of 1900, ' Is that your mother ? *

Anthony nodded. * And that's yours,' he said, pushing across the picture
of Mary Amberley in her funereal plumes. Then, in a tone of disgust, '
All this burden of past experience one trails about with one !' he
added. ' There ought to be some way of getting rid of one's superfluous
memories. How I hate old Proust ! Really detest him.' And with a richly
comic eloquence he proceeded to evoke the vision of that asthmatic
seeker of lost time squatting, horribly white anc flabby, with breasts
almost female but fledged with long black hairs, for ever squatting in
the tepid bath of his remembered past. And all the stale soapsuds of
countless previous washings floated around him, all the accumulated dirt
of years lay crusty on the sides of the tub or hung in dark suspension
in the water.

And there he sat, a pale repellent invalid, taking up spongefuls of his
own thick soup and squeezing it over his face, scooping up cupfuls of it
and appreciatively rolling the grey and gritty liquor round his mouth,
gargling, rinsing his nostrils with it, like a pious Hindu in the
Ganges. . . .

* You talk about him,' said Helen, * as if he were a personal enemy.'

Anthony only laughed.

In the silence that followed, Helen picked up the

8


CHAPTER I

faded snapshot of her mother and began to pore over it intently, as
though it were some mysterious hieroglyph which, if interpreted, might
provide a clue, unriddle an enigma.

Anthony watched her for a little ; then, rousing himself to activity,
dipped into the heap of photographs and brought out his Uncle James in
the tennis clothes of 1906. Dead now—of cancer, poor old wretch, and
with all the consolations of the Catholic religion.

He dropped that snapshot and picked up another. It showed a group in
front of dim Swiss mountains—his father, his stepmother, his two
half-sisters. ' Grindelwald, 1912 ' was written on the back in Mr.
Beavis's neat hand. All four of them, he noticed, were carrying
alpenstocks.

' And I would wish,' he said aloud, as he put the picture down, ' I
would wish my days to be separated each from each by unnatural impiety/

Helen looked up from her undecipherable hieroglyph. 'Then why do you
spend your time looking at old photographs ? '

41 was tidying my cupboard,' he explained. ' They came to light. Like
Tutankhamen. I couldn't resist the temptation to look at them. Besides,
it's my birthday/ he added.

' Your birthday ? '

1 Forty-two to-day.' Anthony shook his head. * Too depressing ! And
since one always likes to deepen the gloom . . .' He picked up a handful
of the snapshots and let them fall again. * The corpses turned up very

9

EYELESS IN GAZA

opportunely. One detects the finger of Providence. The hoof of chance,
if you prefer it.'

' You liked her a lot, didn't you ? ' Helen asked after another silence,
holding out the ghostly image of her mother for him to see.

He nodded and, to divert the conversation, * She civilized me,' he
explained. * I was half a savage when she took me in hand/ He didn't
want to discuss his feelings for Mary Amberley—particularly (though
this, no doubt, was a stupid relic of barbarism) with Helen. ' The white
woman's burden,' he added with a laugh. Then, picking up the alpenstock
group once again, 1 And this is one of the things she delivered me
from,' he said. * Darkest Switzerland. I can never be sufficiently
grateful'

1 It's a pity she couldn't deliver herself,' said Helen, when she had
looked at the alpenstocks.

' How is she, by the way ? '

Helen shrugged her shoulders. ' She was better when she came out of the
nursing home this spring. But she's begun again, of course. The same old
business. Morphia ; and drink in the intervals. I saw her in Paris on
the way here. It was awful ! * She shuddered.

Ironically affectionate, the hand that still pressed her thigh seemed
all of a sudden extremely out of place. He let it fall.

* I don't know which is worse,' Helen went on after a pause. * The
dirt—you've no idea of the state she lives

10


CHAPTER I

in !—or that malice, that awful lying.' She sighed profoundly.

With a gesture that had nothing ironical about it, Anthony took her hand
and pressed it.

* Poor Helen ! '

She stood for a few seconds, motionless and without speech, averted ;
then suddenly shook herself as though out of sleep. He felt her limp
hand tighten on his ; and when she turned round on him, her face was
alive with a reckless and deliberate gaiety. * Poor Anthony, on the
contrary ! ' she said, and from deep in her throat produced a queer
unexpected little sound of swallowed laughter. ' Talk of false pretences
! '

He was protesting that, in her case, they were true, when she bent down
and, with a kind of angry violence, set her mouth against his.

ir


CHAPTER II

April 4th 1934

From A. B.'s diary,

F'lVE words sum up every biography. Video meliora proboque; détériora
sequor. Like all other human beings, I know what I ought to do, but
continue to do what I know I oughtn't to do. This afternoon, for
example, I went to see poor Beppo, miserably convalescent from 'flu. I
knew I ought to have sat with him and let him pour out his complaints
about youth's ingratitude and cruelty, his terror of advancing old age
and loneliness, his awful suspicions that people arc beginning to find
him a bore, no longer à la page. The Bolinskys had given a party without
inviting him, Hagworm hadn't asked him to a week-end since November. ...
I knew I ought to have listened sympathetically, and proffered good
advice, implored him not to make himself miserable over inevitabilities
and trifles.

The advice, no doubt, wouldn't have been accepted— as usual; but still,
one never knows, therefore ought never to fail to give it. Instead of
which I squared conscience in advance by buying him a pound of expensive
grapes and told a lie about some committee I had to run off to, almost
immediately. The truth being that

12


CHAPTER II

I simply couldn't face a repetition of poor B.'s self-commiserations. I
justified my behaviour, as well as by five bob's worth of fruit, by
righteous thoughts : at fifty, the man ought to know better than
continue to attach importance to love affairs and invitations to dinner
and meeting the right people. He oughtn't to be such an ass ; therefore
(impeccable logic) it wasn't incumbent upon me to do what I knew I
should^ do. And so I hurried off after only a quarter of an hour with
him— leaving the poor wretch to solitude and his festering self-pity.
Shall go to him to-morrow for at least two hours.

* Besetting sin '—can one still use the term ? No. It bas too many
unsatisfactory overtones and implications— blood of lamb, terrible thing
to fall into hands of living God, hell fire, obsession with sex,
offences, chastity instead of charity. (Note that poor old Beppo, turned
inside out=Comstock or St. Paul.) Also 'besetting sin ' has generally
implied that incessant, egotistic brooding on self which mars so much
piety. See in this context the diary of Prince, that zealous evangelical
who subsequently founded the Abode of Love—under Guidance, as the
Buchmanites would say ; for his long-repressed wish for promiscuous
copulation at last emerged into consciousness as a command from the Holy
Ghost (with whom in the end he came to identify himself) to ' reconcile
flesh with God.' And he proceeded to reconcile it—in public, apparently,
and on the drawing-room sofa.

b 13

EYELESS IN GAZA

No, one can't use the phrase, nor think in the terms it implies. But
that doesn't mean, of course, that persistent tendencies to behave badly
don't exist, or that it isn't one's business to examine them,
objectively, and try to do something about them. That remark of old
Miller's, as we were riding to see one of his Indian patients in the
mountains : ' Really and by nature every man's a unity ; but you'ye
artificially transformed the unity into a trinity.

One clever man and two idiots—that's what you've made yourself. An
admirable manipulator of ideas, linked with a person who, so far as
self-knowledge and feeling are concerned, is just a moron ; and the pair
of you associated with a half-witted body. A body that's hopelessly
unaware of all it does and feels, that has no accomplishments, that
doesn't know how to use itself or anything else. Two imbeciles and one
intellectual. But man is a democracy, where the majority rules. You've
got to do something about that majority.' This journal is a first step.
Self-knowledge an essential preliminary to self-change. (Pure science
and then applied.) That which besets me is indifference. I can't be
bothered about people. Or rather, won't. For I avoid, carefully, all
occasions for being bothered. A necessary part of the treatment is to
embrace all the bothersome occasions one can, to go out of one's way to
create them. Indifference is a form of sloth. For one can work hard, as
I've always done, and yet wallow in sloth ; be industrious about one's
job, but scandalously lazy about all that isn't the job. Because, of
course, the job is fun.

Whereas


CHAPTER II

the non-job—personal relations, in my case—is disagreeable and
laborious. More and more disagreeable as the habit of avoiding personal
relations ingrains itself with the passage of time. Indifference is a
form of sloth, and sloth in its turn is one of the symptoms of
loveless-ness. One isn't lazy about what one loves. The problem is : how
to love ? (Once more the word is suspect-— greasy from being fingered by
generations of Stigginses. There ought to be some way of dry-cleaning
and disinfecting words. Love, purity, goodness, spirit—a pile of dirty
linen waiting for the laundress. How, then, to—

not ' love/ since it's an unwashed handkerchief— feel, say, persistent
affectionate interest in people? How make the anthropological approach
to them, as old Miller would say ?

Not easy to answer.

April 5th.

Worked all morning. For it would be silly not to put my materials into
shape. Into a new shape, of course. My original conception was of a vast
Bouvard et Pécuchet, constructed of historical facts. A picture of
futility, apparently objective, scientific, but composed, I realize, in
order to justify my own way of life. If men had always behaved either
like half-wits or baboons, if they couldn't behave otherwise, then I was
justified in sitting comfortably in the stalls with my opera-glasses.
Whereas if there were something to be done, if the behaviour could be
modified . . . Meanwhile a description of the behaviour and an account
of the ways of modify-EYELESS IN GAZA

ing it will be valuable. Though not so valuable as to justify complete
abstention from all other forms of activity.

In the afternoon to Miller's, where I found a parson, who takes
Christianity seriously and has started an organization of pacifists.
Purchas by name. Middle-aged. Slightly the muscular-jocular Christian
manner. (How hard to admit that a man can use clichés and yet be
intelligent !) But a very decent sort of man. More than decent, indeed.
Rather impressive.

The aim is to use and extend Purchas's organization. The unit a small
group, like the Early Christian agape, or the communist cell (Note that
all successful movements have been built up in rowing eights or football
elevens.) Purchas's groups preface meetings with Christian devotions.
Empirically, it is found that a devotional atmosphere increases
efficiency, intensifies spirit of co-operation and self-sacrifice. But
devotion in Christian terms will be largely unacceptable. Miller
believes possible a non-theological praxis of meditation. Which he would
like, of course, to couple with training, along F. M.

Alexander's lines, in use of the self, beginning with physical control
and achieving through it (since mind and body are one) control of
impulses and feelings. But this is impracticable. The necessary teachers
don't exist. ' We must be content to do what we can from the mental
side. The physical will let us down, of course. The flesh is weak in so
many more ways than we suppose/

16


CHAPTER II

I agreed to contribute money, prepare some literature and go round
speaking to groups.

The last is the most difficult, as I have always refused to utter in
public. When Purchas had gone, asked Miller if I should take lessons in
speaking.

Answer. * If you take lessons before you're well and physically
co-ordinated, you'll merely be learning yet another way of using
yourself badly. Get well, achieve co-ordination, use yourself properly ;
you'll be able to speak in any way you please. The difficulties, from
stage fright to voice production, will no longer exist/

Miller then gave me a lesson in use of the self. Learning to sit in a
chair, to get out of it, to lean back and forward. He warned me it might
seem a bit pointless at first. But that interest and understanding would
grow with achievement. And that I should find it the solution of the
video meliora proboque^ détériora sequor problem : a technique for
translating good intentions into acts, for being sure of doing what one
knows one ought to do.

Spent the evening with Beppo. After listening to catalogues of miseries,
suggested that there was no cure, only prevention. Avoid the cause. His
reaction was passionate anger : I was robbing life of its point,
condemning him to suicide. In answer I hinted that there was more than
one point. He said he would rather die than give up his point ; then
changed his mood and wished to God he could give it up. But for what ? I

17

EYELESS IN GAZA

suggested pacifism. But he was a pacifist already, always been. Yes, I
knew that ; but a passive pacifist, a negative one. There was such a
thing as active and positive pacifism.

He listened, said he'd think about it, thought perhaps it might be a way
out.

18


CHAPTER III

August 30th 1933

FROM the flat roof of the house the eye was drawn first towards the
west, where the pines slanted down to the sea—a blue Mediterranean bay
fringed with pale bone-like rocks and cupped between high hills, green
on their lower slopes with vines, grey with olive trees, then pine-dark,
earth-red, rock-white or rosy-brown with parched heath.

Through a gap between the nearer hills, the long straight ridge of the
Sainte-Baume stood out metallically clear, but blue with distance. To
north and south, the garden was hemmed in by pines; but eastwards, the
vineyards and the olive orchards mounted in terraces of red earth to a
crest ; and the last trees stood, sometimes dark and brooding, sometimes
alive with tremulous silver, against the sky.

There were mattresses on the roof for sun-bathing ; and on one of these
they were lying, their heads in the narrow shade of the southern
parapet. It was almost noon ; the sunlight fell steep out of the
flawless sky ; but a faint breeze stirred and died and swelled again
into motion. Lapped in that fitfully tempered heat, skin seemed to
acquire a livelier sensibility, almost an independent consciousness. As
though it were drinking a new life from the sun. And that strange,
violent,

*9

EYELESS IN GAZA

flamy life from outer space seemed to strike through the skin, to
permeate and transmute the flesh beneath, till the whole body was a
thing of alien sun-stuff and the very soul felt itself melting out of
its proper identity and becoming something else, something of a
different, an other-than-human kind.

There are so few possible grimaces, such a paucity, in comparison with
all the thoughts and feelings and sensations, such a humiliating poverty
of reflexes, even of consciously expressive gestures ! Still lucid in
his self-estrangement, Anthony observed the symptoms of that death-bed
in which he also had his part as assassin and fellow-victim. Restlessly
she turned her head on the cushions, this way, that way, as though
seeking, but always vainly, some relief, however slight, some respite,
if only for a moment, from her intolerable suffering. Sometimes, with
the gesture of one who prays despairingly diat a cup may be removed, she
clasped her hands, and raising them to her mouth gnawed at the clenched
knuckles or pressed a wrist between her parted teeth as if to stifle her
own crying. Distorted, the face was a mask of extremest grief. It was
the face, he suddenly perceived, as he bent down towards those tormented
lips, of one of Van der Weyden's holy women at the foot of the Cross.

And then, from one moment to the next, there was a stillness. The victim
no longer rolled her tortured head on the pillow. The imploring hands
fell limp. The agonized expression of pain gave place to a superhuman

20


CHAPTER III

and rapturous serenity. The mouth became grave like that of a saint.
Behind the closed eyelids what beatific vision had presented itself?

They lay for a long time in a golden stupor of sunlight and fulfilled
desire. It was Anthony who first stirred. Moved by the dumb unthinking
gratitude and tenderness of his satisfied body he reached out a
caressing hand. Her skin was hot to the touch like fruit in the sun. He
propped himself up on his elbow and opened his eyes.

* You look like a Gauguin/ he said after a moment. Brown like a Gauguin
and, curiously, it struck him, flat like a Gauguin too ; for the sunburn
suppressed those nacreous gleams of carmine and blue and green that give
the untanned white body its peculiar sumpruousness of relief.

The sound of his voice broke startlingly into Helen's warm delicious
trance of unconsciousness. She winced almost with pain. Why couldn't he
leave her in peace ? She had been so happy in that other world of her
transfigured body ; and now he was calling her back—back to this world,
back to her ordinary hell of emptiness and drought and discontent. She
left his words unanswered and, shutting her eyes yet tighter against the
menace of reality, tried to force her way back to the paradise from
which she had been dragged.

Brown like a Gauguin, and flat. . . . But the first Gauguin he ever saw
(and had pretended, he remembered, to like a great deal more than he
actually did) had been with Mary Amberley that time in Paris—that
exciting

EYELESS IN GAZA

and, for the boy of twenty that he then was, extraordinary and
apocalyptic time.

He frowned to himself; this past of his was becoming importunate ! But
when, in order to escape from it, he bent down to kiss Helen's shoulder,
he found the sun-warmed skin impregnated with a faint, yet penetrating
smell, at once salty and smoky, a smell that transported him
instantaneously to a great chalk pit in the flank of the Chilterns,
where, in Brian Foxe's company, he had spent an inexplicably pleasurable
hour striking two flints together and sniffing, voluptuously, at the
place where the spark had left its characteristic tang of marine
combustion.

' L-like sm-moke under the s-sea,' had been Brian's stammered comment
when he was given the flints to smell.

Even the seemingly most solid fragments of present reality are riddled
with pitfalls. What could be more uncompromisingly there, in the
present, than a woman's body in the sunshine ? And yet it had betrayed
him. The firm ground of its sensual immediacy and of his own physical
tenderness had opened beneath his feet and precipitated him into another
time and place. Nothing was safe. Even this skin had the scent of smoke
under the sea. This living skin, this present skin ; but it was nearly
twenty years since Brian's death.

A chalk pit, a picture gallery, a brown figure in the sun, a skin, here,
redolent of salt and smoke, and here (like Mary's, he remembered)
savagely musky. Some-22


CHAPTER HI

where in the mind a lunatic shuffled a pack of snapshots and dealt them
out at random, shuffled once more and dealt them out in different order,
again and again, indefinitely.

There was no chronology. The idiot remembered no distinction between
before and after.

The pit was as real and vivid as the gallery. That ten years separated
flints from Gauguins was a fact, not given, but discoverable only on
second thoughts by the calculating intellect. The thirty-five years of
his conscious life made themselves immediately known to him as a chaos—a
pack of snapshots in the hands of a lunatic. And who decided which
snapshots were to be kept, which thrown away ? A frightened or
libidinous animal, according to the Freudians. But the Freudians were
victims of the pathetic fallacy, incorrigible rationalizers always in
search of sufficient reasons, of comprehensible motives. Fear and lust
are the most easily comprehensible motives of all. Therefore . . .

But psychology had no more right to be anthropomorphic, or even
exclusively zoomorphic, than any other science. Besides a reason and an
animal, man was also a collection of particles subject to the laws of
chance. Some things were remembered for their utility or their appeal to
the higher faculties of the mind ; some, by the presiding animal,
remembered (or else deliberately forgotten) for their emotional content.
But what of the innumerable remembered tilings without any particular
emotional content, without utility, or beauty, or rational significance
? Memory in these

*3

EYELESS IN GAZA

cases seemed to be merely a matter of luck. At the time of the event
certain particles happened to be in a favourable position. Click ! the
event found itself caught, indelibly recorded. For no reason whatever.
Unless, it now rather disquietingly occurred to him, unless of course
the reason were not before the event, but after it, in what had been the
future. What if that picture gallery had been recorded and stored away
in the cellars of his mind for the sole and express purpose of being
brought up into consciousness at this present moment ? Brought up,
to-day, when he was forty-two and secure, forty-two and fixed,
unchangeably himself, brought up along with those critical years of his
adolescence, along with the woman who had been his teacher, his first
mistress, and was now a hardly human creature festering to death, alone,
in a dirty burrow ? And what if that absurd childish game with the
flints had had a point, a profound purpose, which was simply to be
recollected here on this blazing roof, now as his lips made contact with
Helen's sun-warmed flesh ? In order that he might be forced, in the
midst of this act of detached and irresponsible sensuality, to think of
Brian and of the things that Brian had lived for ; yes, and had died
for—died for, another image suddenly reminded him, at the foot of just
such a cliff as that beneath which they had played as children in the
chalk pit.

Yes, even Brian's suicide, he now realized with horror, even the poor
huddled body on the rocks, was mysteriously implicit in this hot skin.

24


CHAPTER III

One, two, three, four—counting each movement of his hand, he began to
caress her. The gesture was magical, would transport him, if repeated
sufficiently often, beyond the past and the future, beyond right and
wrong, into the discrete, the self-sufficient, the atomic present.
Particles of thought, desire and feeling moving at random among
particles of time, coming into casual contact and as casually parting. A
casino, an asylum, a zoo ; but also, in a corner, a library and someone
thinking. Someone largely at the mercy of the croupiers, at the mercy of
the idiots and the animals ; but still irrepressible and indefatigable.
Another two or three years and the Elements of Sociology would be
finished. In spite of everything ; yes, in spite of everything, he
thought with a kind of defiant elation, and counted thirty-two,
thirty-three, thirty-four, thirty-five . . .

2V


CHAPTER IV

November 6th 1902

ORNS with a frizzle of orange hair between ; the pink muzzle lowered
enquiringly towards a tiny cup and saucer ; eyes expressive of a more
than human astonishment. ' the ox/ it was proclaimed in six-inch
lettering, ' the ox in the tea-cup.' The thing was supposed to be a
reason for buying beef extract—was a reason.

Ox in Cup. The words, the basely comic image, spotted the home counties
that summer and autumn like a skin disease. One of a score of nasty and
discreditable infections. The train which carried Anthony Beavis into
Surrey rolled through mile-long eczemas of vulgarity. Pills, soaps,
cough drops and—more glaringly inflamed and scabby than all the
rest—beef essence, the cupped ox.

' Thirty-one . . . thirty-two/ the boy said to himself, and wished he
had begun his counting when the train started. Between Waterloo and
Clapham Junction there must have been hundreds of oxen. Millions.

Opposite, leaning back in his corner, sat Anthony's father. With his
left hand he shaded his eyes. Under the drooping brown moustache his
lips moved.

' Stay for me there,' John Beavis was saying to the

26

H


CHAPTER IV

person who, behind his closed lids, was sometimes still alive, sometimes
the cold, immobile thing of his most recent memories :

* Stay for me there ; I shall not fail To meet thee in that hollow vale/

There was no immortality, of course. After Darwin, after the Fox
Sisters, after John Beavis's own father, the surgeon, how could there be
? Beyond that hollow vale there was nothing. But all the same, oh, all
the same, stay for me, stay for me, stay, stay !

' Thirty-three.'

Anthony turned away from the hurrying landscape and was confronted by
the spectacle of that hand across the eyes, those moving lips. That he
had ever thought of counting the oxen seemed all at once shameful, a
betrayal. And Uncle James, at the other end of the seat, with his
Times—and his face, as he read, twitching every few seconds in sudden
spasms of nervousness. He might at least have had the decency not to
read it now—now, while they were on their way to . . . Anthony refused
to say the words ; words would make it all so clear, and he didn't want
to know too clearly. Reading the Times might be shameful; but the other
thing was terrible, too terrible to bear thinking about, and yet so
terrible that you couldn't help thinking about it.

Anthony looked out of the window again, through tears. The green and
golden brightness of St. Martin's summer swam in an obscuring
iridescence. And sud-

*7

EYELESS IN GAZA

denly the wheels of the train began to chant articulately. *
Dead-a-dead-a-dead,' they shouted, ' dead-a-dead-a-dead . . •' For ever.
The tears overflowed, were warm for an instant on his cheeks, then icy
cold. He pulled out his handkerchief and wiped them away, wiped the fog
out of his eyes. Luminous under the sun, the world before him was like
one vast and intricate jewel. The elms had withered to a pale gold. Huge
above the fields, and motionless, they seemed to be meditating in the
crystal light of the morning, seemed to be remembering, seemed, from the
very brink of dissolution, to be looking back and in a last ecstasy of
recollection living over again, concentrated in this shining moment of
autumnal time, all the long-drawn triumph of spring and summer,

* dead-a-dead/ in a sudden frenzy yelled the wheels, as the train
crossed a bridge, ' a-dead-a-dead ! '

Anthony tried not to listen—vainly; then tried to make the wheels say
something else.

Why shouldn't they say, To stop the train pull down the chain ? Thai was
what they usually said. With a great effort of concentration he forced
them to change their refrain.

' To stop the train pull down the chain, to stop the train pull down
a-dead-a-dead-a-dead. .

. / It was no good.

Mr. Beavis uncovered his eyes for a moment and looked out of the window.
How bright, the autumnal trees ! Cruelly bright they would have seemed,
insultingly, except for something desperate in their stillness, a
certain glassy fragility that, oh ! invited disaster, that

28


CHAPTER IV

prophetically announced the coming darkness and the black branches
moving in torture among stars, the sleet like arrows along the screaming
wind.

Uncle James turned the page of his Times. The Ritualists and the
Kensitites were at it again, he saw ; and was delighted. Let dog eat
dog. * MR. chamberlain at university college school/ What was the old
devil up to now ? Unveiling a tablet to the Old Boys who had been killed
in the war. ' Over one hundred young men went to the front, and twelve
of them laid down their lives for the country in South Africa (cheers).*
Deluded idiots, thought Uncle James, who had always been passionately a
pro-Boer.

Painted, among the real cows in their pasture, the enormous horns, the
triangular auburn frizz, the enquiring nostrils, the tea-cup. Anthony
shut his eyes against the vision.

' No, I won't,' he said with all the determination he had previously
used against the wheels. He refused to know the horror ; he refused to
know the ox. But what was the good of refusing ? The wheels were still
shouting away. And how could he suppress the fact that this ox was the
thirty-fourth, on the right, from Clapham Junction ? A number is always
a number, even on the way to . . . But counting was shameful, counting
was like Uncle James's Times. Counting was shirking, was betraying. And
yet the other thing, the thing they ought to be thinking about, was
really too terrible. Too unnatural, somehow.

29

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Whatever we may have thought, or still think, as to the causes, the
necessity, the justice of the war which is now happily at an end, I
think that we must all have a feeling of profound satisfaction that when
the country called its children to arms, the manhood of the nation
leaped to it in response. . . .' His face twitching with exasperation,
Uncle James put down the Times and looked at his watch.

* Two and a half minutes late,' he said angrily.

' If only it were a hundred years late,' thought his brother. * Or ten
years early—no, twelve, thirteen. The first year of our marriage.'

James Beavis looked out of the window. ' And we're still at least a mile
from Lollingdon,'

he went on.

As though to a sore, to an aching tooth, his fingers travelled again to
the chronometer in his waistcoat pocket. Time for its own sake. Always
imperiously time, categorically time—time to look at one's watch and see
the time. . . .

The wheels spoke more and more slowly, became at last inarticulate. The
brakes screamed.

' Lollingdon, Lollingdon,' the porter called.

But Uncle James was already on the platform. ' Quick ! ' he shouted,
striding, long-legged, beside the still moving train. His hand went once
more to that mystical ulcer for ever gnawing at his consciousness.
'Quick!'

A sudden resentment stirred in his brother's mind. 1 What does he want
me to be quick for ? ' As if they

30


CHAPTER IV

were in danger of missing something—some pleasure, some precariously
brief entertainment.

Anthony climbed down after his father. They walked towards the gate,
along a wall of words and pictures. a guinea a box and a blessing to men
the pickwick the owl and kills moths bugs beetles a spade a spade and
Branson's camp coffee the ox in . . . And suddenly here were the horns,
the expressive eyes, the cup—the thirty-fifth cup—' No, I won't, I won't
'— but all the same, the thirty-fifth, the thirty-fifth from Clapham
Junction on die right-hand side.

The cab smelt of straw and leather. Of straw and leather and of the year
eighty-eight, was it ? yes, eighty-eight ; that Christmas when they had
driven to the Champernownes'

dance—he and she and her mother— in the cold, with the sheepskin rug
across their knees. And as though by accident (for he had not yet dared
to make the gesture deliberately) the back of his hand had brushed
against hers ; had brushed, as though by accident, had casually rested.
Her mother was talking about the difficulty of getting servants—and when
you did get them, they didn't know anything, they were lazy. She hadn't
moved her hand ! Did that mean she didn't mind ? He took the risk ; his
fingers closed over hers. They were disrespectful, her mother went on,
they were ... He felt an answering pressure and, looking up, divined in
the darkness that she was smiling at him.

* Really,' her mother was saying, ' I don't know what

31

EYELESS IN GAZA

things are coming to nowadays.' And he had seen, by way of silent
comment, the mischievous flash of Maisie's teeth ; and that little
squeeze of the hand had been deliciously conspiratorial, secret and
illicit.

Slowly, hoof after hoof, the old horse drew them ; slowly along lanes,
into the heart of the great autumnal jewel of gold and crystal ; and
stopped at last at the very core of it. In the sunshine, the church
tower was like grey amber. The clock, James Beavis noticed with
annoyance, was slow. They passed under the lych-gate. Startlingly and
hideously black, four people were walking up the path in front of them.
Two huge women (to Anthony they all seemed giantesses) rose in great
inky cones of drapery from the flagstones* With them, still further
magnified by their top-hats, went a pair of enormous men.

1 The Champernownes,' said James Beavis ; and the syllables of the
familiar name were like a sword, yet another sword, in the very quick of
his brother's being. ' The Champernownes and—let's see—what's the name
of that young fellow their daughter married ? Anstey ? Annerley ? ' He
glanced enquiringly at John ; but John was staring fixedly in front of
him and did not answer.

' Amersham ? Atherton ? ' James Beavis frowned with irritation.
Meticulous, he attached an enormous importance to names and dates and
figures; he prided himself on his power to reproduce them correctly. A
lapse of memory drove him to fury. ' Atherton ? Anderson

? ' And what made it more maddening was the fact

32


CHAPTER IV

that the young man was so good-looking, carried himself so well—not in
that stupid, stiff, military way, like his father-in-law, the General,
but gracefully, easily . . . * I shan't know what to call him/ he said
to himself; and his right cheek began to twitch, as though some living
creature had been confined beneath the skin and were violently
struggling to escape.

They walked on. It seemed to Anthony that he had swallowed his
heart—swallowed it whole, without chewing. He felt rather sick, as
though he were expecting to be caned.

The black giants halted, turned, and came back to meet them. Hats were
raised, hands shaken.

* And dear little Anthony ! ' said Lady Champernowne, when at last it
was his turn.

Impulsively, she bent down and kissed him.

She was fat. Her lips left a disgusting wet place on his cheek. Anthony
hated her.

' Perhaps I ought to kiss him too/ thought Mary Amberley, as she watched
her mother.

One was expected to do such odd things when one was married. Six months
ago, when she was still Mary Champernowne and fresh from school, it
would have been unthinkable. But now . . . one never knew. In the end,
however, she decided that she wouldn't kiss the boy, it would really be
too ridiculous. She pressed his hand without speaking, smiling only from
the remote security of her secret happiness. She was nearly five months
gone with child, and had lived for these last two or three weeks in a
kind 33

EYELESS IN GAZA

of trance of drowsy bliss, inexpressibly delicious. Bliss in a world
that had become beautiful and rich and benevolent out of all
recognition. The country, as they drove that morning in the gently
swaying landau, had been like paradise ; and this little plot of green
between the golden trees and the tower was Eden itself. Poor Mrs. Beavis
had died, it was true ; so pretty still, so young. How sad that was !
But the sadness, somehow, did not touch this secret bliss of hers,
remained profoundly irrelevant to it, as though it were the sadness of
somebody in another planet.

Anthony looked up for a moment into the smiling face, so bright in its
black setting, so luminous with inner peace and happiness, then was
overcome with shyness and dropped his eyes.

Fascinated, meanwhile, Roger Amberley observed his father-in-law and
wondered how it was possible for anyone to live so unfailingly in
character; how one could contrive to be a real general and at the same
time to look and sound so exactly like a general on the musical comedy
stage. Even at a funeral, even while he was saying a few well-chosen
words to the bereaved husband —pure Grossmith ! Under his fine brown
moustache his lips twitched irrepressibly.

* Looks badly cut up/ the General was thinking, as he talked to John
Beavis ; and felt sorry for the poor fellow, even while he still
disliked him. For of course the man was an affected bore and a prig, too
clever, but at the same time a fool. Worst of all, not a man's man.

34


CHAPTER IV

Always surrounded by petticoats. Mothers' petticoats, aunts' petticoats,
wives' petticoats.

A few years in the army would have done him all the good in the world.
Still, he did look most horribly cut up. And Maisie had been a sweet
little thing. Too good for him, of course. . . .

They stood for a moment, then all together slowly moved towards the
church. Anthony was in the midst of them, a dwarf among the giants.
Their blackness hemmed him in, obscured the sky, eclipsed the amber
tower and the trees. He walked as though at the bottom of a moving well.
Its black walls rustled all around him, He began to cry.

He had not wanted to know—had done his best not to know, except
superficially, as one knows, for example, that thirty-five comes after
thirty-four. But this black well was dark with the concentrated horror
of death. There was no escape. His sobs broke out uncontrollably.

Mary Amberley, who had been lost in the rapturous contemplation of
golden leaves patterned against the pale sky, looked down for a moment
at this small creature weeping on another planet, then turned away
again.

* Poor child ! ' his father said to himself ; and then, overbidding as
it were, ' Poor motherless child ! ' he added deliberately, and was glad
(for he wanted to suffer) that the words should cost him so much pain to
pronounce. He looked down at his son, saw the grief-3Ï

EYELESS IN GAZA

twisted face, the full and sensitive lips so agonizingly hurt, and above
this tear-stained distortion the broad high forehead, seemingly unmoved
in its smooth purity ; saw, and felt his heart wrung with an additional
pain.

* Dear boy ! ' he said aloud, thinking, as he spoke, how this grief
would surely bring them nearer together. It was so difficult somehow
with a child—so hard to be natural, to establish a contact. But surely,
surely this sadness, and their common memories ... He squeezed the small
hand within his own.

They were at the church door. The well disintegrated.

* One might be in Tibet,' thought Uncle James as he took off his hat. *
Why not one's boots as well ? '

Inside the church was an ancient darkness, smelly with centuries of
rustic piety. Anthony took two breaths of that sweet-stale air, and felt
his midriff heave with a qualm of disgust.

Fear and misery had already made him swallow his heart ; and now this
smell, this beastly smell that meant that the place was full of germs. .
. . * Reeking with germs ! *

He heard her voice— her voice that always changed when she talked about
germs, became different, as though somebody else was speaking. At
ordinary times, when she wasn't angry, it sounded so soft and somehow
lazy—laughingly lazy, or else tiredly lazy.

Germs made it suddenly almost fierce, and at the same time frightened. '
Always spit when there's a bad smell about,' she had told him. * There
might be typhoid germs in the air.* His mouth, as he recalled her words,
began to water. But how could 36


CHAPTER IV

he spit here, in church ? There was nothing to do but swallow his
spitde. He shuddered as he did so, with fear and a sickening disgust.
And suppose he really should be sick in this stinking place ? The
apprehension made him feel still sicker. And what did one have to do
during the service ? He had never been to a funeral before.

James Beavis looked at his watch. In three minutes the hocus-pocus was
timed to begin.

Why hadn't John insisted on a plain-clothes funeral ? It wasn't as if
poor Maisie had ever set much store by this kind of thing. A silly
little woman ; but never religiously silly.

Hers had been the plain secular silliness of mere female frivolity. The
silliness of reading novels on sofas, alternating with the silliness of
tea-parties and picnics and dances.

Incredible that John had managed to put up with that kind of foolery—had
even seemed to like it ! Women crackling like hens round the tea-table.
James Beavis frowned with angry contempt. He hated women—was disgusted
by them. All those soft bulges of their bodies. Horrible. And the
stupidity, the brainlessness. But anyhow, poor Maisie had never been one
of the curate-fanciers. It was those awful relations of hers. There were
deans in the family— deans and deanesses. John hadn't wanted to offend
them. Weak-minded of him. One ought to be offensive on a matter of
principle.

The organ played. A litde procession of surplices entered through the
open door. Some men carried in

37

EYELESS IN GAZA

what seemed a great pile of flowers. There was singing. Then silence.
And then, in an extraordinary voice, Now is Christ risen from the dead/
began the clergyman; and went on and on, all about God, and death, and
beasts at Ephesus, and the natural body. But Anthony hardly heard,
because he could think of nothing except those germs that were still
there in spite of the smell of the flowers, and of the spittle that kept
flowing into his mouth and that he had to swallow in spite of the
typhoid and influenza, and of that horrible sick feeling in his stomach.
How long would it last ?

' Like a goat,' James Beavis said to himself as he listened to the
intoning from the lectern.

He looked again at that young son-in-law of the Champernownes. Anderton,
Abdy ... ?

What a fine, classical profile !

His brother sat with bent head and a hand across his eyes, thinking of
the ashes in the casket there beneath the flowers—the ashes that had
been her body.

The service was over at last. ' Thank goodness ! ' thought Anthony, as
he spat surreptitiously into his handkerchief and folded away the germs
into his pocket, ' Thank goodness ! ' He hadn't been sick. He followed
his father to the door and, rapturously, as he stepped out of the
twilight, breathed the pure air. The sun was still shining. He looked
around and up into the pale sky. Overhead, in the church tower, a sudden
outcry of jackdaws was like the noise of a stone flung glancingly on to
a frozen pond and skidding away with a reiteration of glassy chinking
across the ice.

38


CHAPTER IV

* But, Anthony, you mustn't throw stones on the ice,' his mother had
called to him. ' They get frozen in, and then the skaters . . /

He remembered how she had come swerving round towards him, on one
foot—swooping, he had thought, like a sea-gull ; all in white :
beautiful. And now . . . The tears came into his eyes again. But, oh,
why had she insisted on his trying to skate ?

' I don't want to,' he had said ; and when she asked why, it had been
impossible to explain. He was afraid of being laughed at, of course.
People made such fools of themselves. But how could he have told her
that ? In the end he had cried—in front of everyone. It couldn't have
been worse. He had almost hated her that morning. And now she was dead,
and up there in the tower the jackdaws were throwing stones on last
winter's ice.

They were at the grave-side now. Once more Mr. Beavis pressed his son's
hand. He was trying to forestall the effect upon the child's mind of
these last, most painful moments.

' Be brave,' he whispered. The advice was tendered as much to himself as
to the boy.

Leaning forward, Anthony looked into the hole. It seemed extraordinarily
deep. He shuddered, closed his eyes; and immediately there she was,
swooping towards him, white, like a sea-gull, and white again in the
satin evening-dress when she came to say good-night before she went out
to dinner, with that scent on her as 39

EYELESS IN GAZA

she bent over him in bed, and the coolness of her bare arms. ' You're
like a cat,' she used to say when he rubbed his cheek against her arms.
* Why don't you purr while you're about it ? '

' Anyhow,' thought Uncle James with satisfaction, ' he was firm about
the cremation/ The Christians had been scored off there. Resurrection of
the body, indeed ! InA.D. 1902 !

When his time came, John Beavis was thinking, this was where he would be
buried. In this very grave. His ashes next to hers.

The clergyman was talking again in that extraordinary voice. ' Thou
knowest, Lord, the secret of our hearts . . .' Anthony opened his eyes.
Two men were lowering into the hole a small terra-cotta box, hardly
larger than a biscuit tin. The box touched the bottom ; the ropes were
hauled up.

' Earth to earth,' bleated the goat-like voice, ' ashes to ashes.'

' My ashes to her ashes/ thought John Beavis. - Mingled/

And suddenly he remembered that time in Rome, a year after they were
married ; those June nights and the fire-flies, under the trees, in the
Doria Gardens, like stars gone crazy.

* Who shall change our vile body that it may be like unto his glorious
body . . .'

' Vile, vile ? ' His very soul protested.

Earth fell, one spadeful, then another. The box was

40


CHAPTER IV

almost covered. It was so small, so dreadfully and unexpectedly tiny ...
the image of that enormous ox, that minute tea-cup, rose to Anthony's
imagination. Rose up obscenely and would not be exorcized. The jackdaws
cried again in the tower. Like a sea-gull she had swooped towards him,
beautiful. But the ox was still there, still in its tea-cup, still base
and detestable ; and he himself yet baser, yet more hateful.

John Beavis released the hand he had been holding and, laying his arm
round the boy's shoulders, pressed the thin little body against his
own—close, close, till he felt in his own flesh the sobs by which it was
shaken.

* Poor child ! Poor motherless child I '

4»


CHAPTER V

December 8th 1926

* '^TOV wouldn't dare,' Joyce said.

I ' I would/

* No, you wouldn't.'

II tell you I would,' Helen Amberley insisted more emphatically.

Maddeningly sensible, ' You'd be sent to prison if you were caught/ the
elder sister went on. ' No, not to prison,' she corrected herself. *
You're too young. You'd be sent to a reformatory.'

The blood rushed up to Helen's face. * You and your reformatories ! '
she said in a tone that was meant to be contemptuous, but that trembled
with i rrepressible anger. That reformatory was a personal affront.
Prison was terrible ; so terrible that there was something fine about
it. (She had visited Chillon, had crossed the Bridge of Sighs.) But a
reformatory—no ! that was utterly ignoble. A reformatory was on the same
level as a public lavatory or a station on the District Railway. '
Reformatories ! ' she repeated. It was typical of Joyce to think of
reformatories. She always dragged anything amusing and adventurous down
into the mud. And, what made it so much worse, she was generally quite
right in doing so : the mud was facts, the mud was

42


CHAPTER V

common sense. ' You think I wouldn't dare to do it, because you wouldn't
dare,' Helen went on. ' Well, I shall do it. Just to show you. I shall
steal something from every shop we go to. Every one. So there.'

Joyce began to feel seriously alarmed. She glanced questioningly at her
sister. A profile, pale now and rigid, the chin defiandy lifted, was all
that Helen would let her see. ' Now, look here,' she began severely.

' I'm not listening,' said Helen, speaking straight ahead into
impersonal space.

4 Don't be a little fool ! '

There was no answer. The profile might have been that of a young queen
on a coin. They turned into the Gloucester Road and walked towards the
shops.

But suppose the wretched girl really meant what she said ? Joyce changed
her strategy. *

Of course I know you dare,' she said conciliatorily. There was no
answer. * I'm not doubting it for a moment.' She turned again towards
Helen ; but the profile continued to stare ahead with eyes unwaveringly
averted. The grocer's was at the next corner, not twenty yards away.
There was no time to lose. Joyce swallowed what remained of her pride. '
Now, look here, Helen,' she said, and her tone was appealing, she was
throwing herself on her sister's generosity. * I do wish you wouldn't.'
In her fancy she saw the whole deplorable scene. Helen caught red-handed
; the indignant shopkeeper, talking louder and louder; her own attempts
at explanation and excuse made unavailing by the other's intolerable
behaviour.

43

EYELESS IN GAZA

For, of course, Helen would just stand there, in silence, not uttering a
word of self-justification or regret, calm and contemptuously smiling,
as though she were a superior being and everybody else just dirt. Which
would enrage the shopkeeper still more. Until at last he'd send for a
policeman. And then . . . But what would Colin think when he heard of it
? His future sister-in-law arrested for stealing ! He might break off
the engagement. ' Oh, please, don't do it,' she begged ; 1 please ! '
But she might as well have begged the image of King George on a
half-crown to turn round and wink at her. Pale, determined, a young
queen minted in silver, Helen kept on. ' Please ! * Joyce repeated,
almost tearfully. The thought that she might lose Colin was a torture. '
Please ! ' But the smell of groceries was already in her nostrils ; they
were on the very threshold. She caught her sister by the sleeve ; but
Helen shook her off and marched straight in. With a sinking of the
heart, Joyce followed as though to her execution. The young man at the
cheese and bacon counter smiled welcomingly as they came in. In her
effort to avert suspicion, to propitiate in advance his inevitable
indignation, Joyce smiled back with an effusive friendliness. No, that
was overdoing it. She readjusted her face. Calm ; easy ; perfectly the
lady, but at the same time affable ; affable and (what was that word ?),
oh yes, gracious—like Queen Alexandra. Graciously she followed Helen
across the shop.

But why, she was thinking, why had she ever broached the subject of
crime ?

44


CHAPTER V

Why, knowing Helen, had she been mad enough to argue that, if one were
properly brought up, one simply couldn't be a criminal ? It was obvious
what Helen's response would be to that. She had simply asked for it.

It was to the younger sister that their mother had given the shopping
list. * Because she's almost as much of a scatter-brain as I am/ Mrs-
Amberley had explained, with that touch of complacency that always
annoyed Joyce so much. People had no right to boast about their faults.
' It'll teach her to be a good housekeeper— God help her ! * she added
with a little snort of laughter.

Standing at the counter, Helen unfolded the paper, read, and then, very
haughtily and without a smile, as though she were giving orders to a
slave, ' Coffee first of all,' she said to the assistant. * Two
pounds—the two-and-fourpenny mixture.'

The girl, it was evident, was offended by Helen's tone and feudal
manner. Joyce felt it her duty to beam at her with a double,
compensatory graciousness.

1 Do try to behave a little more civilly,' she whispered when the girl
had gone for the coffee.

Helen preserved her silence, but with an effort. Civil, indeed ! To this
horrible little creature who squinted and didn't wash enough under the
arms? Oh, how she loathed all ugliness and deformity and uncleanliness !
Loathed and detested . • .

'And for heaven's sake,' Joyce went on, 'don't do anything idiotic. I
absolutely forbid . . .'

But even as she spoke the words, Helen stretched

C 45

EYELESS IN GAZA

out a hand and without any attempt at concealment took the topmost of an
elaborate structure of chocolate tablets that stood, like the section of
a spiral pillar, on the counter—took it and then, with the same slow
deliberation of movement, put it carefully away in her basket.

But before the crime was fully accomplished Joyce had turned and walked
away.

' I might say I'd never seen her before,' she was thinking. But of
course that wouldn't do.

Everybody knew they were sisters. * Oh, Colin,' she cried inwardly, *
Colin ! '

A pyramid of tinned lobster loomed up before her. She halted. ' Calm,'
she said to herself.

* I must be calm.' Her heart was thumping with terror, and the dark
magenta lobsters on the labels of the tins wavered dizzily before her
eyes. She was afraid to look round ; but through the noise of her
heart-beats she listened anxiously for the inevitable outcry.

11 don't know if you're interested in lobster, Miss,' a confidential
voice almost whispered into her left ear.

Joyce started violently ; then managed, with an effort, to smile and
shake her head.

' This is a line we can heartily recommend, Miss. I'm sure if you were
to try a tin . . .'

' And now,' Helen was saying, very calmly and in the same maddeningly
feudal tone, ' I need ten pounds of sugar. But that you must send.'

They walked out of the shop. The young man at

46


CHAPTER V

the cheese and bacon counter smiled his farewell ; they were
nice-looking girls and regular customers. With a great effort, Joyce
contrived to be gracious yet once more. But they were hardly through the
door when her face disintegrated, as it were, into a chaos of violent
emotion.

' Helen ! ' she said furiously, * Helen ! '

But Helen was still the young queen on her silver florin, a speechless
profile.

' Helen ! ' Between the glove and the sleeve, Joyce found an inch of her
sister's bare skin and pinched, hard.

Helen jerked her arm away, and without looking round, a profile still, *
If you bother me any more/ she said in a low voice, ' I shall push you
into the gutter.'

Joyce opened her mouth to speak, then changed her mind and, absurdly,
shut it again. She knew that if she did say anything more, Helen
unquestionably would push her into the gutter. She had to be content
with shrugging her shoulders and looking dignified.

The greengrocer's was crowded. Waiting for her turn to be served, Helen
had no difficulty in bagging a couple of oranges.

* Have one ? ' she proposed insultingly to Joyce as they walked out of
the shop.

It was Joyce's turn to be a profile on a coin.

At the stationer's there were, unfortunately, no other clients to
distract the attention of the people behind the counter. But Helen was
equal to the situation. A handful of small change suddenly went rolling
across the

47

EYELESS IN GAZA

floor; and while the assistants were hunting for the scattered pennies,
she helped herself to a rubber and three very good pencils.

It was at the butcher's that the trouble began. Ordinarily Helen refused
to go into the shop at all; the sight, the sickening smell of those pale
corpses disgusted her. But this morning she walked straight in. In spite
of the disgust. It was a point of honour. She had said every shop, and
she wasn't going to give Joyce an excuse for saying she had cheated. For
the first half-minute, while her lungs were still full of the untainted
air she had inhaled outside in the street, it was all right. But, oh
God, when at last she had to breathe . . . God

! She put her handkerchief to her nose. But the sharp rasping smell of
the carcases leaked through the barrier of perfume, superimposing itself
upon the sweetness, so that a respiration that began with Quelques
Fleurs would hideously end with dead sheep or, opening in stale blood,
modulated insensibly into the key of jasmine and ambergris.

A customer went out; the butcher turned to her. He was an oldish man,
very large, with a square massive face that beamed down at her with a
paternal benevolence.

* Like Mr. Baldwin/ she said to herself, and then, aloud but
indistinctly through her handkerchief, 'A pound and a half of
rump-steak, please/

The butcher returned in a moment with a mass of gory flesh. * There's a
beautiful piece of meat, Miss I '

48


CHAPTER V

He fingered the dank, red lump with an artist's loving enthusiasm, 'A
really beautiful piece/ It was Mr. Baldwin fingering his Virgil,
thumbing his dog's-eared Webb.

* I shall never eat meat again,1 she said to herself, as Mr. Baldwin
turned away and began to cut up the meat. ' But what shall I take ? '
She looked round. 1 What on earth ...

? Ah ! ' A marble shelf ran, table-high, along one of the walls of the
shop. On it, in trays, pink or purply brown, lay a selection of
revolting viscera. And among the viscera a hook—a big steel S, still
stained, at one of its curving tips, with the blood of whatever drawn
and decapitated corpse had hung from it. She glanced round. It seemed a
good moment—the butcher was weighing her steak, his assistant was
talking to that disgusting old woman like a bull-dog, the girl at the
cash desk was deep in her accounts. Aloof and dissociated in the
doorway, Joyce was elaborately overacting the part of one who
interrogates the sky and wonders if this drizzle is going to turn into
something serious.

Helen took three quick steps, picked up the hook, and was just lowering
it into her basket when, full of solicitude, * Look out, Miss/ came the
butcher's voice, * you'll get yourself dirty if you touch those hooks.'

That start of surprise was like the steepest descent of the Scenic
Railway—sickening !

Hot in her cheeks, her eyes, her forehead, came a rush of guilty blood I
She tried to laugh.

49

EYELESS IN GAZA

' I was just looking/ The hook clanked back on to the marble.

' I wouldn't like you to spoil your clothes, Miss/ His smile was
fatherly. More than ever like Mr. Baldwin.

Nervously, for lack of anything better to do or say, Helen laughed
again, and, in the process, drew another deep breath of corpse. Ugh !
She fortified her nose once more with Quelques Fleurs.

' One pound and eleven ounces, Miss/

She nodded her assent. But what could she take ? And how was she to find
the opportunity ?

4 Anything more this morning ? '

Yes, that was the only thing to do—to order something more. That would
give her time to think, a chance to act. ' Have you any . . / she
hesitated '. . . any sweetbreads ? *

Yes, Mr. Baldwin did have some sweetbreads, and they were on the shelf
with the other viscera. Near the hook. ' Oh, I don't know,' she said,
when he asked her how much she needed. * Just the ordinary amount, you
know/

She looked about her while he was busy with the sweetbreads,
despairingly. There was nothing in this beastly shop, nothing except the
hook, that she could take. And now that he had seen her with it in her
hands, the hook was out of the question. Nothing whatever.

Unless . . . That was it ! A shudder ran through her. But she frowned,
she set her teeth.

She was determined to go through with it.

50


CHAPTER V

' And now,' when he had packed up the sweetbreads, * now,' she said, ' I
must have some of those ! ' She indicated the packets of pale sausages
piled on a shelf at the other end of the shop.

' I'll do it while his back is turned,' she thought. But the girl at the
cash desk had emerged from her accounts and was looking round the shop.
' Oh, damn her, damn her ! ' Helen fairly screamed in her imagination,
and then, ' Thank goodness ! ' the girl had turned away. A hand shot out
; but the averted glance returned, ' Damn her ! ' The hand dropped back.
And now it was too late. Mr. Baldwin had got the sausages, had turned,
was coming back towards her.

' Will that be all, Miss ? '

* Well, I wonder ? * Helen frowned uncertainly, playing for time. ' I
can't help thinking there was something else . . . something else . . /
The seconds passed; it was terrible ; she was making a fool of herself,
an absolute idiot. But she refused to give up. She refused to
acknowledge defeat.

' We've some beautiful Welsh mutton in this morning,' said the butcher
in that artist's voice of his, as though he were talking of the
Georgics.

Helen shook her head : she really couldn't start buying mutton now.

Suddenly the girl at the cash desk began to write again. The moment had
come. * No,'

she said with decision, * I'll take another pound of those sausages/

1 Another ? ' Mr. Baldwin looked surprised.

51

EYELESS IN GAZA

No wonder! she thought. They'd be surprised at home too.

1 Yes, just one more,1 she said, and smiled ingratiatingly, as though
she were asking a favour. He walked back towards the shelf. The girl at
the cash desk was still writing, the old woman who looked like a bulldog
had never stopped talking to the assistant. Quickly

—there was not a second to lose—Helen turned towards the marble shelf
beside her. It was for one of those kidneys that she had decided. The
thing slithered obscenely between her gloved fingers—a slug, a squid. In
the end she had to grab it with her whole hand.

Thank heaven, she thought, for gloves ! As she dropped it into the
basket, the idea came to her that for some reason she might have to take
the horrible thing in her mouth, raw as it was and oozy with some
unspeakable slime, take it in her mouth, bite, taste, swallow.

Another shudder of disgust ran through her, so violent this time that it
seemed to tear something at the centre of her body.

Tired of acting the meteorologist, Joyce was standing under her umbrella
looking at the chrysanthemums in the florist's window next door. She had
prepared something particularly offensive to say to Helen when she came
out. But at the sight of her sister's white unhappy face she forgot even
her legitimate grievances.

1 Why, Helen, what is the matter ? *

For all answer Helen suddenly began to cry.

* What is it?'

5*


CHAPTER V

She shook her head and, turning away, raised her hand to her face to
brush away the tears.

* Tell me . . /

* Oh ! ' Helen started and cried out as though she had been stung by a
wasp. An expression of agonized repugnance wrinkled up her face. * Oh,
too filthy, too filthy/ she repeated, looking at her fingers. And
setting her basket down on the pavement, she unbuttoned the glove,
stripped it off her hand, and, with a violent gesture, flung it away
from her into the gutter.

c* 53


CHAPTER VI

November 6th igoz

THE guard whistled, and obediently the train began to move—past Keating,
at a crawl ; past Branson ; past Pickwick, Owl and Waverley ; past
Beecham, Owbridge, Carter, Pears, in accelerated succession ; past
Humphrey's Iron Buildings, past Lollingdon for Choate; past Eno's almost
at twenty miles an hour; past Pears, Pears, Pears, Pears, Pears—and
suddenly the platform and its palings dipped and were lost, swallowed in
the green country. Anthony leaned back in his corner and sighed
thankfully. It was escape at last ; he had climbed out of that black
well into which they had pushed him, and was free again. The wheels sang
cheerfully in his ears. l To stop the train pull down the chain penalty
for improper use five pounds five pounds five pounds five pounds . . .'
But how perfectly awful luncheon at Granny's had been !

' Work/ James Beavis was saying. ' It's the only thing at a time like
this.'

His brother nodded. ' The only thing,' he agreed. Then, after a moment's
hesitation, *

One's had a pretty bad knock/ he added self-consciously, in that queer
jargon which he imagined to be colloquial English. John Beavis's
colloquialisms mostly came out of books.

Ï4


CHAPTER VI

That ' bad knock ' was a metaphor drawn from the boxing contests he had
never witnessed. c Luckily/ he went on, ' one's got a great deal of work
on hand at the moment/

He thought of his lectures. He thought of his contributions to the
Oxford Dictionary. The mountains of books, the slips, his huge card
index, the letters from fellow philologists.

And the exhaustive essay on Jacobean slang. * Not that one wants to
"shirk" anything,5

he added, putting the colloquial word between the audible equivalents of
inverted commas. James mustn't think that he was going to drown his
grief in work. He groped for a phrase. * It's . . . it's a sacred music
that one's facing ! ' he brought out at last.

James kept nodding with quick little jerks of the head, as though he
knew in advance everything his brother would or possibly could say. His
face twitched with sudden involuntary tics. He was wasted by nervous
impatience as though by a consumption, eaten away by it to the very
bone. ' Quite,' he said, ' quite/ And gave one last nod. There was a
long silence.

1 To-morrow/ Anthony was thinking, * there'll be algebra with old
Jimbug/ The prospect was disagreeable ; he wasn't good at maths, and,
even at the best of times, even when he was only joking, Mr. Jameson was
a formidable teacher. * If Jimbug gets baity with me, like that time
last week . . / Remembering the scene, Anthony frowned ; the blood came
up into his cheeks. Jimbug made sarcastic remarks at him and pulled his
hair. He had begun to blub. (Who wouldn't have

55

EYELESS IN GAZA

blubbed ?) A tear had fallen on to the equation he was trying to work
out and made a huge round blot. That beast Staithes had ragged him about
it afterwards. Luckily Foxe had come to his rescue. One laughed at Foxe
because he stammered ; but he was really extraordinarily decent.

At Waterloo, Anthony and his father took a hansom. Uncle James preferred
to walk. * I can get to the Club in eleven minutes/ he told them. His
hand went to his waistcoat pocket. He looked at his watch ; then turned
and without saying another word went striding away down the hill.

1 Euston 1 ' John Beavis called up to the cabman.

Stepping cautiously on the smooth slope, the horse moved forward ; the
cab heaved like a ship. Inaudibly, Anthony hummed the ' Washington
Post.' Riding in a hansom always made him feel extraordinarily happy. At
the bottom of the hill, the cabby whipped his horse into a trot. They
passed a smell of beer, a smell of fried fish ; drove through ' Goodbye,
Dolly Gray * on a cornet and swung into the Waterloo Bridge Road. The
traffic roared and rattled all about them. If his father had not been
there, Anthony would have sung out aloud.

The end of the afternoon was still smokily bright above the house-tops.
And, all at once, here was the river, shining, with the black barges,
and a tug, and St. Paul's like a balloon in the sky, and the mysterious
Shot Tower.

On the bridge, a man was throwing bread to die seagulls. Dim, almost
invisible, they came sliding through

56


CHAPTER VI

the air ; turned, with a tilt of grey wings, leaning against their
speed, and suddenly flashed into brilliance, like snow against the dark
fringes of the sky ; then wheeled away again out of the light, towards
invisibility. Anthony looked and stopped humming.

Swerving towards you on the ice, a skater will lean like that.

And suddenly, as though, disquietingly, he too had understood the inner
significance of those swooping birds, ' Dear boy/ Mr. Beavis began,
breaking a long silence. He pressed Anthony's arm. ' Dear boy 1 *

With a sinking of the heart Anthony waited for what he would say next.

' We must stand together now,' said Mr. Beavis.

The boy made a vague noise of acquiescence.

' Close together. Because we both . . .' he hesitated, ' we both loved
her/

There was another silence. * Oh, if only he'd stop ! ' Anthony prayed.
Vainly. His father went on.

' We'll always be true to her,' he said. ' Never . . . never let her
down ?—will we ? '

Anthony nodded.

1 Never ! ' John Beavis repeated emphatically. * Never ! * And to
himself he recited yet once more those lines that had haunted him all
these days :

* Till age, or grief, or sickness must Marry my body to that dust It so
much loves ; and fill the room My heart keeps empty in thy tomb. Stay
for me there ! '

57

EYELESS IN GAZA

Then aloud and in a tone almost of defiance, ' She'll never be dead for
us/ he said. ' We'll keep her living in our hearts—won't we ? '

* Living for us,' his father continued, ' so that we can live for
her—live finely, nobly, as she would want us to live.' He paused on the
brink of a colloquialism— the sort of colloquialism, he intended it to
be, that a schoolboy would understand and appreciate. '

Live . . . well, like a pair of regular " bricks," ' he brought out
unnaturally. ' And bricks,'

he continued, extemporizing an improvement on the original locution, '
bricks that are also " pals." Real " chums." We're going to be " chums "
now, Anthony, aren't we ? '

Anthony nodded again. He was in an agony of shame and embarrassment. '
Chums.' It was a school-story word. The Fifth Form at St. Dominic s. You
laughed when you read it, you howled derisively. Chums/ And with his
father ! He felt himself blushing. Looking out of the side window, to
hide his discomfort, he saw one of the grey birds come swooping down,
out of the sky, towards the bridge ; nearer, nearer ; then it leaned, it
swerved away to the left, gleamed for a moment, transfigured, and was
gone.

At school everyone was frightfully decent. Too decent, indeed. The boys
were so tactfully anxious not to intrude on his emotional privacy, not
to insult him with the display of their own high spirits, that, after
having made a few constrained and unnatural demon-

ï8


CHAPTER VI

strations of friendliness, they left him alone. It was almost, Anthony
found, like being sent to Coventry. They could hardly have made it worse
for him if he had been caught stealing or sneaking. Never, since the
first days of his first term, had he felt so hopelessly out of it all as
he felt that evening.

' Pity you missed the match this afternoon,' said Thompson as they sat
down to supper; he spoke in the tone he would have used to a visiting
uncle.

* Was it a good game ? ' Anthony asked with die same unnatural
politeness.

* Oh, jolly good. They won, though. Three-two.' The conversation
languished.

Uncomfortably, Thompson wondered what he should say next. That limerick
of Butterworth's, about the young lady of Ealing ? No, he couldn't
possibly repeat that; not to-day, when Beavis's mother . . . Then what?
A loud diversion at the other end of the table providentially solved his
problem. He had an excuse to turn away. * What's that ? '

he shouted with unnecessary eagerness. ' What's that ? ' Soon they were
all talking and laughing together. From beyond an invisible gulf Anthony
listened and looked on.

4 Agnes ! ' someone called to the maid. * Agnes ! '

* Aganeezer Lemon-squeezer,' said Mark Staithes— but in a low voice, so
that she shouldn't hear ; rudeness to the servants was a criminal
offence at Bulstrode, and for that reason all the more appreciated, even
sotto voce. That lemon-squeezer produces an explosion of laughter.

59

EYELESS IN GAZA

Staithes himself, however, preserved his gravity. To sit unsmiling in
the midst of the laughter he himself had provoked gave him an
extraordinary sense of power and superiority. Besides, it was in the
family tradition. No Staithes ever smiled at his own joke or epigram or
repartee. Looking round the table, Mark Staithes saw that that wretched,
baby-faced Benger Beavis wasn't laughing widî the rest, and for a second
was filled widi a passionate resentment against this person who had
dared not to be amused by his joke. What made the insult more
intolerable was the fact that Benger was so utterly insignificant. Bad
at football, not much use at cricket. The only thing he was good at was
work. Work 1 And did such a creature dare to sit unsmiling when he . . .
Then, all of a sudden, he remembered that the poor chap had lost his
mother, and, relaxing the hardness of his face, he gave him, across the
intervening space, a little smile of recognition and sympathy. Anthony
smiled back, then looked away, blushing with an obscure discomfort as
though he had been caught doing something wrong. The consciousness of
his own magnanimity and the spectacle of Benger's embarrassment restored
Staithes to his good humour.

* Agnes ! ' he shouted. * Agnes ! '

Large, chronically angry, Agnes came at last.

* More jam, please, Agnes/

* Jore mam,' cried Thompson. Everybody laughed again, not because the
joke was anything but putrid, but simply because everybody wanted to
laugh.

60


CHAPTER VI

4 And breadney.'

' Yes, more breaf.'

1 More breaf, please, Agnes/

c Breaf, indeed ! * said Agnes indignantly, as she picked up the empty
bread-and-butter plate. * Why can't you say what you mean ? '

There was a redoubling of the laughter. They couldn't say what they
meant—absolutely couldn't, because to say * breaf or ' breadney '
instead of bread was a Bulstrodian tradition and the symbol of their
togetherness, the seal of their superiority to all the rest of the
uninitiated world.

' More Pépin le Bref ! ' shouted Staithes.

' Pépin le Breadney, le Breadney ! '

The laughter became almost hysterical. They all remembered that occasion
last term, when they had come to Pépin le Bref in their European
History. Pepin le Bref—le Bref/

First Butterworth had broken down, then Pembroke-Jones, then
Thompson—and finally the whole of Division II, Staithes with the rest of
them, uncontrollably. Old Jimbug had got into the most appalling bait.
Which made it, now, even funnier.

' Just a lot of silly babies ! ' said Agnes ; and, finding them still
laughing when, a moment later, she came back with more bread, * Just
babies ! ' she repeated in a determined effort to be insulting. But her
stroke did not touch them. They were beyond her, rapt away in the
ecstasy of causeless laughter.

Anthony would have liked to laugh with them, but

61

EYELESS IN GAZA

somehow did not dare to do more than smile, distantly and politely, like
someone in a foreign country, who does not understand the joke, but
wants to show that he has no objection to other people having a bit of
fun. And a moment later, feeling hungry, he found himself unexpectedly
struck dumb above his empty plate. For to have asked for more breaf, or
another chunk of breadney, would have been, for the sacred paria he had
now become, at once an indecency and an intrusion—an indecency, because
a person who has been sanctified by his mother's death should obviously
not talk slang, and an intrusion, because an outsider has no right to
use the special language reserved to the elect. Uncertainly, he
hesitated. Then at last, ( Pass me the bread, please,* he murmured ; and
blushed (the words sounded so horribly stupid and unnatural) to the
roots of his hair.

Leaning towards his neighbour on the other side, Thompson went on with
his whispered recitation of the limerick. \ . . all over the ceiling,'
he concluded ; and they shrieked with laughter.

Thank goodness, Thompson hadn't heard. Anthony felt profoundly relieved.
In spite of his hunger, he did not ask again.

There was a stir at the high table ; old Jimbug rose to his feet. A
hideous noise of chair-legs scraping across boards filled the hall,
solidly, it seemed ; then evaporated into the emptiness of complete
silence. ' For all that we have received . - .' The talk broke out
again, the boys stampeded towards the door.

62


CHAPTER VI

In the corridor, Anthony felt a hand on his arm. ' Hullo, B-benger/

* Hullo, Foxe/ He did not say, ' Hullo, Horse-Face/ because of what had
happened this morning. Horse-Face would be as inappropriate to the
present circumstances as Breaf.

* I've got s-something to sh-show you,' said Brian Foxe, and his
melancholy, rather ugly face seemed suddenly to shine, as he smiled at
Anthony. People laughed at Foxe because he stammered and looked like a
hor9e. But almost everybody liked him. Even though he was a bit of a
swot and not much good at games. He was rather pi, too, about smut ; and
he never seemed to get into trouble with the masters. But in spite of it
all, you had to like him, because he was so awfully decent. Too decent,
even; for it really wasn't right to treat New Bugs the way he did—as
though they were equals. Beastly little ticks of nine the equals of boys
of eleven and twelve ; imagine ! No, Foxe was wrong about the New Bugs

; of that there could be no doubt. All the same, people liked old
Horse-Face.

* What have you got ? ' asked Anthony ; and he felt so grateful to
Horse-Face for behaving towards him in a normal, natural way, that he
spoke quite gruffly, for fear the other might notice what he was
feeling.

' Come and see,' Brian meant to say ; but he got no further than '
C-c-c-c . . .' The long agony of clicks prolonged itself. At another
time, Anthony might have 63

EYELESS IN GAZA

laughed, might have shouted, * Listen to old Horse-Face trying to be
sea-sick ! ' But to-day he said nothing ; only thought what awful bad
luck it was on the poor chap. In the end, Brian Foxe gave up the attempt
to say, * Come and see/ and, instead, brought out, '

It's in my p-play-box.'

They ran down the stairs to the dark lobby where the play-boxes were
kept.

* Th-there ! ' said Brian, lifting the lid of his box.

Anthony looked, and at the sight of that elegant little ship,
three-masted, square-rigged with paper sails, ' I say/ he exclaimed, *
that's a beauty ! Did you make her yourself?'

Brian nodded. He had had the carpenter's shop to himself that
afternoon—all the tools he needed. That was why she was so
professional-looking. He would have liked to explain it all, to share
his pleasure in the achievement with Anthony ; but he knew his stammer
too well. The pleasure would evaporate while he was laboriously trying
to express it.

Besides, ' carpenter ¦ was a terrible word. * We'll t-try her
to-n-night,' he had to be content with saying. But the smile which
accompanied the words seemed at once to apologize for their inadequacy
and to make up for it Anthony smiled back. They understood one another.

Carefully, tenderly, Brian unstepped the three match-stick masts and
slipped them, sails and all, into the inner pocket of his jacket ; the
hull went into his breeches. A bell rang.

It was bed-time. Obediently, Brian shut

64


CHAPTER VI

his play-box. They started to climb the stairs once more.

* I w-won f-five more g-games to-day with my old c-c-c ... my
ch-cheeser/ he emended, finding ' conker ' too difficult.

1 Five ! * cried Anthony. ' Good for the old Horse-Face!'

Forgetting that he was an outcast, a sacred paria, he laughed aloud. He
felt warm and at home. It was only when he was undressing in his cubicle
that he remembered—because of the tooth powder.

* Twice a day/ he heard her saying, as he dipped his wet brush into the
pink carbolic-smelling dust. * And if you possibly can, after lunch as
well. Because of the germs/

* But, Mother, you can't expect me to go up and clean them after lunch I
'

The wound to his vanity (did she think his teeth were so dirty ?) had
made him rude. He found a retrospective excuse in the reflection that it
was against the school rules to go up into the dorms during the day.

On the other side of the wooden partition that separated his cubicle
from Anthony's, Brian Foxe was stepping into his pyjamas. First the left
leg, then the right. But just as he was starting to pull them up, there
came to him, suddenly, a thought so terrible that he almost cried aloud.
* Suppose my mother were to die ! * And she might die. If Beavis's
mother had died, of course she might. And at once he saw her, lying in
her 65

EYELESS IN GAZA

bed at home. Terribly pale. And the death-rattle, that death-rattle one
always read about in books—he heard it plainly ; and it was like the
noise of one of those big wooden rattles that you scare birds with. Loud
and incessant, as though it were made by a machine. A human being
couldn't possibly make such a noise. But all the same, it came out of
her mouth. It was the death-rattle. She was dying.

His trousers still only half-way up his thighs, Brian stood there, quite
still, staring at the brown varnished partition in front of him with
eyes that had filled with tears. It was too terrible. The coffin ; and
then the empty house; and, when he went to bed, nobody to come and say
good-night.

Suddenly shaking himself out of immobility, he pulled up his trousers
and tied the string with a kind of violence.

' But she isn't dead ! * he said to himself. ' She isn't ! '

Two cubicles away, Thompson gave vent to one of those loud and
extraordinarily long-drawn farts for which, at Bulstrode, he had such a
reputation. There were shouts, a chorus of laughter. Even Brian laughed—
Brian who generally refused to see that there was anything funny about
that sort of noise. But he was filled at this moment with such a sense
of glad relief, that any excuse for laughter was good enough. She was
still alive !

And though she wouldn't have liked him to laugh at anything so vulgar,
he simply had to allow his thankfulness to explode. Uproariously he
guffawed ; then, all at once, broke off.

He had thought of Beavis.

66


CHAPTER VI

His mother was really dead. What must he be thinking ? Brian felt
ashamed of having laughed, and for such a reason.

Later, when the lights had been put out, he climbed on to the rail at
the head of his bed and, looking over the partition into Anthony's
cubicle, ' I s-say,' he whispered, ' sh-shall we see how the new b-b-b
... the new sh-ship goes ? '

Anthony jumped out of bed and, the night being cold, put on his
dressing-gown and slippers ; then, noiselessly, stepped on to his chair
and from the chair (pushing aside the long baize curtain) to the
window-ledge. The curtain swung back behind him, shutting him into the
embrasure.

It was a high narrow window, divided by a wooden transom into two parts.
The lower and larger part consisted of a pair of sashes ; the small
upper pane was hinged at the top and opened outwards. When the sashes
were closed, the lower of them formed a narrow ledge, half-way up the
window. Standing on this ledge, a boy could conveniently get his head
and shoulders through the small square opening above. Each window —each
pair of windows, rather—was set in a gable, so that when you leaned out,
you found the slope of the tiles coming steeply down on either side, and
immediately in front of you, on a level with the transom, the long
gutter which carried away the water from the roof.

The gutter ! It was Brian who had recognized its potentialities. A sod
of turf carried surreptitiously up

67

EYELESS IN GAZA

to bed in a bulging pocket, a few stones—and there was your dam. When it
was built, you collected all the water-jugs in the dormitory, hoisted
them one by one and poured their contents into the gutter. There would
be no washing the next morning ; but what of that ?

A long narrow sea stretched away into the night. A whittled ship would
float, and those fifty feet of watery boundlessness invited the
imagination. The danger was always rain. If it rained hard, somebody had
somehow to sneak up, at whatever risk, and break the dam.

Otherwise the gutter would overflow, and an overflow meant awkward
investigations and unpleasant punishments.

Perched high between the cold glass and the rough hairy baize of the
curtains, Brian and Anthony leaned out of their twin windows into the
darkness. A brick mullion was all that separated them ; they could speak
in whispers.

1 Now then, Horse-Face,' commanded Anthony. 'Blow!'

And like the allegorical Zephyr in a picture, Horse-Face blew. Under its
press of paper sail, the boat went gliding along the narrow water-way.

' Lovely ! ' said Anthony ecstatically ; and bending down till his cheek
was almost touching the water, he looked with one half-shut and
deliberately unfocussed eye until, miraculously, the approaching toy was
transformed into a huge three-master, seen phantom-like in the distance
and bearing down on him, silendy, through the darkness. A great ship—a
ship of the line—one hundred

68


CHAPTER VI

and ten guns—under a cloud of canvas—the North-East Trades blowing
steadily—

bowling along at ten knots— eight bells just sounding from . . . He
started violendy as the foremast came into contact with his nose.
Reality flicked back into place again.

' It looks just like a real ship,' he said to Brian as he turned the
little boat round in the gutter. ' Put your head down and have a squint.
I'll blow.'

Slowly the majestic three-master travelled back again.

'It's like the Fighting T-t-t- . . . You know that p-picture.'

Anthony nodded ; he never liked to admit ignorance.

4 T-téméraire/ the other brought out at last.

* Yes, yes,' said Anthony, rather impatiently, as though he had known it
all the time.

Bending down again, he tried to recapture that vision of the huge
hundred-and-ten-gunner bowling before the North-East Trades ; but
without success ; the little boat refused to be transfigured. Still, she
was a lovely ship. * A beauty,' he said out loud.

1 Only she's a b-bit 1-lopsided,' said Brian, in modest depreciation of
his handiwork.

* But I rather like that,' Anthony assured him. ' It makes her look as
though she were heeling over with the wind.' Heeling over :—it gave him
a peculiar pleasure to pronounce the phrase. He had never uttered it
before—only read it in books. Lovely words ! And making an excuse to
repeat them, ' Just look ! * he said, 1 how she heels over when it blows
really hard.'

«59

EYELESS IN GAZA

He blew, and the little ship almost capsized. The hurricane, he said to
himself . . . struck her full on the starboard beam . . . carried away
the fore top-gallant sails and the spinnakers . . . stove in our only
boat . . . heeled till the gunwale touched the water. . . .

But it was tiring to go on blowing as hard as that. He looked up from
the gutter ; his eyes travelled over the sky ; he listened intently to
the silence. The air was extraordinarily still

; the night, almost cloudless. And what stars ! There was Orion, with
his feet tangled in the branches of the oak tree. And Sirius. And all
the others whose names he didn't know.

Thousands and millions of them.

' Gosh ! * he whispered at last.

' W-what on earth do you s-suppose they're f-for ? ' said Brian, after a
long silence.

' What—the stars ? '

Brian nodded.

Remembering things his Uncle James had said, * They're not for
anything,' Anthony answered.

' But they m-must be,' Brian objected.

1 Why ? *

* Because e-everything is for s-something.'

' I don't believe that.'

1 W-well, th-think of b-b-bees,' said Brian with some difficulty.

Anthony was shaken ; they had been having some lessons in botany from
old Bumface—

making drawings of pistils and things. Bees—yes ; they were obviously 70


CHAPTER VI

for something. He wished he could remember exactly what Uncle James had
said. The iron somethings of nature. But iron whats ?

( And m-mountains,' Brian was laboriously continuing. * It w-wouldn't
r-rain properly if there w-weren't any m-mountains.'

' Well, what do you think they're for ? ' Anthony asked, indicating the
stars with an upward movement of the chin.

' P-perhaps there are p-people.'

* Only on Mars/ Anthony's certainty was dogmatic.

There was a silence. Then, with decision, as though he had at last made
up his mind to have it out, at any cost, ' S-sometimes,' said Brian, ' I
w-wonder wh-whether they aren't really al-Iive.' He looked anxiously at
his companion : was Benger going to laugh ? But Anthony, who was looking
up at the stars, made no sound or movement of derision ; only nodded
gravely. Brian's shy defenceless little secret was safe, had received no
wound. He felt profoundly grateful; and suddenly it was as though a
great wave were mounting, mounting through his body. He was almost
suffocated by that violent up-rush of love and (' Oh, suppose it had
been my mother ! ') of excruciating sympathy for poor Benger. His throat
contracted; the tears came into his eyes. He would have liked to reach
out and touch Benger's hand ; only, of course, that sort of thing wasn't
done.

Anthony meanwhile was still looking at Sirius. Alive,' he repeated to
himself. ' Alive.'

It was like a

7i

EYELESS IN GAZA

heart in the sky, pulsing with light. All at once he remembered that
young bird he had found last Easter holidays. It was on the ground and
couldn't fly. His mother had made fun of him because he didn't want to
pick it up. Big animals he liked, but for some reason it gave him the
horrors to touch anything small and alive. In the end, making an effort
with himself, he had caught the bird. And in his hand the little
creature had seemed just a feathered heart, pulsing against his palm and
fingers, a fistful of hot and palpitating blood. Up there, above the
fringes of the trees, Sirius was just such another heart. Alive.

But of course Uncle James would just laugh.

Stung by this imaginary mockery and ashamed of having been betrayed into
such childishness, ' But how can they be alive ? ' he asked resentfully,
turning away from the stars,

Brian winced. ' Why is he angry ? ' he wondered. Then, aloud, * Well,'
he started, • if G-god's alive . . .'

( But my pater doesn't go to church,' Anthony objected.

' N-no, b-b-but . . / How little he wanted to argue, now !

Anthony couldn't wait. ' He doesn't believe in that sort of thing.'

* But it's G-god that c-counts ; n-not ch-church.* Oh, if only he hadn't
got this horrible stammer ! He could explain it all so well ; he could
say all those things his mother had said. But somehow, at the moment,

72


CHAPTER VI

even the things that she had said were beside the point. The point
wasn't saying; the point was caring for people, caring until it hurt.

* My uncle/ said Anthony, ' he doesn't even believe in God. I don't
either,' he added provocatively.

But Brian did not take up the challenge* * I s-say,' he broke out
impulsively, ' I s-say, B-b-b- . . -' The very intensity of his
eagerness made him stammer all the worse. * B-benger,' he brought out at
last. It was an agony to feel the current of his love thus checked and
diverted. Held up behind the grotesquely irrelevant impediment to its
progress, the stream mounted, seemed to gather force and was at last so
strong widiin him that, forgetting altogether that it wasn't done, Brian
suddenly laid his hand on Anthony's arm.

The fingers travelled down the sleeve, then closed round the bare wrist
; and thereafter, every time his stammer interposed itself between his
feeling and its object, his grasp tightened in a spasm almost of
desperation.

* I'm so t-terribly s-sorry about your m-mother,' he went on. * I
d-didn't w-want to s-say it be-before. N-not in f-front of the o-others.
You know, I was th-th-th- . . .' He gripped on Anthony's wrist more
tightly ; it was as though he were trying to supplement his strangled
words by the direct eloquence of touch, were trying to persuade the
other of the continued existence of the stream within him, of its force,
unabated in spite of the temporary checking of the current. He began the
sentence again and acquired sufficient momen-73

EYELESS IN GAZA

turn to take him past the barrier. ' I was th-thinking just n-now,' he
said, * it m-might have been my mother. Oh, B-b-beavis, it m-must be too
awfal ! '

Anthony had looked at him, in the first moment of surprise, with an
expression of suspicion, almost of fear on his face. But as the other
stammered on, this first hardening of resistance melted away, and now,
without feeling ashamed of what he was doing, he began to cry.

Balanced precariously in the tall embrasure of the windows, the two
children stood there for a long time in silence. The cheeks of both of
them were cold with tears ; but on Anthony's wrist the grip of that
consoling hand was obstinately violent, like a drowning man's.

Suddenly, with a thin rattling of withered leaves, a gust of wind came
swelling up out of the darkness. The litde three-master started, as
though it had been woken out of sleep, and noiselessly, with an air of
purposeful haste, began to glide, stern-foremost, along the gutter.

The servants had gone to bed ; all the house was still. Slowly, in the
dark, John Beavis left his study and climbed past the mezzanine landing,
past the drawing-room, stair after stair, towards the second floor.
Outside, in the empty street, the sound of hoofs approached and again
receded. The silence closed in once more—the silence of his solitude,
the silence (he shuddered) of her grave.

He stood still, listening for long seconds to the beating of his heart ;
then, with decision, mounted the last two

74


CHAPTER VI

stairs, crossed the dark landing and, opening the door, turned on the
light. His image confronted him, staring palely from the dressing-table
mirror. The silver brushes were in their usual place, the little trays
and pincushions, the row of cut-glass bottles. He looked away. One
corner of the broad pink quilt was turned back ; he saw the two pillows
lying cheek by cheek, and above them, on the wall, that photogravure of
the Sistine Madonna they had bought together, in the shop near the
British Museum. Turning, he saw himself again, at full length,
funereally black, in the glass of the wardrobe. The wardrobe ... He
stepped across the room and turned the key in the lock. The heavy glass
door swung open of its own accord, and suddenly he was breathing the
very air of her presence, that faint scent of orris-root, quickened
secretly, as it were, by some sharper, warmer perfume.

Grey, white, green, shell-pink, black—dress after dress. It was as
though she had died ten times and ten times been hung there, limp,
gruesomely headless, but haloed still, ironically, with the sweet,
breathing symbol of her life. He stretched out his hand and touched the
smooth silk, the cloth, the muslin, the velvet ; all those various
textures.

Stirred, the hanging folds gave out their perfume more strongly ; he
shut his eyes and inhaled her real presence* But what was left of her
had been burnt, and the ashes were at the bottom of that pit in
Lollingdon churchyard. * Stay for me there/ John Beavis whispered
articulately in the silence.

75

EYELESS IN GAZA

His throat contracted painfully; the tears welled out between his closed
eyelids. Shutting the wardrobe door, he turned away and began to
undress.

He was conscious, suddenly, of an overwhelming fatigue. It cost him an
immense effort to wash. When he got into bed, he fell asleep almost at
once.

Towards the morning, when the light of the new day and the noises from
the street had begun to break through the enveloping layers of his inner
darkness, John Beavis dreamed that he was walking along the corridor
that led to his lecture-room at King's College. No, not walking :
running. For the corridor had become immensely long and there was some
terrible urgent reason for getting to the end of it quickly, for being
there in time. In time for what ? He did not know ; but as he ran, he
felt a sickening apprehension mounting, as it were, and expanding and
growing every moment more intense within him. And when at last he opened
the door of the lecture-room, it wasn't the lecture-room at all, but
their bedroom at home, with Maisie lying there, panting for breath, her
face flushed with the fever, dark with the horrible approach of
asphyxiation, and across it, like two weals, bluish and livid, the
parted lips. The sight was so dreadful that he started broad awake.

Daylight shone pale between the curtains; the quilt showed pink; there
was a gleam in the wardrobe mirror; outside, the milkman was calling, '
Mu-ilk, Mui-uilk ! ' as he went his rounds. Everything was reassuringly
familiar, in its right place. It had been no more than a

76


CHAPTER VI

bad dream. Then, turning his head, John Beavis saw that the other half
of the broad bed was empty.

The bell came nearer and nearer, plougliing through the deep warm drifts
of sleep, until at last it hammered remorselessly on his naked and
quivering consciousness. Anthony opened his eyes. What a filthy row it
made ! But he needn't think of getting up for at least another five
minutes. The warmth under the sheets was heavenly. Then—and it spoilt
everything—he remembered that early school was algebra with Jimbug. His
heart came into his throat. Those awful quadratics ! Jimbug would start
yelling at him again. It wasn't fair. And he'd blub. But then it
occurred to him that Jimbug probably wouldn't yell at him to-day—because
of what, he suddenly remembered, had happened yesterday. Horse-Face had
been most awfully decent last night, he went on to think.

But it was time to get up. One, two, three and, ugh, how filthily cold
it was ! He was just diving upwards into his shirt when somebody tapped
very softly at the door of his cubicle. One last wriggle brought his
head through into daylight. He went and opened.

Staithes was standing in the passage. Staithes—grinning, it was true, in
apparent friendliness; but still . . . Anthony was disturbed.
Mistrustfully, but with a hypocritical smile of welcome, ' What's up ? '
he began ; but the other put a finger to his lips.

' Come and look,' he whispered. ' It's marvellous ! '

D 77

EYELESS IN GAZA

Anthony was flattered by this invitation from one who, as captain of the
football eleven, had a right to be, and generally was, thoroughly
offensive to him. He was afraid of Staithes and disliked him—and for
that very reason felt particularly pleased that Staithes should have
taken the trouble to come to him like this, of his own accord. . . .

Staithes's cubicle was already crowded. The conspiratorial silence
seethed and bubbled with a suppressed excitement. Thompson had had to
stuff his handkerchief into his mouth to keep himself from laughing, and
Pembroke-Jones was doubling up in paroxysms of noiseless mirth. Wedged
in the narrow space between the foot of the bed and the washstand,
Partridge was standing with one cheek pressed against the partition.
Staithes touched him on the shoulder. Partridge turned round and came
out into the centre of the cubicle ; his freckled face was distorted
with glee and he twitched and fidgeted as though his bladder were
bursting. Staithes pointed to the place he had vacated and Anthony
squeezed in. A knot in the wood of the partition had been prized out,
and through the hole you could see all that was going on in the next
cubicle. On the bed, wearing only a woollen undervest and his rupture
appliance, lay Goggler Ledwidge. His eyes behind the thick glass of his
spectacles were shut ; his lips were parted. He looked tranquilly happy
and serene, as though he were in church.

' Is he still here ? ' whispered Staithes.

?8


CHAPTER VI

Anthony turned a grinning face and nodded; then pressed his eyes more
closely to the spy-hole. What made it so specially funny was the fact
that it should be Goggler—

Goggler, the school buffoon, the general victim, predestined by weakness
and timidity to inevitable persecution. This would be something new to
bait him with.

' Let's give him a fright,' suggested Staithes, and climbed up on to the
rail at the head of the bed.

Partridge, who played centre forward for the first eleven, made a
movement to follow him. But it was to Anthony that Staidies unexpectedly
turned. ' Come on, Beavis,' he whispered. ' Come up here with me/ He
wanted to be specially decent to the poor chap—

because of his mater. Besides, it pleased him to be able to snub that
lout, Partridge.

Anthony accepted the flattering invitation with an almost abject
alacrity and got up beside him. The others perched unsteadily at the
foot of the bed. At a signal from Staithes all straightened themselves
up and, showing their heads above the partition, hooted their derision.

Recalled thus brutally from his squalidly tender little Eden of enemas
and spankings (it had, as yet, no female inhabitants), Goggler gave vent
to a startled cry ; his eyes opened, frantic with terror; he went very
white for a moment, then blushed. With his two hands he pulled down his
vest ; but it was too short to cover his nakedness or even his truss.

Absurdly short, like a

79

EYELESS IN GAZA

baby's vest. (* We'll try to make them last this one more term,' his
mother had said. *

These woollen things are so frightfully expensive.' She had made great
sacrifices to send him to Bulstrode.)

1 Pull, pull ! ' Staithes shouted in sarcastic encouragement of his
efforts.

1 Why wouldn't Henry VIII allow Anne Boleyn to to go into his henhouse?
' said Thompson. Everyone knew the answer, of course. There was a burst
of laughter.

Staithes lifted one foot from its perch, pulled off the leather-soled
slipper, took aim and threw. It hit Goggler on the side of the face. He
gave a cry of pain, jumped out of bed and stood with hunched shoulders
and one skinny little arm raised to cover his head, looking up at the
jeering faces through eyes that had begun to overflow with tears.

* Buzz yours too ! ' shouted Staithes to the others. Then, seeing the
new arrival standing in the open doorway of his cubicle, ' Hullo,
Horse-Face,' he said, as he took off the other slipper ; ' come and have
a shot/ He raised his arm ; but before he could throw, Horse-Face had
jumped on to the bed and caught him by the wrist.

1 No, s-stop ! ' he said. ' Stop.' And he caught also at Thompson's arm.
Leaning over Staithes's shoulder, Anthony threw—as hard as he could.
Goggler ducked. The slipper thumped against the wooden partition behind
him.

So


CHAPTER VI

1 B-beavis ! ' cried Horse-Face—so reproachfully, that Anthony felt a
sudden twinge of shame.

1 It didn't hit him/ he said, by way of excuse; and for some queer
reason found himself thinking of that horrible deep hole in LoUingdon
churchyard.

Staithes had found his tongue again. ' I don't know what you think
you're doing, Horse-Face,' he said angrily, and jerked the slipper out
of Brian's hand. * Why can't you mind your own business ? '

* It isn't f-fair,' Brian answered. 4 Yes, it is.'

* F-five against one.'

1 But you don't know what he was doing/

' I d-don't c-c-c . . . don't m-mind.'

1 You would care, if you knew,' said Staithes ; anc proceeded to tell
him what Goggler had been doing— as dirtily as he knew how.

Brian dropped his eyes and his cheeks went suddenly very red. To have to
listen to smut always made him feel miserable—miserable and at the same
time ashamed of himself.

1 Look at old Horse-Face blushing ! ' called Partridge ; and they all
laughed—none more derisively than Anthony. For Anthony had had time to
feel ashamed of his shame ; time to refuse to think about that hole in
LoUingdon churchyard ; time, too, to find himself all of a sudden almost
hating old Horse-Face. ' For being so disgustingly pi,' he would have
said, if somebody had asked him to explain his hatred. But the real
reason 8i

EYELESS IN GAZA

was deeper, obscurer. If he hated Horse-Face, it was because Horse-Face
was so extraordinarily decent ; because Horse-Face had the courage of
convictions which Anthony felt should also be his convictions— which,
indeed, would be his convictions if only he could bring himself to have
the courage of them. It was just because he liked Horse-Face so much,
that he now hated him. Or, rarher, because there were so many reasons
why he should like him—so few reasons, on the contrary, why Horse-Face
should return the liking. Horse-Face was rich with all sorts of fine
qualities that he himself either lacked completely, or else, which was
worse, possessed, but somehow was incapable of manifesting. That sudden
derisive burst of laughter was the expression of a kind of envious
resentment against a superiority which he loved and admired. Indeed, the
love and the admiration in some sort produced the resentment and the
envy—produced, but ordinarily kept them below the surface in an
unconscious abeyance, from which, however, some crisis like the present
would suddenly call them.

' You should have seen him,' concluded Staithes. Now that he felt in a
better humour he laughed—he could afford to laugh.

1 In his truss,' Anthony added, in a tone of sickened contempt.
Goggler's rupture was an aggravation of the offence.

1 Yes, in his beastly old truss !' Staithes confirmed approvingly. There
was no doubt about it ; combined

82


CHAPTER VI

as it was with the spectacles and the timidity, that truss made the
throwing of slippers not only inevitable, but right, a moral duty.

' He's disgusting,' Anthony went on, warming pleasantly to his righteous
indignation.

For the first time since Staithes had started on his description of
Goggler's activities Brian looked up. * B-but w-why is he more
disg-gusting than anyone else ? * he asked in a low voice. ' A-after
all/ he went on, and the blood came rushing back into his cheeks as he
spoke, ' he i-isn't the . . . the o-only one.'

There was a moment's uncomfortable silence. Of course he wasn't the only
one. But he was the only one, they were all thinking, who had a truss,
and goggles, and a vest that was too short for him ; the only one who
did it in broad daylight and let himself be caught at it. There was a
difference.

Staithes counter-attacked on another front. * Sermon by the Reverend
Horse-Face ! ' he said jeeringly, and at once recovered the initiative,
the position of superiority. ' Gosh ! '

he added in another tone, * it's late. We must buck up.'

»3


CHAPTER VII

April 8th 1934

From A. B/s diary.

CONDITIONED reflex. What a lot of satisfaction I got out of old Pavlov
when first I read him. The ultimate de-bunking of all human pretensions.
We were all dogs and bitches together. Bow-wow, sniff the lamppost, lift
the leg, bury the bone. No nonsense about free will, goodness, truth and
all the rest. Each age has its psychological revolutionaries. La
Mettrie, Hume, Condillac, and finally the Marquis de Sade, latest and
most sweeping of the eighteenth-century de-bunkers. Perhaps, indeed, the
ultimate and absolute revolutionary. But few have the courage to follow
the revolutionary argument to Sade's conclusions. Meanwhile, science did
not stand still. Dix-huitième debunking, apart from Sade, proved
inadequate. The nineteenth century had to begin again. Marx and the
Darwinians. Who are still with us—Marx obsessively so. Meanwhile the
twentieth century has produced yet another lot of de-bunkers—Freud and,
when he began to flag, Pavlov and the Behaviourists. Conditioned reflex
:—it seemed, I remember, to put the lid on everything. Whereas actually,
of course, it merely re-stated the doctrine of free will.

For if reflexes can be conditioned, then, obviously, they can be
re-conditioned.

84


CHAPTER VII

Learning to use the self properly, when one has been using it badly—what
is it but re-conditioning one's reflexes ?

Lunched with my father. More cheerful than I've seen him recently, but
old and, oddly, rather enjoying it. Making much of getting out of his
chair with difficulty, of climbing very slowly up the stairs. A way, I
suppose, of increasing his sense of importance.

Perhaps also a way of commanding sympathy whenever he happens to want
it. Baby cries so that mother shall come and make a fuss of him. It goes
on from the cradle to the grave.

Miller says of old age that it's largely a bad habit. Use conditions
function. Walk about as if you were a martyr to rheumatism and you'll
impose such violent muscular strains upon yourself that a martvr to
rheumatism you'll really be. Behave like an old man and your body will
function like an old man's, you'll think and feel as an old man. The
lean and slippered pantaloon—literally a part that one plays. If you
refuse to play it and learn how to act on your refusal, you won't become
a pantaloon. I suspect this is largely true.

Anyhow, my father is playing his present part with gusto. One of the
great advantages of being old, provided that one's economic position is
reasonably secure and one's health not too bad, is that one can afford
to be serene. The grave is near, one has made a habit of not feeling
anything very strongly ; it's easy, therefore, to take the God's-eye
view of things.

My father took it about peace, for example. Yes, men were mad, he agreed
; d*

8s

EYELESS IN GAZA

there would be another war quite soon—about 1940, he thought. (A date,
significantly, when he was practically certain to be dead !) Much worse
than the last war, yes ; and would probably destroy the civilization of
Western Europe. But did it really matter so much ? Civilization would go
on in other continents, would build itself up anew in the devastated
areas. Our time scale was all wrong. We should think of ourselves, not
as living in the thirties of the twentieth century, but as at a point
between two ice ages. And he ended up by quoting Goethe—ailes
Vergàngliche ist nur ein Gleichniss, All which is doubtless quite true,
but not the whole truth. Query : how to combine belief that the world is
to a great extent illusory with belief that it is none the less
essential to improve the illusion ? How to be simultaneously
dispassionate and not indifferent, serene like an old man and active
like a young one ?

86


CHAPTER VIII

August 30th 1933

4 npHESE vile horse-flies ! ' Helen rubbed the red-JL dening spot on her
arm.

Anthony made no

comment. She looked at him for a little in silence.

* What a lot of ribs you've got ! ' she said at last. ' Schizothyme
physique,' he answered from behind

the arm with which he was shielding his face from the

light. * That's why I'm here. Predestined by the angle

of my ribs.'

c Predestined to what ? '

* To sociology ; and in the intervals to this.' He raised his hand, made
a little circular gesture and let it fall again on the mattress.

* But what's " this ? " * she insisted.

' This ? ' Anthony repeated. 4 Well . . / He hesitated. But it would
take too long to talk about that temperamental divorce between the
passions and the intellect, those detached sensualities, those
sterilized ideas. 4 Well, you, he brought out at last.

*Me?'

* Oh, I admit it might have been someone else,' he said, and laughed,
genuinely amused by his own cynicism.

Helen also laughed, but with a surprising bitterness. ' I am somebody
else/

87

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Meaning what ? ' he asked, uncovering his face to look at her.

' Meaning what I say. Do you think / should be here—the real I ? '

* Real I ! ' he mocked. ' You're talking like a theo-sophist.'

1 And you're talking like a fool/ she said. ' On purpose. Because, of
course, you aren't one/ There was a long silence. I, real I ? But where,
but how, but at what price? Yes, above all, at what price? Those Cavells
and Florence Nightingales. But it was impossible, that sort of thing ;
it was, above all, ridiculous. She frowned to herself, she shook her
head ; then, opening her eyes, which had been shut, looked for something
in the external world to distract her from these useless and importunate
thoughts within. The foreground was all Anthony. She looked at him for a
moment; then, reaching out with a kind of fascinated reluctance, as
though towards some irresistibly strange but distasteful animal, she
touched the pink crumpled skin of the great scar that ran diagonally
across his thigh, an inch or two above the knee. ' Does it still hurt ?
' she asked.

' When I'm run down. And sometimes in wet weather.' He raised his head a
little from the mattress and, at the same time bending his right knee,
examined the scar. ' A touch of the Renaissance/ he said reflectively. '
Slashed trunks/

Helen shuddered. ' It must have been awful ! ' Then, with a sudden
vehemence, ' How I hate pain ! *

88


CHAPTER VIII

she cried, and her tone was one of passionate, deeply personal
resentment. ' Hate it/ she repeated for all the Cavells and Nightingales
to hear.

She had pushed him back into the past again. That autumn day at Tidworth
eighteen years before. Bombing instruction. An imbecile recruit had
thrown short. The shouts, his panic start, the blow. Oddly remote it all
seemed now, and irrelevant, like something seen through the wrong end of
a telescope. And even the pain, all the months of pain, had shrunk
almost to non-existence. Physically, it was the worst thing that had
ever happened to him—and the lunatic in charge of his memory had
practically forgotten it.

* One can't remember pain/ he said aloud.

'/can.'

' No, you can't. You can only remember its occasion, its
accompaniments.'

Its occasion at the midwife's in the rue de la Tombe-Issoire, its
accompaniments of squalor and humiliation. Her face hardened as she
listened to his words.

1 You can never remember its actual quality/ he went on. ' No more than
you can remember the quality of a physical pleasure. To-day, for
example, half an hour ago—you can't remember. There's nothing like a
recreation of the event. Which is lucky.' He was smiling now. ' Think,
if one could fully remember perfumes or kisses ! How wearisome the
reality of them would be ! And what woman with a memory would ever have
more than one baby?'

89

EYELESS IN GAZA

Helen stirred uneasily. ' I can't imagine how any woman ever does,* she
said in a low voice.

4 As it is/ he went on, * the pains and pleasures are new each time
they're experienced.

Brand new. Every gardenia is the first gardenia you ever smelt. And
every confinement . .

/

' You're talking like a fool again/ she interrupted angrily. ' Confusing
the issue.'

* I thought I was clarifying it/ he protested. ' And anyhow, what is the
issue ? '

* The issue's me, you, real life, happiness. And you go chattering away
about things in the air. Like a fool ! '

* And what about you ? ' he asked. ' Are you such a clever one at real
life ? Such an expert in happiness ? '

In the mind of each of them his words evoked the image of a timorous
figure, ambushed behind spectacles.

That marriage ! What on earth could have induced her ? Old Hugh, of
course, had been sentimentally in love. But was that a sufficient reason
? And, afterwards, what sort of disillusions ? Physiological, he
supposed, for the most part. Comic, when you thought of them in relation
to old Hugh. The corners of Anthony's mouth faintly twitched. But for
Helen, of course, the joke could only have been disastrous. He would
have liked to know the details—but at second hand, on condition of not
having to ask for or be offered her confidences. Confidences were
dangerous, confidences were entangling—like fly-paper ; yes, like
fly-paper. . . .

90


CHAPTER VIII

Helen sighed ; then, squaring her shoulders and in a tone of resolution,
* Two blacks don't make a white,' she said. ' Besides, I'm my own
affair.'

Which was all for the best, he thought. There was a silence.

1 How long were you in hospital with that wound ? ' she asked in another
tone.

* Nearly ten months. It was disgustingly infected. They had to operate
six times altogether/

' How horrible ! '

Anthony shrugged his shoulders. At least it had preserved him from those
trenches. But for the grace of God . . . * Queer,' he added, ' what
unlikely forms the grace of God assumes sometimes ! A half-witted
bumpkin with a hand-grenade. But for him I should have been shipped out
to France and slaughtered— almost to a certainty. He saved my life.'
Then, after a pause, ' My freedom too,' he added. ' I'd let myself be
fuddled by those beginning-of-war intoxications. " Honour has come back,
as a king, to earth." But I suppose you're too young ever to have heard
of poor Rupert. It seemed to make sense then, in 1914. " Honour has come
back . . ." But he failed to mention that stupidity had come back too.
In hospital, I had all the leisure to think of that other royal progress
through the earth. Stupidity has come back, as a king—no ; as an
emperor, as a divine Fûhrer of all the Aryans. It was a sobering
reflection. Sobering and profoundly liberating.

And I owed it to the bumpkin. He was one of

9*

1 j

1

EYELESS IN GAZA |

the great Fiihrer's most faithful subjects/ There was a silence. '
Sometimes I feel a bit nervous—like Poly-crates—because Pve had so much
luck in my life. All occasions always seem to have conspired for me.
Even this occasion/ He touched the scar. ' Perhaps I ought to do
something to allay the envy of the gods—throw a ring into the sea next
time I go bathing/ He uttered a little laugh. * The trouble is, I don't
possess a ring/

¦


CHAPTER IX

April 2nd 1903

AT Paddington, Mr. Beavis and Anthony got into Jr\. an empty third-class
compartment and waited for the train to start. For Anthony a railway
journey was still profoundly important, still a kind of sacrament. The
male soul, in immaturity, is naturaliter ferrovialis. This huge and
god-like green monster, for example, that now came snorting into the
station and drew up at Platform 1—but for Watt and Stephenson it would
never have rolled thus majestically into its metropolitan cathedral of
sooty glass. But the intensity of delight which Anthony felt as he
watched the divine creature approach, as he breathed its stink of coal
smoke and hot oil, as he heard and almost unconsciously imitated the
ch-ff, ch-ff, ch-ff of its steamy panting, was a sufficient proof that
the boyish heart must have been, in some mysterious way, prepared for
the advent of Puffing Billy and the Rocket, that the actual locomotive,
when it appeared, must have corresponded (how satisfyingly !) with some
dim prophetic image of a locomotive, preexisting in the mind of children
from the beginning of palaeolithic time. Ch-ff, ch-ff; then silence;
then the terrible, the soul-annihilating roar of escaping steam.
Wonderful ! Lovely !

93

EYELESS IN GAZA

Bonneted, in black, like a pair of Queen Victorias, two fat and tiny old
ladies passed slowly, looking for a compartment where they would not
have their throats cut or be compelled to listen to bad language. Mr.
Beavis looked very respectable indeed. They paused, held a consultation
; but, leaning out of the window, Anthony made such a face at them that
they moved away again. He smiled triumphantly. Keeping the compartment
to oneself was one of the objects of the sacred game of travelling—was
the equivalent, more or less, of a Royal Marriage at bezique ; you
scored forry, so to speak, each time you left a station without a
stranger in your carriage. Having lunch in the dining-car counted as
much as a Sequence—two hundred and fifty. And Double Bezique—but this,
as yet, Anthony had never scored—was being in a slip carriage.

The guard whistled, the train began to move.

* Hurrah ! ' Anthony shouted.

The game had begun well : a Royal Marriage in the very first round. But
a few minutes later he was regretting those two old ladies. For, rousing
himself suddenly from his abstracted silence, John Beavis leaned forward
and, touching his son's knee, ' Do you remember what day of the month it
is ? * he asked in a low and, to Anthony, inexplicably significant tone.

Anthony looked at him doubtfully ; then started to overact the part of
the Calculator, frowning over a difficult problem. There was something
about his father that seemed to make such overacting inevitable.

94


CHAPTER IX

* Let me see,' he said unnaturally, ' we broke up on the thirty-first—or
was it the thirtieth? That was Saturday, and to-day's Monday . . .'

* To-day's the second,' said his father in the same slow voice.

Anthony felt apprehensive- If his father knew the date, why had he asked
?

1 It's exactly five months to-day/ Mr. Beavis went on.

Five months? And then, with a sudden sickening drop of the heart,
Anthony realized what his father was talking about. The Second of
November, the Second of April. It was five months since she had died.

* Each second of the month—one tried to keep the day sacred/

Anthony nodded and turned his eyes away with a sense of guilty
discomfort.*

' Bound each to each by natural piety,' said Mr, Beavis.

What on earth was he talking about now ? And, oh, why, why did he have
to say these things ? So awful ; so indecent—yes, indecent; one didn't
know where to look. Like the times when Granny's stomach made those
awful bubbling noises after meals . . .

Looking into his son's averted face, Mr. Beavis perceived signs of
resistance and was hurt, was saddened, and felt the sadness turn into an
obscure resentment that Anthony should not suffer as acutely as he did.
Of course the child was still very young, not yet able to realize the
full extent of his loss ; but all the same, all the same . . .

95

EYELESS IN GAZA

To Anthony's unspeakable relief the train slowed down for its first
stop. The suburbs of Slough passed slowly and ever slowlier before his
eyes. Against all the rules of the sacred game, he prayed that somebody
might get into their compartment- And, thank heaven, somebody did get
in—a gross, purple-faced man whom on any other occasion Anthony would
have hated. To-day he loved him.

Shielding his eyes with his hand, Mr. Beavis retired again into a
private world of silence.

In the carriage, on the way from Twyford station, his father added
insult to injury.

' You must always be on your very best behaviour/ he recommended.

1 Of course,' said Anthony curtly.

' And always be punctual,' Mr. Beavis continued, * And don't be greedy
at meal-times.'

He hesitated, smiled in anticipation of what he was about to say, then
launched his colloquialism : ' however excellent the " grub " may be.'
There was a little silence. ' And be polite to the Abigails,' he added.

They turned off the road into a drive that wound between tall
shrubberies of rhododendrons. Then, across an expanse of tree-islanded
grass, appeared a façade of Georgian stucco. The house was not large,
but solid, comfortable and at the same time elegant. Built, you divined,
by someone who could quote Horace, aptly, on every occasion. Rachel
Foxe's father, Mr. Beavis reflected, as he looked at it, must have left
quite

96


CHAPTER IX

a lot of money. Naval architecture—and didn't the old boy invent
something that the Admiralty took up ? Foxe, too, had been well off :
something to do with coal. (How charming those daffodils looked in the
grass there, under the tree !) But a dour, silent, humourless man who
had not, Mr. Beavis remembered, understood his little philological joke
about the word ' pencil.' Though if he'd known at the time that the poor
fellow had a duodenal ulcer, he certainly wouldn't have risked it.

Mrs. Foxe and Brian came to meet them as the carriage drew up. The boys
went off together. Mr. Beavis followed his hostess into the
drawing-room. She was a tall woman, slender and very upright, with
something so majestic in her carriage, so nobly austere in the lines and
expression of her face, that Mr. Beavis always felt himself slightly
intimidated and ill at ease in her presence.

1 It was so very good of you to ask us,' he said. ' And I can't tell you
how much it will mean for . . .' he hesitated for an instant ; then
(since it was the second of the month), with a little shake of the head
and in a lower tone, ' for this poor motherless little fellow of mine,'
he went on, * to spend his holidays here with you.'

Her clear brown eyes had darkened, as he spoke, with a sympathetic
distress. Always firm, always serious, the coming together of her full,
almost floridly sculptured lips expressed more than ordinary gravity. '
But I'm so delighted to have him,' she said in a voice that was warm and
musically vibrant with feeling. ' Selfishly 97

EYELESS IN GAZA

glad—for Brian's sake.' She smiled, and he noticed that even when she
smiled her mouth seemed somehow to preserve, through all its
sensibility, its profound capacity for suffering and enjoyment, that
seriousness, that determined purity which characterized it in repose. *
Yes, selfishly/ she repeated. ' Because, when he's happy, I am.'

Mr. Beavis nodded ; then, sighing, * One's thankful/ he said, ' to have
as much left to one as that—the reflection of someone else's happiness.'
Magnanimously, he was giving Anthony the right not to suffer—though of
course when the boy was a little older, when he could realize more fully
. . .

Mrs. Foxe did not continue the conversation. There was something rather
distasteful to her in his words and manner, something that jarred upon
her sensibilities. But she hastened to banish the disagreeable
impression from her mind. After all, the important, the essential fact
was that the poor man had suffered, was still suffering. The false note,
if falsity there were, was after the fact—in the mere expression of the
suffering.

She proposed a stroll before tea, and they walked through the garden and
out into the domesticated wilderness of grass and trees beyond. In a
glade of the little copse that bounded the property to the north, three
crippled children were picking primroses. With a gruesome agility they
swung themselves on their crutches from clump to clump of the pale
golden flowers, yelling as they went in shrill discordant rapture.

98


CHAPTER IX

They were staying, Mrs. Foxe explained, in one of her cottages. ' Three
of my cripples/

she called them.

At the sound of her voice the children looked up, and at once came
hopping across the open space towards her.

' Look, Miss, look what I found ! *

4 Look here, Miss ! *

« What's this called, Miss ? '

She answered their questions, asked others in return, promised to come
that evening to see them.

Feeling that he too ought to do something for the cripples, Mr. Beavis
began to tell them about the etymology of the word ' primrose.' *
Primerole in Middle English/ he explained. c The " rose " crept in by
mistake.' They stared at him uncomprehendingly. *

A mere popular blunder,' he went on ; then, twinkling, ' a " howler," '
he added. ' Like our old friend/ he smiled at them knowingly, * our old
friend " causeway." *

There was a silence. Mrs. Foxe changed the subject.

' Poor little mites ! ' she said, when at last they let her go. '
They're so happy, they make one want to cry. And then, after a week, one
has to pack them off again. Back to their slum. It seems too cruel. But
what can one do ? There are so many of them. One can't keep one lot at
the expense of the others.'

They walked on for a time in silence, and Mrs. Foxe found herself
suddenly thinking that there were also cripples of the spirit. People
with emotions so lame and rickety that they didn't know how to feel
properly ; people with some kind of hunch or deformity in their 99

EYELESS IN GAZA

power of expression, John Beavis perhaps was one of them. But how unfair
she was being ! How presumptuous too ! Judge not that ye be not judged.
And anyhow, if it were true, that would only be another reason for
feeling sorry for him.

' I think it must be tea-time/ she said aloud ; and, to prevent herself
from passing any more judgments, she started to talk to him about those
Cripple Schools she had been helping to organize in Notting Dale and St.
Paneras. She described the cripple's life at home—the parents out at
work ; not a glimpse of a human face from morning till night ; no proper
food ; no toys, no books, nothing to do but to lie still and wait—for
what ?

Then she told him about the ambulance that now went round to fetch the
children to school, about the special desks, the lessons, the
arrangements for supplying a decent dinner.

' And our reward,' she said, as she opened the door into the house, ' is
that same heart-breaking happiness I was speaking of just now. I can't
help feeling it as a kind of reproach, an accusation. Each time I see
that happiness, I ask myself what right I have to be in a position to
give it so easily, just by spending a little money and taking a tiny bit
of pleasant trouble. Yes, what right ? ' Her warm clear voice trembled a
little as she uttered the question. She raised her hands in an
interrogative gesture, then let them fall again and walked quickly into
the drawing-room.

Mr. Beavis followed her in silence. A kind of tingling

IOO


CHAPTER IX

warmth had expanded within him as he listened to her last words. It was
like the sensation he had when he read the last scene of Measure for
Measure, or listened to Joachim in the Beethoven Concerto.

Mr. Beavis could only stay two nights. There was an important meeting of
the Philological Society. And then, of course, his work on the
Dictionary. ' The old familiar grind,' he explained to Mrs. Foxc in a
tone of affected self-pity and with a sigh that was hardly even meant to
carry conviction. The truth was that he enjoyed his work, would have
felt lost without it. ' And you're really sure,' he added, ' that
Anthony won't be too much of a burden to you ? '

* Burden ? But look 1 ' And she pointed through the window to where the
two boys were playing bicycle polo on the lawn. * And it's not only
that,' she went on. ' I've really come to be very much attached to
Anthony in these two days. There's something so deeply touching about
him. He seems so vulnerable somehow. In spite of all that cleverness and
good sense and determination of his. There's part of him that seems
terribly at the mercy of the world.' Yes, at its mercy, she repeated to
herself, thinking, as she did so, of that broad and candid forehead, of
those almost tremulously sensitive lips, of that slight, unforceful
chin. He could be easily hurt, easily led astray. Each time he looked at
her, he made her feel almost guiltily responsible for him.

1 And yet,' said Mr. Beavis, * there are times when he seems strangely
indifferent.'

The memory of that

101

EYELESS IN GAZA

episode in the train had not ceased to rankle. For though, of course, he
wanted the child to be happy, though he had decided that the only
happiness he himself could know henceforward would come from the
contemplation of the child's happiness, the old resentment still
obscurely persisted : he felt aggrieved because Anthony had not suffered
more, because he seemed to resist and reject suffering when it was
brought to him. '

Strangely indifferent,' he repeated.

Mrs. Foxe nodded. ' Yes,' she said, ' he wears a kind of armour. Covers
up his vulnerability in the most exposed place and at the same time
uncovers it elsewhere, so that the slighter wounds shall act as a kind
of distraction, a kind of counter-irritant. It's self-protection. And
yet ' (her voice deepened, thrillingly), ' and yet I believe that in the
long run he'd be better and spiritually healthier, yes, and happier too,
if he could bring himself to do just the opposite—if he'd armour himself
against the little distracting wounds, the little wounds of pleasure as
well as the little wounds of pain, and expose his vulnerableness only to
the great and piercing blows/

' How true that is ! ' said Mr. Beavis, who found that her words applied
exactly to himself.

There was a silence. Then, harking back to his original question, ' No,
no/ said Mrs. Foxe with decision, ' so far from feeling him as a burden,
I'm really enchanted to have him here. Not only for what he is in
himself, but also for what he is to Brian—and incidentally for what
Brian is to him. It's delightful to

T02


CHAPTER IX

see them. I should like them to be together every holidays/ Mrs. Foxe
paused for a moment ; then,

* Seriously,' she went on, ' if you've made no plans for the summer, why
don't you think of this ? We've taken a little house at Tenby for
August. Why shouldn't you and Anthony find a place there too ? '

Mr. Beavis thought the idea an excellent one; and the boys, when it was
broached to them, were delighted.

* So it's only good-bye till August,' said Mrs. Foxe as she saw liim
off. * Though of course,' she added, with a warmth that was all the
greater for being the result of a deliberate effort of cordiality, ' of
course we shall meet before then.'

The carriage rattled away down the drive ; and for a hundred yards or
more Anthony ran beside it, shouting

* Good-bye ' and waving his handkerchief with a vehemence that Mr.
Beavis took as the sign of a correspondingly intense regret to see him
go. In fact, however, it was just a manifestation of overflowing energy
and high spirits. Circumstances had filled him, body and mind, with the
deep joy of being happily alive. This joy required physical expression,
and his father's departure gave him an excuse for running and waving his
arms. Mr.

Beavis was extremely touched. But if only, he went on sadly to think, if
only there were some way of canalizing this love, and his own for the
boy, so that it might irrigate the aridities of their daily intercourse
! Women understood these things so much better. It had been touching to
see how the poor

103

EYELESS IN GAZA

child had responded to Mrs. Foxe's affection. And perhaps, he went on to
speculate, perhaps it was just because there had been no woman to direct
his feelings that Anthony had seemed to be so uncaring. Perhaps a child
could never adequately mourn his mother for the very reason that he was
motherless. It was a vicious circle. Mrs. Foxe's influence would be
good, not only in this matter, but in a thousand other ways as well. Mr.
Beavis sighed. If only it were possible for a man and a woman to
associate ; not in marriage, but for a common purpose, for the sake of
motherless, of fatherless, children ! A good woman—admirable,
extraordinary even. But in spite of that (almost because of ¦ that), it
could only be an association for a common purpose. Never a marriage. And
anyhow there was Maisie—waiting for him there; he would not fail . . .
But an association for the sake of the children—that would be no
betrayal.

Anthony walked back to the house whistling * The Honeysuckle and the
Bee.' He was fond of his father— fond, it is true, by force of habit, as
one is fond of one's native place, or its traditional cooking—but still,
genuinely fond of him. Which did nothing, however, to diminish the
discomfort he always felt in Mr. Beavis's presence.

' Brian ! ' he shouted, as he approached the house— shouted a bit
self-consciously ; for it seemed queer to be calling him Brian instead
of Foxe or Horse-Face. Rather unmanly, even a shade discreditable.

104


CHAPTER IX

Brian's answering whisde came from die school-room.

11 vote we take the bikes/ Anthony called.

At school, people used to mock at old Horse-Face for his bird mania. ' I
say, you fellows/

Staithes would say, taking Horse-Face by the arm, - guess what I saw
to-day ! Two spew-tits and a piddle-warbler/ And a great howl of
laughter would go up—a howl in which Anthony always joined. But here,
where there was nobody to shame him out of being interested in spring
migrants and nest-boxes and heronries, he took to bird-watching with
enthusiasm. Coming in, wet and muddy from the afternoon's walk, 'Do you
know what we heard, Mrs. Foxe ? ' he would ask triumphantly, before poor
Brian had had time to get out a stammered word. ' The first whitethroat
! ' or ' The first willow wren ! ' and Rachel Foxe would say, * How
splendid ! ' in such a way that he was filled with pride and happiness.
It was as though those piddle-warblers had never existed.

After tea, when the curtains had been drawn and the lamps brought in,
Mrs. Foxe would read to them. Anthony, who had always been bored to
death by Scott, found himself following the 'Fortunes of Nigel* with the
most passionate attention.

Easter approached, and, for the time being, ' Nigel ' was put away. Mrs.
Foxe gave them readings, instead, from the New Testament. 'And he saith
unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death : tarry ye here,
and watch. And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and
prayed that, if it were possible, the hour 105

EYELESS IN GAZA

might pass from him. And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible
unto thee ; take away this cup from me : nevertheless not what I will,
but what thou wilt/ The lamplight was a round island in the darkness of
the room, and towards it, from the fire, projected a vague promontory of
luminous redness. Anthony was lying on the floor, and from the high
Italian chair beside the lamp the words came down to him, transfigured,
as it were, by that warm, musical voice, charged with significances he
had never heard or seen in them before. ' And it was the third hour, and
they crucified him.' In the ten heart-beats of silence that followed he
seemed to hear the blows of the hammer on the nails. Thud, thud, thud .
. . He passed the fingers of one hand across the smooth palm of the
other ; his body went rigid with horror, and through the stiffened
muscles passed a violent spasm of shuddering.

* And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole
land until the ninth hour/ Mrs. Foxe lowered her book. ' That's one of
those additions I was telling you about,' she said, ' one of those
embroideries on the story. One must think of the age in which the
writers of the gospels lived. They believed these things could happen ;
and, what's more, they thought they ought to happen on important
occasions. They wanted to do honour to Jesus ; they wanted to make his
story seem more wonderful. But to us, nowadays, these things make it
seem less wonderful; and we don't feel that they do him honour. The
wonder-106


CHAPTER IX

fui thing for us/ she went on, and her voice thrilled with a deep note
of fervour, ' is that Jesus was a man, no more able to do miracles and
no more likely to have them done for him than the rest of us. Just a
man— and yet he could do what he did, he could be what he was. That's
the wonder.'

There was a long silence ; only the clock ticked and the flame rustled
silkily in the grate.

Anthony lay on his back and stared at the ceiling. Everything was
suddenly clear. Uncle James was right ; but the other people were right
too. She had shown how it was possible for both of them to be right.
Just a man—and yet . . . Oh, he too, he too would do and be !

Mrs. Foxe picked up the book once more. The thin pages crackled as she
turned them.

' Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they
came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared,
and certain others with them.

And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre/

The stone . . . But at Lollingdon there was earth; and only ashes in
that little box—that little box no bigger than a biscuit tin. Anthony
shut his eyes in the hope of excluding the odious vision ; but against
the crimson darkness the horns, the triangular frizz of auburn curls
stood out with an intenser vividness. He lifted his hand to his mouth,
and, to punish himself, began to bite the forefinger, harder, harder,
until the pain was almost intolerable.

That evening, when she came to say good-night to

107

EYELESS IN GAZA

him, Mrs. Foxe sat down on the edge of Anthony's bed and took his hand.
* You know, Anthony/ she said after a moment of silence, * you mustn't
be afraid of thinking about her/

* Afraid ? ' he mumbled, as though he hadn't understood. But he had
understood—

understood, perhaps, more than she had meant. The blood rushed guiltily
into his cheeks.

He felt frightened, as though somehow she had trapped him, found him
out—frightened and therefore resentful.

* You mustn't be afraid of suffering,' she went on. 1 Thinking about her
will make you sad : that's inevitable. And it's right. Sadness is
necessary sometimes— like an operation ; you can't be well without it.
If you think about her, Anthony, it'll hurt you. But if you don't think
about her, you condemn her to a second death. The spirit of the dead
lives on in God. But it also lives on in the minds of the living—helping
them, making them better and stronger. The dead can only have this kind
of immortality if the living are prepared to give it them. Will you give
it her, Anthony ? '

Mutely, and in tears, he nodded his answer. It was not so much the words
that had reassured him as the fact that the words were hers and had been
uttered in that compelling voice. His fears were allayed, his suspicious
resentment died down. He felt safe with her.

Safe to abandon himself to the sobs that now mounted irresistibly in his
throat.

4 Poor little Anthony I * She stroked his hair. * Poor

108


CHAPTER IX

little Anthony ! There's no help for it ; it'll always hurt—always.
You'll never be able to think of her without some pain. Even time can't
take away all the suffering, Anthony.'

She paused, and for a long minute sat there in silence, thinking of her
father, thinking of her husband. The old man, so massive, so majestic,
like a prophet—then in his wheeled chair, paralysed and strangely
shrunken, his head on one side, dribbling over his white beard, hardly
able to speak . . . And the man she had married, out of admiration for
his strength, out of respect for his uprightness ; had married, and then
discovered that she did not, could not love. For the strength, she had
found, was cold and without magnanimity ; the uprightness, harsh and
cruel uprightness. And the pain of the long last illness had hardened
and embittered him. He had died implacable, resisting her tenderness to
the last.

* Yes, there'll always be pain and sadness,' she went on at last. * And
after all,' a warm note of pride, almost of defiance, came into her
voice, ' can one wish that it should be otherwise ? You wouldn't want to
forget your mother, would you, Anthony ? Or not to care any more? Just
in order to escape a little suffering. You wouldn't want that ? '

Sobbing, he shook his head. And it was quite true. At this moment he
didn't want to escape. It was in some obscure way a relief to be
suffering this extremity of sorrow. And he loved her because she had
known how to make him suffer.

E

IOÇ

EYELESS IN GAZA

Mrs. Foxe bent down and kissed him. ' Poor little Anthony ! ' she kept
repeating. * Poor little Anthony ! '

It rained on Good Friday ; but on Saturday the weather changed, and
Easter Day was symbolically golden, as though on purpose, as though in a
parable. Christ's resurrection and the re-birth of Nature—two aspects of
an identical mystery. The sunshine, the clouds, like fragments of marbly
sculpture in the pale blue sky, seemed, in some profound and
inexpressible way, to corroborate all that Mrs. Foxe had said.

They did not go to church ; but, sitting on the lawn, she read aloud,
first a bit of the service for Easter Day, then some extracts from
Renan's Life of Jesus. The tears came into Anthony's eyes as he
listened, and he felt an unspeakable longing to be good, to do something
fine and noble.

On the Monday, a party of slum children were brought down to spend the
day in the garden and the copse. At Bulstrode one would have called them
scadgers and offensively ignored their existence. Beastly little
scadgers ; and when they were older, they would grow into louts and
cads. Here, however, it was different. Mrs. Foxe transformed the
scadgers into unfortunate children who would probably never get a second
glimpse of the country in all the year.

' Poor kids ! * Anthony said to her when they arrived. But in spite of
the compassion he was doing his level best to feel, in spite of his
determined goodwill, he was secretly afraid of these stunted yet
horribly mature

no


CHAPTER IX

little boys with whom he had offered to play, he feared and therefore
disliked them. They seemed immeasurably foreign. Their patched, stained
clothes, their shapeless boots, were like a differently coloured skin ;
their cockney might have been Chinese. The mere appearance of them made
him feel guiltily self-conscious. And then there was the way they looked
at him, with a derisive hatred of his new suit and his alien manners ;
there was the way the bolder of them whispered together and laughed.
When they laughed at Brian for his stammer, he laughed with them ; and
in a little while they laughed no more, or laughed only in a friendly
and almost sympathetic way. Anthony, on the contrary, pretended not to
notice their mockery. A gentleman, he had always been taught explicitly
as well as by constant implication and the example of his elders, a
gentleman doesn't pay any attention to that kind of thing. It is beneath
his dignity. He behaved as though their laughter were non-existent. They
went on laughing.

He hated that morning of rounders and hide-and-seek. But worse was to
follow at lunch-time. He had offered to help in die serving of the
table. The work in itself was unobjectionable enough. But the smell of
poverty when the twenty children were assembled in the dining-room was
so insidiously disgusting—like Lollingdon church, only much worse—that
he had to slip out two or three times in the course of the meal to spit
in the lavatory basin. ' Reeking with germs ! * he heard his mother's
angrily frightened voice repeating. ' Reeking

m

EYELESS IN GAZA

with germs ! * And when Mrs. Foxe asked him a question, he could only
nod and make an inarticulate noise with his mouth shut ; if he spoke, he
would have to swallow.

Swallow what ? It was revolting only to think of it.

4 Poor kids ! ' he said once more, as he stood with Mrs. Foxe and Brian
watching their departure. ' Poor kids ! ' and felt all die more ashamed
of his hypocrisy when Mrs. Foxe thanked him for having worked so hard to
entertain them.

And when Anthony had gone up to the school-room, ' Thank you too, my
darling,' she said, turning to Brian. * You were really splendid/

Flushing with pleasure, Brian shook his head. ' It was all y-you/ he
said ; and suddenly, because he loved her so much, because she was so
good, so wonderful, he found his eyes full of tears.

Together they walked out into the garden. Her hand was on his shoulder.
She smelt faintly of eau-de-Cologne, and all at once (and this also, it
seemed, was part of her wonderfulness) the sun came out from behind a
cloud.

' Look at those heavenly daffodils ! * she cried, in that voice that
made everything she said seem, to Brian, truer, in some strange way,
than the truth itself. * " And now my heart with pleasure fills . . •"
Do you remember, Brian ? '

Flushed and with bright eyes, he nodded. - " And d-dances . . ."'

ixa


CHAPTER IX

* " Dances with the daffodils." * She pressed him closer to her. He was
filled with an unspeakable happiness. They walked on in silence. Her
skirts rustled at every step—like the sea, Brian thought ; the sea at
Ventnor, that time last year, when he couldn't sleep at night because of
the waves on the beach. Lying there in the darkness, listening to the
distant breathing of the sea, he had felt afraid, and above all sad,
terribly sad. But, associated with his mother, the memories of that
tear, that profound and causeless sadness, became beautiful ; and at the
same time, in some obscure way, they seemed to reflect their new beauty
back on to her, making her seem yet more wonderful in his eyes.

Rustling back and forth across the sunny lawn, she took on some of the
mysterious significance of the windy darkness, the tirelessly returning
waves.

' Poor little Anthony ! ' said Mrs. Foxe, breaking the long silence. '
It's hard, it's terribly hard.' Hard also for poor Maisie, she was
thinking. That graceful creature, with her languors, her silences, her
dreamy abstractions, and then her sudden bursts of laughing
activity—what had such a one to do with death ? Or with birth, for that
matter ? Maisie with a child to bring up—it hardly made more sense than
Maisie dead.

* It must be t-t-t . . / but ' terrible ' wouldn't come, ' it must be
d-dreadful,' said Brian, laboriously circumventing the obstacle, while
his emotion ran on ahead in an imaginary outburst of unuttered and
unutterable words, * n-not to have a m-mother.'

113

EYELESS IN GAZA

Mrs. Foxe smiled tenderly, and, bending down, laid her cheek for a
moment against his hair. ' Dreadful also not to have a son/ she said,
and realized, as she did so, that the words were even truer than she had
intended them to be—that they were true on a plane of deeper, more
essential existence than that on which she was now moving. She had
spoken for the present ; but if it would be terrible not to have him
now, how incomparably more terrible it would have been then, after her
father had had his stroke and during the years of her husband's illness
! In that time of pain and utter spiritual deprivation her love for
Brian had been her only remaining possession. Ah, terrible, terrible
indeed, then, to have no son !

"4


CHAPTER X

June 16th 1912

OOKS. The table in Anthony's room was covered with them. The five folio
volumes of Bayle, in the English edition of 1738. Rickaby's translation
of the Summa contra Gentiles. De Gourmont's Problème du Style, The Way
of Perfection. Dostoevsky's Notes from Underground. Three volumes of
Byron's Letters* The works of St. John of the Cross in Spanish. The
plays of Wycherley. Lee's History of Sacerdotal Celibacy. If only,
Anthony thought as he came in from his walk, if only one had two sets of
eyes ! Janus would be able to read Candide and the Imitation
simultaneously. Life was so short, and books so countlessly many. He
pored voluptuously over the table, opening at random now one volume, now
another. * He would not lie down/ he read ; * then his neck was too
large for the aperture, and the priest was obliged to drown his
exclamations by still louder exhortations. The head was off before the
eye could trace the blow ; but from an attempt to draw back the head,
notwithstanding it was held forward by the hair, the first head was cut
off close to the ears ; the other two were taken off more cleanly. The
first turned me quite hot and thirsty and made me shake so that I could
hardly hold the opera glass. . ? .*

"5

B

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Happiness being the peculiar good of an intelligent nature, must
attach to the intelligent nature on the side of something that is
peculiar to it. But appetite is not peculiar to intelligent nature, but
is found in all things, though diversely in diverse beings. The will, as
being an appetite, is not a peculiar appurtenance of an intelligent
nature, except so far as it is dependent on the intelligence ; but
intelligence in itself is peculiar to an intelligent nature. Happiness
therefore consists in an act of the intellect substantially and
principally rather than in an act of the will. . . .* ' Even in my most
secret soul I have never been able to think of love as anything but a
struggle, which begins with hatred and ends with moral subjection. . . /
' " I will not be a cuckold, I say; there will be danger in making me a
cuckold." "Why, wert thou well cured of thy last clap ?"...'* La primera
noche o purgacién es amarga y terrible para el sentidoy como ahora
diremos. La segunda no tiene comparatif porque es korrenda y espantable
para el esplritu. . . / ' I think I have read somewhere that preciseness
has been carried so far that ladies would not say, J'ai mangé des
confitures', but des fitures. At this rate, above one half of the words
of the Dictionary of the French Academy should be struck out. . . .'

In the end, Anthony settled down to Tie Way of Perfection of St. Teresa.
When Brian came in, an hour later, he had got as far as the Prayer of
Quiet.

' B-busy ? ' Brian asked.

Anthony shook his head.

n<5


CHAPTER X

The other sat down. * I c-came to s-see if there was anything more to
s-settle about to-m-morrow.' Mrs. Foxe and Joan Thursley, Mr. and Mrs.
Beavis were coming down to Oxford for the day. Brian and Anthony had
agreed to entertain them together.

Hock or Sauterne cup ? Lobster mayonnaise or cold salmon ? And if it
rained, what would be the best thing to do in the afternoon ?

( Are you c-coming to the F-fabians this evening ? ' Brian asked, when
the discussion of the next day's plans was at an end.

1 Of course/ said Anthony. There was to be voting, that evening, for
next term's president. ' It'll be a close fight between you and Mark
Staithes. You'll need all the votes you can . . .'

Interrupting him, ' I've st-stood down,' said Brian.

' Stood down ? But why ? '

' V-various reasons.'

Anthony looked at him and shook his head. * Not that I'd have ever
dreamt of putting up,'

he said. ' Can't imagine anything more boring than to preside over any
kind of organization.' Even belonging to an organization was bad enough.
Why should one be bullied into making choices when one didn't want to
choose ; into binding oneself to a set of principles when it was so
essential to be free ; into committing oneself to associate with other
people when as likely as not one would want to be alone ; into promising
in advance to be at given places at given times ? It was with the
greatest difficulty E* 117

EYELESS IN GAZA

that Brian had persuaded him to join the Fabians ; for the rest he was
unattached. *

Inconceivably boring/ he insisted. * But still, once in the running, why
stand down ? ' '

Mark'll be a b-better president than 1/

* He'll be ruder, if that's what you mean/

' B-besides, he was so a-awfully k-keen on g-getting elected/ Brian
began; then broke off, suddenly conscious-stricken. Anthony might think
he was implying a criticism of Mark Staithes, was assuming the right to
patronize him. ' I mean, he kn-knows he'll do the j-job so well,' he
went on quickly, ' W-whereas I . . . So I r-really didn't see why . . /

' In fact you thought you might as well humour him/

' No, n-no ! ' cried Brian in a tone of distress. * Not th-that/

' Cock of the dunghill,* Anthony continued, ignoring the other's
protest. ' He's got to be cock—even if it's only of the tiniest little
Fabian dunghill/ He laughed. ' Poor old Mark !

What an agony when he can't get to the top of his dunghill ! One's lucky
to prefer books/

He patted St. Teresa affectionately. l Still, I wish you hadn't stood
down. It would have made me laugh to see Mark trying to pretend he
didn't mind when you'd beaten him.

You're reading a paper, aren't you,' he went on, ' after the voting ? *

Relieved by the change of subject, Brian nodded. ' On Syn . . / he
began.

* On sin ? '

* Synd-dicalism/

u8


CHAPTER X

They both laughed.

* Odd, when you come to think of it/ said Anthony when their laughter
subsided, ' that the mere notion of talking to socialists about sin
should seem so . . . well, so outrageous, really. Sin . . . socialism.'
He shook his head. ' It's like mating a duck with a zebra.'

1 You could t-talk about sin if you st-started from the other end.'

' Which end ? '

' The s-social end. O-organizing a s-society so well that the
i-individual simply c-couldn't commit any sins.'

1 But do you honestly think such a society could exist ? '

I P-perhaps/ said Brian doubtfully, but reflected that social change
could hardly abolish those ignoble desires of his, couldn't even
legitimate those desires, except within certain conventional limits. He
shook his head. ' N-no, I don't kn-know/ he concluded.

II can't see that you could do more than just transfer people's sins
from one plane to another. But we've done that already. Take envy and
ambition, for example. They used to express themselves on the plane of
physical violence. Now, we've reorganized society in such a way that
they have to express themselves for the most part in terms of economic
competition.'

* Which we're g-going to ab-abolish.'

* And so bring physical violence back into fashion, eh?* ' Th-that's
what you h-hope, d-don't you ? ' said

Brian ; and laughing, ' You're awful ! ' he added.

119

EYELESS IN GAZA

There was a silence. Absently, Brian picked up The Way of Perfection^
and, turning over the pages, read a line here, a paragraph there. Then
with a sigh he shut the book, put it back in its place and, shaking his
head, * I c-can't underst-stand,' he said, ' why you read this sort of
st-stuff. S-seeing that you d-don't b-believe in it.'

* But I do believe/ Anthony insisted. * Not in the orthodox
explanations, of course.

Those are obviously idiotic. But in the facts. And in the fundamental
metaphysical theory of mysticism/

' You m-mean that you can g-get at t-truth by some s-sort of d-direct
union with it ? '

Anthony nodded. ' And the most valuable and important sort of truth only
in that way/

Brian sat for a time in silence, his elbows on his knees, his long face
between his hands, staring at the floor. Then, without looking up, ' It
s-seems to me,' he said at last, * that you're r-running with the h-hare
and h-h-h... and h-h . . .'

* Hunting with the hounds,' Anthony supplied.

The other nodded. ' Using sc-cepticism against r-religion—ag-gainst any
s-sort of i-idealism, really,' he added, thinking of the barbed mockery
with which Anthony loved to puncture any enthusiasm that seemed to him
excessive. 'And using th-this st-stuff*—he pointed to The Way of
Perfection—* a-against s-scientific argument, when it s-suits your b-b-b
. . .' * book ' refused to come : 4 when it s-suits your
bee-double-o-kay/

120


CHAPTER X

Anthony relit his pipe before answering. * Well, why shouldn't one make
the best of both worlds ? ' he asked, as he threw the spent match into
the grate. * Of all the worlds. Why not ? '

1 W-well, c-consistency, s-single-mindedness . . .' ' But I don't value
single-mindedness, I value completeness. I think it's one's duty to
develop all one's potentialities—all of them.

Not stupidly stick to only one. Single-mindedness ! ' he repeated. ' But
oysters are single-minded. Ants are single-minded.'

* S-so are s-saints.'

1 Well, that only confirms my determination not to be a saint.'

4 B-but h-how can you d-do anything if you're not s-single-minded ? It's
the f-first cond-dition of any ach-achievement.'

* Who tells you I want to achieve anything ? ' asked Anthony. ' I don't.
I want to be, completely. And I want to know. And so far as getting to
know is doing, I accept the conditions of it, single-mindedly.' With the
stem of his pipe he indicated the books on the table.

' You d-don't accept the c-conditions of th-that kind of kn-knowing,'
Brian retorted, pointing once more at The Way of Perfection. ' P-praying
and f-fasting and all th-that.'

c Because it isn't knowing ; it's a special kind of experience. There's
all the difference in the world between knowing and experiencing.
Between learning algebra, for example, and going to bed with a woman/

121

EYELESS IN GAZA

Brian did not smile. Still staring at the floor, ' B-but you th-think,'
he said, ' that m-mystical experiences b-brings one into c-contact with
t-truth ? '

4 And so does going to bed/

' D-does it ? ' Brian forced himself to ask. He disliked this sort of
conversation, disliked it more than ever now that he was in love with
Joan—in love, and yet (he hated himself for it) desiring her basely,
wrongly. . . .

' If it's the right woman,' the other answered with an airy knowingness,
as though he had experimented with every kind of female. In fact, though
he would have been ashamed to admit it, he was a virgin.

' S-so you needn't b-bother about the f-fasting,' said Brian, suddenly
ironical.

Anthony grinned. ' Pm quite content with only knowing about the way of
perfection,' he said.

' I think I should w-want to exp-experience it too,' said Brian, after a
pause.

Anthony shook his head. ' Not worth the price,' he said. * That's the
trouble of all single-minded activity ; it costs you your liberty. You
find yourself driven into a corner. You're a prisoner.'

' But if you w-want to be f-free, you've g-got to be a p-prisoner. It's
the c-condition of freedom—t-true freedom.'

1 True freedom ! ' Anthony repeated in the parody of a clerical voice. '
I always love that kind of argument. The contrary of a thing isn't the
contrary ; oh, dear me, no I It's the diing itself, but as it truly is.
Ask a die-122


CHAPTER X

hard what conservatism is ; he'll tell you it's true socialism. And the
brewers' trade papers; they're full of articles about the beauty of True
Temperance. Ordinary temperance is just gross refusal to drink; but true
temperance, true temperance is something much more refined. True
temperance is a bottle of claret with each meal and three double
whiskies after dinner. Personally, Fm all for true temperance, because I
hate temperance.

But I like being free. So I won't have anything to do with true
freedom.'

' Which doesn't p-prevent it from being t-true freedom,' the other
obstinately insisted.

' What's in a name ? ' Anthony went on. ' The answer is, Practically
everything, if the name's a good one. Freedom's a marvellous name.
That's why you're so anxious to make use of it. You think that, if you
call imprisonment true freedom, people will be attracted to the prison.
And the worst of it is you're quite right. The name counts more with
most people than the thing. They'll follow the man who repeats it most
often and in the loudest voice. And of course " True Freedom " is
actually a better name than freedom tout court.

Truth —it's one of the magical words. Combine it with the magic of "
freedom " and the effect's terrific' After a moment's silence, '
Curious,' he went on, digressively and in another tone, ' that people
don't talk about true truth. I suppose it sounds too queer. True truth ;
true truth,' he repeated experimentally. * No, it obviously won't do.
It's like beri-beri, or Wagga-Wagga,

123

EYELESS IN GAZA

Nigger talk. You couldn't take it seriously. If you want to make the
contrary of truth acceptable, you've got to call it spiritual truth, or
inner truth, or higher truth, or even . . /

' But a m-moment ago you were s-saying that there w-was a k-kind of
higher truth. S-something you could only g-get at m-mystically. You're
c-contradicting yourself/

Anthony laughed. ' That's one of the privileges of freedom. Besides,* he
added, more seriously, * there's that distinction between knowing and
experiencing. Known truth isn't the same as experienced truth. There
ought to be two distinct words.'

' You m-manage to wr-wriggle out of e-e very thing.'

' Not out of everything,' Anthony insisted. ' There'll always be those.'
He pointed again to the books. 1 Always knowledge. The prison of
knowledge—because of course knowledge is also a prison. But I shall
always be ready to stay in that prison/

4 A-always ? ' Brian questioned.

4 Why not?'

* Too m-much of a 1-luxury/

* On the contrary. It's a case of scorning delights and living laborious
days/

* Which are thems-selves del-lightful/

' Of course. But mayn't one take pleasure in one's work?'

Brian nodded. ' It's not exactly th-that/ he said. * One doesn't w-want
to exp-ploit one's p-privileges/

124


CHAPTER X

' Mine's only a little one,' said Anthony. * About six pounds a week/ he
added, specifying the income chat had come to him from his mother.

1 P-plus all the r-rest.'

'Which rest?'

' The 1-luck that you happen to Hike this sort of thing.' He reached out
and touched the folio Bayles. ' And all your g-gifts.'

1 But I can't artificially make myself stupid,' Anthony objected. ' Nor
can you.'

1 N-no, but we can use what we've g-got for s-some-fhing else.'

* Something we're not suited for,' the other suggested sarcastically.

Ignoring the mockery, ' As a k-kind of th-thank-offering,' Brian went on
with a still intenser passion of earnestness.

1 For what ? '

' For all that we've been g-given. M-money, to start with. And then
kn-knowledge, t-taste, the power to c-c . . .' He wanted to say *
create,' but had to be content with ' to do things.'

' B-being a scholar or an artist —it's Mike purs-suing your p-personal
salvation. But there's also the k-kingdom of G-god. W-waiting to be
realized.'

' By the Fabians ? ' asked Anthony in a tone of pretended ingenuousness.

* Am-mong others.' There was a long half-minute of silence. * Shall I
say it ? ' Brian was wondering. ' Shall

125

EYELESS IN GAZA

I tell him ? ' And suddenly, as though a dam had burst, his irresolution
was swept away. *

I've decided,' he said aloud, and the feeling with which he spoke the
words was so strong that it lifted him, almost without his knowledge, to
his feet and sent him striding restlessly about the room, ' I've decided
that I shall g-go on with ph-philosophy and 1-literature and h-history
till I'm thirty. Then it'll be t-time to do something else. S-something
more dir-rect/

1 Direct ? ' Anthony repeated. ' In what way ? *

( In getting at p-people. In r-realizing the k-kingdom of G-god . . .*
The very intensity of his desire to communicate what he was feeling
reduced him to dumbness.

Listening to Brian's words, looking up into the serious and ardent face,
Anthony felt himself touched, profoundly, to the quick of his being . .
. felt himself touched, and, for that very reason, came at once under a
kind of compulsion, as though in self-defence, to react to his own
emotion, and his friend's, with a piece of derision. 'Washing the feet
of the poor, for example,' he suggested. 'And drying them on your hair.
It'll be awkward if you go prematurely bald.'

Afterwards, when Brian had gone, he felt ashamed of his ignoble
ribaldry—humiliated, at the same time, by the unreflecting automatism
with which he had brought it out. Like those pithed frogs that twitch
when you apply a drop of acid to their skin. A brainless response.

' Damn 1 ' he said aloud, then picked up his book.

126


CHAPTER X

He was deep once more in The Way of Perfection^ when there was a thump
at the door and a voice, deliberately harshened so as to be like the
voice of a drill-sergeant on parade, shouted his name.

* These bloody stairs of yours ! ' said Gerry Watchett as he came in. *
Why the devil do you live in such a filthy hole ? '

Gerry Watchett was fair-skinned, with small, un-emphatic features and
wavy golden-brown hair. A good-looking young man, but good-looking, in
spite of his height and powerful build, almost to girlish prettiness.
For the casual observer, there was an air about him of Arcadian
freshness and innocence, strangely belied, however, upon a closer
examination, by the hard insolence in his blue eyes, by the faint smile
of derision and contempt that kept returning to his face, by the
startling coarseness of those thick-fingered, short-nailed hands.

Anthony pointed to a chair. But the other shook his head. ' No, I'm in a
hurry. Just rushed in to say you've got to come to dinner to-night.'

( But I can't'

Gerry frowned. ' Why not ? '

1 I've got a meeting of the Fabians/

1 And you call that a reason for not coming to dine with me ? '

' Seeing I've promised to . . .'

' Then I can expect you at eight ? '

4 But really

127

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Don't be a fool ! What does it matter ? A mother's meeting ? '

1 But what excuse shall I give ? '

* Any bloody thing you like. Tell them you've just had twins/

4 All right, then,' Anthony agreed at last. * I'll come/ ' Thank you
very kindly/ said Gerry, with mock politeness. * I'd have broken your
neck if you hadn't. Well, so long/ At the door he halted, ' I'm having
Bimbo Abinger, and Ted, and Willie Monmouth, and Scroope. I wanted to
get old Gorchakov too ; but the fool's gone and got ill at the last
moment. That's why I had to ask you,' he added with a quiet
matter-of-factness that was far more offensive than any emphasis could
have been ; then turned, and was gone.

' Do you Mike him ? ' Brian had asked one day when Gerry's name came up
between them. And because the question evoked an uneasy echo in his own
consciousness, Anthony had answered, with a quite unnecessary sharpness,
that of course he liked Gerry.

' Why else do you suppose I go about with him ? ' he had concluded,
looking at Brian with irritable suspicion. Brian made no reply ; and the
question had returned like a boomerang upon the asker. Yes, why did he
go about with Gerry ? For of course he didn't like the man ; Gerry had
hurt and humiliated him, was ready, he knew, to hurt and humiliate him
again on the slightest provocation. Or rather without any provocation at
all—just for fun, because it amused him to humiliate people, because 128


CHAPTER X

he had a natural talent for inflicting pain. So why, why?

Mere snobbery, as Anthony was forced to admit to himself, was part of
the discreditable secret- It was absurd and ridiculous; but the fact
remained, nevertheless, that it pleased him to associate with Gerry and
his friends. To be the intimate of these young aristocrats and
plutocrats, and at the same time to know himself their superior in
intelligence, taste, judgment, in all the things that really mattered,
was satisfying to his vanity.

Admitting his intellectual superiority, the young barbarians expected
him to pay for their admiration by amusing them. He was their intimate,
yes ; but as Voltaire was the intimate of Frederick the Great, as
Diderot of the Empress Catherine. The resident philosopher is not easily
distinguishable from the court fool.

With genuine appreciation, but at the same time patronizingly,
offensively, * Good for the Professor ! * Gerry would say after one of
his sallies. Or, ' Another drink for the old Professor'—as though he
were an Italian organ-grinder, playing for pennies.

The prick of remembered humiliation was sharp like an insect's sting.
With sudden violence Anthony heaved himself out of his chair and began
to walk, frowning, up and down the room.

A middle-class snob tolerated because of his capacities as an
entertainer. The thought was hateful, wounding. * Why do I stand it ? '
he wondered. * Why am I such a damned fool ?

I shall write Gerry a note to say I can't

129

EYELESS IN GAZA

come/ But time passed ; the note remained unwritten» For, after all, he
was thinking, there were also advantages, there were also satisfactions.
An evening spent with Gerry and his friends was exhilarating, was
educative. Exhilarating and educative, not because of anything they said
or thought—for they were all stupid, all bottomlessly ignorant ; but
because of what they were, of what their circumstances had made them.
For, thanks to their money and their position, they were able actually
to live in such freedom as Anthony had only imagined or read about. For
them, the greater number of the restrictions which had always hedged him
in did not even exist. They permitted themselves as a matter of course
licences which he took only in theory, and which he felt constrained
even then to justify with all the resources of a carefully perverted
metaphysic, an ingeniously adulterated mystical theology. By the mere
force of social and economic circumstances, these ignorant barbarians
found themselves quite naturally behaving as he did not dare to behave
even after reading all Nietzsche had said about the Superman, or
Casanova about women. Nor did they have to study Patanjali or Jacob
Boehme in order to find excuses for the intoxications of wine and
sensuality : they just got drunk and had their girls, like that, as
though they were in the Garden of Eden. They faced life, not diffidently
and apologetically, as Anthony faced it, not wistfully, from behind
invisible bars, but with the serenely insolent assurance of those who
know that God intended 130


CHAPTER X

them to enjoy themselves and had decreed the unfailing acquiescence of
their fellows in all their desires;

True, they also had their confining prejudices ; they too on occasion
were as ready as poor old Brian to lock themselves up in the prison of a
code. But code and prejudices were of their own particular caste ;
therefore, so far as Anthony was concerned, without binding force. Their
example delivered him from the chains that his upbringing had fastened
upon him, but was powerless to bind him with those other chains in which
they themselves walked through life. In their company the compulsions of
respectability, the paralysing fear of public opinion, the inhibitory
maxims of middle-class prudence fell away from him ; but when Bimbo
Abinger indignantly refused even to listen to the suggestion that he
should sell the monstrous old house that was eating up three-quarters of
his income, when Scroope complained that he would have to go into
Parliament, because in his family the eldest sons had always sat in the
House of Commons before coming into the title, Anthony could only feel
the amused astonishment of an explorer watching the religious antics of
a tribe of blackamoors. A rational being does not allow himself to be
converted to the cult of Mumbo Jumbo ; but he will have no objection to
occasionally going a bit native. The worship of Mumbo Jumbo means the
acceptance of taboos ; going native means freedom. ' True Freedom!'
Anthony grinned to himself; his good humour and equanimity had returned.
A snob, a

131

EYELESS IN GAZA

middle-class snob. No doubt. But there was a reason for his snobbery, a
justification. And if the lordly young barbarians tended to regard him
as a sort of high-class buffoon—well, that was the price he had to pay
for their gift of freedom- There was no price to be paid for associating
with the Fabians ; but then, how little they had to give him ! Socialist
doctrines might to some extent theoretically liberate the intellect ;
but the example of the young barbarians was a liberation in the sphere
of practice.

c So frightfully sorry/ he scribbled in his note to Brian. ' Suddenly
remembered I'd booked myself for dinner to-night/ (* Booked ' was one of
his father's words—a word he ordinarily detested for its affectation.
Writing a lie, he had found it coming spontaneously to his pen.) ' Alas
' (that was also a favourite locution of his father's), ' shan't be able
to listen to you on sin ! Wish I could get out of this, but don't see
how. Yours, A.'

By the time the fruit was on the table they were all pretty drunk. Gerry
Watchett was telling Scroope about that German baroness he had had on
the boat, on the way to Egypt.

Abinger had no audience, but was reciting limericks : the Young Lady of
Wick, the Old Man of Devizes, the Young Man called Maclean—a whole
dictionary of national biography. Ted and Willie were having a violent
quarrel about the best way of shooting grouse. Alone of the party,
Anthony was

132


CHAPTER X

silent. Speech would have compromised the delicate happiness he was then
enjoying.

That last glass of champagne had made him the inhabitant of a new world,
extraordinarily beautiful and precious and significant. The apples and
oranges in the silver bowl were like enormous gems. Each glass, under
the candles, contained, not wine, but a great yellow beryl, solid and
translucent. The roses had the glossy texture of satin and the shining
hardness and distinctness of form belonging to metal or glass. Even
sound was frozen and crystalline. The Young Lady of Kew was the
equivalent, in his ears, of a piece of sculptured jade, and that
violently futile discussion about grouse seemed like a waterfall in
winter. Le transparent glacier des vols qui n'ont pas fuiy he thought
with heightened pleasure. Everything was supernaturally brilliant and
distinct, but at the same time how remote, how strangely irrelevant !
Bright against the outer twilight of the room, the faces grouped about
the table might have been things seen on the odier side of a sheet of
plate-glass, in an illuminated aquarium. And the aquarium was not only
without, it was also, mysteriously, within him. Looking through the
glass at those sea flowers and submarine gems, he was himse'f a fish—but
a fish of genius, a fish that was also a god.

Ichthus—lesos Christos theou huios soter. His divine fish-soul hung
there, poised in its alien element, gazing, gazing through huge eyes
that perceived everything, understood everything, but having no part in
what it saw. Even his own hands lying there on the table in

133

EYELESS IN GAZA

front of him had ceased, in any real sense, to be his. From his aquarium
fastness he viewed them with the same detached and happy admiration as
he felt for the fruits and flowers, or those other transfigured bits of
still life, the faces of his friends. Beautiful hands ! contrived—how
marvellously !—to perform their innumerable functions—the pointing of
double-barrelled guns at flying birds, the caressing of the thighs of
German baronesses in liners, the playing of imaginary scales upon the
table-cloth, so. Enchanted, he watched the movements of his fingers, the
smooth sliding of the tendons under the skin. Exquisite hands ! But no
more truly a part of himself, of the essential fish-soul in its timeless
aquarium, than the hands of Abinger peeling that banana, the hands of
Scroope carrying a match to his cigar. I am not my body, I am not my
sensations, I am not even my mind ; I am that I am. I om that I om. The
sacred word OM represents Him. God is not limited by time. For the One
is not absent from anything, and yet is separated from all things. . . .

1 Hi, Professor ! * A piece of orange-peel struck him on the cheek. He
started and turned round. * What the hell are you thinking about ? '
Gerry Watchett was asking in that purposely harsh voice which it amused
him to put on like a hideous mask.

The momentarily troubled waters of the aquarium had already returned to
rest. A fish once more, a divine and remotely happy Fish, Anthony smiled
at him with serene indulgence.

134


CHAPTER X

' I was thinking about Plotinus,' he said.

'Why Plotinus?'

' Why Plotinus ? But, my dear sir, isn't it obvious ? Science is reason,
and reason is multitudinous.' The fish had found a tongue ; eloquence
flowed from the aquarium in an effortless stream. * But if one happens
to be feeling particularly zmmultitudinous—well, what else is there to
think about except Plotinus ? Unless, of course, you prefer the
pseudo-Dionysius, or Eckhart, or St. Teresa, The flight of the alone to
the Alone-Even St.

Thomas is forced to admit that no mind can see the divine substance
unless it is divorced from bodily senses, either by death or by some
rapture. Some rapture, mark you ! But a rapture is always a rapture,
whatever it's due to. Whether it's champagne, or saying OM, or squinting
at your nose, or looking at a crucifix, or making love—preferably in a
boat, Gerry ; I'm the first to admit it ; preferably in a boat. What are
the wild waves saying ?

Rapture ! Ecstasy ! Fairly yelling it. Until, mark you, until, the
breath of this corporeal frame and even the motion of our human blood
almost suspended, we are laid asleep in body, and become a living soul,
while with an eye made quiet ? . .*

' There was a Young Fellow of Burma,' Abinger suddenly declaimed.

' Made quiet,' Anthony repeated more loudly, ' bj the power of harmony .
. /

* Whose betrothed had good reasons to murmur.'

135

EYELESS IN GAZA

* And the deep power of joy/ shouted Anthony, c we see . . .'

* But now that they're married he's Been taking cantharides . . /

' We see into the life of things. The life of things, I tell you. The
life of things. And damn all Fabians ! ' he added.

Anthony got back to his lodgings at about a quarter to midnight, and was
unpleasantly startled, as he entered the sitting-room, to see someone
rising with the violent impatience of a Jack-in-the-box from an
armchair.

' God, what a fright . . . ! '

1 At last ! ' said Mark Staithes. His emphatically featured face wore an
expression of angry impatience. 'I've been waiting nearly an hour/ Then,
with contempt, ' You're drunk/

he added.

' As though youd never been drunk 1 ' Anthony retorted. ' I remember . .
/

1 So do I,' said Mark Staithes, interrupting him. 1 But that was in my
first year.' In his first year, when he had felt it necessary to prove
that he was manly— manlier than the toughest of them, noisier,
harder-drinking. ' I've got something better to do now.'

' So you imagine,' said Anthony.

The other looked at his watch. * I've got about seven minutes/ he said.
' Are you sober enough to listen ? '

Anthony sat down with dignity and in silence.

i36


CHAPTER X

Short, but square-shouldered and powerful, Mark stood over him, almost
menacingly. '

It's about Brian,' he said.

' About Brian ? ' Then with a knowing smile, ' That reminds me,' Anthony
added, ' I ought to have congratulated you on being our future
president/

1 Fool ! ' said Mark angrily. ' Do you think I go about accepting
charity ? When he withdrew, I withdrew too.'

* And let that dreary little Mumby walk into the job ? ' ' What the
devil do I care about Mumby ? ' 'What do any of us care about anybody?*
said

Anthony sententiously. ' Nothing, thank God. Absolutely noth . . /

' What does he mean by insulting me like that ? *

'Who? Little Mumby?'

I No ; Brian, of course/

* He thinks he's being nice to you/

II don't want his damned niceness,' said Mark. * Why can't he behave
properly ? '

1 Because it amuses him to behave like a Christian/

1 Well, then, tell him for God's sake to try it on someone else in
future. I don't like having Christian tricks played on me.'

1 You want a cock to fight with, in fact/

' What do you mean ? '

* Otherwise it's no fun being on top of die dunghill. Whereas Brian
would like us «11 to be jolly little capons together. Well, so far as
dunghills are concerned, I'm 137

EYELESS IN GAZA

all for Brian. It's when we come to the question of the hens that I
begin to hesitate.'

Mark looked at his watch again. * I must go.' At the door he turned
back. ' Don't forget to tell him what I've told you. I like Brian, and I
don't want to quarrel with him. But if he tries being charitable and
Christian again . . /

' The poor boy will forfeit your esteem for ever,' concluded Anthony.

6 Buffoon ! ' said Staithes, and, slamming the door behind him, hurried
downstairs.

Left alone, Anthony took the fifth volume of the Historical Dictionary
and began to read what Bayle had to say about Spinoza.

i38


CHAPTER XI

December 8th 192G

1 jT~70NDARintraMEVMlatus! It is the only place of Xj) refuge left to
us/ Anthony rolled the sheet off his typewriter, added it to the other
sheets lying before him on the table, clipped them together and started
to read through what he had written. Chapter XI of his Elements of
Sociology was to deal with the Individual and his conceptions of
Personality. He had spent the day jotting down unmethodically a few
preliminary reflections.

* Cogito ergo sum, he read. ' But why not caco ergo sum ? Eructo ergo
sum ? Or, escaping solipsism, why not futuo ergosumus? Ribald questions.
But what

^"personality"?

' MacTaggart knows his personality by direct acquaintance ; others by
description. Hume and Bradley don't know theirs at all, and don't
believe it really exists. Mere splitting, all this, of a bald man's
imaginary hairs. What matters is that ** Personality " happens to be a
common word with a generally accepted meaning.

' People discuss my " personality." What are they talking about ? Not
homo cacansy nor homo eructans> not even, except very superficially,
homo futuens. No, they are talking about homo sentiens (impossible
Latin) and homo cogitons. And when, in public, I talk about

*39

EYELESS IN GAZA

" myself," I talk about the same two homines. My " personality," in the
present conventional sense of the word, is what I think and feel—or,
rather, what I confess to thinking and feeling. Cacoy eructoy futuo—I
never admit that the first person singular of such verbs is really me.
Only when, for any reason, they palpably affect my feeling and thinking
do the processes they stand for come within the bounds of my "
personality."

(This censorship makes ultimate nonsense of all literature. Plays and
novels just aren't true.)

* Thus, the " personal " is the creditable, or rather the potentially
creditable. Not the morally undifferentiated.

' It is also the enduring. Very short experiences are even less personal
than discreditable or merely vegetative experiences. They become
personal only when accompanied by feeling and thought, or when
reverberated by memory.

* Matter, analysed, consists of empty space and electric charges. Take a
woman and a washstand. Different in kind. But their component electric
charges are similar in kind.

Odder still, each of these component electric charges is different in
kind from the whole woman or washstand. Changes in quantity, when
sufficiently great, produce changes in quality. Now, human experience is
analogous to matter. Analyse it— and you find yourself in the presence
of psychological atoms. A lot of these atoms constitute normal
experience, and a selection from normal experience constitutes u
personality." Each individual atom is unlike normal

140


CHAPTER XI

experience and still more unlike personality. Conversely, each atom in
one experience resembles the corresponding atom in another. Viewed
microscopically, a woman's body is just like a washstand, and Napoleon's
experience is just like Wellington's. Why do we imagine that solid
matter exists ? Because of the grossness of our sense organs. And why do
we imagine that we have coherent experiences and personality ? Because
our minds work slowly and have very feeble powers of analysis. Our world
and we who live in it are the creations of stupidity and bad sight.

1 Recently, however, thinking and seeing have been improved. We have
instruments that will resolve matter into very small parts and a
mathematical technique that allows us to think about still smaller
parts.

' Psychologists have no new instruments, only new techniques of thought.
All their inventions are purely mental—techniques of analysis and
observation, working hypotheses. Thanks to the novelists and
professional psychologists, we can think of our experience in terms of
atoms and instants as well as in terms of lumps and hours. To be a
tolerably good psychologist was possible, in the past, only for men of
genius. Compare Chaucer's psychology with Gower's, even Boccaccio's.
Compare Shakespeare's with Ben Jonson's. The difference is one not only
of quality, but also of quantity. The men of genius knew more than their
merely intelligent contemporaries.

1 To-day, there is a corpus of knowledge, a technique,

F 141

EYELESS IN GAZA

a working hypothesis. The amount a merely intelligent man can know is
enormous—

more than an unlearned man of genius relying solely on intuition.

' Were the Gowers and Jonsons hampered by their ignorance ? Not at all.
Their ignorance was the standard knowledge of their times. A few
monsters of intuition might know more than they ; but the majority knew
even less.

* And here a digression—sociologically speaking, more important than the
theme digressed from. There are fashions in personality. Fashions that
vary in time— like crinolines and hobble skirts—and fashions that vary
in space—like Gold Coast loin-cloths and Lombard Street tail-coats. In
primitive societies everyone wears, and longs to wear, the same
personality. But each society has a different psychological costume.

Among the Red Indians of the North-West Pacific Coast the ideal
personality was that of a mildly crazy egotist competing with his rivals
on the plane of wealth and conspicuous consumption. Among the Plains
Indians, it was that of an egotist competing with others in the sphere
of warlike exploits. Among the Pueblo Indians, the ideal personality was
neither that of an egotist, nor of a conspicuous consumer, nor of a
fighter, but of the perfectly gregarious man who makes great efforts
never to distinguish himself, who knows the traditional rites and
gestures and tries to be exactly like everyone else.

' European societies are large and racially, economically,
professionally heterogeneous ; therefore orthodoxy is

142


CHAPTER XI

hard to impose, and there are several contemporaneous ideals of
personality. (Note that Fascists and Communists are trying to create one
single " right " ideal—in other words, are trying to make industrialized
Europeans behave as though they were Dyaks or Eskimos. The attempt, in
the long run, is doomed to failure ; but in the meantime, what fun they
will get from bullying the heretics !)

c In our world, what are the ruling fashions ? There are, of course, the
ordinary clerical and commercial modes—turned out by the little
dressmakers round the corner. And then la haute couture. Ravissante
personalité d'intérieur de che\ Proust. Maison Nietzsche et

^Kipling : personalité de sport, Personalité de nuit, création de
Lawrence. Personalité de bain, par Joyce. Note the interesting fact
that, of these, the personalité de sport is the only one that can really
count as a personality in the accepted sense of the word. The others are
to a greater or less extent impersonal, because to a greater or less
extent atomic. And this brings us back to Shakespeare and Ben Jonson. A
pragmatist would have to say that Jonson's psychology was " truer " than
Shakespeare's. Most of his contemporaries did in fact perceive
themselves and were perceived as Humours. It took Shakespeare to see
what a lot there was outside the boundaries of the Humour, behind the
conventional mask. But Shakespeare was in a minority of one—or, if you
set Montaigne beside him, of two. Humours " worked " ; the complex,
partially atomized personalities of Shakespeare didn't,

«43

EYELESS IN GAZA

' In the story of the emperor's new clothes the child perceives that the
great man is naked.

Shakespeare reversed the process. His contemporaries thought they were
just naked Humours ; he saw that they were covered with a whole wardrobe
of psychological fancy dress.

'Take Hamlet. Hamlet inhabited a world whose best psychologist was
Polonius. If he had known as little as Polonius, he would have been
happy. But he knew too much ; and in this consists his tragedy. Read his
parable of the musical instruments. Polonius and the others assumed as
axiomatic that man was a penny whistle with only half a dozen stops.

Hamlet knew that, potentially at least, he was a whole symphony
orchestra.

'Mad, Ophelia lets the cat out of the bag. " We know what we are, but
know not what we may be." Polonius knows very clearly what he and other
people are, within the ruling conventions. Hamlet knows this, but also
what they may be—outside the local system of masks and humours.

1 To be the only man of one's age to know what people may be as well as
what they conventionally are ! Shakespeare must have gone through some
rather disquieting quarters of an hour.

*It was left to Blake to rationalize psychological atomism into a
philosophical system.

Man, according to Blake (and, after him, according to Proust, according
to Lawrence), is simply a succession of states. Good and evil can be
predicated only of states, not of individuals, who in fact don't east,
except as the places where the 144


CHAPTER XI

states occur. It is the end of personality in the old sense of the word.
(Parenthetically—for this is quite outside the domain of sociology—is it
the beginning of a new kind of personality ? That of the total man,
unbowdler-ized, unselected, uncanalized, to change the metaphor, down
any one particular drainpipe of Weltanschauung— of the man, in a word,
who actually is what he may be. Such a man is the antithesis of any of
the variants on the fundamental Christian man of our history. And yet in
a certain sense he is also the realization of that ideal personality
conceived by the Jesus of the Gospel. Like Jesus's ideal personality,
the total, unexpurgated, non-canalized man is (i) not pharisaic, that is
to say, not interested in convention and social position, not puffed up
with the pride of being better than other men; (2) humble, in his
acceptance of himself, in his refusal to exalt himself above his human
station ; (3) poor in spirit, inasmuch as " he "—his ego—lays no lasting
claims on anything, is content with what, for a personality of the old
type, would seem psychological and philosophical destitution ; (4) like
a little child, in his acceptance of the immediate datum of experience
for its own sake, in his refusal to take thought for the morrow, in his
readiness to let the dead bury their dead ; (5) not a hypocrite or a
liar, since there is no fixed model which individuals must pretend to be
like.)

' A question : did the old personality ever really exist ? In the year m
men feel x in context ç. In the year n they feel the same x in quite a
different context p. But x is 145

EYELESS IN GAZA

a major emotion—vitally significant for personality. And yet x is felt
in contexts that change with the changing conventions of fashion, "
Rather death than dishonour." But honour is like women's skirts. Worn
short, worn long, worn full, worn narrow, worn with petticoats, worn
minus drawers. Up to 1750 you were expected to feel, you did feel,
mortally dishonoured if you saw a man pinching your sister's bottom. So
intense was your indignation, that you had to try to kill him. Today,
our honours have migrated from the fleshy parts of our female relations'
anatomy, and have their seats elsewhere. And so on, indefinitely.

1 So what is personality ? And what is it not ?

* It is not our total experience. It is not the psychological atom or
instant. It is not sense impressions as such, nor vegetative life as
such.

1 It is experience in the lump and by the hour. It is feeling and
thought.

' And who makes this selection from total experience, and on what
principle ? Sometimes we make it—whoever we are. But as often it is made
for us—by the collective unwisdom of a class, a whole society. To a
great extent, " personality " is not even our personal property.

1 Vaguely, but ever more widely, this fact is now coming to be realized.
At the same time, ever-increasing numbers of people are making use of
the modern techniques to see themselves and others microscopically and
instantaneously, as well as in the lump and by the hour. Moreover,
having a working hypothesis of the

146


CHAPTER XI

unconscious, increasing numbers are becoming aware of their secret
motives, and so are perceiving the large part played in their lives by
the discreditable and vegetative elements of experience. With what
results ? That the old conception of personality has begun to break
down. And not only the conception, also the fact. " Strong
personalities," even "

definite personalities," are becoming less common. Fascists have to go
out of their way to manufacture them, deliberately, by a suitable
process of education. An education that is simplification,
Eskimiz-ation; that entails the suppression of psychological knowledge
and the inculcation of respect for psychological ignorance. Odious
policy—but, I suspect, inevitable and, sociologically speaking, right.
For our psychological acumen is probably harmful to society. Society has
need of simple Jonsonian Humours, not of formless collections of
self-conscious states. Yet another example of the banefulness of too
much knowledge and too much scientific technique.

1 Once more, Hamlet casts a light. Polonius is much more obviously and
definitely a person than the prince. Indeed, Hamlet's personality is so
indefinite that critics have devoted thousands of pages to the
discussion of what it really was. In fact, of course, Hamlet didn't have
a personality—knew altogether too much to have one. He was conscious of
his total experience, atom by atom and instant by instant, and accepted
no guiding principle which would make him choose one set of patterned
atoms to represent his personality rather than

147

EYELESS IN GAZA

another. To himself and to others he was just a succession of more or
less incongruous states. Hence that perplexity at Elsinore and among the
Shakespearean critics ever.since.

Honour, Religion, Prejudice, Love— all the conventional props that shore
up the ordinary personality have been, in this case, gnawed through.
Hamlet is his own termite, and from a tower has eaten himself down to a
heap of sawdust. Only one thing prevents Polonius and the rest from
immediately perceiving the fact : whatever the state of his mind,
Hamlet's body is still intact, unatomized, macroscopically present to
the senses. And perhaps, after all, this is the real reason for our
belief in personality :—the existence and persistence of bodies. And
perhaps whatever reality there is in the notion of coherent individual
continuity is just a function of this physical persistence. " Such hair,
such a wonderful figure ! I think Mrs. Jones has a lovefy poyssonality."
When I heard that, in the bus going up Fifth Avenue, it made me laugh.
Whereas I probably ought to have listened as though to Spinoza. For what
is the most personal thing about a human being ?

Not his mind—his body. A Hearst, a Rother-mere, can mould my feelings,
coerce my thinking. But no amount of propaganda can make my digestion or
metabolism become identical to theirs. Cogito^ ergo Rothermere est. But
caco9 ergo sum.

'And here, I suspect, lies the reason for that insistence, during recent
years, on the rights of the body. From the Boy Scouts to the fashionable
sodomites, and from

£48


CHAPTER XI

Elizabeth Arden to D. H. Lawrence (one of the most powerful
personality-smashers, incidentally : there are no " characters " in his
bcoks). Always and everywhere the body.

Now the body possesses one enormous merit ; it is indubitably there.
Whereas the personality, as a mental structure, may be all in
bits—gnawed down to Hamlet's heap of sawdust. Only the rather stupid and
insentient, nowadays, have strong and sharply denned personalities. Only
the barbarians among us " know what they are." The civilized are
conscious of " what they may be," and so are incapable of knowing what,
for practical, social purposes, they actually are—have forgotten how to
select a personality out of their total atomic experience. In the swamp
and welter of this uncertainty the body stands firm like a Rock of Ages.

Jesuy pro me perforatu$y Con Jar intra tuum latus.

Even faith hankers for warm caverns of perforated flesh. How much more
wildly urgent must be the demands of a scepticism that has ceased to
believe even in its own personality ! Con Jar intra meum latus ! It is
the only place of refuge left to us.'

Anthony laid the typescript down, and, tilting backwards, rocked himself
precariously on the hind legs of his chair. Not so bad, he was thinking.
But there were obviously omissions, there were obviously unjustifiable
generalizations. He had written of the world in general as though the
world in general were like himself—from f* 149

EYELESS IN GAZA

die desire, of course, that it should be. For how simple it would be if
it were ! How agreeable ! Each man a succession of states enclosed in
the flesh of his own side. And if any other principle of coherence were
needed, there was always some absorbing and delightful intellectual
interest, like sociology, for example, to supplement the persisting
body. Condar intra meum laborem. Instead of which ... He sighed. In
spite of Hamlet^ in spite of The Prophetic Booksy in spite of Du côté de
chei Swarm and Women in Love, the world was still full of Jonsonian
Humours. Full of the villains of melodrama, the equally deplorable
heroes of films, full of Poincarés, of Mussolinis, of Northcliffes, full
of ambitious and avaricious mischief-makers of every size and shape.

An idea occurred to him. He let his tilted chair fall forward and picked
up his fountain-pen.

1 Last infirmity of noble mind, the primary, perhaps only, source of
sin/ he scribbled. *

Noble mmd=evil mind. Tree known by fruits. What are fruits of
fame-seeking, ambition, desire to excel ? Among others, war,
nationalism, economic competition, snobbery, class hatred, colour
prejudice. Comus quite right to preach sensuality ; and how foolish of
Satan to tempt a, by definition, ahimsa-cxactising Messiah with fame,
dominion, ambition—things whose inevitable fruits are violence and
coercion ! Compared with fame-seeking, pure sensuality all but harmless.
Were Freud right and sex supreme, we should live almost in Eden. Alas,
only half right. Adler also half right. Hinc Mae lac'

150


CHAPTER XI

He looked at his watch. Twenty past seven—and he had to be in Kensington
by eight ! In his bath, he wondered what the evening would be like. It
was twelve years now since he had quarrelled with Mary Amberley. Twelve
years, during which he had seen her only at a distance—in picture
galleries, once or twice; and across the drawing-room of a common
friend. * I don't ever want to speak to you again,' he had written in
that last letter to her.

And yet, a few days since, when her reconciliatory invitation had
unexpectedly appeared with the other letters on his breakfast table, he
had accepted immediately ; accepted in the same tone as that in which
the invitation itself was couched— casually, matter-of-factly, with no
more explicit reference to the past than a ' Yes, it's a long time since
I last dined at Number 17.' And after all, why not ? What was the point
of doing things finally and irrevocably ? What right had the man of 1914
to commit the man of 1926 ? The 1914

man had been an embodied state of anger, shame, distress, perplexity.
His state to-day was one of cheerful serenity, mingled, so far as Mary
Amberley was concerned, with considerable curiosity. What would she be
like now—at forty-three, was it ? And was she really as amusing as he
remembered her ? Or had his admiration been only one of the fruits—the
absurd, delicious fruits—of youthful inexperience ? Would his swan turn
out a goose ? Or still a swan—but moulted, but (poor Mary !) middle-aged
? Still wondering, he hurried downstairs and into the street.


CHAPTER XII

August 30th 1933

A FAINT rustling caressed the half-conscious fringes of their torpor,
swelled gradually, as though a shell were being brought closer and
closer to the ear, and became at last a clattering roar that brutally
insisted on attention. Anthony opened his eyes for just long enough to
see that the aeroplane was almost immediately above them, then shut them
again, dazzled by the intense blue of the sky.

' These damned machines ! ' he said. Then, with a little laugh, '
They'll have a nice God's-eye view of us here/ he added.

Helen did not answer ; but behind her closed eyelids she smiled.
Pop-eyed and with an obscene and gloating disapproval ! The vision of
that heavenly visitant was irresistibly comic.

* David and Bathsheba,' he went on. * Unfortunately at a hundred miles
an hour . . /

A strange yelping sound punctuated the din of the machine. Anthony
opened his eyes again, and was in time to see a dark shape rushing down
towards him. He uttered a cry, made a quick and automatic movement to
shield his face. With a violent but dull and muddy impact the thing
struck the flat roof a yard or two from

*5*


CHAPTER XII

where they were lying. The drops of a sharply spurted liquid were warm
for an instant on their skin, and then, as the breeze swelled up out of
the west, startlingly cold. There was a long second of silence. * Christ
! ' Anthony whispered at last. From head to foot both of them were
splashed with blood. In a red pool at their feet lay the almost
shapeless carcase of a fox-terrier. The roar of the receding aeroplane
had diminished to a raucous hum, and suddenly the ear found itself
conscious once again of the shrill rasping of the cicadas.

Anthony drew a deep breath ; then, with an effort and still rather
unsteadily, contrived to laugh. * Yet another reason for disliking
dogs,' he said, and, scrambling to his feet, looked down, his face
puckered with disgust, at his blood-bedabbled body. ' What about a bath
? ' he asked, turning to Helen.

She was sitting quite still, staring with wide-open eyes at the horribly
shattered carcase.

Her face was very pale, and a glancing spurt of blood had left a long
red streak that ran diagonally from the right side of the chin, across
the mouth, to the corner of the left eye.

' You look like Lady Macbeth/ he said, with another effort at
jocularity. ' Allons? He touched her shoulder. * Out, vile spot. This
beastly stuff's drying on me. Like seccotine/

For all answer, Helen covered her face with her hands and began to sob.

For a moment Anthony stood quite still, looking at her crouched there,
in the hopeless abjection of her

153

EYELESS IN GAZA

blood-stained nakedness, listening to the painful sound of her weeping.
' Like seccotine *

: his own words reechoed disgracefully in his ears. Pity stirred within
him, and then an almost violent movement of love for this hurt and
suffering woman, this person, yes, this person whom he had ignored,
deliberately, as though she had no existence except in the context of
pleasure. Now, as she knelt there sobbing, all the tenderness he had
ever felt for her body, all the affection implicit in their sensualities
and never expressed, seemed suddenly to discharge themselves, in a kind
of lightning flash of accumulated feeling, upon this person, this
embodied spirit, weeping in solitude behind concealing hands.

He knelt down beside her on the mattress, and, with a gesture that was
meant to express all that he now felt, put an arm round her shoulder.

But at his touch she winced away as if from a defilement. With a
violent, shuddering movement she shook her head.

' But, Helen . . .' he protested, in the stupid conviction that there
must be some mistake, that it was impossible that she shouldn't be
feeling what he was feeling. It was only a question of making her
understand what had happened to him. He laid his hand once more on her
shoulder. ( But I care, I'm so fond.. / Even now he refused to commit
himself to the word 1 love/

1 Don't touch me,' she cried almost inarticulately, leaning away from
him.

M4


CHAPTER XII

He withdrew his hand, but remained there, kneeling beside her, in
perplexed and miserable silence. He remembered the time when she had
wanted to be allowed to love, and how he had evaded her, had refused to
take more of the person that she was, or to give more of himself, than
the occasional and discontinuous amorousness of their bodies.

She had ended by accepting his terms—accepting them so completely that
now . . .

* Helen/ he ventured once more. She must be made to understand.

Helen shook her head again. * Leave me alone/ she said ; then, as he did
not move, she uncovered a face now grotesquely smudged with blood and
looked at him. l Why can't you go away ? ' she asked, making an effort
to express a cold dispassionate resentment of his intrusion upon her.
Then, suddenly, her tears began to flow again. ' Oh, please go away ! *
she implored. Her voice broke, and turning aside, she once more buried
her face in her hands.

Anthony hesitated for a moment; then, realizing that he would only make
things worse if he stayed on, rose to his feet and left her. ' Give her
time/ he said to himself, ' give her time.'

He took a bath, dressed and went down to the sitting-room. The snapshots
were lying as they had left them, scattered over the table. He sat down
and methodically began to sort them out, subject by subject, into little
heaps. Mary in plumes ; Mary veiled, clambering into a pre-war Renault ;
Mary bathing at Dieppe in a half-155

EYELESS IN GAZA

sleeved bodice and bloomers that were covered to the knee by a little
skirt. His mother in a garden ; feeding the pigeons in the Piazza San
Marco ; and then her grave at Lollingdon churchyard. His father with an
alpenstock ; roped to a guide on a snow slope ; with Pauline and the two
children. Uncle James on his bicycle; Uncle James wearing a speckled
straw hat; rowing on the Serpentine ; talking, ten years later, with
convalescent soldiers in a hospital garden. Then Brian ; Brian with
Anthony's own former self at Bulstrode; Brian in a punt with Joan and
Mrs. Foxe ; Brian climbing in the Lakes. That girl he had had an affair
with in New York, in 1927, was it? His grandmother. His aunts.

Half a dozen snaps of Gladys , . .

Half an hour later he heard Helen's steps, cautious at first and slow on
the precipitous stairs leading down from the roof, then swift along the
passage. Water splashed in the bath.

Time, she must have time. He decided to behave towards her as though
nothing had happened. It was almost cheerfully, therefore, that he
greeted her as she entered the room.

* Well ? ' he questioned brightly, looking up from his photographs. But
the sight of that pale and stonily collected face filled him with
misgiving,

1 I'm going,' she said.

1 Now ? Before lunch ? *

She nodded.

1 But why?*

156


CHAPTER XII

' I prefer it/ was all she answered.

Anthony was silent for a moment, wondering whether he ought to protest,
to insist, to tell her the things he had tried to tell her on the roof.
But the stoniness of her composure proclaimed in advance that the
attempt would be useless. Later, when she had got over the first shock,
when she had been given time . . . ' All right, then,' he said aloud. '
I'll drive you back to the hotel.'

Helen shook her head. ' No, I shall walk/

' Not in this heat ! '

' I shall walk,' she repeated in a tone of finality.

1 Well, if you also prefer to swelter . . / He tried to smile, without
much success.

She passed through the glass doors on to the terrace, and suddenly that
pale stony face was as though fire-flushed by the reflection from her
pyjamas. In hell again, he said to himself, as he followed her.

* Why do you come out ? ' she asked. ' 1*11 take you as far as the gate/

* There's no need/

* I prefer it/

She did not return his smile, but walked on without speaking.

Two tall bushy plants of buddleia grew on either side of the steps that
led down from the terrace. On the hot air the scent of the flowers
(itself, so it seemed, intrinsically hot) was of an intense and violent
sweetness,

1 Delicious/ Anthony said aloud as they stepped into

'57

EYELESS IN GAZA

die perfumed aura of the blossoms. * Almost too delicious. But look ! '
he called in another voice, and caught her sleeve. ' Do look ! *

New from the chrysalis, bright and still untattered, a swallowtail had
settled on one of the clusters of mauve flowers. The pale yellow wings,
with their black markings, their eyes of blue and crimson, were fully
outstretched in the sunlight. Their forward edges had the curve of a
sabre, and from the tips the line slanted elegantly backwards towards
the two projecting tails of the lower wings. The whole butterfly seemed
the symbol, the hieroglyph of gay and airy speed. The spread wings were
tremulous as though from an uncontrollable excess of life, of passionate
energy. Rapidly, ravenously, but with an extraordinary precision of
purposeful movement, the creature plunged its uncoiled proboscis into
the tiny trumpet-shaped flowers that composed the cluster. A quick
motion of the head and thorax, and the probe had been thrust home, to be
withdrawn a moment later and plunged as swiftly and unerringly between
the lips of another and yet another flower, until all the blooms within
striking distance had been explored and it was necessary to hasten on
towards a yet unrifled part of the cluster. Again, again, to the very
quick of the expectant flowers, deep to the sheathed and hidden sources
of that hot intoxicating sweetness ! Again, again, with what a tireless
concupiscence, what an intense passion of aimed and accurate greed !

For a long minute they watched in silence. Then,


CHAPTER XII

suddenly, Helen stretched out her hand and flicked the cluster on which
the butterfly was settled. But before her finger had even touched the
flowers, the light, bright creature was gone. A quick flap of the wings,
then a long soaring swoop ; another spurt of fluttering movement,
another long catenary of downward and upward slanting flight, and it was
out of sight behind the house.

' Why did you do that ? ' he asked.

Pretending not to have heard his question, Helen ran down the steps and
along the gravelled path. At the gate of the garden she halted and
turned back.

1 Good-bye, Anthony.'

* When are you coming again ? ' he asked.

Helen looked at him for a few seconds without speaking, then shook her
head. ' I'm not coming again/ she said at last.

' Not coming again ? * he repeated, ' What do you mean ? '

But she had already slammed the gate behind her and with long springing
stride was hurrying along the dusty road under the pine trees.

Anthony watched her go, and knew that, for the moment at least, it was
no good even trying to do anything. It would only make things worse if
he followed her. Later on, perhaps; this evening, when she had had time
. . . But walking back along the garden path, through the now unheeded
perfume of the buddleias, he wondered uneasily whether it would be much
good, even later on. He knew Helen's obstinacy. And then 159

EYELESS IN GAZA

what right had he now, after all these months of disclaiming, of
actively refusing any rights whatever ?

' But I'm a fool,' he said aloud as he opened the kitchen door, ' I'm
mad.' And he made an effort to recover his sanity by disparaging and
belittling the whole incident. Unpleasant, admittedly. But not
unpleasant enough to justify Helen in behaving as though she were acting
Ibsen. Doing a slight Doll's House, he said to himself —trying to reduce
it all to a conveniently ridiculous phrase—when there was no doll and no
house; for she really couldn't complain that old Hugh had ever shut her
up, or that he himself had cherished any designs on her liberty. On the
contrary, he had insisted on her being free. Her liberty was also his ;
if she had become his slave, he would necessarily have become hers.

As for his own emotions, up there on the roof—that uprush of tenderness,
that longing to know and love the suffering person within that all at
once irrelevantly desirable body—

these had been genuine, of course; were facts of direct experience. But
after all, they could be explained, explained away, as the mere
exaggerations, in a disturbing moment, of his very natural sympathy with
her distress. The essential thing was time. Given a little time, she
would listen once more to what he wanted to say, and he would no longer
want to say any of the things she had just now refused to listen to.

He opened the refrigerator and found that Mme. Cayol had prepared some
cold veal and a cucumber and tomato salad. Mme. Cayol had a vicarious
passion for 160


CHAPTER XII

cold veal, was constantly giving it him. Anthony, as it happened, didn't
much like it, but he preferred eating it to discussing the bill of fare
with Mme. Cayol. Whole weeks would sometimes pass without the necessity
arising for him to say more than Bonjour and A demain, Mme. Cayoly and
II fait beau aujourd'hui, or Quel vent!, whichever the case might be.
She came for two hours each morning, tidied up, prepared some food, laid
the table and went away again. He was served, but almost without being
aware of the servant.

The arrangement, he considered, was as nearly perfect as any earthly
arrangement could be. Cold veal was a small price to pay for such
service.

At the table in the shade of the great fig tree on the terrace, Anthony
settled down with determination to his food, and as he ate, turned over
die pages of his latest note-book.

There was nothing, he assured himself, like work—nothing, to make
oneself forget a particular and personal feeling, so effective as a good
generalization. The word ' freedom

' caught his eye, and remembering the satisfaction he had felt, a couple
of months before, when he had got those ideas safely on to paper, he
began to read.

' Acton wanted to write the History of Man in terms of a History of the
Idea of Freedom.

But you cannot write a History of the Idea of Freedom without at the
same time writing a History of the Fact of Slavery.

* The Fact of Slavery. Or rather of Slaveries. For, in his successive
attempts to realize the Idea of Freedom,

161

EYELESS IN GAZA

man is constantly changing one form of slavery for another.

' The primal slavery is the slavery to the empty belly and the
unpropitious season. Slavery to nature, in a word. The escape from
nature is through social organization and technical invention. In a
modern city it is possible to forget that such a thing as nature exists—

particularly nature in its more inhuman and hostile aspects. Half the
population of Europe lives in a universe that's entirely home-made.

' Abolish slavery to nature. Another form of slavery instantly arises.
Slavery to institutions : religious institutions, legal institutions,
military institutions, economic institutions, educational, artistic and
scientific institutions.

'All modern history is a History of the Idea of Freedom from
Institutions. It is also the History of the Fact of Slavery to
Institutions.

1 Nature is senseless. Institutions, being the work of men, have meaning
and purpose.

Circumstances change quicker than institutions. What once was sense is
sense no longer.

An outworn institution is like a person who applies logical reasoning to
the non-existent situation created by an idée fixe or hallucination. A
similar state of things comes about when institutions apply the letter
of the law to individual cases. The institution would be acting
rationally if the circumstances envisaged by it really existed. But in
fact they don't exist. Slavery to an institution is like slavery to a

162


CHAPTER XII

paranoiac, who suffers from delusions but is still in possession of all
his intellectual faculties. Slavery to nature is like slavery to an
idiot who hasn't even enough mind to be able to suffer from delusions.

1 Revolt against institutions leads temporarily to anarchy. But anarchy
is slavery to nature, and to a civilized man slavery to nature is even
less tolerable than slavery to institutions. The escape from anarchy is
through the creation of new institutions.

Sometimes there is no period of anarchy—no temporary enslavement to
nature ; men pass directly from one set of institutions to another.

1 Institutions are changed in an attempt to realize the Idea of Freedom.
To appreciate the fact of the new slavery takes a certain time. So it
comes about that in all revolts against institutions there is a kind of
joyful honeymoon, when people believe that freedom has at last been
attained. " Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive." And not only in the
dawn of the French Revolution. What undiluted happiness, for example, in
the dawn of the Franciscan movement, in the dawn of the Reformation, in
the dawn of Christianity and Islam ! Even in the dawn of the Great War.
The honeymoon may last for as much as twenty or thirty years. Then the
fact of the new slavery imposes itself on men's consciousness. It is
perceived that the idea of freedom was not realized by the last change,
that the new institutions are just as enslaving as the old. What is to
be done ? Change the new institutions for yet newer ones.

163

EYELESS IN GAZA

And when that honeymoon is over ? Change the yet newer for newer still.
And so on—

indefinitely, no doubt.

1 In any given society the fact of freedom exists only for a very small
number of individuals. Propitious economic circumstances are the
condition of at least a partial freedom. But if the freedom is to be
more nearly complete, there must also be propitious intellectual,
psychological, biographical circumstances. Individuals for whom all
these circumstances are favourable are not the slaves of institutions.
For them, institutions exist as a kind of solid framework on which they
can perform whatever gymnastics they please. The rigidity of society as
a whole makes it possible for these privileged few to wander out of
intellectual and customary moral bounds without risk either for
themselves or for the community at large. All particular freedoms—and
there is no freedom that is not particular—is enjoyed on the condition
of some form of general slavery/

Anthony shut his book, feeling that he couldn't read even one line more.
Not that his words seemed any less true now than they had done when he
wrote them. In their own way and on their particular level they were
true. Why then did it all seem utterly false and wrong ? Not wishing to
discuss this question with himself, he went into the house and sat down
to Usher's History of Mechanical Inventions.

At half-past four he suddenly remembered that dead dog. A few hours
more, and in this heat ... He

164


CHAPTER XII

hurried out to the tool-house. The ground in the untended garden was
sun-baked almost to the consistency of brick ; by the time he had dug
the hole he was dripping with sweat.

Then, spade in hand, he went up to the roof. There lay the dog. The
blood-stains on its fur, on the parapet, on the mattresses had turned
the colour of rust. After several ineffectual attempts, he succeeded in
scooping up the carcase with his spade and throwing it, flies and
all—for the flies refused to be disturbed—over the parapet. He went
downstairs and out into the garden ; there, as though he were
obstinately competing in some hideous egg-and-spoon race, he scooped the
thing up once more and carried it, horribly dangling across the iron of
his spade, to the grave. When he came back to the house, he felt so sick
that he had to drink some brandy. After that he went down to the sea and
took a long swim.

At six, when he was dressed again, he took his car and drove down to the
hotel to have a talk with Helen. By this time, he calculated, she would
have got over her first shock, she would be ready to listen to him.
Forgetting all about the Doll's House and the sanity it had been
intended to preserve, he was filled, as he drove, with an extraordinary
elation.

In a few minutes he would be seeing her again. Would be telling her of
the discoveries he had suddenly made that morning : the discovery that
he cared for her, the discovery that he had been a fool and worse,
unspeakably worse than a fool ... It would be difficult, it would be all
but

165

EYELESS IN GAZA

impossible to say these things about himself; but for that very reason
the thought that he was going to say them filled him with profound
happiness.

He drew up at the door of the hotel and hurried into the hall.

* Madame Ledw'tdge est-elle dans sa chambre, mademoiselle t 9

' Mais non, monsieur, Madame vient de partir*9 ' Elle vient de partir ?
*

* Madame est allée prendre le rapide à Toulon.9 Anthony looked at his
watch. The train had already

started. In a wretched little car like his there was no hope of getting
to Marseille before it left again for Paris.

1 Merci, mademoiselle, merci,9 he said, lapsing by force of habit into
that excessive politeness by means of which he protected himself from
the disquieting world of the lower classes.

' Mais de rien, monsieur.9

He drove home again, wondering miserably whether he oughtn't to be
thankful for the deliverance. The postman had called in his absence.
There was a letter from his broker, advising him to sell at least a part
of that block of gold-mining shares he had inherited from Uncle James.
There seemed to be no likelihood of their appreciating any further ; in
view of which, the wisest course would be to take advantage of the
present prices and re-invest in sound English industrials such as . . .
He threw the letter aside. Occasions, as usual, had been conspiring for
him—thrusting good fortune upon him, 166


CHAPTER XII

malignantly. Now, in the depression, he was better off than ever before.
Better off when other people were worse off. Freer while they were more
hopelessly enslaved. The ring of Polycrates ... It looked as though the
gods had already begun their vengeance.

He went to bed early, and at two was woken by that horribly familiar
dream that had haunted his boyhood and plagued him from time to time
even as a grown man. In substance it was always the same. Nothing much
was ever visible ; but there was generally a knowledge that he was in
company, surrounded by dim presences. He took a mouthful of some
indeterminate food, and instantly it expanded between his teeth, became
progressively more rubbery and at the same time stickier, till it was
like a gag smeared with a kind of gum that dried in a thick film on the
teeth, tongue, palate.

Unspeakably disgusting, this process of asphyxiating expansion, of gluey
thickening and clogging, went on and on. He tried to swallow, tried, in
spite of the obscure but embarrassing presence of strangers, to
disgorge. Without effect. In the end, he was reduced to hooking the
stuff out with his finger—lump after ropy lump of it. But always in
vain. For the gag continued to expand, the film to thicken and harden.
Until at last he was delivered by starting out of sleep. This night, the
expanding mouthful had some kind of vague but horrible connection with
the dog. He woke up shuddering. Once awake, he was unable to go to sleep
again. A huge accumulation of neglected memories broke 167

EYELESS IN GAZA

through, as it were, into his awareness. Those snapshots. His mother and
Mary Amberley.

Brian in the chalk pit, evoked by that salty smell of sun-warmed flesh,
and again dead at the cliff's foot, among the flies—like that dog * . .

i<53


CHAPTER XIII

May zoth 1934

ADE my second speech yesterday night. Without serious nervousness. It's
easy enough, once you've made up your mind that it doesn't matter if you
make a fool of yourself. But it's depressing. There's a sense in which
five hundred people in a hall aren't concrete.

One's talking to a collective noun, an abstraction, not to a set of
individuals. Only those already partially or completely convinced of
what you're saying even want to understand you. The rest are invincibly
ignorant. In private conversation, you could be certain of getting your
man to make at least a grudging effort to understand you. The fact that
there's an audience confirms the not-understander in his
incomprehension. Particularly if he can ask questions after the address.
Some of the reasons for this are obvious. Just getting up and being
looked at is a pleasure—in many cases, piercing to the point of pain.

Excruciating orgasms of self-assertion. Pleasure is heightened if the
question is hostile.

Hostility is a declaration of personal independence. Makes it clear at
the same time that it's only an accident that the questioner isn't on
the platform himself—accident or else, of course, deliberate plot on the
part of ruffians who want to keep him down. Inter-169

M

EYELESS IN GAZA

ruptions and questions are generally of course quite irrelevant.
Hecklers (like the rest of us) live in their own private world, make no
effort to enter other people's worlds. Most arguments in public are at
cross-purposes and in different languages—without interpreters.

Mark was at the meeting, and afterwards, in my rooms, took pleasure in
intensifying my depression.

c Might as well go and talk to cows in a field.' The temptation to agree
with him was strong. All my old habits of thinking, living, feeling
impel me towards agreement. A senseless world, where nothing whatever
can be done—how satisfactory ! One can go off and (seeing that there's
nothing else to do) compile one's treatise on sociology—the science of
human senselessness. With Mark last night I caught myself taking intense
pleasure in commenting on the imbecility of my audience and human beings
at large.

Caught and checked myself. Reflecting that seeds had been sown, that if
only one were to germinate, it would have been worth while to hold the
meeting. Worth while even if none were to germinate—for my own sake, as
an exercise, a training for doing better next time.

I didn't say all this. Merely stopped talking and, I suppose, changed my
expression. Mark, who notices everything, began to laugh. Foresaw the
time when I'd preface every mention of a person or group with the
adjecdve ' dear/ * The dear Communists,' ' the dear armament makers/ '
dear General Goering.'

I laughed—for he was comic in his best savage

170


CHAPTER XIII

manner. But, after all, if you had enough love and goodness, you could
be sure of evoking some measure of answering love and goodness from
almost everyone you came in contact with—whoever he or she might be. And
in that case almost everyone would really be ( dear/ At present, most
people seem more or less imbecile or odious ; the fault is at least as
much in oneself as in them.

May 24th 1934.

Put in four hours this morning at working up my notes. Extraordinary
pleasure ! How easily one could slip back into uninterrupted scholarship
and idea-mongering ! Into that *

higher Life ' which is simply death without tears. Peace,
irresponsibility—all the delights of death here and now. In the past,
you had to go into a monastery to find them. You paid for the pleasures
of death with obedience, poverty, chastity. Now you can have them gratis
and in die ordinary world. Death completely without tears. Deadi with
smiles, death with the pleasures of bed and bottle, death in private
with nobody to bully you.

Scholars, philosophers, men of science—conventionally supposed to be
unpractical. But what other class of men has succeeded in getting the
world to accept it and (more astonishing) go on accepting it at its own
valuation ? Kings have lost their divine right, plutocrats look as
though diey were going to lose theirs. But Higher Lifers continue to be
labelled as superior. It's the fruit of persistence.

171

EYELESS IN GAZA

Persistently paying compliments to themselves, persistently disparaging
other people.

Year in, year out, for the last sixty centuries. We're High, you're Low
; we're of the Spirit, you're of the World. Again and again, like Pears
Soap. It's been accepted, now, as an axiom. But, in fact, die Higher
Life is merely the better death-substitute. A more complete escape from
the responsibilities of living than alcohol or morphia or addiction to
sex or property. Booze and dope destroy health. Sooner or later sex
addicts get involved in responsibilities. Property addicts can never get
all the stamps, Chinese vases, houses, varieties of lilies or whatever
it may be, that they want. Their escape is a torment of Tantalus.
Whereas the Higher Lifer escapes into a world where there's no risk to
health and the minimum of responsibilities and tortures. A world, what's
more, that tradition regards as actually superior to the world of
responsible living—higher. The Higher Shirker can fairly wallow in his
good conscience. For how easy to find in the life of scholarship and
research equivalents for all the moral virtues ! Some, of course, are
not equivalent, but identical : perseverance, patience,
self-forgetfulness and the like. Good means to ends that may be bad. You
can work hard and whole-heartedly at anything—

from atomic physics to forgery and white-slaving. The rest are ethical
virtues transposed into the mental key. Chastity of artistic and
mathematical form. Purity of scientific research. Courageousness of
thought. Bold hypotheses. Logical integrity. Temper-172


CHAPTER XIII

once of views. Intellectual humility before the facts. All the cardinal
virtues in fancy dress. The Higher Lifers come to think of themselves as
saints—saints of art and science and scholarship. A purely figurative
and metaphorical sanctity taken au pied de la lettre.

1 Blessed are the poor in spirit.' The Higher Lifer even has equivalents
for spiritual poverty. As a man of science, he tries to keep himself
unbiassed by his interests and prejudices. But that's not all. Ethical
poverty of spirit entails taking no thought for the morrow, letting the
dead bury their dead, losing one's life to gain it. The Higher Lifer can
make parodies of these renunciations. I know ; for I made them and
actually took credit to myself for having made them. You live
continuously and responsibly only in the other, Higher world. In this,
you detach yourself from your past ; you refuse to commit yourself in
the future ; you have no convictions, but live moment by moment; you
renounce your own identity, except as a Higher Lifer, and become just
the succession of your states. A more than Franciscan destitution. Which
can be combined, however, with more than Napoleonic exultations in
imperialism. I used to think I had no will to power. Now I perceive that
I vented it on thoughts, rather than people. Conquering an unknown
province of knowledge. Getting the better of a problem. Forcing ideas to
associate or come apart. Bullying recalcitrant words to assume a certain
pattern. All the fun of being a dictator without any risks and
responsibilities.

G 173


CHAPTER XIV

December 8th 1926

Y dinner-time it was already a Story—the latest addition to Mary
Amberley's repertory.

The latest, and as good, it seemed to Anthony's critically attentive
ear, as the finest classics of the collection. Ever since he received
her invitation, he now realized, his curiosity had been tinged with a
certain vindictive hope that she would have altered for the worse,
either relatively in his own knowledgeable eyes, or else absolutely by
reason of the passage of these twelve long years ; would have
degenerated from what she was, or what he had imagined her to be, at the
time when he had loved her. Discreditably enough, as he now admitted to
himself, it was with a touch of disappointment that he had found her
hardly changed from the Mary Amberley of his memories. She was
forty-three. But her body was almost as slim as ever, and she moved with
all the old swift agility. With something more than the old agility,
indeed ; for he had noticed that she was now agile on purpose, that she
acted the part of one who is carried away by a youthful impulse to break
into quick and violent motion—acted it, moreover, in circumstances where
the impulse could not, if natural, possibly have been felt. Before
dinner, she took him upstairs to her 174

B


CHAPTER XIV

bedroom to see those nudes by Pascin that she had just bought. The first
half of the flight she negotiated at a normal pace, talking as she went
; then, as though she had suddenly remembered that slowness on stairs is
a sign of middle-age, she suddenly started running—no, scampering,
Anthony corrected himself as he remembered the incident : scampering was
the word. And when they returned to the drawing-room, no tomboy of
sixteen could have thrown herself more recklessly into the sofa or
tucked up her legs with a more kittenish movement. The Mary of 1914 had
never behaved so youthfully as that.

Couldn't have even if she had wanted to, he reflected, in all those
skirts and petticoats.

Whereas now, in kilts ... It was absurd, of course ; but not yet, he
judicially decided, painfully absurd, For Mary could still claim to look
the youthful part. Only a little worn, her face still seemed to sparkle,
through the faint stigmata of fatigue, with the old laughing vitality.
And as for her accomplishments— why, this improvisation (and an
improvisation it must be, seeing that the event had occurred only that
morning), this improvisation on the theme of Helen's stolen kidney was a
little masterpiece.

' I shall have the object embalmed,' she was concluding in a
mock-serious tone, pregnant with subdued laughter. ' Embalmed and . . /

But like a suddenly opened ginger-beer bottle, bubblingly, ' I'll give
you an address for the embalming,' put in Beppo Bowles. He smiled, he
blinked his eyes, 17$

EYELESS IN GAZA

he wriggled. His whole plump and florid person seemed to participate in
what he said; he talked with every organ of his body. ' From the
Mortician9s Journal.9 He waved a hand and declaimed, ' Embalmers ! do
your results have that unpleasant putty look ? If so . .

.*

Mrs. Amberley had laughed—a little perfunctorily, perhaps ; for she did
not like to be interrupted in the middle of a story. Beppo was a
darling, of course. So boyish, in spite of his tummy and the bald patch
on the top of his head. (So girlish, even, on occasion.) But still . . .
She cut him short with a ' Too perfect/ Then, turning back to the rest
of the table,

* Well, as I was saying,' she continued, ' I shall have it embalmed and
put under one of those glass domes . . /

' Like life/ Beppo could not refrain from ginger-beerily interjecting.
But nobody caught the reference to Adonais, and he giggled alone.

* Those domes/ repeated Mrs. Amberley without looking at the
interrupter, ' one finds in lodging-houses. With birds under them.
Stuffed birds9 She lingered over the monosyllable, as though she were a
German prolonging a modified o ; and the birds, the Teutonic bô-ôds,
became, for some obscure reason, extraordinarily funny.

The voice, Anthony decided, was better than ever. There was a faint
hoarseness now, like the bloom on a fruit, like the haze through which,
on a summer's day, one sees St. Paul's from Waterloo Bridge. The
interposition of that curtain of husky gauze seemed to deepen,

176


CHAPTER XIV

as it were, and enrich the beauties of the vocal landscape lying behind
it. Listening more attentively than ever, he tried to fix the cadences
of her speech upon his memory, to analyse them into their component
sounds. In his projected Elements of Sociology there was to be a chapter
on Mass Suggestion and Propaganda. One of the sections would be devoted
to the subject of Fascinating Noises. The fascinatingly excitingly
exciting noise, for example, of Savonarola, or Lloyd George. The
fascinatingly sedative noise of intoning priests; the fascinatingly
hilarious noise of Robey and Little Tich ; the fascinatingly aphrodisiac
noise of certain actors and actresses, certain singers, certain sirens
and Don Juans of private life. Mary's gift, he decided, was for making a
noise that was simultaneously aphrodisiac and comic. She could emit
sounds that touched the springs of laughter and desire, but never those
of sorrow, of pity, of indignation. In moments of emotional stress (and
he recalled those horrible scenes she used to make) her voice passed out
of control into a chaos of raucous shrillness. The sound of her words of
complaint, reproach or grief evoked in the hearer only a certain
physical discomfort.

Whereas with Mrs. Foxe, he now went on to think, the noise alone of what
she said had been enough to compel your acquiescence and sympathy. Hers
was the mysterious gift that hoisted Robespierre into power, that
enabled Whitefield, by the mere repetition, two or three times, of some
pious exclamation, to reduce the most hardened sceptic to tears.

There

177

EYELESS IN GAZA

are fascinating noises capable of convincing a listener of the existence
of God.

Those bb-od$ ! They all laughed, all simply had to laugh, at them. Even
Colin Egerton, even Hugh Ledwidge. And yet ever since that man Beavis
had come into the drawing-room. Hugh had been in a prickle of
uneasiness. Beavis whom he always did his best to avoid . . . Why hadn't
Mary told him ? For a moment he imagined it was a plot. Mary had invited
Beavis on purpose to put him to shame—because she knew that the man had
been a witness of his humiliations at Bulstrode. There were to be two of
them : Staithes (for Staithes, he knew, was expected after dinner) and
Beavis. Hugh had grown accustomed to meeting Staithes in this house,
didn't mind meeting him. Staithes, there could be no doubt, had
forgotten. But Beavis—whenever he met Beavis, it always seemed to Hugh
that the man looked at him in a queer way. And now Mary had invited him,
on purpose, so that he could remind Staithes ; and then the two of them
would bait him with their reminiscences—their reminiscences of how he
had funked at football ; of how he had cried when it was his turn at
fire-drill to slide down the rope ; of how he had sneaked to Jimbug and
had then been made to run the gauntlet between two lines of them, armed
with wet towels rolled up into truncheons ; of how they had looked over
the partition ...

He shuddered. But of course, on second, saner thoughts, it couldn't
possibly be a plot.

Not conceivably. All

178


CHAPTER XIV

the same, he was glad when they went down to dinner and he found himself
separated from Beavis. Across Helen, conversation would be difficult.
And after dinner he would do his best to keep at a distance . . .

As for Colin, he had sat all through the meal in a bewilderment that, as
it grew, as he felt himself more and more hopelessly out of it all, was
mingled to an ever-increasing extent with exasperation and disapproval,
until at last he was saying to himself (what he intended to say aloud to
Joyce at the first opportunity), was saying : ' I may be stupid and all
that'—and this confession was uttered by his inward voice in a tone of
firm contempt, as though it were a confession of strength, not
weakness—' I may be stupid and all that, but at least— well, at least I
do know what's within the pale and what's without/ He would say all that
to Joyce, and much more ; and Joyce (he had glanced at her in the middle
of one of Beppo's outrageous stories and caught an eye that was humble,
anxious, pleadingly apologetic), Joyce would agree with every word he
said. For the poor child was like a kind of changeling—a County
changeling left by some inexplicable mistake in the arms of a mad,
impossible mother who forced her, against her real nature, to associate
with these . . . these . . . (He couldn't find the mentionable word for
Beppo.) And he, Colin Egerton, he was the St. George who would rescue
her. The fact that—like some pure young girl fallen among
white-slavers—she needed rescuing was one of the reasons why he felt so
strongly attracted to

179

EYELESS IN GAZA

her. He loved her, among other reasons, because he so violently loathed
that ghastly degenerate (that was the word), Beppo Bowles; and his
approval of all that Joyce was and did was proportionate to his
disapproval (a disapproval strengthened by a certain terror) of Joyce's
mother. And yet, now, in spite of the disapproval, in spite of his fear
of that sharp tongue of hers, those piercingly ironic glances, he could
not help laughing with the rest. Those long-drawn bô-ôds under their
glass domes were irresistible.

For Mrs. Amberley the laughter was like champagne— warming, stimulating.
' And I shall have an inscription carved on the base/ she went on,
raising her voice against the din

: * " This kidney was stolen by Helen Amberley, at the risk of her life
and ..." *

4 Oh, do shut up, Mummy ! * Helen was blushing with a mixture of
pleasure and annoyance. ' Please ! ' It was certainly nice to be the
heroine of a story that everybody was listening to—but then the heroine
was also a bit of an ass. She felt angry with her mother for exploiting
the assishness.

'. . . and in spite of a lifelong and conscientious objection to
butchery/ Mrs. Amberley went on. Then, ' Poor darling/ she added in
another tone. * Smells always were her weak point. Butchers,
fishmongers, —and shall I ever forget the one and only time I took her
to church ! '

(' One and only time/ thought Colin. * No wonder she goes and does
things like this ! ') 180


CHAPTER XIV

' Oh, I do admit/ cried Mrs, Amberley, ' that a village congregation on
a wet Sunday morning—well, frankly, it stinks. Deafeningly ! But still .
. .'

1 It's the odour of sanctity,* put in Anthony Beavis : and turning to
Helen, ( I've suffered from it myself. And did your mother make you spit
when there were bad smells about?

Mine did. It made things very difficult in church/

' She didn't spit,' Mrs. Amberley answered for her daughter. ' She was
sick. All over old Lady Worples-don's astrakhan coat. I was never able
to show my face in respectable society again. Thank God ! ' she added.

Beppo sizzled a protest against her implied imputations. Switched off
kidneys, the conversation rolled away along another line.

Helen sat unnoticed, in silence. Her face had suddenly lost all its
light ; ' I'll never touch meat again,' she had said. And here she was,
with a morsel of that gruesome red lump of cow impaled on her fork. '
I'm awful/ she thought. Pas sérieuse^ old Mme. Delécluze had pronounced.
And though as a professional girl-finisher the old beast could hardly be
expected to say anything else, yet it was true; at bottom it was quite
true. ' I'm not serious.

I'm not . . .' But suddenly she was aware that the voice which had been
sounding, inarticulately and as though from an immense distance, in her
right ear was addressing itself to her.

'. . . Proust/ she heard it saying, and realized that it had pronounced
the same syllable at least twice before.

EYELESS IN GAZA

She looked round, guiltily, and saw, red with embarrassment, the face of
Hugh Ledwtdge turned, waveringly and uncertainly, towards her. He smiled
foolishly ; his spectacles flashed ; he turned away. She felt doubly
confused and ashamed.

' I'm afraid I didn't quite catch . . .' she contrived to mumble.

* Oh, it doesn't matter/ he mumbled back. * It's really of no
importance.' Of no importance ; but it had taken him the best part of
five minutes to think of that gambit about Proust. * I must say
something to her,' he had decided, when he saw Beavis safely involved in
intimate talk with Mary Amberley and Beppo. ' Must say something.' But
what ? What did one say to young girls of eighteen ? He would have liked
to say something personal, something even a bit gallant. About her
frock, for example. * How nice ! ' No, that was a bit vague and
unspecific. ' How it suits your complexion, your eyes

! * (What colour were they, by the way ?) Or he might ask her about
parties. Did she go to many ? With (very archly) boy friends ? But that,
he knew, was too difficult for him.

Besides, he didn't much like to think of her with boy friends—preferred
her virginal : du bist wie eine Blume ... Or else, seriously but with a
smile, ' Tell me,* he might say, ' tell me, Helen, what are young people
really like nowadays? What do they think and feel about things ? ' And
Helen would plant her elbows on the table and turn sideways and tell
him, exactly, all he wanted to know about that

182


CHAPTER XIV

mysterious world, the world where people danced and went to parties and
were always having personal relations with one another ; would tell him
everything, everything—or else, more likely, nothing, and he would just
be made to feel an impertinent fool. No, no; this wouldn't do, wouldn't
do at all. This was just fancy, this was just wish-fulfilment. It was
then that the question about Proust had occurred to him. What did she
think of Proust

? It was a comfortingly impersonal question—one that he could ask
without feeling awkward and unnatural. But its impersonality could
easily be made to lead to a long discussion—always in the abstract,
always, so to speak, in a test-tube—of the most intimately emotional,
even (no, no; but still, one never knew; it was revolting; and yet . .

.) even physiological matters. Talking of Proust, it would be possible
to say everything—

everything, but always in terms of a strictly literary criticism.
Perfect ! He had turned towards Helen.

'I suppose you're as keen on Proust as everybody else.' No answer. From
the end of the table came wafts of Mrs. Amberley's conversation with
Anthony and Beppo : they were discussing the habits of their friends.
Colin Egerton was in the middle of a tiger hunt in the Central
Provinces. He coughed, then, ' You're a Proustian, I take it ? Like the
rest of us,' he repeated. But the lowered and melancholy profile gave no
sign of life. Feeling most uncomfortably a fool, Hugh Ledwidge tried
once more.

i83

EYELESS IN GAZA

* I wish you'd tell me,' he said in a louder voice, that sounded, he
thought, peculiarly unnatural, ' what you think about Proust/

Helen continued to stare at some invisible object on the table, just in
front of her plate.

Pas sérieuse. She was thinking of all the unserious things she had ever
done in her life, all the silly, the mean, the awful things. A kind of
panic embarrassment overwhelmed Hugh Ledwidge. He felt as he might feel
if his trousers were to start coming down in Piccadilly—lost. Anybody
else, of course, would just touch her arm and say, * A penny for your
thoughts, Helen ! ' How simple this would be, how sensible ! The whole
incident would at once be turned into a joke—a joke, moreover, at her
expense. He would establish once and for all a position of teasing
superiority, * Day-dreaming in the middle of a dinner ! About what ?
About whom ? ' Very knowing and arch. And she would blush, would
giggle—at his behest, in response to his command. Like a skilled
matador, he would wave his little red flag, and she would go plunging
here, go charging there, making an absurd and ravishing exhibition of
herself, until at last, raising his sword . . .

But simple and sensible and strategically advantageous as all this would
be, Hugh Ledwidge found it quite impossible to make the first move.
There was her bare arm, thin like a little girl's ; but somehow he could
not bring himself to put out his hand and touch it. And the jocular
offer of that penny—it couldn't be made ; his vocal chords 184


CHAPTER XIV

would not do it. Thirty seconds passed—seconds of increasing
embarrassment and uncertainty. Then suddenly, as though waking from
sleep, she had looked round at him.

What had he said ? But it was impossible to repeat that question again.

' It's of no importance. No importance.' He turned away. But why, oh why
was he such a fool, so ridiculously incompetent? At thirty-five. Nel
me^o del cammm. Imagine Dante in the circumstances ! Dante, with his
steel profile, ploughing forward, like a spiritual battleship. And
meanwhile, what on earth should he say to her in place of that now
impossible remark about Proust ? What in the name of heaven ... ? *- It
was she finally who touched his arm. 'I'm so sorry/ she said with a real
contrition. She was trying to make up for her awfulness, for having so
frivolously eaten Mr. Baldwin's well-thumbed cow.

Besides, she liked old Hugh. He was nice. He had taken the trouble to
show her the Mexican things at the Museum. 'I have an appointment with
Mr. Ledwidge,' she had said.

And the attendants had all been delightfully deferential. She had been
led to his private room—the private room of the Assistant Director of
the Department—as though she were some distinguished personage. One
eminent archaeologist visiting another. It had really been
extraordinarily interesting. Only, of course—and this was another
symptom of her awful unseriousness—she had forgotten most of the things
he had told her. ¦ So awfully sorry,' she repeated ; and it was
genuinely true.

185

EYELESS IN GAZA

She knew what he must be feeling. ' You see/ she explained, ' Granny's
deaf. I know how awful it is when I have to repeat something. It sounds
so idiotic. Like Mr. Shandy and the clock, somehow, if you see what I
mean. Do forgive me/ She pressed his arm appealingly, then, planting her
elbows on the table and turning sideways towards him in just the
confidential attitude he had visualized, ' Listen, Hugh/ she said, *
you're serious, aren't you ? You know, sérieux.9

1 Well, I suppose so/ he stammered. He had just seen, rather belatedly,
what she meant by that reference to Mr. Shandy, and the realization had
come as something of a shock.

* I mean/ she went on, * you could hardly be at the Museum if you
weren't serious.'

1 No/ he admitted, * I probably couldn't.' But after all, he was
thinking, still preoccupied by Mr. Shandy, there's such a thing as
theoretical knowledge. (And didn't he know it ?

Only too well.) Theoretical knowledge corresponding to no genuine
experience, unrealized, not lived through. ' Oh God ! ' he inwardly
groaned.

' Well, I'm not serious/ Helen was saying. She felt a great need to
unburden herself, to ask for help. There were moments—and they recurred
whenever, for one reason or another, she felt doubtful of
herself—moments when everything round her seemed terribly vague and
unreliable. Everything—but in practice, of course, it all boiled down to
the unreliability of her mother. Helen was very fond of her mother, but
at the same 186


CHAPTER XIV

time she had to admit to herself that she was no use. * Mummy's like a
very bad practical joke/ she had once said to Joyce. * You think you're
going to sit on it ; but the chair's whisked away and you come down with
a horrible bump on your bottom.' But all that Joyce had said was : '
Helen, you simply mustn't use those words.' Ass of a girl ! Though, of
course, it had to be admitted, Joyce was a chair that could be sat on.
But an inadequate chair, a chair only for unimportant occasions—and what
was the good of that ? Joyce was too young ; and even if she'd been much
older, she wouldn't really have understood anything properly. And now
that she was engaged to Colin, she seemed to understand things less and
less. God, what a fool that man was ! But all the same, there, if you
liked, was a chair. A chair like the rock of ages. But so shaped,
unfortunately, that it forced you to sit in the most grotesquely
uncomfortable position. However, as Joyce didn't seem to mind the
discomfort, that was all right. Chairless in an exhausting world, Helen
almost envied her. Meanwhile there was old Hugh. She sat down, heavily.

1 What's wrong with me,' she went on, ' is that I'm so hopelessly
frivolous.'

* I can't really believe that,' he said ; though why he said it he
couldn't imagine. For, obviously, he ought to be encouraging her to make
confession, not assuring her that she had no sins to confess. It was as
though he were secretly afraid of the very tiling he had wished for.

187

EYELESS IN GAZA

* I don't think you're . . .'

But fortunately nothing he said could put her off. She insisted on using
him as a chair.

' No, no, it's quite true,' she said. ' You can't imagine how frivolous
I am. I'll tell you . . .'

Half an hour later, in the back drawing-room, he was writing out for her
a list of the books she ought to read. Burnet's Early Greek Philosophers
; Phaedrus, Timaeus, The Apology, and The Symposium in Jowett's
translation ; the Nicomachean Ethics ; Cornford's little anthology of
the Greek moralists ; Marcus Aurelius ; Lucretius in any good
translation ; Inge's Plotinus. His manner, as he spoke, was easy,
confident, positively masterful. He was like a creature suddenly
restored to its proper element.

' Those will give you some idea of the way the ancients thought about
things.'

She nodded. Her face as she looked at the pencilled list was grave and
determined. She had decided that she would wear spectacles, and have a
table brought up to her bedroom, so that she could sit undisturbed, with
her books piled up and her writing materials in front of her.
Note-books—or, better, a card index. It would be a new life—a life with
some meaning in it, some purpose. In the drawing-room somebody started
up the gramophone. As though on its own initiative, her foot began to
beat out the rhythm. One two three, one two three— it was a waltz. But
what was she thinking of? She frowned and held her foot still.

188


CHAPTER XIV

* As for modern thought/ Hugh was saying, ' well, the two indispensable
books, from which every modern culture must start, are '—his pencil
hurried across the paper—'

Montaigne's Essays and the Pensées of Pascal. Indispensable, these/ He
underlined the names. ' Then you'd better glance at the Discourse on
Method.9

6 Which method ? ' asked Helen.

But Hugh did not hear her question. * And take a look at Hobbes, if you
have the time/ he went on with ever-increasing power and confidence. '
And then Newton. That's absolutely essential. Because if you don't know
the philosophy of Newton, you don't know why science has developed as it
has done. You'll find all you need in Burt's Metaphysical Foundations of
Modem Science.9 There was a little silence while he wrote.

Tom had arrived, and Eileen and Sybil. Helen could hear them talking in
the other room.

But she kept her eyes determinedly fixed on the paper. ' Then there's
Hume,' he continued. ' You'd better begin with the Essays. They're
superb. Such sense, such an immense sagacity ! '

1 Sagacity,' Helen repeated, and smiled to herself with pleasure. Yes,
that was exactly the word she'd been looking for—exactly what she
herself would like to be : sagacious, like an elephant, like an old
sheep-dog, like Hume, if you preferred it. But at the same time, of
course, herself. Sagacious, but young ; sagacious, but lively and
attractive ; sagacious, but impetuous and . . .

* I won't inflict Kant on you/ said Hugh indulgently.

189

EYELESS IN GAZA

'But I think' (he brought the pencil into play again), * I think you'll
have to read one or two of the modern Kantians. Vaihinger's Philosophy
of As If for example, and von Uexkull's Theoretical Biology. You see,
Kant's behind all our twentieth-century science.

Just as Newton was behind all the science of the eighteenth and
nineteenth . . .'

1 Well, Helen ! '

They started and looked up—looked up into the smiling, insolently
handsome face of Gerry Watchett. Brilliantly blue against the sunburnt
skin, the eyes glanced from one to the other with a kind of mockery.
Coming a step nearer, he laid his hand familiarly on Helen's shoulder. '
What's the fun ? Cross-word puzzles ? ' He gave the shoulder two or
three little pats.

' As though she were his horse,' Hugh said to himself indignantly. And,
in effect, that was what the man looked like—a groom. That crisply
waving, golden-brownish hair, that blunt-featured face, at once boyish
and tough—they were straight from the stable, straight from Epsom downs.

Helen smiled a smile that was intended to be contemptuously superior—an
intellectual's smile. ' You would think it was cross-words ! ' she said.
Then, ' By the way,' she added in another tone, ' you know each other,
don't you ? ' she looked enquiringly from Gerry to Hugh.

1 We do,' Gerry answered : and still keeping his

190


CHAPTER XIV

right hand on Helen's shoulder, he raised his left in the derisive
caricature of military salute. ' Good evening, Colonel.*

Sheepishly, Hugh returned the salute- All his power and confidence had
vanished with his forced return from the world of books to that of
personal life ; he felt like an albatross on dry land—helplessly
awkward, futile, ugly. And yet how easy it should have been to put on a
knowing smile, and say significantly, ' Yes, I know Mr. Watchett very
well '—

know him, the tone would imply, for what he is : the gentleman
sharepusher, the professional gambler and the professional lover. Mary
Amberley's lover at the moment, so it was supposed. * Know him very well
indeed ! * That was what it would have been so easy to say. But he
didn't say it: he only smiled and rather foolishly raised his hand to
his forehead.

Gerry, meanwhile, had sat down on the arm of the sofa, and through the
smoke of his cigarette was staring at Helen with a calm and easy
insolence, appraising her, so it seemed, point by point—hocks, withers,
quarters, barrel. ' Do you know, Helen,' he said at last, ' you're
getting prettier and prettier every day.'

Blushing, Helen threw back her head and laughed ; then suddenly
stiffened her face into an unnatural rigidity. She was angry—angry with
Gerry for his damned impertinence, angry above all with herself for
having been pleased by the damned impertinence, for having reacted with
such a humiliatingiy automatic

191

EYELESS IN GAZA

punctuality to that offensive flattery. Going red in the face and
giggling like a schoolgirl !

And that Philosophy of As If, those horn-rimmed spectacles, and the new
life, and the card index ... ? A man said, * You're pretty,' and it was
as though they had never been so much as thought of. She turned towards
Hugh ; turned for protection, for support. But her eyes no sooner met
his than he looked away. His face took on an expression of meditative
absence ; he seemed to be thinking of something else. Was he angry with
her, she wondered ? Had he been offended because she had been pleased by
Gerry's compliment ?

But it had been like blinking at the noise of a gun—something you
couldn't help doing.

He ought to understand, ought to realize that she wanted to lead that
new life, was simply longing to be sagacious. Instead of which, he just
faded out and refused to have anything to do with her. Oh, it wasn't
fair !

Behind that cold detached mask of his, Hugh was feeling more than ever
like Baudelaire's albatross.

Ce voyageur ailé, comme il est gauche et veule ! Lui) naguère si beau^
qu'il est comique et laid !

Ah, those strong and majestic swoopings in the neo-Kantian azure !

From the next room the gramophone was trumpeting, ' Yes, sir, she's my
Baby/ Gerry whistled a couple of bars ; then * What about a spot of
fox-trotting, Helen ? ' he suggested. ' Unless, of course, you haven't
finished

192


CHAPTER XIV

with the Colonel/ He glanced mockingly at Hugh's averted face. ' I don't
want to interrupt . . .'

It was Helen's turn to look to Hugh. ' Well . . / she began doubtfully.

But without looking up, * Oh, not at all, not at all,' Hugh made haste
to say ; and wondered, even as he did so, what on earth had induced him
to proclaim his own defeat before even there had been a battle. Leaving
her to that groom ! Fool, coward ! Still, he told himself cynically, she
probably preferred the groom. He got up, mumbled something about having
to talk to someone about some point that had turned up, and moved away
towards the door that gave on to the landing and the stairs.

' Well, if he doesn't want me to stay,' Helen thought resentfully, ' if
he doesn't think it's worth his while to keep me.' She was hurt.

' Exit the Colonel,' said Gerry. Then, ' What about that spot of dancing
? * He rose, came towards her and held out his hand. Helen took it and
pulled herself up from the low chair.

' No, sir, don't say maybe,' he sang as he put his arm about her. They
stepped out into the undulating stream of the music. Zigzagging between
chairs and tables, he steered towards the door that led into the other
room.

m


CHAPTER XV

June 1903-January 1904

IT had become a rite, a sacrament (that was how John Beavis described it
to himself) : a sacrament of communion. First, the opening of the
wardrobe door, the handling of her dresses. Closing his eyes, he
breathed the perfume they exhaled, the faint sweet essence of her body
from across the widening abyss of time. Then there were the drawers.
These three, on the left, contained her linen. The lavender bags were
tied with pale blue ribbon.

This lace on the night-gown he now unfolded had touched . . . Even in
thought, John Beavis avoided the pronunciation of the words c her
breasts/ but only imagined the rounded flesh softly swelling and sinking
under the intricacies of the patterned thread ; then recalled those
Roman nights ; and finally thought of Lollingdon and the hollow vale,
the earth, the terrible dark silence. The night-gown refolded and once
more shut away, it was the turn of the two small drawers on the right—of
the gloves that had encased her hands, the belts that had girdled her
body and that now he wound round his wrist or tightened like a
phylactery about his temples. And the rite concluded with the reading of
her letters—those touchingly childish letters she had written during
their engagement.

That

194


CHAPTER XV

consummated the agony for him ; the rite was over and he could go to bed
with yet another sword in his heart.

But recently, it seemed, the sword had grown blunter. It was as though
her death, till now so poignantly alive, had itself begun to die. The
rite seemed to be losing its magic : consummation became increasingly
difficult of achievement, and, when achieved, was less painful and, for
that reason, less satisfying. For the thing which had made life worth
living all these months was precisely the pain of his bereavement.
Desire and tenderness had suddenly been deprived of their object. It was
an amputation—agonizing. And now this pain— and it was all of her that
was left him—this precious anguish was slipping away from him, was
dying, even as Maisie herself had died.

To-night it seemed to have vanished altogether. He buried his face in
the scented folds of her dresses, he spread out the lace and lawn she
had worn next her skin, he blew into one of her gloves and watched the
gradual deflation of this image of her hand—dying, dying, till the skin
hung limp again and empty of even the pretence of life. But the rites
were without effect ; John Beavis remained unmoved. He knew that she was
dead and that his bereavement was terrible. But he felt nothing of this
bereavement—nothing except a kind of dusty emptiness of spirit.

He went to bed unfulfilled, somehow humiliated. Magic rites justify
themselves by success; when they fail to produce their proper emotional
results, the per-195

EYELESS IN GAZA

former feels that he has been betrayed into making a fool of himself.

Dry, like a mummy, in the dusty emptiness of his own sepulchre, John
Beavis lay for a long time, unable to sleep. Twelve ; one ; two ; and
then, when he had utterly despaired of it, sleep came, and he was
dreaming that she was there beside him ; and it was Maisie as she had
been in the first year of their marriage, the round flesh swelling and
subsiding beneath the lace, the lips parted and, oh, innocently
consenting. He took her in his arms.

It was the first time since her death that he had dreamed of her except
as dying.

John Beavis woke to a sense of shame ; and when, later in the day, he
saw Miss Gannett evidendy waiting for him, as usual, in the corridor
outside his lecture-room, he pretended not to have noticed her, but
hurried past with downcast eyes, frowning, as though preoccupied by some
abstruse, insoluble problem in the higher philology.

But the next afternoon found him at his old Aunt Edith's weekly At Home.
And of course—though he expressed a perhaps excessive surprise at seeing
her— of course Miss Gannett was there, as he knew she would be ; for she
never missed one of Aunt Edith's Thursdays.

' You were in a terrible hurry yesterday,' she said, when his surprise
had had time to die down.

* Me ? When ? ' He pretended not to know what she meant.

196


CHAPTER XV

* At the College, after your lecture.'

1 But were you there ? I didn't see you/

' Now he thinks I shirked his lecture,' she wailed to some non-existent
third party. Ever since, two months before, she had first met him in
Aunt Edith's drawing-room, Miss Gannett had faithfully attended every
one of his public lectures, ' To improve my mind,'

she used to explain. ' Because,' with a jocularity that was at the same
time rather wistful, '

it does so need improving ! '

Mr. Beavis protested. ' But I didn't say anything of the kind.'

' I'll show you the notes I took.'

c No, please don't do that ! ' It was his turn to be playful. ' If you
knew how my own lectures bored me ! *

' Well, you nearly ran me over in the corridor, after the lecture.'

* Oh, then ! '

' I never saw anyone walk so fast.'

He nodded. ' Yes, I was in a hurry ; it's quite true. I had a Committee.
Rather a special one,' he added impressively.

She opened her eyes at him very wide, and, from playful, her tone and
expression became very serious. 1 It must be rather a bore sometimes,'
she said, ' to be such a very important person—isn't it ? *

Mr. Beavis smiled down at the grave and awestruck child before him—at
the innocent child who was also a rather plump and snubbily pretty young
woman of seven and twenty—smiled with pleasure and stroked his

197

EYELESS IN GAZA

moustache. ' Oh, not quite so important as all that,' he protested. '
Not quite such . . .' he hesitated for a moment ; his mouth twitched,
his eyes twinkled ; then the colloquialism came out : ' not quite such a
" howling toff" as you seem to imagine/

There was only one letter that morning. From Anthony, Mr. Beavis saw as
he tore open the envelope.

* Bulstrode, June 26tL

* Dearest Father,—Thank you for your letter. I thought we were going to
Tenby for the holidays. Did you not arrange it with Mrs. Foxe? Foxe says
she expects us, so perhaps we ought not to go to Switzerland instead as
you say we are doing. We had two matches yesterday, first eleven r.
Sunny Bank, second v. Mumbridge, we won both which was rather ripping. I
was playing in the second eleven and made six not out. We have begun a
book called Lettres de mon Moulin in French, I think it is rotten. There
is no more news, so with much love.—Your loving son,

' Anthony.

* PS.—Don't forget to write to Mrs. Foxe, because Foxe says he knows she
thinks we are going to Tenby.'

Mr. Beavis frowned as he read the letter, and when breakfast was over,
sat down at once to write an answer.

* Earl's Court Square, 27.vi.03.

4 Dearest Anthony,—I am disappointed that you should have received what
I had hoped was a piece of

198


CHAPTER XV

very exciting news with so little enthusiasm. At your age I should
certainly have welcomed the prospect of " going abroad," especially to
Switzerland, with unbounded delight. The arrangements with Mrs. Foxe
were always of the most indeterminate nature.

Needless to say, however, I wrote to her as soon as the golden
opportunity for exploring the Bernese Oberland in congenial company
turned up, as it did only a few days since, and made mc decide to
postpone the realization of our vague Tenby plans. If you want to see
exactly where we are going, take your map of Switzerland, find
Interlaken and the Lake of Brienz, move eastward from the end of the
lake to Meiringen and thence in a southerly direction towards
Grindelwald. We shall be staying at the foot of the Scheideck Pass, at
Rosenlaui, almost in the shadow of such giants as the Jungfrau,
Weisshorn and Co. I do not know the spot, but gather from all accounts
that it is entirely " spiffing " and paradisal.

' I am delighted to hear you did so creditably in your match. You must
go on, dear boy, from strength to strength. Next year I shall hope to
see you sporting the glories of the First Eleven colours.

' I cannot agree with you in finding Daudet " rotten." I suspect that
his rottenness mainly consists in the difficulties he presents to a
tyro. When you have acquired a complete mastery of the language, you
will come to appreciate the tender charm of his style and the sharpness
of his wit.

' I hope you are working your hardest to make good your sad weakness in
" maths." I confess that I never shone in the mathematical line myself,
so am able to sympathize with your difficulties. But hard work will

199

EYELESS IN GAZA

do wonders, and I am sure that if you really " put your back into "
algebra and geometry, you can easily get up to scholarship standards by
this time next year.—Ever your most affectionate father, J. B.'

4 It's too sickening ! ' said Anthony, when he had finished reading his
father's letter. The tears came into his eyes; he was filled with a
sense of intolerable grievance.

' W-what does he s-say ? ' Brian asked.

* It's all settled. He's written to your mater that we're going to some
stinking hole in Switzerland instead of Tenby. Oh, I really am too sick
about it ! ' He crumpled up the letter and threw it angrily on the
ground, then turned away and tried to relieve his feelings by kicking
his play-box. c Too sick, too sick ! ' he kept repeating.

Brian was sick too. They were going to have had such a splendid time at
Tenby ; it had all been imaginatively foreseen, preconstructed in the
most luxuriant detail ; and now, crash ! the future good time was in
bits.

' S-still/ he said at last, after a long silence, * I exp-pect you'll
enj-joy yourself in S-switzerland.' And, moved by a sudden impulse, for
which he would have found it difficult to offer an explanation, he
picked up Mr. Beavis's letter, smoothed out the crumpled pages and
handed it back to Anthony. * Here's your 1-letter,' he said.

Anthony looked at it for a moment, opened his mouth

200


CHAPTER XV

as though to speak, then shut it again, and taking the letter, put it
away in his pocket.

The congenial company in which they were to explore the Bernese Oberland
turned out, when they reached Rosenlaui, to consist of Miss Gannett and
her old school-friend Miss Louie Piper. Mr. Beavis always spoke of them
as ' the girls,' or else, with a touch of that mock-heroic philological
jocularity to which he was so partial, ' the damsels *—

dominicellae^ double diminutive of domina. The teeny weeny ladies ! He
smiled to himself each time he pronounced the word. To Anthony the
damsels seemed a pair of tiresome and already elderly females. Piper,
the thin one, was like a governess. He preferred fat old Gannett, in
spite of that awful mooey, squealing laugh of hers, in spite of the way
she puffed and sweated up the hills. Gannett at least was well-meaning.
Luckily, there were two other English boys in the hotel. True, they came
from Manchester and spoke rather funnily, but they were decent chaps,
and they knew an extraordinary number of dirty stories. Moreover, in the
woods behind the hotel they had discovered a cave, where they kept
cigarettes. Proudly, when he got back to Bulstrode, Anthony announced
that he had smoked almost every day of the hols.

One Saturday in November Mr. Beavis came down to Bulstrode for the
afternoon. They watched the football for a bit, then went for a
depressing walk that ended, however, at the King's Arms. Mr. Beavis
ordered crumpets ' and buttered eggs for this young stalwart '

(with

20Ï

EYELESS IN GAZA

a conspiratorial twinkle at the waitress, as though she also knew that
the word meant '

foundation-worthy '), * and cherry jam to follow—isn't cherry the
favourite ? *

Anthony nodded. Cherry was the favourite. But so much solicitude made
him feel rather suspicious. What could it all be for? Was he going to
say something about his work ?

About going in for the scholarship next summer ? About ... ? He blushed.
But after all, his father couldn't possibly know anything about that.
Not possibly. In the end he gave it up ; he couldn't imagine what it
was.

But when, after an unusually long silence, his father leaned forward and
said, * I've got an interesting piece of news for you, dear boy,'
Anthony knew, in a sudden flash of illumination, exactly what was
coming.

1 He's going to marry the Gannett female/ he said to himself.

And so he was. In the middle of December.

* A companion for you,* Mr. Beavis was saying. That youthfiilness, those
fresh and girlish high spirits ! * A companion as well as a second
mother.'

Anthony nodded. But ' companion '—what did he mean ? He thought of the
fat old Gannett, toiling up the slopes behind Rosenlaui, red-faced,
smelling of sweat, reeking . . .

And suddenly his mother's voice was sounding in his ears.

* Pauline wants you to call her by her Christian name,' Mr. Beavis went
on. ' It'll be • • .

well, jollier, don't you think ? '

202


CHAPTER XV

Anthony said ' Yes,' because there was obviously nothing else for him to
say, and helped himself to more cherry jam.

' Third person singular aorist of rCdrffii ? ' questioned Anthony.

Horse-Face got it wrong. It was Staithes who answered correctly.

* Second plural pluperfect of ep^ofiai ? '

Brian's hesitation was due to something graver than his stammer.

1 You're putrid to-night, Horse-Face,' said Anthony, and pointed his
finger at Staithes, who gave him the right answer again. ' Good for you,
Staithes.' And repeating Jimbug's stalest joke, * The sediment sinks to
the bottom, Horse-Face,' he rumbled in a parody of Jimbug's deep voice.

' Poor old Horse-Face ! ' said Staithes, slapping the other on the back.
Now that Horse-Face had given him the pleasure of knowing less Greek
grammar than he did, Staithes almost loved him.

It was nearly eleven, long after lights-out, and the three of them were
crowded into the w.c, Anthony in his capacity of examiner sitting
majestically on the seat, and the other two squatting on their heels
below him, on the floor. The May night was still and warm ; in less than
six weeks they would be sitting for their scholarship examinations,
Brian and Anthony at Eton, Mark Staithes at Rugby. It was after the
previous Christmas holidays*

203

EYELESS IN GAZA

that Staithes had come back to Bulstrode with the announcement that he
was going in for a scholarship. Astonishing news and, for his courtiers
and followers, appalling ! That work was idiotic, and that those who
worked were contemptible, had been axiomatic among them. And now here
was Staithes going in for a schol with the other swots—with Benger
Beavis, with old Horse-Face, with diat horrible little tick, Goggler
Ledwidge. It had seemed a betrayal of all that was most sacred.

By his words first of all, and afterwards, more effectively, by his
actions, Staithes had reassured them. The scholarship idea was his
Pater's. Not because of the money, he had hastened to add. His Pater
didn't care a damn about the money. But for the honour and glory,
because it was a traditionin the Family. His Pater himself and his
Uncles, his Fraters—they had all got schols. It wouldn't do to let the
Family down. Which didn't change the fact that swotting was a stinking
bore and that all swotters who swotted because they liked it, as
Horse-Face and Beavis seemed to do, or for the sake of the money, like
that miserable Goggler, were absolutely worms. And to prove it he had
ragged old Horse-Face about his stammer and his piddle-warblers, he had
organized a campaign against Goggler for funking at football, he had
stuck nibs into Beavis's bottom during prep; and, though working very
hard himself, he had made up for it by playing harder than ever and by
missing no opportunity of telling everyone how beastly swotting 204


CHAPTER XV

was, how he had absolutely no chance whatever of getting a schol.

When face had been sufficiently saved, he had changed his tactics
towards Beavis and Horse-Face, and after showing himself for some time
progressively more friendly towards them, had ended by proposing the
creation of a society of mutual assistance in schol swotting. It was he
who, at the beginning of the summer term, had suggested the nightly
sessions in the w.c. Brian had wanted to include Goggler in these
reading-parties ; but the other two had protested ; and anyhow, the w.c,
was demon-strably too small to contain a fourth. He had to be content
with helping Goggler in occasional half-hours during the day. Night and
the lavatory were reserved for the triumvirate.

To explain this evening's failure with Greek verbs, ' I'm rather t-t-t •
. .' Brian began ; then, forced into apparent affectation, * rather
weary to-n-night,' he concluded.

His pallor and the blue transparency under his eyes testified to the
truth of his words ; but for Mark Staithes they were obviously an excuse
by means of which Horse-Face hoped to diminish a little the sting of his
defeat at the hands of one who had been swotting, not for years, as his
rivals had, but only a few months. It was an implied confession of
inferiority. Triumphing, Staithes felt that he could be magnanimous. *
Hard luck ! * he said solicitously. * Let's have a bit of a rest'

From the pocket of his dressing-gown Anthony pro-H 205

EYELESS IN GAZA

duced three ginger-nuts, rather soft, it was true, with age, but none
the less welcome.

For the thousandth time since it had been decided that he should go in
for a scholarship, *

I wish I had the ghost of a chance,' said Staithes.

' You've g-got a very g-good one.'

' No, I haven't. It's just a crazy idea of my Pater's. Crazy ! ' he
repeated, shaking his head.

But in fact it was with a tingling, warm sensation of pride, of
exultation, that he remembered his father's words, ' We Staitheses . . .
When one's a Staithes . . . You've got as good brains as the rest of us,
and as much determination . . .* He forced a sigh, and, aloud, * Not a
ghost of a chance,' he insisted.

* Yes, you h-have, honestly.'

' Rot ! ' He refused to admit even the possibility of the thing. Then,
if he failed, he could laughingly say, * I told you so ' ; and if he
succeeded, as he privately believed he would, the glory would be all the
greater. Besides, the more persistently he denied his chances, the
oftener they would repeat their delicious assurances of his possible,
his probable, success. Success, what was more, in their own line ;
success, in spite of his consistent refusal, till the beginning of last
term, ever to take this ridiculous swotting seriously.

It was Benger who brought the next tribute. ' Jimbug thinks you've got a
chance,' he said.

' I heard him talking to old Jacko about it yesterday.'

' What does that old fool Jimbug know about it ? *

206


CHAPTER XV

Staithes made a disparaging grimace ; but through the mask of contempt
his brown eyes shone with pleasure. 1 And as for Jacko . . /

A sudden rattling of the door-handle made them all start. * I say, you
chaps/ came an imploring whisper through the keyhole, ' do buck up !
I've got the most frightful belly-ache.'

Brian rose hastily from the floor. ' We must 1-let him in,' he began.

But Staithes pulled him down again. ' Don't be a fool ! ' he said ;
then, turning towards the door, ' Go to one of the rears downstairs,' he
said, * we're busy/

' But I'm in a most frightful hurry.'

' Then the quicker you go, the better.'

* You are swine ! ' protested the whisper. Then 1 Christ ! * it added,
and they heard the sound of slippered feet receding in a panic rush down
the stairs.

Staithes grinned. ' That'll teach him/ he said. * What about another go
at the Greek grammar ? '

Outraged in advance, James Beavis had felt his indignation growing with
every minute he spent under his brother's roof. The house positively
reeked of matrimony. It was asphyxiating ! And there sat John, fairly
basking in those invisible radiations of dark female warmth, inhaling
the stuffiness with a quivering nostril, deeply contented, revoltingly
happy ! Like a marmot, it suddenly occurred to James Beavis, a marmot
with its female, crowded fur to fur in their subterranean burrow.

207

EYELESS IN GAZA

Yes, the house was just a burrow—a burrow, with John like a thin marmot
at one end of the table and that soft, bulging marmot-woman at the
other, and between them, one on either side, himself, outraged and
nauseated, and that unhappy little Anthony, like a changeling from the
world of fresh air, caught and dragged down and imprisoned in the
marmot-warren. Indignation begot equally violent pity and affection for
this unhappy child, begot at the same time a retrospective feeling of
sympathy for poor Maisie. In her lifetime he had always regarded Maisie
as just a fool—hopelessly silly and frivolous.

Now, John's marriage and the oppressive connubiality which enveloped the
all too happy couple made him forget his judgments on the living Maisie
and think of her as a most superior woman (at least, she had had the
grace to be slim), posthumously martyred by her husband for the sake of
this repulsively fleshy female marmot. Horrible ! He did well to be
angry.

Pauline meanwhile had refused a second helping of the chocolate soufflé.

1 But, my dear, you must, John Beavis insisted.

Pauline heaved the conscious imitation of a sigh of repletion. * I
couldn't/

'Not even the favourite chocolat!?' Mr, Beavis always spoke of chocolate
in the original Aztec.

Playfully, Pauline eyed the dish askance. ' I shouldn't,' she said,
implicitly admitting that the repletion was not complete.

1 Yes, you should,' he wheedled.

208


CHAPTER XV

' Now he's trying to make me fat ! ' she wailed with mock reproach. '
He's leading me into temptation ! '

' Well, be led.'

This time, Pauline's sigh was a martyr's. * All right, then/ she said
submissively. The maid, who had been waiting impassively for the outcome
of the controversy, presented the dish once again. Pauline helped
herself.

1 There's a good child,' said Mr. Beavis, in a tone and with a twinkle
that expressed a sportive mock-fatherli-ness. * And now, James, I hope
you'll follow the good example.'

James's disgust and anger were so intense that he could not trust
himself to speak, for fear of saying something outrageous. He contented
himself with curtly shaking his head.

' No chocolat! for you ? ' Mr. Beavis turned to Anthony. * But I'm sure
you'll take pity on the pudding ! ' And when Anthony did, * Ah, that's
good ! ' he said. ' That's the way . .

.'—he hesitated for a fraction of a second—*... the way to tuck in 1 '

209


CHAPTER XVI

June lyth 1912

ANTHONY'S fluency, as they walked to the station, a~~A wasa symptom of
his inward senseof guilt. By the profusion of his talk, by the
brightness of his attention, he was making up to Brian for what he had
done the previous evening. It was not as though Brian had uttered any
reproaches ; he seemed, on the contrary, to be taking special pains not
to hint at yesterday's offence. His silence served Anthony as an excuse
for postponing all mention of the disagreeable subject of Mark Staithes.
Some time, of course, he would have to talk about the whole wretched
affair (what a bore people were, with their complicated squabbles !) ;
but, for the moment, he assured himself, it would be best to wait ... to
wait until Brian himself referred to it. Meanwhile, his uneasy
conscience constrained him to display towards Brian a more than ordinary
friendliness, to make a special effort to be interesting and to show
himself interested. Interested in the poetry of Edward Thomas as they
walked down Beaumont Street ; in Bergson opposite Worcester ; crossing
Hythe Bridge, in the nationalization of coal mines ; and finally, under
the viaduct and up the long approach to the station, in Joan Thursley.

* It's ext-traordinary,' said Brian, breaking, with what

210


CHAPTER XVI

was manifestly an effort, a rather long preparatory silence, * that you
sh-shouldn't ever have met her/

' Dis aliter visum> Anthony answered in his father's best classical
style. Though, of course, if he had accepted Mrs. Foxe's invitations to
stay at Twyford, the gods, he reflected, would have changed their minds.

* I w-want you to I-like one another,' Brian was saying.

1 I'm sure we shall.'

1 She's not frightfully c-c-c . . .' Patiently he began again : *
frightfully c-clever. N-not on the s-surface. You'd th-think she was
o-only interested in c-c-c . . .' But * country life '

wouldn't allow itself to be uttered ; Brian was forced into a seemingly
affected circumlocution : 1 in rural m-matters,' he brought out at last.
' D-dogs and b-birds and all that.'

Anthony nodded and, suddenly remembering those spew-tits and
piddle-warblers of the Bulstrode days, imperceptibly smiled.

' But w-when you g-get to kn-know her better, Brian went on laboriously,
' you f-find there's a lot m-more in her than you th-thought. She's
g-got ext-traordinary feeling for p-p-p ... for v-verse. W-wordsworth
and M-meredith, for example. I'm always ast-tonished how g-good her
j-judgments are.'

Anthony smiled to himself sarcastically. Yes, it would be Meredith !

The other was silent, wondering how he should explain, whether he should
even try to explain. Everything was against him—his own physical
disability, the 211

EYELESS IN GAZA

difficulty of putting what he had to say into words, the possibility
that Anthony wouldn't even want to understand what he said, that he
would produce his alibi of cynicism and just pretend not to be there at
all.

Brian thought of their first meeting. The embarrassing discovery of two
strangers in the drawing-room when he came in, flushed and his hair
still wet with the rain, to tea. His mother pronounced a name : ' Mrs.
Thursley.' The new vicar's wife, he realized, as he shook hands with the
thin dowdy woman. Her manners were so ingratiating that she lisped as
she spoke ; her smile was deliberately bright.

' And this is Joan/

The girl held out her hand, and as he took it, her slender body swayed
away from his alien presence in a movement of shyness that was yet
adorably graceful, like the yielding of a young tree before the wind.
That movement was the most beautiful and at the same time the most
touching thing he had ever seen.

' We've been hearing you're keen on birds/ said Mrs. Thursley, with an
oppressive politeness and intensifying that all too bright,
professionally Christian smile of hers. ' So's Joan. A regular
ornithologist.'

Blushing, the girl muttered a protest.

1 She will be pleased to have someone to talk to about her precious
birds. Won't you, Joanie ? '

Joan's embarrassment was so great that she simply couldn't speak.

Looking at her flushed, averted face, Brian was filled

212


CHAPTER XVI

with compassionate tenderness. His heart began to beat very hard. With a
mixture of fear and exultation he realized that something extraordinary,
something irrevocable had happened.

And then, he went on to think, there was that time, some four or five
months later, when they were staying together at her uncle's house in
East Sussex. Away from her parents, she was as though transformed—not
into another person; into her own fundamental self, into the happy,
expansive girl that it was impossible for her to be at home. For at home
she lived under constraint. Her father's chronic grumblings and
occasional outbursts of bad temper oppressed her with fear. And though
she loved her, she felt herself the prisoner of her mother's affection,
was dimly conscious of being somehow exploited by means of it. And
finally there was the cold numbing atmosphere of the genteel poverty in
which they lived, the unremitting tension of the struggle to keep up
appearances, to preserve social superiority. At home, it was impossible
for Joan to be fully herself; but there, in that spacious house at Iden,
among its quiet, easy-going inhabitants, she was liberated into a
transfiguring happiness. Dazzled, Brian fell in love with her all over
again.

He thought of the day when they had gone walking in Winchelsea marshes.
The hawthorn was in bloom ; dotted here and there on the wide, flat
expanse of grass, the sheep and their lambs were like white
constellations ; overhead, the sky was alive with white clouds gliding

H* 213

EYELESS IN GAZA

in the wind. Unspeakably beautiful ! And suddenly it seemed to him that
they were walking through the image of their love. The world was their
love, and their love the world ; and the world was significant, charged
with depth beyond depth of mysterious meaning. The proof of God's
goodness floated in those clouds, crept in those grazing sheep, shone
from every burning bush of incandescent blossom—and, in himself and
Joan, walked hand in hand across the grass and was manifest in their
happiness. His love, it seemed to him, in that apocalyptic moment, was
more than merely his ; it was in some mysterious way the equivalent of
this wind and sunshine, these white gleams against the green and blue of
spring. His feeling for Joan was somehow implicit in the world, had a
divine and universal significance. He loved her infinitely, and for that
reason was able to love everything in the world as much as he loved her.

The memory of that experience was precious to him, all the more so now,
since the quality of his feelings had undergone a change. Transparent
and seemingly pure as spring water, that infinite love of his had
crystallized out, with the passage of time, into specific desires.

Et son bras et sa jambe, et sa cuisse et ses reins. Polis comme de
l'huile, onduleux comme un cygne. Passaient devant mes yeux clairvoyants
et sereins, Et son ventre et ses seins, ces grappes de ma vigne.

Ever since Anthony had first made him read the poem, those lines had
haunted his imagination ; impersonally,

214


CHAPTER XVI

at first ; but later, they had come to associate themselves, definitely,
with the image of Joan. Polis comme de Vhuile, onduleux comme un cygne.
There was no forgetting. The words had remained with him, indelibly,
like a remorse, like the memory of a crime.

They entered the station and found that there were nearly five minutes
to wait. The two young men walked slowly up and down the platform.

In an effort to lay the shameful phantom of those breasts, that
oil-smooth belly, * My m-mother likes her a 1-lot/ Brian went on at
last.

( That's very satisfactory/ said Anthony ; but felt, even as he uttered
the words, that he was rather overdoing the approval. If he fell in
love, he most certainly wouldn't take the girl to be inspected by his
father and Pauline. On approval ! But it wasn't their business to
approve—or disapprove, for that matter. Mrs. Foxe was different, of
course ; one could take her more seriously than Pauline or his father.
But, all the same, one wouldn't want even Mrs. Foxe to interfere—indeed,
he went on to reflect, would probably dislike the interference even more
intensely than other people's, just because of that superiority. For the
superiority constituted a kind of claim on one, gave her certain rights.
One wouldn't be able so easily to ignore her opinion as one could ignore
Pauline's, for example. He was very fond of Mrs. Foxe, he respected and
admired her ; but for that very reason he felt her as potentially a
menace to his freedom. For she might—indeed, if she knew it, she 215

EYELESS IN GAZA

certainly would—object to his way of looking at things. And though her
criticisms would be based on the principles of that liberal Christianity
of hers, and though, of course, such modernism was just as preposterous
and, in spite of its pretensions to being c scientific/

just as hopelessly beyond the pale of rationality as the most
ex-tragavant fetishism—

nevertheless, her words, being hers9 would carry weight, would have to
be considered.

Which was why he did his best not to place himself in the position of
having to listen to them. It was more than a year now since he had
accepted one of her invitations to come and stay with them in the
country. Dis aliter visum. But he looked forward rather nervously to his
impending encounter with her.

The train came roaring in ; and there, a minute later, they all were, at
the other end of the platform—Mr. Beavis in a grey suit, and Pauline
beside him, very large in mauve, her face apoplectically flushed by the
shadow of her mauve parasol, and behind them Mrs.

Foxe, straight and queenly, and a tall girl in a big flopping hat and a
flowered dress.

Mr. Beavis adopted for his greetings a humorously mock-heroic manner
that Anthony found particularly irritating. ' Six precious souls/ he
quoted, as he patted his son's shoulder, ' or rather only four precious
souls, but all agog to dash through thick and thin.

And what a hot dash—what a dashed hot dash 1 * he emended, twinklingly.

1 Well, Anthony.' Mrs. Foxe's voice was musically rich with affection. '
It's an age since I saw you.*

216


CHAPTER XVI

'Yes, an age.' He laughed rather uncomfortably, trying, as he did so, to
remember those elaborate reasons he had given for not accepting her
invitations. At all costs he mustn't contradict himself. Was it at
Easter or at Christmas that the necessity of working at the British
Museum had kept him in London ? He felt a touch on his arm, and thankful
for any excuse to break off the embarrassing conversation, turned
quickly away.

1 J-joan,' Brian was saying to the girl in the flowered dress, '
h-here's A-anthony.'

* Awfully glad,' he mumbled. * Heard such a lot about you from . . .'
Nice hair, he thought ; and the hazel eyes were beautifully bright and
eager. But the profile was too emphatic ; and though the lips were well
cut, the mouth was too wide. A bit dairymaidish, was his conclusion ;
and her clothes were really too homemade. He himself preferred something
rather more urban.

1 Well, lead on, Macduff,' said Mr. Beavis.

They left the station, and slowly, on the shady side of the street,
walked towards the centre of the town. Still merrily Gilpinesque, as
though (and this particularly irritated Anthony) to-day's expedition
were his first holiday jaunt for twenty years, Mr. Beavis expatiated in
waggish colloquialisms on the Oxford of his own undergraduate days. Mrs.

Foxe listened, smiled at the appropriate moments, asked pertinent
questions. Pauline complained from time to time of the heat. Her face
shone; and, walking in gloomy silence beside her,

217

EYELESS IN GAZA

Anthony remarked with distaste the rather rank intensification of her
natural odour. From behind him, he could hear snatches of the
conversation between Brian and Joan. '... a great big hawk/ she was
saying. Her speech was eager and rapid. * It must have been a harrier.*
' D-did it have b-bars on its t-t-t ... on its tail ? * ' That's it.
Dark bars on a light grey ground/ ' Th-then it was a f-female,' said
Brian. ' F-females have b-bars on their t-tails/ Anthony smiled to
himself sarcastically.

They were passing the Ashmolean, when a woman who was coming very slowly
and as though disconsolately out of the museum suddenly waved her hand
at them and, calling out first Mr. Beavis's name and then, as they all
turned round to look at her, Mrs. Foxe's, came running down the steps
towards them.

* Why, it's Mary Champernowne,' said Mrs. Foxe. ' Mary Amberley, I
should say.' Or perhaps, she reflected, should not say, now that the
Amberleys were divorced.

The name, the familiar face, evoked in Mr. Beavis's mind only a pleasant
sensation of surprised recognition. Raising his hat with a
self-consciously comic parody of an old-world flourish, * Welcome,' he
said to the new arrival. ' Welcome, dear lady/

Mary Amberley took Mrs. Foxe's hand. ' Such luck,' she exclaimed
breathlessly. Mrs.

Foxe was surprised by so much cordiality. Mary's mother was her friend ;
but Mary had always held aloof. And anyhow, since

218


CHAPTER XVI

her marriage she had moved in a world that Mrs. Foxe did not know, and
of which, on principle, she disapproved. ' Such marvellous luck 1 ' the
other repeated as she turned to Mr. Beavis.

* The luck is ours/ he said gallantly. * You know my wife, don't you ?
And the young stalwart ? ' His eyes twinkled ; the corners of his mouth,
under the moustache, humorously twitched. He laid a hand on Anthony's
arm. * The young foundation-worthy

? '

She smiled at Anthony. A strange smile, he noticed ; a crooked smile of
unparted lips that seemed as though secretly significant. ' I haven't
seen you for years,' she said. ' Not since .

. .' Not since the first Mrs. Beavis's funeral, as a matter of fact. But
one could hardly say so. * Not since you were so high ! ' And lifting a
gloved hand to the level of her eye, she measured, between the thumb and
forefinger, a space of about an inch.

Anthony laughed nervously, intimidated, even while he admired, by so
much prettiness and ease and smartness.

Mrs. Amberley shook hands with Joan and Brian; then, turning back to
Mrs. Foxe, ' I was feeling like Robinson Crusoe,' she said, explaining
that abnormal cordiality. ' Marooned.'

She lingered with a comical insistence over the long syllable. *
Absolutely maroo-ooned.

Monarch of all I surveyed/ And while they slowly walked on across St.
Giles's, she launched out into a complicated story about a stay in the
Cotswolds ; about an appointment to meet some friends on the way

219

EYELESS IN GAZA

home, at Oxford, on the eighteenth ; about her journey from Chipping
Campden ; about her punctual arrival at the meeting-place, her waiting,
her growing impatience, her rage, and finally her discovery that she had
come a day too early : it was the seventeenth. *

Too typical of me/

Everybody laughed a great deal For the story was full of unexpected
fantasies and extravagances ; and it was told in a voice that modulated
itself with an extraordinary subtlety to fit the words—a voice that knew
when to hurry breathlessly and when to drawl, when to fade out into an
inaudibility rich with unspoken implications.

Even Mrs. Foxe, who didn't particularly want to be amused—because of
that divorce—

found herself unable to resist the story.

For Mary Amberley, their laughter was like champagne; it warmed her, it
sent a tingling exhilaration through her body. They were bores, of
course ; they were philistines. But the applause even of bores and
philistines is still applause and intoxicating. Her eyes shone, her
cheeks flushed. * Too hopelessly typical of me ! * she wailed, when
their laughter had subsided ; but the gesture of despairing
self-disparagement was a caricature ; she was really proud of her
incompetence, regarded it as part of her feminine charm. ' Well,
anyhow,' she concluded, * there I was—shipwrecked. All alone on a desert
island.'

They walked for a moment in silence. The thought

220


CHAPTER XVI

that she would have to be asked to lunch was in all their minds—a
thought tinged in Mrs.

Foxe's case with vexation, in Anthony's with embarrassed desire. The
lunch was being given in his rooms; as the host, he ought to ask her.
And he wanted to ask her—violently wanted it. But what would the others
say ? Oughtn't he somehow to consult them first ?

Mr. Beavis solved the problem for him by making the suggestion on his
own account.

41 think '—he hesitated ; then, twinkling, ' I think our festal "
spread," ' he went on, * will run to another guest, won't it, Anthony ?
'

4 But I can't impose myself,' she protested, turning from the father to
the son. He seemed a nice boy, she thought, sensitive and intelligent.
Pleasant-looking too.

1 But I assure you . . .' Anthony was earnestly and incoherently
repeating, ' I assure you .

. /

( Well, if it's really all right . . .' She thanked him with a smile of
sudden intimacy, almost of complicity— as though there were some bond
between them, as though, of all the party, they two were the only ones
who understood what was what.

After lunch, Joan had to be shown the sights of Oxford ; and Mr. Beavis
had an appointment with a philological colleague in the Woodstock Road ;
and Pauline thought she would like to take tilings quietly till
tea-time. Anthony was left to entertain Mary Amberley. The
responsibility was deliciously alarming.

In the hansom that was taking them to Magdalen

211

EYELESS IN GAZA

Bridge Mrs. Amberley turned to him a face that was bright with sudden
mischief.

4 Free at last,' she said.

Anthony nodded at her and smiled back, understand-ingly,
conspiratorially. * They were rather heavy/ he said. ' Perhaps I ought
to apologize/

' I've often thought of founding a league for the abolition of
families,' she went on. '

Parents ought never to be allowed to come near their children.'

' Plato thought so too,' he said, rather pedantically.

* Yes, but he wanted children to be bullied by the state instead of by
their fathers and mothers. I don't want them to be bullied by anyone.'

He ventured a personal question. ' Were you bullied ? ' he asked.

Mary Amberley nodded. e Horribly. Few children have been more loved than
I was. They fairly bludgeoned me with affection. Made me a mental
cripple. It took me years to get over the deformity.' There was a
silence. Then, looking at him with an embarrassingly appraising glance,
as though he were for sale, ' Do you know,' she said, ' the last time I
saw you was at your mother's funeral.'

The subterranean association between this remark and what had gone
before made him blush guiltily, as though at an impropriety in mixed
company. ' Yes, I remember,' he mumbled, and was annoyed with himself
for feeling so uncomfortably embarrassed, was at the same time rather
ashamed that he had allowed even this remotely implied 222


CHAPTER XVI

comment upon his mother to pass without some kind of protest, that he
had felt so little desire to make a protest.

* You were a horrible, squalid little boy then/ she went on, still
looking at him judicially.

' How awful little boys always are ! It seems incredible that they
should ever turn into presentable human beings. And of course,' she
added, ' a great many of them don't.

Dismal, don't you find ?—the way most people are so hideous and stupid,
so utterly and abysmally boring ! '

Making a violent effort of will, Anthony emerged from his embarrassment
with a creditable dash. * I hope I'm not one of the majority ? ' he
said, lifting his eyes to hers.

Mrs. Amberley shook her head, and with a serious matter-of-factness, *
No,' she answered. * I was thinking how successfully you'd escaped from
the horrors of boyhood.'

He blushed again, this lime with pleasure.

* Let's see, how old are you now ? ' she asked,

* Twenty—nearly twenty-one/

'And I shall be thirty this winter. Queer,' she added, ' how these
things change their significance. When I saw you last, those nine years
were a great gulf between us.

Uncrossable, it seemed then. We belonged to different species. And yet
here we are, sitting on the same side of the gulf as though it were the
most natural thing in the world.

Which indeed it is, now.' She turned and smiled at him that secret and
significant smile of unparted lips. Her dark eyes were full of dancing
brightness. ( Ah, there's Magdalen,' she went on, leaving

223

EYELESS IN GAZA

him (to his great relief; for in his excited embarrassment he would not
have known what to say) no time to comment on her words. ' How dreary
that late Gothic can be ! So mean

! No wonder Gibbon didn't think much of the Middle Ages ! ' She was
suddenly silent, remembering the occasion when her husband had made that
remark about Gibbon. Only a month or two after their marriage. She had
been shocked and astonished by his airy criticisms of things she had
been brought up to regard as sacredly beyond judgment—

shocked, but also thrilled, also delighted. For what fun to see the
sacred things knocked about ! And in those days Roger was still
adorable. She sighed; then, with a touch of irritation, shook off the
sentimental mood and went on talking about that odious architecture.

The cab drew up at the bridge ; they dismounted and walked down to the
boat-house.

Lying back on the cushions of the punt, Mary Amberley was silent. Very
slowly, Anthony poled his way upstream. The green world slid past her
half-shut eyes. Green darkness of trees overarching the olive shadows
and tawny-glaucous lights of water ; and between the twilight stretches
of green vaulting, the wide gold-green meadows, islanded with elms. And
always the faint weedy smell of the river ; and the air so soft and warm
against the face that one was hardly aware any longer of the frontiers
between self and not-self, but lay there, separated by no dividing
surfaces, melting, drowsily melting into the circumambient summer.

ZZ4


CHAPTER XVI

Standing at the stern, Anthony could look down on her, as from a post of
vantage. She lay there at his feet, limp and abandoned. Handling his
long pole with an easy mastery of which he was proud, he felt, as he
watched her, exultantly strong and superior. There was no gulf between
them now. She was a woman, he a man. He lifted his trailing punt pole
and swung it forward with a movement of easy grace, of unhurried and
accomplished power. Thrust it down into the mud, tightened his muscles
against its resistance ; the punt shot forward, the end of the pole
lifted from the river-bed, trailed for a moment, then gracefully, once
more, easily, masterfully was swung forward. Suddenly she lifted her
eyelids and looked at him, with that detached appraising look that had
embarrassed him so much in the cab. His manly confidence evaporated at
once.

* My poor Anthony,' she said at last, and her face came closer, as it
were, in a sudden smile. ' It makes me hot even to look at you/

When the punt had been secured, he came forward and sat down in the
place she made, drawing her skirts away, on the cushion beside her.

' I don't suppose your father bullies you much,' she said, returning to
the theme of their conversation in the cab.

He shook his head.

1 Nor blackmails you with too much affection, I imagine.'

Anthony found himself feeling unexpectedly loyal to his father. ' I
think he was always very fond of me.'

225

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Oh, of course,' said Mrs. Amberley impatiently, * I didn't imagine he
knocked you about/

Anthony could not help laughing. The vision of his father running after
him with a club was irresistibly comic. Then, more seriously, * He never
got near enough to knock me about/ he said. * There was always a great
gulf fixed/

1 Yes, one feels he has a talent for fixing gulfs. And yet your
step-mother seems to get on with him all right. So did your mother, I
believe/ She shook her head. ' But, then, marriage is so odd and
unaccountable. The most obviously incompatible couples stick together,
and the most obviously compatible fly apart. Boring, tiresome people are
adored, and charming ones are hated. Why? God knows. But I suppose it's
generally a matter of what Milton calls the Genial Bed/ She lingered,
ludicrously, over the first syllable of * genial ' ; but Anthony was so
anxious not to seem startled by the casual mention of what he had always
regarded as, in a lady's presence, the unmentionable, that he did not
laugh —for a laugh might have been interpreted as a schoolboy's
automatic reaction to smut—did not even smile ; but gravely, as though
he were admitting the truth of a proposition in geometry, nodded his
head and in a very serious and judicial tone said,

* Yes, I suppose it generally is/

* Poor Mrs. Foxe,' Mary Amberley went on. ' I imagine there was a
minimum of geniality there/

( Did you know her husband ? ' he asked.

226


CHAPTER XVI

* Only as a child. One grown-up seems as boring as another then. But my
mother's often talked to me about him. Thoroughly beastly. And
thoroughly virtuous. God preserve me from a virtuous beast ! The vicious
ones are bad enough ; but at least they're never beastly on principle.
They're inconsistent; so they're sometimes nice by mistake. Whereas the
virtuous ones—they never forget ; they're beastly all the time. Poor
woman ! She had a dog's life, I'm afraid. But she seems to be getting it
back on her son all right.'

' But she adores Brian,' he protested. * And Brian adores her/

* That's exactly what I was saying. AU the love she never got from her
husband, all the love she never gave him—it's being poured out on that
miserable boy.'

* He isn't miserable.'

' He may not know it, perhaps. Not yet. But you wait ! ' Then, after a
little pause, ' You're lucky,' Mrs. Amberley went on. ' A great deal
luckier than you know.'

227


CHAPTER XVII

May 26th 1934

IITERATURE for peace—of what kind ? One can Ji concentrate on economics
: trade barriers, disorganized currency, impediments in the way of
migration, private interests bent on making profits at all costs. And so
on. One can concentrate on politics : danger of the concept of the
sovereign state, as a wholly immoral being having interests
irreconcilable with those of other sovereign states. One can propose
political and economic remedies—trade agreements, international
arbitration, collective security.

Sensible prescriptions following sound diagnosis. But has the diagnosis
gone far enough, and will the patient follow the treatment prescribed ?

This question came up in the course of to-day's discussion with Miller.
Answer in the negative. The patient can't follow the treatment
prescribed, for a good reason : there is no patient. States and Nations
don't exist as such. There are only people. Sets of people living in
certain areas, having certain allegiances. Nations won't change their
national policies unless and until people change their private policies.
All governments, even Hitler's, even Stalin's, even Mussolini's, are
representative. To-day's national behaviour—

a large-scale projection of to-day's individual behaviour. Or rather,
228


CHAPTER XVII

to be more accurate, a large-scale projection of the individual's secret
wishes and intentions. For we should all like to behave a good deal
worse than our conscience and respect for public opinion allow. One of
the great attractions of patriotism—it fulfils our worst wishes. In the
person of our nation we are able, vicariously, to bully and cheat.

Bully and cheat, what's more, with a feeling that we're profoundly
virtuous. Sweet and decorous to murder, lie, torture for the sake of the
fatherland. Good international policies are projections of individual
good intentions and benevolent wishes, and must be of the same kind as
good inter-personal policies. Pacifist propaganda must be aimed at
people as well as their governments ; must start simultaneously at the
periphery and the centre.

Empirical facts :

One. We are all capable of love for other human beings.

Two. We impose limitations on that love.

Three. We can transcend all these limitations—if we choose to. (It is a
matter of observation that anyone who so desires can overcome personal
dislike, class feeling, national hatred, colour prejudice. Not easy ;
but it can be done, if we have the will and know how to carry out our
good intentions.)

Four. Love expressing itself in good treatment breeds love. Hate
expressing itself in bad treatment breeds hate.

In the light of these facts, it's obvious what inter-

229

EYELESS IN GAZA

personal, inter-class and international policies should be. But, again,
knowledge cuts little ice. We all know ; we almost all fail to do. It is
a question, as usual, of the best methods of implementing intentions.
Among other things, peace propaganda must be a set of instructions in
the art of modifying character.

I see The lost are like this, and their scourge to be, As I am mine,
their sweating selves ; but worse.

Hell is the incapacity to be other than the creature one finds oneself
ordinarily behaving as.

On the way home from Miller's, dived into the public lavatory at Marble
Arch, and there ran into Beppo Bowles deep in conversation with one of
those flannel-trousered, hatless young men who look like undergraduates
and are, I suppose, very junior clerks or shop assistants. On B/s face,
what a mingling of elation and anxiety. Happy, drunk with thrilling
anticipation, and at the same time horribly anxious and afraid. He might
be turned down —unspeakable humiliation ! He might not be turned
down—appalling dangers ! Frustration of desire, if there was failure,
cruel blow to pride, wound to the very root of personality. And, if
success, fear (through all the triumph) of blackmail and police court.
Poor wretch ! He was horribly embarrassed at the sight of me. I just
nodded and hurried past. B/s hell—an underground lavatory with rows of
urinals stretching to infinity in all directions and a boy at each.
Beppo walking up and down the rows, for ever—his sweating self, but
worse,

230

:


CHAPTER XVIII

December 8th 1926

ORE guests kept arriving—young people mostly, friends of Joyce and
Helen. Dutifully, they crossed the drawing-room to the far corner where
Mrs. Amberley was sitting between Beppo Bowles and Anthony, said
good-evening, then hurried off to dance.

' They put one in one's middle-aged place all right/ said Anthony ; but
either Mrs.

Amberley preferred not to hear the remark, or else she was genuinely
absorbed in what Beppo was saying with such loud and fizzling enthusiasm
about Berlin—the most amusing place in Europe nowadays ! Where else
would you find, for example, those special tarts for masochists ? In
top-boots ; yes, genuine top-boots ! And the Museum of Sexology : such
photographs and wax models—almost too trompe-U&il—such astounding
objects in horn from Japan, such strange and ingenious tailoring for
exhibitionists ! And all those delicious little Lesbian bars, all those
cabarets where the boys were dressed up as women . . .

' There's Mark Staithes,' said Mrs. Amberley, interrupting him, and
waved to a shortish, broad-shouldered man who had just entered the
drawing-room. ' I forget,' she said, turning to Anthony, * whether you
know him.'

231

M

EYELESS IN GAZA

4 Only for the last thirty years,' he answered, finding once again a
certain malicious pleasure in insisting, to the point of exaggeration,
on his vanished youth. If he were no longer young, then Mary had ceased
to be young nine years ago.

1 But with long gaps,' he qualified. ' During the war and then
afterwards, for all that time he was in Mexico. And I've hardly had more
than a glimpse of him since he came back.

I'm delighted to have this chance . . .'

* He's a queer fish,' said Mary Amberley, thinking of the time, just
after his return from Mexico, some eighteen months before, when he had
first come to her house. His appearance, his manner, as of some savage
and fanatical hermit, had violently attracted her. She had tried all her
seductions upon him—without the smallest effect. He had ignored them—but
so completely and absolutely that she felt no ill-will towards him for
the rebuff, convinced, as she was, that in fact there hadn't been any
rebuff, merely a display of symptoms, either, she diagnosed judicially,
of impotence, or else, less probably (though of course one never knew,
one never knew), of homosexuality. * A queer fish,'

she repeated, and decided that she'd take the next opportunity of asking
Beppo about the homosexuality. He would be sure to know. They always did
know about one another.

Then, waving again, ' Come and sit with us, Mark,' she called through
the noise of the gramophone.

Staithes crossed the room, drew up a chair and sat down. His hair had
retreated from his forehead, and

232


CHAPTER XVIII

above the ears was already grey. The brown face— that fanatical hermit's
face which Mary Amberley had found so strangely attractive—was deeply
lined. No smooth obliterating layer of fat obscured its inner structure.
Under the skin each strip of muscle in the cheek and jaw seemed to stand
out distinct and separate like the muscles in those lime-wood statues of
flayed human beings that were made for Renaissance anatomy rooms. When
he smiled—and each time that happened it was as though the flayed statue
had come to life and were expressing its agony—one could follow the
whole mechanism of the excruciating grimace ; the upward and outward
pull of the zygomaticus major, the sideways tug of the risorius, the
contraction of the great sphincters round the eyelids.

' Am I interrupting ? ' he asked) looking with sharp» inquisitorial
movements from one to the other.

* Beppo was telling us about Berlin/ said Mrs. Amberley.

* I popped over to get away from the General Strike,' Beppo explained.

* Naturally,' said Staithes, and his face twitched in the anguish of
amused contempt.

' Such a heavenly place ! ' Beppo exploded irrepressibly.

* You feel like Lord Haldane about it ? Your spiritual home ? '

' Carnal,' Anthony emended.

Only too happy to plead guilty, Beppo giggled. 1 Yes, those
transvestitists ! ' he had to admit rapturously.

*33

EYELESS IN GAZA

* I was over there this winter/ said Staithes. * On business. But of
course one has to pay one's tribute to pleasure too. That night life . .
/

* Didn't you find it amusing ? * ' Oh, passionately.'

* You see ! ' Beppo was triumphant.

' One of the creatures came and sat at my table/ Staithes went on. ' I
danced with it. It looked like a woman.'

' You simply can't tell them apart/ Beppo cried excitedly, as though he
were taking personal credit for the fact.

' When we'd finished dancing, it painted its face a bit and we drank a
little beer. Then it showed me some indecent photographs. That rather
surgical, anti-aphrodisiac kind—you know. Damping. Perhaps that was why
the conversation flagged. Anyhow, there were uncomfortable silences.
Neither it nor I seemed to know what to say next. We were becalmed.' He
threw out his two thin and knotted hands horizontally, as though sliding
them across an absolutely flat surface. ' Utterly becalmed. Until,
suddenly, the creature did a most remarkable thing. One of its regular
gambits, no doubt ; but never having had it played on me before, I was
impressed. " Would you like to see something ? " it said. I said yes,
and immediately it began to poke and pull at something under its blouse.
" Now, look ! " it said at last. I looked. It smiled triumphantly, like
a man playing the ace of trumps—or rather playing two

234


CHAPTER XVIII

aces of trumps ; for what it plunked down on the table was a pair. A
pair of superb artificial breasts, made of pink rubber sponge.'

1 But how revolting ! ' cried Mrs. Amberley, while Anthony laughed and
Beppo's round face took on an expression of pained distress. * How
revolting ! ' she repeated.

' Yes, but how satisfactory ! ' Staithes insisted, making that crooked
and agonized grimace that passed with him for a smile. * It's so good
when things happen as they ought to happen—artistically, symbolically.
Two rubber breasts between the beer mugs—that's what vice ought to be.
And when that was what it actually was—well, it felt as though something
had clicked into place. Inevitably, beautifully. Yes, beautifully' he
repeated. '

Beautifully revolting.'

* All the same/ Beppo insisted, ' you must admit there's a lot to be
said for a town where that sort of thing can happen. In public,' he
added earnestly, ' in public, mind you. It's the most tolerant in the
world, the German Government. You've got to admit that.'

I Oh, I do,' said Staithes. * It tolerates everybody. Not only girls in
boiled shirts and boys with rubber breasts, but also monarchists,
fascists, Junkers, Krupps. Communists too, I'm thankful to say. All its
enemies of every colour.'

II think that's rather fine,' said Mrs. Amberley.

' Very fine indeed, until its enemies rise up and destroy it. I only
hope the communists will get in first/

*3f

EYELESS IN GAZA

1 But seeing that they're tolerated, why should its enemies want to
destroy it ? '

1 Why not ? They don't believe in tolerance. Quite rightly/ he added.

1 You're barbarous/ Beppo protested.

'As one should be if one lives in the Dark Ages. You people—you're
survivors from the Age of theAntonines.' He looked from one to the
other, smiling his flayed smile, and shook his head. ' Imagining you're
still in the first volume of Gibbon. Whereas we're well on in the third/

' Do you mean to say ... ? But, good heavens,' Mrs. Amberley interrupted
herself, ' there's Gerry 1 *

At her words, at the sight of Gerry Watchett himself, fox-trotting in
from the back drawing-room with Helen, Anthony took out his pocket-book
and quickly examined its contents. • Thank God ! ' he said. - Only two
pounds.' Gerry had caught him with ten the previous month and, on the
strength of a most improbably distressing story, borrowed them all. He
ought to have disbelieved the story, of course, ought to have withheld
the loan. Ten pounds were more than he could afford. He had said so, but
had lacked the firmness to persist in his refusal It had taken more than
a fortnight of strict economy to make up that lost money. Economizing
was an unpleasant process ; but to say no and to go on saying it in the
teeth of Gerry's importunities and reproaches would have been still more
unpleasant. He was always ready to sacrifice his rights to his
conveniences. People thought him disinterested, and he would

a36


CHAPTER XVIII

have liked, he did his best, to accept their diagnosis of his character.
But awareness of the real state of affairs kept breaking through. When
it did, he accepted self-knowledge with a laugh. He was laughing now. '
Only two/ he repeated. ' Luckily I can afford . . .'

He broke off. Behind Mary's back, Beppo had tapped him on the shoulder,
was making significant grimaces. Anthony turned and saw that she was
still staring intently and with knitted brows at the new arrivals.

1 He told me he wasn't coming this evening,' she said, almost as though
she were speaking to herself. Thçn, through the music, ' Gerry ! ' she
called sharply in a voice that had suddenly lost all its charm—a voice
that reminded Anthony only too painfully of those distasteful scenes in
which, long since, he had played his part. So that was it, he said to
himself, and felt sorry for poor Mary.

Gerry Watchett turned, and with the expression of one who refers to some
excellent shared joke gave her a quick smile and even a hint of a wink,
then looked down again to go on talking to his partner.

Mrs. Amberley flushed with sudden anger. Grinning at her like that ! It
was intolerable.

Intolerable too— but how typical !—to appear like this, unannounced, out
of the blue—

casually dancing with another woman, as though it were the most natural
thing in the world. This time, it was true, the other woman was only
Helen ; but that was merely because he hadn't found anyone else to dance
with, anyone worse. ' The beast ! ' she thought,

I 137

EYELESS IN GAZA

as she followed him round the room with her eyes. Then, making an
effort, she looked away, she forced herself to pay attention to what was
going on around her.

"... a country like this,' Mark Staithes was saying, ' a country where a
quarter of the population's genuinely bourgeois and another quarter
passionately longs to be.'

' You're exaggerating,' Anthony protested.

' Not a bit. What does die Labour Party poll at an election ? A third of
the votes. I'm generously assuming it might some day poll half of them.
The rest's bourgeois. Either naturally bourgeois by interest and fear,
or else artificially, by snobbery and imagination.

It's childish to think you can get what you want by constitutional
methods.*

1 And what about unconstitutional ones ? *

' There's a chance.'

1 Not much of a chance,' said Anthony. ' Not against the new weapons.'

' Oh, I know,' said Mark Staithes, ' I know. If they use their strength,
the middle classes can obviously win. They could win, most likely, even
without tanks and planes—just because they're potentially better
soldiers than the proletariat.'

' Better soldiers ? ' Beppo protested, thinking of those guardsmen
friends of his.

* Because of their education. A bourgeois gets anything from ten to
sixteen years of training—most of it, what's more, in a boarding school;
that's to say, in barracks.

Whereas a workman's child lives at home and

238


CHAPTER XVIII

doesn't get more than six or seven years at his day school. Sixteen
years of obedience and esprit de corps. No wonder that Waterloo was won
on the playing fields of Eton. If they'll use only half their
resources—use them ruthlessly—the game's theirs.'

4 You think they won't use their resources ? '

Mark shrugged his shoulders. ' Certainly the German republicans don't
seem ready to use theirs. And think of what happened here, during the
Strike ? Even the majority of industrialists were ready to compromise.'

' For the simple reason/ Anthony put in, * that you can't be a
successful industrialist unless you have the compromising habit. A
business isn't run by faith ; it's run by haggling.'

' Anyhow,' Mark went on, * the fact remains that the available resources
weren't used.

That's what allows one to hope that a revolution might succeed. Provided
it were carried out very quickly. For, of course, once they realized
they were seriously in danger, they'd forget their scruples. But they
might hesitate long enough, I think, to make a revolution possible. Even
a few hours of compunction would be sufficient. Yes, in spite of tanks,
there's still a chance of success. But you must be prepared to take a
chance. Not like the imbeciles of the T.U.C. Or the rank and file of the
Unions, for that matter. As full of scruples as the bourgeoisie. It's
the hang-over of evangelical Christianity. You've no idea what a lot of
preaching and hymn-singing there was during the General Strike. I was
flabbergasted. But it's

239

EYELESS IN GAZA

good to know the worst. Perhaps the younger generation ...' He shook his
head. ( But I don't feel certain even of them. Methodism may be
decaying. But look at those spiritualist chapels that are sprouting up
all over the industrial areas ! Like toadstools/

The next tifne he passed, Gerry called her name ; but Mary Amberley
refused to acknowledge his greeting. Turning coldly away she pretended
to be interested only in what Anthony was saying.

* Ass of a woman ! ' thought Gerry, as he looked at her averted face.
Then, aloud, ' What do you say to putting on this record another time ?
' he asked his partner.

Helen nodded ecstatically.

The music of the spheres, the beatific vision . . . But why should
heaven be a monopoly of ear or eye ? The muscles as they move, they too
have their paradise. Heaven is not only an illumination and a harmony ;
it is also a dance.

' Haifa tick,' said Gerry, when they were opposite the gramophone.

Helen stood there as he wound up the machine, quite still, her arms
hanging limp at her sides. Her eyes were closed; she was shutting the
world away from her, shutting herself out of existence. In this still
vacancy between two heavens of motion, existence was without a point.

The music stopped for a moment ; then began again in the middle of a
bar. Behind her closed eyelids, she

240


CHAPTER XVIII

was aware that Gerry had moved, was standing over her, very near ; then
his arm encircled her body.

1 Onward, Christian soldiers ! ' he said ; and they stepped out once
more into the music, into the heaven of harmoniously moving muscles.

There had been a silence. Determined not to pay any attention to that
beast, Mrs.

Amberley turned to Staithes. ' And those scents of yours ? ' she asked
with an assumption of bright, amused interest.

8 Flourishing/ he answered. * I've had to order three new stills and
take on more labour/

Mrs. Amberley smiled at him and shook her head. ' You of all people ! '
she said. * It seems peculiarly ridiculous that you should be a
scent-manufacturer.'

'Why?'

* The most unfrivolous of men,' she went on, ' the least gallant, the
most implacable misogynist ! ' (Either impotent or homosexual—there
couldn't be a doubt; and, after his story about Berlin, almost certainly
impotent, she thought.)

With a smile of excruciated mockery, ' But hasn't it occurred to you,'
Staithes asked, ' that those might be reasons for being a scent-maker ?
'

' Reasons ? '

' A way of expressing one's lack of gallantry/ In point of fact, it was
entirely by chance that he had gone into the scent business. His eye had
been caught by an advertisement in the Times, a small factory for sale
very

241

EYELESS IN GAZA

cheap.... Just luck. But now, after the event, it heightened his
self-esteem to say that he had chosen the profession deliberately, in
order to express his contempt for the women for whom he catered. The
lie, which he had willed and by this time half believed to be the truth,
placed him in a position of superiority to all women in general and, at
this moment, to Mary Amberley in particular. Leaning forward, he took
Mary's hand, raised it as though he were about to kiss it, but, instead,
only sniffed at the skin—then let it fall again. ' For example,' he
said, 1 there's civet in the stuff you've scented yourself with/

* Well, why not ? '

1 Oh, no reason at all,' said Staithes, * no reason at all, if you
happen to have a taste for the excrement of polecats.'

Mrs. Amberley made a grimace of disgust.

* In Abyssinia,' he went on, ' they have civet farms. Twice a week, you
take a stick and go and poke the cats until they're thoroughly angry and
frightened. That's when they secrete their stuff. Like children wetting
their knickers when they're afraid. Then you catch them with a pair of
tongs, so that they can't bite, and scrape out the contents of the
little pouch attached to their genital organs. You do it with an
egg-spoon and the stuff's a kind of yellow grease, rather like ear-wax.
Stinks like hell when it's undiluted. We get it in London packed in
buffalo horns. Huge cornucopias full of dark brown stinking ear-wax. At
a hundred and seventeen shillings the ounce, what's more. That's one of
the reasons why

242


CHAPTER XVIII

your scent costs you so much. The poor can't afford to smear themselves
with cat's mess.

They have to be content with plain iso-eugenol and phenyl acetic
aldehyde/

Colin and Joyce had stopped dancing and were sitting on the landing
outside the drawing-room door. Alone. It was Colin's opportunity for
releasing some of the righteous indignation that had been accumulating
within him, ever since dinner-time.

' I must say, Joyce/ he began, ' some of your mother's guests . . .*

Joyce looked at him with eyes in which there was anxiety as well as
adoration. * Yes, I know/ she apologized. '1 know/ and was abjectly in a
hurry to agree with him about Beppo's degeneracy and Anthony Beavis's
cynicism. Then, seeing that he was enjoying his indignation and that she
herself rather profited than suffered by it, she even volunteered the
information diat that man who had come in last and was sitting with her
mother was a Bolshevik. Yes, Mark Staithes was a Bolshevik.

The phrase that Colin had been meditating all the evening found
utterance. ' I may be stupid and all that/ he said with an assumption of
humility that cloaked an overweening self-satisfaction in what he
regarded as the quite extraordinary quality of his ordinariness

; * I may be ignorant and badly educated ; but at least ' (his tone
changed, he was proudly giving expression to his consciousness of being
uniquely average),( at least I know—

well, I do know what's done. I mean, if one's a gentleman.9

M3

EYELESS IN GAZA

He underlined the words to make them sound slightly comic and so prove
that he had a sense of humour. To speak seriously of what one took
seriously—this, precisely, was one of the things that wasn't done. That
touch of humour proved more cogently than any emphasis could do, any
emotional trembling of the voice, that he did take these things
seriously—as a uniquely average gentleman must take them. And of course
Joyce understood that he did. She glanced at him worshippingly and
pressed his hand.

Dancing, dancing . . . Oh, if only, thought Helen, one could go on
dancing for ever ! If only one didn't have to spend all that time doing
other things ! Wrong things, mostly, stupid things, things one was sorry
for after they were done. Dancing, she lost her life in order to save
it; lost her identity and became something greater than herself; lost
her perplexities and self-hatreds in a bright harmonious certitude ;
lost her bad character and was made perfect; lost the regretted past,
the apprehended future, and gained a timeless present of consummate
happiness. She who could not paint, could not write, could not even sing
in tune, became while she danced an artist ; no, more than an artist ;
became a god, the creator of a new heaven and a new earth, a creator
rejoicing in his creation and finding it good.

1 " Yes, sir, she's my baby. No, sir...'" Gerry broke off his humming. '
I won sixty pounds at poker last night,' he said. ' Pretty good, eh ? '

244


CHAPTER XVIII

She smiled up at him and nodded in a rapturous silence. Good,
good—everything was wonderfully good.

1 And I can't tell you/ Staithes was saying, ' how intensely I enjoy
writing those advertisements/ The muscles in his face were working as
though for an anatomical demonstration. ' The ones about bad breath and
body odours/

' Hideous ! ' Mrs. Amberley shuddered. ' Hideous ! There's only one
Victorian convention I appreciate, and that's the convention of not
speaking about those things/

' Which is precisely why it's such fun to speak about them,' said
Staithes, beaming at her between contracted sphincters. * Forcing humans
to be fully, verbally conscious of their own and other people's
disgustingness. That's the beauty of this kind of advertising. It shakes
them into awareness/

1 And into buying,' put in Anthony. ' You're forgetting the profits/

Staithes shrugged his shoulders. ' They're incidental,' he said ; and it
was obvious, Anthony reflected, as he watched him, it was obvious that
the man was telling the truth.

For him, the profits were incidental. ' Breaking down your protective
convention,' he went on, turning again to Mary, ' that's the real fun.
Leaving you defenceless against the full consciousness of the fact that
you can't do without your fellow humans, and that, when you're with
them, they make you sick/

i* MS


CHAPTER XIX

July yth 1912

RS. FOXE was looking through her engagement book. The succession of
committee meetings, of district visi tings, of afternoons at the
cripples' playroom, darkened the pages. And in between whiles there
would be calls, and tea at the vicarage and luncheon-parties in London.
And yet (she knew it in advance) the total effect of the coming summer
would be one of emptiness. However tightly crammed with activity, time
always seemed strangely empty when Brian was away. In other years there
had been a wedge of well-filled time each summer. But this July, after
only a week or two at home, Brian was going to Germany. To learn the
language. It was essential. She knew that he had to go ; she earnestly
wanted him to go. All the same, when the moment actually came for his
departure, it was painful. She wished she could be frankly selfish and
keep him at home.

' This time to-morrow,' she said, when Brian came into the room, '
you'll be driving across London to Liverpool Street/

He nodded without speaking and, laying a hand on her shoulder, bent down
and kissed her.

Mrs. Foxe looked up at him and smiled. Then, for-

246

M


CHAPTER XIX

getting for a moment that she had vowed not to say anything to him about
her feelings, '

It'll be a sadly empty summer, I'm afraid/ she said ; and immediately
reproached herself for having brought that expression of distress to his
face ; reproached herself even while, with a part of her being, she
rejoiced to find him so respons-ively loving, so sensitively concerned
with her feelings. * Unless you fill it with your letters,' she added by
way of qualification. ' You will write, won't you ? *

4 Of c-c-c . . . N-naturally, I'll wr-write.'

Mrs. Foxe proposed a walk ; or what about a little drive in the dogcart?
Embarrassed, Brian looked at his watch.

' But I'm 1-lunching with the Th-Thursleys/ he answered uncomfortably. '
There w-wouldn't be much t-t-t . . . much leisure ' (how he hated these
ridiculous circumlocutions

!) ' for a drive.'

' But how silly of me ! ' cried Mrs. Foxe. ' I'd quite forgotten your
lunch.' It was true that she had forgotten ; and this sudden, fresh
realization that for long hours, on this last day, she would have to do
without him was like a wound. She made an effort to prevent any sign of
the pain she felt from appearing on her face or sounding in her voice. '
But there'll be time at least for a stroll in the garden, won't there ?
'

They walked out through the French window and down the long green alley
between the herbaceous borders. It was a sunless day, but warm, almost
sultry. Under the grey sky the flowers took on a brilliance that

247

EYELESS IN GAZA

seemed somehow almost unnatural. Still silent, they turned at the end of
the alley and walked back again.

1 I'm glad it's Joan/ said Mrs. Foxe at last ; * and Fm glad you care so
much. Though in a way it's a pity you met her when you did. Because, Fm
afraid, it'll be such a weary long time before you'll be able to get
married.'

Brian nodded without speaking.

' It'll be a testing time,' she went on. ' Difficult ; not altogether
happy perhaps. All the same ' (and her voice vibrated movingly), ' I'm
glad it happened, I'm glad, she repeated. '

Because I believe in love.' She believed in it, as the poor believe in a
heaven of posthumous comfort and glory, because she had never known it.
She had respected her husband, admired him for his achievements, had
liked him for what was likeable in him, and, maternally, had pitied him
for his weaknesses. But there had been no transfiguring passion, and his
carnal approach had always remained for her an outrage, hardly
supportable. She had never loved him. That was why her belief in love's
reality was so strong. Love had to exist in order that the unfavourable
balance of her own personal experience might be at least vicariously
redressed. Besides, there were the attestations of the poets ; it did
exist and was wonderful, holy, a revelation. ' It's a kind of special
grace,* she went on, * sent by God to help us, to make us stronger and
better, to deliver us from evil. Saying no to the worst is easy when one
has said yes to the best.'

Easy, Brian was thinking in the ensuing silence, even

248


CHAPTER XIX

when one hasn't said yes to the best. The woman who had come and sat at
their table in the Café-Concert, when Anthony and he were learning
French at Grenoble, two years before—it hadn't been difficult to resist
that temptation.

' Tu as l'air bien vicieux, she had said to him in the first entr'acte ;
and to Anthony, * //

doit être terrible avec les femmes, hein ? ' Then she had suggested that
they should come home with her. * Tous les deux, j'ai une petite amie.
Nous nous amuserons bien gentiment. On vous fera voir des choses drôles.
Toi qui es si vicieux—ça t'amusera.9

No, that certainly hadn't been difficult to resist, even though he had
never set eyes on Joan at the time. The real temptations were not the
worst, but the best. At Grenoble, it had been the best in literature. Et
son ventre, et ses seins, ces grappes de ma vigne. . . .

Elle se coula à mon côté, m'appela des noms les plus tendres et des noms
les plus effroyablement grossiers, qui glissaient sur ses lèvres en
suaves murmures. Puis elle se tût et commença à me donner ces baisers
quelle savait. . . . The creations of the best stylists had proved to be
far more dangerously attractive, far less easily resistible than the
sordid realities of the Café-Concert. And now that he had said yes to
the best possible reality, the appeal of the worst was even less
effective, had ceased altogether to be anything remotely resembling a
temptation. Such temptation as there was came once more from the best.
It had been impossible to desire the low, vulgar, half-animal creature
of the Café-Concert, But Joan was beautiful, Joan was

249

EYELESS IN GAZA

refined, Joan shared his interests—and precisely for those reasons was
desirable. Just because she was the best (and this for him was the
paradox that it was so painful and bewildering to live through), he
desired her in the wrong way, physically. . . .

* Do you remember those lines of Meredith's ? ' said Mrs. Foxe, breaking
the silence.

Meredith was one of her favourite authors. ' From the Woods] she
specified, affectionately abbreviating the title of the poem almost to a
nickname. And she quoted : 1 " Love, the great volcano, flings Fires of
lower earth to sky."

Love's a kind of philosopher's stone,' she went on. ' Not only does it
deliver us ; it also transforms. Dross into gold. Earth into heaven/

Brian nodded affirmatively. And yet, he was thinking, those voluptuous
and faceless bodies created by the stylists had actually come to assume
Joan's features. In spite of love, or just because of it, the succubi
now had a name, a personality.

The stable clock struck twelve ; and at the first stroke there was a
noiseless explosion of doves, like snowflakes whirling up against the
clotted darkness of the elms beyond.

* The beauty of it ! * said Mrs. Foxe with a kind of muted intensity.

But suppose, it suddenly occurred to Brian, suppose she were suddenly
left with no money at all ? And if

250


CHAPTER XIX

Joan were as poor as that wretched woman at Grenoble, as hopelessly
without an alternative resource ?

Slowly the last bell note expired, and one by one the whirling doves
dropped back on to their turreted cote above the clock.

' Perhaps,* said Mrs. Foxe, ' you ought to be starting if you're going
to get there punctually/

Brian knew how reluctant his mother was to let him go ; and this display
of generosity produced in him a sense of guilt and, along with it (since
he did not want to feel guilty), a certain resentment. c B-but I d-don't
need an hour/ he said almost angrily, ' to c-cycle three m-miles.'

A moment later he was feeling ashamed of himself for the note of
irritation in his voice, and for the rest of the time he was with her he
showed himself more than ordinarily affectionate.

At half-past twelve he took his bicycle and rode over to the Thursleys*.
The maid opened the nineteenth-century Gothic front door and he stepped
into a faint smell of steamed pudding flavoured with cabbage. As usual.
The vicarage always smelt of steamed pudding and cabbage. It was a
symptom, he had discovered, of poverty and, as such, gave him a feeling
of moral discomfort, as though he had done something wrong and were
suffering from an uneasy conscience.

He was ushered into the drawing-room. Behaving as if he were some very
distinguished old lady, Mrs. Thursley rose from her writing-table and
advanced to 25»

EYELESS IN GAZA

meet him. ' Ah, dear Brian ! ' she cried. Her professionally Christian
smile was pearly with the flash of false teeth. ' So nice to see you ! '
She took and held his hand. 'And your dear mother—how's she? Sad because
you're going to Germany, I'm sure. We're all sad, if it comes to that.
You've got such a gift for making people miss you,' she continued in the
same complimentary strain, while Brian blushed and fidgeted in an agony
of discomfort. Saying nice things to people's faces, particularly to the
faces of the rich, the influential, the potentially useful, was a habit
with Mrs. Thursley. A Christian habit she would have called it, if she
had been pressed for an explanation. Loving one's neighbour; seeing the
good in everybody ; creating an atmosphere of sympathy and trust. But
below the level of the avowal, almost below the level of consciousness,
she knew that most people were greedy for flattery, however outrageous,
and were prepared, in one way or another, to pay for it.

* Ah, but here's Joan,' she cried, interrupting her praise of him, and
added, in a tone that was charged with sprightly meaning, ' You won't
want to go on talking with her tiresome old mother—will he, Joanie ? '

The two young people looked at one another in a speechless
embarrassment.

The door suddenly flew open and Mr. Thursley hurried into the room. *
Look at this ! ' he cried in a voice that trembled with rage, and held
out a glass inkpot. ' How do you expect me to do my work with an

252


CHAPTER XIX

eighth of an inch of sediment? Dipping, dipping, dipping the whole
morning. Never able to write more than two words at a time. . . .*

' Here's Brian, Daddy,' said Joan in the hope, which she knew in advance
was vain, that the stranger's presence might shame him into silence.

His pointed nose still white with rage, Mr. Thursley glared at Brian,
shook hands and, turning away, at once went on with his angry complaint.
* It's always like that in this house. How can one be expected to do
serious work ? '

6 Oh, God,' Joan inwardly prayed, * make him stop, make him shut up.'

' As if he couldn't fill the pot himself ! ' Brian was thinking. ' Why
doesn't she tell him so ? '

But it was impossible for Mrs. Thursley to say or even think anything of
the kind. He had his sermons, his articles in the Guardian^ his studies
in Neo-Platonism. How could he be expected to fill his own ink-pot? For
her as well as for him it was obvious, it had become, after these five
and twenty years of abjectly given and unreflectingly accepted slavery,
completely axiomatic that he couldn't do such a thing. Besides, if she
were to suggest in any way that he wasn't perfectly right, his anger
would become still more violent.

Goodness only knew what he mightn't do or say—in front of Brian ! It
would be awful.

She began to make excuses for the empty ink-pot. Abject excuses on her
own behalf, on Joan's, on her servants'. Her tone was at once depre-253

EYELESS IN GAZA

catory and soothing; she spoke as though she were dealing with a mixture
between Jehovah and a very savage dog that might bite at any moment.

The gong—the Thursleys had a gong that would have been audible from end
to end of a ducal mansion—rumbled up to a thunderous fortissimo that
reduced even the vicar to silence. But as the sound ebbed, he began
again.

1 It's not as though I asked for very much/ he said.

' He'll be quieter when he's had something to eat,* Mrs. Thursley
thought, and led the way into the dining-room, followed by Joan. Brian
wanted the vicar to precede him; but even in his righteous anger Mr.
Thursley remembered his good manners. Laying his hand on Brian's
shoulder, he propelled him towards the door, keeping up all the time a
long-range bombardment of his wife.

* Only a little quiet, only the simplest material conditions for doing
my work. The barest minimum. But I don't get it. The house is as noisy
as a railway station, and my ink-pot's neglected till I have nothing but
a little black mud to write with.'

Under the bombardment, Mrs. Thursley walked as though shrunken and with
bowed head. But Joan, Brian noticed, had gone stiff; her body was rigid
and ungraceful with excess of tension.

In the dining-room they found the two boys, Joan's younger brothers,
already standing behind their chairs. At the sight of them, Mr. Thursley
reverted from his ink-pot to the noise in the house. * Like a railway

*54


CHAPTER XIX

station/ he repeated, and the righteous indignation flared up in him
with renewed intensity, * George and Arthur have been rushing up and
down the stairs and round the garden the whole morning. Why can't you
keep them in order ? '

They were all at their places now ; Mrs. Thursley at one end of the
table, her husband at the other ; the two boys on her left ; Joan and
Brian on her right. They stood there, waiting for the vicar to say
grace.

* Like hooligans,' said Mr. Thursley ; the flames of wrath ran through
him ; he was filled with a tingling warmth, horribly delicious. ' Like
savages.'

Making an effort, he dropped his long cleft chin on his chest and was
silent. His nose was still deathly pale with anger ; like marine animals
in an aquarium, the nostrils contracted and expanded in a pulse of
regular but fluttering movement. In his right hand he still held the
ink-pot.

' Benedictus benedicaty per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum? he said at
last in his praying voice, which was deep, with the suspicion of a
tremolo, and charged with transcendental significance.

With the noise of pent-up movement suddenly released, they all sat down.

1 Screaming and howling,' said Mr. Thursley, reverting from the tone of
piety to his original shrill harshness. * How am I expected to do my
work ? ' With an indignant bang, he put the ink-pot down on the table in
front of him, then unfolded his napkin.

EYELESS IN GAZA

At the other end of the table Mrs. Thursley was cutting up the mock duck
with an extraordinary rapidity.

c Pass that to your father,' she said to the nearest boy. It was
essential to get him eating as soon as possible.

A second or two later the parlour-maid was offering Mr. Thursley the
vegetable. Her apron and cap were stiff with starch and she was as well
drilled as a guardsman. The vegetable dishes were hideous, but had been
expensive ; the spoons were of heavy Victorian silver. With them, the
vicar helped himself first to boiled potatoes, then to cabbage, mashed
and moulded into damp green bricks.

Still indulging himself in the luxury of anger, ' Women simply don't
understand what serious work is,' Mr. Thursley went on ; then started
eating.

When she had helped the others to their mock duck, Mrs. Thursley
ventured a remark. *

Brian's just off to Germany,' she said.

Mr. Thursley looked up, chewing his food very rapidly with his front
teeth, like a rabbit. '

What part of Germany ? ' he asked, darting a sharp inquisitorial look at
Brian. His nose had flushed again to its normal colour.

' M-marburg/

* Where there's the university ? '

Brian nodded.

Startlingly, with a noise like coke being poured down a chute, Mr.
Thursley burst out laughing. * Don't take to beer-drinking with the
students,' he said.

256


CHAPTER XIX

The storm was over. In part out of the thankfulness of her heart, in
part to make her husband feel that she had found his joke irresistible,
Mrs. Thursley also laughed. ' Oh, no,' she cried, ' don't take to that !
*

Brian smiled and shook his head.

' Water or soda-water ? ' the parlour-maid asked confidentially,
creaking with starch and whalebone as she bent over him.

* W-water, please.'

After lunch, when the vicar had returned to his study, Mrs. Thursley
suggested, in her bright, embarrassingly significant way, that the two
young people should go for a walk.

The ogival front door slammed behind them. Like a prisoner at last
restored to liberty, Joan drew a deep breath.

The sky was still overcast, and beneath the low ceiling of grey cloud
the air was soft and as though limp with fatigue, as though weary with
the burden of too much summer. In the woods, into which they turned from
the high-road, the stillness was oppressive, like the intentional
silence of sentient beings, pregnant with unavowed thoughts and hidden
feelings. An invisible tree-creeper started to sing ; but it was as if
the clear bright sound were coming from some other time and place. They
walked on hand in hand ; and between them was the silence of the wood
and at the same time the deeper, denser, more secret silence of their
own unexpressed emotions. The silence of the complaints she was too
loyal to utter and the pity that, unless she

257

EYELESS IN GAZA

complained, it would, he felt, be insulting for him to put into words ;
her longing for the comfort of his arms and those desires he did not
wish to feel.

Their path led them between great coverts of rhododendrons, and suddenly
they were in a narrow cleft, hemmed in by high walls of the
impenetrable, black-green foliage. It was a solitude within a solitude,
the image of their own private silence visibly hollowed out of the
greater stillness of the wood.

' Almost f-frightening,' he whispered, as they stood there
listening—listening (for there was nothing else for them to hear) to
their own heart-beats and each other's breathing and all the words that
hung unspoken between them.

All at once, she could bear it no longer, ' When I think of what it'll
be like at home .. /

The complaint had uttered itself, against her will. ' Oh, I wish you
weren't going, Brian ! '

Brian looked at her and, at the sight of those trembling lips, those
eyes bright with tears, he felt himself as it were disintegrated by
tenderness and pity. Stammering her name, he put his arm about her. Joan
stood for a little while quite still, her head bent, her forehead
resting on his shoulder. The touch of her hair was electric against his
lips, he breathed its perfume. All at once, as though waking from sleep,
she stirred into motion and, drawing a little away from him, looked up
into his face. Her regard had a desperate, almost inhuman fixity.

* Darling,' he whispered.

2S8


CHAPTER XIX

Joan's only answer was to shake her head.

But why ? What was she denying, what implication of his endearment was
she saying no to ? ' But J-joan . . . ? ' There was a note of anxiety in
his voice.

Still she did not answer ; only looked at him and once more slowly shook
her head. How many negations were expressed in that single movement !
The refusal to complain; the denial for herself of the possibility of
happiness ; the sad insistence that all her love and all his availed
nothing against the pain of absence ; the resolution not to exploit his
pity, not to elicit, however much she longed for it, another, a more
passionate avowal....

Suddenly, he took her face between his hands and, stooping, kissed her
on the mouth.

But this was what she had resolved not to extort from him, this was the
gesture that could avail nothing against her inevitable unhappiness !
For a second or two she stiffened her body in resistance, tried to shake
her head again, tried to draw back. Then, vanquished by a longing
stronger than herself, she was limp in his arms ; the shut, resisting
lips parted and were soft under his kisses ; her eyelids closed, and
there was nothing left in the world but his mouth and the thin hard body
pressed against her own.

Fingers stirred the hair above the nape of her neck, slid round to the
throat and dropped to her breast. The strength went out of her, she felt
herself sinking deeper and deeper into that mysterious other world,
behind her eyelids, into the sightless universe of touch.

159

EYELESS IN GAZA

Then, without warning, as though in precipitate obedience to some
inaudible word of command, he broke away from her. For an instant she
thought she was going to fall ; but the strength came back to her knees,
just in time. She swayed unsteadily, then recovered her balance, and
with it the consciousness of the outrage he had inflicted upon her. She
had leaned upon him with her whole being, soul as well as body, and he
had allowed her to fall, had withdrawn his lips and arms and chest and
left her suddenly cold and horribly exposed, defenceless and as if
naked. She opened hurt, reproachful eyes and saw him standing there pale
and strangely furtive ; he met her glance for a moment, then averted his
face.

Her resentful sense of outrage gave place to anxiety. ( What is it,
Brian ? '

He looked at her for a moment, then turned away again. * Perhaps we'd
better go home,'

he said in a low voice.

It was a day late in September. Under a pale blue sky the distances were
mournful, were exquisitely tender with faint mist. The world seemed
remote and unactual, like a memory or an ideal.

The train came to a standstill. Brian waved to the solitary porter, but
he himself, nevertheless, got out with the heaviest of the suit-cases.
By straining his muscles he found that he was able to relieve his
conscience of some of the burden that the ability to buy a poor man's
services tended, increasingly as he grew older, to impose upon it.

260


CHAPTER XIX

The porter came running up and almost snatched the bag out of Brian's
hand. He too had his conscience. 1 You leave that to me, sir,' he said,
almost indignantly.

1 T-two more in the c-c-c . . . inside,' he emended, long after the
porter had stepped into the unpronounceable compartment to collect the
remaining pieces. ' Sh-.shall I give a hand ? ' he offered. The man was
old —forty years older than himself, Brian calculated ; white-haired and
wrinkled, but called him ' sir,' but carried his bags and would be
grateful for a shilling. ' Sh-shall I ... ? '

The old porter did not even answer, but swung the suit-cases down from
the rack, taking evident pride in his well-directed strength.

A touch on his shoulder made Brian turn sharply round. The person who
had touched him was Joan.

' In the king's name ! ' she said ; but the laughter behind her words
was forced, and there was an expression in her eyes of anxiety—the
accumulated anxiety of weeks of bewildered speculation. All those queer,
unhappy letters he had written from Germany—

they had left her painfully uncertain what to think, how to feel, what
to expect of him when he came back. In his letters, it was true, he had
reproached only himself—with a violence for whose intensity she was
unable to account. But to the extent that she was responsible for what
had happened in the wood (and of course she was partly responsible

; why not ? what was so wrong with just a kiss ?), she felt that the
reproaches were also addressed to her. And if he

261

EYELESS IN GAZA

reproached her, could he still love her ? What did he really feel about
her, about himself, about their relations to one another ? It was
because she simply couldn't wait an unnecessary minute for the answer
that she had come, surreptitiously, to meet him at the station.

Brian stood there speechless ; he had not expected to see her so soon,
and was almost dismayed at thus finding himself, without preparation, in
her presence. Automatically, he held out his hand. Joan took it and
pressed it in her own, hard, hard, as if hoping to force the reality of
her love upon him ; but even while doing so, she swayed away from him in
her apprehension, her embarrassed uncertainty of what he might have
become, swayed away as she would have done from a stranger.

The grace of that shy, uneasy movement touched him as poignantly as it
had touched him at their first meeting. It was the grace, in spite of
the embarrassment that the movement expressed, of a young tree in the
wind. That was how he had thought of it then. And now it had happened
again ; and the beauty of the gesture was again a revelation, but more
poignant than it had been the first time, because of its implication
that he was once again an alien ; but an alien, against whose renewed
strangeness the pressure on his hand protested, almost violently.

Her face, as she looked up into his, seemed to waver ; and suddenly that
artificial brightness was quenched in profound apprehension.

1 Aren't you glad to see me, Brian ? * she asked.

262


CHAPTER XIX

Her words broke a spell ; he was able to smile again, able to speak. '
G-glad ? ' he repeated ; and, for answer, kissed her hand. ' But I
didn't th-think you'd be here. It almost g-gave me a fright/

His expression reassured her. During those first seconds of silence, his
still, petrified face had seemed the face of an enemy. Now, by that
smile, he was transfigured, was once more the old Brian she had loved ;
so sensitive, so kind and good; and so beautiful in his goodness,
beautiful in spite of that long, queer face, that lanky body, those
loose, untidily moving limbs.

Noisily, the train started, gathered speed and was gone. The old porter
walked away to fetch a barrow. They were alone at the end of the long
platform.

11 thought you didn't love me,' she said after a long silence.

( But, J-joan ! ' he protested. They smiled at one another ; then, after
a moment, he looked away. Not love her ? he was thinking. But the
trouble was that he loved her too much, loved her in a bad way, even
though she was the best.

* I thought you were angry with me.'

* But why sh-should I be ? ' His face was still averted*

* You know why.'

11 wasn't a-angry with you.9

' But it was my fault.'

Brian shook his head. ' It w-wasn't/

' It was,' she insisted.

At the thought of what his sensations had been as he

263

EYELESS IN GAZA

held her there, in the dark cleft between the rhododendron coverts, he
shook his head a second time, more emphatically.

The old porter was there again with his barrow and his comments on the
weather, his scraps of news and gossip. They followed him, playing for
his benefit their parts as supernumerary characters in the local drama.

When they were almost at the gate, Joan laid a hand on Brian's arm. '
It's all right, isn't it

? ' Their eyes met. ' I'm allowed to be happy ? '

He smiled without speaking and nodded.

In the dogcart on the way to the house he kept remembering the sudden
brightening of her face in response to that voiceless gesture of his.
And all he could do to repay her for so much love was to ... He thought
of the rhododendron coverts again and was overcome with shame.

When she learned from Brian that Joan had been at the station, Mrs. Foxe
felt a sharp pang of resentment. By what right ? Before his own mother .
. . And besides, what bad faith ! For Joan had accepted her invitation
to come to lunch the day after Brian's return.

Which meant that she had tacitly admitted Mrs. Foxe's exclusive right to
him on the day itself. But here she was, stealing surreptitiously to the
station to catch him as he stepped out of the train. It was almost
dishonest.

Mrs. Foxe's passion of indignant jealousy lasted only a few seconds ;
its very intensity accelerated her recognition of its wrongness, its
unworthiness. No sign of what 264


CHAPTER XIX

she felt had appeared on her face, and it was with a smile of amused
indulgence diat she listened to Brian's vaguely stammered account of the
meeting. Then, with a strong eifort of the will, she not only shut off
the expression of her emotion, but even excluded the emotion itself from
her consciousness. All that, as it seemed, an impersonal regard for
right conduct justified her in still feeling was a certain regretful
disapproval of Joan's—

how should she put it?—disingenuousness. For the girl to have stolen
that march upon her was not quite right.

Not quite right ; but still very understandable, she now went on to
reflect, very excusable.

When one's in love . . . And Joan's was an impulsive, emotional
character. Which had its fortunate side, Mrs. Foxe reflected. The
impulses were as strong towards right as towards wrong. If one could
canalize that deep and powerful stream of life within her, if one could
make the right appeal to what was best in her, if one could confirm her
in those fine and generous aspirations of hers—why, she would be a
splendid person. Splendid, Mrs.

Foxe insisted to herself.

* Well,* she said next day, when Joan came over to lunch, ' I hear you
caught our migrant on the wing before he'd even had time to settle.' The
tone was playful, there was a charming smile on Mrs. Foxe's face. But
Joan blushed guiltily.

' You didn't mind, did you ? * she asked.

' Mind ? ' Mrs. Foxe repeated. ' But, my dear, why should I? I only
thought we'd agreed on to-day.

265

EYELESS IN GAZA

But, of course, if you felt you absolutely couldn't wait...'

* I'm sorry,' said Joan, But something that was almost hatred mounted
hot within her.

Mrs. Foxe laid her hand affectionately on the girl's shoulder. ' Let's
stroll out into the garden,' she suggested, ' and see if Brian's
anywhere about/

266


CHAPTER XX

December 8th 1926

TIPTOEING out of the back drawing-room, Hugh Ledwidge had hoped to find
the refreshment of a little solitude ; but on the landing he was caught
by Joyce and Colin.

And Colin, it appeared, was tremendously keen on natives, had always
been anxious to talk to a professional ethnologist about his experiences
on shikar. For nearly half an hour he had to listen, while the young man
poured out his illiterate nonsense about India and Uganda. An immense
fatigue overwhelmed him. His one desire was to escape, to get away from
this parrot house of stupid chatter, back to delicious silence and a
book.

They left him, thank God, at last, and drawing a deep breath, he braced
himself for the final ordeal of leave-taking. That saying good-bye at
the end of an evening was one of the things Hugh most intensely
disliked. To have to expose yourself yet once more to personal contact,
to be compelled, weary as you were and thirsty for solitude, to grin
again and gibber and make yet another effort of hypocrisy—how odious
that could be !

Particularly with Mary Amberley. There were evenings when the woman
simply wouldn't allow you to say good-bye, but clung to you desperately,
as though she 267

EYELESS IN GAZA

were drowning. Questions, confidences, scabrous discussions of people's
love-affairs—

anything to keep you a few minutes longer. She seemed to regard each
successive departure of a guest as the death of a fragment of her own
being. His heart sank as he made his way across the room towards her. '
Damned woman ! ' he thought, and positively hated her; hated her, as
well as for all the other reasons, because Helen was still dancing with
that groom; and now with a fresh access of malevolence, because, as he
suddenly perceived through the mists of his dim sight, Staithes and that
man Beavis were sitting with her. All his insane thoughts about the plot
came rushing back into his mind.

They had been talking about him, him and the fire-escape, him on the
football field, him when they threw the slippers over the partition of
his cubicle. For a moment, he thought of turning back and slipping out
of the house without a word; But they had seen him coming, they would
suspect the reason of his flight, they would laugh all the louder. His
common sense returned to him, it was all nonsense, there was no plot.
How could there be a plot ? And even if Beavis did remember, what reason
had he to talk ? But all the same, all the same . . . Squaring his
narrow shoulders, Hugh Ledwidge marched resolutely towards the
anticipated ambush.

To his immense relief, Mary Amberley let him go almost without a
protest. ' Must you be off, Hugh ? So soon ? ' That was all. She seemed
to be absent, thinking of something else.

268


CHAPTER XX

Beppo fizzled amiably ; Staithes merely nodded ; and now it was Beavis's
turn. Was that smile of his what it seemed to be—just vaguely and
conventionally friendly ? Or did it carry hidden significances, did it
secretly imply derisive reminders of those past shames ?

Hugh turned and hurried away. Why on earth, he wondered, did one ever go
to these idiotic parties ? Kept on going, what was more, again and
again, when one knew it was all utterly pointless and boring. . . .

Mark Staithes turned to Anthony. ' You realize who that is ? ' he asked.

1 Who ? Ledwidge ? Is he anyone special ? '

Staithes explained.

1 Goggler ! * Anthony laughed. ' Why, of course. Poor Goggler ! How
fiendish we were to him ! '

1 That's why I've always pretended I didn't know who he was/ said
Staithes, and smiled an anatomical smile of pity and contempt. ' I think
it would be charitable/ he added, ' if you did the same.' Protecting
Hugh Ledwidge gave him genuine pleasure.

Utterly pointless and boring—yes, and humiliating, Hugh was thinking,
humiliating as well. For there was always some humiliation. A Beavis
smiling ; a Gerry Watchett, like an insolent groom ...

There was a hurrying of feet on the stairs behind him. 1 Hugh ! Hugh ! *
He started almost guiltily and turned round. ' Why were you slinking
away without saying goodnight to me ? '

Essaying a joke, ' You seemed so busy/ he began, k 269

EYELESS IN GAZA

twinkling up at Helen through his spectacles ; then fell silent in
sudden astonishment, almost in awe.

She was standing there, three steps above him, one hand on the banister,
the fingers of the other splayed out against the opposite wall, leaning
forward as though on the brink of flight. But what had happened to her,
what miracle ? The flushed face that hung over him seemed to shine with
an inward illumination. This was not Helen, but some supernatural
creature. In the presence of such unearthly beauty, he blushed for the
ignoble irrelevance of his waggery, his knowing look.

' Busy ? ' she echoed. ' But I was only dancing.' And it was as though
some ingenuous and unconscious Moses had said to his bedazzled
Israelites : ' I was only talking to Jehovah.' ' You had no excuse,' she
went on. Then quickly, as though a new and curious idea had suddenly
occurred to her, ' Or were you cross with me for some reason ? ' she
added in another tone.

He began by shaking his head ; but felt impelled, on second thoughts, to
try to explain a little. ' Not cross,' he distinguished, * just. . .
just a bit unsociable.'

The light behind her face seemed to leap up in a quivering rush of
intenser flame.

Unsociable ! That was really too exquisitely funny 1 The dancing had
made her perfect, had transformed earth into heaven. At the idea that
one could be (preposterous word !) unsociable, that one could feel
anything but an overflowing love for everyone and everything, she could
only laugh.

' You are funny, Hugh 1 '

270


CHAPTER XX

' I'm glad you think so/ His tone was offended. He had turned away his
head.

The silk of her dress rustled sharply ; a little gust of perfume was
cool on his cheek—and she was standing only one step above him, very
close. ' You're not hurt because I said you were funny ? ' she asked.

He lifted his eyes again and found her face on a level with his own.
Mollified by that expression of genuine solicitude he shook his head.

' I didn't mean funny in the horrid way,' she explained. 11 meant . . .
well, you know : nicely funny. Funny, but a darling.'

In threateningly personal circumstances, a well-timed foolery is a sure
defence. Smiling, Hugh raised his right hand to his heart. * Je suis
pénétré de reconnaissance, was what he was going to say by way of
acknowledgment for that * darling.' The courdy jape, the mock-heroic
gesture were his immediate and automatic reaction to her words. c Je
suis pénétré . . .'

But Helen gave him no time to take cover behind his dix-huitième
waggery. For she followed up her words by laying her two hands on his
shoulders and kissing him on the mouth.

For a moment he was almost annihilated with surprise and confusion and a
kind of suffocating, chaotic joy.

Helen drew back a little and looked at him. He had gone very pale—looked
as though he had seen a ghost. She smiled—for he was funnier than
ever—then bent forward and kissed him again.

271

EYELESS IN GAZA

The first time she had kissed him, it had been out of the fulness of the
life that was in her, because she was made perfect in a perfect world.
But his scared face was so absurdly comic that the sight of it somehow
transformed this fulness of perfect life into a kind of mischievous
wantonness. The second time she kissed him, it was for fun ; for fun
and, at the same time, out of curiosity. It was an experiment, made in a
spirit of hilarious scientific enquiry. She was a vivisector— licensed
by perfection, justified by happiness.

Besides, Hugh had an extraordinarily nice mouth. She had never kissed
such full soft lips before ; the experience had been startlingly
pleasurable. It was not only that she wanted to see, scientifically,
what the absurd creature would do next ; she also wanted to feel once
more that cool resilience against her mouth, to experience that strange
creeping of pleasure that tingled out from her lips and ran, quick and
almost unbearable, like moths, along the surface of her body.

' You were so sweet to take all that trouble,' she said by way of
justification for the second kiss. The moths had crept again,
deliciously, had settled with an electric tremor of vibrating wings on
her breasts. ' All that trouble about my education/

But ' Helen ! ' was all that he could whisper ; and, before he had had
time to think, he had put his arms about her and kissed her.

His mouth, for the third time; and those hurrying moths along the skin
... But, oh, how quickly he drew away !

272


CHAPTER XX

' Helen ! * he repeated.

They looked at one another ; and now that he had had the time to think,
Hugh found himself all of a sudden horribly embarrassed. His hands
dropped furtively from her body.

He didn't know what to say to her—or, rather, knew, but couldn't bring
himself to say it.

His heart was beating with a painful violence. 41 love you, I want you,'
he was crying, he was positively shouting, from behind his embarrassed
silence. But no word was uttered.

He smiled at her rather foolishly, and dropped his eyes—the eyes, he now
reflected, that must look so hideous, like a fish's eyes, through the
thick lenses of his spectacles.

' How funny he is,' Helen thought. But her scientific laughter had died
down. His shyness was infectious. To put an end to the uncomfortable
situation, ' I shall read all those books,' she said. ' And that reminds
me, you must give me the list.'

Grateful to her for supplying him with a subject about which it was
possible to talk, he looked up at her again— for a moment only, because
of those fish-eyes, goggling. * I'll fill in the gaps and send it you/
he said. Then, after a second or two, he realized that in his
improvidence he had exhausted the preciously impersonal topic of the
books in a single sentence. The silence persisted, distressingly; and at
last, in despair, because there was nothing else to say, he decided to
say good-night. Trying to charge his voice with an infinity of loving
significance, * Good-night, Helen,' he said. The words were 273

EYELESS IN GAZA

intended to be as eloquent as a whole speech. But would she hear the
eloquence, would she understand the depths of his implied meaning ? He
bent forward and kissed her again, quickly, very lightly, a kiss of
tenderly respectful devotion.

But he had not reckoned with Helen. The embarrassment that had
momentarily clouded her wanton perfection had evaporated at the touch of
his lips ; she was once more the laughing vivisector.

' Kiss me again, Hugh/ she said. And when he obeyed, she would not let
him go ; but kept his mouth pressed to hers, second after second . . .

The noise of voices and music became suddenly louder ; somebody had
opened the drawing-room door.

' Good-night, Hugh/ she whispered against his lips ; then loosed her
hold and ran up the stairs two at a time.

Looking after her, as she ran out of the room to say good-night to old
Ledwidge, Gerry had smiled to himself complacently. Pink in the face ;
with shining eyes. As though she'd drunk a bottle of champagne.
Absolutely buffy with the dancing. It was fun when they lost their heads
like that ; lost them so enthusiastically, so ungrudgingly, so
completely.

Not keeping anything back, but chucking it all out of the window, so to
speak. Most girls were so damned avaricious and calculating. They'd only
lose half their heads and carefully keep the other half to play the
outraged virgin with. Mean little bitches 1 But with Helen you felt that
the engine was all

274


CHAPTER XX

out. She stepped on the gas and didn't care what was in the way. He
liked that sort of thing, and liked it not only because he hoped to
profit by the lost head, but also disinterestedly, because he couldn't
help admiring people who let themselves go and didn't care two hoots
about the consequences. There was something fine and generous and
spirited about such people. He was like that himself, when he could
afford it. Guts: that was what she'd got. And the makings of a
temperament, he was thinking with an inward satisfaction, when a touch
on his arm from behind made him suddenly start. His surprise turned
almost instantaneously to anger. There was nothing he hated more than to
be taken unawares, off his guard. He turned sharply round and, seeing
that the person who had touched him was Mary Amberley, tried to readjust
his face. Vainly ; die hard resentful eyes belied his smile.

But Mary was herself too angry to notice the signs of his annoyance. ' I
want to talk to you, Gerry/ she-said in a low voice that she tried to
keep level and unemotional, but that trembled in spite of all her
efforts.

4 Christ ! ' he thought ; * a scene,' and felt angrier than ever with
the tiresome woman. '

Talk away,' he said aloud ; and, with an offensive air of detachment, he
took out his cigarette-case, opened and proffered it.

* Not here,' she said.

Gerry pretended not to understand her. c Sorry. I thought you didn't
mind people smoking here.'

' Fool 1 ' Her anger broke out with sudden violence

*75

EYELESS IN GAZA

Then, catching him by the sleeve, ' Come ! ' she commanded, and almost
dragged him to the door.

Running upstairs, Helen was in time to see her mother and Gerry mounting
from the drawing-room landing towards the higher floors of the tall
house. * I shall have to find somebody else to dance with,' was all she
thought ; and a moment later she had found little Peter Quinn and was
gliding away once more into paradise.

1 Talk of floaters ! * said Anthony as their hostess left the room with
Gerry Watchett. * I didn't realize that Gerry was the present incumbent.
. . .'

Beppo nodded. ' Poor Mary ! * he sighed.

' On the contrary,' said Staithes, ' rich Mary ! She'll be poor later/

' And nothing can be done about it ? ' asked Anthony.

* She'd hate you if you tried.'

Anthony shook his head. ' These dismal compulsions ! Like cuckoos in
August. Like stags in October/

' She showed symptoms of having a compulsion about me,' said Staithes. *
Just after I first met her, it was. But I soon cured her of that. And
then that ruffian Watchett turned up.'

1 Fascinating, the way these aristocrats can behave ! * Anthony's tone
was one of scientific enthusiasm.

Staithes's flayed face twisted itself into a grimace of contempt. ' Just
a coarse, vulgar gangster/ he said. * How on earth you ever put up with
him at Oxford, I simply cannot imagine.' In fact, of course, he was
busily

276


CHAPTER XX

imagining that Anthony had done it out of mere ignoble toadyism,

1 Just snobbery/ said Anthony, depriving the other of half his pleasure
by the easy confession. ' But, then, I insist, people like Gerry are an
essential part of any liberal education. There was something really
rather magnificent about him when he was rich. A certain detached and
disinterested recklessness. Now . . •* He raised his hand and let it
fall again. * Just a gangster —you're quite right. But that's the
fascinating thing— the ease with which aristocrats turn into gangsters.
Very comprehensible, when you come to think of it. Here's a man brought
up to believe that he has a divine right to the best of everything. And
so long as he gets his rights it's all noblesse oblige and honour and
all the rest of it. Inextricably mixed up with insolence, of course; but
genuinely there. Now, take away his income ; the oddest things are
liable to happen. Providence intended you to have the best of
everything; therefore intended you to have the means for procuring the
best of everything ; therefore, when the means don't come to you
legitimately, justifies you in getting them illegitimately. In the past,
our Gerry could have gone in for banditry or simony. He'd have made an
admirable condottiere, an almost perfect cardinal. But nowadays the
church and the army are too respectable, too professional. They've no
place for amateurs. The impoverished nobleman finds himself driven into
business. Selling cars. Touting stocks and shares. Promoting K* 277

EYELESS IN GAZA

dubious companies. To the accompaniment, of course, if he's presentable,
of a judicious prostitution of his body. If he has the luck to be born
with a gift of the gab, he can make a good living out of the politer
forms of blackmail and sycophancy—as a gossip writer.

Noblesse oblige ; but so does poverty. And when they both oblige
simultaneously—well, we of the middle classes had better start counting
the silver. Instead of which . . . ' He shrugged his shoulders. ' Poor
Mary ! '

Upstairs, in the bedroom, the torrent of Mary's reproaches and abuse
streamed on, unceasingly. Gerry did not even look at her. Averted, he
seemed absorbed in the contemplation of the Pascin hanging over the
mantelpiece. The painting showed two women lying foreshortened on a bed,
naked.

' I like this picture,' he said with deliberate irrelevance, when Mrs.
Amberley had paused for breath. ' You can see that the man who painted
it had just finished making love to those girls. Both of them. At the
same time,' he added.

Mary Amberley went very pale; her lips trembled, her nostrils fluttered
as though with a separate and uncontrollable life of their own.

* You haven't even been listening to me/ she cried. ' Oh, you're awful,
you're horrible ! '

The torrent began to flow again, more vehemently than ever.

Still turning his back to her, Gerry went on looking at the Pascin nudes
; then at last, blowing out a final cloud

278


CHAPTER XX

of tobacco-smoke, he threw the stump of his cigarette into the fireplace
and turned round.

' When you've quite done/ he said in a tired voice, ' we may as well go
to bed/ And after a little pause, while, unable to speak, she glared
furiously in his face, ' Seeing that that's what you really want,' he
added, and, smiling ironically, advanced across the room towards her.
When he was quite near her, he halted and held out his hands invitingly.

They were large hands, immaculately kept, but coarse, insensitive,
brutal. ' Hideous hands,' Mary thought as she looked at them, ' odious
hands ! * All the more odious now, because it was by their very ugliness
and brutality that she had first been attracted, was even at this very
moment being attracted, shamefully, in spite of all the reasons she had
for hating him. ' Well, aren't you coming?' he asked in the same bored,
derisive tone.

For answer, she hit out at his face. But he was too quick for her,
caught the flying hand in mid-air and, when she tried to bring the other
into play, caught that too. She was helpless in his grasp.

Still smiling down at her, and without a word, he pushed her backwards,
step by step, towards the bed.

1 Beast ! ' she kept repeating, ' beast ! ' and struggled, vainly, and
found an obscure pleasure in her helplessness. He pushed her against the
end of the low divan, further and further, inexorably, and at last she
lost her balance and fell back across the counterpane—

(fell back, while, with one knee on the edge of the bed, he bent over
her, 279

EYELESS IN GAZA

still smiling the same derisive smile). ' Beast, beast ! ' But in fact,
as she secretly admitted to herself—and the consciousness was
intoxicating in its shamefulness—in fact, she really wanted to be
treated as he was treating her —like a prostitute, like an animal ; and
in her own house, what was more, with her guests all waiting for her,
and the door unlocked, and her daughters wondering where she was,
perhaps at this very moment coming up the stairs to look for her. Yes,
she really wanted it. Still struggling, she gave herself up to the
knowledge, to the direct physical intuition that this intolerable
degradation was the accomplishment of an old desire, was a revelation
marvellous as well as horrible, was the Apocalypse, the whole Apocalypse
at once, angel and beast, plague, lamb and whore in a single divine,
revolting, overwhelming experience. • • •

' Civilization and sexuality/ Anthony was saying : 1 there's a definite
correlation. The higher the one, the intenser the other/

' My word,' said Beppo, fizzling with pleasure, ' we must be civilized !
*

* Civilization means food and literature all round. Beefsteaks and
fiction magazines for all. First-class proteins for the body,
fourth-class love-stories for the spirit. And this in a safe urban
world, where there are no risks, no physical fatigues. In a town like
this, for example, one can live for years at a time without being made
aware that there's such a thing as nature. Every-280


CHAPTER XX

thing's man-made and punctual and convenient. But people can have too
much of convenience ; they want excitement, they want risks and
surprises. Where are they going to find them under our dispensation ? In
money-making, in politics, in occasional war, in sport, and finally in
sex. But most people can't be speculators or active politicians ; and
war's getting to be too much of a good thing ; and the more elaborate
and dangerous sports are only for the rich. So that sex is all that's
left. As material civilization rises, the intensity and importance of
sexuality also rises. Must rise, inevitably. And since at the same time
food and literature have increased the amount of available appetite . .
.' He shrugged his shoulders. * Well, you see ! '

Beppo was charmed. * You explain it all/ he cried. ' Tout comprendre
c'est tout pardonner.9 He felt, delightedly, that Anthony's argument
gave, not only absolution, but also a plenary indulgence—to everyone
(for Beppo unselfishly wanted everyone to be as happy as he was) and for
everything, everything, from the ravishing barmen at Toulon to those
top-booted tarts (so definitely not for him) on the Kurfurstendamm.

Staithes said nothing. If social progress, he was thinking, just meant
greater piggishness for more people, why then—then, what?

' Do you remember that remark of Dr. Johnson's ? ' Anthony began again
with a note of elation in his voice. It had suddenly come to him, an
unexpected gift from his memory to his discursive reason—come to enrich
the

281

EYELESS IN GAZA

pattern of his thinking, to fill out his argument and extend its scope.
His voice reflected the sudden triumphant pleasure that he felt. ' How
does it go ? " A man is seldom so innocently employed as when he is
making money." Something like that. Admirable 1 '

He laughed aloud. ' The innocence of those who grind the faces of the
poor, but refrain from pinching the bottoms of their neighbours^ wives !
The innocence of Ford, the innocence of Rockefeller ! The nineteenth
century was the Age of Innocence—thatsort of innocence. With the result
that we're now almost ready to say that a man is seldom more innocently
employed than when making love/

There was a silence. Staithes looked at his watch. 1 Time one was
getting out of here/ he said. c But the problem/ he added, turning round
in his chair to scan the room, * the problem is one's hostess/

They got up, and while Beppo hurried off to greet a couple of young
acquaintances on the other side of the room, Staithes and Anthony made
their way to the door.

* The problem/ Staithes kept repeating, ' the problem

On the landing, however, they met Mrs. Amberley and Gerry coming down
the stairs.

' We were looking for you/ said Anthony. ' To say good-night/

1 So soon ? * cried Mary with a sudden access of anxiety.

But they were firm. A couple of minutes later the

282


CHAPTER XX

three of them, Staithes, Gerry Watchett and Anthony, were walking up the
street together.

It was Gerry who broke the silence. ' These old hags,' he said in a tone
of meditative rancour, and shook his head. Then more cheerfully, ' What
about a game of poker ? * he suggested. But Anthony didn't know how, and
Mark Staithes didn't desire, to play poker ; he had to go off alone in
search of more congenial company.

1 Good riddance,' said Mark. c And now what about coming to my rooms for
an hour ? '

It was the most important thing, Hugh Ledwidge felt as he walked home,
the most important and also the most extraordinary, most incredible
thing that had ever happened to him. So beautiful, so young. ' Fashioned
so slenderly.' (If only she had thrown herself into the Thames and he
had rescued her ! ' Helen ! My poor child ! ' And, ' Hugh ! ' she would
have murmured gratefully. * Hugh ...' ) But even widiout the suicide it
had been astonishing enough. Her mouth against his. Oh, why hadn't he
shown more courage, more presence of mind ? All the things he might have
said to her, the gestures he ought to have made ! And yet, in a certain
sense, it was better that he should have behaved as he did —

stupidly, timidly, ineptly. Better, because it proved more conclusively
that she cared for him ; because it gave a higher value to her action,
so young, so pure—and yet spontaneously, under no compulsion of his, in
the teeth, indeed, of what had almost been his resistance,

283

EYELESS IN GAZA

she had stepped down, had laid her hands on his shoulders, had kissed
him. Kissed him in spite of everything, he repeated to himself with a
kind of astonished triumph that mingled strangely with his sense of
shame, his conviction of weakness and futility ; in spite of everything.
Non piu andrai, he hummed to himself as he walked along ; then, as
though the dank London night were a morning on the downs in spring,
broke out into unequivocal singing.

Delle belle turhando il riposOj NarcissettOj Adoncino d' amor, . . «

At home, he sat down at once to his desk and began to write to hen

* Helen, Helen. ... If I repeat the syllables too often, they lose their
sense, become just a noise in my silent room—terrifying in their
meaninglessness. But if I say the name just two or three times, very
softly, how rich it becomes, how full ! Charged with echoes and
reminders. Not so much, for me, of the original Greek Helen. I can't
feel that she was ever anything but a mature woman —never anything but
married to Menelaus and eloping with Paris. Never really young, as you
are—exquisitely, exquisitely, like a flower. No, it's more Poe's Helen I
catch sight of through the name. The beauty that carries the traveller
back to his own native shore—takes him home. Not to the obvious, worldly
home of the passions. No; to that further, rarer, lovelier home, beyond
and above them. Beyond and above ; and yet

284


CHAPTER XX

implying, yet including, even while transcending, the passions . . .'

It was a long letter; but he was in time, running out, to catch the
midnight post. The sense of triumph with which he returned this second
time was almost unalloyed. Momentarily, he had forgotten his shyness,
his humiliating cowardice ; he remembered only that consciousness of
soaring power that had filled him while he wrote his letter. Exalted
above his ordinary self, he forgot, when undressing, to put his truss
away in the chest of drawers, so that Mrs. Brinton shouldn't see it when
she came in with his early tea in the morning. In bed, he lay for a long
time thinking tenderly, paternally, poetically, thinking at the same
time with desire, but a desire so lingeringly gentle that lasciviousness
assumed the quality of prayer, thinking of Helen's exquisite
youthfulness, fashioned so slenderly, and her innocence, her slender
innocence, and those unexpected, those extraordinary kisses.

**5

»


CHAPTER

XXI

August 3zst 1933

ELEN rang the bell, then listened. In the silence behind the closed
door, nothing stirred.

She had come straight from the station after a night in the train ; it
was not yet ten ; her mother would still be asleep. She rang again ;
then, after a pause, once more. Heavily asleep—unless, of course, she
had stayed out all night. Where ? And with whom ?

Remembering that horrible Russian she had met at her mother's flat the
last time she was in Paris, Helen frowned. She rang a fourth time, a
fifth. From within the apartment there was suddenly an answering sound
of movement. Helen sighed, partly with relief that her mother had only
been asleep, partly in apprehension of what the coming minutes or hours
held in store. The door opened at last, opened on a twilight that smelt
of cats and ether and stale food ; and there, in dirty pink pyjamas, her
dyed orange hair dishevelled, and still blinking, still strangely
swollen with sleep, stood her mother. For a second the face was a mask,
bloated and middle-aged, of stupefied incomprehension ; then, in a
flash, it came back to life, almost back to youth, with a sudden smile
of genuine delight.

1 But what fun ! ' cried Mrs. Amberley. * Darling, I'm so glad/

286

H


CHAPTER XXI

If she hadn't known—by how bitter an experience !— that this mood of
gaiety and affectionateness would inevitably be followed by, at the
best, a spiteful despondency, at the worst, by a fit of insanely violent
anger, Helen would have been touched by the warmth of her mother's
greeting. As it was, she merely suffered herself to be kissed and, her
face still set and stony, stepped across the threshold into the horribly
familiar nightmare of her mother's life.

This time, she found, the nightmare had a comic element.

* It's all because of that beastly old femme de ménage, Mrs. Amberley
explained as they stood there in the smelly little lobby. * She was
stealing my stockings. So I had to lock the bedroom door when I went
out. And then somehow I lost the key. You know what I am/ she added
complacently, boasting by force of habit of that absent-mindedness of
which she had always been so proud. ' Hopeless, I'm afraid.' She shook
her head and smiled that crooked little smile of hers,
conspiratori-ally. * When I got home, I had to smash that panel.' She
pointed to the oblong aperture in the lower half of the door. ' You
should have seen me, banging away with the flat-iron ! ' Her voice was
richly vibrant with laughter. ' Luckily it was like matchwood. Cheap and
nasty to a degree. Like everything in this beastly place.'

1 And you crawled through ? ' Helen asked.

1 Like this.' And geing down on her hands and knees, Mrs. Amberley
pushed her head through the hole, turned

287

EYELESS IN GAZA

sideways so as to admit an arm and shoulder, then, with surprising
agility, pulled and pushed with a hand beyond and feet on the hither
side of the door, till only her legs remained in the lobby. First one,
then the other, the legs were withdrawn, and an instant later, as though
from a dog-kennel, Mrs. Amberley's face emerged, a little flushed,
through the aperture.

* You see,' she said. ' It's as easy as winking. And the beauty of it is
that old Madame Roget's much too fat. No possible chance of her getting
through. I don't have to worry about my stockings any more.'

' Do you mean to say she never goes into your bedroom ? '

Mrs. Amberley shook her head. ' Not since I lost the key ; and that was
three weeks ago, at least.' Her tone was one of triumph.

* But who makes the bed and does the cleaning ? '

* Well...' There was a moment's hesitation. ' Why, I do, of course,' the
other replied a little irritably.

' You ? '

' Why not ? ' From her kennel door, Mrs. Amberley looked up almost
defiantly into her daughter's face. There was a long silence ; then,
simultaneously, both of them burst out laughing.

Still smiling, ' Let's have a look,' said Helen, and went down on all
fours. The stony face had softened into life ; she felt an inward
warmth. Her mother had been so absurd, peering up like that out of her
kennel, so childishly ridiculous, that suddenly she was able to love

288


CHAPTER XXI

her again. To love her while she laughed at her, just because she could
laugh at her.

Mrs. Amberley withdrew her head. c Of course it is a bit untidy/ she
admitted rather anxiously, as Helen wriggled through the hole in the
door. Still kneeling, she pushed some dirty linen and the remains of
yesterday's lunch under the bed.

On her feet again, inside the bedroom, Helen looked round. It was
filthier even than she had expected— much filthier. She made an effort
to go on smiling ; but the muscles of her face refused to obey her.

Three days later Helen was on her way back to London. Opening the
English newspaper she had bought at the Gare du Nord, she read, with an
equal absence of interest, about the depression, the test match, the
Nazis, the New Deal. Sighing, she turned the page. Printed very large,
the words, ' An Exquisite First Novel/ caught her eye. And below, in
small letters, ' The Invisible Lover.. By Hugh Ledwidge. Reviewed by
Catesby Rudge/ Helen folded back the page to make it more manageable and
read with an intense and fixed attention.

' Just another book, I thought, like all the rest. And I was on the
point of throwing it aside, unread. But luckily something—some mystic
intuition, I suppose— made me change my mind. I opened the book. I
turned over the pages, glancing at a sentence here and there.

And the sentences I found, were gems—jewels of wrought crystal. I
decided to read the book. That was

289

EYELESS IN GAZA

at nine in the evening. And at midnight I was still reading, spellbound.
It was nearly two before I got to bed—my mind in a whirl of enthusiasm
for this masterpiece I had just read.

'How shall I describe the book to you? I might call it a fantasy. And as
far as it goes, that description holds good. The Invisible Lover is a
fantasy. But a fantasy that is poignant as well as airy ; profound as
well as intriguing and light ; fraught with tears as well as with smiles
; at once subtly humorous and of a high, Galahadlike spirituality. It is
full of a kind of broken-hearted fun, and its laughter is dewy with
tears. And throughout runs a vein of naïve and child-like purity,
infinitely refreshing in a world full of Freudians and sex-novelists and
all their wearisome ilk. This fantasy of the invisible but ever present,
ever watchful, ever adoring lover and his child-beloved has an almost
celestial innocence.

If I wanted to describe the book in a single phrase, I should say that
it was the story of Dante and Beatrice told by Hans Andersen. . . .'

Falling into her memories of Hugh's few ignominious attempts to make
love to her, the words produced in Helen's mind a kind of violent
chemical reaction. She burst out laughing; and since the ridiculous
phrase went echoing on, since the grotesque memories kept renewing
themselves with ever heightened intensity and in ever fuller, more
painfully squalid detail, the laughter continued, irrepressibly. The
story of Dante and Beatrice told by Hans Andersen ! Tears of hysterical
merriment ran down her cheeks ; she was breathless, and the

290


CHAPTER XXI

muscles of her throat were contracted in a kind of agonizing cramp. But
still she went on laughing— was utterly unable to stop ; it was as
though she were possessed by a demon.

Luckily, she was alone in the compartment. People would have taken her
for a madwoman.

In the cab, on the way to Hugh's flat—her flat too, in spite of Dante
and Beatrice and Hans Andersen—she wondered whether he'd have gone to
bed already, and just how upset he'd be to see her. She hadn't warned
him of her arrival ; he would be unprepared to receive her, unbraced
against the shock of her grossly physical presence. Poor old Hugh !

she thought with a derisive pity. Enjoying his private and invisible
fun, like Dante with his phantom, and then having to suffer the
trampling intrusion of Signora Alighieri ! But to-night, she realized,
as she stood at last before the door of the flat, looking in her bag for
the latch-key, that invisible solitude of his had already been invaded.
Somebody was playing the piano ; there was a sound of laughter and
voices. Hugli must be having a party. And all at once Helen saw herself
making a dramatic entrance, like Banquo's ghost, and was delighted by
the vision. The reading of that article had momentarily transposed her
entire being into the key of laughter. Everything was a vast,
extravagant, savage joke—or if it wasn't already, should be made so. It
was with a tingling sense of excited anticipation that she opened the
door and silently slipped into the hall. An assortment of strange hats
hung

291

EYELESS IN GAZA

on the pegs, lay on the chairs—a couple of rich hats, she noticed, very
new and shapely, and the rest deformed, and ancient ; hats, one could
see, of the intellectual poor. There were some letters on the
marble-topped table; she bent down by mere force of habit to look at
them, and found that one was addressed to her—from Anthony, she
recognized; and that too was a joke. Did he seriously imagine that she
would read his letters ?

Enormous ass ! She popped the envelope unopened into her bag, then
tiptoed along the passage to her room. How tidy it was ! How dead ! Like
a family vault under dust-sheets.

She took off her coat and hat, washed, combed her hair, made up her
face, then, as silently as she had come, crept back to the hall and
stood at the door of the sitting-room, trying to guess by the sound of
their voices who were the guests. Beppo Bowles, for one ; that giggle,
those squeaks and fizzlings were unmistakable. And Mark Staithes. And
then a voice she wasn't sure of, and another, very soft and
confidential, that must be old Croyland's. And who was that ridiculous
foreigner who spoke so slowly and ponderously, all on one note ? She
stood there at the door for a long minute, then very gently turned the
handle, drew the door gradually open, and without a sound edged into the
room. Nobody had noticed her. Mark Staithes was seated at the piano,
with Beppo, a Beppo fatter than ever, she noticed, and balder and more
nervously agitated, and —yes, beard and all !—

old Croyland, standing one on either side of him, leaning on the
instrument and looking 292


CHAPTER XXI

down at him while he spoke. Hugh was in the sofa near the fireplace,
with the owner of the voice she hadn't recognized, but who turned out to
be Caldwell, the publisher—the publisher, of course, of The Invisible
Lover, she reflected, and had a difficulty in checking another uprush of
mirth. With them was a young man she had never seen before—a young man
with very pale flaxen hair and a ruddy open face that wore at the moment
an expression of almost child-like seriousness. His, it was evident, had
been the foreign accent—German, she supposed.

But now the moment had come.

* Good-evening,' she called, and stepped forward.

They were all startled ; but as for poor Hugh—he jumped as though
someone had fired a cannon in his ear. And after the first fright, what
an expression of appalled dismay !

Irresistibly comic I

' Well, Hugh,' she said.

He looked up into her laughing face, unable to speak. Ever since the
first laudatory notices of his book had begun to come in, he had been
feeling so strong, so blissfully secure. And now here was Helen—come to
humiliate him, come to bear shameful witness against him.

' I didn't expect,' he managed to mumble incoherently. 1 I mean, why did
you ... ? '

But Caldwell, who had a reputation for after-dinner speaking to keep up,
interrupted him.

Raising the glass he was holding, ' To the Muse,' he called out. ' The
293

EYELESS IN GAZA

Muse and also—I don't think it's an indiscretion if I say so—also the
heroine of our masterpiece/ Charmed by the felicity of his own phrasing,
he beamed at Helen ; then, turning to Hugh with a gesture of
affectionate proprietorship, he patted him on the shoulder. ' You must
drink too, old man. It's not a compliment to you —not this time.'

And he uttered a rich chuckle.

Hugh did as he was told and, averting his eyes, took a gulp of
whisky-and-soda.

' Thank you, thank you,' cried Helen. The -laughter was seething within
her, like water in a kettle. She gave one hand to Caldwell and the odier
to Hugh. ' I can't tell you how thrilled I was,' she went on. ' Dante
and Beatrice by Hans Andersen—it sounds too delicious/

Blushing, Hugh tried to protest. ' That frightful article . . /

Cutting him short, ' But why did you keep it up your sleeve ? ' she
asked.

Yes why, why ? Hugh was thinking ; and that he had been mad to publish
the book without first showing it to Helen. He had always wanted to show
it to her—and always, at the last moment, found the task too difficult,
too embarrassing. But the desire to publish had remained with him, had
grown stronger, until at last, senselessly, he had taken the manuscript
to Caldwell and, after its acceptance, arranged with him that it should
appear while Helen was out of the country. As though that would prevent
her knowing anything about it ! Madness, madness ! And the proof that he
had been

294


CHAPTER XXI

mad was her presence here to-night, with that strange wild smile on her
face, that brightness in the eyes. An uncalculating recklessness was one
of the child-beloved's most characteristic and engaging traits; she was
a celestial enfant terrible. But in the real Helen this recklessness
seemed almost fiendish. She was capable of doing anything, absolutely
anything.

' Why did you ? ' she insisted.

He made a vague apologetic noise.

' You ought to have told me you were Dante Andersen. I'd have tried to
live up to you.

Beatrice and the Little Match Girl rolled into one. Good-evening, Beppo
! And Mark ! '

They had come over from the piano to greet her. * And, Mr. Croyland, how
are you ? '

Mr. Croyland gave a perfect performance of an old gentleman greeting a
lovely young woman—benevolently, yet with a touch of playfulness, an
attenuated echo of gallantry.

' Such an unexpected enchantment,' he breathed in the soft, deliberately
ecstatic voice he ordinarily reserved for describing quattrocento
paintings or for addressing the celebrated or the very rich. Then, with
a gesture that beautifully expressed an impulsive outburst of affection,
Mr. Croyland sandwiched her hand between both of his. They were very
pale, soft hands, almost gruesomely small and dainty. By comparison, it
seemed to Helen that her own brown hand was like a peasant's. Mr.
Croyland's silvery and prophetic beard parted in a smile that ought to
have been the gracious confirmation of his 295

EYELESS IN GAZA

words and gestures, but which, with its incongruous width and the sudden
ferocity of all its large and yellowing teeth, seemed instead to deny
all reality to the old gentleman's exquisite refinement of manner. That
smile belonged to the Mr. Croyland who had traded so profitably in the
Old Masters; the little white hands and their affectionate gestures, the
soft, ecstatic voice and its heartfelt words, were the property of that
other, that ethereal Croyland who only cared about Art.

Helen disengaged her hand. ' Did you ever see those china mugs, Mr.
Croyland ? ' she asked, ' you who know Italy so well? The ones they sell
at Montecatini for drinking the purgative waters out of? White, with an
inscription in golden letters : Io son Beatrice che tifaccio andare*

1 But what an outrage ! * Mr. Croyland exclaimed, and lifted his small
hands in horror.

' But it's the sort of joke I really enjoy. Particularly now that
Beatrice is really me . . .'

Becoming aware that the flaxen-haired young man was standing at
attention about a yard to the west of her, evidently trying to attract
her notice, Helen interrupted herself and turned towards him, holding
out her hand.

The young man took it, bowed stiffly from the waist and, saying, '
Giesebrecht,' firmly squeezed it.

Laughing (it was another joke), Helen answered, 'Ledwidge'; then, as an
afterthought, (

geboren Am-berley.'

296


CHAPTER XXI

Nonplussed by this unexpected gambit, the young man bowed again in
silence.

Staithes intervened to explain that Ekki Giesebrecht was his discovery.
A refugee from Germany. Not because of his nose, he added as (taking
pity on poor old Hugh) he drew her confidentially out of the group
assembled round the sofa; not because of his nose—

because of his politics. Aryan, but communist— ardently and all along
the line.

4 He believes that as soon as all incomes are equalized, men will stop
being cruel. Also that all power will automatically find itself in the
hands of the best people. And he's absolutely convinced that nobody who
obtains power will be capable of even wishing to abuse it/ Staithes
shook his head. ' One doesn't know whether to admire and envy, or to
thank God for not having made one such an ass. And to complicate
matters, he's such a thoroughly good ass. An ass with the moral
qualities of a saint. Which is why he's such an admirable propagandist.
Saintliness is almost as good as sex-appeal/ He pulled up a chair for
Helen, and himself sat down again at the piano and began to play the
first few bars of Beethoven's Fur Elise ; then broke off and, turning
back to her, ' The trouble,' he resumed, ' is that nothing works. Not
faith, not intelligence, not saintliness, not even villainy—nothing.
Faith's just organized and directed stupidity. It may remove a mountain
or two by dint of mere obstinate butting ; but it's blinkered, it can't
see that if you move mountains, you don't destroy

297

EYELESS IN GAZA

them, you merely shove them from one place to another. You need
intelligence to see that

; but intelligence isn't much good because people can't feel
enthusiastic about it ; it's at the mercy of the first Hitler or
Mussolini that comes along—of anyone who can rouse enthusiasm ; and one
can rouse enthusiasm for any cause however idiotic and criminal/

Helen was looking across the room. ' I suppose his hair's naturally that
colour ? ' she said, more to herself than to her companion. Then,
turning back to Staithes, * And what about saintliness ? * she asked.

' Well, look at history,' he answered.

41 don't know any.'

1 Of course not. But I take it that you've heard of someone called jesus
? And occasionally, no doubt, you read the papers ? Well, put two and
two together, the morning's news and the saint, and draw your own
conclusions.'

Helen nodded. ' I've drawn them/

' If saintliness were enough to save the world,' he went on, ' then
obviously the world would have been saved long ago. Dozens of times. But
saintliness can exist without intelligence. And though it's attractive,
it isn't more attractive than lots of other things—

good food, for example, comfort, going to bed with people, bullying,
feeling superior/

Laughing (for this also was laughable), ' It looks,' said Helen, * as if
there were nothing to do but throw up everything and become an invisible
lover/ She helped 298


CHAPTER XXI

herself to a sandwich and a tumbler of white wine from the tray.

The group at the other end of the room had disintegrated, and Beppo and
Mr. Croyland were drifting back towards the piano. Staithes smiled at
them and, picking up the thread of the argument that Helen's arrival had
interrupted, ' Alternatively/ he said, ' one might become an aesthete/

1 You use the word as though it were an insult,' Beppo protested with
the emphatic peevishness that had grown upon him with age. Life was
treating him badly— making him balder, making him stouter, making young
men more and more reluctant to treat him as their contemporary, making
sexual successes increasingly difficult of achievement, making that
young German of Staithes's behave almost rudely to him. ' Why should one
be ashamed of living for beauty ? '

The thought of Beppo living for beauty—living for it with his bulging
waistcoat and the tight wide seat of his check trousers and his bald
crown and Florentine page's curls—

almost made Helen choke over her wine.

From the depths of his armchair, * " Glory be to God for dappled
things," ' murmured Mr.

Croyland. ' I've been re-reading Father Hopkins lately. So poignant !
Like a dagger. "

What lovely behaviour of silk-sack clouds ! " ' He sighed, he pensively
shook his head. *

They're among the things that wound one with theit loveliness. Wound and
yet sustain, make life liveable/

There was a cathedral silence.

299

EYELESS IN GAZA

Then, making an effort to keep the laughter out of her voice, ' Be an
angel, Beppo,' said Helen, * and give me some more of that hock.'

Mr. Croyland sat remote, behind half-closed eyelids, the inhabitant of a
higher universe.

When the clinking of the glasses had subsided, '"Ripeness is all," ' he
quoted. ' " That sober certainty of waking bliss." Waking? he insisted.
* Piercingly conscious. And then, of course, there are pictures—the
Watteaus at Dresden, and Bellini's Transfiguration, and those Raphael
portraits at the Pitti. Buttresses to shore up the soul. And certain
philosophies, too. Zarathustra, the Symposium.' He waved his little
hand. * One would be lost without them—lost ! '

1 And, with them, I take it, you're saved ? * said Mark from his seat at
the piano ; and, without waiting for an answer, * I wish / were,' he
went on. ' But there seems to be so little substance in it all. Even in
the little that's intrinsically substantial. For of course most thinking
has never been anything but silly. And as for art, as for
literature—well, look at the museums and the libraries. Look at them !
Ninety-nine per cent, of nonsense and mere rubbish.'

' But the Greeks,' Mr. Croyland protested, ' the Florentines, the
Chinese . . .' He sketched in the air an exquisitely graceful gesture,
as though he were running his fingers over the flanks of a Sung jar,
round the cup-shaped navel of a High Renaissance water-nymph.

Subtly, with what was meant to be the expression of a

300


CHAPTER XXI

Luini madonna, he smiled ; but always, through the opening fur, his
large yellow teeth showed ferociously, rapaciously—even when he talked
about the Schifanoia frescoes, even when he whispered, as though it were
an Orphic secret, the name of Vermeer of Delft.

But nonsense, Staithes insisted, almost invariably nonsense and rubbish.
And most of what wasn't nonsense or rubbish was only just ordinarily
good. ' Like what you or I could do with a little practice,' he
explained. 1 And if one knows oneself—the miserable inept little self
that can yet accomplish such feats—well, really, one can't be bothered
to take the feats very seriously/

Mr. Croyland, it was evident from his frown, didn't think of his own
self in quite this spirit.

' Not but what one can enjoy the stuff for all kinds of irrelevant
reasons,' Staithes admitted. ' For its ingenuity, for example, if one's
in any way a technician or an interpreter. Steady progressions in the
bass, for example, while the right hand is modulating apparently at
random. Invariably delightful ! But then, so's carpentry. No ;
ultimately it isn't interesting, that ordinarily good stuff. However
great the accomplishment or the talent. Ultimately it's without value ;
it differs from the bad only in degree. Composing like Brahms, for
example—what is it, after all, but a vastly more elaborate and
intellectual way of composing like Meyerbeer ? Whereas the best
Beethoven is as far beyond the best Brahms as it's beyond the worst
Meyerbeer. There's a difference in kind. One's in another world.'

L

30I

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Another world,' echoed Mr. Croyland in a religious whisper. ' But
that's just what I've been trying to get you to admit. With the highest
art one enters another world.'

Beppo fizzled with emphatic agreement. ' A world,' Mr. Croyland
insisted, ' of gods and angels.'

* Don't forget the invisible lovers,' said Helen, who was finding, as
she drank her white wine, that everything was becoming more and more
uproariously amusing.

Mr. Croyland ignored the interruption. * A next world,' he went on. *
The great artists carry you up to heaven.9

1 But they never allow you to stay there,' Mark Staithes objected. '
They give you just a taste of the next world, then let you fall back,
flop, into the mud. Marvellous while it lasts. But the time's so short.
And even while they've actually got me in heaven, I catch myself asking
: Is that all ? Isn't there anything more, anything further ? The other
world isn't other enough. Even Macbeth, even the Mass in D, even the El
Greco Assumption.9

He shook his head. * They used to satisfy me. They used to be an escape
and a support.

But now • . . now I find myself wanting something more, something
heavenlier, something less human. Yes, less human,' he repeated. Then
the flayed face twisted itself up into an agonized smile. ' I feel
rather like Nurse Cavell about it,' he added. ' Painting, music,
literature, thought—they're not enough.'

30a


CHAPTER XXI

' What is enough, then ? ' asked Beppo. ' Politics ? Science ?
Money-making ? * Staithes shook his head after every suggestion.

' But what else is there ? * asked Beppo.

Still anatomically smiling, Mark looked at him for a moment in silence,
then said, *

Nothing—absolutely nothing/

1 Speak for yourself,' said Mr. Croyland. ' They're enough for me/ He
dropped his eyelids once more and retired into spiritual fastnesses.

Looking at him, Staithes was moved by a sudden angry desire to puncture
the old gentleman's balloon-like complacency—to rip a hole in that great
bag of cultural gas, by means of which Mr. Croyland contrived to hoist
his squalid traffickings sky-high into the rarefied air of pure
aesthetics. ' And what about death ? You find them adequate against
death ? ' he insisted in a tone that had suddenly become brutally
inquisitorial. He paused, and for a moment the old man was enveloped in
a horribly significant silence—the silence of those who in the presence
of a victim or an incurable tactfully ignore the impending doom. '
Adequate against life, for that matter,' Mark Staithes went on,
relenting; * against life in any of its more unpleasant or dangerous
aspects/

* Such as dogs falling on one out of aeroplanes !> Helen burst out
laughing.

' But what are you talking about ? ' cried Beppo.

' Father Hopkins won't keep dogs off,' she went on

303

EYELESS IN GAZA

breathlessly. 'I agree withyoa, Mark. A good umbrella, any day . . .'

Mr. Croyland rose to his feet. ' I must go to bed/ he said. ' And so
should you, my dear.'

The little white hand upon her shoulder was benevolent, almost
apostolic. £ You're tired after your journey/

* You mean, you think I'm drunk/ Helen answered, wiping her eyes. '
Well, perhaps you're right. Gosh/ she added, ' how nice it is to laugh
for a change ! '

When Mr. Croyland was gone, and Beppo with him, Staithes turned towards
her. ' You're in a queer state, Helen/

' I'm amused/ she explained.

'What by?1

' By everything. But it began with Dante ; Dante and Hans Andersen. If
you'd been married to Hugh, you'd know why that was so extraordinarily
funny. Imagine Europa if the bull had turned out after all to be
Narcissus ! "

' I don't think you'd better talk so loud/ said Staithes, looking across
the room to where, with an expression on his face of hopeless misery,
Hugh was pretending to listen to an animated discussion between Caldwell
and the young German.

Helen also looked round for a moment ; then turned back with a careless
shrug of the shoulders. * If he says he's invisible, why shouldn't / say
I'm inaudible ? ' Her eyes brightened again with laughter. ' I shall
write a book called The Inaudible Mistress. A woman

304


CHAPTER XXI

who says exactly what she thinks about her lovers while they're making
love to her. But they can't hear her. Not a word.' She emptied her glass
and refilled it

* And what does she say about them ? '

* The truth, of course. Nothing but the truth. That the romantic Don
Juan is just a crook.

Only I'm afraid that in reality she wouldn't find that out till
afterwards. Still, one might be allowed a bit of poetic licence—make the
esprit d'escalier happen at the same time as the romantic affair. The
moonlight, and " My darling," and " I adore you," and those
extraordinary sensations —and at the same moment "You're nothing but a
sneak-thief, nothing but a low blackguardly swindler." And then there'd
be the spiritual lover—Hans Dante, in fact.' She shook her head. ' Talk
of Kraft Ebbing ! '

' But what does she say to him ? '

' What indeed ! ' Helen took a gulp of wine. ' Luckily she's inaudible.
We'd better skip that chapter and come straight to the epicurean sage.
With the sage, she doesn't have to be quite so obscure. " You think
you're a man, because you happen not to be impotent."

That's what she says to him. " But in fact you're not a man. You're
sub-human. In spite of youf sageness —because of it even. Worse than the
crook in some ways." And then, bang, like a sign from heaven, down comes
the dog ! '

* But what dog ? '

1 Why, the dog Father Hopkins can't protect you from. The sort of dog
that bursts like a bomb when

3°ï

EYELESS IN GAZA

you drop it out of an aeroplane. Bang ! * The laughing excitement
seethed and bubbled within her, seeking expression, seeking an outlet;
and the only possible assuagement was through some kind of outrage, some
violence publicly done to her own and other people's feelings. ' It
almost fell on Anthony and me,' she went on, finding a strange relief in
speaking thus openly and hilariously about the unmentionable event. ' On
the roof of his house it was. And we had no clothes on. Like the Garden
of Eden. And then, out of the blue, down came that dog—and exploded, I
tell you, literally exploded/ She threw out her hands in a violent
gesture. * Dog's blood from head to foot. We were drenched—but drenched
I In spite of which this imbecile goes and writes me a letter/ She
opened her bag and produced it. ' Imagining I'd read it, I suppose. As
though nothing had happened, as though we were still in the Garden of
Eden. I always told him he was a fool. There ! ' She handed the letter
to Staithes. * You open it and see what the idiot has to say. Something
witty, no doubt; something airy and casual; humorously wondering why I
took it into my funny little head to go away/ Then, noticing that Mark
was still holding the letter unopened, * But why don't you read it ? '
she asked.

* Do you really want me to ? '

' Of course. Read it aloud. Read it with expression/ She rolled the r
derisively.

1 Very well, then/ He tore open the envelope and

306


CHAPTER XXI

unfolded the thin sheets. ' " I went to look for you at the hotel," * he
read out slowly, frowning over the small and hurried script. * " You
were gone—and it was like a kind of death." '

' Ass ! ' commented Helen.

' " It's probably too late, probably useless ; but I feel I must try to
tell you in this letter some of the things I meant to say to you,
yesterday evening, in words. In one way it's easier—for I'm inept when
it comes to establishing a purely personal contact with another human
being. But in another way, it's much more difficult; for these written
words will just be words and no more, will come to you, floating in a
void, unsupported, without the life of my physical presence." '

Helen gave a snort of contemptuous laughter. ' As though that would have
been a recommendation ! * She drank some more wine.

* " Well, what I wanted to tell you," ' Staithes read on, * " was this :
that suddenly (it was like a conversion, like an inspiration) while you
were kneeling there yesterday on the roof, after that horrible thing had
happened . . ." '

* He means the dog,' said Helen. ' Why can't he say so ? '

* " • • . suddenly I realized . . ." " Mark Staithes broke off. ' Look
here,' he said, * I really can't go on.'

' Why not ? I insist on your going on,' she cried excitedly.

He shook his head. * I've got no right 1 *

307

EYELESS IN GAZA

' But I've given you the right/

* Yes, I know. But he hasn't/

' What has he got to do with it ? Now that I've received the letter . .
/

* But it's a love-letter/

1A love-letter ? ' Helen repeated incredulously, then burst out
laughing. * That's too good

! ' she cried. * That's really sublime ! Here, give it to me/ She
snatched the letter out of his hand. ' Where are we ? Ah, here ! "...
kneeling on the roof after that horrible thing had happened, suddenly I
realized that I'd been living a kind of outrageous lie towards you ! "

' She declaimed the words rhetorically and to the accompaniment of
florid gesticulations.

c " I realized that in spite of all the elaborate pretence that it was
just a kind of detached irresponsible amusement, I really loved you/' He
really lo-o-oved me/ she repeated, drawing the word into a grotesque
caricature of itself. ' Isn't that wonderful? He really lo-o-oved me/
Then, turning round in her chair, * Hugh ! ' she called across the room.

' Helen, be quiet ! '

But the desire, the need to consummate the outrage was urgent within
her.

She shook off the restraining hand that Staithes had laid on her arm,
shouted Hugh's name again and, when they all turned towards her, ' I
just wanted to tell you he really lo-o-oved me,' she said, waving the
letter,

' Oh, for God's sake shut up ! '

308


CHAPTER XXI

11 most certainly won't shut up/ she retorted, turning back to Mark.
'Why shouldn't I tell Hugh the good news ? He'll be delighted, seeing
how much he lo-o-oves me himself.

Don't you, Hughie ? ' She swung back again, and her face was flushed and
brilliant with excitement. ' Don't you ? ' Hugh made no answer, but sat
there pale and speechless, looking at the floor.

1 Of course you do,' she answered for him. l In spite of all appearances
to the contrary.

Or rather,' she emended, uttering a little laugh, ' in spite of all
disappearances—seeing that it was always invisible, that love of yours.
Oh yes, Hughie darling, definitely invisible. But still . . . still, in
spite of all disappearances to the contrary, you do lo-o-ove me, don't
you ? Don't you ? ' she insisted, trying to force him to answer her, '
don't you ? '

Hugh rose to his feet and, without speaking a word, almost ran out of
the room.

' Hugh ! ' Caldwell shouted after him, ' Hugh ! ' There was no answer.
Caldwell looked round at the others. * I think perhaps one ought to see
that he's all right,' he said, with the maternal solicitude of a
publisher who sees a first-rate literary property rushing perhaps
towards suicide. ' One never knows.' And jumping up he hurried after
Hugh. The door slammed.

There was a moment's silence. Then, startlingly, Helen broke into
laughter. ' Don't be alarmed, Herr Giesebrecht,' she said, turning to
the young German. 1 It's just a little bit of English family life. Die
Farnilk

l* 3°9

EYELESS IN GAZA

im Wohn%immery as we used to learn at school. Was tut die Mutter? Die
Mutter spielt Klavier. Und was tut der Vater ? Der Vater sit{t in einem
Lehnstuhl und raucht seine Pfeife. Just that, Herr Giesebrecht, no more.
Just a typical bourgeois family/

' Bourgeois/ the young man repeated, and nodded gravely. * You say
better than you know.'

<DoI?'

* You are a wictim/ he went on, very slowly, and separating word from
word, * a wictim of capitalist society. It is full of wices . . .'

Helen threw back her head and laughed again more loudly than before ;
then, controlling herself with an effort, ' You mustn't think I'm
laughing at you/ she gasped. ' I think you're being sweet to
me—extraordinarily decent. And probably you're quite right about
capitalist society. Only somehow at this particular moment—I don't know
why—it seemed rather . . . rather . . .' The laughter broke out once
more. ' I'm sorry.'

* We must be going/ said Mark, and rose from his chair. The young German
also got up and came across the room towards them. * Good-night, Helen.'

' Good-night, Mark. Good-night, Mr. Giesebrecht. Come and see me again,
will you ? I'll behave better next time.'

He returned her smile and bowed. * I will come whenever you wish/ he
said.

310


CHAPTER XXII

December 8th 1926

ARK lived in a dingy house off the Fulham Road. Dark, brown brick with
terra-cotta trimmings ; and, within, patterned linoleum ; bits of red
Axminster carpet ; wallpapers of ochre sprinlded with bunches of
cornflowers, of green, with crimson roses ; fumed oak chairs and tables
; rep curtains ; bamboo stands supporting glazed blue pots. The
hideousness, Anthony reflected, was so complete, so absolutely
unrelieved, that it could only have been intentional. Mark must
deliberately have chosen the ugliest surroundings he could find. To
punish himself, no doubt—but why, for what offence ?

1 Some beer ? *

Anthony nodded.

The other opened a bottle, filled a single glass ; but himself did not
drink.

1 You still play, I see/ said Anthony, pointing in the direction of the
upright piano.

' A little,' Mark had to admit. ' It's a consolation.'

The fact that the Matthew Passion, for example, the Hammerklavier
Sonata, had had human authors was a source of hope. It was just
conceivable that humanity might some day and somehow be made a little
more

311

M

EYELESS IN GAZA

John-Sebastian-like. If there were no Well-Tempered Clavichord, why
should one bother even to wish for revolutionary change ?

' Turning one kind of common humanity into common humanity of a slightly
different kind—well, if that's all that revolution can do, the game
isn't worth the candle.'

Anthony protested. For a sociologist it was the most fascinating of all
games.

' To watch or to play ? *

' To watch, of course.'

A spectacle bottomlessly comic in its grotesqueness, endlessly varied.
But looking closely, one could detect the uniformities under the
diversity, the fixed rules of the endlessly shifting game.

' A revolution to transform common humanity into common humanity of
another variety.

You find it horrifying. But that's just what I'd like to live long
enough to see. Theory being put to the test of practice. To detect,
after your catastrophic reform of everything, the same old uniformities
working themselves out in a slightly different way—I can't imagine
anything more satisfying. Like logically inferring the existence of a
new planet and then discovering it with the telescope. As for producing
more John Sebastians . . .' He shrugged his shoulders. ' You might as
well imagine that revolution will increase the number of Siamese twins.'

That was the chief difference between literature and

312


CHAPTER XXII

life. In books, the proportion of exceptional to commonplace people is
high ; in reality, very low.

' Books are opium/ said Mark.

1 Precisely. That's why it's doubtful if there'll ever be such a thing
as proletarian literature. Even proletarian books will deal with
exceptional proletarians. And exceptional proletarians are no more
proletarian than exceptional bourgeois are bourgeois. Life's so ordinary
that literature has to deal with the exceptional. Exceptional talent,
power, social position, wealth. Hence those geniuses of fiction, those
leaders and dukes and millionaires. People who are completely
conditioned by circumstances—one can be desperately sorry for them ; but
one can't find their lives very dramatic. Drama begins where there's
freedom of choice. And freedom of choice begins when social or
psychological conditions are exceptional. That's why the inhabitants of
imaginative literature have always been recruited from the pages of Who
s Who'

'But do you really think that people with money or power are free ? '

' Freer than the poor, at any rate. Less completely conditioned by
matter and other people's wills.'

Mark shook his head. ' You don't know my father/ he said. ' Or my
disgusting brothers.'

At Bulstrode, Anthony remembered, it was always, ' My pater says . . . '
or ' My frater at Cambridge . . .*

' The whole vile brood of Staitheses/ Mark went on.

313

EYELESS IN GAZA

He described the Staithes who was now a Knight Commander of St. Michael
and St.

George and a Permanent Under-Secretaiy. Pleased as Punch with it all,
and serenely conscious of his own extraordinary merits, adoring himself
for being such a great man.

' As though there were any real difficulty in getting where he's got !
Anything in the least creditable about that kind of piddling little
conquest ! ' Mark made a flayed grimace of contemptuous disgust. ' He
thinks he's a marvel.'

And the other Staitheses, the Staitheses of the younger generation—they
also thought that they were marvels. There was one of them at Delhi,
heroically occupied in bullying Indians who couldn't stand up for
themselves. And the other was on the Stock Exchange and highly
successful. Successful as what? As a cunning exploiter of ignorance and
greed and the insanity of gamblers and misers. And on top of everything
the man prided himself on being an amorist, a professional Don Juan.

(Why the poor devil shouldn't be allowed to have a bit of fun, Anthony
was unable, as he sipped his beer, to imagine.)

One of the boys ! One of the dogs ! A dog among bitches—what a triumph !

• And you call them free/ Mark concluded. * But how can a climber be
free ? He's tied to his ladder.'

' But social ladders/ Anthony objected, ' become broader as they rise.
At the bottom, you can only just

3M


CHAPTER XXII

get your foot on to them. At the top the rungs are twenty yards across.'

* Well, perhaps it's a wider perch than the bank clerk's/ Mark admitted.
' But not wide enough for me. And not high enough ; above all, not clean
enough/

The rage they had been in when he enlisted during the war as a private !
Feeling that he'd let the family down. The creatures were incapable of
seeing that, if you had the choice, it was more decent to elect to be a
private than a staff lieutenant.

4 Turds to the core,' he said. * So they can't think anything but
turdish thoughts. And above all, they can't conceive of anyone else
thinking differently. Turd calls to turd ; and, when it's answered by
non-turd, it's utterly at a loss.'

And when the war was over, there was that job his father had taken such
pains to find for him in the City— with Lazarus and Coit, no less !—just
waiting for him to step into the moment he was demobilized. A job with
almost unlimited prospects for a young man with brains and energy—for a
Staithes, in a word. 'A five-figure income by the time you're fifty,'
his father had insisted almost lyrically, and had been really hurt and
grieved, as well as mortally offended, furiously angry, when Mark
replied that he had no intention of taking it.

'"But why not?" the poor old turd kept asking. " Why not ? " And simply
couldn't see that it was just because it was so good that I couldn't
take his job. So EYELESS IN GAZA

unfairly good ! So ignobly good ! He just couldn't see it. According to
his ideas, I ought to have rushed at it, headlong, like all the Gadarene
swine rolled into one. Instead of which I returned him his cow-pat and
went to Mexico—to look after a coffeefinca*

( But did you know anything about coffee ? '

* Of course not. That was one of the attractions of the job/ He smiled.
' When I did know something about it, I came back to see if there was
anything doing here/

' And is there anything doing ? '

The other shrugged his shoulders. God only knew. One joined the Party,
one distributed literature, one financed pressure-groups out of the
profits on synthetic carnations, one addressed meetings and wrote
articles. And perhaps it was all quite useless. Perhaps, on the
contrary, the auspicious moment might some day present itself . . .

' And then what ? ' asked Anthony.

'Ah, that's the question. It'll be all right at the beginning.
Revolution's delightful in the preliminary stages. So long as it's a
question of getting rid of the people at the top. But afterwards, if the
thing's a success —what then? More wireless sets, more chocolates, more
beauty parlours, more girls with better contraceptives/ He shook his
head. ' The moment you give people the chance to be piggish, they take
it— thankfully. That freedom you were talking about just now, the
freedom at the top of the social ladder 316


CHAPTER XXII

—it's just the licence to be a pig; or alternatively a prig, a
self-satisfied pharisee like my father. Or else both at once, like my
precious brother. Pig and prig simultaneously. In Russia they haven't
yet had the chance to be pigs. Circumstances have forced them to be
ascetics. But suppose their economic experiment succeeds ; suppose a
time comes when they're all prosperous—what's to prevent them turning
into Babbitts ? Millions and millions of soft, piggish Babbitts, ruled
by a small minority of ambitious Staitheses.'

Anthony smiled. * A new phase of the game played according to the old
unchanging rules.'

' I'm horribly afraid you're right,' said the other. ' It's orthodox
Marxism, of course.

Behaviour and modes of thought are the outcome of economic
circumstances. Reproduce Babbitt's circumstances and you can't help
reproducing his manners and customs. Christ !

' He rose, walked to the piano and, drawing up a chair, sat down in
front of it, ' Let's try to get that taste out of our mouths.' He held
his large bony hands poised for a moment above die keyboard ; then began
to play Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D. They were in another universe, a
world where Babbitts and Staitheses didn't exist, were inconceivable.

Mark had played for only a minute or two when the door opened and an
elderly woman, thin and horse-faced, in a brown silk dress and wearing
round her neck an old diseased, brown fur, entered the room. She walked
on tiptoe, acting in elaborate pantomime 3*7

EYELESS IN GAZA

the very personification of silence, but in the process produced an
extraordinary volume and variety of disturbing noises—creaking of shoes,
rustling of silk, glassy clinkings of bead necklaces, jingling of the
silver objects suspended by little chains from the waist.

Mark went on playing without turning his head. Embarrassed, Anthony rose
and bowed.

The horse-faced creature waved him back to his place, and cautiously, in
a final prolonged explosion of noise, sat down on the sofa.

' Exquisite ! * she cried when the final chord had been struck. ' Play
us something more, Mark.'

But Mark got up, shaking his head. * I want to introduce you to Miss
Pendle,' he said to Anthony; and to the old woman, ' Anthony Beavis was
at Bulstrode with me,' he explained.

Anthony took her hand. She gave him a smile. The teeth, which were false
ones and badly fitting, were improbably too white and bright. * So you
were at Bulstrode with Mark ! ' she cried- ' Isn't that extraordinary !
*

1 Extraordinary that we should still be on speaking terms ? ' said Mark.

1 No, no,* said Miss Pendle, and with a playfulness that Anthony found
positively ghoulish, gave him a little slap on the arm. ' You know
exactly what I mean. He always was like that, Mr. Beavis, even when he
was a boy—do you remember ? '

Anthony duly nodded assent.

318


CHAPTER XXII

' So sharp and sarcastic ! Even before you knew him at Bulstrode.
Shocking ! ' She flashed her false teeth at Mark in a sparkle of loving
mock-reprobation. ' He was my first pupil, you know,' she went on
confidentially. ' And I was his first teacher/

Anthony rose gallantly to the occasion. ' Let me congratulate Mark/ he
said, * and condole with you.'

Miss Pendle looked at Mark. ' Do you think I need his condolences ? '
she asked, almost archly, like a young girl, coquettishly fishing for
compliments.

Mark did not answer, only smiled and shrugged his shoulders. * I'll go
and make some tea/ he said. ' You'd like tea, wouldn't you, Penny ? *
Miss Pendle nodded, and he rose and left the room.

Anthony was wondering rather uncomfortably what he should say to this
disquietingly human old nag, when Miss Pendle turned towards him. ' He's
wonderful, Mark is ; really wonderful.' The false teeth flashed, the
words came gushingly with an incongruously un-equine vehemence. Anthony
felt himself writhing with an embarrassed distaste. ' Nobody knows how
kind he is/ she went on. ' He doesn't like it told ; but I don't mind—I
want people to know.' She nodded so emphatically that the beads of her
necklace rattled. ' I was ill last year/ she went on. Her savings had
gone, she couldn't get another job. In despair, she had written to some
of her old employers, Sir Michael Staithes among them. '

Sir Michael sent me five pounds/ she said. * That kept me going for a
319

EYELESS IN GAZA

bit. Then I had to write again. He said he couldn't do anything more.
But he mentioned the matter to Mark. And what do you think Mark did ? *
She looked at Anthony in silence, a horse transfigured, with an
expression at once of tenderness and triumph and her red-lidded brown
eyes full of tears.

1 What did he do ? ' asked Anthony.

' He came to me where I was staying—I had a room in Camberwell then—he
came and he took me away with him. Straight away, the moment I could get
my things packed up, and brought me here. I've kept house for him ever
since. What do you think of that, Mr.

Beavis ? ' she asked. Her voice trembled and she had to wipe her eyes ;
but she was still triumphant. ' What do you think of that ? '

Anthony really didn't know what to think of it ; but said, meanwhile,
that it was wonderful.

' Wonderful,' the horse repeated, approvingly. * That's exactly what it
is. But you mustn't tell him I told you. He'd be furious with me. He's
like that text in the Gospel about not letting your left hand know what
your right hand is doing. That's what he's like.' She gave her eyes a
final wipe and blew her nose. * There, I hear him coming/ she said, and,
before Anthony could intervene, had jumped up, darted across the room in
a storm of rustlings and rattlings, and opened the door. Mark entered,
carrying a tray with the tea-things and a plate of mixed biscuits.

Miss Pendle poured out, said she oughtn't to eat

320


CHAPTER XXII

anything at this time of night, but, all the same, took a round biscuit
with pink sugar icing on it.

' Now, tell me what sort of a boy young Master Mark was at Bulstrode,'
she said in that playful way of hers. 1 Up to all kind of mischief, I'll
be bound ! ' She took another bite at her biscuit

' He bullied me a good deal,' said Anthony.

Miss Pendle interrupted her quick nibbling to laugh aloud. ' You naughty
boy ! ' she said to Mark ; then the jaws started to work again.

4 Being so good at football, he had a right to bully me/

1 Yes, you were captain of the eleven, weren't you ? '

' I forget/ said Mark.

* He forgets 1 ' Miss Pendle repeated, looking triumphantly at Anthony.
' That's typical of him. He forgets ! ' She helped herself to a second
biscuit, pushing aside the plain ones to select another with icing on
it, and began to nibble once more with the intense and concentrated
passion of those whose only sensual pleasures have been the pleasures of
the palate.

When she had gone to bed, the two men sat down again by the fire. There
was a long silence.

* She's rather touching,' said Anthony at last.

For some time Mark made no comment. Then, 1 A bit too touching,' he
brought out.

Anthony looked into his face and saw there a demonstration of the
anatomy of sardonic irony. There was another silence. The clock, which
was supported

321

EYELESS IN GAZA

by two draped nymphs in gilded bronze, ticked from its place among the
imitation Dresden figures that thronged the shelves of the elaborate
overmantel. Hideous on purpose, Anthony said to himself, as his eye took
in the details of each separate outrage on good taste. And the poor old
horse—was she merely the largest, the most monstrous of the knick-knacks
? ' I'm surprised/ he said aloud, ' that you don't wear a hair-shirt. Or
perhaps you do ? ' he added.

32a


CHAPTER XXIII

June ist 1934

^pO-NIGHT, at dinner with Mark, saw Helen, for the iL first time since
my return from America. Consider the meaning of a face. A face can be a
symbol, signifying matter which would require volumes for its exposition
in successive detail. A vast sum, for the person on whom it acts as a
symbol, of feelings and thoughts, of remembered sensations, impressions,
judgments, experiences—all rendered synthetically and simultaneously, at
a single glance. As she came into the restaurant, it was like the
drowning man's instantaneous vision of life. A futile, bad,
unsatisfactory life ; and a vision, charged with regret. All those wrong
choices, those opportunities irrevocably missed ! And that sad face was
not only a symbol, indirectly expressive of my history; it was also a
directly expressive emblem of hers. A history for whose saddening and
embittering quality I was at least in part responsible. If I had
accepted the love she wanted to give me, if I had consented to love (for
I could have loved) in return . . . But I preferred to be free, for the
sake of my work—in other words, to remain enslaved in a world where
there could be no question of freedom, for the sake of my amusements. I
insisted on irresponsible sensuality, rather

323

EYELESS IN GAZA

than love. Insisted, in other words, on her becoming a means to the end
of my detached, physical satisfaction and, conversely, of course, on my
becoming a means to hers.

Curious how irrelevant appears the fact of having been, technically, '
lovers ' ! It doesn't qualify her indifference or my feeling. There's a
maxim of La Rochefoucauld's about women forgetting the favours they have
accorded to past lovers. I used to like it for being cynical ; but
really it's just a bald statement of the fact that something that's
meant to be irrelevant, i.e. sensuality, is irrelevant. Into my present
complex of thoughts, feelings and memories, physical desire, I find,
enters hardly at all. In spite of the fact that my memories are of
intense and complete satisfactions. Surprising, the extent to which
eroticism is a matter of choice and focus. I don't think much in erotic
terms now; but very easily could, if I wished to. Choose to consider
individuals in their capacity as potential givers and receivers of
pleasure, focus attention on sensual satisfactions : eroticism will
become immensely important and great quantities of energy will be
directed along erotic channels. Choose a different conception of the
individual, another focal range : energy will flow elsewhere and
eroticism seem relatively unimportant.

Spent a good part of the evening arguing about peace and social justice.
Mark, as sarcastically disagreeable as he knew how to be about Miller
and what 3*4


CHAPTER XXIII

he called my neo-Jesus avatar. * If the swine want to rip one another's
guts out, let them; anyhow, you can't prevent them. Swine will be swine/
Rut may become human, I insisted. Homo non nascitur> fit. Or rather
makes himself out of the ready-made elements and potentialities of man
with which he's born.

Helen's was the usual communist argument—no peace or social justice
without a preliminary ' liquidation ' of capitalists, liberals and so
forth. As though you could use violent, unjust means and achieve peace
and justice ! Means determine ends ; and must be like the ends proposed.
Means intrinsically different from the ends proposed achieve ends like
themselves, not like those they were meant to achieve. Violence and war
will produce a peace and a social organization having the potentialities
of more violence and war. The war to end war resulted, as usual, in a
peace essentially like war; the revolution to achieve communism, in a
hierarchical state where a minority rules by police methods à la
Metternich-Hitler-Mussolini, and where the power to oppress in virtue of
being rich is replaced by the power to oppress in virtue of being a
member of the oligarchy. Peace and social justice, only obtainable by
means that are just and pacific. And people will behave justly and
pacifically only if they have trained themselves as individuals to do
so, even in circumstances where it would be easier to behave violently
and unjustly. And the training must be simultaneously physical and
mental. Knowledge of how to use the self 3*5

EYELESS IN GAZA

and of what the self should be used for, Neo-Ignatius and neo-Sandow was
Mark's verdict.

Put Mark into a cab and walked, as the night was beautiful, all the way
from Soho to Chelsea. Theatres were closing. Helen brightened suddenly
to a mood of malevolent high spirits. Commenting in a ringing voice on
passers-by. As though we were at the Zoo.

Embarrassing, but funny and acute, as when she pointed to the rich young
men in top-hats trying to look like the De Reszke Aristocrat, or opening
and shutting cigarette-cases in the style of Gerald du Maurier ; to the
women trying to look like Vogue, or expensive advertisements (for winter
cruises or fur coats), head in air, eyelids dropped superciliously—or
slouching like screen vamps, with their stomachs stuck out, as though
expecting twins. The pitiable models on which people form themselves !
Once it was the Imitation of Christ—now of Hollywood.

Were silent when we had left the crowds. Then Helen asked if I were
happy. I said, yes—

though didn't know if happiness was the right word. More substantial,
more complete, more interested, more aware. If not happy exactly, at any
rate having greater potentialities for happiness. Another silence. Then,
* I thought I could never see you again, because of that dog. Then Ekki
came, and the dog was quite irrelevant. And now he's gone, it's still
irrelevant. For another reason. Everything's irrelevant, for that
matter. Except Communism/ But that was an afterthought—an

326


CHAPTER XXIII

expression of piety, uttered by force of habit. I said our ends were the
same, the means adopted, different. For her, end justified means ; for
me, means the end. Perhaps, I said, one day she would see the importance
of the means.

June 3rd 1934'

At to-day's lesson with Miller found myself suddenly a step forward in
my grasp of the theory and practice of the technique. To learn proper
use one must first inhibit all improper uses of the self. Refuse to be
hurried into gaining ends by the equivalent (in personal,
psycho-physiological terms) of violent revolution ; inhibit this
tendency, concentrate on the means whereby the end is to be achieved ;
then act. This process entails knowing good and bad use—knowing them
apart. By the ' feel.' Increased awareness and increased power of
control result. Awareness and control : trivialities take on new
significance. Indeed, nothing is trivial any more or negligible.
Cleaning teeth, putting on shoes—such processes are reduced by habits of
bad use to a kind of tiresome non-existence. Become conscious, inhibit,
cease to be a greedy end-gainer, concentrate on means : tiresome
non-existence turns into absorbingly interesting reality. In
Evans-Wentz's last book on Tibet I find among ' The Precepts of the
Gurus ' the injunction : *

Constantly retain alertness of consciousness in walking, in sitting, in
eating, in sleeping/

An injunction, like most injunctions, un-

327

EYELESS IN GAZA

accompanied by instructions as to the right way of carrying it out.
Here, practical instructions accompany injunctions ; one is taught how
to become aware. And not only that. Also how to perform rightly, instead
of wrongly, the activities of which there is awareness. Nor is this all.
Awareness and power of control are transferable. Skill acquired in
getting to know the muscular aspect of mind-body can be carried over
into the exploration of other aspects. There is increasing ability to
detect one's motives for any given piece of behaviour, to assess
correctly the quality of a feeling, the real significance of a thought.
Also, one becomes more clearly and consistently conscious of what's
going on in the outside world, and the judgment associated with that
heightened consciousness is improved. Control also is transferred.
Acquire the art of inhibiting muscular bad use and you acquire thereby
the art of inhibiting more complicated trains of behaviour. Not only
this : there is prevention as well as cure. Given proper correlation,
many occasions for behaving undesirably just don't arise. There is an
end, for example, of neurotic anxieties and depressions—whatever the
previous history. For note : most infantile and adolescent histories are
disastrous : yet only some individuals develop serious neurosis.

Those, precisely, in whom use of the self is particularly bad. They
succumb because resistance is poor. In practice, neurosis is always
associated with some kind of wrong use.

(Note the typically bad physical posture of neurotics and lunatics.

328


CHAPTER XXIII

The stooping back, the muscular tension, the sunken head.) Re-educate.
Give back correct physical use. You remove a keystone of the arch
constituting the neurotic personality. The neurotic personality
collapses. And in its place is built up a personality in which all the
habits of physical use are correct. But correct physical use
entails—since body-mind is indivisible except in thought—correct mental
use. Most of us are slightly neurotic. Even slight neurosis provides
endless occasions for bad behaviour. Teaching of right use gets rid of
neurosis—therefore of many occasions for bad behaviour. Hitherto
preventive ethics has been thought of as external to individuals. Social
and economic reforms carried out with a view to eliminating occasions
for bad behaviour. This is important. But not nearly enough. Belief that
it is enough makes the social-reform conception of progress nonsensical.
The knowledge that it is nonsensical has always given me pleasure.
Sticking pins in large, highly inflated balloons—one of the most
delightful of amusements. But a bit childish ; and after a time it
palls. So how satisfactory to find that there seems to be a way of
making sense of the nonsense. A method of achieving progress from within
as well as from without. Progress, not only as a citizen, a
machine-minder and machine-user, but also as a human being.

Prevention is good ; but can't eliminate the necessity for cure. The
power to cure bad behaviour seems essentially similar to the power to
cure bad co-ordina-329

EYELESS IN GAZA

tion. One learns this last when learning the proper use of self. There
is a transference. The power to inhibit and control. It becomes easier
to inhibit undesirable impulses. Easier to follow as well as see and
approve the better. Easier to put good intentions into practice and be
patient, good-tempered, kind, unrapacious, chaste.

31°


CHAPTER XXIV

June 23rd and July 5th 192.J

SHE couldn't afford it; but that didn't matter. Mrs. Amberley was used
to doing things she couldn't afford. It was really so simple ; you just
sold a little War Loan, and there you were. There you were with your
motor tour in Italy, your nudes by Pascin, your account at Fortnum and
Mason. And there, finally, you were in Berkshire, in the most adorable
little old house, smelling of pot-pourri, with towering lime trees on
the lawn and the downs at your back door, stretching away mile after
mile in smooth green nakedness under the sky. She couldn't afford it ;
but it was so beautiful, so perfect. And after all, what were a hundred
and fifty pounds of War Loan ? How much did they bring in ?

About five pounds a year, when the taxes had been paid. And what were
five pounds a year ? Nothing. Absolutely nothing. And besides, Gerry was
going to re-invest her money for her. Her capital might have shrunk ;
but her income would soon start growing. Next year she would be able to
afford it ; and so, in anticipation of that happy time, here she was,
sitting under the lime trees on the lawn with her guests around her.

Propped up on one elbow, Helen was lying on a rug behind her mother's
chair. She was paying no attention

33*

EYELESS IN GAZA

to what was being said. The country was so exquisitely beautiful that
one really couldn't listen to old Anthony holding forth about the place
of machines in history; no, the only thing one could do in such heavenly
circumstances was to play with the kitten. What the kitten liked best,
she found, was the rug game. You pushed a twig under the corner of the
rug, very slowly, till the end reappeared again on the other side, like
the head of an animal cautiously peeping out from its burrow. A little
way, very suspiciously ; and then with a jerk you withdrew it. The
animal had taken fright and scuttled back to cover. Then, plucking up
its courage, out it came once more, went nosing to right and left
between the grass stems, then retired to finish its meal safely under
the rug. Long seconds passed ; and suddenly out it popped like a
jack-in-the-box, as though it were trying to catch any impending danger
unaware, and was back again in a flash. Then once more, very doubtfully
and reluctantly—impelled only by brute necessity and against its better
judgment—it emerged into the open, conscious, you felt, of being the
predestined victim, foreknowing its dreadful fate. And all this time the
tabby kitten was following its comings and goings with a bright
expressionless ferocity. Each time the twig retired under the rug, he
came creeping, with an infinity of precautions, a few inches nearer.

Nearer, nearer, and now the moment had come for him to crouch for the
final, decisive spring. The green eyes stared with an absurd balefulness
; the tiny body was so heavily overcharged with a tigerish

332


CHAPTER XXIV

intensity of purpose that, not the tail only, but the whole hindquarters
shook under the emotional pressure. Overhead, meanwhile, the lime trees
rustled in a faint wind, the round dapplings of golden light moved
noiselessly back and forth across the grass. On the other side of the
lawn the herbaceous borders blazed in the sunshine as though they were
on fire, and beyond them lay the downs like huge animals, fast asleep,
with the indigo shadows of clouds creeping across their flanks. It was
all so beautiful, so heavenly, that every now and then Helen simply
couldn't stand it any longer, but had to drop the twig and catch up the
kitten, and rub her cheek against the silky fur, and whisper meaningless
words to him in baby language, and hold him up with ridiculously
dangling paws in front of her face, so that their noses almost touched,
and stare into those blankly bright green eyes, till at last the
helpless little beast began to mew so pathetically that she had to let
him go again. * Poor darling ! ' she murmured repentantly. ' Did I
torture him? * But the torturing had served its purpose; the painful
excess of her happiness had overflowed, as it were, and left her at
ease, the heavenly beauty was once more supportable. She picked up the
twig. Forgivingly, for he had already forgotten everything, the kitten
started the game all over again.

The ringing of a bicycle bell made her look up. It

was the postman riding up the drive with the afternoon

delivery. Helen scrambled to her feet and, taking the

kitten with her, walked quickly but, she hoped, incon-

m 333

EYELESS IN GAZA

spicuously towards the house. At the door she met the parlour-maid
coming out with the letters. There were two for her. The first she
opened was from Joyce, from Aldershot.

(She had to smile as she read the address at the head of the paper. '
Joyce is now living at

^-aider-shot,' her mother would say, lingering over the first syllable
of the name with a kind of hollow emphasis and in a tone of slightly
shocked incredulity, as though it were really inconceivable that any
daughter of hers should find herself at such a place. ' At

^a/dershot, my dear.' And she managed to endow that military suburb with
the fabulous strangeness of Tibet, the horror and remoteness of darkest
Liberia. * Living at A-a-a\àex-shot—as a mem-sahib/)

1 Just a line,' Helen read, still smiling, * to thank you for your sweet
letter. I am rather worried by what you say about Mother's taking so
many sleeping draughts. They cant be good for her. Colin thinks she
ought to take more healthy exercise. Perhaps you might suggest riding. I
have been having riding lessons lately, and it is really lovely once you
are used to it. We are now quite settled in, and you have no idea how
adorable our little house looks now. Colin and I worked like niggers to
get things straight, and I must say the results are worth all the
trouble. I had to pay a lot of nerve-racking calls ; but everybody has
been very nice to me and I feel quite at home now. Colin sends his
love.—Yours,

' Joyce.'

The other letter—and that was why she had gone to meet the postman—was
from Hugh Ledwidge. If the

334


CHAPTER XXIV

letters had been brought to Mrs. Amberley on the lawn ; if she had
sorted them out, in public . . . Helen flushed with imagined shame and
anger at the thought of what her mother might have said about that
letter from Hugh, In spite of all the people sitting round ; or rather
because of them. When they were alone, Helen generally got off with a
teasing word. But when other people were there, Mrs. Amberley would feel
inspired by her audience to launch out into elaborate descriptions and
commentaries. * Hugh and Helen/ she would explain, ' they're a mixture
between Socrates and Alcibiades and Don Quixote and Dulcinea.' There
were moments when she hated her mother. ' It's a case/ said the
remembered voice, ' a case of: I could not love thee, dear, so much,
loved I not ethnology more/ Helen had had to suffer a great deal on
account of those letters. She tore open the envelope.

* 22.vi.27.

* Midsummer Day, Helen. But you're too young, I expect, to think much
about the significance of special days. You've only been in the world
for about seven thousand days altogether ; and one has got to have lived
through at least ten thousand before one begins to realize that there
aren't an indefinite number of them and that you can't do exactly what
you want with them. I've been here more than thirteen thousand days, and
the end's visible, the boundless possibilities have narrowed down. One
must cut according to one's cloth; and one's cloth is not only exiguous
; it's also of one special kind—and generally of poor quality at that.
When

335

EYELESS IN GAZA

one's young, one thinks one can tailor one's time into all sorts of
splendid and fantastic garments—shakoes and chasubles, and Ph.D gowns ;
Nijinsky's tights and Rimbaud's slate-blue trousers and Garibaldi's red
shirt. But by the time you've lived ten thousand days, you begin to
realize that you'll be lucky if you succeed in cutting one decent
workaday suit out of the time at your disposal. It's a depressing
realization ; and Midsummer is one of the days that brings it home. The
longest day. One of the sixty or seventy longest days of one's five and
twenty thousand. And what have I done with this longest day—longest of
so few, of so uniform, of so shoddy ? The catalogue of my occupations
would be humiliatingly absurd and pointless. The only creditable and, in
any profound sense of the word, reasonable thing I've done is to think a
little about you, Helen, and write this letter. . . .'

' Any interesting letters ? ' asked Mrs. Amberley when her daughter came
out again from the house.

* Only a note from Joyce.'

* From our mem-sahib ? ' Helen nodded.

' She's living at A-aldershot, you know,' said Mary Amberley to the
assembled company. '

At A-a-alder-shot,' she insisted, dragging out the first syllable, till
the place became ludicrously unreal and the fact that Joyce lived there,
a fantastic and slightly indecent myth.

1 You can thank your stars that you aren't living at Aldershot,' said
Anthony. * After all, you ought to be. A general's daughter.'

336


CHAPTER XXIV

For the first moment Mary was put out by his interruption; she had
looked forward to developing her fantastic variations on the theme of
Aldershot. But her good humour returned as she perceived the richer
opportunity with which he had provided her. ' Yes, I know,' she cried
eagerly. * A general's daughter. And do you realize that, but for the
grace of God, I might at this moment be a colonel's wife ? I was within
an ace of marrying a soldier. Within an ace, I tell you. The most
ravishingly beautiful creature. But ivory,' she rapped her forehead, '
solid ivory. It was lucky he was such a crashing bore. If he'd been the
tiniest bit brighter, I'd have gone out to India with him. And then what
? It's unimaginable.'

1 Unimaginable ! ' Beppo repeated, with a little squirt of laughter.

* On the contrary,' said Anthony, ' perfectly imaginable. The club every
evening between six and eight ; parties at government house; adultery in
the hot weather, polo in the cold ; incessant bother with the Indian
servants; permanent money difficulties and domestic scenes; occasional
touches of malaria and dysentery ; the monthly parcel of second-hand
novels from the Times Book Club ; and all the time the inexorable
advance of age—twice as fast as in England. If you've ever been to
India, nothing's more easy to imagine.'

* And you think all that would have happened to me ? * asked Mary.

337

EYELESS IN GAZA

4 What else could have happened ? You don't imagine you'd have gone
about buying Pascins in Quetta ? '

Mary laughed.

4 Or reading Max Jacob in Rawalpindi ? You'd have been a mem-sahib like
all the other mem-sahibs. A bit more bored and discontented than most of
them, perhaps. But still a mem-sahib.'

* I suppose so,' she agreed. * But is one so hopelessly at the mercy of
circumstances ? '

He nodded.

' You don't think I'd have escaped/

* I can't see why.'

4 But that means there isn't really any such thing as me. Me> she
repeated, laying a hand on her breast. * I don't really exist.'

1 No, of course you don't. Not in that absolute sense. You're a chemical
compound, not an element.'

* But if one doesn't really exist, one wonders why . . .' she hesitated.

4 Why one makes such a fuss about things,' Anthony suggested. 4 All that
howling and hurrahing and gnashing of teeth. About the adventures of a
self that isn't really a self—

just the result of a lot of accidents. And of course,' he went on,4 once
you start wondering, you see at once that there is no reason for making
such a fuss. And then you don't make a fuss—that is, if you're sensible.
Like me,' he added, smiling.

There was a silence. 4 You don't make a fuss,' Mrs. Amberley repeated to
herself, and thought of Gerry

338


CHAPTER XXIV

Watchett. ' You don't make a fuss/ But how was it possible not to make a
fuss, when he was so stupid, so selfish, so brutal, and at the same time
so excruciatingly desirable—like water in the desert, like sleep after
insomnia ? She hated him ; but the thought that in a few days he would
be there, staying in the house, sent a prickling sensation of warmth
through her body. She shut her eyes and drew a deep breath.

Still carrying the kitten, like a furry baby, in her arms, Helen had
walked awav across the lawn. She wanted to be alone, out of earshot of
that laughter, those jarringly irrelevant voices. ' Seven thousand
days,' she repeated again and again. And it was not only the declining
sun that made everything seem so solemnly and richly beautiful ; it was
also the thought of the passing days, of human limitations, of the final
unescapable dissolution. 1

Seven thousand days/ she said aloud, ' seven thousand days.' The tears
came into her eyes

; she pressed the sleeping kitten more closely to her breast.

Savernake, the White Horse, Oxford ; and in between whiles the roar and
screech of Gerry's Bugatti, the rush of the wind, the swerves and bumps,
the sickening but at the same time delicious terrors of excessive speed.
And now they were back again. After an age, it seemed ; and at the same
time it was as though they had never been away. The car came to a halt ;
but Helen made no move to alight.

339

EYELESS IN GAZA

5What's the matter?* Gerry asked. 'Why don't you get out ? '

1 It seems so terribly final/ she said with a sigh. ' Like breaking a
spell. Like stepping out of the magic circle.'

* Magic ? ' he repeated questioningly. ' What kind ? White or black?'

Helen laughed. ' Piebald. Absolutely heavenly and absolutely awful. You
know, Gerry, you ought to be put in gaol, the way you drive. Or in a
lunatic asylum. Crazy and criminal. But I adored it,' she added, as she
opened the door and stepped out.

1 Good ! ' was all he answered, while he gave her a smile that was as
studiedly unamorous as he could make it. He threw the car into gear and,
in a stink of burnt castor oil, shot off round the house, towards the
garage.

Charming ! he was thinking. And how wise he had been to take that jolly,
honest-to-God, big-brother line with her ! Ground bait. Getting the game
accustomed to you. She'd soon be eating out of his hand. The real
trouble, of course, was Mary. Tiresome bitch ! he thought, with a sudden
passion of loathing. Jealous, suspicious, interfering. Behaving as
though he were her private property. And greedy, insatiable. Perpetually
thrusting herself upon him—thrusting that ageing body of hers. His face,
as he manœuvred the car into the garage, was puckered into folds of
distaste. But thank God, he went on to reflect, she'd got this chill on
the liver, or whatever it was. That ought to'keep her quiet for a bit,
keep her out of the way.

340


CHAPTER XXIV

Without troubling to take off her coat, and completely forgetting her
mother's illness and for the moment her very existence, Helen crossed
the hall and, almost running, burst into the kitchen.

* Where's Tompy, Mrs. Weeks ? ' she demanded of the cook. The effect of
the sunshine and the country and Gerry's Bugatti had been such that it
was now absolutely essential to her that she should take the kitten in
her arms. Immediately. ' I must have Tompy,' she insisted. And by way of
excuse and explanation, ( I didn't have time to see him this morning,'
she added ; ' we started in such a hurry.'

* Tompy doesn't seem to be well, Miss Helen.' Mrs. Weeks put away her
sewing.

' Not well ? '

' I put him in here,' Mrs. Weeks went on, getting up from her Windsor
chair and leading the way to the scullery. ' It's cooler. He seemed to
feel the heat so. As though he was feverish like. I'm sure I don't know
what's the matter with him,' she concluded in a tone half of complaint,
half of sympathy. She was sorry for Tompy. But she was also sorry for
herself because Tompy had given her all this trouble.

The kitten was lying in the shadow, under the sink. Crouching down
beside the basket, Helen stretched out her hand to take him ; then, with
a little exclamation of horror, withdrew it, as though from the contact
of something repellent.

1 But what has happened to him ? ' she cried.

m* 34*

EYELESS IN GAZA

The little cat's tabby coat had lost all its smoothness, all its silky
lustre, and was matted into damp uneven tufts. The eyes were shut and
gummy with a yellow discharge. A running at the nose had slimed the
beautifully patterned fur of the face. The absurd lovely little Tompy
she had played with only yesterday, the comic and exquisite Tompy she
had held up, pathetically helpless, in one hand, had rubbed her face
against, had stared into the eyes of, was gone, and in his place lay a
limp unclean little rag of living refuse. Like those kidneys, it
suddenly occurred to her with a qualm of disgust ; and at once she felt
ashamed of herself for having had the thought, for having, in that first
gesture of recoil, automatically acted upon the thought even before she
had consciously had it.

' How beastly I am ! * she thought. ' Absolutely beastly ! '

Tompy was sick, miserable, dying perhaps. And she had been too squeamish
even to touch him. Making an effort to overcome her distaste, she
reached out once more, picked up the little cat, and with the fingers of
her free hand caressed (with what a sickening reluctance !) the dank
bedraggled fur. The tears came into her eyes, overflowed, ran down her
cheeks.

'It's too awful, it's too awful,' she repeated in a breaking voice. Poor
little Tompy !

Beautiful, adorable, funny little Tompy ! Murdered—no ; worse than
murdered : reduced to a squalid litttle lump of dirt ; for no reason,
just senselessly ; and on this day of all days,

34*


CHAPTER XXIV

this heavenly day with the clouds over the White Horse, die sunshine
between the leaves in Savernake forest. And now, to make it worse, she
was disgusted by the poor little beast, couldn't bear to touch him, as
though he were one of those filthy kidneys—she, who had pretended to
love him, who did love him, she insisted to herself. But it was no good
her holding him like this and stroking him ; it made no difference to
what she was really feeling. She might perform the gesture of overcoming
her disgust ; but the disgust was still there. In spite of the love.

She lifted a streaming face to Mrs. Weeks. ' What shall we do ? *

Mrs. Weeks shook her head. c I never found there was much you could do,'
she said. '

Not with cats.'

' But there must be something.'

' Nothing except leave them alone,' insisted Mrs. Weeks, with a
pessimism evidently reinforced by her determination not to be bothered.
Then, touched by the spectacle of Helen's misery, ( He'll be all right,
dear,' she added consolingly. ' There's no need to cry.

Just let him sleep it off.'

Footsteps sounded on the flagstones of the stable yard, and through the
open window came the notes of ' Yes, sir, she's my baby,' whistled
slightly out of tune. Helen straightened herself up from her crouching
position and, leaning out, ' Gerry ! ' she called

; then added, in response to his expression of surprised commiseration,
* Something awful has happened.'

343

EYELESS IN GAZA

In his large powerful hands Tompy seemed more miserably tiny than ever.
But how gentle he was, and how efficient ! Watching him, as he swabbed
the little cat's eyes, as he wiped away the slime from the nostrils,
Helen was amazed by the delicate precision of his movements. She
herself, she reflected with a heightened sense of her own shameful
ineptitude, had been incapable of doing anything except stroke Tompy's
fur and feel disgusted. Hopeless, quite hopeless ! And when he asked for
her help in getting Tompy to swallow half an aspirin tablet crushed in
milk, she bungled everything and spilt the medicine.

' Perhaps I can do it better by myself,' he said, and took the spoon
from her. The cup of her humiliation was full. . . .

Mary Amberley was indignant. Here she was, feverish and in pain,
worrying herself, what was more, into higher fever, worse pain, with the
thought of Gerry's dangerous driving. And here was Helen, casually
strolling into her room after having been in the house for more than two
hours—more than two hours without having had the common decency to come
and see how she was, more than two hours while her mother—her mother,
mind you !—had lain there, in an agony of distress, thinking that they
must have had an accident.

€ But Tompy was dying,' Helen explained. ' He's dead now.' Her face was
very pale, her eyes red with tears.

* Well, if you prefer a wretched cat to your mother. ? /

344


CHAPTER XXIV

' Besides, you were asleep. If you hadn't been asleep, you'd have heard
the car coming back.'

' Now you're grudging me my sleep,' said Mrs. Amberley bitterly. '
Aren't I to be allowed a moment's respite from pain ? Besides,' she
added, ' I wasn't asleep. I was delirious. I've been delirious several
times to-day. Of course I didn't hear the car.' Her eyes fell on the
bottle of Somnifaine standing on the table by her bed, and the suspicion
that Helen might also have noticed it made her still more angry. ' I
always knew you were selfish,' she went on. ' But I must say I didn't
think you'd be quite as bad as this/

At another time Helen would have flared up in angry self-defence, or
else, convicted of guilt, would have burst out crying. But to-day she
was feeling too miserable to be able to shed any more tears, too much
subdued by shame and unhappiness to resent even the most flagrant
injustice. Her silence exasperated Mrs. Amberley still further.

*1 always used to think,' she resumed, ' that you were only selfish from
thoughtlessness.

But now I see that it's heartlessness. Plain heartlessness. Here am I—
having sacrificed the best years of my life to you ; and what do I get
in return ? ' Her voice trembled as she asked the question. She was
convinced of the reality of that sacrifice, profoundly moved by the
thought of its extent, its martyr-like enormity. ' The most cynical
indifference. I might die in a ditch ; but you wouldn't care. You'd be
much more upset about your cat.

And

345

EYELESS IN GAZA

now go away/ she almost shouted, ' go away ! I know my temperature's
gone up. Go away.'

After a lonely dinner—for Helen was keeping her room on the plea of a
headache—Gerry went up to sit with Mrs. Amberley. He was particularly
charming that evening, and so affectionately solicitous that Mary forgot
all her accumulated grounds of complaint and fell in love with him all
over again, and for another set of reasons— not because he was so
handsome, so easily and insolently dominating, such a ruthless and
accomplished lover, but because he was kind, thoughtful and
affectionate, was everything, in a word, she had previously known he
wasn't.

Half-past ten struck. He rose from his chair. * Time for your spot of
shut-eye/

Mary protested ; he was firm—for her own good.

Thirty drops were the normal dose of Somnifaine ; but he measured out
forty-five, so as to make quite sure of her sleeping, made her drink,
then tucked her up (' like an old Nanny/ she cried, laughing with
pleasure, as he busied himself round the bed) and, after kissing her
good-night with an almost maternal tenderness, turned out the light and
left her.

The clock of the village church sounded eleven—how sadly, Helen thought
as she listened to the strokes of the distant bell, how lonelily ! It
was as diough she were listening to the voice of her own spirit,
reverberated in some mysterious way from the walls of the enclosing

346


CHAPTER XXIV

night. One, two, three, four . . . Each sweet, cracked note seemed more
hopelessly mournful, seemed to rise from the depths of a more extreme
solitude, than the last.

Tompy had died, and she hadn't even been capable of giving him a
spoonful of milk and crushed aspirin, hadn't had the strength to
overcome her disgust.

Selfish and heartless : her mother was quite right. But lonely as well
as selfish, all alone among the senseless malignities that had murdered
poor little Tompy ; and her heartlessness spoke with the despairing
voice of that bell ; night was empty and enormous all around.

1 Helen ! ¦

She started and turned her head. The room was impenetrably black.

* It's me,' Gerry's voice continued. ' I was so worried about you. Are
you feeling better ?

'

Her first surprise and alarm had given place to a feeling of resentment
that he should intrude upon the privacy of her unhappiness. ' You
needn't have bothered,' she said coldly. ' I'm quite all right.'

Enclosed in his faint aura of Turkish tobacco, of peppermint-flavoured
tooth-paste and bay rum, he approached invisibly. Through the blanket, a
groping hand touched her shin; then the springs creaked and tilted under
his weight as he sat down on the edge of the bed.

4 Felt a bit responsible,' he went on. 4 All that looping the loop ! '
The tone of his voice implied the unseen smile, suggested a whimsical
and affectionate twinkling of hidden eyes.

347

EYELESS IN GAZA

She made no comment ; there was a long silence. A bad start, Gerry
thought, and frowned to himself in the darkness ; then began again on
another tack,

' I can't help thinking of that miserable little Tompy/ he said in a
different voice. '

Extraordinary how upsetting it is when an animal gets ill like that. It
seems so frightfully unfair?

In a few minutes she was crying, and he had an excuse to console her.

Gently, as he had handled Tompy, and with all the tenderness that had so
much touched Mrs. Amberley, he stroked her hair, and later, when her
sobs began to subside, drew the fingers of his other hand along her bare
arm. Again and again, with the patient regularity of a nurse lulling her
charge to sleep ; again and again . . . Three hundred times at least, he
was thinking, before he risked any gesture that could possibly be
interpreted as amorous. Three hundred times; and even then the caresses
would have to deviate by insensible degrees, as though by a series of
accidents, till gradually, unintentionally, the hand that was now on her
arm would come at last to be brushing, with the same maternal
persistence, against her breast, while the fingers that came and went
methodically among the curls would have strayed to the ear, and from the
ear across the cheek to the lips, and would linger there lightly,
chastely, but charged with the stufF of kisses, proxies and forerunners
of the mouth that would ultimately come down on hers, through the
darkness, for the reward of its long patience.

348


CHAPTER X XV

May 20th 1931

IT was another ' knock,' Fitzsimmons, Jefferies, Jack Johnson,
Carpentier, Dempsey, Gene Tunney —the champions came and went ; but the
metaphor in which Mr. Beavis described his successive bereavements
remained unaltered.

Yes, a hard knock. And yet, it seemed to Anthony, there was a note
almost of triumph in his father's reminiscences, over the luncheon
table, of Uncle James as a schoolboy.

' Poor James . . . such curly hair he had then . . . nos et mutamur.9
The commiseration and regret were mingled with a certain
satisfaction—the satisfaction of an old man who finds himself still
alive, still able to attend the funerals of his contemporaries, his
juniors.

1 Two years/ he insisted. ' There was the best part of two years between
James and me. I was Beavis major at school.'

He shook his head mournfully ; but the old, tired eyes had brightened
with an irrepressible light. ' Poor James !' He sighed. c We hadn't seen
one another much these last years. Not since his conversion. How did he
do it ? It beats me. A Catholic—he of all people . . /

Anthony said nothing. But after all, he was thinking,

349

EYELESS IN GAZA

it wasn't so surprising. The poor old thing had grown up as a Bradlaugh
atheist. Ought to have been blissfully happy, parading his cosmic
defiance, his unyielding despair. But had had the bad luck to be a
homosexual at a time when one couldn't avow it even to oneself.

Ingrowing pederasty—it had poisoned his whole life. Had turned that
metaphysical and delightfully Pickwickian despair into real, common or
garden misery. Misery and neurasthenia; the old man had been half mad,
really. (Which hadn't prevented him from being a first-rate actuary.)
Then, during the war, the clouds had lifted. One could be kind to
wounded soldiers— be kind pro patria and with a blameless
conscience-Anthony remembered Uncle James's visits to him in hospital.
He had come almost every day.

Loaded with gifts for a dozen adopted nephews as well as for the real
one. On his thin, melancholy face there had been, in those days, a
perpetual smile. But happiness never lasts. The armistice had come ;
and, after those four years in paradise, hell had seemed blacker than
ever. In 1923 he had turned papist. It was only to be expected.

But Mr. Beavis simply couldn't understand. The idea of James surrounded
by Jesuits, James bobbing up and down at Mass, James going to Lourdes
with his inoperable tumour, James dying with all the consolations of
religion —it filled him with horrified amazement.

* And yet,' said Anthony,( I admire the way they usher you out of life.
Dying—it's apt to be an animal process. More exclusively animal even
than seasickness.' He 350


CHAPTER XXV

was silent for a moment, thinking of poor Uncle James's last and most
physiological hour. The heavy, snoring breath, the mouth cavemously
gaping, the scrabbling of the hands.

* How wise the Church has been to turn it into a ceremonial ! '

' Charades/ said Mr. Beavis contemptuously.

' But good charades/ Anthony insisted. * A work of art. In itself, the
event's like a rough channel crossing— only rather worse. But they
manage to turn it into something rather fine and significant. Chiefly
for the spectator, of course. But perhaps also significant for the
actor.'

There was a silence. The maid changed the plates and brought in the
sweet. * Some apple tart ? ' Pauline questioned, as she cut the crust.

' Apple pie, my dear.' Mr. Beavis's tone was severe. ' When will you
learn that a tart's uncovered ? A thing with a roof is a pie.'

They helped themselves to cream and sugar.

* By the way/ said Pauline suddenly, ' had you heard about Mrs. Foxe ? *
Anthony and Mr. Beavis shook their heads. ' Maggie Clark told me
yesterday. She's had a stroke.'

' Dear, dear/ said Mr. Beavis. Then, reflectively, ' Curious the way
people pass out of one's life/ he added. c After being very much in it.
I don't believe I've seen Mrs. Foxe half a dozen times in the last
twenty years. And yet before that . . .'

351

EYELESS IN GAZA

* She had no sense of humour/ said Pauline, by way of explanation.

Mr. Beavis turned to Anthony. ' I don't suppose you've . . . well, "
kept up " with her very closely, not since that poor boy of hers died.'

Anthony shook his head, without speaking. It was not agreeable to be
reminded of all that he had done to avoid keeping up with Mrs. Foxe.
Those long affectionate letters she had written to him during the first
year of the war—letters which he had answered more and more briefly,
perfunctorily, conventionally ; and at last hadn't answered at all ;
hadn't even read. Hadn't even read, and yet—moved by some superstitious
compunction—had never thrown away. At least a dozen of the blue
envelopes, addressed in the large, clear, flowing writing, were still
lying unopened in one of the drawers of his desk. Their presence there
was, in some obscure, inexplicable way, a salve to his conscience. Not
an entirely effective salve. His father's question had made him feel
uncomfortable ; he hastened to change the subject.

' And what have you been delving into recently ? ' he asked, in the sort
of playfully archaic language that his father himself might have used.

Mr. Beavis chuckled and began to describe his researches into modern
American slang.

Such savoury locutions ! Such an Elizabethan wealth of new coinages and
original metaphors ! Horse feathers, dish the dope, button up your
face—delicious ! ' And how would you like to

3î2


CHAPTER XXV

be called a fever frau ? ' he asked his younger daughter, Diana, who had
sat in silence, severely aloof, throughout the meal. ' Or worse, a cinch
pushover, my dear ? Or I might say that you had a dame complex, Anthony.
Or refer regretfully to your habit of smooching the sex jobs/ He
twinkled with pleasure.

' It's like so much Chinese,' said Pauline from the other end of the
table. Across her round placid face mirth radiated out in concentric
waves of soft pink flesh; the succession of her chins shook like jelly.
' He thinks he's the cat's pyjamas, your father does/ She reached out,
helped herself to a couple of chocolate creams from the silver bowl on
the table in front of her and popped one of them into her mouth. * The
cat's pyjamas,* she repeated indistinctly and heaved with renewed
laughter.

Mr. Beavis, who had been working himself up to the necessary pitch of
naughtiness, leaned forward and asked Anthony, in a confidential
whisper, ' What would you do if the fever frau had the misfortune to be
storked ? '

They were darlings, Diana was thinking ; that went without saying. But
how silly they could be, how inexpressibly silly ! All the same, Anthony
had no right to criticize them; and under that excessive politeness of
his he obviously was criticizing them, the wretch !

She felt quite indignant. Nobody had a right to criticize them except
herself and possibly her sister. She tried to think of something
unpleasant to say to Anthony; but he had given her no opening and she
had no gift for

353

EYELESS IN GAZA

epigram. She had to be content with silently frowning. And anyhow it was
time to go back to the lab.

Getting up, ' I must go,' she said in her curt, abrupt way. ' I
absolutely forbid you to eat all those sweets/ she added, as she bent
down to kiss her mother. ' Doctor's orders.'

* You're not a doctor yet, darling.'

1 No, but I shall be next year.'

Tranquilly Pauline poked the second chocolate cream into her mouth. 'And
next year, perhaps, I'll stop eating sweets,' she said.

Anthony left a few minutes later. Walking through South Kensington, he
found his thoughts harking back to Mrs. Foxe. Had the stroke, he
wondered, been a bad one ? Was she paralysed ? He had been so anxious to
prevent his father from talking about her, that there had been no time
for Pauline to say. He pictured her lying helpless, half dead, and was
horrified to find himself feeling, along with sympathy, a certain
satisfaction, a certain sense of relief. For, after all, she was the
chief witness for the prosecution, the person who could testify most
damningly against him. Dead, or only half dead, she was out of court ;
and, in her absence, there was no longer any case against him. With part
of his being he was glad of Pauline's news. Shamefully glad. He tried to
think of something else, and, meanwhile, boarded a bus so as to reach
more quickly the haven of the London Library.

He spent nearly three hours there, looking up refer-

354


CHAPTER XXV

ences to the history of the Anabaptists, then walked home to his rooms
in Bloomsbury.

He was expecting Gladys that evening before dinner. The girl had been a
bit tiresome recently ; but still . . . He smiled to himself with
anticipatory pleasure.

She was due at six ; but at a quarter-past she had not yet come. Nor yet
at half-past. Nor yet at seven. Nor yet at half-past seven. At eight, he
was looking at those blue envelopes, postmarked in 1914 and 1915 and
addressed in Mrs. Foxe's writing—looking at them and wondering, in the
self-questioning despondency that had succeeded his first impatience and
rage, whether he should open them. He was still wondering, when the
telephone bell rang, and there was Mark Staithes asking him if by any
chance he was free for dinner. A little party had formed itself at the
last moment. Pitchley would be there, and his wife, the psychologist,
and that Indian politician, Sen, and Helen Ledwidge . . . Anthony put
the letters back in their drawer and hurried out of the Louse.

3Î5


CHAPTER XXVI

September 5th 1933

IT was after two o'clock. Anthony lay on his back staring up into the
darkness. Sleep, it seemed, deliberately refused to come, was being
withheld by someone else, some malignant alien inhabiting his own body.
Outside, in the pine trees the cicadas harped incessantly on the theme
of their existence ; and at long intervals a sound of cockcrowing would
swell up out of the darkness, louder and nearer, until all the birds in
the surrounding gardens were shouting defiance back and forth, peal
answering peal. And then for no reason, first one, then another fell
silent and the outburst died away fainter and fainter into increasing
distance—right across France, he fancied as he strained his ears after
the receding sound, in a hurrying wave of ragged crowing. Hundreds of
miles, perhaps. And then somewhere, the wave would turn and roll back
again as swiftly as it had come. Back from the North Sea, perhaps ; over
the battlefields ; round the fringes of Paris and from bird to distant
bird through the forests ; then across the plains of Beauce ; up and
down the hills of Burgundy and, like another aerial river of sound,
headlong down the valley of the Rhône ; past Valence, past Orange and
Avignon, past Aries and Aix and across the bare hills of Provence ;

356


CHAPTER XXVI

until here it was again, an hour after its previous passage, flowing
tumultuously shrill across the cicadas' loud, unremitting equivalent of
silence.

He was reminded suddenly of a passage in Lawrence's The Man who Died^
and, thankful for an excuse to interrupt for a little his vain pursuit
of sleep, he turned on the light and went downstairs to look for the
book. Yes, here it was. ( As he came out, the young cock crowed. It was
a diminished, pinched cry, but there was that in the voice of the bird
stronger than chagrin. It was the necessity to live and even to cry out
the triumph of life.

The man who had died stood and watched the cock who had escaped and been
caught, ruffling himself up, rising forward on his toes, throwing up his
head, and parting his beak in another challenge from life to death. The
brave sounds rang out, and though they were diminished by the cord round
the bird's leg, they were not cut off. The man who had died looked
nakedly on life, and saw a vast resoluteness everywhere flinging itself
up in stormy or subtle wave crests, foam-tips emerging out of the blue
invisible, a black orange cock or the green flame-tongues out of the
extremes of the fig tree. They came forth, these things and creatures of
spring, glowing with desire and assertion. They came like crests of
foam, out of the blue flood of the invisible desire, out of the vast
invisible sea of strength, and they came coloured and tangible,
evanescent, yet deathless in their coming.

The man who had died looked on the great swing into existence of things
that had not died, but he saw no longer their

357

EYELESS IN GAZA

tremulous desire to exist and to be. He heard instead their ringing,
ringing, defiant challenge to all other things existing. . . .'

Anthony read on till he had finished the story of the man who had died
and come to life again, the man who was himself the escaped cock ; then
put away the book and went back to bed. The foam on the waves of that
invisible sea of desire and strength. But life, life as such, he
protested inwardly—it was not enough. How could one be content with the
namelessness of mere energy, with the less than individuality of a
power, that for all its mysterious divineness, was yet unconscious,
beneadi good and evil ? The cicadas sounded incessantly, and again, at
about four, the tide of cock-crowing came sweeping across the land and
passed on out of hearing, towards Italy.

Life irrepressibly living itself out. But there were emblems, he
reflected, more vividly impressive than the crowing cock or the young
leaves breaking out from the winter fig tree's bone-white skeleton. He
remembered that film he had seen of the fertilization of a rabbit's
ovum. Spermatozoa, a span long on the screen, ferociously struggling
towards their goal—the moon-like sphere of the egg. Countless, aimed
from every side, their flagella in frantic vibration. And now the
foremost had reached their objective, were burrowing into it, thrusting
through the outer wall of living matter, tearing away in their violent
haste whole cells that floated off and were lost. And at last one of the
invaders 358


CHAPTER XXVI

had penetrated to the quick of the nucleus, the act of fertilization was
consummated ; and suddenly the hitherto passive sphere stirred into
movement. There was a violent spasm of contraction ; its smooth rounded
surface became corrugated and in some way resistant to the other sperms
that vainly threw themselves upon it. And then the egg began to divide,
bending in its walls upon itself till they met in the centre, and there
were two cells instead of one ; then, as the two cells repeated the
process, four cells ; then eight, then sixteen.

And within the cells the granules of protoplasm were in continuous
motion, like peas in a boiling pot, but self-activated, moving by their
own energy.

In comparison with these minute fragments of living matter, the crowing
cock, the cicadas endlessly repeating the proclamation of their
existence, were only feebly alive.

Life under the microscope seemed far more vehement and irrepressible
than in the larger world. Consolingly and at the same time appallingly
irrepressible. For, yes, it was also appalling, the awful
unconsciousness of that unconquerable, crawling desire ! And, oh, the
horror of that display of sub-mental passion, of violent and impersonal
egotism !

Intolerable, unless one could think of it only as raw material and
available energy.

Yes, raw material and a stream of energy. Impressive for their quantity,
their duration.

But qualitatively they were only potentially valuable : would become
valuable only when made up into something else, only when used to serve
an ulterior purpose.

359

EYELESS IN GAZA

For Lawrence, the animal purpose had seemed sufficient and satisfactory.
The cock, crowing, fighting, mating— anonymously; and man anonymous like
the cock. Better such mindless anonymity, he had insisted, than the
squalid relationships of human beings advanced halfway to consciousness,
still only partially civilized.

But Lawrence had never looked through a microscope, never seen
biological energy in its basic undifFerentiated state. He hadn't wanted
to look, had disapproved on principle of microscopes, fearing what they
might reveal; and had been right to fear. Those depths beneath depths of
namelessness, crawling irrepressibly —they would have horrified him.

He had insisted that the raw material should be worked up—but worked
only to a certain pitch and no further ; that the primal crawling energy
should be used for the relatively higher purposes of animal existence,
but for no existence beyond the animal. Arbitrarily, illogically. For
the other, ulterior purposes and organizations existed and were not to
be ignored. Moving through space and time, the human animal discovered
them on his path, unequivocally present and real.

Thinking and the pursuit of knowledge—these were purposes for which he
himself had used the energy that crawled under the microscope, that
crowed defiantly in the darkness.

Thought as an end, knowledge as an end. And now it had become suddenly
manifest that they were only means—as definitely raw material as life
itself. Raw material—and he divined, he knew, what the finished

360


CHAPTER XXVI

product would have to be ; and with part of his being he revolted
against the knowledge.

What, set about trying to turn his raw material of life, thought,
knowledge into that—at his time of life, and he a civilized human being
! The mere idea was ridiculous. One of those absurd hang-overs from
Christianity—like his father's terror of the more disreputable realities
of existence, like the hymn-singing of workmen during the General
Strike. The headaches, the hiccoughs of yesterday's religion. But with
another part of his mind he was miserably thinking that he would never
succeed in bringing about the transformation of his raw material into
the finished product ; that he didn't know how or where to begin ; that
he was afraid of making a fool of himself ; that he lacked the necessary
courage, patience, strength of mind.

At about seven, when behind the shutters the sun was already high above
the horizon, he dropped off into a heavy sleep, and woke with a start
three hours later to see Mark Staithes standing beside his bed and
peering at him, smiling, an amused and inquisitive gargoyle, through the
mosquito net.

* Mark ? ' he questioned in astonishment. ' What on earth . . . ? '

' Bridal ! ' said Mark, poking the muslin net. ' Positively première
communion ! I've been watching you sleeping.'

' For long ? '

1 Oh, don't worry,' he said, replying not to the spoken,

36i

EYELESS IN GAZA

but to the unspoken question implied by Anthony's tone of annoyance. '
You don't give yourself away in your sleep. On the contrary, you take
other people in. I've never seen anyone look so innocent as you did
under that veil. Like the infant Samuel. Too sweet !

'

Reminded of Helen's use of the same word on the morning of the
catastrophe, Anthony frowned. Then, after a silence, ' What have you
come for ? ' he asked.

( To stay with you.'

1 You weren't asked.'

' That remains to be seen,' said Mark.

' What do you mean ? '

* I mean, you may discover it after the event.'

' Discover what ? '

' That you wanted to ask me. Without knowing that you wanted it.'

1 What makes you think that ? '

Mark drew up a chair and sat down before answering. 11 saw Helen the
night she got back to London.'

'Did you?* Anthony's tone was as blankly inexpressive as he could make
it. ( Where ? '

he added.

1 At Hugh's. Hugh was giving a party. There were some uncomfortable
moments.'

•Why?'

' Well, because she wanted them to be uncomfortable. She was in a queer
state, you know.*

' Did she tell you why ? '

Mark nodded. ' She even made me read your letter. The beginning of it,
at least. I wouldn't go on/

362


CHAPTER XXVI

1 Helen made you read my letter ? *

I Aloud. She insisted. But, as I say, she was in a very queer state/
There was a long silence. ' That's why I came here,' he added at last.

' Thinking that I'd be glad to see you ? * the other asked in an
ironical tone.

' Thinking that you'd be glad to see me,' Mark answered gravely.

After another silence, * Well, perhaps you're not altogether wrong,'
said Anthony. ' In a way, of course, I simply hate the sight of you.' He
smiled at Mark. ( Nothing personal intended, mind you. I should hate the
sight of anyone just as much. But in another way I'm glad you've come.
And this is personal. Because I think you're likely—well, likely to have
some notion of what's what,' he concluded with a non-committal
vagueness. ' If there's anybody who can . . .' He was going to say '
help ' : but the idea of being helped was so repugnant to him, seemed so
grotesquely associated with the parson's well-chosen words after a death
in the family,, with the housemaster's frank, friendly talk about sexual
temptations, that he broke off uncomfortably. ' If anybody can make a
sensible remark about it all/ he began again, on a different level of
expression, * I think it's you.'

The other nodded without speaking, and thought how typical it was of the
man to go on talking about sensible remarks—even now !

II have a feeling/ Anthony went on slowly, overcoming inward resistances
in order to speak, * a feeling

363

EYELESS IN GAZA

that I'd like to get it over, get things settled. On another basis/ he
brought out as though under torture. ' The present one . . .' He shook
his head. * I'm a bit bored with it.' Then, perceiving with a sense of
shame the ludicrous inappropriateness and the worse than ludicrous
falsity of the under-statement, * It won't do,' he added resolutely. '
It's a basis that can't carry more than the weight of a ghost. And in
order to use it, I've turned myself into a ghost.' After a pause, '
These last few days,' he went on slowly, ' I've had a queer feeling that
I'm not really there, that I haven't been there for years past. Ever
since . . .

well, I don't exactly know when. Since before the war, I suppose.' He
could not bring himself to speak of Brian. * Not there,' he repeated.

1A great many people aren't there,' said Mark. * Not as people, at any
rate. Only as animals and incarnate functions.'

' Animals and incarnate functions,' the other repeated. ' You've said it
exactly. But in most cases they have no choice; nonentity is forced on
them by circumstance. Whereas I was free to choose—at any rate, so far
as anybody is free to choose. If I wasn't there, it was on purpose.'

1 And do you mean to say that you've only just discovered the fact that
you've never been there ? *

Anthony shook his head. * No, no, I've known it, of course. All the
time. But theoretically. In the same way as one knows . • . well, for
example, that 364


CHAPTER XXVI

there are birds that live symbiotically with wasps. A curious and
interesting fact, but no more. I didn't let it be more. And then I had
my justifications. Work : too much personal life would interfere with my
work. And the need for freedom : freedom to think, freedom to indulge my
passion for knowing about the world. And freedom for its own sake. I
wanted to be free, because it was intolerable not to be free/

* I can understand that,' said Mark, ( provided that there's someone
there who can enjoy the freedom. And provided,' he added, ' that that
someone makes himself conscious of being free by overcoming the
obstacles that stand in the way of freedom. But how can you be free, if
there's no " you " ? *

1 I've always put it the other way round,' said Anthony. 1 How can you
be free—or rather (for one must think of it impersonally) how can there
be freedom—so long as the "you"

persists? A "you" has got to be consistent and responsible, has got to
make choices and commit itself. But if one gets rid of the " you," one
gets rid of responsibility and the need for consistency. One's free as a
succession of unconditioned, uncommitted states without past or future,
except in so far as one can't voluntarily get rid of one's memories and
anticipations/ After a silence, ' The staggering imbecility of old
Socrates ! ' he went on. '

Imagining that one had only to know the correct line of conduct in order
to follow it. One practically always knows it—and more often than not
one doesn't follow it. Or perhaps you're not like that,' he added N 365

EYELESS IN GAZA

in another tone, looking at Mark through the mosquito net. ' One's
inclined to attribute one's own defects to everyone else. Weakness, in
my case. Not to mention timidity,' he added with a laugh, that uttered
itself automatically, so deeply ingrained was the habit of half
withdrawing, as soon as it was spoken, anything in the nature of a
personal confidence, of evoking in the listener's mind a doubt as to the
seriousness of his intention in speaking ; * timidity, and downright
cowardice, and indolence in regard to anything that isn't my work.' He
laughed again as though it were all absurd, not worth mentioning.

' One forgets that other people may be different. Tough-minded, firm of
purpose. I dare say you always do what you know is right/

1 I always do it,' Mark answered. ' Whether it's right or wrong.' He
demonstrated the anatomy of a smile.

Anthony lay back on his pillows, his hands clasped behind his head, his
eyes half shut.

Then, after a long silence, he turned to Staithes and said abruptly : '
Don't you ever feel that you simply can't be bothered to do what you've
decided on? Just now, for example, I found myself wondering all of a
sudden why on earth I'd been talking to you like this—

why I'd been thinking these things before you came—why I'd been trying
to make up my mind to do something. Wondering and feeling that I simply
couldn't be bothered.

Thinking it would be better just to evade it all and go back to the
familiar routine. The quiet life. Even though the quiet

366


CHAPTER XXVI

life would be fatal. Fatal, mortal, but all the same anything for it/ He
shook his head. '

Probably if you hadn't come to shame me into some sort of resolution,
that's what I would have done—escaped from it all and gone back to the
quiet life.' He laughed. * And perhaps,' he added, * I shall do it even
now. In spite of you.' He sat up, lifted the mosquito net and stepped
out of bed. * I'm going to have my bath/

367


CHAPTER XXVII

May zjtk 1914

ANTHONY came down to breakfast to find his ./"^father explaining to the
two children the etymology of what they were eating. *. . . merely
another form of " pottage." You say

" porridge " just as you say— or rather* (he twinkled at them) ' I hope
you don't say— 4t shurrup " for " shut up." '

The two little girls went on stolidly eating.

1 Ah, Anthony ! ' Mr. Beavis went on. ' Better late than never. What, no
pottage this morning ? But you'll have an Aberdeen cutlet, I hope.'

Anthony helped himself to the haddock and sat down in his place.

* Here's a letter for you,' said Mr. Beavis, and handed it over. ' Don't
I recognize Brian's writing ? ' Anthony nodded. ' Does he still enjoy
his work at Manchester ? '

* I think so,' Anthony answered. ' Except, of course, that he does too
much. He's at the newspaper till one or two in the morning. And then
from lunch to dinner he works at his thesis.'

' Well, it's good to see a young man who has the energy of his
ambitions/ said Mr. Beavis.

* Because, of course, he needn't work so hard. It's not as if his mother
hadn't got the wherewithal/

368


CHAPTER XXVII

The wherewithal so exasperated Anthony that, though he found Brian's
action absurd, it was with a cutting severity that he answered his
father. ' He won't accept his mother's money/ he said very coldly. '
It's a matter of principle.'

There was a diversion while the children put away their porridge plates
and were helped to Aberdeen cutlets. Anthony took the opportunity to
start reading his letter.

1 No news of you for a long time. Here all goes on as usual, or would
do, if I were feeling a bit spright-lier. But sleep has been none too
good and internal workings not all they might be. Am slowing down, in
consequence, on the thesis, as I can't slow down on the paper. All this
makes me look forward longingly to our projected fortnight in Langdale.

Don't let me down, for heaven's sake. What a bore one's carcass is when
it goes in the least wrong ! Even when it goes right, for that matter.
Such a lot of unmodern inconveniences. I sometimes bitterly resent this
physical predestination *to scatology and obscenity.

c Write soon and let me know how you are, what you've been reading,
whether you've met anybody of interest. And will you do me a kindness ?
Joan's in town now, staying with her aunt and working for the Charity
Organization people. Her father didn't want her to go, of
course—preferred to have her at home, so that he could tyrannize her.
There was a long battle, which he finally lost ; she has been in town
nearly a month now. For which I'm exceedingly thankful—but at the same
time, for various reasons, feel a bit worried. If I could get away for
the week-ends, I'd come myself; but I can't.

369

EYELESS IN GAZA

And perhaps, in a certain sense, it's all for the best. In my present
mouldy condition I should be rather a skeleton at the feast ; and
besides, there are certain complications. I can't explain them in a
letter ; but when you come north in July I'll try. I ought to have asked
your advice before this. You're harder in the head than I am. Which is
ultimately the reason why I didn't talk to you about the matter—for fear
of being thought a fool by you ! Such is one's imbecility. But, there,
we'll discuss it all later. Meanwhile, will you get in touch with her,
take her out to a meal, get her to talk, then write and tell me how you
think she's reacting to London, what she feels about life in general,
and so forth. It's been a violent transition —from remote country to
London, from cramping poverty to a rich house, from subjection to her
father's bad-tempered tyranny to independence. A violent transition ;
and, though I'm glad of it, I'm a bit nervous as to its effects. But
you'll see.—Yours, B.'

Anthony did see that same day. The old shyness, he noticed, as they
shook hands in the lobby of the restaurant, was still there—the same
embarrassed smile, the same swaying movement of recoil. In face and body
she was more of a woman than when he had seen her last, a year before,
seemed prettier too—chiefly, no doubt, because she was better dressed.

They passed into the restaurant and sat down. Anthony ordered the food
and a bottle of Vouvray, then began to explore the ground.

London—how did she like London ?

Adored it.

370


CHAPTER XXVII

Even the work ?

Not the office part, perhaps. But three times a week she helped at a
crèche. fi I love babies.'

* Even those horrible little smelly ones ? '

Joan was indignant. ' They're adorable. I love the work with them.
Besides, it allows me to enjoy all the rest of London with a clear
conscience. I feel I've paid for my theatres and dances/

Shyness broke up her talk, plunged it, as it were, into alternate light
and shade. At one moment she would be speaking with difficulty, hardly
opening her lips, her voice low and indistinct, her face averted ; the
next, her timidity was swept aside by an uprush of strong feeling—
delight, or some distress, or irrepressible mirth, and she was looking
at him with eyes grown suddenly and surprisingly bold ; from almost
inaudible, her voice had become clear ; the strong white teeth flashed
between lips parted in a frank expression of feeling. Then suddenly she
was as though appalled by her own daring; she became conscious of him as
a possible critic. What was he thinking? Had she made a fool of herself?
Her voice faltered, the blood rose to her cheeks, she looked down at her
plate; and for the next few minutes he would get nothing but short
mumbled answers to his questions, nothing but the most perfunctory of
nervous laughs in response to his best efforts to amuse her. The food,
however, and the wine did their work, and as the meal advanced, she
found herself more at ease with him. They began to talk about Brian.

37X

EYELESS IN GAZA

' You ought to prevent him from working so hard/ he said.

4 Do you think I don't try ? * Then, with something almost like anger in
her voice, ' It's his nature/ she went on. ' He's so terribly
conscientious/

1 It's your business to make him unconscientious.* He smiled at her,
expecting a return in kind. But, instead of that, she frowned ; her face
took on an expression of resentful misery. ' It's easy for you to talk/
she muttered. There was a silence, while she sat with downcast eyes,
sipping her wine.

They could have married, it occurred to him for the first time, if Brian
had consented to live on his mother. Why on earth, then, seeing how much
he was in love with the girl ... ?

With the peach-melba it all came out. ' It's difficult to talk about/
she said. * I've hardly mentioned it to anyone. But with you it's
different. You've known Brian such a long time; you're his oldest
friend. You'll understand. I feel I can tell you about it.'

Curious, but at the same time a little disquieted, he murmured something
vaguely polite.

She failed to notice the signs of his embarrassment ; for her, at the
moment, Anthony was only the heavensent opportunity for at last
releasing in speech a flood of distressing feelings too long debarred
from expression.

'It's that conscientiousness of his. If you only knew ... ! Why has he
got the idea that there's something wrong about love ? The ordinary,
happy kind of

372


CHAPTER XXVII

love, I mean. He thinks it isn't right ; he thinks he oughtn't to have
those feelings/

She pushed away her plate, and, leaning forward, her elbows on the
table, began to speak in a lower, more intimate tone of the kisses that
Brian had given and been ashamed of, and those other kisses that, by way
of atonement, he had refused to give.

Anthony listened in astonishment. * Certain complications ' was what
Brian had written in his letter ; it was putting it mildly. This was
just craziness. Tragic—but also grotesque, absurd. It occurred to him
that Mary would find the story particularly ludicrous.

' He said he wanted to be worthy of me,' she went on. ' Worthy of love.
But all that happened was that it made me feel unworthy. Unworthy of
everything, in every way.

Guilty—feeling I'd done something wrong. And dirty too, if you
understand what I mean, as though I'd fallen into the mud. But, Anthony,
it isn't wrong, is it ? ' she questioned. ' I mean, we'd never done
anything that wasn't . . . well, you know : quite innocent. Why does he
say he's unworthy, and make me feel unworthy at the same time ? Why does
he ?

' she insisted. There were tears in her eyes.

' He was always rather like that,' said Anthony. * Perhaps his
upbringing . . . His mother's a wonderful person,' he added, dropping,
as he suddenly realized, while the words were being spoken, into Mrs.
Foxe's own idiom. ' But perhaps a bit oppressive, just for that reason.'

Joan nodded emphatically, but did not speak. n* 373

EYELESS IN GAZA

* It may be she's made him aim a bit too high/ he went on. ' Too high
all along the line, if you see what I mean—even when he's not directly
following her example. That business of not wanting to take her money,
for instance . . /

Joan caught up the subject with passionate eagerness. 1 Yes, why does he
want to be different from everyone else ? After all, there are other
good people in the world and they don't feel it necessary to do it. Mind
you,' she added, looking up sharply into Anthony's face, as if trying to
catch and quell any expression of disapproval there, or worse, of
patronizing amusement, ' mind you, I think it's wonderful of him to do
it. Wonderful ! '

she repeated with a kind of defiance. Then, resuming the critical tone
which she would not allow Anthony to use, but to which it seemed to her
that her own feelings for Brian gave her a right, 'All the same,' she
went on, 'I can't see how it would hurt him to take that money. I
believe it was mostly his mother's doing.'

Surprised, ' But he told me that Mrs. Foxe had tried to insist on his
taking it.'

' Oh, she made it seem as though she wanted him to take it. We were
there for a week-end in May to talk it over. She kept telling him that
it wasn't wrong to take the money, and that he ought to think about me
and getting married. But then, when Brian and I told her that I'd agreed
to his not taking it, she . . .'

Anthony interrupted her. ' But had you agreed ? '

Joan dropped her eyes. ' In a way,' she said sullenly.

374


CHAPTER XXVII

Then looking up again with sudden anger, ' How could I help agreeing
witli him ? Seeing that that was what he wanted to do, and would have
done, what's more, even if I hadn't agreed. And besides, I've told you,
there was something rather splendid and wonderful about it. Of course, I
had agreed. But agreeing didn't mean that I really wanted him to refuse
the money. And that's where her falseness came in—pretending to think
that I wanted him to refuse it, and congratulating me and him on what
we'd done. Saying we were heroic and all that. And so encouraging him to
go on with the idea. It is her doing, I tell you. Much more than you
think.'

She was silent, and Anthony thought it best to allow the subject to
drop. Heaven only knew what she'd say if he allowed her to go on talking
about Mrs. Foxe. ' Poor Brian,' he said aloud, and added, taking refuge
in platitude, ' The best is the enemy of the good.'

' Yes, that's just it ! ' she cried. ' The enemy of the good. He wants
to be perfect—but look at the result ! He tortures himself and hurts me.
Why should I be made to feel dirty and criminal ? Because that's what
he's doing. When I've done nothing wrong. Nor has he, for that matter.
And yet he wants me to feel the same about him. Dirty and criminal. Why
does he make it so difficult for me? As difficult as he possibly can.'
Her voice trembled, die tears overflowed. She pulled out her
handkerchief and quickly wiped her eyes. * I'm sorry,' she said. * I'm
making a fool of myself. But if you knew how hard it's been for me

! I've loved him so

375

EYELESS IN GAZA

much, I want to go on loving him. But he doesn't seem to want to allow
me to. It ought to be so beautiful ; but he does his best to make it all
seem ugly and horrible/ Then, after a pause, and in a voice that had
sunk almost to a whisper, ' I sometimes wonder if I can go on much
longer.'

Did it mean, he wondered, that she had already decided to break it
off—had already met someone else who was prepared to love her and be
loved less tragically, more normally than Brian? No; probably not, he
decided. But there was every likelihood that she soon would. In her way
(it didn't happen to be exactly the way he liked) she was attractive.

There would be no shortage of candidates ; and if a satisfactory
candidate presented himself, would she be able—whatever she might
consciously wish—to refuse ?

Joan broke the silence. ' I dream so often of the house we're going to
live in,' she said. *

Going from room to room ; and it all looks so nice. Such pretty curtains
and chair covers.

And vases full of flowers/ She sighed ; then, after a pause, ' Do you
understand his not wanting to take his mother's money ? '

Anthony hesitated a moment; then replied non-committally : ' I
understand it ; but I don't think I should do it myself.'

She sighed once more. ' That's how I feel too/ She looked at her watch ;
then gathered up her gloves. * I shall have to go/ With this return from
intimacy to the prosaic world of time and people and appoint-376


CHAPTER XXVII

ments, she suddenly woke up again to painful self-consciousness. Had it
bored him ? Did he think her a fool ? She looked into his face, trying
to divine his thoughts; then dropped her eyes. 'I'm afraid I've been
talking a lot about myself/ she mumbled. ' I don't know why I should
burden you . . .*

He protested. ' I only wish I could be of some help/ Joan raised her
face again and gave him a quick smile of gratitude. ' You've done a lot
by just listening.'

They left the restaurant and, when he had seen her to her bus, he set
off on foot towards the British Museum, wondering, as he went, what sort
of letter he ought to write to Brian.

Should he wash his hands of the whole business and merely scribble a
note to the effect that Joan seemed well and happy ? Or should he let
out that she had told him everything, and then proceed to expostulate,
warn, advise ? He passed between the huge columns of the portico into
the dim coolness within. A regular sermon, he thought with distaste. If
only one could approach the problem as it ought to be approached—as a
Rabelaisian joke. But then poor Brian could hardly be expected to see it
in that light. Even though it would do him a world of good to think for
a change in Rabelaisian terms. Andiony showed his card to the attendant
and walked down the corridor to the Reading Room.

That was always the trouble, he reflected; you could never influence
anybody to be anything except himself, nor influence him by any means
that he didn't already accept the validity of. He pushed open the door
and

377

EYELESS IN GAZA

was under the dome, breathing the faint, acrid smell of books. Millions
of books. And all those hundreds of thousands of authors, century after
century—each convinced he was right, convinced that he knew the
essential secret, convinced that he could convince the rest of the world
by putting it down in black and white. When in fact, of course, the only
people anyone ever convinced were the ones that nature and circumstances
had actually or potentially convinced already. And even those weren't
wholly to be relied on.

Circumstances changed. What convinced in January wouldn't necessarily
convince in August. The attendant handed him the books that had been
reserved for him, and he walked off to his seat. Mountains of the spirit
in interminable birth-pangs ; and the result was—what ? Well, si
ridiculum murem reqidris, circumspke. Pleased with his invention, he
looked about him at his fellow readers—the men like walruses, the dim
females, die Indians, emaciated or overblown, the whiskered patriarchs,
the youths in spectacles.

Heirs to all the ages. Depressing, if you took it seriously ; but also
irresistibly comic. He sat down and opened his book —De Lancre's Tableau
de VInconstance des Mauvais Anges—at the place where he had stopped
reading the day before. ' Le Diable estoit en forme de bouc, ayant une
queue et au dessoubs un visage d'homme noir, où elle fut contrainte le
baiser. . . .' He laughed noiselessly to himself. Another one for Mary,
he thought.

At five he rose, left his books at the desk and, from

378


CHAPTER XXVII

Holborn, took the tube to Gloucester Road. A few minutes later he was at
Mary Amberley's front door. The maid opened ; he smiled at her
familiarly and, assuming the privilege of an intimate of the house, ran
upstairs to the drawing-room, unannounced.

' I have a story for you,' he proclaimed, as he crossed the room.

' A coarse story, I hope,' said Mary Amberley from the sofa.

Anthony kissed her hand in that affected style he had recently adopted,
and sat down. ' To die coarse,' he said, ' all things are coarse.'

* Yes, how lucky that is ! ' And with that crooked little smile of hers,
that dark glitter between narrowed lids, ' A filthy mind,' she added, '
is a perpetual feast.' The joke was old and not her own; but Anthony's
laughter pleased her none the less for that. It was wholehearted
laughter, loud and prolonged—louder and longer than the joke itself
warranted. But then it wasn't at the joke that he was really laughing.
The joke was hardly more than an excuse; that laughter was his response,
not to a single stimulus, but to the whole extraordinary and exciting
situation. To be able to talk freely about anything (anything, mind you)
with a woman, a lady, a genuine ' loaf-kneader,' as Mr. Beavis, in his
moments of etymological waggery, had been known to say, a true-blue
English loaf-kneader who was also one's mistress, had also read
Mallarmé, was also a friend of Guillaume Apollinaire ; and to listen to
the

379

EYELESS IN GAZA

loaf-kneader preaching what she practised and casually mentioning beds,
water-closets, the physiology of what (for the Saxon words still
remained unpronounceable) they were constrained to call Vamour—for
Anthony, the experience was still, after two years and in spite of
Mary's occasional infidelities, an intoxicating mixture of liberation
and forbidden fruit, of relief and titillation. In his father's
universe, in the world of Pauline and the Aunts, such things were simply
not there—but not there with a painfully, glaringly conspicuous absence.
Like the hypnotized patient who has been commanded to see die five of
clubs as a piece of virgin pasteboard, they deliberately failed to
perceive the undesirable things, they were conspiratorially silent about
all they had been blind to. The natural functions even of the lower
animals had to be ignored; there were silences even about quadrupeds.
That goat incident, for example— it was the theme, now, of one of
Anthony's choicest anecdotes. Exquisitely comic—but how much more comic
now than at the time, nearly two years before he first met Mary, when it
had actually happened !

Picnicking on that horrible Scheideck Pass, with the Weiss-horn hanging
over them like an obsession and a clump of gentians, carefully sought
out by Mr. Beavis, in the grass at their feet, the family had been
visited by a half-grown kid, greedy for the salt of their hard-boiled
eggs. Shrinking and a little disgusted under their delight, his two
small half-sisters had held out their hands to be licked, while Pauline
took a snapshot, and Mr.

Beavis,

380


CHAPTER XXVII

whose interest hi goats was mainly philological, quoted Theocritus.
Pastoral scene ! But suddenly the little creature had straddled its legs
and, still expressionlessly gazing at the Beavis family through the
oblong pupils of its large yellow eyes, had proceeded to make water on
the gentians.

' They're not very generous with their butter,' and, * How jolly the
dear old Weisshorn is looking to-day,' Pauline and Mr. Beavis brought
out almost simultaneously—the one, as she peered into her sandwich, in a
tone of complaint, the other, gazing away far-focussed, with a note in
his voice of a rapture none the less genuinely Wordsworthian for being
expressed in terms of a gentlemanly and thoroughly English
facetiousness.

In haste and guiltily, the two children swallowed their incipient shriek
of startled mirth and averted frozen faces from one another and the
outrageous goat. Momentarily compromised, the world of Mr. Beavis and
Pauline and the Aunts had settled down again to respectability.

' And what about your story ? ' Mrs. Amberley enquired, as his laughter
subsided.

' You shall hear,' said Anthony, and was silent for a little, lighting a
cigarette, while he thought of what he was about to say and the way he
meant to say it. He was ambitious about his story, wanted to make it a
good one, at once amusing and psychologically profound ; a smoking-room
story that should also be a library story, a laboratory story.

Mary must be made to pay a double tribute of laughter and admiration.

38i

EYELESS IN GAZA

1 You know Brian Foxe ? ' he began.

' Of course/

1 Poor old Brian ! * By his tone, by the use of the patronizing
adjective, Anthony established his position of superiority, asserted his
right, the right of the enlightened and scientific vivisector, to
anatomize and examine. Yes, poor old Brian ! That maniacal preoccupation
of his with chastity ! Chastity—the most unnatural of all the sexual
perversions, he added parenthetically, out of Remy de Gourmont. Mary's
appreciative smile acted on him like a spur to fresh efforts. Fresh
efforts, of course, at Brian's expense.

But at the moment, that didn't occur to him.

' But what can you expect,' Mrs. Amberley put in, 1 with a mother like
that ? One of those spiritual vampires. A regular St. Monica/

' St. Monica by Ary Scheffer,' he found himself overbidding. Not that
there was a trace in Mrs. Foxe of that sickly insincerity of Scheffer's
saint. But the end of his story-telling, which was to provoke Mary's
laughter and admiration, was sufficient justification for any means
whatever. Scheffer was an excellent joke, too good a joke to be
neglected, even if he were beside the point. And when Mary brought out
what was at the moment her favourite phrase and talked of Mrs. Foxe's *
uterine reactions,' he eagerly seized upon the words and began applying
them, not merely to Mrs. Foxe, but also to Joan and even (making another
joke out of the physical absurdity of the thing) to Brian. Brian's
uterine reactions

382


CHAPTER XXVII

towards chastity in conflict with his own and Joan's uterine reactions
towards the common desires—it was a drama. A drama, he explained, whose
existence hitherto he had only suspected and inferred. Now there was no
more need to guess ; he knew.

Straight from the horse's mouth. Or rather, straight from the mare's.
Poor Joan ! The vivisector laid out another specimen on the operating
table.

* Like early Christians,' was Mrs. Amberley's comment, when he had
finished.

The virulent contempt in her voice made him suddenly remember, for the
first time since he had begun this story, that Brian was his friend,
that Joan had been genuinely unhappy.

Too late, he wanted to explain that, in spite of all appearances to the
contrary, there was nobody he liked and admired and respected more than
Brian. ' You mustn't misunderstand me,' he said to Mary retrospectively
and in imagination. ' I'm absolutely devoted to him.' Inside his head,
he became eloquent on the subject. But no amount of this interior
eloquence could alter the fact that he had betrayed confidences and been
malicious without apology or qualifying explanation. At the time, of
course, this malice had seemed to him the manifestation of his own
psychological acuteness ; these betrayed confidences, the indispensable
facts without which the acuteness could not have been exercised. But now
. . .

He found himself all at once confused and tongue-tied with
self-reproach»

383

EYELESS IN GAZA

11 felt awfully sorry for Joan,' he stammered, trying to make amends. '
Promised Fd do all I could to help the poor girl. But what ? That's the
question. What ? * He exaggerated the note of perplexity. Perplexed, he
was justified in betraying Joan's confidences ; he had told the story
(he now began to assure himself) solely for the sake of asking Mary's
advice—the advice of an experienced woman of the world.

But the experienced woman of the world was looking at him in the most
disquieting way.

Mrs. Amberley's eyelids had narrowed over a mocking brilliance; the
left-hand corner of her mouth was drawn up ironically. ' The nicest
thing about you/ she said judicially, ' is your innocence.'

Her words were so wounding that he forgot in an instant Joan, Brian, his
own discreditable behaviour, and could think only of his punctured
vanity.

1 Thank you,' he said, trying to give her a smile of frank amusement.
Innocent—she thought him innocent? After their time in Paris. After
those jokes about uterine réactions

?

' So deliciously youthful, so touching.'

' Fm glad you think so.' The smile had gone all awry ; he felt the blood
mounting to his cheeks.

' A girl comes to you,' Mrs. Amberley went on, * and complains because
she hasn't been kissed enough. And here you are, solemnly asking what
you ought to do to help her ! And now you're blushing like a beetroot.
Darling, I absolutely adore you ! ' Laying 384


CHAPTER XXVII

her hand on his arm, c Kneel down on the floor here/ she commanded.
Rather sheepishly, he obeyed, Mary Amberley looked at him for a little
in silence, with the same bright mocking expression in her eyes. Then,
sofdy, * Shall I show you what you can do to help her ? * she asked. '
Shall I show you ? '

He nodded without speaking; but still, at arm's length, she smiled
enquiringly into his face.

* Or am I a fool to show you ? ' she asked. * Won't you learn the lesson
too well?

Perhaps I shall be jealous ? ' She shook her head and smiled—a gay and '
civilized '

smile. * No, I don't believe in being jealous/ She took his face between
her two hands and, whispering, * This is how you can help her/drew him
towards her.

Anthony had felt humiliated by her almost contemptuous assumption of the
dominant rôle ; but no shame, no resentment could annul his body's
consciousness of the familiar creepings of pleasure and desire. He
abandoned himself to her kisses.

A clock struck, and immediately, from an upper floor, came the
approaching sound of shrill childish voices. Mrs. Amberley drew back
and, laying a hand over his mouth, pushed him away from her. ' You've
got to be domestic/ she said, laughing. * It's six. I do the fond mother
at six/

Anthony scrambled to his feet and, with the idea of fabricating a little
favourable evidence, walked over to the fire and stood there with his
elbows on the mantelpiece, looking at a Conder water-colour.

385

EYELESS IN GAZA

The door burst open, and with a yell like the whistle of an express
train a small round child of about five came rushing into the room and
fairly hurled herself upon her mother.

Another little girl, three or four years older than the first, came
hurrying after.

' Helen ! ' she kept calling, and her face, with its expression of
anxious disapproval, was the absurd parody of a governess's face. '
Helen 1 You mustn't. Tell her she mustn't shout like that, Mummy/ she
appealed to Mrs. Amberley.

But Mrs. Amberley only laughed and ran her fingers through the little
one's thick yellow hair. 'Joyce believes in the Ten Commandments/ she
said, turning to Anthony. * Was born believing in them. Weren't you,
darling ? ' She put an arm round Joyce's shoulder and kissed her. '
Whereas Helen and I . . .' She shook her head. ' Stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears.'

' Nanny says it's the draught that gives her a stiff neck/ Joyce
volunteered, and was indignant when her mother and Anthony, and even, by
uncomprehending contagion, little Helen, burst out laughing. ' But it's
true ! ' she cried ; and tears of outraged virtue were in her eyes. '
Nanny said so/

386


CHAPTER XXVIII

June 2 5th 1934

THE facility with which one could become a Stiggins in modern dress ! A
much subtler, and therefore more detestable, more dangerous Stiggins.
For of course Stiggins himself was too stupid to be either intrinsically
very bad or capable of doing much harm to other people. Whereas if I set
my mind to it, heaven knows what I mightn't achieve in the way of lies
in the soul. Even with not setting my mind to it, I could go far—as I
perceived, to my horror, to-day, when I found myself talking to Purchas
and three or four of his young people. Talking about Miller's '
anthropological approach ' ; talking about peace as a way of life as
well as an international policy—the way of life being the condition of
any policy that had the least hope of being permanendy successful.
Talking so clearly, so profoundly, so convincingly, (The poor devils
were listening with their tongues hanging out.) Much more convincingly
than Purchas himself could have done ; that muscular-jocular-Christian
style starts by being effective, but soon makes hearers feel that
they're being talked down to. What they like is that the speaker should
be thoroughly serious, but comprehensible. Which is a trick I happen to
possess. There I was, discoursing in a 387

EYELESS IN GAZA

really masterly way about the spiritual life, and taking intense
pleasure in that mastery, secretly congratulating myself on being not
only so clever, but also so good —when all at once I realized who I was:
Stiggins. Talking about the theory of courage, self-sacrifice, patience,
without any knowledge of the practice. Talking, moreover, in the
presence of people who had practised what I was preaching—preaching so
effectively that the proper rôles were reversed : they were listening to
me, not I to them. The discovery of what I was doing came suddenly. I
was overcome with shame. And yet—more shameful—went on talking. Not for
long, however. A minute or two, and I simply had to stop, apologize,
insist that it wasn't my business to talk. This shows how easy it is to
be Stiggins by mistake and unconsciously. But also that unconsciousness
is no excuse, and that one's responsible for the mistake, which arises,
of course, from the pleasure one takes in being more talented than other
people and in dominating them by means of those talents. Why is one
unconscious ? Because one hasn't ever taken the trouble to examine one's
motives ; and one doesn't examine one's motives, because one's motives
are mostly discreditable.

Alternatively, of course, one examines one's motives, but tells oneself
lies about them till one comes to believe that they're good. Which is
the conviction of the self-conscious Stiggins. I've always condemned
showing off and the desire to dominate as vulgar, and imagined myself
pretty free of these vulgarities. But in so far as free 388


CHAPTER XXVIII

at all, free, I now perceive, only thanks to the indifference which has
kept me away from other people, thanks to the external-economic and
internal-intellectual circumstances which made me a sociologist rather
than a banker, administrator, engineer, working in direct contact with
my fellows. Not to make contacts, I have realized, is wrong ; but the
moment I make them, I catch myself showing off and trying to dominate.
Showing off, to make it worse, as Stiggins would have done, trying to
dominate by a purely verbal display of virtues which I don't put into
practice. Humiliating to find that one's supposed good qualities are
mainly due to circumstances and the bad habit of indifference, which
made me shirk occasions for behaving badly—or well, for that matter,
seeing that it's very difficult to behave either well or badly except
towards other people. More humiliating still to find that when, with an
effort of goodwill, one creates the necessary opportunities, one
immediately responds to them by behaving badly. Note : meditate on the
virtues that are the contraries of vanity, lust for power, hypocrisy.

389


CHAPTER XXIX

May 24th 1931

THE blinds were up; the sunlight lay bright across the dressing-table.
Helen, as usual, was still in bed. The days were so long. Lying in the
soft, stupefying warmth of her own body under the quilt, she shortened
them with sleep, with vague ihconsequent thoughts, with drowsy reading.
The book, this morning, was Shelley's poems. ' Warm fragrance,'

she read, articulating the words in an audible whisper, 1 seemed to fall
from her light dress . . / (She saw a long-legged figure in white
muslin, with sloping shoulders and breasts high set.)

. . . from her light dress And her loose hair ; and where some heavy
tress The air of her own speed has disentwined. . . .

(The figure was running now, in square-toed pumps cross-gartered with
black ribbon over the white cotton

stockings.)

The sweetness seems to satiate the faint wind ; And in the soul a wild
odour is felt Beyond the sense, like fiery dews that melt Into the bosom
of a frozen bud. . . .

The half-opened rose gave place to Mark Staithes's strangely twisted
face. Those things he had told her

390


CHAPTER XXIX

the other night about perfumes. Musk, ambergris . . . And Henri Quatre
with his bromidrosis of the feet. Bien vous en prend d'être roi; sans
cela on ne vous pourrait souffrir. Fous pue^ comme charogne. She made a
grimace. Hugh's smell was like sour milk.

A clock struck. Nine, ten, eleven, twelve. Twelve ! She felt guilty ;
then defiantly decided that she would stay in bed for lunch. A
remembered voice—it was Cynthia's — sounded reproachfully in her memory.
* You ought to go out more, see more people.' But people, Cynthia's
people, were such bores. Behind closed eyelids, she saw her mother
rapping the top of her skull : ' Solid ivory, my dear ! ' Hopelessly
stupid, ignorant, tasteless, slow. ' I was brought up above my mental
station,' was what she had said to Anthony the other night. ' So that
now, if ever I have to be with people as silly and uneducated as myself,
it's torture, absolute torture ! *

Cynthia was sweet, of course; always had been, ever since they were at
school together.

But Cynthia's husband—that retriever 1 And her young men, and the young
men's young women ! ' My boy friend. My girl friend.' How she loathed
the words and, still more, the awful way they spoke them 1 So coy, such
saucy implications of sleeping together !

When, in fact, most of them were utterly respectable. In the few cases
where they weren't respectable, it seemed even worse —a double
hypocrisy. Really sleeping together, and pretending to be only archly
pretending to do it. The

391

EYELESS IN GAZA

dreary, upper-class Englishness of it all ! And then

they were always playing games. * Ga-ames/ Mrs.

Amberley drawled out of a pre-morphia past. ' A

Dear Old School in every home/ See more of those

people, do more of the things they did . .* , She

shook her head.

Spouse ! Sister ! Angel ! Pilot of the Fate Whose course has been so
starless . . .

Was it all nonsense ? Or did it mean something— something marvellous she
had never experienced ? But, yes, she had experienced it.

For in the fields of Immortality

My spirit should at first have worshipped thine,

A divine presence in a place divine. . . .

It was humiliating, now, to admit it ; but the fact remained that, with
Gerry, she had known exactly what those lines signified. A divine
presence in a place divine. And it had been the presence in bed of a
swindler who was also a virtuoso in the art of love-making.

She found a perverse pleasure in insisting, as brutally as she could,
upon the grotesque disparity between the facts and what had then been
her feelings.

I love thee ; yes, I feel That on the fountain of my heart a seal Is
set, to keep its waters pure and bright For thee . . .

Noiselessly, Helen laughed. The sound of the clock chiming the quarter
made her think again of Cynthia's advice. There were also the other
people—the people 392


CHAPTER XXIX

they met when Hugh and she dined with the Museum or the University. '
Those god-fearing people ' (her mother spoke again), ' who still go on
fearing God even though they've pitched him overboard.' Fearing God on
committees. Fearing him in W.E.A.

lecture-rooms. Fearing him through interminable discussions of the
Planned Society. But Gerry's good looks, Gerry's technique as a
lover—how could those be planned out of existence ? Or the foetus
irrepressibly growing and growing in the womb ? * A co-ordinated housing
scheme for the whole country.' She remembered Frank Ditchling's eager,
persuasive voice. He had a turned-up nose, and the large nostrils stared
at one like a second pair of eyes, insistently. ' Redistribution of the
population . . . Satellite towns . . .

Green belts . . . Lifts even in working-class flats . . .* She had
listened, she had succumbed to the spell of his hypnotic nostrils, and
at the time it had seemed splendid, worth dying for. But afterwards . .
. Well, lifts were very convenient—she wished there were one to her own
flat. Parks were nice to walk in. But how would Frank Ditchling's
crusade affect any of the serious issues ? Co-ordinated housing wouldn't
make her mother any less dirty, any less hopelessly at the mercy of an
intoxicated body. And Hugh—

would Hugh be any different in a satellite town and with a lift from
what he was now, when he walked up four flights of stairs in London ?
Hugh ! She thought, derisively, of his letters—all the delicate,
beautiful things he had written

393

EYELESS IN GAZA

—and then of the man as he had been in everyday reality, as a husband. *
Show me how I can help you, Hugh/ Arranging his papers, typing his
notes, looking up references for him in the library. But always, his
eyes glassy behind glass, he had shaken his head : either he didn't need
help, or else she wasn't capable of giving it. ' I want to be a good
wife, Hugh/

With her mother's laughter loud in her imagination, it had been
difficult to pronounce those words. But she had meant them ; she <&/want
to be a good wife- Darning socks, making hot milk for him before he went
to bed, reading up his subject, being sérieuse, in a word, for the first
time and profoundly. But Hugh didn't want her to be a good wife, didn't
want her, so far as she could see, to be anytliing. A divine presence in
a place divine. But the place was his letters ; she was present, so far
as he was concerned, only at the other end of the postal system. He
didn't even want her in bed—or at any rate not much, not in any ordinary
way. Green belts, indeed !

It was all beside the point. For the point was those silences in which
Hugh enclosed himself at meals. The point was that martyred expression
he put on if ever she came into his study while he was working. The
point was the furtive squalor of those approaches in the darkness, the
revolting detachment and gentleness of a sensuality, in which the part
assigned to her was purely ideal. The point was that expression of
dismay, almost of horror and disgust, which she had detected that time,
within the first few weeks of their marriage, when she

394


CHAPTER XXIX

was laid up with the flu. He had shown himself solicitous ; and at first
she had been touched, had felt grateful. But when she discovered how
heroic an effort it cost him to attend upon her sick body, the gratitude
had evaporated. In itself, no doubt, the effort was admirable. What she
resented, what she couldn't forgive was the fact that an effort had had
to be made. She wanted to be accepted as she was, even in fever, even
vomiting bile.

In that book on mysticism she had read, there was an account of Mme.
Guyon picking up from the floor a horrible gob of phlegm and spittle and
putting it in her mouth—as a test of will. Sick, she had been Hugh's
test of will ; and, since then, each month had renewed his secret horror
of her body. It was an intolerable insult—and would be no less
intolerable in one of Ditchling's satellite towns, in the planned world
those god-fearing atheists were always talking about.

But there was also Fanny Carling. ' The mouse ' was Helen's name for
her—she was so small, so grey, so silently quick. But a mystical mouse.
A mouse with enormous blue eyes that seemed perpetually astonished by
what they saw behind the appearances of things. Astonished, but bright
at the same time with an inexplicable happiness—a happiness that to
Helen seemed almost indecent, but which she envied. ' How does one
believe in things that are obviously false ? ' she had asked, half in
malice, half genuinely desirous of learning a valuable secret. ' By
living,' the mouse answered. * If you live in the right way, all these
things turn out to be

395

EYELESS IN GAZA

obviously true/ And she went on to talk incomprehensible stuff about the
love of God and the love of things and people for the sake of God. T
don't know what you mean.' ' Only because you don't want to, Helen/
Stupid, maddening answer ! 'How do you know what I want?' Sighing, Helen
returned to her book.

I never was attached to that great sect, Whose doctrine is, that each
one should select Out of the crowd a mistress or a friend,

(' One of my boy friends . . /)

And all the rest, though fair and wise commend To cold oblivion, though
it is the code Of modern morals, and the beaten road Which those poor
slaves with weary footsteps tread, Who travel to their home among the
dead By the broad highway of the world, and so With one chained friend,
perhaps a jealous foe, The dreariest and the longest journey go.

The dreariest and the longest, she repeated to herself. But it could be
as long, she thought, and as dreary with several as with only one—with
Bob and Cecil and Quentin as with Hugh.

True Love in this differs from gold and clay, That to divide is not to
take away.

11 don't believe it/ she said aloud ; and anyhow there hadn't been much
love to divide.

For poor little Cecil she had never pretended to be more than sorry. And
with Quentin it was just—well, just hygiene. As for Bob, he had
genuinely cared for her and she, on her side,

396


CHAPTER XXIX

had done her best to care for him. But under those charming manners of
his, under those heroic good looks there was really nothing. And as a
lover, how hopelessly clumsy he had been, how barbarous and
uncomprehending ! She had broken with him after only a few weeks. And
perhaps, she went on to think, that was her fate— to lose her heart only
to men like Gerry, to be loved only by men like Hugh, and Bob and Cecil.
To worship cruelty and meanness, be adored by deficiency.

The telephone bell rang ; Helen picked up the receiver.

' Hullo/

It was the voice of Anthony Beavis that answered. He wanted her to dine
with him to-morrow.

* I'd love to,' she said, though she had promised the evening to
Quentin.

There was a smile on her face, as she leaned back again on the pillows.
An intelligent man, she was thinking. Worth fifty of these wretched
little Cecils and Quentins. And amusing, charming, even rather
good-looking. How nice he had been to her die other night at Mark's
dinner ! Had gone out of his way to be nice. Whereas that pretentious
ass Pitchley had gone out of his way to be rude and snubbing. She had
wondered at the time whether Anthony wasn't rather attracted by her. Had
wondered and radier hoped so. Now, this invitation gave her reasons, not
only for hoping, but for thinking so as well. She hummed to herself;
then, suddenly energetic, threw back the bed-clothes. She had decided
that she would get up for lunch.

o 397


CHAPTER XXX

July 2nd 1914

SO far as Mary Amberley was concerned, that spring and early summer had
been extremely dull. Anthony was a charming boy, no doubt. But two years
were a long time ; he had lost his novelty. And then he was really too
much in love. It was pleasant having people in love with you, of course,
but not too violently, not if it went on too long. They became a
nuisance in that case ; they began to imagine that they had rights and
that you had duties. Which was intolerable. All the fuss that Anthony
had made last winter about that art critic in Paris ! Flattering, in a
certain sense. Mary had rarely seen anyone so desperately upset. And
seeing that the art critic had turned out, on a nearer acquaintance, to
be a bit of a bore, she had quite enjoyed the process of letting herself
be blackmailed by Anthony's dumb miseries and tears. But the principle
was wrong. She didn't want to be loved in that blackmailing way.
Particularly if it was a long-drawn blackmail. She liked things to be
short and sharp and exciting. Another time, and with anyone who wasn't
the art critic, she wouldn't allow Anthony to blackmail her. But the
trouble was that, except for Sidney Gattick—and she wasn't really sure
if she could

398


CHAPTER XXX

tolerate Sidney's voice and manner—there was nobody else in sight. The
world was a place where all amusing and exciting things seemed, all of a
sudden, to have stopped happening. There was nothing for it but to make
them happen. That was why she went on at Anthony about what she called '
Joan's treatment,' went on and on with a persistence quite out of
proportion with any interest she felt in Joan, or in Brian Foxe, or even
in Anthony—went on simply in the hope of creating a little fun out of
the boring nothingness of the time.

' How's the treatment advancing ? ' she asked yet again that afternoon
in July.

Anthony replied with a long story, elaborately rehearsed, about his
position as Heavy Uncle ; and how he was gradually establishing himself,
on a more intimate footing, as Big Brother; how from Big Brother, he
proposed to develop, almost imperceptibly, into Sentimental Cousin ; and
from Sentimental Cousin into . . .

' The truth being,' said Mrs. Amberley, interrupting him, ' that you're
doing nothing at all.'

Anthony protested. * I'm going slow. Using strategy.'

* Strategy I * she echoed contemptuously. ' It's just funk/

He denied it, but with an irrepressible blush. For of course she was
half right. The funk was ihere. In spite of the two years he had spent
as Mary's lover, he still suffered from shyness, still lacked
self-confidence in the presence of women. But his timidity was not the

399

EYELESS IN GAZA

only inhibiting force at work. There was also compunction, also
affection and loyalty.

But of these it would be all but impossible to talk to Mary. She would
say that he was only disguising his fear in a variety of creditable
fancy dresses, would simply refuse to believe in the genuineness of
these other feelings of his. And the trouble was that she would have
some justification for the refusal. For, after all, there hadn't been
much sign of that compunction, that affection and loyalty, when he
originally told her the story.

How often since then, in futile outbursts of retrospective anger, he had
cursed himself for having done it ! And, trying to persuade himself that
the responsibility was not exclusively his, had also cursed Mary.
Blaming her for not having told him that he was betraying confidences
out of mere wantonness and vanity; for not having refused to listen to
him.

' The fact of the matter,' Mary now went on, implacably, ' is that you
haven't got the guts to kiss a woman. You can only put on one of those
irresistibly tender and melancholy faces of yours and silendy beg to be
seduced.'

* What nonsense ! ' But he was blushing more hotly than ever.

Ignoring the interruption, ' She won't seduce you, of course,' Mary
continued. * She's too young. Not too young to be tempted, perhaps.
Because the thing you go for is the mother instinct, and even a child of
three has got that. Even a child of three would feel 400


CHAPTER XXX

her little heart wrung for you. Absolutely wr-wrung/ She rolled the r
derisively. ' But seduction . . / Mrs. Amberley shook her head. ' You
can't expect that till a good deal later.

Certainly not from a girl of twenty/

' As a matter of fact/ said Anthony, trying to divert her from this
painful dissection of his character, ' I've never found Joan
particularly attractive. A bit too rustic/ He emphasized the word in
Mary's own style. ' Besides, she's really rather childish/ he added, and
was instantly made to regret his words ; for Mary was down on him again,
like a hawk.

' Childish ! ' she repeated. ' I like that. And what about you ? Talk
about pots and kettles !

The feeding-bottle calling the diaper childish. Though of course,' she
went on, returning to the attack at the point where she had broken
through before, ' it's only natural that you should complain of her. She
is too childish for you. Too childish to do the pouncing.

Childish enough to expect to be pounced on. Poor girl ! she's come to
the wrong address.

She'll get no more kisses out of you than she gets out of that benighted
early Christian of hers. Even though you do profess to be civilized. . .
/

She was interrupted by the opening of the door.

1 Mr. Gattick,' the maid announced.

Large, florid, almost visibly luminous with the inner glow of his
self-satisfaction and confidence, Sidney Gattick came striding in. His
voice boomed resonantly as he spoke his greetings, enquired after her
health.

40 r

EYELESS IN GAZA

A deep voice, virile as only the voice of an actor-manager playing the
part of a strong man can be virile. And his profile, Anthony suddenly
perceived—that too was an actor's : too noble to be quite true. And
after all, he went on to think, with a contempt born of jealousy and a
certain envy of the other's worldly success, what were these barristers
but actors ? Clever actors, but clever with the cleverness of
examination-passers ; capable of mugging up a case and forgetting it
again the moment it was finished, as one mugged up formal logic or The
Acts of the Apostles for Pass Mods or Divvers. No real intelligence, no
coherent thinking. Just the examinee's mind lodged in the actor's body
and expressing itself in the actor's booming voice. And, for this,
society paid the creature five or six thousand pounds a year. And the
creature regarded itself as important, wise, a man of note; the creature
felt itself in a position to be patronizing. Not that it mattered,
Anthony assured himself, being patronized by this hollow, booming
mountebank. One could laugh—it was so absurd ! But in spite of the
absurdity, and even while one laughed, the patronage seemed painfully
humiliating. The way, for example, he now acted the distinguished old
military man, the bluff country squire, and, patting him on the
shoulder, said, ' Well, Anthony my lad ! '—it was absolutely
intolerable. On this occasion, however, the intolerable-ness, it seemed
to Anthony, was worth putting up with. The man might be a tiresome and
pretentious fool ; but at least his coming had delivered him from the
assaults

402


CHAPTER XXX

of Mary. In Gattick's presence she couldn't go on at him about Joan.

But he had reckoned without Mary and her boredom, her urgent need to
make something amusing and exciting happen. Few diings are more exciting
than deliberate bad taste, more amusing than the spectacle of someone
else's embarrassment. Before Gattick had had time to finish his
preliminary boomings, she was back again on the old, painful subject.

( When you were Anthony's age,' she began, ' did you always wait for the
woman to seduce you ? '

'Me?'

She nodded.

Recovering from his surprise, Gattick smiled the knowing smile of an
experienced Don Juan and, in his most virile jeune premier's voice,
said, ' Of course not/ He laughed complacently. ' On the contrary, I'm
afraid I used to rush in where angels fear to tread.

Got my face slapped sometimes. But more often, not.' He twinkled
scabrously.

* Anthony prefers to sit still,* said Mrs. Amberley ; c to sit still and
wait for the woman to make the advances/

4 Oh, that's bad, Anthony, that's very bad,' said Gattick ; and his
voice once more implied the military moustaches, the country gentleman's
Harris tweeds.

'Here's a poor girl who wants to be kissed,'.Mrs. Amberley went on, '
and he simply hasn't got the courage to put an arm round her waist and
do it*

403

EYELESS IN GAZA

1 Nothing to say in your own defence, Anthony ? * Gattick asked.

Trying, rather unsuccessfully, to pretend that he didn't care, Anthony
shrugged his shoulders. ' Only that it isn't true/

1 What isn't true ? ' asked Mary.

* That I haven't the courage.'

* But it is true that you haven't done the kissing. Isn't it ? ' she
insisted. ' Isn't it ? ' And when he had to admit that it was true, '
I'm only drawing the obvious inference from the facts,* she said. c
You're a lawyer, Sidney. Tell me if it's a justifiable inference.'

' Absolutely justifiable,' said Gattick, and the Lord Chancellor himself
could not have spoken more weightily. An aura of robes and full-bottomed
wigs hung round him. He was justice incarnate.

Anthony opened his mouth to speak, then shut it again. In front of
Gattick, and with Mary obstinately determined to be only ' civilized,'
how could he say what he really felt ? And if that were what he really
felt, why (the question propounded itself once more), why had he told
her the story ? And told it in that particular style—as though he were a
vivisecting comedian ? Vanity, wantonness ; and then, of course, the
fact that he was in love with her and anxious to please, at any cost,
even at the cost of what he really felt. (And at the moment of telling,
he was forced to admit, he hadn't really felt anything but the desire to
be amusing.) But, again, that couldn't be put into words. Gattick didn't
404


CHAPTER XXX

know about their affair, mustn't know- And even if Gattick hadn't been
there, it would have been difficult, almost impossible, to explain it to
Mary. She would laugh at him for being romantic—romantic about Brian,
about Joan, even about herself; would think him absurd and ridiculous
for making tragic mountains out of a simple amorous mole-hill.

* People will insist,' she used to say, ' on treating the mons Veneris
as though it were Mount Everest. Too silly ! '

When at last he spoke, ' I don't do it,' he confined himself to saying,
' because I don't want to do it.'

* Because you don't dare,' cried Mary. ( I do/

1 You don't ! ' Her dark eyes shone. She was thoroughly enjoying
herself.

Booming, but with a hint of laughter in his ponderous-ness, the Lord
Chancellor let fly once more. ' It's an overwhelming case against you,'
he said.

1 I'm ready to bet on it,' said Mary. ' Five to one. If you do it within
a month, I'll give you five pounds.'

* But I tell you I don't want to,' he persisted.

' No, you can't get out of it like that. A bet's a bet. Five pounds to
you if you bring it off within a month from to-day. And if you don't,
you pay me a pound.'

1 You're too generous,' said Gattick.

* Only a pound,' she repeated. ' But I shall never speak to you again.*

For a few seconds they looked at one another in

o* 405

EYELESS IN GAZA

silence, Anthony had gone very pale. Close-lipped and crookedly, Mary
was smiling; between the half-closed lids, her eyes were bright with
malicious laughter.

Why did she have to be so horrible to him, he wondered, so absolutely
beastly ? He hated her, hated her all the more because of his desire for
her, because of die memory and the anticipation of those pleasures,
because of her liberating wit and knowledge, because of everything, in a
word, that made it inevitable for him to do exactly what she wanted.

Even though he knew it was stupid and wrong.

Watching him, Mary saw the rebellious hatred in his eyes, and when at
last he dropped them, the sign of her own triumph.

1 Never again/ she repeated. * I mean it/

At home, as Anthony was hanging up his hat in the hall, his father
called to him.

' Come and look here, dear boy.'

' Damn ! ' Anthony said to himself resentfully ; it was with an
aggrieved expression, which Mr. Beavis was much too busy to notice, that
he entered his father's study.

* Just having a little fun with the map/ said Mr. Beavis, who was
sitting at his desk with a sheet of the Swiss ordnance survey spread out
before him. He had a passion for maps, a passion due in part to his love
of walking, in part to his professional interest in place names. '
Comballas/ he murmured to himself, without

406


CHAPTER XXX

looking up from the map. ' Chamossaire. Charming, charming ! * Then,
turning to Anthony, ' It's a thousand pities,' he said, * that your
conscience won't allow you to take a holiday and come along with us.'

Anthony, who had made his work for the research fellowship an excuse for
staying in England with Mary, gravely nodded. ' One really can't do any
serious reading at high altitudes,' he said.

* So far as I can see,' said Mr. Beavis, who had turned back to his map,
' we ought to have the jolliest walks and scrambles all round les
Diablerets. And what a delicious name that is ! ' he added
parenthetically. 1 Up the Col du Pillon, for example.' He ran his finger
sinuously along the windings of a road. ' Can you see, by the way ? '
Perfunctorily, Anthony bent a little closer. * No, you can't,' Mr.
Beavis went on. * I cover it all up with my hand.* He straightened
himself up and dipped first into one pocket, then into another.

4 Where on earth,' he said, frowning ; then suddenly, as his most daring
philological joke came to his mind, he changed the frown into a sly
smile. * Where on earth is my teeny weeny penis. Or, to be accurate, my
teeny weeny weeny . . .'

Anthony was so much taken aback that he could only return a blank
embarrassed stare to the knowing twinkle his father gaily shot at him.

1 My pencil,' Mr. Beavis was forced to explain. 1 Penecillus :
diminutive ofpeniculus : double diminutive of penis; which as you know,'
he went on, at last pro-407

EYELESS IN GAZA

ducing the teeny weeny weeny from his inside left-breast pocket, '
originally meant a tail.

And now let's attack the Pillon again.' Lowering the point of the pencil
to the map, he traced out the zigzags. ' And when we're at the top of
the Col,' he continued, ' we bear north-north-west round the flank of
Mont Fornettaz until . . .'

It was the first time, Anthony was thinking, that his father had ever,
in his presence, made any allusion to the physiology of sex.

408


CHAPTER XXXI

September 6th 1933

DEATH/ said Mark Staithes. 'It's the only thing we haven't succeeded in
completely vulgarizing. Not from any lack of die desire to do so, of
course. We're like dogs on an acropolis. Trotting round with
inexhaustible bladders and only too anxious to lift a leg against every
statue- And mostly we succeed. Art, religion, heroism, love—we've left
our visiting-card on all of them. But death—death remains out of reach.
We haven't been able to defile that statue. Not yet, at any rate. But
progress is still progressing.' He demonstrated the anatomy of a smile.
* The larger hopes, the proliferating futures . . .'

The bony hands went out in a lavish gesture. ' One day, no doubt, some
genius of the kennel will manage to climb up and deposit a well-aimed
tribute bang in the middle of the statue's face. But luckily progress
hasn't yet got so far. Death still remains.'

' It remains,' Anthony repeated. ' But the smoke-screen is pretty thick.
We manage to forget it most of the time.'

1 But not all the time. It remains, unexorcizably. Intact. Indeed,' Mark
qualified, 'more than intact. We have bigger and better smoke-screens
than our fathers had. But behind the smoke die enemy is more

409

EYELESS IN GAZA

formidable. Death's grown, I should say, now that the consolations and
hopes have been taken away. Grown to be almost as large as it was when
people seriously believed in hell.

Because, if you're a busy film-going, newspaper-reading,
football-watching, chocolate-eating modern, then death is hell. Every
time the smokescreen thins out a bit, people catch a glimpse and are
terrified. I find that a very consoling thought.' He smiled again. '

It makes up for a great deal. Even for those busy little dogs on the
acropolis.' There was a silence. Then, in another tone, ' It's a
comfort/ he resumed, ' to think that death remains faithful. Everything
else may have gone ; but death remains faithful/ he repeated. ' If we
choose to risk our lives, we can risk them as completely as ever we
did.' He rose, took a turn or two about the room ; then, coming to a
halt in front of Anthony's chair, ' That's what I really came to see you
about/ he said.

'What?'

'About this business of risking one's life. I've been feeling as though
I were stuck. Bogged to the neck in civilized humanity/ He made the
grimace of one who encounters a foul smell. ' There seemed to be only
one way out. Taking risks again. It would be like a whiff of fresh air.
I thought perhaps that you too . . / He left the sentence unfinished.

* I've never taken a risk,' said Anthony, after a pause. 1 Only had one
taken for me once/

he added, remembering the bumpkin with the hand-grenade.

410


CHAPTER XXXI

* Isn't that a reason for beginning ? '

' The trouble/ said Anthony, frowning to himself, * the trouble is that
I've always been a coward. A moral one, certainly. Perhaps also a
physical one—I don't know. I've never really had an opportunity of
finding out.'

c T should have thought that that was a still more cogent reason.'

* Perhaps.'

4 If it's a case of changing the basis of one's life, wouldn't it be
best to change it with a bang ? '

c Bang into a corpse ? '

'No, no. Just a risk; not suicide. It's merely dangerous, the business
I'm thinking of. No more.* He sat down again. * I had a letter the other
day,' he began. ' From an old friend of mine in Mexico. A man I worked
with on the coffee finca. Jorge Fuentes, by name. A remarkable creature,
in his way.'

He outlined Don Jorge's history. Besieged by the revolutionaries on his
estate in the valley of Oaxaca. Most of the other landowners had fled.
He was one of the only men who put up a resistance. At first he had had
his two brothers to help him. But they were killed, one at long range,
the other by machetes in an ambush among the cactuses. He had carried on
the fight single-handed. Then, one day when he was out riding round the
fields, a dozen of them managed to break into the house. He had come
home to find the bodies of his wife and their two little boys lying
mangled in the courtyard.

411

EYELESS IN GAZA

After that, the place seemed no longer worth defending. He stayed long
enough to shoot three of the murderers, then abandoned his patrimony and
went to work for other men. It was during this period that Mark had
known him. Now he possessed his own house again and some land ; acted as
agent for most of the planters on the Pacific coast of Oaxaca state;
recruited their labour for them in the mountain villages, and was the
only man the Indians trusted, the only one who didn't try to swindle
them. Recendy, however, there had been trouble. Don Jorge had gone into
politics, become the leader of a party, made enemies and hardly less
dangerous friends. He was in opposition now ; the state governor was
persecuting him and his allies. A bad man, according to Don Jorge ;
corrupt, unjust—unpopular too. It shouldn't be difficult to get rid of
him. Some of the troops would certainly come over. But before he
started, Don Jorge wanted to know if there was any prospect of Mark's
being in the neighbourhood of Oaxaca in the immediate future.

1 Poor old Jorge i He has a most touching belief in the soundness of my
judgment.' Mark laughed. Thus to understate Don Jorge's faith in him,
thus to withhold the reasons of that faith, sent a glow of satisfaction
running through his body. He might have told Anthony of that occasion
when the old ass had gone and let himself be caught by bandits, and of
the way he had been rescued. A good story, and creditable to himself.
But not to tell it gave him more pleasure than telling it

4«


CHAPTER XXXI

would have done. ' True, it's better than his judgment,' Mark went on. '
But that isn't saying much. Don Jorge's brave—brave as a lion ; but
foolhardy. No sense of reality.

He'll make a mess of his coup d'état.9

* Unless you are there to help him, I take it. And do you propose to be
there ? *

Mark nodded. * I've written him that I'll start as soon as I can settle
my affairs in England. It occurred to me that you . . .' Again he left
the sentence unfinished and looked enquiringly at Anthony.

' Do you think it's a good cause ? ' Anthony asked at last.

The other laughed. ' As good as any other Mexican politician's cause,'
he answered.

* Is diat good enough ? '

* For my purpose. And anyhow, what is a good cause? Tyranny under
commissars, tyranny under Gauleiters—it doesn't seem to make much
difference. A drill-sergeant is always a drill-sergeant, whatever the
colour of his shirt.'

' Revolution for revolution's sake, then ? '

I No, for mine. For the sake of every man who takes part in die thing.
For every man can get as much fun out of it as I can.'

II expect it would be good for me,' Anthony brought out after a pause.

* I'm sure it would be.*

1 Though I'm devilishly frightened—even at this distance.'

4*3

EYELESS IN GAZA

* That'll make it all the more interesting/ Anthony drew a deep breath.
* All right,' he said at last. ( I'll come with you.' Then vehemently, *
It's the most stupid, senseless idea I've ever heard of,' he concluded.
' So, as I've always been so clever and sensible . . .' He broke off
and, laughing, reached for his pipe and the tin of tobacco.

4M


CHAPTER XXXII

July 29th 1934

WTH Helen to-day to hear Miller speaking at Tower Hill, during the
dinner hour. A big crowd. He spoke well—the right mixture of arguments,
jokes, emotional appeal. The theme, peace. Peace everywhere or no peace
at all. International peace not achievable unless a translation into
policy of inter-individual relations. Militarists at home, in factory,
and office, towards inferiors and rivals, cannot logically expect
governments which represent them to behave as pacifists. Hypocrisy and
stupidity of those who advocate peace between states, while conducting
private wars in business or the family.

Meanwhile, there was much heckling by communists in the crowd. How can
anything be achieved without revolution ? Without liquidating the
individuals and classes standing in the way of social progress ? And so
on. Answer (always with extraordinary good humour and wit) : means
determine ends. Violence and coercion produce a post-revolutionary
society, not communistic but (like the Russian) hierarchical, ruled by
an oligarchy using secret police methods. And all the rest.

After about a quarter of an hour, an angry young heckler climbed on to
the litde wall, where Miller was

415

EYELESS IN GAZA

standing, and threatened to knock him off if he didn't stop. ' Come on
then, Archibald.'

The crowd laughed; the young man grew still angrier, advanced, clenched,
squared up. '

Get down, you old bastard, or else . . .* Miller stood quite still,
smiling, hands by side, saying, All right; he had no objection to being
knocked off. The attacker made sparring movements, brought a fist to
within an inch of Miller's nose. The old man didn't budge, showed no
sign of fear or anger. The other drew back the hand, but instead of
bringing it into Miller's face, hit him on the chest. Pretty hard.
Miller staggered, lost his balance and fell off the wall into the crowd.
Apologized to the people he'd fallen on, laughed, got up again on to the
wall. Repetition of the performance. Again the young man threatened the
face, but again, when Miller didn't lift his hands, or show either fear
or anger, hit him on the chest. Miller went down and again climbed up.
Got another blow. Came up once more. This time the man screwed himself
up to hitting the face, but only with the flat of his hand. Miller
straightened his head and went on smiling. * Three shots a penny,
Archibald.' The man let out at the body and knocked him off the wall. Up
again. Miller looked at his watch. * Another ten minutes before you need
go back to work, Archibald.

Come on.' But this time the man could only bring himself to shake his
fist and call Miller a bloodsucking old reactionary. Then turned and
walked off along the wall, pursued by derisive laughter, jokes and

416


CHAPTER XXXII

whistlings from the crowd. Miller went on with his speech.

Helen's reaction was curious. Distress at the spectacle of the young
man's brutality towards the old. But at the same time anger with Miller
for allowing himself to be knocked about without resistance. The reason
for this anger ? Obscure ; but I think she resented Miller's success.
Resented the fact that the young man had been reduced, psychologically,
to impotence. Resented the demonstration that there was an alternative
to terrorism and a non-violent means of combating it. * It's only a
trick/ she said. Not a very easy trick, I insisted ; and that I
certainly couldn't perform it. ' Anyone could learn it, if he tried.' *
Possibly ; wouldn't it be a good thing if we all tried ? ' ' No, I think
it's stupid.' Why ? She found it hard to answer. ' Because it's
unnatural/ was the reason she managed to formulate at last—and proceeded
to develop it in terms of a kind of egalitarian philosophy. ' I want to
be like other people. To have the same feelings and interests. I don't
want to make myself different. Just an ordinary person ; not somebody
who's proud of having learnt a difficult trick. Like that old Miller of
yours/ I pointed out that we'd all learn such difficult tricks as
driving cars, working in offices, reading and writing, crossing the
street. Why shouldn't we all learn this other difficult trick ? A trick,
potentially, so much more useful. If all were to leam it, then one could
afford to be like other people, one could share all their feelings in
safety, with the 4*7

EYELESS IN GAZA

certainty that one would be sharing something good, not bad. But Helen
wasn't to be persuaded. And when I suggested that we should join the old
man for a late lunch, she refused. Said she didn't want to know him.
That the young man had been quite right ; Miller was a reactionary.
Disguising himself in a shroud of talk about economic justice; but
underneath just a tory agent. His insistence that changes in social
organization weren't enough, but that they must be accompanied by, must
spring from a change in personal relations— what was that but a plea for
conservatism ? * I think he's pernicious,' she said.

'And I think you're pernicious.' But she consented to have lunch with
me. Which showed how little stock she set on my powers to shake her
convictions ! Arguments—I might have lots of good arguments ; to those
she was impervious. But Miller's action had got between the joints of
her armour. He acted his doctrine, didn't rest content with talking it.

Her confidence that I couldn't get between the joints, as he had done,
was extremely insulting. The more so as I knew it was justified.

Perseverance, courage, endurance. All, fruits of love. Love goodness
enough, and indifference and slackness are inconceivable. Courage comes
as to the mother defending her child ; and at the same time there is no
fear of the opponent, who is loved, whatever he may do, because of the
potentialities for goodness in him. As for pain, fatigue,
disapproval—they are borne cheerfully, because they seem of no
consequence by 418


CHAPTER XXXII

comparison with the goodness loved and pursued. Enormous gulf separating
me from this state ! The fact that Helen was not afraid of my
pemiciousness (as being only theoretical), while dreading Miller's
(because his life was the same as his argument), was a painful reminder
of the existence of this gulf.

419


CHAPTER XXXIII

July 18th 1914

THE curtain rose, and before them was Venice, green in the moonlight,
with Iago and Roderigo talking together in the deserted street.

' Light, I say ! Light ! * Brabantio called from his window. And in an
instant the street was thronged, there was a clanking of weapons and
armour, torches and lanterns burned yellow in the green darkness. ...

1 Horribly vulgar scenery, Pm afraid/ said Anthony as the curtain fell
after the first scene.

Joan looked at him in surprise. ' Was it ? ' Then : ' Yes, I suppose it
was,' she added, hypocritically paying the tribute of philistinism to
taste. In reality, she had thought it too lovely. ' You know,' she
confessed, * this is only the fifth time Pve ever been in a theatre.'

' Only the fifth time ? ' he repeated incredulously.

But here was another street and more armed men and Iago again, bluff and
hearty, and Othello himself, dignified like a king, commanding in every
word and gesture ; and when Brabantio came in with all his men, and the
torchlight glittering on the spears and halberds, how heroically serene
! ' Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.' A kind of
anguish ran up and down her spine as she listened, as she saw the dark
hand

420


CHAPTER XXXIII

lifted, as the sword-points dropped, under his irresistible compulsion,
towards the ground.

' He speaks the lines all right,' Anthony admitted.

The council chamber was rich with tapestry; the red-robed senators came
and went. And here was Othello again. Still kingly, but with a
kingliness that expressed itself, not in commands, this time, not in the
lifting of a hand, but on a higher plane than that of the real world—in
the calm, majestic music of the record of his wooing.

Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,

Rough quarries, rocks and hills whose heads touch

heaven, It was my hint to speak. . . .

Her lips moved as she repeated the familiar words after him—familiar but
transfigured by the voice, the bearing of the speaker, the setting, so
that, though she knew them by heart, they seemed completely new. And
here was Desdemona, so young, so beautiful, with her neck and her bare
shoulders rising frail and slender out of the heavy magnificence of her
dress. Sumptuous brocade, and beneath it, the lovely irrelevance of a
girl's body ; beneath the splendid words, a girl's voice.

You are the lord of duty, I am hitherto your daughter ; but here's my
husband.

She felt again that creeping anguish along her spine. And now they were
all gone, Othello, Desdemona, senators, soldiers, all the beauty, all
the nobleness—

421

EYELESS IN GAZA

leaving only Iago and Roderigo whispering together in the empty room. '
When she is sated of his body, she will find the error of her choice/
And then that fearful soliloquy.

Evil, deliberate and conscious of itself. . . . The applause, the lights
of the entr'-acte were a sacrilegious irrelevance ; and when Anthony
offered to buy her a box of chocolates she refused almost indignantly. '
Do you think there really are people like Iago ? ' she asked.

He shook his head, ' Men don't tell themselves that the wrong they're
doing is wrong.

Either they do it without thinking. Or else they invent reasons for
believing it's right.

Iago's a bad man who passes other people's judgments of him upon
himself.'

The lights went down again. They were in Cyprus. Under a blazing
sun,Desdemona's arrival; then Othello's —and oh, the protective
tenderness of his love !

The sun had set. In cavernous twilight, between stone walls, the
drinking, the quarrel, the rasping of sword on sword, and Othello again,
kingly and commanding, imposing silence, calling them all to obedience.
Kingly and commanding for the last time. For in the scenes that
followed, how terrible it was to watch the great soldier, the holder of
high office, the civilized Venetian, breaking down, under Iago's
disintegrating touches, breaking down into the African, into the savage,
into the uncontrolled and primordial beast ! '

Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief ! . . . Noses, ears, and lips ! Is
it possible ? '

And then the determination

422


CHAPTER XXXIII

to kill. * Do it not with poison, strangle her in bed, even the bed she
hath contaminated.1

And afterwards the horrible outburst of his anger against Desdemona, the
blow delivered in public ; and in the humiliating privacy of the locked
room, that colloquy between the kneeling girl and an Othello,
momentarily sane again, but sane with the base, ignoble sanity of Iago,
cynically knowing only the worst, believing in the possibility only of
what was basest.

I cry you mercy then ;

I took you for that cunning whore of Venice

That married with Othello.

There was a hideous note of derision in his voice, an undertone of
horrible obscene laughter. Irrepressibly, she began to tremble.

' I can't bear it/ she whispered to Anthony between the scenes. *
Knowing what's going to happen. It's too awful. I simply can't bear it.'

Her face was pale, she spoke with a violent intensity of feeling.

1 Well, let's go,' he suggested. * At once.*

She shook her head. ' No, no. I must see it to the end. Must.'

1 But if you can't bear it ... ? *

' You mustn't ask me to explain. Not now.'

The curtain rose again.

My mother had a maid call'd Barbara ;

She was in love, and he she lov'd prov'd mad

And did forsake her j she had a song of * willow.*

4*3

EYELESS IN GAZA

Her heart was beating heavily ; she felt sick with anticipation. In an
almost childish voice, sweet, but thin and untrained, Desdemona began to
sing.

The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree, Sing all a green willow.

The vision wavered before Joan's eyes, became indistinct ; the tears
rolled down her cheeks.

It was over at last ; they were out in the street again.

Joan drew a deep breath. ' I feel I'd like to go for a long walk,' she
said. ' Miles and miles without stopping.'

1 Well, you can't,' he said shortly. ' Not in those clothes.'

Joan looked at him with an expression of pained astonishment. 4 You're
angry with me,'

she said.

Blushing, he did his best to smile it off. ' Angry ? Why on earth should
I be angry ? ' But she was right, of course. He was angry—angry with
everyone and everything that entered into the present insufferable
situation : with Mary for having pushed him into it; with himself for
having allowed her to push him in ; with Joan for being the subject of
that monstrous bet ; with Brian because he was ultimately responsible
for the whole thing; widi Shakespeare, even, and the actors and this
jostling crowd. . . .

1 Don't be cross/ she pleaded. * It's been such a lovely evening. If you
knew how marvellous it's made me feel ! But I have to be so careful with
the marvel-lousness. Like carrying a cup that's full to the brim.

424


CHAPTER XXXIII

The slightest jolt—and down it goes. Let me carry it safely home.'

Her words made him feel embarrassed, almost guilty. He laughed
nervously. ' Do you think you can carry it home safely in a hansom ? '
he asked.

Her face lit up with pleasure at the suggestion. He waved his hand ; the
cab drew up in front of them. They climbed in and closed the doors upon
themselves. The driver jerked his reins. The old horse walked a few
steps, then, at the crack of the whip, broke reluctantly into a very
slow trot. Along Coventry Street, through the glare of the Circus, into
Piccadilly. Above the spire of St. James's the dilute blackness of the
sky was flushed with a coppery glow. Reflected in the polished darkness
of the roadway, the long recession of the lamps seemed inexpressibly
mournful, like a reminder of death. But here were the trees of the Green
Park—bright wherever the lamplight struck upwards into the leaves with
an unearthly, a more than springlike freshness. There was life as well
as death.

Joan sat in silence, holding firm within herself the fragile cup of that
strange happiness that was also and at the same time intensest sadness.
Desdemona was dead, Othello was dead, and the lamps retreating for ever
down their narrowing vistas were symbols of the same destiny. And yet
the melancholy of these converging parallels and the pain of the tragedy
were as essential constituents of her present joy as her delight in the
splendour of the poetry, as her pleasure in the significant

42J

EYELESS IN GAZA

and almost allegorical beauty of those illumined leaves. For this joy of
hers was not one particular emotion exclusive of all others ; it was all
emotions—a state, so to speak, of general and undifFerentiated
movedness. The overtones and aftertones of horror, of delight, of pity
and laughter—all lingered harmoniously in her mind. She sat there,
behind the slowly trotting horse, serene, but with a serenity that
contained the potentiality of every passion. Sadness, delight, fear,
mirth—they were all there at once, impossibly conjoined within her mind.
She cherished the precarious miracle.

A hansom, he was thinking—it was die classical opportunity. They were
already at Hyde Park Corner ; by this time he ought at least to have
been holding her hand. But she sat there like a statue, staring at
nothing, in another world. She would feel outraged if he were to call
her roughly back to reality.

* I shall have to invent a story for Mary/ he decided. But it wouldn't
be easy; Mary had an extraordinary talent for detecting lies.

Reined in, the old horse gingerly checked itself, came to a halt. They
had arrived. Oh, too soon, Joan thought, too soon. She would have liked
to drive on like this for ever, nursing in silence her incommunicable
joy. It was with a sigh that she stepped on to the pavement.

1 Aunt Fanny said you were to come and say goodnight to her if she was
still up.'

That meant that the last chance of doing it had gone,

426


CHAPTER XXXIII

he reflected, as he followed her up the steps and into the dimly lighted
hall.

1 Aunt Fanny/ Joan called softly as she opened the drawing-room door.
But there was no answer; the room was dark.

* Gone to bed ? '

She turned back towards him and nodded affirmatively. They stood there
for a moment in silence.

' I shall have to go,' he said at last.

( It was a wonderful evening, Anthony* Simply wonderful.'

* I'm glad you enjoyed it.' Behind his smile, he was thinking with
apprehension diat that last chance had not yet disappeared.

1 It was more than enjoying,' she said. ' It was . . . I don't know how
to say what it was.'

She smiled at him, added, ' Good-night,' and held out her hand.

Anthony took it, said good-night in his turn ; then, suddenly deciding
that it was now or never, stepped closer, laid an arm round her shoulder
and kissed her.

The suddenness of his decision and his embarrassment imparted to his
movements a clumsy abruptness indistinguishable from that which would
have been the result of a violent impulse irrepressibly breaking through
restraints. His lips touched her cheek first of all, then found her
mouth. She made as if to withdraw, to avert her face ; but the movement
was checked almost before it was begun. Her mouth came back to his,
drawn irresistibly. All the diffuse and indefinite emotion that

4*7

EYELESS IN GAZA

had accumulated within her during the evening suddenly crystallized, as
it were, round her surprise and the evidence of his desire and this
almost excruciating pleasure that, from her lips, invaded her whole body
and took possession of her mind. The astonishment and anger of the first
second were swallowed up in an apocalypse of new sensations. It was as
though a quiet darkness were violently illuminated, as though the
relaxed dumb strings of an instrument had been wound up and were
vibrating ever more shrilly and piercingly, until at last the brightness
and the tension annihilated themselves in their own excess. She felt
herself becoming empty; enormous spaces opened up within her, gulfs of
darkness.

Anthony felt her body droop limp and heavy in his arms. So heavy indeed,
and with so unexpected a weight, that he almost lost his balance. He
staggered, then braced himself and held her up more closely.

'What is it, Joan?'

She did not answer, but leaned her forehead against his shoulder. He
could feel that if he were now to let her go, she would fall. Perhaps
she was ill. He would have to call for help—wake up the aunt—explain
what had happened. . . . Wondering desperately what to do, he looked
about him. The lamp in the hall projected through the open door of the
drawing-room a strip of light that revealed the end of a sofa covered
with yellow chintz.

Still holding her up with one arm about her shoulders, he bent down and
slid the other behind her

428


CHAPTER XXXIII

knees ; then, with an effort (for she was heavier than he had imagined),
lifted her off her feet, carried her along the narrow path of
illumination that led into the darkness, and lowered her as gently as
her weight would allow him on to the sofa.

Kneeling on the floor beside her, ' Are you feeling better now ? ' he
asked.

Joan drew a deep breath, passed a hand across her forehead, then opened
her eyes and looked at him, but only for a moment ; overcome by an
access of timidity and shame, she covered her face with her hands. ' I'm
so sorry/ she whispered. ' I don't know what happened. I felt so faint
all of a sudden/ She was silent for a little ; the lamps were alight
again, the stretched wires were vibrating—but tolerably, not to excess.
She parted her hands once more and turned towards him, shyly smiling.

With eyes that had grown accustomed to the faint light, he looked
anxiously into her face.

Thank God, she seemed to be all right. He wouldn't have to call the
aunt. His feeling of relief was so profound that he took her hand and
pressed it tenderly.

* You're not cross with me, Anthony ? '

c Why should I be?'

1 Well, you have every right. Fainting like that . . / Her face felt
naked and exposed ; withdrawing her hand from his grasp, she once more
hid her shame. Fainting like that . . .

The recollection humiliated her. Thinking of that sudden, silent,
violent gesture of his, '

He

P 4*9

EYELESS IN GAZA

loves me/ she said to herself. And Brian ? But Brian's absence seemed to
have been raised to a higher power. He was not there with an
unprecedented intensity, not there to the point of never having been
there. All that was really there was this living presence beside her—
the presence of desire, the presence of hands and mouth, the presence,
potential but waiting, waiting to actualize itself again, of those
kisses. She felt her breast lift, though she was unaware of having taken
a deep breath ; it was as though someone else had drawn it. ' He loves
me,' she repeated ; it was a justification. She dropped her hands from
her face, looked at him for a moment, then reached out and, whispering
his name, drew his head down towards her.

' Well, what's the result ? ' Mary called from the sofa as he entered.
By the gloomy expression on Anthony's face she judged that it was she
who had won the bet ; and this annoyed her. She felt suddenly very angry
with him—doubly and trebly angry ; because he was so spiritless ;
because he hadn't cared enough for her to win his bet in spite of the
spiritlessness ; because he was forcing upon her a gesture which she
didn't in the least want to make. After a day's motoring with him in the
country she had come to the conclusion that Sidney Gattick was
absolutely insufferable. By contrast, Anthony seemed the most charming
of men. She didn't want to banish him, even temporarily. But her threat
had been solemn and explicit; if she didn't carry it

430


CHAPTER XXXIII

out, at least in part, all her authority was gone. And now the wretch
was forcing her to keep her word. In a tone of angry reproach, ' You've
been a coward and lost,' she said. *

I can see it/

He shook his head. ' No, I've won.'

Mary regarded him doubtfully. ' I believe you're lying/

" I'm not/ He sat down beside her on the sofa.

* Well, then, why do you look so glum ? It's not very flattering to me/

' Why on earth did you make me do it ? ' he burst out. ' It was idiotic/
It had also been wrong ; but Mary would only laugh if he said that. ' I
always knew it was idiotic. But you insisted/ His voice was shrill with
a complaining resentment. * And now God knows where I've landed myself/
Where he'd landed Joan and Brian, for that matter. ' God knows/

* But explain,' cried Mary Amberley, * explain ! Don't talk like a minor
prophet/ Her eyes were bright with laughing curiosity. She divined some
delightfully involved and fantastic situation. ' Explain,' she repeated.

' Well, I did what you told me,' he answered sullenly.

4 Hero ! '

' There's nothing funny about it/

1 What 1 did you get your face slapped ? '

Anthony frowned angrily and shook his head.

* Then how did she take it ? '

* That's just the trouble : she took it seriously.*

43'

EYELESS IN GAZA

1 Seriously ? * Mary questioned. ' You mean, she threatened to tell papa
? '

' I mean, she thought I was in love with her. She wants to break it off
with Brian.'

Mrs. Amberley threw back her head and gave utterance to a peal of her
clear, richly vibrant laughter.

Anthony felt outraged. ' It's not a joke.'

1 That's where you make your mistake.' Mary wiped her eyes and took a
deep breath. ' It's one of the best jokes I ever heard. But what do you
propose to do ? '

' I shall have to tell her it's all a mistake.'

* That'll be an admirable scene ! *

He shook his head. * I shall write a letter/

* Courageous, as usual ! ' She patted his knee. ' But now I want to hear
the details. How was it that you let her go as far as she did? To the
point of thinking you were in love with her. To the point of wanting to
break it off with Brian. Couldn't you nip it in the bud ? '

' It was difficult,' he muttered, avoiding her inquisitive eye. ' The
situation . . . well, it got a bit out of control.'

* You mean, you lost your head ? *

' If you like to put it that way,' he admitted reluctantly, thinking
what a fool he had been, what an utter fool. He ought, of course, to
have retreated when she turned towards him in the darkness ; he ought to
have refused her kisses, to have made it quite clear that his own had
been light-hearted and without significance. But

43*


CHAPTER XXXIII

instead of that he had accepted them : out of laziness and cowardice,
because it had been too much of an effort to make the necessary and
necessarily difficult explanation; out of a certain weak and misplaced
kindness of heart, because it would have hurt and humiliated her if he
had said no—and to inflict a suffering he could actually witness was
profoundly distasteful to him. And having accepted, he had enjoyed her
kisses, had returned them with a fervour which he knew to be the result
only of a detached, a momentary sensuality, but which Joan, it was
obvious now (and he had known it even at the time), would inevitably
regard as being roused specifically by herself, as having her for its
special and irreplaceable object. An impartial observer would say that
he had done his best, had gone out of his way, to create the greatest
possible amount of misunderstanding in the shortest possible time.

( How do you propose to get out of it ? ' Mary asked.

He hated her for putting the question that was tormenting him. ' I shall
write her a letter/

he said. As though that were an answer !

* And what will Brian say about it ? '

1 I'm going to stay with him to-morrow,' he replied irrelevantly. ' In
the Lakes/

' Like Wo-odsworth/ said Mary. ' What fun that'll be ! And what exactly
do you propose to tell him about Joan ? ' she went on inexorably.

¦ Oh, I shall explain.'

433

EYELESS IN GAZA

4 But suppose Joan explains first—in a different way? '

He shook his head. * I told her I didn't want her to write to Brian
before I'd talked to him.'

1 And you think she'll do what you ask ? '

'Why shouldn't she?'

Mary shrugged her shoulders and looked at him, smiling crookedly, her
eyes bright between narrowed eyelids. ' Why should she, if it comes to
that ? '

434


CHAPTER XXXIV

March 3rd 1928

REORGANIZATION . . / - Readjustment . . / ». ' Writing down of capital
values in the light of existing trade conditions - . / Anthony lifted
his eyes from the printed page.

Propped up on her pillows, Mary Amberley was staring at him, he found,
with an embarrassing intentness.

1 Well ? * she asked, leaning forward. Hennaed to an impossible orange,
a lock of tousled hair fell drunkenly across her forehead. Her
bed-jacket opened as she moved; under soiled lace, the breasts swung
heavily towards him. ' What does it mean ? *

* It means that they're politely going bankrupt on you/

* Going bankrupt ? *

' Paying you six and eightpence in the pound/

4 But Gerry told me they were doing so well,' she protested in a tone of
angry complaint.

1 Gerry doesn't know everything/ he charitably explained.

But, of course, the ruffian had known only too well; had known, had
acted on his knowledge, had been duly paid by the people who wanted to
unload their shares before the crash came. ' Why don't you ask him about
it? ' he said aloud, and in a tone that implied some of the

435

EYELESS IN GAZA

resentment he felt at having been dragged, this very evening of his
return from New York, into the entanglements of Mary's squalid tragedy.
Everyone else, he supposed, had fled from her since she'd started taking
that morphia ; alone of all her friends, having been out of England for
half a year, he had had as yet no opportunity and been given no reason
to flee. Absence had preserved their friendship, as though in cold
storage, in the state it was in before he left. When she had asked him
urgently to come and see her, he had no excuse to refuse. Besides,
people exaggerated ; she couldn't be as bad as they made out.

c Why don't you ask him ? ' he repeated irritably.

' He's gone to Canada.'

' Oh, he's gone to Canada.'

There was a silence. He laid the paper down on the coverlet. Mrs.
Amberley picked it up and re-read it— for the hundredth time, in the
absurd and desperate hope that there might, this hundredth time, be
something new in it, something different.

Anthony looked at her. The lamp on the bed-table lit up the profile she
presented to him with a ruthlessly revealing brilliance. How hollow the
cheeks were ! And those lines round the mouth, those discoloured pouches
of skin beneath the eyes ! Remembering how she looked when he had seen
her last, that time in Berkshire, only the previous summer, Anthony was
appalled. The drug had aged her twenty years in half as many months.

And it was not only her body that had

436


CHAPTER XXXIV

been ravaged; the morphia had also changed her character, transformed
her into someone else, someone (there had been no exaggeration at all)
much worse. That engaging absence of mind, for example, that vagueness,
of which, as of yet another feminine allurement, she always used to be
so irritatingly vain, had now degenerated into almost an idiot's
indifference. She forgot, she wasn't aware; above all, she didn't care,
she couldn't any longer be bothered. Grotesquely dyed (in the hope, he
supposed, of regaining some of the attractiveness which she could not
help noticing that she had lost), the hair was greasy and uncombed. A
smear of red paint, clumsily laid on, enlarged her lower lip into an
asymmetrical shapelessness. A cigarette-end had burned a round hole in
the eiderdown, and the feathers fluttered up like snow-flakes each time
she moved. The pillows were smudged with rouge and yolk of egg. There
was a brown stain of coffee on the turned-back sheet. Between her body
and the wall, the tray on which her dinner had been brought up stood
precariously tilted. Still stained with gravy, a knife had slipped on to
the counterpane.

With a sudden movement, Mrs. Amberley crumpled up the paper and threw it
from her. '

That beast ! ' she cried, in a voice that trembled with rage. * That
beast ! He absolutely forced me to put my money into this. And now look
what's happened ! ' The tears overflowed, carrying the black of her
painted eyelashes in long sooty trickles down her cheeks*

r* 437

EYELESS IN GAZA

* He did it on purpose/ she went on through her angry sobbing. ' Just in
order to harm me.

He's a sadist, really. He likes hurting people. He does it for
pleasure.'

' For profit,' Anthony almost said ; but checked himself. She seemed to
derive some consolation from the thought that she had been swindled, not
from vulgarly commercial motives, but gratuitously, because of a
fiendishness allied to and springing from the passion of love. It would
be unkind to deprive her of that illusion. Let the poor woman think the
thoughts she found least painfully humiliating. Besides, the less she
was contradicted and diverted, the sooner, it might be hoped, would she
stop. Prudently as well as considerately, he contented himself with a
non-committal nod.

* When I think of all I did for that man ! ' Mrs. Amberley burst out.
But while she recited her incoherent catalogue of generosities and
kindnesses, Anthony could not help thinking of what the man had done for
her; above all, of the terms in which Gerry was accustomed to describe
what he had done. Gross, extravagantly cynical terms. Terms of an
incredible blackguardism. One was startled, one was set free into sudden
laughter; and one was ashamed that such inadmissible brutalities should
contain any element of liberating truth.

And yet they were true.

* All the most intelligent people in London,* Mrs. Amberley was sobbing.
' He met them all at my house.'

* These old hags 1 ' Gerry Watchett's voice sounded

438


CHAPTER XXXIV

clearly in Anthony's memory, * They'll do anything to get it, absolutely
anything.*

1 Not that he ever appreciated them/ she went on. ' He was too stupid
for that, too barbarous.'

' Not a bad old bitch really, if she gets enough of it to keep her
quiet. The problem is to give her enough. It's uphill work, I can tell
you.'

The tone changed from anger to self-pity. ' But what shall I do ? * she
wailed. * What can I do ? Without a penny. Living on charity.'

He tried to reassure her. There was still something. Quite a decent
little sum, really. She would never starve. If she lived carefully, if
she economized . . .

' But I shall have to give up this house,' she interrupted, and, when he
agreed that of course she would have to give it up, broke out into new
and louder lamentations. Giving up the house was worse than being
penniless and living on charity—worse, because more conceivable, a
contingency nearer to the realities of her actual life. Without her
pictures, without her furniture, how could she live? She was made
physically ill by ugliness. And then small rooms—she developed
claustrophobia in small rooms. And how could she possibly manage without
her books ? How did he expect her to work, when she was poor

? For of course she was going to work ; had already planned to write a
critical study of the modern French novel. Yes, how did he expect her to
do that, if he deprived her of her books ?

Anthony stirred impatiently in his chair. * I don't

439

EYELESS IN GAZA

expect you to do anything/ he said. ' I'm simply telling you what you'll
find you've got to do/

There was a long silence. Then, with a little smile that she tried to
make ingratiating and appealing, * Now you're angry with me/ she said.

' Not in the least. I'm merely asking you to face the facts/ He rose,
and feeling himself in danger of being inextricably entangled in Mary's
misfortune, symbolically asserted his right to be free by walking
restlessly up and down the room. * I ought to talk to her about the
morphia,' he was thinking ; ' try to persuade her to go into a home and
get cured. For her own sake. For the sake of poor Helen/ But he knew
Mary. She'd start to protest, she'd scream, she'd fly into a rage. It
would be like a public-house brawl. Or worse, much worse, he thought
with a shudder, she'd repent, she'd make promises, she'd melt into
tears. He would find himself her only friend, her moral support for
life. In the end, he said nothing. ' It wouldn't do any good,' he
assured himself. ' It never does do any good with these morphia cases/ '
One's got to come to terms with reality,' he said aloud.

Meaningless platitude—but what else was there to say ?

Unexpectedly, with a submissive alacrity that he found positively
disquieting, she agreed with him. Oh, absolutely agreed ! It was no use
crying over spilt milk. No use building castles in the air. What was
needed was a plan—lots of plans—serious, practical, sensible plans for
die new life. She smiled at him with

440


CHAPTER XXXIV

an air of connivance, as though they were a pair of conspirators.

Reluctantly, and with mistrust, he accepted her invitation to sit on the
edge of the bed.

The plans unfolded themselves—serious to a degree. A little flat in
Hampstead. Or else a tiny house in one of those slummy streets off the
King's Road, Chelsea. She could still give an occasional party, very
cheaply. The real friends would come, in spite of the cheapness—
wouldn't they? she insisted with a rather pathetic anxiety to be
reassured.

1 Of course,* he had to say; though it wasn't the cheapness that would
put them off; it was the dirt, the squalor, the morphia, this sickening
smell of ether on the breath.

* One can have bottle parties,' she was saying. ' It'll be fun ! ' Her
face brightened. ' What sort of bottle will you bring, Anthony ? ' And
before he could answer, * We shall get

^finitely tight with all those mixed drinks,' she went on. '/«finitely .
. .' A moment later she had begun to tell him about the advances that
George Wyvern had taken it into his head to make to her these days.
Rather embarrassing, in the circumstances—seeing that Sally Wyvern was
also . . . well ! She smiled that enigmatic smile of hers, close-lipped
and between half-shut eyelids. And what was really too extraordinary,
even old Hugh Ledwidge had recently shown signs . . .

Anthony listened in astonishment. Those pathetically few real friends
had been transformed, as though by

441

EYELESS IN GAZA

magic, into positively a host of eager lovers. Did she seriously believe
in her own inventions ? But anyhow, he went on to think, it didn't seem
to matter whether she believed in them or not. Even unbelieved, these
fictions evidently had power to raise her spirits, to restore her, at
least for the moment, to a state of cheerful self-confidence.

* That time in Paris/ she was saying intimately. ' Do you remember ? *

But this was awful !

4 The Hôtel des Saints-Pères/ Her voice deepened and vibrated with a
subterranean laughter.

Anthony nodded without raising his head. She had obviously wanted him to
echo her hint of significant mirth, to take up the scabrous reference to
that old joke of theirs about the Holy Fathers and their own amusements
under that high ecclesiastical patronage. In their private language, '
doing a slight Holy Father,' or, yet more idiomatically, * doing
Holiers,' had signified * making love.' He frowned, feeling suddenly
very angry. How did she dare ... ?

The seconds passed. Making a desperate effort to fill the icy gulf of
his silence, * We had a lot of fun,' said Mary in a tone of sentimental
reminiscence.

* A lot/ he repeated, as unemphatically as possible. Suddenly she took
his hand. * Dear Anthony ! '

4 Oh, God ! * he thought, and tried, as politely as might be, to
withdraw. But the clasp of those hot dry fingers never relaxed.

442


CHAPTER XXXIV

' We were fools to quarrel/ she went on. * Or rather, / was a fool/

' Not at all/ he said politely.

' That stupid bet/ she shook her head. * And Sidney . . /

' You did what you wanted to do.'

' I did what I didn't want to do/ she answered quickly. 1 One's always
doing things one doesn't want—stupidly, out of sheer perversity. One
chooses the worse just because it is the worse. Hyperion to a satyr—and
therefore the satyr.'

' But for certain purposes/ he couldn't resist saying, * the satyr may
be more satisfactory.'

Ignoring his words, Mary sighed and shut her eyes.

1 Doing what one doesn't want/ she repeated, as though to herself. '
Always doing what one doesn't want.' She released his hand, and,
clasping her own behind her head, leaned back against the pillows in the
attitude, the known and familiar attitude, that in the Hôtel des
Saints-Pères had been so delicious in its graceful indolence, so wildly
exciting because of that white round throat stretched back like a
victim's, those proffered breasts, lifted and taut beneath the lace. But
to-day the lace was soiled and torn, the breasts hung tired under their
own weight, the victim throat was no more a smooth column of white
flesh, but withered, wrinkled, hollow between starting tendons.

She opened her eyes, and, with a start, he recognized the look she gave
him as the same, identically the same

443

EYELESS TN GAZA

look, at once swooning and cynical, humorous and languidly abandoned, as
had invited him, irresistibly then, in Paris, fifteen years ago. It was
the look of 1913 in the face of 1928—painfully out of its context. He
stared at her for a second or two, appalled ; then managed to break the
silence.

11 shall have to go/

But before he could rise, Mrs. Amberley had quickly leaned forward and
laid her hands on his shoulders.

' No, don't go. You mustn't go.' She tried to repeat that laughingly
voluptuous invitation, but could not prevent a profound anxiety from
showing in her eyes.

Anthony shook his head and, in spite of that sickening smell of ether,
did his best to smile as he lied about the supper-party he had promised
to join at eleven. Gently, but with a firm and decided movement, he
lifted her confining hands and stood up by the side of the bed.

' Good-night, dear Mary ! ' The tone of his voice was warm ; he could
afford to be affectionate, now. ' Bon courage !9 he squeezed her hands ;
then, bending down, kissed first one, then the other. Now that he was on
his feet, and with the road to freedom clear before him, he felt at
liberty to plunge into almost any emotional extravagance. But, instead
of taking the cue, Mary Amberley returned him a look that had now become
fixed and as though stony with unwavering misery. The mask he had
adjusted to be so radiant with whimsical affectionateness seemed all of
a sudden horribly out of keeping with the real situation. He could feel
its irrelev-444


CHAPTER XXXIV

ance, physically, in the muscles of his face. Fool, hypocrite, coward !
But it was almost at a run that he made towards the door and hurried
down the stairs.

* If a woman/ Helen was reading in the Encyclopaedia, 'administers to
herself any poison or other noxious thing, or unlawfully uses any
instrument or other means to procure her own miscarriage, she is guilty
of . , / The sound of Anthony's feet on the stairs caught her ear. She
rose, and quickly walked to the door and out on to the landing.

1 Well ? ' She smiled no greeting in answer to his, simulated no
pleasure at seeing him.

The face she lifted was as tragically naked of all the conventional
grimaces as her mother's had been.

' But what's the matter, Helen ? ' he was startled into exclaiming. She
looked at him for a few seconds in silence, then shook her head and
began to ask him about those shares, the whole financial position.

Obviously, he was thinking as he answered her questions, one would
expect her to find it all very upsetting. But upsetting to this point—he
looked at her again : no —one wouldn't have expected that. It wasn't as
if the girl had ever had a wild devotion for her mother. In the teeth of
Mary's ferocious egotism, how could she ? And after all, it was nearly a
year since the wretched woman had started on her morphia. One would
think that by this time the horror would have lost some of its
intensity. And yet he had never seen an unhappier face. Such youth, such
freshness—it wasn't right that they

445

EYELESS IN GAZA

should be associated with an expression of so intense a despair. The
sight of her made him feel somehow guilty —guiltily responsible. But
when he made another gesture of enquiring sympathy, she only shook her
head again and turned away.

1 You'd better go/ she said.

Anthony hesitated a moment, then went. After all, she wanted him to go.
Still feeling guilty, but with a sense of profound relief, he closed the
front door behind him, and, drawing a deep breath, set off towards the
Underground station.

Helen went back to her volume of the Encyclopaedia *. . .to procure her
own miscarriage, she is guilty of felony. The punishment for this
offence is penal servitude for life, or not less than three years, or
imprisonment for not more than two years. If the child is born alive
...' But they didn't say which the proper poisons were, nor what sort of
instruments you had to use, and how. Only this stupid nonsense about
penal servitude. Yet another loophole of escape had closed against her.
It was as though the whole world had conspired to shut her in with her
own impossibly appalling secret.

Melodiously, the clock in the back drawing-room struck eleven. Helen
rose, put the heavy volume back in its place, and went upstairs to her
mother's room.

With an unwontedly careful precision of movement, Mrs. Amberley was
engaged, when her daughter entered, in filling a hypodermic syringe from
a little glass ampoule. She started as the door opened, looked up, made
a move-446


CHAPTER XXXIV

ment as if to hide syringe and ampoule under the bedclothes, then,
fearful of spilling any of the precious liquor, checked herself in the
midst of her gesture.

* Go away ! * she called angrily. * Why do you come in without knocking
? I won't have you coming into my room without knocking,' she repeated
more shrilly, glad of the excuse she had discovered for her fury.

Helen stood for a second or two in the doorway, quite still, as if
incredulous of the evidence of her own eyes ; then hurried across the
room.

' Give those things to me/ she said, holding out her hand.

Mrs. Amberley shrank back towards the wall. * Go away ! ' she shouted.

* But you promised . . / 11 didn't/

' You did, Mummy.'

* I did not. And, anyhow, I shall do what I like.' Without speaking,
Helen reached out and caught her

mother by the wrist. Mrs. Amberley screamed so loudly that, fearful lest
the servants should come down to see what was the matter, Helen relaxed
her grip.

Mrs. Amberley stopped screaming ; but the look she turned on Helen was
terrifying in its malevolence. ' If you make me spill any of this,' she
said in a voice that trembled with rage, ' I shall kill you. Kill you/
she repeated.

They looked at one another for a moment without speaking. It was Helen
who broke the silence. ' You'd

447

EYELESS IN GAZA

like to kill me/ she said slowly, ' because I don't let you kill
yourself.' She shrugged her shoulders. * Well, I suppose if you really
want to kill yourself . . .' She left the sentence unfinished.

Mrs. Amberley stared at her in silence. * If you really want . . .' She
remembered the words she had spoken to Anthony only a few minutes since,
and suddenly the tears ran down her cheeks. She was overwhelmed with
self-pity. ' Do you think I want to do this ? '

she said brokenly. 'I hate it, I absolutely hate it. But I can't help
it/

Sitting down on the edge of the bed, Helen put her arm round her
mother's shoulders. '

Mummy darling ! ' she implored. ' Don't cry. It'll be all right.' She
was profoundly moved.

1 It's all Gerry's fault,' Mrs. Amberley cried ; and without noticing
the little shuddering start Helen gave, ' everything's his fault,' she
went on. * Everything. I always knew he was a beast. Even when I cared
for him most.'

As though her mother had suddenly become a stranger whom it was not
right to be touching so intimately, Helen withdrew her encircling arm. *
You cared for him ? ' she whispered incredulously. * In that way ? '

Answering quite a different question, parrying a reproach that had never
been made, ' I couldn't help it/ Mrs. Amberley replied. ' It was like
this.9 She made a little movement with the hand that held the hypodermic
syringe.

448


CHAPTER XXXIV

* You mean,' said Helen, speaking very slowly, and as though overcoming
an almost invincible reluctance, ' you mean he was ... he was your lover
? '

The strangeness of the tone aroused Mrs. Amberley, for the first time
since their conversation had begun, to something like a consciousness of
her daughter's real, personal existence. Turning, she looked at Helen
with an expression of astonishment. '

You didn't know ? ' Confronted by that extraordinary pallor, those
uncontrollably trembling lips, the older woman was seized with a sudden
compunction. ' But, darling, I'm sorry. I didn't imagine . . . You're
still so young; you don't understand. You can't...

But where are you going ? Come back ! Helen ! '

The door slammed. Mrs. Amberley made a move to follow her daughter, then
thought better of it, and, instead, resumed the interrupted task of
filling her hypodermic syringe.

449


CHAPTER XXXV

August 4th 1934

RETURNED depressed from an evening with Helen l. and half a dozen of her
young political friends. Such a passion for ' liquidating ' the people
who don't agree with them !

And such a sincere conviction that liquidation is necessary !

Revolting—but only to be expected. Regard the problem of reform
exclusively as a matter of politics and economics, and you must approve
and practise liquidation.

Consider recent history. Industrialism has grown pari passu with
population. Now, where markets are expanding, the two besetting problems
of all industrial societies solve themselves. New inventions may create
technological unemployment ; but expanding markets cure it as it's made.
Each individual may possess inadequate purchasing power; but the total
number of individuals is steadily rising. Many small purchasing powers
do as much as fewer big ones.

Our population is now stationary, will soon decline. Shrinkage instead
of expansion of markets. Therefore, no more automatic solution of
economic problems. Birth control necessitates the use of co-ordinating
political intelligence. There must be a large-scale plan.

450


CHAPTER XXXV

Otherwise the machine won't work. In other words, politicians will have
to be about twenty times as intelligent as heretofore. Will the supply
of intelligence be equal to the demand ?

And of course intelligence, as Miller's always insisting, isn't
isolated. The act of intelligently planning modifies the emotions of the
planners. Consider English politics.

We've made plenty of reforms—without ever accepting the principles
underlying them.

(Compare the king's titles with his present position. Compare our
protestations that we'll never have anything to do with socialism with
the realities of state control.) There are no large-scale plans in
English politics, and hardly any thinking in terms of first principles.

With what results ? Among others, that English politics have been on the
whole very good-natured. The reason is simple. Deal with practical
problems as they arise and without reference to first principles ;
politics are a matter of higgling. Now higglers lose tempers, but don't
normally regard one another as fiends in human form. But this is
precisely what men of principle and systematic planners can't help
doing. A principle is, by definition, right ; a plan, for the good of
the people. Axioms from which it logically follows that those who
disagree with you and won't help to realize your plan are enemies of
goodness and humanity. No longer men and women, but personifications of
evil, fiends incarnate. Killing men and women is wrong ; but killing
fiends is a duty. Hence the Holy Office, hence Robespierre and the Ogpu.
Men with strong religious 45*

EYELESS IN GAZA

and revolutionary faith, men with well-thought-out plans for improving
the lot of their fellows, whether in this world or the next, have been
more systematically and cold-bloodedly cruel than any others. Thinking
in terms of first principles entails acting with machine-guns. A
government with a comprehensive plan for the betterment of society is a
government that uses torture. Per contra, if you never consider
principles and have no plan, but deal with situations as they arise,
piecemeal, you can afford to have unarmed policemen, liberty- of speech
and habeas corpus. Admirable. But what happens when an industrial
society learns (a) how to make technological advances at a constantly
accelerating speed, and (b) to prevent conception ? Answer : it must
either plan itself in accordance with general political and economic
principles, or else break down. But governments with principles and
plans have generally been tyrannies making use of police spies and
terrorism. Must we resign ourselves to slavery and torture for the sake
of co-ordination ?

Breakdown on the one hand, Inquisition and Ogpu rule on the other. A
real dilemma, if the plan is mainly economic and political. But think in
terms of individual men, women, and children, not of States, Religions,
Economic Systems and such-like abstractions : there is then a hope of
passing between the horns. For if you begin by considering concrete
people, you see at once that freedom from coercion is a necessary
condition of their developing into full-grown human

452


CHAPTER XXXV

beings ; that the form of economic prosperity which consists in
possessing unnecessary objects doesn't make for individual well-being ;
that a leisure filled with passive amusements is not a blessing; that
the conveniences of urban life are bought at a high physiological and
mental price ; that an education which allows you to use yourself
wrongly is almost valueless ; that a social organization resulting in
individuals being forced, every few years, to go out and murder one
another must be wrong. And so on.

Whereas if you start from the State, the Faith, the Economic System,
there is a complete transvaluation of values. Individuals must murder
one another, because the interests of the Nation demand it ; must be
educated to think of ends and disregard means, because the schoolmasters
are there and don't know of any other method ; must live in towns, must
have leisure to read the newspapers and go to the movies, must be
encouraged to buy things they don't need, because the industrial system
exists and has to be kept going; must be coerced and enslaved, because
otherwise they might think for themselves and give trouble to their
rulers.

The sabbath was made for man. But man now behaves like the Pharisees and
insists that he is made for all the things—science, industry, nation,
money, religion, schools—which were really made for him. Why ? Because
he is so little aware of his own interests as a human being that he
feels irresistibly tempted to sacrifice himself to these idols. There is
no remedy except to

453

EYELESS IN GAZA

become aware of one's interests as a human being, and, having become
aware, to learn to act on that awareness. Which means learning to use
the self and learning to direct the mind. It's almost wearisome, the way
one always comes back to the same point. Wouldn't it be nice, for a
change, if there were another way out of our difficulties 1 A short cut.
A method requiring no greater personal effort than recording a vote or
ordering some *

enemy of society * to be shot. A salvation from outside, like a dose of
calomel.

4Î4


CHAPTER XXXVI

July zgth 1914

IN the train going north, Anthony thought of what was in store for him.
Within the next two days, or at the outside three, Brian would have to
be told about what had happened, and a letter would have to be written
to Joan. In what words ? And what excuses should he make for himself?
Should he tell the whole truth about his bet with Mary ? For himself,
the truth had certain advantages ; if he told it, he could throw most of
the blame for what had happened on Mary— but at the risk, he went on to
think, of seeming miserably feeble. And that was not the only
disadvantage ; for Joan, the truth would be intolerably humiliating.
However much blame he threw on Mary, the insult to Joan would remain. If
only he could tell the truth to Brian and something else to Joan !

But that wasn't possible. They would have to be told the same story,
and, for Joan's sake, a story that wasn't true. But what story? Which
explanation of the facts would throw least discredit upon himself and
inflict the least humiliation on Joan? On the whole, he decided, the
best thing to say would be that he had lost his head—been carried away
by a sudden impulse, an impulse that he had subsequently seen the
madness 455

EYELESS IN GAZA

of and regretted. It was somebody else who had kissed her: that was what
he would write to Joan. Somebody else—but not too else. She wouldn't
like it if she were made to feel that it was a mere momentary baboon who
had behaved like that in the unlighted drawing-room. The person who had
kissed her would have to be partially himself.

Enough himself to have been all the time very fond of her, profoundly
sorry for her ; but someone else to the extent of allowing the
circumstances of the evening to transform the affection and sympathy
into—what ? Love ? Desire ? No, he would have to avoid saying anything
so specific ; would have to talk about confusions, temporary insanities
spoiling a relationship which had been so fine, and so forth. Meanwhile
he could only say that he was sorry and ashamed ; that he felt, more
strongly than ever now, that Brian was the only man who was worthy of
her, that the difficulties that had arisen between herself and Brian
were only temporary and would soon . . . And all the rest.

Yes, the letter ought to be fairly easy. The trouble was that he would
be expected to follow it up by interviews and explanations; that he
would have to bear reproaches, listen to confidences, perhaps defend
himself against declarations of passion. And in the interval there would
be Brian to talk to—and with Brian the thing would begin with the
interviews ; and the more he thought about those interviews, the harder
did he find it to foresee the part that Brian would play in them.

456


CHAPTER XXXVI

Anthony imagined himself trying to make it clear that he wasn't in love,
that Joan had only momentarily lost her head as he had lost his, that
nothing had changed, and that all Brian had to do was to go and kiss her
himself. But would he succeed in making Brian believe him? The man being
what he was, it seemed to him probable— seemed more probable the more he
thought about it —that he would fail. Brian was the sort of man who
would imagine that one couldn't kiss a woman under any compulsion less
urgent than the deepest, most heart-felt love. He would be told that
Joan had been kissed and had returned the kisses ; and no amount of talk
about lost heads would persuade him that it wasn't a serious matter of
love at its intensest pitch. And then, Anthony speculated, what would
the man do then? He'd be hurt, of course, he'd feel betrayed : but the
chances were that there'd be no recriminations. No, something much worse
might happen. Brian would probably take all the blame on himself; would
renounce all his rights, would refuse to believe it when Anthony swore
that he wasn't in love and that it had all been a kind of bad joke ;
would insist, just because it would be so agonizing a sacrifice, that
Joan should go to the man she really loved and who really loved her. And
then, suppose that, on her side, Joan agreed ! And it was probable,
Anthony thought with dismay as he remembered her response to his kisses,
it was almost certain even, that she would do so. Appalling prospect 1
He couldn't face it. And why should he face it, after all ?

457

EYELESS IN GAZA

He could borrow on his securities—enough to get out of the country and
stay away ; for six months, for a year if necessary. And while the
midlands streamed past the window, he leaned back with closed eyes,
picturing himself in Italy or, if Italy wasn't far enough from England,
in Greece, in Egypt, even in India, Malaya, Java. With Mary ; for of
course Mary would have to come too, at least for part of the time. She
could dump the children with some relation; and Egypt, he reflected,
practical in his day-dreaming, Egypt in the off-season was quite cheap,
and this war scare of course was nothing. Was Luxor as impressive as it
looked in the photographs ? And the Parthenon ? And Paestum ? And what
of the tropics ? In imagination he sailed from island to island in the
Aegean; smoked hashish in the slums of Cairo, ate bhang in Benares ; did
a slight Joseph Conrad in the East Indies, a slight Loti even, in spite
of the chromolithograph style, among the copper-coloured girls and the
gardenias, and, though he still found it impossible to like the man as
much as Mary did, a slight Gauguin in the South Seas. These future and
hypothetical escapes were escapes also here and now, so that for a long
time in his corner of the compartment he quite forgot the reason for his
projected flight into the exotic. The memory of what had happened, the
apprehensive anticipation of what was going to happen, returned only
with the realization that the train was crossing Shap Fell, and that in
less than an hour he would be talking

4Î8


CHAPTER XXXVI

to Brian on the platform at Ambleside. All the old questions propounded
themselves with a more desperate urgency. What should he say? How? On
what occasion ? And what would be Brian's response ? What Joan's, when
she got his letter? Horrible questions !

But why had he put himself in the position of having to provide or
receive the answers to them ? What a fool he had been not to take flight
at once ! By this time he could have been at Venice, in Calabria, on a
ship in the Mediterranean. Beyond the reach of letters.

Secure and happy in complete ignorance of the results of his actions.
And free. Instead of which he had stupidly stayed where he was and
consented to be made the slave of the circumstances his folly had
created. But even now, at the eleventh hour, it wasn't too late.

He could get out at the next station, make his way back to London, raise
a little money and be off within twenty-four hours. But when the train
stopped at Kendal, he made no move. The taking of so sudden and
momentous a decision was something from which he shrank. He hated
suffering, and looked forward with dread to what the next few days and
weeks held in store for him. But his fear of suffering was less than his
fear of action. He found it easier to accept passively what came than to
make a decisive choice and act upon it.

As the train rolled on again, he thought of all the reasons why it had
been right for him not to take that decision. Brian was counting on him,
would be so disturbed by his non-arrival tliat he might easily rush

459

EYELESS IN GAZA

down to London to find out what had happened, see Joan and learn
everything, at once.

And how should he explain things to his father ? Besides, there was no
reason to think that Mary would come with him ; she had made her
arrangements for the summer and wouldn't, perhaps couldn't, alter them.
And while he was away, heaven only knew what rivals would present
themselves. Besides, flight would be cowardly, lie went on to assure
himself, and immediately afterwards was reflecting that he could
probably escape from his difficulties just as effectively if he stayed
in England. A little tact, a bit of passive resistance . • .

Brian was waiting on the platform when the train drew in, and at the
sight of him Anthony felt a sudden pang of pitying distress. For between
the man and his clothes there was a startling and painful
incongruousness. The rough homespun jacket and breeches, the stockings,
the nailed boots, the bulging rucksack were emblems of energy and rustic
good health. But the Brian who wore these emblems was the living denial
of their significance. The long face was emaciated and sallow. The nose
seemed larger than in the past, the eye-sockets deeper, the cheek-bones
more prominent. And when he spoke, he stammered more uncontrollably than
ever.

' But what is the matter with you ? ' cried Anthony, laying a hand on
his friend's shoulder.

' You look wretched/

Half touched by this display of a genuine solicitude (it was
extraordinary, he reflected, how charming Anthony

46o


CHAPTER XXXVI

could unexpectedly be), half annoyed by having been, as he felt, found
out, Brian shook his head and mumbled something about being a bit tired
and in need of a rest.

But his idea of a rest, it turned out, was to walk twenty miles a day up
and down the steepest hills he could find.

Anthony looked at him disapprovingly. ' You ought to be lying out in a
deck-chair,' he said, but could see, as he spoke, that his advice was
unwelcome. With Brian it was a kind of dogma that taking violent
exercise in mountain scenery was intrinsically good. Good, because of
Wordsworth ; because, in his mother's version of Christianity, landscape
took the place of revelation.

' I 1-like w-walking,' Brian insisted. ' S-saw a d-dipper yesterday. The
p-place is f-full of nice b-birds.'

In his distress at finding his friend so ill, Anthony had forgotten all
about Joan and the events of the last days ; but those birds (those
bô-ôds, those piddle-warblers) reminded him violently of what had
happened. Feeling suddenly ashamed, as though he had been caught in some
unworthy display of hypocrisy, Anthony withdrew his hand from Brian's
shoulder. They made their way in silence along the platform and out into
the street. There they halted for a discussion. Brian wanted to send the
luggage by the carrier and walk to their cottage in Langdale. Anthony
proposed that they should take a car.

' You've no business to walk a step further to-day/ he said; then, when
the other protested that he hadn't yet taken enough exercise, changed
ground and insisted that q 461

EYELESS IN GAZA

it was he who was tired after the journey, and that anyhow he couldn't
walk because he was wearing unsuitable clothes and shoes. After a final
plea to be allowed to walk back to Langdale by himself, Brian was
overruled and submitted to the car. They drove away.

Breaking a long silence, * Have you see J-joan lately ? ' Brian asked.

The other nodded without speaking.

' How w-was she ? '

1 Quite well,' Anthony found himself replying in the brightly vague tone
in which one answers questions about the health of those in whom one
takes no particular interest. The lie—for it was a lie by omission— had
come to him of its own accord. By means of it, his mind had defended
itself against Brian's question as automatically and promptly as his
body, by blinking, by lifting an arm, by starting back, would have
defended itself against an advancing fist. But the words were no sooner
spoken than he regretted their brevity and the casualness with which
they had been uttered, than he felt that he ought at once to qualify
them with additional information, in another and more serious tone. He
ought to rush in immediately, and without further delay make a clean
breast of everything. But time passed ; he could not bring himself to
speak ; and within a few seconds he had already begun to dignify his
cowardice with the name of consideration, he was already assuring
himself that it would be wrong, Brian's health being what it was, to
speak out at once, that the truly friendly thing

462


CHAPTER XXXVI

was to wait and choose an occasion, to-morrow perhaps or the day after,
when Brian was in a better state to receive the news,

* You d-don't think she was w-worrying?' Brian went on. * I m-mean
ab-bout all this d-delay in our g-getting married ? '

* Well, of course,' Anthony admitted, * she's not altogether happy about
it/

Brian shook his head. ' N-nor am I. But I th-think it's r-right ; and I
th-think in the 1-long r-run she'll see it was r-right/ Then, after a
silence, ' If only one were a-absolutely certain,'

he said. ' S-sometimes I w-wonder if it isn't a k-kind of s-selfishness/

'What is?'

' St-sticking to p-principles, reg-gardless of p-people.
P-peopIe—o-other p-people; I mean—p-perhaps they're m-more imp-portant
e-even than what one kn-knows is a r-right p-principle. But if you
d-don't st-tick to your p-principles . . / he hesitated, turned a
puzzled and unhappy face towards Anthony, then looked away again : c
well, where are you ? ' he concluded despairingly.

' The sabbath is made for man,' said Anthony ; and thought resentfully
what a fool Brian had been not to take whatever money he could get and
marry out of hand. If Joan had been safely married, there would have
been no confidences, no bet, no kiss and none of the appalling
consequences of kissing. And then, of course, there was poor Joan. He
went on to feel what was almost righteous indignation against Brian for
not having grasped the 463

EYELESS IN GAZA

fundamental Christian principle that the sabbath is made for man, not
man for the sabbath- But was it made for man, an intrusive voice
suddenly began asking, to the extent of man's having the right, for a
bet, to disturb the equilibrium of another person's feelings, to break
up a long-established relationship, to betray a friend ?

Brian meanwhile was thinking of the occasion, a couple of months before,
when he and Joan had talked over the matter with his mother.

* You still think/ she had asked, ' that you oughtn't to take the money
? ' and went on, when he told her that his opinions hadn't changed, to
set forth all the reasons why it wouldn't be wrong for him to take it.
The system might be unjust, and it might be one's duty to alter it ; but
meanwhile one could use one's financial advantages to help the
individual victims of the system, to forward the cause of desirable
reform.

1 That's what I've always felt about it/ his mother concluded.

And had been right, he insisted ; and that he didn't dream of
criticizing what she had done, of even thinking it criticizable. But
that was because her circumstances had been so different from his. A
man, he had opportunities to make his own living such as she had never
had. Besides, she had been left with responsibilities ; whereas he . . .

* But what about Joan ? ' she interrupted, laying her hand
affectionately, as she spoke, on Joan's arm. ' Isn't she a
responsibility ? *

464


CHAPTER XXXVI

He dropped his eyes and, feeling that it was not for him to answer the
question, said nothing.

There were long seconds of an uncomfortably expectant silence, while he
wondered whether Joan would speak and what, if she didn't, he should say
and do.

Then, to his relief, c After all/ Joan brought out at last in a
curiously flat and muffled voice, ' Brian was a child then. But I'm
grown up, I'm responsible for myself. And Fm able to understand his
reasons.'

He raised his head and looked at her with a smile of gratitude. But her
face was cold and as though remote ; she met his eyes for only a moment,
then looked away.

1 You understand his reasons ?* his mother questioned.

Joan nodded.

4 And you approve them ? *

She hesitated for a moment, then nodded again. * If Brian thinks it's
right/ she began, and broke off.

His mother looked from one to the other. ' I think you're a pair of
rather heroic young people/ she said, and the tone of her voice, so
beautiful, so richly vibrant with emotion, imparted to the words a
heightened significance. He felt that he had been confirmed in his
judgment.

But later, he remembered with a pained perplexity, later, when Joan and
he were alone together and he tried to thank her for what she had done,
she turned on him widi a bitterly resentful anger.

' You love your own ideas more than you love me. Much more/

46î

EYELESS IN GAZA

Brian sighed and, shaking himself out of his long distraction, looked at
the trees by the side of the road, at the mountains so sumptuously
shadowed and illumined by the late afternoon sunlight, at the marbly
islands of cloud in the sky—looked at them, saw that they were
beautiful, and found their beauty hopelessly irrelevant,

' I wish to G-god/ he said, ' I knew what to d-do.* So did Anthony,
though he did not say so.

466


CHAPTER XXXVII

Autumn i£)33

IT took longer than Mark expected to dispose of his business, and at
moments, during the long weeks that preceded their departure, the
temptation to throw up the whole ridiculous enterprise and scuttle back
into the delicious other-world of Mediterranean sunshine and abstract
ideas became, for Anthony, almost irresistible.

* What are you really going for ? ' he asked resentfully. 1 Fun,' was
all the answer that Mark condescended to

give.

' And your Don Jorge/ Anthony insisted. ' What does he hope to achieve
by this little revolution of his ? *

' His own greater glory.'

* But the peasants, the Indians ? '

* They'll be exactly where they were before, where they always will be :
underneath.'

1 And yet you think it's worth while to go and help this Jorge of yours
? '

1 Worth while for me.' Mark smiled anatomically. 1 And worth while for
you. Very much worth while for you,' he insisted.

* But not for the peons, I gather.*

' It never is. What did the French peons get out of their Revolution ?
Or our friends, the Russians, for that

467

EYELESS IN GAZA

matter ? A few years of pleasant intoxication. Then the same old
treadmill. Gilded, perhaps ; repainted. But in essentials the old
machine/

1 And you expect me to come along with you for fun ? * The thought of
the Mediterranean and his books heightened Anthony's indignation. ' It's
crazy, it's abominable.'

' In other words,' said Mark, ' you're afraid. Well, why not? But if you
are, for God's sake say so. Have the courage of your cowardice.*

How he had hated Mark for telling him the home truths he knew so well !
If it hadn't been for Mr. Beavis, and that interview with Helen, and
finally Beppo Bowles, perhaps he would have had the courage of his
cowardice. But they made it impossible for him to withdraw. There was
his father, first of all, still deep in the connubial burrow, among the
petticoats and the etymologies and the smell of red-haired women—but
agitated, as Anthony had never seen him agitated before, hurt,
indignant, bitterly resentful. The presidency of the Philological
Society, which ought, without any question, to have come to him, had
gone instead to Jenkins. Jenkins, if you please ! A mere ignorant
popularizer, the very antithesis of a real scholar. A charlatan, a
philological confidence trickster, positively (to use an American
colloquialism) a * crook/

Jenkins's election had taken Mr. Beavis long strides towards death. From
being a man much younger than his years, he had suddenly come to look
his age. An old man ; and tired into the bargain, eroded from within.

468


CHAPTER XXXVII

'I'm worried/ Pauline had confided to Anthony. 1 He's making himself
ill. And for something so childish, really. I can't make him see that it
doesn't matter. Or rather I can't make him feel it. Because he sees it
all right, but goes on worrying all the same/

Even in the deepest sensual burrow, Anthony reflected as he walked back
to his rooms, even in the snuggest of intellectual other-worlds, fate
could find one out. And suddenly he perceived that, having spent all his
life trying to react away from the standards of his father's universe,
he had succeeded only in becoming precisely what his father was—a man in
a burrow. With this small difference, that in his case the burrow
happened to be intermittently adulterous instead of connubial all the
time j and that the ideas were about societies and not words. For the
moment, he was out of his burrow— had been chased out, as though by
ferrets. But it would be easy and was already a temptation to return. To
return and be snug, be safe. No, not safe ; that was the point. At any
moment a Jenkins might be elected to some presidency or other, and then,
defenceless in one's burrow of thought and sensuality, one would be at
the mercy of any childish passion that might arise. Outside, perhaps,
one might learn to defend oneself against such contingencies.

He decided to go with Mark.

But in the succeeding days the temptation kept coming back. In spite of
the spectacle of Mr. Beavis's self-destroying childishness, the quiet
life seemed immensely attractive. *

Mark's mad/ he kept assuring himself.

Q* 469

EYELESS IN GAZA

' We're doing something stupid and wrong. And after all, my sociology is
important. It'll help people to think clearly/ Wasn't it (ridiculous
word 1 ) a ' duty ' to go on with it ? But then, more than six weeks
after his return to London, he saw Helen and Beppo Bowles—

saw them both in the course of a single afternoon. The meeting with
Helen was a chance one. It was in the French Room at the National
Gallery. Anthony was stooping to look closely into Cezanne's Mont Sainte
Victoire, when he became aware that two. other visitors had halted just
behind him. He shifted a little to one side, so as to let them see the
picture, and continued his meticulous examination of the brushwork.

A few seconds passed ; then, very slowly and with a foreign accent, a
man's voice said : '

See now here how the nineteenth-century petit bourgeois tried to escape
from industrialism. Why must he paint such landscapes, so romantic ?
Because he will forget the new methods of production. Because he will
not think of the proletariat. That is why.*

1 Yes, I suppose that is the reason,' said another voice.

With a start, Anthony recognized it as Helen's. 1 What shall I do ? ' he
was wondering, when the voice spoke again.

* Why, it's Anthony 1 ' A hand touched his arm.

He straightened himself up and turned towards her, making the gestures
and noises appropriate to delighted astonishment. That face, which he
had last seen alternately stony and bright with mockery, then in the
rapt

470


CHAPTER XXXVII

agony of pleasure, then dabbled with blood and pitiably disintegrated by
a grief extreme beyond expression, finally hard as it had been at first,
harder, more rigidly a stone—that face was now beautifully alive, and
tender, illuminated from within by a kind of secure joy. She looked at
him without the least trace of embarrassment. It was as though the past
had been completely abolished, as though, for her, only the present
existed and were real.

4 This is Ekki Giesebrecht,' she said.

The fair-haired young man beside her bent stiffly forwards as they shook
hands.

' He had to escape from Germany,' she was explaining. 4 They would have
killed him for his politics/

It was not jealousy that he felt as he looked from one glad face to the
other—not jealousy, but an unhappiness so acute that it was like a
physical pain. A pain that endured and that was not in the least
diminished by the solemn absurdity of the little lecture which Helen now
delivered on art as a manifestation of class interests. Listening, he
could laugh to himself, he could reflect with amusement on love's
fantastic by-products in matters of taste, political opinions, religious
beliefs. But behind the laughter, beneath the ironical reflections, that
pain of unhappiness persisted.

He refused her invitation to have tea with them.

* I've promised to go and see Beppo/ he explained.

* Give him my love/ she said, and went on to ask if, since his return,
he had met Hugh.

Anthony shook his head.

47*

EYELESS IN GAZA

* We're parting company, you know.'

Making an effort to smile, * All good wishes for the divorce/ he said,
and hurried away.

Walking through the smoky dimness of the afternoon, he thought of that
softly radiant face of hers, and felt, along with the pain of
unhappiness, a renewal of that other, profounder pain of dissatisfaction
with himself. Since his arrival in London he had led his ordinary London
life—the lunches with men of learning and affairs, the dinners where
women kept the. conversation more gossipy and amusing—and the easy,
meaningless successes, which his talents and a certain natural charm
always allowed him to score at such gatherings, had made him all but
completely forget his dissatisfaction, had masked the pain of it, as a
drug will mask neuralgia or toothache. This meeting with Helen had
instantaneously neutralized the soothing drug and left him defenceless
against a pain no whit diminished by the temporary anodyne—radier,
indeed, intensified by it. For the realization that he had permitted
himself to be soothed by an opiate of such poor quality was a new cause
for dissatisfaction added to the old. And then to think that he had been
seriously considering the idea of returning to the old quiet life ! So
quietly squalid, so quietly inhuman and, for all the expense of thought
it entailed, so quietly mad. Mark's enterprise might be stupid and even
disgraceful ; but, however bad, it was still preferable to that quietude
of work and occasional detached sensuality beside the Mediterranean.

472


CHAPTER XXXVII

Standing at the door of Beppo's flat, he heard the sound of
voices—Beppo's and another man's. He rang the bell. Time passed. The
door remained unopened. The voices talked on, inarticulately, but with
shrill squeaks on Beppo's side and, on that of the stranger, a crescendo
of gruff barks which proclaimed that they were quarrelling. He rang
again.

There were a few more squeaks and shouts ; then the sound of hurrying
feet. The door was flung open, and there stood Beppo. The face was
flushed, the bald crown shiny with perspiration. Behind him, very
upright and soldierly in his carriage, appeared a rather coarsely
handsome young man, with a small moustache and carefully oiled wavy
brown hair, dressed in a blue serge suit of extreme and somehow
improbable smartness.

c Come in,' said Beppo rather breathlessly.

1 Am I disturbing ? '

' No, no. My friend was just going—this is Mr. Simpson, by the way—just
going.'

* Was he ? ' asked the young man in a significant voice and with a
Nottinghamshire accent. * I hadn't known he was.'

c Perhaps Pa better go,' Anthony suggested.

' No, please don't, please don't.' There was a note in Beppo's voice of
almost desperate appeal.

The young man laughed. ' He wants protection— that's what it is. Thinks
he's going to be blackmailed. And so I could if I wanted to.' He looked
at Anthony with knowing, insolent eyes. ' But I don't want to.'

473

EYELESS IN GAZA

He assumed an expression that was meant to be one of lofty moral
indignation. * I wouldn't do it for a thousand pounds. It's a skunk's
game, that's what I say.' From being loftily general, the moral
indignation came down to earth and focussed itself on Beppo. '

But a man's got no business to be mean,' he went on. ' That's a skunk's
game too.' He pointed an accusing finger. ' A mean, dirty swine. That's
what you are. I've said it before, and I say it again. And I don't care
who hears me. Because I can prove it. Yes, and you know I can. A mean,
dirty swine.'

1 All right, all right,' Beppo cried, in the tone of one who makes
unconditional surrender.

Catching Anthony by the arm, * Go into the sitting-room, will you,' he
begged.

Anthony did as he was told. Outside in the hall, a few almost whispered
sentences were exchanged. Then, after a silence, the front door slammed,
and Beppo, pale and distracted, entered the room. With one hand he was
wiping his forehead ; but it was only after he had sat down that he
noticed what he was holding in the other. The fat white fingers were
closed round his wallet. Embarrassed, he put the compromising object
away in his breast pocket. Then, fizzling explosively in misery as he
fizzled in mirth, ' It's only money that they're after,' he burst out
like an opened ginger-beer bottle. 'You've seen it. Why should I try to
hide it ? Only money.' And he rambled on, popping, squeaking, fizzling
in almost incoherent denunciation of ' them,' and com-474


CHAPTER XXXVII

miseration for himself. Yes, he was doubly to be pitied —pitied for what
he had to suffer because of * their ' mercenary attitude, when the thing
he was looking for was love for love's and adventure for adventure's
sake ; pitied also for that growing incapacity to find the least
satisfaction in any amorous experience that was not wholly new.
Increasingly, repetition was becoming the enemy. Repetition killed what
he called the frisson.

Unspeakable tragedy. He, who so longed for tenderness, for
understanding, for companionship, was debarred from ever getting what he
wanted. To have an affair with somebody of one's own class, somebody one
could talk to, had come to be out of the question. But how could there
be real tenderness without the sensual relationship ? With

* them/ the relationship was possible, was wildly desirable. But
tenderness could no more flourish without communication than it could
flourish without sensuality. And sensuality entirely divorced from
communication and tenderness seemed now to be possible only under the
stimulus of a constant change of object. There had to be another of '
them ' each time. For that he was to be pitied ; but the situation had
its romantic side. Or at any rate might have it—used to have it.
Nowadays, Beppo complained, * they ' had changed, were becoming
mercenary, frankly rapacious, mere prostitutes.

* You saw just now,' he said, ' the sordidness of it, the lowness ! '
His misery bubbled over as though under an inner pressure of carbonic
acid gas. In his agitation he 475

EYELESS IN GAZA

heaved himself out of his chair and began to walk up and down the room,
exposing to Anthony's eyes, now the bulging waistcoat, the lavish de
from Sulka's, the face with its pendant of chins, the bald and shining
crown, now the broad seat of pale check trousers, the black jacket
rising pear-like to narrow shoulders, and below the central baldness
that fuzz of pale brown hair, like a Florentine page's, above the
collar. * And I'm not mean.

God knows, I've got plenty of other faults, but not diat. Why can't they
understand that it isn't meanness, that it's a wish to ... to ../ he
hesitated, ' well, to keep the thing on a human basis ? A basis at least
of romance, of adventure. Instead of that, they make these awful,
humiliating scenes. Refusing to understand, absolutely refusing.'

He continued to walk up and down the room in silence. Anthony made no
comment, but wondered inwardly how far poor old Beppo knew the truth or
whether he too refused to understand—refused to understand that, to *
them,' his ageing and unpalatable person could hardly be expected to
seem romantic, that the only charm which remained to him, outside a
certain good taste, and a facile intelligence which * they ' were not in
a position to appreciate, was his money. Did he know all this ? Yes, of
course he did ; it was unavoidable. He knew it quite well and refused to
understand. ' Like me/ Anthony said to himself.

That evening he telephoned to Mark to tell him definitely that he could
book their passages.

476


CHAPTER XXXVIII

August loth 1934

TO-DAY Helen talked again about Miller. Talked with a kind of resentful
vehemence.

(Certain memories, certain trains of thought are like the aching tooth
one must always be touching just to make sure it still hurts.)
Non-violence : this time, it was not only a mere trick, insignificant ;
it was also wrong. If you're convinced people are wicked, you've no
right not to try to make them behave decently. Agreed : but how are you
most likely to succeed ? By violence ? But violence may make people
assume the forms of good behaviour for the moment ; it won't produce the
reality of genuine and pennanent good behaviour. She accused me of
shirking real issues, taking refuge in vague idealism. It all boiled
down at last to her vengeful hatred for the Nazis. Peace all round,
except for Nazis and, by contagion, Fascists. These should be punished,
painfully exterminated—like rats.

(Note that we're all ninety-nine per cent, pacifists. Sermon on Mount,
provided we're allowed to play Tamburlane or Napoleon in our particular
one per cent, of selected cases.

Peace, perfect peace, so long as we can have die war that suits us.
Result : everyone is the predestined victim of somebody else's
exceptionally permissible war. Ninety-nine per cent.

477

EYELESS IN GAZA

pacifism is merely another name for militarism. If there's to be peace,
there must be hundred per cent, pacifism.) We exchanged a lot of
arguments ; then, for some time, said nothing. Finally, she began to
talk about Giese-brecht. Executed after God only knew what tortures. '
Can you be surprised if I feel like this about the Nazis ? ' Not
surprised at all—any more than by the Nazis themselves. Surprising would
have been tolerance on their part, forgiveness on hers. * But the person
who might have forgiven vanished when Ekki vanished. I was good while he
was with me. Now I'm bad. If he were still here I might be able to
forgive them for taking him away. But that's an impossible condition. I
can't ever forgive.' (There were answers to that, of course. But it
didn't seem to me that I had any right, being what I am, acting as I
still do, to make them.) She went on to describe what he had been to
her. Someone she didn't have to be ashamed of loving, as she had had to
be ashamed of loving Gerry. Someone she had been able to love with her
whole being—' not just occasionally and with part of me, on a roof; or
just for fun, in a studio, before dinner/ And she came back to the same
point—that Ekki had made her kind, truthful, unselfish, as well as
happy. ' I was somebody else while I was with him. Or perhaps I was
myself—for the first time.' Then, ' Do you remember how you laughed at
me that time on the roof, when I talked about my real self?' Did I not
remember ! I hadn't even been real enough, at that moment, to perceive
my own remoteness from 478


CHAPTER XXXVIII

reality. Afterwards, when I saw her crying, when I knew that I'd been
deliberately refusing to love her, I did perceive it.

After a silence, * At the beginning I believe I could have loved you
almost as much as I loved Ekki.'

And I'd done my best, of course, to prevent her.

Her face brightened with sudden malicious derision. Like her mother's. *
Extraordinary how funny a tragedy is, when you look at it from the wrong
side ! ' Then, still smiling, '

Do you imagine you care for me now ? Lo-ove me, in a word ? '

Not only imagined ; did really.

She held up a hand, like a policeman. * No film stuff here. I'd have to
throw you out if you began that game. Which I don't want to do. Because,
oddly enough, I really like you.

In spite of everything. I never thought I should. Not after that dog.
But I do.' That painful brightness came back into her face. ' AH the
things I thought I should never do again !

Such as eating a square meal ; but I was doing it after three days. And
wanting to make love. That seemed inconceivably sacrilegious. And yet
within three or four months it was occurring to me, I was having dreams
about it. And one of these days, I suppose, I shall actually be doing
it. Doing it " without any obligation," as they say when they send you
the vacuum-cleaner on approval. Exactly as I did before.' She laughed
again. ' Most probably with you, Anthony. Till the next dog comes down.
Would you be ready to begin again ? '

479

EYELESS IN GAZA

Not on the old basis. I'd want to give more, receive more.

* It takes two to give and receive/ Then she switched the conversation
on to another line ; who was I having an affair with at the moment ? and
when I answered : with nobody, asked whether it wasn't difficult and
disagreeable to be continent, and why I should want to imitate Mark
Staithes. Tried to explain that I wasn't imitating Mark, that Mark's
asceticism was undertaken for its own sake and above all for Ais, that
he might feel himself more separate, more intensely himself, in a better
position to look down on other people. Whereas what I was trying to do
was to avoid occasions for emphasizing individual separateness through
sensuality. Hate, anger, ambition explicitly deny human unity ; lust and
greed do the same indirectly and by implication—by insisting exclusively
on particular individual experiences and, in the case of lust, using
other people merely as a means for obtaining such experiences. Less
dangerously so than malevolence and the passions for superiority,
prestige, social position, lust is still incompatible with pacifism ;
can be made compatible only when it ceases to be an end in itself and
becomes a means towards the unification through love of two separate
individuals. Such particular union, a paradigm of union in generaL

480


CHAPTER XXXIX

March z5th 1928

HEN Helen kept her eyes closed, the red darkness behind the lids came
wildly and chaotically to life. Like a railway station, it seemed, full
of hurrying people, loud with voices ; and the colours glowed, the forms
stood sharply out, jewelled, with the more than real definition of forms
and colours under limelight. It was as though the fever had assembled a
crowd inside her head, had lighted lamps and turned on the gramophone.
On the unnaturally brilliant stage the images came and went on their own
initiative and in ferocious disregard of Helen's own wishes. Came and
went, talked, gesticulated, acted out their elaborate, insane dramas,
unceasingly, without mercy on her fatigue, without consideration for her
longing to be at rest and alone. Sometimes, in the hope that the outer
world would eclipse this scurrying lunacy within, she opened her eyes.
But the light hurt her ; and in spite of those bunched roses on the
wallpaper, in spite of the white counterpane and the knobs at the end of
the bedstead, in spite of the looking-glass, the hair-brushes, the
bottle of eau-de-Cologne, those images on the other side of her eyes
went on living that private life of theirs, undisturbed. A vehement and
crazy life—now utterly irrelevant, like a story invented

481

w

EYELESS IN GAZA

by somebody else, then all at once agonizingly to the point, agonizingly
hers.

This morning, for example, this afternoon (which was it ? time was at
once endless and non-existent : but at any rate it was just after Mme.
Bonifay had been in to see her—

stinking, stinking of garlic and dirty linen), there had been a huge
hall, with statues.

Gilded statues. She recognized Voltaire, fifty feet high, and there was
one of those Chinese camels, but enormous. People were standing in
groups, beautifully placed, like people on the stage. Indeed, they were
on the stage. Acting a play of intrigue, a play with love-scenes and
revolvers. How bright the spotlights were ! how clearly and emphatically
they spoke the lines ! Each word a bell, each figure a shining lamp.

' Hands up ... I love you ... If she falls into the trap . . .' And yet
who were they, what were they saying ? And now for some extraordinary
reason they were talking about arithmetic.

Sixty-six yards of linoleum at three and eleven a yard. And the woman
with the revolver was suddenly Miss Cosmas. There was no Voltaire, no
gilded camel. Only the blackboard. Miss Cosmas had always hated her
because she was so bad at maths, had always been odious and unfair. * At
three and eleven/ Miss Cosmas shouted, ' at three and eleven.' But Mme.
Bonifay's number was eleven, and Helen was walking once again along the
rue de la Tombe-Issoire, feeling more and more sick with apprehension at
every step. Walking slowlier and slowlier in the hope

482


CHAPTER XXXIX

of never getting there. But the houses came rushing down towards her,
like the walls of the moving staircases in the Underground. Came rushing
towards her, and then, when number eleven drew level, stopped dead,
noiselessly. ' Mme. Bonifay. Sage Femme de 1ère Classe.' She stood
looking at the words, just as she had stood in reality, two days before
; then walked on, just as she had walked on then. Only one more minute,
she pleaded with herself, till she got over her nervousness, till she
felt less sick. Walked up the street again, and was in a garden with her
grandmother and Hugh Led-widge. It was a walled garden widi a pine wood
at one end of it. And a man came running out of the wood, a man widi
some awful kind of skin disease on his face. Red blotches and scabs and
scurf. Horrible ! But all her grandmother said was, ' God has spat in
his face,' and everyone laughed. But in the middle of the wood, when she
went on, stood a bed, and immediately, somehow, she was lying on it,
looking at a lot more people in another play, in the same play, perhaps.
Bright under the spotlights, with voices like bells in her ears; but
incomprehensible, unrecognizable. And Gerry was there, sitting on the
edge of her bed, kissing her, stroking her shoulders, her breasts. c
But, Gerry, you mustn't ! All those people—they can see us. Gerry, don't
! ' But when she tried to push him away, he was like a block of granite,
immovable ; and all the time his hands, his lips were releasing soft
moths of quick and fluttering pleasure under her skin ; and the shame,
the dismay at being seen

483

EYELESS IN GAZA

by all those people, let loose at the same time a special physical
anguish of its own—a finer-footed, wildlier-fluttering sensation that
was no longer a moth, but some huge beetle, revolting to the touch, and
yet revoltingly delicious. c Don't, Gerry, don't ! ' And suddenly she
remembered everything—that night after the kitten had died, and all the
other nights, and then the first signs, the growing anxiety, and the day
she had telephoned to him and been told that he'd gone to Canada, and
finally the money, and that evening when her mother ... * I hate you ! '
she cried ; but as she managed with a last violent effort to push him
away, she felt a stab of pain so excruciating that for a moment she
forgot her delirium and was wholly at the mercy of immediate, physical
reality. Slowly the pain died down ; the other-world of fever closed in
on her again. And it wasn't Gerry any more, it was Mme. Bonifay. Mme.
Bonifay with that thing in her hand. Je vous ferai un peu mal. And it
wasn't the bed or the pine wood but the couch in Mme. Bonifay's
sitting-room. She clenched her teeth, just as she had clenched them
then. Only this time it was worse, because she knew what was going to
happen. And under the limelight the people were still there, acting
their play. And lying there on the couch she herself was part of the
play, outside, and at last was no longer herself, but someone else,
someone in a bathing-dress, with enormous breasts, like Lady Knipe's.
And what was there to prevent her breasts from getting to be like that ?
Bell-clear, but incomprehensible, the actors discussed the

484


CHAPTER XXXIX

nightmarish possibility. The possibility of Helen with enormous breasts,
of Helen with thick rolls of fat round her hips, of Helen with creases
in her thighs, of Helen with rows and rows of children—howling all the
time ; and that disgusting smell of curdled milk ; and their diapers.
And here, all of a sudden, was Joyce wheeling the pram along the streets
of Aldershot. Taking the baby out. Feeding him. Half horrified, half
fascinated, she watched him clinging, sucking. Flattened against the
breast, the little frog face wore an expression of determined greed that
gradually relaxed, as the stomach filled, to one of sleepy, imbecile
ecstasy. But the hands —those were fully human, those were little
miracles of the most delicate elegance. Lovely, exquisite little hands !
Irresistible little hands ! She took the baby from Joyce, she pressed
him close against her body, she bent her head so as to be able to kiss
those adorable little fingers. But the thing she held in her arms was
the dying kitten, was those kidneys at the butcher's, was that horrible
thing which she had opened her eyes to see Mme. Bonifay nonchalantly
picking up and carrying away in a tin basin to the kitchen.

The surgeon had been called in time, and Helen now was out of all
danger. Reassured, Mme. Bonifay had resumed the motherly and Rabelaisian
good humour that was natural to her.

It was almost with a wink that she now talked of the

485

EYELESS IN GAZA

operation that had saved Helen's life. ' Ton petit curetage* she would
say with a kind of jovial archness, as though she were talking of some
illicit pleasure. For Helen, every tone of that fat, jolly voice was yet
anodier insult, yet a further humiliation. The fever had left her ; her
present weakness was lucid ; she inhabited the real world once more.
Turning her head, she could see herself reflected in the wardrobe
mirror. It gave her a certain satisfaction to see how thin she was, how
pale, what blue transparent shadows there were under the eyes, and the
eyes themselves, how lifelessly without lustre. She could have powdered
herself now, painted her lips a little, and rouged her cheeks, brushed
back the gloss into her dull untidy hair; but, perversely, she preferred
her sick pallor and dishevelment. ' Like the kitten/ she kept thinking.
Reduced to a dirty little rag of limp flesh, transformed from a bright
living creature into something repellent, into the likeness of kidneys,
of that unspeakable thing that Mme. Bonifay . . . She shuddered. And now
ton petit curetage—in the same tone as ton petit amoureux. It was
horrible, the final humiliation. She loathed the beastly woman, but at
the same time was glad that she was so awful. That cheerful gross
vulgarity was somehow appropriate—in keeping with all the rest. But when
Mme. Bonifay had left the room she would start crying, silently, in an
agony of self-pity.

Returning unexpectedly, Mme. Bonifay found her, that second morning
after the petit curetage, with the tears

486


CHAPTER XXXIX

streaming down her face. Genuinely distressed, she offered comfort. But
the comfort smelt, as usual, of onions. Physically disgusted as well as
resentful of the intrusion upon the privacy of her unhappiness, Helen
turned aside, and when Mme. Bonifay tried to force consolation upon her,
she shook her head and told her to go away. Mme. Bonifay hesitated for a
moment, then obeyed, but with a Parthian insult in the form of a
tenderly suggestive remark about the letter she had brought and which
she now laid on Helen's pillow. From himy without a doubt. A good heart,
in spite of everything . . .

The letter, it turned out, was from Hugh. * A holiday in Paris ! ' he
wrote. * From my dingy little kennel among the bric-à-brac, how I envy
you, Helen ! Paris in high summer.

Gaily beautiful, as this place of hazy distances can never be. London's
always mournful, even in the sunshine. One pines for the clear,
unequivocal brilliance of the Paris summer.

How I wish I were there ! Selfishly, first of all, for the pleasure of
being with you and out of London and the Museum. And then unselfishly,
for your sake—because it worries me, the diought of your being all alone
in Paris. Theoretically, with my head, I know that nothing's likely to
happen to you. But all the same, all the same—I'd like to be there,
protective, but invisible, so that you wouldn't be aware of me, never
feel my devotion as an importunity, but so that you should always have
the confidence that comes from being two instead of one. Not, alas, that
I should

487

EYELESS IN GAZA

be a very good second in a tight corner. (How I hate myself sometimes
for my shameful inadequacy I) But better, perhaps, than nobody. And I'd
never encroach, never trespass or interfere. I'd be non-existent ;
except when you needed me. My reward would be just being in your
neighbourhood, just seeing and hearing you— the reward of someone who
comes out of a dusty place into a garden, and looks at the flowering
trees, and listens to the fountains.

1 I've never told you before (was afraid you'd laugh— and you may laugh
; I don't mind : for after all it'syour laughter), but the truth is that
I sit sometimes, spinning stories to myself—stories in which I'm always
with you, as I've told you I'd like to be with you now in Paris.
Watching over you, keeping you from harm, and in return being refreshed
by your loveliness, and warmed by your fire, and dazzled by your bright
purity . . .'

Angrily, as though the irony in it had been intentional, Helen threw the
letter aside. But an hour later she had picked it up again and was
re-reading it from the beginning. After all, it was comforting to know
that there was somebody who cared.

488


CHAPTER XL

September nth 1934

ITH Miller to see a show of scientific films. Development of the sea
urchin. Fertilization, cell division, growth. A renewal of last year's
almost nightmarish vision of a more-than-Bergsonian life force, of an
ultimate Dark God, much darker, stranger and more violent than any that
Lawrence imagined. Raw material that, on its own inhuman plane, is
already a perfectly finished product. A picture of earthworms followed.
Week-long hermaphroditic love-making, worm to worm, within a tube of
slime. Then an incredibly beautiful film showing the life-history of the
blow-fly. The eggs. The grubs on their piece of decaying meat.
Snow-white, like a flock of sheep on a meadow. Hurrying away from light.
Then, after five days of growth, descending to the earth, burrowing,
making a cocoon. In twelve more days, the fly emerges. Fantastic process
of resurrection ! An organ in the head is inflated like a balloon. Blown
up so large, that the walls of the cocoon are split. The fly wriggles
out. Positively now, instead of negatively phototropic, as it was as a
grub. (Minor and incidental miracle !) Burrowing upwards, towards the
light. At the surface, you see it literally pumping up its soft, wet
body with air, smoothing out its crumpled wings by

489

w

EYELESS IN GAZA

forcing blood into the veins. Astonishing and moving spectacle.

I put the question to Miller : what will be the influence of the spread
of knowledge such as this ? Knowledge ol a world incomparably more
improbable and more beautiful than the imaginings of any myth-maker. A
world, only a few years ago, completely unknown to all but a handful of
people. What the effects of its general discovery by all ? Miller
laughed. * It will have exactly as much or as little effect as people
want it to have. Those who prefer to think about sex and money will go
on thinking about sex and money.

However loudly the movies proclaim the glory of God.' Persistence of the
ingenuous notion that the response to favourable circumstances is
inevitably and automatically good. Raw material, once again, to be
worked up. One goes on believing in automatic progress, because one
wants to cherish this stupidity : it's so consoling. Consoling, because
it puts the whole responsibility for everything you do or fail to do on
somebody or something other than yourself.

490

CHAPTER XLÏ

December 1933

AT Colon they drove in a cab, at evening, along an A~\ esplanade.
Whitish, like a vast fish's eye, the sea lay as though dead. Against a
picture postcard of sunset the immoderately tall thin palms were the
emblems of a resigned hopelessness, and in the nostrils the hot air was
like a vapour of wool. They swam for a little in the warm fish-eye, then
returned through the deepening night to the town.

For the rich there were, after dinner, cabaret shows with expensive
drinks and genuinely white prostitutes at ten dollars. For the poor, in
the back streets, the mulatto women sat at doors that opened directly on
to lighted bedrooms.

' If one were really conscientious,' said Anthony, as they walked back
late that night to the hotel, ' I suppose one would have to go and
infect oneself with syphilis.'

The smell of sweat, the smell of alcohol, the smells of sewage and decay
and cheap perfumes ; then, next morning, the Canal, the great locks, the
ship climbing up from one ocean and down again to the other. A more than
human achievement that made it possible, Mark explained, smiling
anatomically, to transport whores and whisky by water instead of
overland from Colon to Panama,

49 «

EYELESS IN GAZA

Their ship headed northwards. Once every couple of days they would call
at a little port to pick up cargo. From among the bananas, at San José,
a spider, large as a fist and woolly, made its way into their cabin. Off
Champerico, where the lighters came out loaded with bags of coffee, an
Indian fell into the sea and was drowned.

At night, it was not the ship that seemed to move, but the stars. They
mounted slowly, slantwise, hung at die top of their trajectory, then
swooped downwards, travelled tentatively to the right and back to the
left, then, beginning all over again, mounted once more towards the
zenith.

' Rather sickening,' was Anthony's verdict, ' but beautiful.'

An improvement on the ordinary celestial mechanics. One could lie there
and look at them indefinitely.

There was a note of grim satisfaction in Staithes's voice as he replied
that in two days'

time they would be at Puerto San Felipe.

Puerto San Felipe was a village of huts, with some wooden sheds, near
the water, for storing coffee. Don Jorge's agent at the port helped them
through the customs. A pure Spaniard, half dead with tropical diseases,
but still elaborately courteous. ' My house is yours/ he assured them,
as they climbed the steep path towards his bungalow, * my house is
yours/

Orchids hung from the veranda, and, among them, cages full of incessandy
screaming green parrakeets.

An emaciated woman, prematurely old and tired, hope-

49*


CHAPTER XLI

lessly tired, beyond the limit of her strength, came shuffling out of
the house to welcome them, to apologize in advance for her hospitality.
Puerto San Felipe was a small place, lacked commodities ; and besides,
she explained, the child was not well, not at all well.

Mark asked her what was the matter. She looked at him with eyes
expressionless with fatigue, and answered vaguely that it was fever ;
fever and a pain in the head.

They went with her into the house, and were shown a little girl lying on
a camp-bed, resdessly turning her head from side to side, as if seeking,
but always vainly, some cool place on which to rest her cheek, some
position in which she might find relief from pain.

The room was full of flies, and a smell of fried fish came from the
kitchen. Looking at the child, Anthony suddenly found himself
remembering Helen, that day on the roof—

turning and turning her head in the torture of pleasure.

* I suppose it must be mastoid,* Mark was saying. ' Or meningitis,
perhaps/

As he spoke, the child lifted thin arms from under the sheet and,
clasping her head between her hands, began to roll still more violently
from side to side, and at last broke out into a paroxysm of screaming.

In immediate response, the noise of the parrakeets on the veranda
swelled up, shriek after shriek, to a deafening maximum of intensity.

* Quiet, quiet,' the mother kept repeating, wheedlingly at first, then
with a growing insistence, begging, exhorting, commanding the child to
stop crying, to feel less r 493

EYELESS IN GAZA

pain. The screaming continued, the head went on rolling from side to
side.

Tortured by pleasure, tortured by pain. At the mercy of one's skin and
mucus, at the mercy of those thin threads of nerve.

' Quiet, quiet,' the woman repeated almost angrily. She bent over the
bed and, by main force, dragged down the child's lifted arms; then,
holding the two thin wrists in one hand, laid the other on the head in
an effort to hold it unmoving on the pillows. Still screaming, the
little girl struggled under the constraint. The woman's bony hand
tightened round the wrists, rested more heavily on the forehead. If she
could forcefully restrain the manifestations of pain, perhaps the pain
itself would cease, perhaps the child would stop that screaming, would
sit up perhaps, smiling, and be well again.

' Quiet, quiet,' she commanded between clenched teeth.

With a violent effort the child released her arms from the grasp of
those claw-like fingers

; the hands flew once more to the head. Before the woman could snatch
them away again, Mark touched her on the arm. She looked round at him.

1 Better to leave her/ he was saying.

Obediently she straightened herself up and walked away towards the door
that gave on to the veranda. They followed her. There was nothing
whatever that they could do.

1 Mi casa es suyaJ

494


CHAPTER XLI

Thank God, it wasn't. The child's screams had subsided ; but the frying
fish, the parrakeets among the orchids . . . Politely, Mark refused the
invitation to an early luncheon. They walked out again into the
oppressive sunshine. The moTos had loaded their baggage on to the
pack-mules, and the riding animals stood in the shade of a tree, ready
saddled. They buckled on enormous spurs and mounted.

The track wound up and up from the coast, through a jungle silvery and
brownish pink with drought. Sitting bolt upright on his high-backed
saddle, Mark read Timon of Athens from his pocket edition of the
Tragedies. Each time he turned a page, he gave his mule the spur ; and
for a few yards she would climb a little more quickly, then revert to
the old, slow pace.

In the hotel at Tapatlan, where they spent the night, Anthony was bitten
for the first time in his life by bed bugs, and the next morning it was
an attack of dysentery. . . . On the fourth day he was well enough to go
out and see the sights. The last earthquake had almost wrecked the
church. A dense black fruitage of bats hung, like ripe plums, from the
rafters ; an Indian boy, ragged and bare-footed, was sweeping up the
droppings ; from the altars the baroque saints flapped and gesticulated
in a frozen paroxysm of devotion. They walked out again into the
market-place, where, secret and as though ambushed within their dark
shawls, the brown Indian women squatted in the dust before their little
piles of fruit and withering vegetables. The meat on the

49Ï

EYELESS IN GAZA

butcher's stall was covered with a crust of flies. Rhythmically shaking
their long ears the donkeys passed, on small quick hoofs, noiseless in
the dust. The women came and went in silence, carrying kerosene tins of
water on their heads. From under hat-brims, dark eyes regarded the
strangers with an inscrutably reptilian glitter that seemed devoid of
all curiosity, all interest, any awareness even of their presence.

' I'm tired,' Anthony announced. They had not walked very far; but at
Tapatlan, it was an immense fatigue even to be living and conscious. '
When I die,' he went on after a silence,

* this is the part of hell I shall be sent to. I recognize it
instantly.'

The bar of the hotel was in a dim crypt-like room with a vaulted ceiling
supported at the centre by a pier of masonry, inordinately thick for its
height, to resist the earthquake shocks. ' The Saxon ossuary,' Mark
called it; and here, while he went to their room to fetch a
handkerchief, he left Anthony installed in a cane chair.

Propped against the bar, a smardy dressed young Mexican in
riding-breeches and an enormous felt hat was boasting to the
proprietress about the alligators he had shot in the swamps at the mouth
of the Coppalita, of his firmness in dealing with die Indians who had
come to pick the coffee on his estate, of the money he expected to make
when he sold his crop.

' A bit tight,' Anthony reflected, listening and looking on from his
chair ; and was enjoying the performance, when the young man turned,
and, bowing with the grave 496


CHAPTER XLI

formality of one who is so drunk that he must do everything with a
conscious deliberation, asked if the foreign cavalier would take a glass
of tequila with him.

Fatigue had made Anthony's Spanish more halting than usual. His efforts
to explain that he had not been well, that it would not be good for him
to drink alcohol, landed him very soon in incoherence. The young man
listened, fixing him all the time with dark eyes, bright like the
Indians', but, unlike theirs, comprehensibly expressive—European eyes,
in which it was possible to read an intense and passionate interest, a
focussed awareness.

Anthony mumbled on, and all at once those eyes took on a new and
dangerous glitter ; an expression of anger distorted the handsome face,
the knuckles of the strong rapacious hands went white under a sudden
pressure. The young man stepped forward menacingly.

1 Usted me dispreciaj he shouted.

His movement, the violence of his tone, startled Anthony into a kind of
panic alarm. He scrambled to his feet and, edging behind his chair,
began to explain in a voice that he had meant to be calmly conciliatory,
but which, in spite of all his efforts to keep it grave and steady,
trembled into a breathless shrillness, that he hadn't dreamed of
despising anyone, that it was merely a question of—he fumbled for the
medical explanation and could find nothing better than a pain in the
stomach —merely a question of un dolor en mi estâmago.

For some reason the word estâmago seemed to the young man the final,
most outrageous insult. He

497

EYELESS IN GAZA

bellowed something incomprehensible, but evidently abusive ; his hand
went back to his hip-pocket and, as the proprietress screamed for help,
came forward again, holding a revolver.

' Don't, don't 1 * Anthony cried out, without knowing what he was saying
; then, with extraordinary agility, darted out of his corner to take
shelter behind the massive pillar at the centre of the room.

For a second the young man was out of sight. But suppose he were to
creep up on tiptoe.

Anthony imagined the revolver suddenly coming round the pillar into his
face ; or else from behind—he would feel the muzzle pressed against his
back, would hear the ghastly explosion, and then ... A fear so intense
that it was like the most excruciating physical pain possessed him
entirely ; his heart beat more violently than ever, he felt as though he
were going to be sick. Overcoming terror by a greater terror, he stuck
out his head to the left. The young man was standing only two yards
away, staring with a ferocious fixity at the pillar. Anthony saw him
jerk into movement, and with a despairing shout for help jumped to the
right, looked out again and jumped back to the left ; dien once more to
the right.

• It can't go on,' he was thinking, ' I can't do it much longer.' The
thought of that pistol coming unexpectedly round the pillar forced him
to look out yet again.

The young man moved, and he darted precipitately to the left.

The noise of the revolver going off—that was what he

498


CHAPTER XLI

dreaded most. The horrible noise, sudden and annihilating like the noise
of that other explosion years before. His eyelids had stiffened and were
irrepressibly trembling, ready to blink, in anticipation of the
horrifying event. The lashes flickered before his eyes, and it was
through a kind of mist that, peeping out, he saw the door open and Mark
moving swiftly across the room, Mark catching the young man by the
wrist. . . . The pistol went off; reverberated from walls and ceiling,
the report was catastrophically loud. Anthony uttered a great cry, as
though he had been wounded, and, shutting his eyes, flattened himself
against the pillar. Conscious only of nausea and that pain in the
genitals, those gripings of the bowels, he waited, reduced to a mere
quivering embodiment of fearful anticipation, for the next explosion.
Waited for what seemed hours. Dim voices parleyed incomprehensibly. Then
a touch on his shoulder made him start. He shouted, 4 No, don't/

and lifting eyelids that still twitched with the desire to blink, saw
Mark Staithes, demonstrating muscle by muscle a smile of friendly
amusement.

1 All clear/ he said, * you can come out/ Feeling profoundly ashamed and
humiliated, Anthony followed him into the open. The young Mexican was at
the bar again and already drinking. As they approached, he turned and
with outstretched arms came to meet them. ' Homhrty he said to Anthony,
as he shook him affectionately by the hand, ' hombre

/ '

Anthony felt more abjectly humiliated than ever.

499


CHAPTER XLII

September iSth 1934

AVE built up during the last few days a meditation on a phrase of
William Penn's. ' Force may subdue, but Love gains ; and he who forgives
first wins the laurel.'

1 Force may subdue.' I visualize men using force. First, hand to hand.
With fists, knives, truncheons, whips. Weals, red or livid, across
flesh. Lacerations, bruises, the broken bone sticking in jags through
the skin, faces horribly swollen and bleeding. Then try to imagine, in
my own body, the pain of a crushed finger, of blows with a stick or lash
across the face, the searing touch of red-hot iron. All the short-range
brutalities and tortures. Then, force from a distance. Machine-gun
bullets, high explosive, gases, choking or blistering, fire.

Force, finally, in the shape of economic coercion. Starved children,
pot-bellied and with arms and legs like sticks. Women old at thirty. And
those living corpses, standing in silence at the street corners in
Durham or South Wales, shuffling in silence through the mud.

Yes, force may subdue. Subdue in death, subdue by wounds, subdue through
starvation and terror. Vision of frightened faces, of abject gestures of
servility. The manager at his desk, hectoring. The clerk cringing under
the threat of dismissal. Force—the act of violently denying man's
ultimate unity with man.

500

H


CHAPTER XLII

•Force may subdue, but Love gains.' I rehearse the history of Penn
himself among the Redskins. Remember how Miller used to allay the
suspicious hostility of the Indians in the mountain villages. Think of
Pennell on the North-West Frontier; of the Quakers during the Russian
famine; of Elizabeth Fry and Damien.

Next I consider the translations of love into terms of politics.
Campbell-Bannerman's insistence that reparation should be made in South
Africa—in the teeth of the protests, the Cassandra-like prophesyings of
such ' sane and practical men ' as Arthur Balfour.

Love gains even in the clumsy, distorted form of a good political
constitution. ' He who forgives first wins the laurel/ In South Africa,
the English forgave those whom they had wronged—which is only less
difficult than forgiving those by whom one has been wronged—and so
secured a prize which they couldn't have won by continued coercion.

No prize has been won since the last war, because no combatant has yet
forgiven those by whom he has been wronged or those he has wronged.

Consistently applied to any situation, love always gains. It is an
empirically determined fact. Love is the best policy. The best not only
in regard to those loved, but also in regard to the one who loves. For
love is self-energizing. Produces the means whereby its policy can be
carried out. In order to go on loving, one needs patience, courage,
endurance. But the process of loving generates these means to its own
continuance. Love r*

501

EYELESS IN GAZA

gains because, for the sake of that which is loved, the lover is patient
and brave.

And what is loved ? Goodness and the potentialities for goodness in all
human beings—

even those most busily engaged in refusing to actualize those
potentialities for goodness in relation to the lover himself. If
sufficiently great, love can cast out the fear even of malevolently
active enemies.

I end by holding the thought of goodness, still, as it were, before the
eyes of my mind.

Goodness, immanent in its potentialities transcendent as a realized
ideal; conceivable in its perfection, but also susceptible of being
realized in practice, of being embodied at least partially in any
situation in which we may find ourselves. * The thought of goodness

'—it is the wrong phrase. For in reality it is a whole system of
thoughts and sentiments. It is this whole system that I hold, quite
still, perceived simultaneously in its entirety—hold it without words,
without images, undiscursively, as a single, simple entity. Hold it—then
at last must retreat again, back into words, back at last (but
refreshed, but made more conscious, but replenished, as it were) into
ordinary life.

September lyth 1934.

Was called in by Helen to help entertain her sister and brother-in-law,
back on leave from India. Had to put on evening clothes—the first time
this year—because Colin could not allow himself to be seen in a theatre
or at the Savoy Grill in anything but a white tie. A depressing

502


CHAPTER XLII

evening. Joyce sickly and gaunt before her time. Colin furtively
interested in plumper, fresher bodies. She, jealous and nagging; he,
resentful at being tied to her and the children, blaming her for the
strictness of his own code, which doesn*t allow him to be the libertine
he would like to be. Each chronically impatient with the other. Every
now and then an outburst of bad temper, an exchange of angry or spiteful
words. Colin had other grievances as well. England, it seemed, didn't
show sufficient respect to the officer and gent. Cabmen were
impertinent, the lower classes jostled him in the streets. ' They call
this a white man's country/ (This, after the second ' quick one ' in the
bar of the theatre, between the acts.) ' It isn't. Give me Poona every
time.'

Reflect that we ail have our Poonas, bolt-holes from unpleasant reality.
The danger, as Miller is always insisting, of meditation becoming such a
bolt-hole. Quietism can be mere self-indulgence. Charismata like
masturbations. Masturbations, however, that are dignified, by the
amateur mystics who practise them, with all the most sacred names of
religion and philosophy. ' The contemplative life/ It can be made a kind
of high-brow substitute for Marlene Dietrich : a subject for erotic
musings in the twilight. Meditation—

valuable, not as a pleasurable end ; only as a means for effecting
desirable changes in the personality and mode of existence. To live
contemplatively is not to live in some deliciously voluptuous or
flattering Poona ; it is to live in London, but to live there in a
non-cockney style.

5°3


CHAPTER XLIII

July 20th and 21st 1914

THE right, the auspicious moment for telling Brian the truth—or at any
rate as much of the truth as it was expedient for him to know—never
seemed to present itself. That first evening had been ruled Out in
advance —because Anthony felt that he must treat himself to a respite,
because poor Brian was looking so ill and tired. At supper, and after
it, Anthony kept the conversation as entertainingly impersonal as he
could make it. He talked about Sorel's Réflexions sur la
Violence—uncomfortable reading for Fabians !

And had Brian seen how effectively his beloved Bergson had been
punctured by Julien Benda ? And what about Lascelles Abercrombie's blank
verse ? And the latest Gilbert Cannan ? Next morning they set out for a
walk on the Langdale Pikes. Both were out of training ; but in spite of
shortened breath and bumping heart, Brian pressed on with a kind of
Spartan determination that to Anthony seemed at first absurd, then
exasperating.

When they got home, late in the afternoon, they were both thoroughly
tired ; but Anthony was also resentful. Rest and a meal did something to
change his mood ; but he still found it impossible to behave towards
Brian except as a man, forgiving indeed, but still on his dignity; and
dignity was obvi-504


CHAPTER XLIII

ously quite incompatible with the telling of this particular truth. They
spent a silent evening—Anthony reading, the other restlessly prowling
about the room, as though on the watch for an occasion to speak—an
occasion which Anthony's air of intense preoccupation was deliberately
intended not to give him.

In bed the next morning Anthony found himself startled broad awake by
the uncomfortable thought that time was passing, and passing not only
for himself but also for Joan and Brian. Joan's impatience might get the
better of her promise not to write to Brian ; besides, the longer he
postponed the inevitable explanation with Brian, the worse Brian would
think of him.

Inventing a blistered heel for the occasion, he let Brian go out by
himself, and having watched him indomitably striding away up the steep
slope behind the cottage, sat down to write his letter to Joan. To try
to write it, rather ; for every one of the drafts he produced displayed
one or other of two faults, and each of the two faults exposed him, he
realized, to a particular danger: the danger that, if he insisted too
much on the esteem and affection which had prepared him to lose his head
on that accursed evening, she would reply that so much esteem and
affection accompanied by head-losing amounted to love, and were his
justification (since love was supposed to justify everything) for
betraying Brian ; and the other danger that, if he insisted too
exclusively on the head-losing and temporary insanity, she would feel
insulted and complain to Brian, to Mrs. Foxe, to her relations, EYELESS
IN GAZA

raise a regular hue and cry against him as a cad, a seducer, and heaven
only knew what else. After the expense of three hours and a dozen sheets
of paper, the best of his efforts seemed to him too unsatisfactory to
send off. He put it angrily aside, and, in his mood of exasperation,
dashed off a violent letter of abuse to Mary. Damned woman ! She was
responsible for everything. ' Deliberate malice . . / ' Shameless
exploitation of my love for you . . / ' Treating me as though I were
some sort of animal you could torment for your private amusement . . .'
The phrases flowed from his pen. ' This is good-bye,' he concluded, and,
with half his mind, believed in what he was dramatically writing. ' I
never want to see you again. Never.9 But a quarrel, the other half of
his mind was reflecting, can always be made up : he would give her this
lesson : then, perhaps, if she behaved well, if he felt he simply
couldn't do without her... He sealed up the letter, and at once walked
briskly to the village to post it. This act of decision did something to
restore his self-esteem. On his way home he made up his mind, quite
definitely this time, that he would have his talk with Brian that
evening, and then, in the light of his knowledge of Brian's attitude,
re-write the letter to Joan the following morning.

Brian was back at six, triumphing in the fact that he had walked further
and climbed to the tops of more mountains than on any previous occasion
in his life, but looking, in spite of his exultations, completely
exhausted. At the sight of that face he had known so long, that face

506


CHAPTER XLIII

now so tragically worn and emaciated beneath the transfigurement of the
smile, Anthony felt an intenser renewal of the first evening's
emotions—of anxious solicitude for an old friend, of distressed sympathy
with a human being's suffering—and along with these an excruciating
sense of guilt towards the friend, of responsibility for the human
being.

Instant confession might have relieved his pain, might have allowed him
at the same time to express his feelings; but he hesitated ; he was
silent; and in a few seconds, by an almost instantaneous process of
psychological chemistry, the sympathy and the solicitude had combined
with the sense of guilt to form a kind of anger. Yes, he was positively
angry with Brian for looking so tired, for being already so miserable,
for going to be so much more miserable the moment he was told the truth.

' You're mad to overtire yourself like this,' he said gruffly, and drove
him into the house to take a rest before supper.

After the meal they went out on to the strip of terraced lawn in front
of the cottage and, spreading out a rug, lay down and looked up into a
sky green at their arrival with the last trace of summer twilight, then
gradually and ever more deeply blue.

The time, thought Anthony, with a certain sinking of the heart, had
come, irrevocably ; and through a long silence he prepared himself to
begin, trying out in his mind one opening gambit after another;
hesitating between the abrupt and precipitate clean-breast-of-it-all

507

EYELESS IN GAZA

and a more devious strategy that would prepare the victim gradually for
the final shock.

But before he had decided which was the best approach to his confession,
the other broke out all at once into stammering speech. He too, it was
evident, had been waiting for an opportunity to ease his mind, and
instead of acting the penitent, as he had intended, Anthony found
himself (to the relief of a part of his mind, to the dismay and
embarrassment of the inhabitant of a deeper layer of consciousness)
suddenly called upon to play the part of confessor and director of
conscience ; called upon to listen all over again to the story that Joan
had already told him—the story that, adorned with St.

Monicas and uterine reactions, he had so joyfully passed on to Mary
Amberley. He had to hear how humiliating, how painful his friend found
it to be unable to gain the mastery of his body, to banish all the low
desires unworthy of the love he felt for Joan. Or perhaps, Brian had
qualified, citing Meredith's great volcano flinging fires of earth to
sky, perhaps not unworthy when circumstances should have allowed them to
take their place in the complex whole of a perfect marriage ; but
unworthy at that moment when it was not yet possible for them to find
their legitimate expression, unworthy in so far as they were able to
defy the authority of the conscious mind.

'I've had to r-run away/ he explained, 'h-had to remove my b-body to a
safe d-distance. B-because I wasn't able to c-c-c .. . * ; ' control '
would not come ; he had to be satisfied with another less expressive
word ;

jo8


CHAPTER XLIII

' to m-manage myself with my w-will. One's ash-shamed of being so weak/
Brian continued-Anthony nodded. Weak in making up one's mind to kiss,
and no less weak when it came to interrupting a momentarily agreeable
experience—though there had been something more than weakness there,
something positive, a perverse revelling in an action known to be
stupid, dangerous, wrong.

* But if one kn-knows one c-can't overc-come it,' Brian was saying, ' I
s-suppose it's b-best to r-run away. B-better dian 1-Ietting it g-get
one into av-voidable trouble.'

* Yes, I agree,' said Anthony, wondering why he hadn't followed his
impulse and turned back at Kendal.

* And not only ones-self, but o-other people. G-get-ting th-them into
trouble t-too.' There was a long silence; then, slowly and laboriously,
he set out to explain that the lovely, the splendid thing about Joan was
her naturalness. She had the strength of natural things and their
spontaneity ; she was warm, like nature, and generous and profoundly
innocent. She had the qualities of a summer landscape, of a flowering
tree, of a water-bird darting bright-eyed and glossy between the rushes.
This naturalness was what he had chiefly loved in her, because it was
the complementary opposite of his own scrupulousness and
intellectualism. But it was this same naturalness that had made it all
but impossible for Joan to understand why he had found her presence so
dangerous, why he had felt it necessary to keep away from her. She had
been hurt by his withholding of him-509

EYELESS IN GAZA

self, had thought it was because he didn't love her; whereas the truth
was . . .

The truth was, Anthony said to himself, finding a kind of consolation, a
renewal of his sense of superiority, in the derisive cynicism of his
thoughts, the truth was that she was thirsty for kisses, that at his
first caress her whole body revealed itself a shuddering and palpitating
protest against the continence that had been imposed on it.

* The t-truth/ Brian was laboriously saying, ' is that I 1-love her
m-more than I e-ever did.

Unspeakably much.' He was silent once more for a little ; then, looking
up at Anthony, '

What shall I d-do ? ' he asked.

Still in his cynical mood, Anthony scored, with the grossness of his
unspoken answer, another private triumph—as short-lived, however, as it
was easy ; for his first thought was succeeded almost instantaneously by
the disquieting realization that he was being faced by a choice : either
to tell Brian what had happened between himself and Joan ; or else to
make some anodyne and non-committal reply to his question, and postpone
the telling of the truth till later on. By omission, the anodyne reply
would be a monstrous falsehood ; and when at last he came to tell the
truth, this lie and all the other lies implied in more than two days of
silence or irrelevant chatter would inevitably be remembered against
him. But to tell the truth at once, in this particular context, would be
specially painful—and painful, he went on to think, not only to himself
but also, and above all, to 510


CHAPTER XLIII

Brian. After what Brian had been saying this evening, to blurt out a
plain account of what had happened would be sheer cruelty and deliberate
insult.

' What o-ought I to d-do ? ' Brian was insisting.

' I think,' Anthony answered softly, ' I think you ought to come to
terms with reality/

He had made his decision—or rather, as he preferred to put it when,
later on, in the privacy of his bedroom, he thought of the events of the
evening, the decision had made itself. Looking back, he felt that he had
had nothing to do widi the matter.

Ï"


CHAPTER XLIV

September 21st 1934

REMARKS by St, Teresa. ' Let us look at our own - faults, and not at
other people's. We ought not to insist on everyone following our
footsteps, nor to take upon ourselves to give instructions in
spirituality when, perhaps, we do not even know what it is. Zeal for the
good of souls, though given us by God, may often lead us astray/ To
which add this. * It is a great grace of God to practise
self-examination, but too much is as bad as too little, as they say ;
believe me, by God's help, we shall accomplish more by contemplating the
divinity than by keeping our eyes fixed on ourselves/ God may or may not
exist. But there is the empirical fact that contemplation of the
divinity—of goodness in its most unqualified form—is a method of
realizing that goodness to some slight degree in one's life, and
results, often, in an experience as if of help towards that realization
of goodness, help from some being other than one's ordinary self and
immensely superior to it.

Christian God and the Buddhist's primal Mind—interpretations of concrete
experiences, the Buddhist being the rationalization of a state further
removed from the normal than the Christian. Christians, of course, have
often experienced that state and found great difficulties in explaining
it in orthodox


CHAPTER XLIV

terms. Both conceptions legitimate—just as both microscopical and
microscopical views of matter are legitimate. We look at the universe
with a certain kind of physicomental apparatus. That apparatus can
respond only to certain stimuli. Within relatively narrow limits, it is
adjustable. The nature of the facts which each of us perceives as
primary and given depends on the nature of the individual instrument and
on the adjustment we have been brought up, or deliberately chosen, to
give it. From these data one can draw inferences. Which may be logically
sound or unsound. Any philosophy is intellectually legitimate if, one,
it starts from facts which, for the philosopher, are data and if, two,
the logical construction based on these facts is sound. But an
intellectually is not the same as a morally legitimate philosophy. We
can adjust our instrument deliberately, by an act of the will. This
means that we can will modifications in the personal experiences which
underlie our philosophy, die data from which we argue. Problem: to build
really solid logical bridges between given facts and philosophical
inferences. All but insoluble. No bullet-proof arguments for any of the
main cosmological theories. What, then, shall we do ? Stick, so far as
possible, to the empirical facts—always remembering that these are
modifiable by anyone who chooses to modify the perceiving mechanism. So
that one can see, for example, either irremediable senselessness and
turpitude, or else actualizable potentialities for good—whichever one
likes ; it is a question of choice.

513


CHAPTER XLV

April 14th 1928

APPINESS inexpressible—that was what her letter should have brought him.
But Hugh's face, as he walked—walked instead of having his lunch—up and
down the long gallery of the Ethnographical Collection, was a mask of
perplexity and distress. The words of Helen's letter repeated themselves
in his memory. ' Nobody cares a pin whether I'm alive or dead/

From the Mexican case the symbol of death in crystal and that other
skull inlaid with turquoise stared out at him as he passed. ' Nobody
cares . . .' It should have been his opportunity. He had dreamt of her
unhappiness —in an agony of commiseration, but also with hope. Unhappy,
she would turn to him. ' Nobody cares . . .'

* Nobody except you.' His exultant pride and pleasure in those words had
been tempered, as he read on, by the realization that she didn't really
understand how he cared, didn't appreciate the exact quality of his
feeling. * My mother ? ' she had written. * But, after all, ever since
she started taking that horrible stuff, she's somebody else— always was
somebody else really, even when she was well (though of course not so
else). Just as I was always somebody else, if it comes to that. She
expected a daughter; but I was always selfish and irresponsible.

ïi4

H


CHAPTER XLV

just as she was. Somebody else. How could she care ? You're not selfish,
Hugh. You're . .

.' But it wasn't a question merely of selfishness or unselfishness, he
began to protest, with all the painted faces of the Peruvian vases
staring down from the right with an unwinking intensity of frozen life.
It was a question of something different, something deeper and more
spiritual. On his left the trophies of the Papuan head-hunters hung
shrivelled, but fantastically painted, like the heads of decapitated
clowns. The skulls from the Torres Straits had been given round shining
eyes of mother-of-pearl. Yes, more spiritual, Hugh insisted, thinking of
what he had written about her—lyrically, lyrically !—and of that subtle
analysis of his own emotions. The unselfishness was there, but melted
down, as it were, in contemplation, refined into something aesthetic.
Unselfishness in a picture.

Unselfishness by Watteau, by Cima da Conegliano. And she herself, the
object of his contemplative and aesthetic unselfishness—she too, in his
imaginings, in the accumulating pages of his manuscript, had possessed
the quality of a picture or a piece of music ; something that it would
be sufficient happiness merely to look at for ever, to listen to ;
perhaps, occasionally, to touch, as though she were a statue, to caress
with an almost imperceptible tenderness. And sometimes in those
imaginings she was cold, was unhappy—nobody cared a pin—and she asked to
be comforted and made warm, she crept into lus arms, into those
unselfish, contemplative, impalpable arms of his, and lay there safely,
but naked, lay there a picture,

5*5

EYELESS IN GAZA

virginal, ideal, but melting, melting . . . Feathered like an ambassador
in full dress uniform, with the beak of a bird, the teeth of a shark,
this wooden mask had once made its wearer feel, as he danced, that he
was more than human, akin to the gods. ' You've said you'd like to be
always with me. Well, I've been thinking about it a lot recendy, and I
believe that that's what I'd like too. Dear Hugh, I'm not in love with
you ; but I like you more than anyone else. I think you're nicer,
kinder, gentler, less selfish. And surely that's a good enough
foundation to build on.' The words, when he read them first, had filled
him with a kind of panic ; and it was with the same protesting agitation
that he now walked between New Caledonia and the Solomon Islands. In the
belly of a wooden bonito fish the Melanesian widow opened a little door,
and there, like a chamber-pot, was her husband's skull. But it was
always spiritually and aesthetically that he had wanted to be with her.
Hadn't she been able to understand that ? Surely he had made it clear
enough

? ' If you still want it, there I am—I want it too.' It was terrible, he
was thinking, terrible !

She was forcing a decision on him, making it impossible for him to say
no by assuming that he had already said yes. He felt himself hemmed in,
driven into a corner. Marriage ?

But he would have to change his whole way of life. The flat wouldn't be
large enough.

She'd want to eat meat at night. Mrs. Barton would give notice. Of the
spears on his left some were tipped with obsidian, some with the spines
of sting-rays, some with human bone.

U6


CHAPTER XLV

#You probably think I'm a fool, and flighty and irresponsible ; and it's
true, I have been up till now, I'm hopeless. But I wasn't born
hopeless—I was made it, because of the kind of life I've lived. Now I
want to be something else, and I know I can be something else.

Sérieuse. A good wife and all that, ridiculous and embarrassing as it
sounds when one puts it down on paper. But I refuse to be ashamed of
goodness any longer. I absolutely refuse/ That irresponsibility, he was
thinking, was one of the loveliest and most moving things about her. It
separated her from the common world, it promoted her out of vulgar
humanity. He didn't want her to be responsible and a good wife. He
wanted her to be like Ariel, like the delicate creature in his own
manuscript, a being of another order, beyond good and evil. Meanwhile he
had walked into Africa. The image of a negress holding her long pointed
breasts in her two hands glistened darkly from behind the confining
glass.

Her belly was tattooed, her navel projected in a little cone. The spears
in the next case were headed with iron. Like Ariel, he repeated to
himself, like those Watteaus at Dresden, like Debussy. For resonator,
this xylophone had, not the usual gourd, but a human skull, and there
were skulls festooned along the ivory fetish horns, thigh-bones around
the sacrificial drum from Ashanti. She was spoiling everything, he said
to himself resentfully. And suddenly, lifting his eyes, he saw that she
was there, hurrying along the narrow passage between the cases to meet
him* ' You ? ' he managed to whisper.

JI7

EYELESS IN GAZA

But Helen was too much perturbed to see the look of dismay, the pallor,
and then the guilty blush, too intensely preoccupied with her own
thoughts to hear the note of startled apprehension in his voice.

* Pm sorry,' she said breathlessly, as she took his hand. 11 didn't mean
to come and pester you here. But you don't know what it's been like this
morning at home/ She shook her head ; her lips trembled. ' Mother's been
like a madwoman. I can't tell you . •. You're the only person, Hugh .. /

Clumsily, he tried to console her. But the reality was profoundly
different from his imagination of her un-happiness. The imagination had
always been his delicious opportunity ; the reality was the menace of an
unavoidable doom. Desperately, he tried the effect of changing the
subject. These things from Benin were rather interesting. The ivory
leopard, spotted with disks of copper inlay. The negro warriors, in
bronze, with their leaf-shaped spears and swords, and the heads of their
enemies hanging from their belts. The Europeans, bearded and aquiline,
in their high sixteenth-century morions and baggy hose, their matchlocks
in their hands, and the cross hanging round their necks.

Comic, he remarked, parenthetically, that the only thing these
blackamoors ever got out of Christianity should have been the art of
crucifying people. The punitive expedition in 1897 found the place full
of crosses. And this beautiful head of the young girl with her tapering
Phrygian cap of coral beads ? . .

518


CHAPTER XLV

4 Look at this,' Helen suddenly interrupted ; and, pulling up her
sleeve, she showed him two red semicircular marks on the skin of her
forearm a few inches above the wrist. *

That's where she bit me, when I tried to make her go back to bed.'

Hugh was startled into pitying indignation. * But it's awful ! ' he
cried. ' It's too awful.*

He took her hand. ' My poor child ! ' They stood for a moment in
silence. Then, suddenly, his pity was shot through by the realization
that the thing had happened. There could be no escape now. He found
himself thinking again of Mrs. Barton. If she were to give notice, what
would he do?

5*9

CH APTER XLVI

October 30th 1934

ARK, at dinner, said he'd been re-reading Anna Karenina. Found it good,
as novels go.

But complained of the profound untruthfulness of even the best
imaginative literature.

And he began to catalogue its omissions. Almost total neglect of those
small physiological events that decide whether day-to-day living shall
have a pleasant or unpleasant tone. Excretion, for example, with its
power to make or mar the day.

Digestion. And, for the heroines of novel and drama, menstruation. Then
the small illnesses—catarrh, rheumatism, headache, eye-strain. The
chronic physical disabilities—

ramifying out (as in the case of deformity or impotence) into luxuriant
insanities. And conversely the sudden accessions, from unknown visceral
and muscular sources, of more than ordinary health. No mention, next, of
the part played by mere sensations in producing happiness. Hot bath, for
example, taste of bacon, feel of fur, smell of freesias.

In life, an empty cigarette-case may cause more distress than the
absence of a lover ; never in books. Almost equally complete omission of
the small distractions that fill the greater part of human lives.
Reading the papers; looking into shops; exchanging gossip ; with all the
varieties of day-dreaming, from lying in bed, imagining what one

?20

M


CHAPTER XLVI

would do if one had the right lover, income, face, social position, to
sitting at the picture palace passively accepting ready-made day-dreams
from Hollywood.

Lying by omission turns inevitably into positive lying. The implications
of literature are that human beings are controlled, if not by reason, at
least by comprehensible, well-organized, avowable sentiments. Whereas
the facts are quite different. Sometimes the sentiments come in,
sometimes they don't. All for love, or the world well lost ; but love
may be the title of nobility given to an inordinate liking for a
particular person's smell or texture, a lunatic desire for the
repetition of a sensation produced by some particular dexterity. Or
consider those cases (seldom published, but how numerous, as anyone in a
position to know can tell !), those cases of the eminent statesmen,
churchmen, lawyers, captains of industry— seemingly so sane,
demonstrably so intelligent, publicly so high-principled ; but, in
private, under irresistible compulsion towards brandy, towards young
men, towards little girls in trains, towards exhibitionism, towards
gambling or hoarding, towards bullying, towards being whipped, towards
all the innumerable, crazy perversions of the lusts for money and power
and position on the one hand, for sexual pleasure on the other. Mere
tics and tropisms, lunatic and unavowable cravings—these play as much
part in human life as the organized and recognized sentiments. And
imaginative literature suppresses the fact. Propagates an enormous lie
about the nature of men and women.

• J2I

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Rightly, no doubt. Because, if human beings were shown what they're
really like, they'd either kill one another as vermin7 or hang
themselves. But meanwhile, I really can't be bothered to read any more
imaginative literature. Lies don't interest me. However poetically they
may be expressed. They're just a bore.'

Agreed with Mark that imaginative literature wasn't doing its duty. That
it was essential to know everything —and to know it, not merely through
scientific textbooks, but also in a form that would have power to bring
the facts home to the whole mind, not merely to the intellect. A
complete expression (in terms of imaginative literature) leading to
complete knowledge (with the whole mind) of the complete truth :
indispensable preliminary condition of any remedial action, any serious
attempt at the construction of a genuinely human being. Construction
from within, by training in proper use of the self—

training, simultaneously physical and mental. Construction, at the same
time, from without, by means of social and economic arrangements devised
in the light of a complete knowledge of the individual, and of the way
in which the individual can modify himself.

Mark only laughed, and said I reminded him of the men who go round from
house to house selling electric washing-machines.

November 4th i£>34*

Very good meeting in Newcastle with Miller and

Ç22 *


CHAPTER XLVI

Purchas. Large and enthusiastic crowds—predominantly of the
dispossessed. Note the significant fact that pacifism is in inverse
ratio, generally, to prosperity. The greater the poverty, the longer the
unemployment, the more whole-hearted the determination not to fight
again, and the more complete the scepticism about the conventional
idols, Empire, National Honour and the like. A negative attitude closely
correlated with bad economic conditions. Therefore not to be relied on.
Such pacifism is without autonomous life. At the mercy, first of all, of
anyone who comes along with money—and threats of war would lead to a
vast increase of employment. At the mercy, in the second place, of
anyone who comes along with an alluring positive doctrine—however crazy
and criminal its positiveness may be. The mind abhors a vacuum. Negative
pacifism and scepticism about existing institutions are just holes in
the mind, emptinesses waiting to be filled.

Fascism or communism have sufficient positive content to act as fillers.
Someone with the talents of Hitler may suddenly appear. The negative
void will be pumped full in a twinkling. These disillusioned pacifist
sceptics will be transformed overnight into drilled fanatics of
nationalism, class war or whatever it may be. Question : have we time to
fill the vacuum with positive pacifism ? Or, having the time, have we
the ability ?

5*3


CHAPTER XLVII

January 10th and nth 1934

OSTENSIBLY, Don Jorge's telegram was an order for the immediate sale of
six hundred bags of coffee. In fact, it announced that the moment had
come, and that he was urgently expecting them.

Mark looked at his companion with an expression that was frankly
hostile. * Those blasted guts of yours ! ' he said.

Anthony protested that he was all right again.

1 You're not fit to do the journey/

1 Yes, I am/

* You're not,' Mark repeated with a solicitude that was at the same time
a passionate resentment. * Three days on a mule across these damned
mountains. It's too much for anyone in your condition/

Piqued by the other's words, and afraid, if he agreed with Mark, of
seeming unwilling to face the difficulties and dangers that lay in front
of them, Anthony insisted obstinately that he was fit for anything.
Wishing to believe it, Mark soon allowed himself to be persuaded. An
answer was despatched to Don Jorge—the six hundred bags were being sold
immediately ; he might expect to hear furdier details on Friday—and,
after lunch, in the blazing heat of the early afternoon, they set out
for

524


CHAPTER XLVII

the fined., lying high in the mountains above Tapatlan, where one of Don
Jorge's friends would put them up for the night. Mark produced his
pocket Shakespeare once again, and, for four hours, they spurred their
reluctant beasts, up and up, between dusty maize stubbles, and, above
the fields, through a dry leafless scrub that gave place at last to the
green darkness and golden lights of coffee plantations under their
towering shade trees.

Up and up, while Mark read the whole of Hamlet and two acts of Troilus
and Cressida, and Anthony sat wondering, in a mist of fatigue, how much
longer he could stand it. But at last, as night was falling, they
reached their destination.

At four the next morning they were in the saddle again. Under the trees
there was a double night of starless shadow ; but the mules picked their
way along the windings of the track with a reassuring certainty. From
time to time they rode under invisible lemon trees, and in the darkness
the scent of the flowers was like the brief and inénarrable revelation
of something more than earthly—a moment's ecstasy, and then, as the
mules advanced, hoof after hoof, up the stony path, the fading of the
supernatural presence, the return to a common life symbolically
represented by the smell of leather and sweat.

The sun rose, and a little later they emerged from the cultivated forest
of the coffee plantations into an upland country of bare rocks and pine
woods. Almost level, the track went winding in and out along the
buttressed and

s 5*5

EYELESS IN GAZA

indented flank of a mountain. To the left, the ground fell steeply away
into valleys still dark with shadow. Far off, through air made hazy by
the dry season's dust and the smoke of forest fires, a dim whiteness
high up in the sky was the Pacific.

Mark went on reading Troilus and Cressida.

A descent so steep that they had to dismount and lead their animals
brought them in another hour to the banks of a river. They forded it,
and, in die blistering sunshine, began to climb the slope beyond. There
was no shade, and the vast bald hills were the colour of dust and burnt
grass. Nothing stirred, not even a lizard among the stones. There was no
sight or sound of life. Hopelessly empty, the chaos of tumbled mountains
seemed to stretch away interminably. It was as though they had ridden
across the frontier of the world out into nothingness, into an infinite
expanse of hot and dusty negation.

At eleven they halted for a meal, and an hour later, with the sun almost
perpendicularly above them, were off once more. The path climbed,
dropped fifteen hundred feet into a ravine and climbed again. By three
o'clock Anthony was so tired that he could scarcely think or even see.
The landscape seemed to advance and retreat before his eyes, turned
black sometimes and faded away altogether. He heard voices, and, in his
mind, his dioughts began to lead a life of their own—a life that was
autonomous in its mad and maddening irrelevance. Image succeeded image
in a phantasmagoria that it was beyond his power to exorcize. It was as
though he were


CHAPTER XLVII

possessed, as though he were being forced to lead someone else's life
and think with another person's mind. But the sweat that poured like
water off his face and soaked through his shirt and cotton
riding-breeches, the intolerable aching of loins and thighs—

these were his own. His own and excruciating, intolerable. He was
tempted to groan, even to burst into tears. But through the other
person's delirium he remembered his assurances to Mark, his confident
promise that he wouldn't be tired. He shook his head and rode on—rode on
through the illusory world of alien fancy and half-seen, vanishing
landscape, rode on through the hideous reality of his pain and fatigue.

Mark's voice startled him out of his stupor.

* Are yoii all right ? '

Looking up, and, with an effort, focussing his eyes, he saw that Mark
had halted and was waiting at the turn of the track just above him.
Fifty yards further up the slope the mo^o was riding behind the
baggage-mule.

' Mula-a-a ! ' came the long-drawn shout, and along with it the dull
thump of a stick on mule-skin,

* Sorry,' Anthony mumbled, ' I must have dropped behind.' '

1 You're sure you're all right ? ' i He nodded.

4 There's less than an hour to go,' said Mark. ' Stick it out if you
can/ In the shadow of the enormous straw hat, his worn face twisted
itself into a smile of encouragement.

EYELESS IN GAZA

Touched, Anthony smiled back and, to reassure him, tried to make a joke
about the hardness of the wooden saddles on which they were riding.

Mark laughed, ' If we get through intact/ he said, * we'll dedicate a
pair of silver buttocks to St. James of Compostella/

He jerked the reins and gave his mule the spur. The animal started up
the slope ; then, in a slither of rolling stones, stumbled and fell
forward on its knees.

Anthony had shut his eyes to rest them a moment from the glare. At the
noise he opened them again and saw Mark lying face downwards on the
ground and the mule heaving itself, in a series of violent spasms of
movement, to its feet. The landscape snapped back into solidity, the
moving images fell still. Forgetting the pain in his back and legs,
Anthony swung himself down from the saddle and ran up the path. As he
approached, Mark rolled over and raised himself to a sitting position.

* Hurt ? ¦ Anthony asked.

The other shook his head, but did not speak.

' You're bleeding.'

The breeches were torn at the left knee, and a red stain was creeping
down the leg.

Anthony shouted to the mo{o to come back with the baggage-mule ; then,
kneeling down, opened his penknife, slid the blade into the rent and
sawed a long jagged slit in the tough material.

1 You're spoiling my bags,' Mark said, speaking for the first time.

528


CHAPTER XLVII

Anthony did not answer, only tore away a wide panel of the stuff.

The whole knee-cap and the upper part of the shin were skinless red
flesh, grey, where the blood was not oozing, with dust and grit. On the
inner side of the knee was a deep cut that bled profusely.

Anthony frowned, and, as though the pain were his own, caught his lower
lip between his teeth. A pang of physical disgust mingled with his
horrified sympathy. He shuddered.

Mark had leaned forward to look at the damaged knee. * Messy,' was his
comment.

Anthony nodded without speaking, unscrewed the stopper of his
water-bottle, and, wetting his handkerchief, began to wash the dirt out
of the wounds. His emotion disappeared ; he was wholly absorbed in his
immediate task. Nothing was important any more except to wash this grit
away without hurting Mark in the process.

By this time, the moio had come back with the baggage-mule and was
standing beside them in silence, looking down with expressionless black
eyes on what was happening.

11 expect he thinks we're making an unnecessary fuss,' said Mark, and
made an attempt to smile.

Anthony rose to his feet, ordered the mo^o to untie the mule's load,
and, from one of the canvas bundles, pulled out the medicine-chest.

Under the sting of the disinfectant Mark gave vent to an explosive burst
of laughter. ' No humanitarian non-5*9

EYELESS IN GAZA

sense about iodine/ he said. * The good old-fashioned idea of hurting
you for your own good. Like Jehovah. Christ ! ' He laughed again as
Anthony swabbed another patch of raw flesh. Then, when the knee was
bandaged, ' Give me a hand,' he went on. Anthony helped him to his feet,
and he took a few steps up the path and back again. * Seems all right/
He bent down to look at the fore-legs of his mule. They were hardly
scratched. '

Nothing to prevent us pushing on at once/ he concluded.

They helped him to mount, and, spurring with his uninjured leg, he set
off at a brisk pace up the hill. For the rest of the way he was, for
Anthony, mostly a straight and rigid back, but sometimes also, at the
zigzags of the path, a profile, marbly in its fixed pallor—the statue of
a stoic, flayed, but still alive and silently supporting his agony.

In less than the appointed hour—for Mark had chosen to keep up a pace
that set the mules blowing and sweating in the afternoon heat—they rode
into San Cristobal el Alto.

The thirty or forty Indian ranches of which the village consisted were
built on a narrow ridge between plunging gulfs, beyond which, on either
side, the mountains stretched away chaotically, range after range, into
the haze.

Seeing distinguished travellers, the village shopkeeper hurried out on
to the plaza to offer them accommodation for the night. Mark listened to
him, nodded and made a movement to dismount ; then, wincing, let himself
fall back into his saddle.

530


CHAPTER XLVII

Without turning his head, * You'll have to get me off this blasted
mule,' he called in a loud, angry voice.

Anthony and the mo\o helped him down ; but, once on the ground, he
refused any further assistance.

11 can walk by myself,' he said curtly, frowning while he spoke, as
though, in offering an arm, Anthony had meant to insult him.

Their quarters for the night turned out to be a wooden shed, half full
of coffee bags and hides. After inspecting the place, Mark limped out
again to look at the thatched lean-to, where the mules were to be
stabled ; then suggested a walk round the village, * to see the sights,'
he explained.

Walking, it was evident, hurt him so much that he could not trust
himself to speak. It was in silence that they crossed the little pla^a,
in silence that they visited the church, the school, the cabildo^ the
village prison. In silence, and one behind the other. For if they walked
abreast, Anthony had reflected, he would be able to see Mark's face, and
Mark would feel that he was being spied upon. Whereas if he walked in
front, it would be an insult, a challenge to Mark to quicken his pace.
Deliberately, Anthony lagged behind, silent, like an Indian wife
trailing through the dust after her husband.

It was nearly half an hour before Mark felt that he had tortured himself
sufficiendy.

* So much for the sights,' he said grimly. € Let's go and have something
to eat.'

The night was piercingly cold, the bed merely a board

531

EYELESS IN GAZA

of wood. It was from a restless and unrefreshing sleep that Anthony was
roused next morning.

' Wake ! ' Mark was shouting to him. ' Wake ! '

Anthony sat up, startled, and saw Mark, in the other wooden bed, propped
on his elbow and looking across at him with angry eyes.

' Time to get away,' the harsh voice continued. * It's after six.'

Suddenly remembering yesterday's accident, ' How's the knee ? ' Anthony
asked.

' Just the same.'

* Did you sleep ? '

' No, of course not,' Mark answered irritably. Then, looking away, ' I
can't manage to get out of bed,' he added. ' The thing's gone stiff on
me.'

Anthony pulled on his boots and, having opened the door of the shed to
admit the light, came and sat down on the edge of Mark's bed.

' We'd better put on a clean dressing,' he said, and began to untie the
bandage.

The lint had stuck to the raw flesh. Anthony pulled at it cautiously,
then let go. * I'll see if they can give me some warm water at the
shop,* he said.

Mark uttered a snort of laughter, and taking a corner of the lint
between his thumb and forefinger, gave a violent jerk. The square of
pink fabric came away in his hand.

1 Don't ! ' Anthony had cried out, wincing as though the pain were his.
The other only smiled at him contemptuously. ¦ You've made it bleed
again/ he added, 53*


CHAPTER XLVII

in another tone, finding a medical justification for his outburst. But
in point of fact, that trickle of fresh blood was not the thing that
disturbed him most when he bent down to look at what Mark had uncovered.
The whole knee was horribly swollen and almost black with bruises, and
round the edges of the newly opened wound the flesh was yellow with pus.

( You can't possibly go with your knee in this state,' he said.

' That's for me to decide,' Mark answered, and added, after a moment, '
After all, you did it the day before yesterday/

The words implied a contemptuous disparagement. 1 If a poor creature
like you can overcome pain, then surely I . . .' That was what they
meant to say. But the insult, Anthony realized, was unintended. It
sprang from the depths of an arrogance that was almost childlike in its
single-minded intensity. There was something touching and absurd about
such ingenuousness. Besides, there was the poor fellow's knee. This was
not the time to resent insults.

'1 was practically well/ he argued in a conciliatory tone. ' You've got
a leg that's ready to go septic at any moment.'

Mark frowned. ' Once I'm on my mule I shall be all right,' he insisted.
( It's just a bit stiff and bruised ; that's all. Besides,' he added, in
contradiction of what he had said before,

'there'll be a doctor at Miajutla. The quicker I get this thing into his
hands, the better.'

s* 533

EYELESS IN GAZA

* You'll make it ten times worse on the way. If you waited here a day or
two . . /

' Don Jorge would think I was leaving him in the lurch/ ' Damn Don Jorge
! Send him a telegram.* ' The line doesn't go through this place. I
asked.' ' Send the mop, then.'

Mark shook his head. * I wouldn't trust him.' 1 Why not?'

1 He'll get drunk at the first opportunity.' ' In other words, you don't
want to send him.'

* Besides, it would be too late,' Mark went on. ' Don Jorge will be
moving in a day or two/

' Aoid do you imagine you'll be able to move with him?'

* I mean to be there/ said Mark.

* You can't.*

61 tell you, I mean to be there. I'm not going to let him down/ His
voice was cold and harsh with restrained anger. * And now help me up,'
he commanded.

' I won't/

The two men looked at one another in silence. Then, making an effort to
control himself, Mark shrugged his shoulders.

' All right, then,' he said, ' PU call the moio. And if you're afraid of
going on to Miajutla,'

he continued in a tone of savage contempt, * you can ride back to
Tapadan. I'll go on by myself/ Then, turning towards the open door, '
Juan/ he shouted. ' Juan 1 *

534


CHAPTER XLVII

Anthony surrendered. ' Have it your own way. If you really want to be
mad . . .' He left the sentence unfinished. ' But I take no
responsibility.'

1 You weren't asked to,' Mark answered. Anthony got up and went to fetch
the medicine-chest. He swabbed the wounds and applied the new dressing
in silence; then, while he was trying to bandage, * Suppose we stopped
quarrelling,' he said. 'Wouldn't that make things easier ? '

For a few seconds Mark remained hostile and averted ; then looked up and
twisted his face into a reconciliatory smile of friendliness. * Peace,'
he said, nodding affirmatively. '

We'll make peace.'

But he had reckoned without the pain. It began, agonizingly, when he
addressed himself to the task of getting out of bed. For it turned out
to be impossible for him, even with Anthony's assistance, to get out of
bed without bending his wounded knee ; and to bend it was torture. When
at last he was on his feet beside the bed, he was pale and the
expression of his face had hardened to a kind of ferocity.

' All right ? ' Anthony questioned.

Mark nodded and, as though the other had become his worst enemy, limped
out of the shed without giving him a glance.

The torture began again when the time came for mounting, and was renewed
with every step the mule advanced. As on the previous day, Mark took the
lead. At the head of die cavalcade, he proved his superiority

535

EYELESS IN GAZA

and at the same time put himself out of range of inquisitive eyes. The
air was still cold ; but from time to time, Anthony noticed, he took out
his handkerchief and wiped his face, as if he were sweating. Each time
he put the handkerchief away again, he would give the mule a
particularly savage dig with his one available spur.

The track descended, climbed again, descended through pine woods,
descended, descended. An hour passed, two hours, three ; the sun was
high in the sky, it was oppressively hot. Three hours, three and a half
; and now there were clearings in the woods, steep fields, the stubble
of Indian corn, a group of huts, and an old woman carrying water, brown
children silently playing in the dust. They were on the outskirts of
another village.

' What about stopping here for some food ? * Anthony called, and spurred
his animal to a trot. * We might get some fresh eggs/ he continued as he
drew up with the other mule.

The face Mark turned towards him was as white as paper, and, as he
parted his clenched teeth to speak, the lower jaw trembled
uncontrollably. ' I think we'd better push on/ he began in an almost
inaudible voice. * We've still got a long way . . / Then the lids
fluttered over his eyes, his head dropped, his body seemed to collapse
upon itself; he fell forward on to the neck of his mule, slid to one
side, and would have pitched to the ground if Anthony had not caught him
by the arm and held him up.

536


CHAPTER XLVIII

July 23rd 1914

ANTHONY had dozed off again after being called, AA. and was late for
breakfast. As he entered the little living-room, Brian looked up with
startled eyes and, as though guiltily, folded away the letter he had
been reading into his pocket, but not before Anthony had recognized from
across the room the unmistakable characteristics of Joan's rather heavy
and elaborately looped writing. Putting a specially casual note of
cheeriness into his good-morning, he sat down and proceeded to busy
himself elaborately, as though it were a complicated scientific process
requiring the whole of his attention, with pouring out his coffee.

' Should I tell him ? ' he was wondering, ' Yes, I ought to tell him. It
ought to come from me, even though he does know it already. Bloody girl
! Why couldn't she keep her promise ? ' He felt righteously indignant
with Joan. Breaking her word ! And what the devil had she told Brian ?
What would happen if his own story was different from hers ?

And anyhow, what a fool he would look, confessing now, when it was too
late. She had robbed him of the opportunity, the very possibility, of
telling Brian what had happened.

The woman had queered his pitch ; and as his anger modu-

537

EYELESS IN GAZA

lated into self-pity, he perceived himself as a man full of good
intentions, maliciously prevented, at the eleventh hour, from putting
them into practice. She had stopped his mouth just as he was about to
speak the words that would have explained and made amends for everything
; and by doing so, she had made his situation absolutely intolerable.
How the devil did she expect him to behave towards Brian, now that Brian
knew ? He answered the question, so far, at any rate, as the next few
minutes were concerned, by retiring behind the Manchester Guardian.
Hidden, he pretended, while he ate his scrambled eggs, to be taking a
passionate interest in all this stuff about Russia and Austria and
Germany. But the silence, as it lengthened out, became at last
intolerable.

' This war business looks rather bad,' he said at last, without lowering
his barricade.

From the other end of the table Brian made a faint murmur of assent.
Seconds passed.

Then there was the noise of a chair being pushed back. Anthony sat
there, a man so deeply preoccupied with the Russian mobilization that he
wasn't aware of what was going on in his immediate neighbourhood. It was
only when Brian had actually opened the door that he started
ostentatiously into consciousness.

' Off already ? ' he questioned, half turning, but not so far that he
could see the other's face.

11 d-don't think I shall g-go out this m-morning/

Anthony nodded approvingly, like a family doctor, * That's good,' he
said, and added that he himself pro-538


CHAPTER XLVIII

posed to hire a bicycle in the village and nip down to Ambleside. There
were some things he had to buy. 1 See you at lunch-time/ he concluded.

Brian said nothing. The door closed behind him.

By a quarter to one Anthony had returned his borrowed bicycle and was
walking up the hill to the cottage. This time it was settled,
definitely, once and for all. He would tell Brian everything—almost
everything, the very moment he came in.

1 Brian ! ' he called from the doorstep.

There was no answer.

1 Brian ! *

The kitchen door opened, and old Mrs. Benson, who did their cooking and
cleaning, stepped out into the narrow hall. Mr. Foxe, she explained, had
started for a walk about half an hour before ; wouldn't be back for
lunch, he had said, but had wanted (would you believe it?) to set off
without anything to eat ; she had made him take some sandwiches and a
hard-boiled egg.

It was with a sense of inner discomfort that Anthony sat down to his
solitary lunch. Brian had deliberately avoided him; therefore must be
angry—or worse, it occurred to him, was hurt—too deeply to be able to
bear his presence. The thought made him wince ; to hurt people was so
horrible, so hurting even to the hurter. And if Brian came back from his
walk magnanimously forgiving—and knowing him, Anthony felt convinced
that he would—what then ? It was also painful to be forgiven ;
particularly painful in the case of an offence

539

EYELESS IN GAZA

one had not oneself confessed. * If only I could have told him/ he kept
repeating to himself, * if only I could have told him * ; and almost
contrived to persuade himself that he had been prevented.

After lunch he walked up into the wild country behind the cottage,
hoping (for it was now so urgently necessary to speak), and at the same
time (since the speaking would be such an agonizing process) profoundly
fearing, to meet Brian. But he met nobody. Resting on the crest of the
hill, he managed for a little while to forget his troubles in sarcasms
at the expense of the view. So typically and discreditably English, he
reflected, wishing that Mary were there to listen to his comments.
Mountains, valleys, lakes, but on the pettiest scale. Miserably small
and hole-and-cornery, like English cottage architecture—all ingle-nooks
and charming features; nothing fine or grandiose. No hint of
thirteenth-century megalomania or baroque gesticulation. A snug, smug
little sublimity. It was almost in high spirits that he started his
descent.

No, said old Mrs. Benson, Mr. Foxe hadn't yet come back.

He had his tea alone, then sat on a deck-chair on the lawn and read de
Gourmont on style.

At six, Mrs. Benson came out, and after elaborately explaining that she
had laid the table and that the cold mutton was in the larder, wished
him good-evening and walked away down the road towards her own cottage.

Soon afterwards the midges began to bite and he went indoors. The little
bird in the Swiss clock opened

540


CHAPTER XLVIII

its door, cuckooed seven times and retired again into silence. Anthony
continued to read about style. Half an hour later the bird popped out
for a single cry. It was supper-time.

Anthony rose and walked to the back door. Behind the cottage the hill
was bright with an almost supernatural radiance. There was no sign of
Brian. He returned to the sitting-room, and for a change read some
Santayana. The cuckoo uttered eight shrill hiccoughs.

Above the orange stain of sunset the evening planet was already visible.
He lit the lamp and drew the curtains. Then, sitting down again, he
tried to go on reading Santayana; but those carefully smoothed pebbles
of wisdom rolled over the surface of his mind without making the
smallest impression. He shut the book at last. The cuckoo announced that
it was half-past eight.

Aji accident, he was wondering, could the fellow have had an accident?
But, after all, people don't have accidents—not when they're out for a
quiet walk. A new thought suddenly came to him, and at once the very
possibility of twisted ankles or broken legs disappeared. That walk—he
felt completely certain of it now—had been to the station.

Brian was in the train, on his way to London, on his way to Joan. It was
obvious, when one came to think of it ; it simply couldn't be otherwise.

* Christ 1 ' Anthony said aloud in the solitude of the little room.
Then, made cynical and indifferent by the very hopelessness of the
situation, he shrugged his shoulders and, lighting a candle, went out to
the larder to fetch the cold mutton.

541

EYELESS IN GAZA

This time, he decided, as he ate his meal, he really would escape. Just
bolt into hiding till things looked better. He felt no compunction.
Brian's journey to London had relieved him, in his own estimation, of
any further responsibility in the matter ; he felt that he was now free
to do whatever suited him best.

In preparation for his flight, he went upstairs after supper and began
to pack his bag. The recollection that he had lent Brian The Wife of Sir
Isaac Harmon to read in bed sent him, candle in hand, across the
landing. On the chest of drawers in Brian's room three envelopes stood
conspicuously propped against the wall. Two, he could see from the
doorway, were stamped, the other was unstamped. He crossed the room to
look at them more closely. The unstamped envelope was addressed to
himself, the others to Mrs. Foxe and Joan respectively. He set down the
candle, took the envelope addressed to himself, and tore it open. A
vague but intense apprehension had filled his mind, a fear of something
unknown, something he dared not know. He stood there for a long time
holding the open envelope in his hand and listening to the heavy pulse
of his own blood.

Then, coming at last to a decision, he extracted the folded sheets.
There were two of them, one in Brian's writing, the other in Joan's.
Across the top of Joan's letter Brian had written : * Read this for
yourself/ He read.

1 Dearest Brian,—By this time Anthony will have told you what has
happened. And, you know, it didyxst

542


CHAPTER XLVIII

happen—from outside, if you see what I mean, like an accident, like
being run into by a train. I certainly hadn't thought about it before,
and I don't think Anthony had —not really

; the discovery that we loved one another just ran into us, ran over us.
There wasn't any question of us doing it on purpose. That's why I don't
feel guilty. Sorry, yes—more than words can say—for the pain I know I
shall give you. Ready to do all I can to make it less.

Asking forgiveness for hurting you. But not feeling guilty, not feeling
I've treated you dishonourably. I should only feel that if I had done it
deliberately ; but I didn't. I tell you, it just happened to me—to us
both. Brian dear, I'm unspeakably sorry to be hurting you.

You of all people. If it were a matter of doing it with intention, I
couldn't do it. No more than you could have hurt me intentionally. But
this thing has just happened, in the same way as it just happened that
you hurt me because of that fear that you've always had of love. You
didn't want to hurt me, but you did ; you couldn't help it. The impulse
that made you hurt me ran into you, ran over you, like this impulse of
love that has run into me and Anthony. I don't think it's anybody's
fault, Brian. We had bad luck. Everything ought to have been so good and
beautiful. And then things happened to us—to you first, so that you had
to hurt me ; then to me. Later on, perhaps, we can still be friends. I
hope so. That's why I'm not saying goodbye to you, Brian dear. Whatever
happens, I am always your loving friend, Joan.'

In the effort to keep up his self-esteem and allay his profound
disquietude, Anthony forced himself to think with distaste of the really
sickening style in which this 543

EYELESS IN GAZA

kind of letter was generally written. A branch of pulpit oratory, he
concluded, and tried to smile to himself. But it was no good. His face
refused to do what he asked of it. He dropped Joan's letter and
reluctantly picked up the other sheet in Brian's handwriting.

* Dear A.,—I enclose the letter I received this morning from Joan. Read
it ; it will save me explaining. How could he have done it ? That's the
question I've been asking myself all the morning ; and now I put it to
you. How could you ? Circumstances may have run over her—like a train,
as she says. And that, I know, was my fault. But they couldn't have run
over you. You've told me enough about yourself and Mary Amberley to make
it quite clear that there could be no question in your case of poor
Joan's train. Why did you do it ?

And why did you come here and behave as though nothing had happened ?
How could you sit there and let me talk about my difficulties with Joan
and pretend to be sympathetic, when a couple of evenings before you had
been giving her the kisses I wasn't able to give ? God knows, I've done
all manner of bad and stupid things in the course of my life, told all
manner of lies ; but I honestly don't think I could have done what you
have done. I didn't think anybody could have done it. I suppose I've
been living in a sort of fool's paradise all these years, thinking the
world was a place where this sort of thing simply couldn't happen. A
year ago I might have known how to deal with the discovery that it can
happen. Not now. I know that, if I tried, I should just break down into
some kind of madness. This last year has strained me more than I knew. I
544


CHAPTER XLVIII

realize now that Fm all broken to pieces inside, and that I've been
holding myself together by a continuous effort of will. It's as if a
broken statue somehow contrived to hold itself together- And now this
has finished it. I can't hold any more. I know if I were to see you now—
and it's not because I feel that you've done something you shouldn't
have done ; it would be the same with anyone, even my mother—yes, if I
were to see anyone who had ever meant anything to me, I should just
break down and fall to bits. A statue at one moment, and the next a heap
of dust and shapeless fragments. I can't face it.

Perhaps I ought to ; but I simply can't. I was angry with you when I
began to write this letter, I hated you ; but now I find I don't hate
you any longer. God bless you, B.'

Anthony put the two letters and the torn envelope in his pocket, and,
picking up the two stamped envelopes and the candle, made his way
downstairs to the sitting-room. Half an hour later, he went to the
kitchen, and in the range, which was still smouldering, set fire one by
one to all the papers that Brian had left behind him. The two unopened
envelopes with their closely folded contents burnt slowly, had to be
constantly relighted ; but at last it was done. With the poker he broke
the charred paper into dust, stirred up the fire to a last flame and
drew the round cover back into place. Then he walked out into the garden
and down the steps to the road. On the way to the village it suddenly
struck him that he would never be able to see Mary again. She would
question him, she would worm the truth out of him, and

Ï4Ï

EYELESS IN GAZA

having wormed it out, would proclaim it to the world. Besides, would he
even want to see her again now that Brian had ... He could not bring
himself to say the words even to himself. ' Christ ! ' he said aloud. At
the entrance to the village he halted for a few moments to think what he
should say when he knocked up the policeman. ' My friend's lost . . . My
friend has been out all day and . . . I'm worried about my friend . . .*

Anything would do; he hurried on, only anxious to get it over.

U6


CHAPTER XLIX

January izth and 14th 1934

IT was dark in the little rancho, and from noon till sunset stiflingly
hot ; then cold all through the night. A partition divided the hut into
two compartments ; in the middle of the first compartment was a hearth
of rough stones, and when the fire was lighted for cooking, the smoke
filtered slowly away through the chinks in the windowless wooden walls.
The furniture consisted of a stool, two kerosene tins for water, some
earthenware cooking-pots, and a stone mortar for grinding maize. On the
further side of the partition were a couple of plank beds on trestles.
It was on one of tliese that they laid Mark.

By the following morning he was delirious with fever, and, from the
knee, the infection had crept downwards, until the leg was swollen
almost to the ankle.

For Anthony, as he sat there in the hot twilight, listening to the
mutterings and sudden outcries of this stranger on the bed, there was,
for the moment, only one thing to decide.

Should he send the mozo to fetch a doctor and the necessary drugs from
Miajutla? Or should he go himself?

It was a choice of evils. He thought of poor Mark, abandoned, alone in
the hands of diese inept and not too

547

EYELESS IN GAZA

well-intentioned savages. But even if he himself were there, what could
he do with the resources at his disposal ? And suppose the mo[o were
sent and failed to persuade the doctor to come at once, failed to bring
the necessary supplies, failed perhaps to return at all. Miajutla, as
Mark had said, was in the pulque country ; there would be oceans of
cheap alcohol. Riding hard, he himself could be back again at Mark's
bedside in less than thirty hours. A white man with money in his pocket,
he would be able to bully and bribe the doctor to bestir himself. Hardly
less important, he would know what stores to bring back with him. His
mind was made up. He rose, and, going to die door, called to the mo\o to
saddle his mule.

He had ridden for less than two hours when the miracle happened. Coming
round a bend in the track he saw advancing towards him, not fifty yards
away, a white man, followed by two Indians, one mounted and one on foot,
with a couple of laden baggage-mules. As they drew together, the white
man courteously raised his hat. The hair beneath it was light brown,
grizzled above the ears, and in the deeply bronzed face the blue eyes
were startlingly pale.

' Buenas diasy caballero^ he said.

There was no mistaking the accent. ' Good-morning,* Anthony replied.

They reined up their beasts alongside one another and began to talk.

' This is the first word of English I've heard for seven

548


CHAPTER XLIX

and a half months/ said the stranger. He was an elderly little man,
short and spare, but with a fine upright carriage that lent him a
certain dignity. The face was curiously proportioned, with a short nose
and an upper lip unusually long above a wide, tightly shut mouth. A
mouth like an inquisitor's. But the inquisitor had forgotten himself and
learned to smile ; there were the potentialities of laughter in the deep
folds of skin which separated the quiveringly sensitive corners of the
mouth from the cheeks. And round the bright enquiring eyes those
intricate lines seemed the traces and hieroglyphic symbols of a
constantly repeated movement of humorous kindliness. A queer face,
Anthony decided, but charming.

' My name is James Miller,' said the stranger. ' What's yours ? ' And
when he had been told, * Are you travelling alone, Anthony Beavis ? ' he
questioned, addressing the other, Quaker fashion, by both his names.

Anthony told him where he was bound and on what errand. ' I suppose you
don't know anything about doctors in Miajutla,' he concluded.

With a sudden deepening of the hieroglyphs about the eyes, a sudden
realization of those potentialities of laughter round the mouth, the
little man smiled. ' I know about doctors here, he said, and tapped
himself on the chest. ' M.D., Edinburgh. And a good supply of materia
medica on those mules, what's more.' Then, in another tone, ' Come on,'
he said briskly. ' Let's get back to that poor friend of yours as quick
as we can.'

549

EYELESS IN GAZA

Anthony wheeled his animal round, and side by side the two men set off
up the track.

* Well, Anthony Beavis/ said the doctor, ' you came to the right
address/

Anthony nodded. ' Fortunately/ he said, * I hadn't been praying,
otherwise I'd have had to believe in special providence and miraculous
interventions.'

* And that would never do/ the doctor agreed. ' Not that anything ever
happens by chance, of course. One takes the card the conjuror forces on
one—the card which one has oneself made it inevitable that he should
force on one. It's a matter of cause and effect.'

Then, without a pause, ' What's your profession ? ' he asked.

11 suppose you'd say I was a sociologist. Was one, at any rate.'

' Indeed ! Is that so ? * The doctor seemed surprised and pleased. c
Mine's anthropology/

he went on. * Been living with the Lacandones in Chiapas these last
months. Nice people when you get to know them. And I've collected a lot
of material. Are you married, by the way?'

'No/

' Never been married ? *

'No.'

Dr. Miller shook his head. ' That's bad, Anthony Beavis/ he said. * You
ought to have been/

1 What makes you say that ? '

* I can see it in your face. Here, and here/ He touched his lips, his
forehead. c I was married. For

550


CHAPTER XLIX

fourteen years. Then my wife died. Blackwater fever it was. We were
working in West Africa then. She was qualified too. Knew her job better,
in some ways, than I did.' He sighed. 'You'd have made a good husband,
you know. Perhaps you will do, even now.

How old are you ? '

' Forty-three/

4 And look younger. Though I don't like that sallow skin of yours,' he
protested with sudden vehemence. 1 Do you suffer much from constipation
? '

' Well, no,' Anthony answered, smiling, and wondered whether it would be
agreeable if everybody were to talk to one in this sort of way. A bit
tiring, perhaps, to have to treat all the people you met as human
beings, every one of them with a right to know all about you ; but more
interesting than treating them as objects, as mere lumps of meat dumped
down beside you in the bus, jostling you on the pavements. c Not much/
he qualified.

1 You mean, not manifestly/ said the doctor. ' Any eczema ? '

1 Occasional touches.'

' And the hair tends to be scurfy.' Dr. Miller nodded his own
confirmation to this statement. ' And you get headaches, don't you ? '

Anthony had to admit that he sometimes did.

( And, of course, stiff necks and attacks of lumbago. I know. I know. A
few years more and it'll be settled in as sciatica or arthritis/ The
doctor was silent for a Ï5I

EYELESS IN GAZA

moment while he looked enquiringly into Anthony's face. 'Yes, that
sallow skin/ he repeated, and shook his head. * And the irony, the
scepticism, the what's-the-good-of-itall attitude ! Negative really.
Everything you think is negative/

Anthony laughed ; but laughed to hide a certain disquiet. This being on
human terms with everyone you met could be a bit embarrassing,

' Oh, don't imagine I'm criticizing ! ' cried the doctor, and there was
a note of genuine compunction in his voice.

Anthony went on laughing, unconvincingly.

' Don't get it into your head that I'm blaming you in any way.'

Stretching out a hand, he patted Anthony affectionately on the shoulder.
' We're all of us what we are ; and when it comes to turning ourselves
into what we ought to be—well, it isn't easy. No, it isn't easy, Anthony
Beavis. How can you expect to think in anything but a negative way, when
you've got chronic intestinal poisoning? Had it from birth, I guess.

Inherited it. And at the same time stooping, as you do. Slumped down on
your mule like that—it's awful. Pressing down on the vertebrae like a
ton of bricks. One can almost hear the poor things grinding together.
And when the spine's in that state, what happens to the rest of the
machine ? It's frightful to think of/

' And yet,' said Anthony, feeling a little piqued by this remorseless
enumeration of his physical defects, * I'm still alive. I'm here to tell
the tale/

55*


CHAPTER XLIX

* Somebody*s here to tell the tale/ the doctor answered. ' But is he the
one you'd like him to be ? '

Anthony did not answer, only smiled uncomfortably.

'And even that somebody won't be telling the tale much longer, if you're
not careful. I'm serious/ he insisted. ' Perfectly serious. You've got
to change if you want to go on existing. And if it's a matter of
changing—why, you need all the help you can get, from God's to the
doctor's. I tell you this because I like you/ he explained. * I think
you're worth changing.'

' Thank you/ said Anthony, smiling this time with pleasure.

' Speaking as a doctor, I'd suggest a course of colonie irrigation to
start with.'

' And speaking for God/ said Anthony, allowing his pleasure to overflow
in good-humoured mockery, ' a course of prayer and fasting.'

1 No, not fasting/ the doctor protested very seriously, ' not fasting.
Only a proper diet. No butcher's meat ; it's poison, so far as you're
concerned. And no milk ; it'll only blow you up with wind. Take it in
the form of cheese and butter ; never liquid. And a minimum of eggs.
And, of course, only one heavy meal a day. You don't need half the stuff
you're eating. As for prayer...' He sighed and wrinkled his forehead
into a pensive frown. 'I've never really liked it, you know. Not what's
ordinarily meant by prayer, at any rate. All that asking for special
favours and guidances and forgivenesses—I've always found that it tends
to make one

553

EYELESS IN GAZA

egotistical, preoccupied with one's own ridiculous self-important little
personality. When you pray in the ordinary way, you're merely rubbing
yourself into yourself. You return to your own vomit, if you see what I
mean. Whereas what we're all looking for is some way of getting beyond
our own vomit.'

Some way, Anthony was thinking, of getting beyond the books, beyond the
perfumed and resilient flesh of women, beyond fear and sloth, beyond the
painful but secretly flattering vision of the world as menagerie and
asylum.

4 Beyond this piddling, twopenny-halfpenny personality,' said the
doctor, ' with all its wretched little virtues and vices, all its silly
cravings and silly pretensions. But, if you're not careful, prayer just
confirms you in the bad habit of being personal. I tell you, I've
observed it clinically, and it seems to have much the same effect on
people as butcher's meat. Prayer makes you more yourself, more separate.
Just as a rump-steak does. Look at the correlation between religion and
diet. Christians eat meat, drink alcohol, smoke tobacco ; and
Christianity exalts personality, insists on the value of petitionary
prayer, teaches that God feels anger and approves the persecution of
heretics. It's the same with the Jews and the Moslems. Kosher and an
indignant Jehovah. Mutton and beef—and personal survival among the
houris, avenging Allah and holy wars. Now look at the Buddhists.
Vegetables and water. And what's their philosophy ? They don't exalt
personality ; they

SÎ4


CHAPTER XLIX

try to transcend it. They don't imagine that God can be angry ; when
they're unenlightened, they think he's compassionate, and when they're
enlightened, they think he doesn't exist, except as an impersonal mind
of the universe. Hence they don't offer petitionary prayer ; they
meditate—or, in other words, try to merge their own minds in the
universal mind. Finally, they don't believe in special providences for
individuals; they believe in a moral order, where every event has its
cause and produces its effect—where the card's forced upon you by the
conjuror, but only because your previous actions have forced the
conjuror to force it upon you. What worlds away from Jehovah and God the
Father and everlasting, individual souls ! The fact is, of course, that
we think as we eat. I eat like a Buddhist, because I find it keeps me
well and happy ; and the result is that I think like a Buddhist—and,
thinking like a Buddhist, I'm confirmed in my determination to eat like
one.'

1 And now you're recommending me to eat like one.'

1 More or less.'

' And do you also want me to think like one ? '

' In the long run you won't be able to avoid it. But, of course, it's
better to do it consciously.'

' Well, as a matter of fact,' said Anthony, * I do think like a Buddhist
already. Not in all ways perhaps, but certainly in many ways. In spite
of roast beef/

1 You think you think like a Buddhist,' said the doctor. * But you
don't. Thinking negatively isn't thinking like a Buddhist; it's thinking
like a Christian who's ÎÎ5

EYELESS IN GAZA

eating more butcher's meat than his intestine can deal with/

Anthony laughed.

' Oh, I know it sounds funny/ said the doctor. ' But that's only because
you're a dualist.'

* I'm not.'

* Not in theory perhaps. But in practice—how can you be anything but a
dualist ? What are you, Anthony Beavis ? A clever man—that's obvious.
But it's equally obvious that you've got an unconscious body. An
efficient thinking apparatus and a hopelessly stupid set of muscles and
bones and viscera. Of course you're a dualist. You live your dualism.

And one of the reasons you live it is because you poison yourself with
too much animal proteir. Like millions of other people, of course !
What's the yreatesi enemy of Christianity to-day? Frozen meat. In the
past only members of the upper classes were thoroughly sceptical,
despairing, negative. Why? Among other reasons, because they were the
only people who could afford to eat too much meat. Now there's cheap
Canterbury Lamb and Argentine chilled beef* Even the poor can afford to
poison themselves into complete scepticism and despair. And only the
most violent stimuli will rouse them to purposive activity, and, what's
worse, the only activity they'll undertake is diabolic. They can only be
stimulated by hysterical appeals to persecute Jews, or murder
socialists, or go to war. You personally happen to be too intelligent to
be a fascist or a nationalist; but again, it's a

556


CHAPTER XLIX

matter of theory, not of life. Believe me, Anthony Beavis, your
intestines are ripe for fascism and nationalism. They're making you long
to be shaken out of the horrible negativity to which they've condemned
you— to be shaken by violence into violence.'

' As a matter of fact,' said Anthony, * that's one of the reasons why
I'm here.' He waved his hand towards the tumbled chaos of the mountains.
€ Simply to be shaken out of negativity. We were on our way to a
revolution when poor Staithes got hurt.'

The doctor nodded. ' You see,' he said, ' you see ! And do you suppose
you'd be here if you had a healthy intestine ? '

' Well, I don't really know,' Anthony answered, laughing.

' You know quite well that you wouldn't,' said the doctor almost
severely. ' Not on that kind of lunatic's errand, at any rate. For, of
course, you might be here as an anthropologist, say, or a teacher, a
healer, whatever you like, so long as it meant understanding people and
helping them.'

Anthony nodded his head slowly, but did not speak ; and for a long way
they rode along in silence.

There was light out of doors, and it was cleaner under the sky than in
the little rancho. Dr.

Miller had chosen as his operating theatre a little clearing in the
woods, outside the village.

T 557

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Beyond the range of the flies, let's hope/ he said, but without
seeming too confident of it.

A hearth had been built by his two mo{os, and on the fire stood a
cauldron of boiling water. They had borrowed a table from the
schoolmaster and some stools, with bowls for the disinfectant, and a
cotton sheet to cover the bedstead.

Dr. Miller had given him a dose of Nembutal, and when the time came,
Mark was carried out unconscious to the clearing among the pine trees.
All the boys in the village escorted the stretcher and stood round in
attentive silence while the patient was lifted on to the bed. Trousered,
and in their wide hats, with their little blankets folded over their
shoulders, they seemed, not children, but the absurd and derisive
parodies of grown men.

Anthony, who had been holding the gangrened leg, straightened himself
up, and, looking round, saw the ring of brown faces and the glitter of
all those black, blank eyes. At the sight he found his growing
apprehension abruptly transformed into uncontrollable anger.

' Go away ! * he shouted in English, and advanced towards them, waving
his arms.

'Away, you little beasts, away ! '

The children retreated, but slowly, reluctantly, with the manifest
intention of returning the moment he should turn his back.

Anthony made a quick dart and caught one small boy by the arm.

558


CHAPTER XLIX

c Little beast ! '

He shook the child violently, then, carried away by an irresistible
impulse to inflict pain, gave him a cuff over the head that sent the big
hat flying between the trees.

Uttering no cry, the child ran away after its companions. Anthony made a
last menacing gesture in their direction, then turned and walked back
towards the centre of the clearing.

He had not taken more than a few steps when a stone, well aimed, caught
him full between the shoulders. He swung round furiously, exploding into
such obscenities as he had not uttered since he was at school.

Dr. Miller, who was washing his hands at the table, looked up. ' What's
the matter ? ' he askecL

' The little devils are throwing stones/

* Serve you right,' said the doctor unsympathetically. 4 Leave them
alone, and come and do your duty/

The unfamiliarly clerical and military word startled him into the
uncomfortable realization that he had been behaving like a fool. Worse
than a fool. With the realization of his discreditable folly came the
impulse to justify it. It was in a tone of pained indignation that he
spoke. ' You're not going to let them look on, are you ? *

' How am I to prevent them looking on, if they want to ? ' asked the
doctor, drying his hands as he spoke. * And now, Anthony Beavis,' he
went on sternly, * pull yourself together. This is going to be difficult
enough anyhow, without your being hysterical/

559

EYELESS IN GAZA

Silenced and, because he was ashamed of himself, angry with Miller,
Anthony washed his hands and put on the clean shirt which had to do duty
as overall.

* Now,' said the doctor, and stepped forward. ' We must begin by
draining the leg of blood.'

' The ' leg, not * his ' leg, Anthony was thinking, as he stood beside
the doctor, looking down on the man sleeping on the bed. Something
impersonal, belonging to nobody in particular. The leg. But Mark's face,
Mark's sleeping face, now so incredibly calm, so smooth, in spite of the
emaciation, as though this death-like stupor had drawn a new skin across
the flayed and twisted muscles —this could never be merely ' the ' face.
It was '

his/ his for all its unlikeness to that contemptuous, suffering mask
through which at ordinary times Mark looked out at the world. All the
more genuinely his, perhaps, just because of that unlikeness. He
remembered suddenly what Mark had said to him, beside the Mediterranean,
only four months before, when he had woken to see those eyes, now shut,
but then wide open and bright with derision, sardonically examining him
through the mosquito net. Perhaps one really is what one seems to be in
sleep. Innocence and peace—the mind's essence, and all the rest mere
accident.

' Take his foot,' Dr. Miller ordered, * and lift the leg as nearly
vertical as you can.'

Anthony did as he was told. Raised in this grotesque way, the horribly
swollen and discoloured leg seemed more impersonal, more a mere thing
than ever. The 560


CHAPTER XLIX

stink of mortified flesh was in his nostrils. From behind them, among
the trees, a voice said something incomprehensible ; there was a snicker
of laughter.

' Now leave the foot to the mo\o and stand by here/ Anthony obeyed, and
smelt again the resin of the forest.

* Hold that bottle for me.'

There was an astonished murmur of ' Amarillo ! * as the doctor painted
the thigh with flavine. Anthony looked again at his friend's face ; it
remained undisturbed in its serenity.

Essentially still and pure. The leg with its black dead flesh ; the saw
there in the bowl of permanganate solution, the knives and forceps ; the
fascinated children peering out of the forest—all were somehow
irrelevant to the essential Mark.

1 Now the chloroform,' said Dr. Miller. ' And the cotton wool. I'll show
you how to use it.

Then you'll have to go on by yourself.'

He opened the bottle, and the smell of pine trees in the sunshine was
overlaid by a rasping and nauseating sweetness.

' There, do you see the trick ? ' asked the doctor.

* Like that. Go on with that. I'll tell you when to stop. I've got to
put on the tourniquet.'

There were no birds in the trees, hardly, even, any insects. The wood
was deathly still.

This sunny clearing was a little island of speech and movement in an
ocean of silence.

And at the centre of that island lay another silence, intenser, more
complete than the silence of the forest.

56i

EYELESS IN GAZA

The tourniquet was in place. Dr. Miller ordered the moio to lower the
grotesquely hoisted leg. He pulled up a stool to the bedside, sat down,
then rose again and, as he washed his hands for the last time, explained
to Anthony that he would have to operate sitting down.

The bed was too low for him to be able to stand. Taking his seat once
more, he dipped into the bowl of permanganate for a scalpel.

At the sight of those broad flaps of skin turned back, like the peel of
a huge banana, but from a red and biaeding fruit, Anthony was seized
with a horrible sensation of nausea.

The saliva came pouring into his mouth and he had to keep swallowing and
swallowing to get rid of it. Involuntarily, he gave vent to a retching
cough.

1 Steady now/ said the doctor without looking up. With an artery
forceps, he secured the end of an oozing vessel.

' Think of it scientifically.' He made another sweeping cut through the
red flesh. ' And if you must be sick/ he went on with sudden asperity, '
for God's sake go and do it quickly !

' Then, in another tone—the tone of the professor who demonstrates an
interesting point to his students, ' One has to cut back the nerves a
long way,' he said. ' There's a tremendous retraction as the tissues
heal up. Anyhow/ he added, ' he'll probably have to have a re-amputation
at home. It won't be a beautiful stump, I'm afraid.'

Calm and at peace, innocent of all craving, all malice, all ambition—it
was the face of one who has made him-562


CHAPTER XLIX

self free, one for whom there are no more bars or chains, no more
sepulchres under a stone, and on whom the bird-lime no longer sticks.
The face of one who has made himself free .. . But in fact, Anthony
reflected, in fact he had had his freedom forced upon him by this
evil-smelling vapour. Was it possible to be one's own liberator ? There
were snares ; but also there was a way of walking out of them. Prisons ;
but they could be opened. And if the torture-chambers could never be
abolished, perhaps the tortures could be made to seem irrelevant. As
completely irrelevant as now to Mark this sound of sawing, as this
revolting rasp and squeak of the steel teeth biting into the bone, of
the steel blade rubbing back and forth in the deepening groove. Mark lay
there serene, almost smiling.

5<3


CHAPTER L

Christmas Day 1934

GOD—a person or not a person ? Quien sale ? Only revelation can decide
such metaphysical questions. And revelation isn't playing the game—is
equivalent to pulling three aces of trumps from up your sleeve.

Of more significance is the practical question. Which gives a man more
power to realize goodness—belief in a personal or an impersonal God ?
Answer : it depends. Some minds work one way, some another. Mine, as it
happens, finds no need, indeed, finds it impossible to think of the
world in terms of personality. Patanjali says you may believe in a
personal God, or not, according to taste. The psychological results will
be the same in either case.

For those whose nature demands personality as a source of energy, but
who find it impossible to believe that the universe is run by a person
in any sense of the word that we can possibly understand—what's the
right policy ? In most cases, they reject any practice which might be
called religious. But this is throwing away the baby with the bath
water.

The desired relationship with a personality can be historical, not
ontological. A contact, not with somebody existing at present as manager
of the universe, but with somebody known to have

564


CHAPTER L

existed at some time in the past. The Imitation of Christ (or of any
other historical character) is just as effective if the model be
regarded as having existed there, then, as it is if the model be
conceived as existing here, now. And meditation on goodness,
communication with goodness, contemplation of goodness are demonstrably
effective means of realizing goodness in life, even when that which is
meditated on, communicated with and contemplated, is not a person, but a
general mind, or even an ideal supposed to exist only in human minds.
The fundamental problem is practical—to work out systems of
psychological exercises for all types of men and women. Catholicism has
many systems of mental prayer —Ignatian, Franciscan, Liguorian,
Carmelite and so on.

Hinduism, Northern, Southern and Zen Buddhism also have a variety of
practices. There is a great work to be done here. Collecting and
collating information from all these sources. Consulting books and, more
important, people who have actually practised what is in the books, have
had experience of teaching novices. In time, it might be possible to
establish a complete and definitive Ars Contemplative. A series of
techniques, adapted to every type of mind. Techniques for meditating on,
communicating with and contemplating goodness. Ends in themselves and at
the same time means for realizing some of that goodness in practice.

January ist 1935.

Machinery and good organization—modern inven-

T* 565

EYELESS IN GAZA

tions ; and, like all blessings, have to be paid for. In many ways. One
item is the general belief, encouraged by mechanical and social
efficiency, that progress is automatic and can be imposed from outside.
We, as individuals, need do nothing about it. Liquidate undesirables,
distribute enough money and goods—all will be well. It is a reversion to
magic, a pandering to man's natural sloth. Note the striking way in
which this tendency runs through the whole of modern life, cropping up
at every point. There seems no obvious connection between the Webbs and
the Soviets on the one hand and Modern Catholicism on the other. But
what profound subterranean resemblances ! The recent Catholic revival
essentially a revival of sacraments. From a Catholic point of view, this
is a ' sacramental age/ Magic power of sacraments regarded as sufficient
for salvation.

Mental prayer conspicuously absent. Exact analogy to the Webbs-Soviet
idea of progress from without, through machinery and efficient
organization. For English Catholics, sacraments are the psychological
equivalents of tractors in Russia.

J66


CHAPTER LI

February yth 1934

R. MILLER dismounted at the open door, left his beast with the wop, and
stepped into the hut.

Propped up on his bed, Mark watched him enter—a small, erect figure,
walking briskly, his blue eyes bright with enquiring kindness, the
corners of his mouth alive with the potentialities of laughter.

' And how are all the little patients this evening ? ' Mark twisted up
his pale and still emaciated face into a ferociously sardonic smile.

From the stool on which he was sitting beside the bed, Anthony shot a
glance at him, and remembered the serenity of that face three weeks
before, in the early morning sunshine among the pine trees. Serene and
at peace. But now that life had come back to him, now that he was safely
convalescent, the peace had departed, leaving him the embittered enemy
of the whole world. There had been hatred in his eyes even before he was
strong enough to speak. Hatred for everyone who came near him—above all
for old Miller.

1 I can't bear his perpetual twinkle,' was what he had said to Anthony
later on. ' Nobody has a right to go about looking like the
advertisement of a constipation cure.'

567

D

EYELESS IN GAZA

But the real reason for Mark's dislike was different. He hated old
Miller because of his dependence upon him, because of the unflaggingly
watchful efficiency of the man's care.

Poor Mark ! How acutely he suffered from having to accept a service and,
still more, from being compelled by his own physical weakness to ask for
it ! How bitterly he resented even affection, if it were given by
somebody to whom it was impossible for him to feel superior 1 His
dislike for the doctor had been present from the first moment of his
return to consciousness, had increased with every day that the old man
delayed his departure in order to look after him.

1 But why don't you get on with your journey ? ' he had asked ; and when
the doctor answered that he was in no hurry and intended to see him
safely down to the coast and even, since he himself was leaving, home
through the Canal to England, had protested vehemently that his leg was
practically healed, that there would be no difficulty in getting back to
Puerto San Felipe, that he himself would probably be taking the
north-bound boat to Los Angeles.

But the doctor had remained, attending to Mark and in the intervals
riding out to the neighbouring villages to treat the sick. To the
convalescent this was an additional source of irritation—though why it
should have annoyed him Anthony could not rightly understand. Perhaps he
resented the fact that the benefactor of the Indians was not himself.
Anyhow, there it was ; he was never tired of baiting old Miller with
those ' little patients ' of his.

j68


CHAPTER LI

Then, a fortnight after the operation, had come the news of the
ignominious failure of Don Jorge's attempt at insurrection. He had been
surprised with an insufficient guard, taken alive, summarily tried and
shot with his chief lieutenant. The report added that the two men had
cracked jokes together as they walked between the soldiers towards the
cemetery, where their graves were already dug.

' And he died,' had been Mark's comment, * believing that I'd taken
fright at the last moment and let him down.'

The thought was like another wound to him.

* If I hadn't had this blasted accident . . .' he kept repeating. ' If
I'd been there to advise him . . . That crazy rashness of his ! That was
why he'd asked me to come. He mistrusted his own judgment. And here was
I lying in this stinking pigsty, while the poor devil marches off to the
cemetery....' Cracking jokes, as he sniffed die cold morning air. '
Huele al cimintero, Don Jaime.' He too would have cracked his joke.
Instead of which ... It was just bad luck, of course, just a typical
piece of providential idiocy ; but providence was not there for him to
vent his grievance on. Only Anthony and the doctor were there. His
behaviour towards them, after the news of Don Jorge's death, had become
increasingly bitter and resentful. It was as though he regarded them as
personally responsible for what had happened. Both of them, especially
the doctor.

* How's the delicious bedside manner ? ' Mark now

569

EYELESS IN GAZA

went on, in the same derisive tone in which he had asked after the
little patients.

* Wasted, I'm afraid/ Dr. Miller answered good-humouredly as he took off
his hat and sat down. ' Either they haven't got any beds for me to be at
the side of— only a blanket on the floor. Or else they don't speak any
Spanish, and I don't speak their brand of Indian dialect. And how's
yourself? ' he asked.

* Myself^ said Mark, returning the doctor his expression in a tone of
emphatically contemptuous disgust, as though it were some kind of verbal
ordure, ' is very well, thanks.'

1 But doing a slight Bishop Berkeley,' Anthony interposed. * Feeling
pains in the knee he hasn't got.'

Mark looked at him for a moment with an expression of stony dislike ;
then turning away and fixing his eyes on the bright evening landscape,
visible through the open door of the hut, * Not pains,' he said coldly,
though it was as pains that he had described them to Anthony only half
an hour before. * Just the sensation that the knee's still there.'

1 Can't avoid that, I'm afraid.' The doctor shook his head.

' I didn't suppose one could,' Mark said, as though he were replying
with dignity to an aspersion on his honour.

Dr. Miller broke the uncomfortable silence by remarking that there was a
good deal of goitre in the higher valleys.

Ï70


CHAPTER LI

' It has its charm/ said Mark, stroking an imaginary bulge at his
throat. * How I regret those cretins one used to see in Switzerland when
I was a child ! They've iodined them out of existence now, I'm afraid.
The world's too damned sanitary these days.' He shook his head and
smiled anatomically. ' What do they do up there in the high valleys ? '
he asked.

* Grow maize,' said the doctor, * And kill one another in the intervals.
There's a huge network of vendettas spread across these mountains.
Everybody's involved, I've been talking to the responsible men, trying
to persuade them to liquidate all the old accounts and start afresh.*

' They'll die of boredom/

* No, I'm teaching them football instead. Matches between the villages/
He smiled. * I've had a lot of experience with vendettas/ he added. '
All over the world. They all detest them, really. Are only too thankful
for football when they're used to it/

1 Christ ! '

'Why "Christ"?'

' Those games ! Can't we ever escape from them ? '

* But they're the greatest English contribution to civilization,' said
the doctor. ' Much more important than parliamentary government, or
steam engines, or Newton's Principia.

More important even than English poetry. Poetry can never be a
substitute for war and murder. Whereas games can be, A complete and
genuine substitute/

571

EYELESS IN GAZA

* Substitutes ! * Mark echoed contemptuously. * You're all content with
substitutes.

Anthony finds his in bed or in the British Museum Reading Room. You look
for yours on the football field. God help you ! Why are you so
frightened of the genuine article ? 9

For a little while no one spoke. Dr. Miller looked at Anthony, and,
seeing that he did not propose to answer, turned back to the other. * It
isn't a question of being frightened, Mark Staithes,' he said very
mildly. ' It's a question of choosing something right instead of
something wrong. . . .*

' I'm suspicious of right choices that happen to need less courage than
wrong ones.'

( Is danger your measure of goodness ? '

Mark shrugged his shoulders. c What is goodness ? Hard to know, in most
cases. But at least one can be sure that it's good to face danger
courageously.'

4 And for that you're justified in deliberately creating dangerous
situations—at other people's expense ? ' Dr. Miller shook his head. *
That won't do, Mark Staithes. If you want to use courage, why not use it
in a good cause.'

' Such as teaching blackamoors to play football,' Mark sneered.

* Which isn't so easy, very often, as it sounds/

* They can't grasp the offside rule, I suppose.'

* They don't want to grasp any rule at all, except the rule of killing
the people from the next village. And when you're between two elevens
armed to the teeth 572


CHAPTER LI

and breathing slaughter at one another . . / He paused ; his wide mouth
twitched into a smile ; the almost invisible hieroglyphs round his eyes
deepened, as he narrowed the lids, into the manifest symbols of an inner
amusement. ' Well, as I say, it isn't quite so easy as it sounds. Have
you ever found yourself faced by a lot of angry men who wanted to kill
you ? '

Mark nodded, and an expression of rather malevolent satisfaction
appeared on his face. '

Several times,' he answered. ' When I was running a coffee finca a bit
further down the coast, in Chiapas.'

1 And you faced them without arms ? *

' Without arms,' Mark repeated, and, by way of explanation, ' The
politicians,' he added,c were still talking about revolution in those
days. The land for the people —and all the rest. One fine morning the
villagers came to seize the estate.'

' Which, on your principles/ said Anthony, ' you ought to have approved
of.'

' And did approve, of course. But I could hardly admit it—not in those
circumstances.'

'Why not?*

t Well, surely that's pretty obvious, isn't it ? There they were,
marching against me. Was I to tell them I sympathized with their
politics and then hand over the estate? No, really, that would have been
a bit too simple ! '

' What did you do, then ? *

' There were about a hundred of them the first time/

573

EYELESS IN GAZA

Mark explained. * Festooned with guns and cartridge-belts like Christmas
trees, and all with their machetes. But polite, soft spoken. They had no
particular quarrel with me, and the revolutionary idea was strange ;
they didn't feel too certain of themselves. Not that they ever make much
noise,' he added. ' I've seen them killing in silence. Like fish. It's
an aquarium, this country.'

' Seems an aquarium/ Dr. Miller emended. ' But when one has learnt how
the fishes think

. . .'

' I've always found it more important to learn how they drink,' said
Mark. ' Tequila's the real enemy. Luckily, mine were sober. Otherwise .
. . Well, who knows what would have happened ? ' After a pause, ' They
were standing on the cement drying floor,' he went on,

' and I was sitting at the door of the office, up a few steps, above
them. Superior, as though I were holding a durbar of my loyal subjects.'
He laughed ; the colour had come to his cheeks, and he spoke with a kind
of gusto, as though the words had a pleasant taste in his mouth. * A
hundred villainous, coffee-coloured peons, staring up at one with those
beady tortoise's eyes of theirs—it wasn't reassuring. But I managed to
keep my face and voice from giving anything away. It helped a lot, I
found, to think of the creatures as some kind of rather squalid insects.
Cockroaches, dung beetles. Just a hundred big, staring bugs. It helped,
I say. But still my heart did beat a bit. On its own—you know the
sensation, don't you ? It's as though you had a live bird under your
ribs. A bird with its own bird-like

574


CHAPTER LI

consciousness. Suffering from its own private fears. An odd sensation,
but exhilarating. I don't think I was ever happier in my life than I was
that day. The fact of being one against a hundred. A hundred armed to
the teeth. But bugs, only bugs. Whereas the one was a man. It was a
wonderful feeling.' He was silent for a little, smiling to himself.

* And what happened then ? ' Anthony asked.

* Nothing. I just gave them a little speech from the throne. Told them
ûiefinca wasn't mine to give away. That, meanwhile, I was responsible
for the place. And if I caught anybody trespassing on the land, or doing
any mischief—well, I should know what to do.

Firm, dignified, the real durbar touch. After which I got up, told them
they could go, and walked up the path towards the house. I suppose I was
within sight of them for about a minute. A full minute with my back
turned to them. And there were at least a hundred of the creatures ;
nobody could ever have discovered who fired the shot. That bird under
the ribs ! ' Lifting a hand, he fluttered the fingers in the air. € And
there was a new sensation— ants running up aad down the spine.
Terrors—but of the body only ; autonomous, if you see what I mean. In my
mind I knew that they wouldn't shoot, couldn't shoot, A hundred
miserable bugs—it was morally impossible for them to do it.

Bird under the ribs, ants up and down the spine ; but inside the skull
there was a man; and he was confident, in spite of the body's doubts, he
knew that the game had been won. It was

575

EYELESS IN GAZA

a long minute, but a good one. A very good one. And there were other
minutes like it afterwards. The only times they ever shot at me were at
evening, from out of the bushes. I was within their range, but they were
out of mine- Out of the range of my consciousness and will. That was why
they had the courage to shoot. When the man's away, the bugs will play.
Luckily, no amount of courage has ever taught an Indian to shoot
straight. In time, of course, they might have got me by a fluke ; but
meanwhile revolution went out of fashion. It never cut very much ice on
the Pacific coast.* He lit a cigarette. There was a long silence.

1 Well/ said Dr. Miller at last, * that's one way of dealing with a
hostile crowd. And seeing that you're here to tell us, it's evidently a
way that sometimes succeeds. But it's not my way. I'm an anthropologist,
you see.'

* What difference does that make ? *

1 Quite a big one.' Dr. Miller replied. ' An anthropologist is a person
who studies men.

But you prefer to deal with bugs. I'd call you an entomologist, Mark
Staithes.' His smile evoked no answering sign of friendliness. Mark's
face was stony as he met the doctor's eyes and looked away again.

1 Entomologist ! * he repeated scornfully. ' That's just stupid. Why do
you play with words ? *

' Because words express thoughts, Mark Staithes ; and thoughts determine
actions. If you call a man a bug, it means that you propose to treat him
as a bug.

576


CHAPTER LI

Whereas if you call him a man, it means that you propose to treat him as
a man. My profession is to study men. Which means that I must always
call men by their name ; always think of them as men ; yes, and always
treat them as men. Because if you don't treat men as men, they don't
behave as men. But I'm an anthropologist, I repeat. I want human
material. Not insect material.'

Mark uttered an explosive little laugh. ' One may want human material,'
he said. ' But that doesn't mean one's going to get it. What one
actually gets . . .' He laughed again. 'Well, it's mostly plain,
undiluted bug.'

* There,' said Dr. Miller, ' you're wrong. If one looks for men, one
finds them. Very decent ones, in a majority of cases. For example, go
among a suspicious, badly treated, savage people ; go unarmed, with your
hands open.' He held out his large square hands in a gesture of
offering. ' Go with the persistent and obstinate intention of doing them
some good—curing their sick, for example. I don't care how bitter their
grievance against white men may be ; in the end, if you're given time
enough to make your intentions clear, they'll accept you as a friend,
they'll be human beings treating you as a human being. Of course,'

he added, and the symbols of inner laughter revealed themselves once
more about his eyes, ' it sometimes happens that they don't leave you
the necessary time. They spear you before you're well under way. But it
doesn't often happen— it has never happened to me, as you see—and when
it

Ï77

EYELESS IN GAZA

does happen, well, there's always the hope that the next man who comes
will be more successful. Anthropologists may get killed ; but
anthropology goes on ; and in the long run it can't fail to succeed.
Whereas your entomological approach . . / He shook his head.

* It may succeed at the beginning ; you can generally frighten and
overawe people into submission. That's to say that, by treating them as
bugs, you can generally make them behave like bugs—crawl and scuttle to
cover. But the moment they have the opportunity, they'll turn on you.
The anthropologist may get killed while establishing his first contacts

; but after that, he's safe ; he's a man among men. The entomologist may
start by being safe ; but he's a bug-hunter among bugs—among bugs,
what's more, who resent being treated as bugs, who know they aren't
bugs. His bad quarter of an hour comes later on. It's the old story :
you can do everything with bayonets except sit on them.'

* You don't have to sit on them,' said Mark. ' It's the other people's
bottoms that get punctured, not yours. If you wielded the bayonets with
a certain amount of intelligence, I don't see why you shouldn't go on
ruling indefinitely. The real trouble is, of course, that there isn't
the necessary intelligence. Most bug-hunters are indistinguishable from
the bugs.'

* Exactly/ Dr. Miller agreed. ' And the only remedy is for the
bug-hunter to throw his bayonets away and treat the bugs as though they
were human beings.'

1 But we're talking about intelligence/ said Mark.

578


CHAPTER LI

The tone of contemptuous tolerance implied that he was doing his best
not to get angry with the old fool for his incapacity to think. ' Being
sentimental has nothing to do with being intelligent/

1 On the contrary/ the doctor insisted, ' it has everything to do with
it. You can't be intelligent about human beings unless you're first
sentimental about them. Sentimental in the good sense, of course. In the
sense of caring for them. It's the first indispensable condition of
understanding them. If you don't care for them, you can't possibly
understand them ; all your acuteness will just be another form of
stupidity.'

' And if you do care for them,' said Mark, ' you'll be carried away by
your maudlin emotions and become incapable of seeing them for what they
are. Look at the grotesque, humiliating things that happen when people
care too much. The young men who fall in love and imagine that hideous,
imbecile girls are paragons of beauty and intellect. The devoted women
who persist in thinking that their squalid little hubbies are all that's
most charming, noble, wise, profound/

1 They're probably quite right,' said Dr. Miller. ' It's indifference
and hatred that are blind, not love/

1 Not lo-ove ! ' Mark repeated derisively. ' Perhaps we might now sing a
hymn/

1 With pleasure,' Dr. Miller smiled. ' A Christian hymn, or a Buddhist
hymn, or a Confucian—whichever you like. I'm an anthropologist ; and
after all, what's anthropology

? Merely applied scientific religion/

579

EYELESS IN GAZA

Anthony broke a long silence. c Why do you only apply it to blackamoors
? ' he asked. '

What about beginning at home, like charity ? '

1 You're right,' said the doctor, * it ought to have begun at home. If,
in fact, it began abroad, that's merely a historical accident. It began
there because we were imperialists and so came into contact with people
whose habits were different from ours and therefore seemed stranger than
ours. An accident, I repeat. But in some ways a rather fortunate
accident. For thanks to it we've learnt a lot of facts and a valuable
technique, which we probably shouldn't have learnt at home. For two
reasons. Because it's hard to think dispassionately about oneself, and
still harder to think correctly about something that's very complicated.
Home's both those things—an elaborate civilization that happens to be
our own. Savage societies are simply civilized societies on a small
scale and with the lid off. We can learn to understand them fairly
easily. And when we've learnt to understand savages, we've learnt, as we
discover, to understand the civilized. And that's not all.

Savages are usually hostile and suspicious. The anthropologist has got
to learn to overcome that hostility and suspicion. And when he's learnt
that, he's learnt the whole secret of politics/

1 Which is ... ? '

' That if you treat other people well, they'll treat you well/

1 You're a bit optimistic, aren't you ? '

4 No. In the long run they'll always treat you well/

580


CHAPTER LI

* In the long run/ said Mark impatiently, * we shall all be dead. What
about the short run ? '

* You've got to take a risk/

1 But Europeans aren't like your Sunday-school savages. It'll be an
enormous risk.'

' Possibly. But always smaller than the risk you run by treating people
badly and goading them into a war. Besides, they're not worse than
savages. They've just been badly handled—need a bit of anthropology,
that's all.'

* And who's going to give them the anthropology ? ' 4 Well, among
others,' Dr. Miller answered, * I am.

And I hope you are, Mark Staithes.'

Mark made a flayed grimace and shook his head. * Let them slit one
another's throats,' he said. 'They'll do it anyhow, whatever you tell
them. So leave them to make their idiotic wars in peace. Besides,' he
pointed to the basket-work cage that kept the bed-clothes out of contact
with his wound, ' what can I do now ? Look on, that's all. We'd much
better all look on. It won't be for long, anyhow. Just a few years ; and
then . . .' He paused, looked down and frowned. ' What are those verses
of Rochester's ? Yes.' He raised his head again and recited :

1 Then old age and experience, hand in hand, Lead him to death, and make
him understand, After a search so painful and so long, That all his life
he had been in the wrong. Huddled in dirt the reasoning engine lies, Who
was so proud, so witty and so wise.

58i

EYELESS IN GAZA

Huddled in dirt/ he repeated. ' That's really admirable. Huddled in
dirt. And one doesn't have to wait till one's dead to be that. We'll
find a snug little patch of dirt and huddle together, shall we ? ' He
turned to Anthony. ' Huddle togedier among the cow-pats and watch the
doctor trying his best anthropological bedside manner on General
Goering.

There'll be some hearty laughs/

1 In spite of which,' said Anthony, * I think I shall go and make myself
ridiculous with Miller.'

58a


CHAPTER L IT

July 24th 1914

THERE were four of them in the search-party : Anthony, the policeman, an
old shepherd, with the grey whiskers and the majestic profile of a
Victorian statesman, and a fair, red-faced boy of seventeen, the baker's
son. The boy was made to carry the canvas part of the stretcher, while
the shepherd and the policeman used the long poles as staves.

They set out from behind the cottage, walking in a line—like beaters,
Anthony found himself reflecting— up the slope of the hill. It was a
brilliant day, cloudless and windless.

The distant hills showed as though through veils, dim with much sunlight
and almost without colour. Under their feet the grass and heather were
dusty with long drought.

Anthony took off his jacket, and then, on second thoughts, his hat. A
touch of sunstroke might simplify things; there would be no need to give
explanations or answer questions.

Even as it was, he felt rather sick and there was a griping in his
bowels. But that was hardly enough. How many difficulties would be
removed if he could be really ill ! Every now and then, as they climbed
slowly on, he put his hand to his head, and each time the hair felt hot
to the touch, like the fur of a cat that has been sitting in 583

EYELESS IN GAZA

front of the fire. It was a pity, he thought, that his hair was so
thick.

Three hours later they had found what they were looking for. Brian's
body was lying, face downwards, in a kind of rocky bay, at the foot of a
cliff above the tarn. Bracken was growing between the rocks, and in the
hot air its sweetish, oppressive scent was almost suffocatingly strong.
The place was loud with flies. When the policeman turned the body over,
the mangled face was almost unrecognizable. Anthony looked for a moment,
then turned away. His whole body had begun to tremble uncontrollably ;
he had to lean against a rock to prevent himself from falling.

* Come, lad.' The old shepherd took him by the arm, and leading him
away, made him sit down on the grass, out of sight of the body. Anthony
waited. A buzzard turned slowly in the sky, tracing out the passage of
time on an invisible clock-face. Then at last they came out from behind
the buttress of rock into his view. The shepherd and the boy walked in
front, each holding one pole of the stretcher, while the policeman,
behind, had to support the weight on both the poles. Brian's torn jacket
had been taken off and spread over his face. One stiffened arm stuck out
irrepressibly and, at every step the bearers took, swung and trembled in
the air. There were bloodstains on the shirt. Anthony got up, and, in
spite of their protestations, insisted on taking half the policeman's
burden. Very slowly, they made their way down towards the valley.

584


CHAPTER LU

It was after three o'clock when at last they reached the cottage.

Later, the policeman went through the pockets of coat and trousers. A
tobacco pouch, a pipe, Mrs. Benson's packet of sandwiches, six or seven
shillings in money, and a note-book half full of jottings about the
economic history of the Roman Empire. Not the smallest hint that what
had happened had been anything but an accident.

Mrs. Foxe arrived the following evening. Rigid at first with
self-control, she listened in silence, stonily, to Anthony's story ;
then, all at once, broke down, fell to pieces as it were, in a passion
of tears. Anthony stood by her for a moment, uncertainly ; then crept
out of the room.

Next morning, when he saw her again, Mrs. Foxe had recovered her
calm—but a different kind of calm. The calm of a living, sentient being,
not the mechanical and frozen stillness of a statue. There were dark
lines under her eyes, and the face was that of an old and suffering
woman ; but there was a sweetness and serenity in the suffering, an
expression of dignity, almost of majesty. Looking at her, Anthony felt
himself abashed, as though he were in the presence of something that he
was not worthy, that he had no right, to approach. Abashed and guilty,
more guilty even than he had felt the night before, when her grief had
passed beyond her control.

He would have liked to escape once more ; but she kept him with her all
the morning, sometimes sitting

585

EYELESS IN GAZA

in silence, sometimes speaking in that slow, beautifully modulated voice
of hers. To Anthony silence and speech were equally a torture. It was an
agony to sit there, saying nothing, listening to the clock ticking, and
wondering, worrying about the future—how to get away from Joan, what to
tell her about that accursed letter of hers ; and every now and then
stealing a glance at Mrs. Foxe and asking himself what was going on in
her mind and whether she had any knowledge, any suspicion even, of what
had really happened. Yes, her silences were painful ; but equally
painful was her speech.

* I realize/ she began, slowly and pensively, * I realize now that I
loved him in the wrong way—too possessively.'

What was he to say ? That it was true ? Of course it was true. She had
been like a vampire, fastened on poor Brian's spirit. Sucking his life's
blood. (St. Monica, he remembered, by Ary SchefFer.) Yes, a vampire. If
anyone was responsible for Brian's death, it was she. But his
self-justificatory indignation against her evaporated as she spoke
again.

* Perhaps that was one of the reasons why it happened, in order that I
might learn that love mustn't be like that.' Then, after a pause, ' I
suppose,' she went on, ' Brian had learnt enough. He hadn't very much to
learn, really. He knew so much to start with. Like Mozart— only his
genius wasn't for music ; it was for love. Perhaps that was why he could
go so soon. Whereas

f86


CHAPTER LU

I . . / She shook her head. ' I've had to have this lesson. After all
these long years of learning, still so wilfully stupid and ignorant ! '
She sighed and was silent once more.

A vampire—but she knew it ; she admitted her share of responsibility.
There remained his share—still un-confessed. ' I ought to tell her/ he
said to himself, and thought of all that had resulted from his failure
to tell the truth to Brian. But while he was hesitating, Mrs. Foxe began
again.

' One ought to love everyone like an only son,' she went on. ' And one's
own only son as one amongst them. A son one can't help loving more than
the rest, because one has more opportunities for loving him. But the
love would be different only in quantity, not in kind.

One ought to love him as one loves all the other only sons—for God's
sake, not for one's own.'

The richly vibrant voice spoke on, and, with every word it uttered,
Anthony felt more guilty—more guilty, and at the same time more
completely and hopelessly committed to his guilt. The longer he delayed
and the more she said in this strain of resignation, the harder it was
going to be to undeceive her with the truth.

4 Listen, Anthony,' she resumed, after another long pause. ' You know
how fond of you I've always been. Ever since that time just after your
mother's death—do you remember

?—when you first came to stay with us. You were such a defenceless
little boy. And that's how I've always seen you, ever since. Defenceless
under

587

EYELESS IN GAZA

your armour. For, of course, you've had an armour. You still have. To
protect yourself against me, among other dangers.' She smiled at him.
Anthony dropped his eyes, blushed and mumbled some incoherent phrase. '
Never mind why you've wanted to protect yourself,* she went on. ' I
don't want to know, unless you want to tell me. And perhaps you'll feel
you want to protect yourself still more now. Because I'm going to say
that I'd like you to take Brian's place. The place,' she qualified, '
that Brian ought to have had if I'd loved him in the right way. Among
all the other only sons, the one whom there's more opportunity of loving
than the rest. That's what I'd like you to be, Anthony. But, of course,
I won't force myself on you. It's for you to decide.'

He sat in silence, his face averted from her, his head bent. ' Blurt it
out,' a voice was crying within him, ' Anyhow, at any price 1 ' But if
it had been difficult before, now it was impossible. Saying she wanted
him to take Brian's place ! It was she who had made it impossible. He
was shaken by a gust of futile anger. If only she'd leave him in peace,
let him go away and be alone ! Suddenly his throat contracted, the tears
came into his eyes, the muscles of his chest tightened in spasm after
violent spasm ; he was sobbing.

Mrs. Foxe crossed the room, and bending over him, laid a hand on his
shoulder.

' Poor Anthony,' she whispered.

He was pinned irrevocably to his lie,

588


CHAPTER LU

That evening he wrote to Joan. This horrible accident. So unnecessary.
So stupid in its tragedy. It had happened, as a matter of fact, before
he had had an opportunity for telling Brian about those events in
London. And, by the way, had she written to Brian ? An envelope
addressed in her handwriting had been delivered at mid-day, when the
poor fellow had already started out. He was keeping it for her and would
return it personally, when he saw her next. Meanwhile, Mrs. Foxe was
bearing it wonderfully ; and they must all be brave ; and he was always
hers affectionately.

0 5»9


CHAPTER LUI

February 23rd 1934

ELEN came into the sitting-room, holding a frying-pan in which the bacon
was still spluttering from the fire.

1 Breakfast ! ' she called.

' Komme gleich ' came back from the bedroom, and a moment later Ekki
showed himself at the open door in shirt-sleeves, razor in hand, his
fair ruddy face covered with soapsuds.

1 Almost finished,' he said in English, and disappeared again.

Helen smiled to herself as she sat down. Loving him as she did, she
found an extraordinary pleasure in this close and incessant physical
intimacy with him—the intimacy that their poverty had perforce imposed
on them. Why do people want large houses, separate rooms, all die
private hiding-places that the rich find indispensable ? She couldn't
imagine, now. Humming to herself, out of tune, Helen poured out the tea,
helped herself to bacon, then began to sort the morning's letters. Helen
Amberley. No Mrs.

Communist frankness and informality. She opened the envelope. The letter
was from Newcastle. Would it be possible for her or Giesebrecht to speak
to a group of young comrades on

590

H


CHAPTER LUI

conditions in Germany some time in March? Well, one would have to see.
Mr. E.

Giesebrecht. From Switzerland; and surely that thin spiky writing was
Holtzmann's.

Ekki would be pleased.

1 Something from Holtzmann,' she said as he came in. 11 wonder what news
he'll have this time ? '

Ekki took the letter, and, with that methodical deliberation that
characterized all his actions, opened it ; then, laid it down beside his
plate and cut off a piece of bacon. He poked the bacon into his mouth,
picked up the letter again, and, slowly chewing, began to read. An
expression of intent and focussed gravity came into his face ; he could
never do anything except thoroughly and wholeheartedly. When he had
finished, he turned back to the first page and started reading all over
again.

Helen's impatience got the better of her at last. ' Anything interesting
? ' she asked.

Holtzmann was the best informed of the exiled journalists ; he always
had something to communicate. ' Tell me what he says/

Ekki did not answer at once, but read on in silence for a few seconds,
then folded up the letter and put it away in his pocket. * Mach is in
Basel/ he answered at last, looking up at her.

1 Mach ? ' she repeated. f Do you mean Ludwig Mach ? *

In the course of these last months, the name of this most resourceful
and courageous of all the German comrades engaged in the dissemination
of communist propaganda and censored news had become, for Helen, at once
familiar and fabulous, like the name of a per-591

EYELESS IN GAZA

sonage in literature or mythology. That Ludwig Mach should be at Basel
seemed almost as improbable as that Odysseus should be there, or Odin,
or the Scarlet Pimpernel. *

Ludwig Mach from Stuttgart ? ' she insisted incredulously.

Ekki nodded. 'I shall have to go and see him. To-morrow/

Spoken in that slow, emphatic, foreign way of his, the words had a
strange quality of absolute irrevocableness. Even his most casual
statements always sounded, when uttered in English, as though he had
made them on oath.

' I shall have to go,' he repeated.

Carefully, conscientiously pronounced, each syllable had the same value.
Two heavy spondees and the first half of a third. Whereas an Englishman,
however irrevocably he had made up his mind, would have spoken the
phrase as a kind of gobbled anapaest—I-shall-have-to go. In another man,
this way of speaking—so ponderous, so Jehovah-like, as she herself had
teasingly called it—would have seemed to Helen intolerably grotesque.

But, in Ekki, it was an added attraction. It seemed somehow right and
fitting that this man, whom (quite apart from loving) she admired and
respected beyond anyone she had ever known, should be thus touchingly
absurd.

' If I couldn't laugh at him sometimes,' she explained to herself, * it
might all go putrid. A pool of stagnant adoration. Like religion. Like
one of Landseer's dogs. The laughter keeps it aired and moving.'

59*


CHAPTER LUI

Listening, looking into his face (at once so absurdly ingenuous in its
fresh and candid gravity and so heroically determined) Helen felt, as
she had so often felt before, that she would like to burst out laughing
and then go down on her knees and kiss his hands.

* I shall have to go too,' she said aloud, parodying his way of
speaking. He thought at first that she was joking ; then, when he
realized that she was in earnest, grew serious and began to raise
objections. The fatigue—for they would be travelling third-class. The
expense. But Helen was suddenly like her mother—a spoilt woman whose
caprices had to be satisfied.

' It'll be such fun,' she cried excitedly. ' Such an adventure ! ' And
when he persisted in being negatively reasonable, she grew angry. ' But
I will come with you/ she repeated obstinately. ' I will?

Holtzmann met them at the station, and, instead of being the tall,
stiff, distinguished personage of Helen's anticipatory fancy, turned out
to be short and squat, with a roll of fat at the back of his neck, and,
between little pig's eyes, a soft shapeless nose like a potato.

His hand, when she shook it, was so coldly sweaty that she felt her own
defiled; surreptitiously, when he wasn't looking, she wiped it on her
skirt. But worse than even his appearance and his sweaty hands was the
man's behaviour. Her presence, she could see, had taken him aback.

* I had not expected . . .' he stammered, when Ekki presented her ; and
his face, for a moment, seemed to

593

EYELESS IN GAZA

disintegrate in agitation. Then, recovering himself, he became
effusively polite and cordial- It was gnadige Frau9 Ikber £kki,
unbeschreiblich frok all the way down the platform. As though he were
meeting them on the stage, Helen thought. And acting badly, what was
more, like someone in a third-rate touring company. And how detestable
that nervousness was 1 A man had no business to giggle like that and
gesticulate and make grimaces. Mopping and mowing, she said under her
breath. Walking beside him, she felt herself surrounded by a bristling
aura of dislike. This horrible creature had suddenly spoilt all the fun
of the journey. She found herself almost wishing that she hadn't come.

' What a loathsome man ! * she managed to whisper to Ekki, while
Holtzmann was engaged in extravagantly overacting the part of one who
tells the porter to be careful with the typewriter.

' You find him so ? ' Ekki asked with genuine surprise. * I had not
thought . . •' He left the sentence unfinished and shook his head. A
little frown of perplexity wrinkled his smooth forehead. But a moment
later, interrupting Holtzmann's renewed protestations of affection and
delight, he was asking what Mach thought of the present situation in
Germany ; and when Holtzmann replied, he listened, absorbed.

Half angry with him for his insensitive obtuseness, half admiring him
for his power to ignore everything that, to him, was irrelevant, Helen
walked in silence at his side.

594


CHAPTER LUI

' Men are extraordinary/ she was thinking. c All the same, I ought to be
like that/

Instead of which she allowed herself to be distracted by faces, by
gigglings and gestures; she wasted her feeling on pigs' eyes and rolls
of fat. And all the time millions of men and women and children were
going cold and hungry, were being exploited, were being overworked, were
being treated as though they were less than human, mere beasts of
burden, mere cogs and levers; millions were being forced to live in
chronic fear and misery and despair, were being dragooned and beaten,
were being maddened with lies and cowed with threats and blows, were
being herded this way and that like senseless animals on the road to
market, to an ultimate slaughter-house. And here was she, detesting
Holtzmann, because he had sweaty hands—instead of respecting him, as she
should have done, for what he had dared, what he had suffered for the
sake of those unhappy millions. His hands might be sweaty ; but he lived
precariously in exile, had been persecuted for his principles, was a
champion of justice and truth. She felt ashamed of herself, but at the
same time couldn't help thinking that life, if you were like Ekki, must
be strangely narrow and limited, unimaginably without colour. A life in
black and white, she reflected, hard and clear and definite, like a
Durer engraving. Whereas hers—

hers was a vague bright Turner, a Monet, a savage Gauguin. But ' you
look like a Gauguin,5 Anthony had said, that morning on the blazing
roof, and here in the 595

EYELESS IN GAZA

chilly twilight of Basel station she suddenly winced, as though with
physical pain.

' Oh, how awful/ she said to herself, ' how awful ! '

'And the labour camps/ Ekki was asking, intently, ' what does Mach say
about the feeling in the labour camps ? '

Outside the station they halted.

' Shall we begin by taking our things to a hotel ? ¦ Ekki suggested.

But Holtzmann would not hear of it. ' No, no, you must come at once,' he
insisted with a breathless emphasis. ' To my house at once. Mach is
waiting there. Mach wouldn't understand it if there was any delay.' But
when Ekki agreed, he still stood irresolute and nervous at the
pavement's edge, like a swimmer afraid to plunge.

' What's the matter with the man ? ' Helen wondered impatiently ; then
aloud, * Well, why don't we take a taxi ? * she asked, forgetting for
the moment that the time of taxis had long since come to an end. One
took trams now, one took buses. But Gauguin had precipitated her into
the past ; it seemed natural to think of taxis.

Holtzmann did not answer her ; but suddenly, with the quick, agitated
movements of one who has been forced by circumstances to take a
disagreeable decision, caught Ekki by the arm, and, drawing him aside,
began to speak to him in a hurried whisper. Helen saw a look of surprise
and annoyance come over Ekki's face as he listened. His lips moved, he
was evidently making an

596


CHAPTER LUI

objection. The other replied in smiling deprecation and began to stroke
his sleeve, as though in the hope of caressing him into acquiescence.

In the end Ekki nodded, and, turning back to Helen, c Holtzmann wants
you to join us only at lunch/ he said in his abrupt, heavy way. ' He
says that Mach wouldn't like it if there is anyone beside me/

' Does he think I'll give him away to the Nazis ? * Helen asked
indignantly.

' It isn't you,' Ekki explained. ' He doesn't know you. If he did, it
would be different. But he is afraid. Afraid of everyone he does not
know. And he is quite right to be afraid/ he added, in that tone of
dogmatic finality which meant that the argument was closed.

Making a great effort to swallow her annoyance and chagrin, Helen nodded
her head. (

All right then, I'll meet you at lunch-time. Though what the point "was
of my coming here at all/ she couldn't help adding, ' I really can't
imagine/

' Dear Miss Amberley, chère consœur, gnddige Frauy comrade . . /
Holtzmann overflowed with bourgeois and communist courtesies in all the
languages at his disposal.

' Es tut mir so kid. So very sorry/ But here was the address of his
house. At half-past twelve. And if he might advise her on the best way
of spending a morning in Basel . . .

She slipped the card into her bag, and without waiting to listen to his
suggestions, turned her back on the two men and walked quickly away.

u* 597

EYELESS IN GAZA

' Helen ! ' Ekki called after her. But she paid no attention. He did not
call again.

It was cold ; but the sky was a clear pale blue, the sun was shining.
And suddenly, emerging from behind high houses, she found herself beside
the Rhine. Leaning over the parapet, she watched the green water
hurrying past, silent, but swift and purposive, like a living thing,
like life itself, like the power behind the world, eternally,
irresistibly flowing

; watched it, until at last it was as though she herself were flowing
along with the great river, were one with it, a partaker of its power. (
And shall Trelawney die ? ' she found herself singing. ' And shall
Trelawney die ? There's twenty thousand Cornish men shall know the
rea-ea-eason why.' And suddenly it seemed certain that they would win,
that the revolution was only just round the corner—there, after that
first bend in the river.

Irresistibly the flood drove on towards it. And meanwhile what a fool
she had been to be cross with Ekki, what an absolute beast ! Remorse
gave place, after a little, to the ecstatically tender anticipation of
their reconcilement. ' Darling,' she would say to him, '

darling, you must forgive me. I was really too stupid and odious.' And
he would put one arm round her, and with the other hand would push back
the hair from her forehead and then bend down and kiss her....

When she walked on, the Rhine was still rushing within her, and,
unburdened of her offence towards Ekki, she felt immaterially light,
felt almost as though she were floating—floating in a thin intoxicating
air of happiness.

598


CHAPTER LUI

The starving millions receded once more into remote abstraction. How
good everything was, how beautiful, how exactly as it ought to be ! Even
the fat old women were perfect, even the nineteenth-century Gothic
houses. And that cup of hot chocolate in the café—

how indescribably delicious ! And the old waiter, so friendly and
paternal. Friendly and paternal, what was more, in an astonishing
Swiss-German that made one want to roar with laughter, as though
everything he said—from his commentaries on the weather to his
complaints about the times—were one huge, continuous joke- Such
gutturals, such neighings ! Like the language of the Houyhnhnms, she
thought, and led him on, with an unwearying delight in the performance,
to hoick and whinny yet again.

From the café she went on at last to the picture gallery; and the
picture gallery turned out to be as exquisitely comic in its own way as
the waiter's German. Those Boecklins ! All the extraordinary pictures
one had only seen on postcards or hanging, in coloured reproduction, on
the walls of pensions in Dresden. Mermaids and tritons caught as though
by a camera; centaurs in the stiff ungainly positions of race-horses in
a pressman's photograph. Painted with a good faith and a laborious lack
of talent that were positively touching. And here—unspeakable joy !—was
the ToteninseL The funereal cypresses, the white tomb-like temples, the
long-robed figures, the solitary boat on its way across the wine-dark
sea . . . The joke was perfect. Helen

599

EYELESS IN GAZA

laughed aloud. In spite of everything, she was still her mother's
daughter.

In the room of the primitives she paused for a moment, on her way out,
before a picture of the martyrdom of St. Erasmus. An executioner in
fifteenth-century costume, with a pale shell-pink cod-piece, was
methodically turning the handle of a winch—like Mr.

Mantalini at the mangle—winding the saint's intestines, yard after yard,
out of a gash in the emaciated belly, while the victim lay back, as if
on a sofa, making himself thoroughly comfortable and looking up into the
sky with an expression of unruffled equanimity. The joke here was less
subtle than in Toteninsei, more frankly a knockabout; but excellent,
none the less, in its own simple way. She was still smiling as she
Talked out into the street.

Holtzmann, it turned out, lived only a few hundred yards from the
gallery, in a pretty little early nineteenth-century house (much too
good for a man with sweaty hands !) set back from the road behind a
little square of gravel. A large car was standing at the door.

Holtz-mann's ? she wondered. He must be rich, the old pig 1 It had taken
her so little time to come from the gallery that it was hardly a
quarter-past twelve as she mounted the steps. * Never mind/ she said to
herself. ' They'll have to put up with me. I refuse to wait one second
longer.' The thought that, in a moment, she would see Ekki again made
her heart beat quickly. ' What a fool I am ! What an absolute fool.' But
how marvellous to be able to be a fool 1 She rang the bell.

600


CHAPTER LUI

It was Holtzmann himself who opened—dressed in an overcoat, she was
surprised to see, as though he were just going out. The expression with
which he had greeted her at the station reappeared on his face as he saw
her.

1 You are so soon/ he said, trying to smile ; but his nervousness and
embarrassment amounted almost to terror. * We had not awaited you until
half-one.*

Helen laughed. ' I hadn't awaited myself/ she explained. ' But I got
here quicker than I thought/

She made a movement to step across the threshold ; but Holtzmann held
out his arm. ' We are not yet ready/ he said. His face was flushed and
sweating with embarrassment. ' If you will return in a quarter hour,' he
almost implored. * Only a quarter hour/

* Nur ein viertel stundchen? Helen laughed, thinking of those
embroidered cushions on the sofas where the Geheimrats slept off the
effects of noonday eating. ' But why shouldn't I wait indoors ? ' She
pushed past him into a dark little hall that smelt of cooking and stale
air. ' Where's Ekki ? ' she asked, suddenly overcome by the desire to
see him, to see him at once, without another second's delay, so that she
could tell him what a beast she had been, but how loving all the same,
how adoring in spite of the beastliness, and how happy, how eager to
share her happiness with him ! At the other end of the vestibule a door
stood ajar. Calling his name, Helen ran towards it.

* Stop ! ' Holtzmann shouted behind her. But she was already across the
threshold.

601

EYELESS IN GAZA

The room in which she found herself was a bedroom. On the narrow iron
bed Ekki was lying with all his clothes on, his head on one side, his
mouth open. His breath came slowly in long snores ; he was asleep—but
asleep as she had never seen him sleeping.

' Ekki ! ' she had time to cry, while a door slammed, another voice
joined itself to Holtzmann's, and the vestibule was loud with violent
movement. ' My darling . . /

Then suddenly a hand closed on her shoulder from behind. She turned, saw
the face of a strange man within a few inches of her own, heard
somewhere from the background Holtzmann's * Schnell, Willi, schnell! *
and the stranger almost whispering, between clenched teeth, '
Schmut\iges Frauençimmer ' ; then, as she opened her mouth to scream,
received a terrible blow on the chin that brought the teeth violently
together again, and felt herself dropping into blackness.

When she came to herself, she was in bed in a hospital ward. Some
peasants had found her lying unconscious in a little wood five or six
miles from the town. An ambulance had brought her back to Basel. It was
only on the following morning that the effects of the barbitone wore off
and she remembered what had happened. But by that time Ekki had been
over the frontier, in Germany, for nearly twenty hours.

602


CHAPTER LIV

February 23rd 1935

ANTHONY had spent the morning at the offices of jf~-\. the organization,
dictating letters. For the most part, it was a matter of dealing with
the intellectual difficulties of would-be pacifists. * What would you do
if you saw a foreign soldier attacking your sister ? * Well, whatever
else one did, one certainly wouldn't send one's son to murder his second
cousin. Wearisome work ! But it had to be done. He dictated twenty-seven
letters; then it was time to go to lunch with Helen.

1 There's practically nothing to eat,' she said, when he came in. ' I
simply couldn't be bothered to cook anything. The unspeakable boredom of
making meals ! * Her voice took on a note of almost malevolent
resentment.

They addressed themselves to tinned salmon and lettuce. Anthony tried to
talk ; but his words seemed to bounce off the impenetrable surface of
her sullen and melancholy silence. In the end, he too sat speechless.

1 It's just a year ago to-day,' she brought out at last.

'What is?'

4 Just a year since those devils at Basel . . .* She shook her head and
was silent again.

603

EYELESS IN GAZA

Anthony said nothing. Anything he could say would be an irrelevance, he
felt, almost an insult.

' I often wish they'd killed me too/ she went on slowly. ' Instead of
leaving me here, rotting away, like a piece of dirt on a rubbish heap.
Like a dead kitten/ she added, as an afterthought. ' So much carrion/
The words were spoken with a vehement disgust.

' Why do you say that ? ' he asked.

' Because it's true. I am carrion.'

' There's no need for you to be.'

' I can't help it. I'm carrion by nature/

' No, you're not/ he insisted. * You've said it yourself. When Ekki was
there . . /

' No, I wasn't carrion then/

* What you've been once, you can be again/

' Not without him/

He nodded. ' Yes, if you want to be, you can. It's a matter of choosing.
Choosing and dien setting to work in the right way/

Helen shook her head. ' They ought to have killed me. If you only knew
how I disgust myself ! ' She screwed up her face into a grimace. * I'm
no good. Worse than no good.

Just a lump of dirt/ After a pause, ' I'm not even interested in Ekki's
work/ she went on. ' I don't like his friends. Communists. But they're
just beastly little people, like anyone else.

Stupid, vulgar, envious, pushing. One might as well have the fun of
wearing a chinchilla coat and lunching at Claridge's. I shall probably
end by selling myself to a rich man.

604


CHAPTER LIV

That is, if I can find one.' She laughed again. Then, in a tone of more
bitter self-contempt,c Only a year to-day/ she resumed, * and already
I'm sick of it all. Utterly sick of it and pining to get out of it. Pm
disgusting.'

' But are you entirely to blame ? '

' Of course I am.'

Anthony shook his head. * Perhaps it's also the fault of the work.'

' What do you mean ? '

' Organized hatred—it's not exactly attractive. Not what most people
feel they really want to live for/

£ Ekki lived for it. Lots of people live for it.'

* But what sort of people ? ' he asked. ' They're of three kinds.
Idealists with an exceptional gift for self-deception. Either they don't
know that it's organized hatred, or else they genuinely believe that the
end justifies the means, genuinely imagine that the means don't
condition the end. Ekki was one of those. They form the majority. And
then there are two minorities. A minority of people who know that the
thing's organized hatred and rejoice in the fact. And a minority that's
ambitious, that merely uses the movement as a convenient machine for
realizing its ambition. You, Helen —you're neither ambitious nor
self-deceiving. And, in spite of what happened this day last year, don't
really want to liquidate people—not even Nazis. And that's why the
chinchillas and the orchids seem so attractive. Not because you actively
long for them. Only because this particular alternative is so
unsatisfactory.'

605

EYELESS IN GAZA

There was a silence. Helen got up, changed the plates and set a bowl of
fruit on the table.

* What is the satisfactory alternative ? ' she asked, as she helped
herself to an apple.

c It begins/ he answered, ' with trying to cultivate the difficult art
of loving people.'

* But most people are detestable.'

4 They're detestable, because we detest them. If we liked them, they'd
be likeable.'

1 Do you think that's true ? *

' I'm sure it's true.'

1 And what do you do after that ? *

' There's no " after," ' he replied. ' Because, of course, it's a
lifetime's job. Any process of change is a lifetime's job. Every time
you get to the top of a peak, you see another peak in front of you—a
peak that you couldn't see from lower down. Take the mind-body
mechanism, for example. You begin to learn how to use it better ; you
make an advance ; from the position you've advanced to, you discover how
you can use it better still. And so on, indefinitely. The ideal ends
recede as you approach them ; they're seen to be other and more
remarkable than they seemed before the advance was begun. It's the same
when one tries to change one's relations with other people. Every step
forward reveals the necessity of making new steps forward— unanticipated
steps, towards a destination one hadn't seen when one set out. Yes, it
lasts a lifetime,' he repeated. * There can't be any " after."

There can only be an

606


CHAPTER LIV

attempt, as one goes along, to project what one has discovered on the
personal level on to the level of politics and economics. One of the
first discoveries/ he added, ' one of the very first one makes, is that
organized hatred and violence aren't the best means for securing justice
and peace. All men are capable of love for all other men. But we've
artificially restricted our love. By means of conventions of hatred and
violence.

Restricted it within families and clans, within classes and nations.
Your friends want to remove those restrictions by using more hatred and
violence—that's to say, by using exactly the same means as were the
original causes of the restrictions.' He smiled. * Can you be surprised
if you find the work a bit unsatisfying ? *

Helen looked at him for a little in silence, then shook her head. ' I
prefer my chinchillas.'

1 No, you don't.'

' Yes, I do. I'd rather be a lump of dirt. It's easier.' She got up. '
What about some coffee ?

' In the little kitchen, as they were waiting for the water to boil, she
suddenly started to tell him about that young man in advertising. She
had met him a couple of weeks before.

Such an amusing and intelligent creature ! And he had fallen violently
in love with her.

Her face brightened with a kind of reckless, laughing malice. * Blue
eyes,' she said, cataloguing the young man's merits, as though she were
an auctioneer, * curly hair, tremendous shoulders, narrow hips,
first-rate amateur boxer—which is more than you ever were, my poor
Anthony,* she added

607

EYELESS IN GAZA

parenthetically and in a tone of contemptuous commiseration. 'In fact,
thoroughly bed-worthy. Or at least he looks it. Because one never really
knows till one's tried, does one ?

' She laughed. ' I've a good mind to try to-night,' she went on. ' To
commemorate this anniversary. Don't you think it would be a good idea,
Anthony ? ' And when he didn't answer, * Don't you think so ? ' she
insisted. ' Don't you think so ? ' She looked into his face, trying to
detect in it the signs of anger, or jealousy, or disgust.

Anthony smiled back at her. * It isn't so easy, being a lump of dirt,'
he said. ' In fact, I should say it was very hard work indeed.'

The brightness faded out of her face. * Hard work,' she repeated. '
Perhaps that's one of the reasons for going on trying.' After a pause,
while she poured the water into the percolator, ' Did you say you were
having a meeting to-night ? '

* In Battersea.'

* Perhaps I shall come and listen to you. Unless,' she added, making an
effort to laugh,c unless, of course, I've decided to celebrate the
anniversary in the other way.'

When they had drunk their coffee, Anthony walked back to his rooms, to
put in a few hours' work at the new pamphlet he had promised to write
for Purchas. Two letters had come by the mid-day delivery. One was from
Miller, describing the excellent meetings he had been having in
Edinburgh and Glasgow. The other, without an address, was typewritten.

608


CHAPTER LIV

'Sir,' it began, 'we have been keeping an eye on you for some time past,
and have decided that you cannot be allowed to go on in your present
disloyal and treacherous way. We give you fair warning. If you make any
more of your dirty pacifist speeches, we shall deal with you as you
deserve. Appealing to the police will not do any good. We shall get you
sooner or later, and it will not be pleasant for you. It is announced
that you are speaking to-night in Battersea. We shall be there. So we
advise you, if you value your yellow skin, to keep away. You do not
deserve this warning, but we want to behave sportingly even towards a
skunk like you.—Yours faithfully,

' A Group of Patriotic Englishmen.*

A joke, Anthony wondered ? No, probably serious. He smiled. c How
virtuous they must be feeling ! ' he said to himself. ' And how heroic !
Striking their blow for England.'

But the blow, he went on to reflect, as he sat down in front of the
fire, the blow would fall upon himself—if he spoke, that was to say, if
they weren't prevented from attacking him.

And, of course, there could be no question of not speaking. No question
of calling on the police for protection. Nothing to do but practise what
he had been preaching.

But would he have the strength of mind to see it through? Suppose they
set on him, suppose they started to knock him about ? Would he know how
to stand it ?

He tried to work on the pamphlet ; but the personal

609

EYELESS IN GAZA

questions insistently recurred, thrusting aside those remoter and
impersonal problems of colonies and prestige, markets, investment,
migration. He visualized the horrible expression of anger on the men's
distorted faces, heard in his fancy their violent insulting words, saw
hands, lifted, falling. Would he be able to prevent himself from
flinching ?

And the pain of blows—sharp, excruciating, on the face, heavy and
sickening on the body—how much would he be able to bear, for how long?
If only Miller were here to give advice and encouragement ! But Miller
was in Glasgow.

Doubt of himself grew upon him. To stand there, letting himself be
struck, without hitting back, without giving ground—he would never be
able to do that.

11 shan't have the guts/ he kept repeating, and was obsessed by the fear
of being afraid.

Remembering the way he had behaved at Tapatlan, he blushed with shame.
And, this time, the disgrace would be public. They would all know—Helen
with the rest.

And this time, he went on to think, this time there wouldn't be the
excuse of surprise.

They had given him warning—* even to a skunk like you.' And besides, he
had been training himself for months past to cope with just such a
contingency as this. The scene had been rehearsed. He knew by heart
every cue and gesture. But when the time actually came, when the pain
was no longer imaginary but real, would he remember his part ?

What guarantee was there that he wouldn't hopelessly break down? In
front of Helen—

when Helen was

610


CHAPTER LIV

standing hesitant on the threshold of her own life, perhaps also of his.
Besides, if he broke down, he would be discrediting more than himself.
To break down would be to deny his convictions, to invalidate his
philosophy, to betray his friends. * But why are you such a fool ? ' a
small voice began to question ; ' why do you go and saddle yourself with
convictions and philosophies ? And why put yourself in the position of
being able to betray anyone? Why not go back to doing what nature meant
you to do—to looking on from your private box and making comments ? What
does it all matter, after all ? And even if it matters, what can you do
? Why not quietly resign yourself to the inevitable, and in the interval
get on with the job you can do best ? *

The voice spoke out of a cloud of fatigue. For a minute he was nothing
but a dead, dry husk enclosing black weariness and negation. ' Ring them
up/ the voice went on. * Tell them you've got flu. Stay in bed a few
days. Then have yourself ordered to the south of France by the doctor .
. /

Suddenly he laughed aloud. From sinister, from insidiously persuasive,
that small voice had become absurd. Carried to such a pitch, expressed
so ingenuously, baseness was almost comic.

* Unity,' he said in an articulate whisper.

He was committed to them, as a hand is committed to the arm. Committed
to his friends, committed even to those who had declared themselves his
enemies. There was nothing he could do but would affect them all,

611

EYELESS IN GAZA

enemies and friends alike—for good, if what he did were good, for evil
if it were wrong.

Unity, he repeated. Unity.

Unity of mankind, unity of all life, all being even.

Physical unity, first of all. Unity even in diversity, even in
separation. Separate patterns, but everywhere alike. Everywhere the same
constellations of the ultimate units of energy.

The same on the surface of the sun as in the living flesh warmed by the
sun's radiance ; in the scented cluster of buddleia flowers as in the
blue sea and the clouds on the horizon ; in the drunken Mexican's pistol
as in the dark dried blood on that mangled face among the rocks, the
fresh blood spattered scarlet over Helen's naked body, the drops oozing
from the raw contusion on Mark's knee.

Identical patterns, and identical patternings of patterns. He held the
thought of them in his mind, and, along with it, the thought of life
incessantly moving among the patterns, selecting and rejecting for its
own purposes. Life building up simpler into more complex patterns—
identically complex through vast ranges of animate being.

The sperm enters the egg, the cell divides and divides, to become at
last this man, that rat or horse. A cow's pituitary will make frogs
breed out of season. Urine of a pregnant woman brings the mouse on heat.
Sheep's thyroid transforms the axolotl from a gilled larva into an
air-breathing salamander, the cretinous dwarf into a well-grown and
intelligent human being. Between one form of animal life and another,
patterns are interchange-612


CHAPTER LIV

able. Interchangeable also between animal and plant, plant and the
inanimate world.

Patterns in seed and leaf and root, patterns built up from simpler
patterns existent in the air and soil—these can be assimilated and
transformed by insect, reptile, mammal, fish.

The unity of life. Unity demonstrated even in the destruction of one
life by another. Life and all being are one. Otherwise no living thing
could ever derive sustenance from another or from the unliving
substances around it. One even in destruction, one in spite of
separation. Each organism is unique. Unique and yet united with all
other organisms in the sameness of its ultimate parts ; unique above a
substratum of physical identity.

And minds—minds also are unique, but unique above a substratum of mental
identity.

Identity and inter-changeableness of love, trust, courage. Fearless
affection restores the lunatic to sanity, transforms the hostile savage
into a friend, tames the wild animal. The mental pattern of love can be
transferred from one mind to another and still retain its virtue, just
as the physical pattern of a hormone can be transferred, with all its
effectiveness, from one body to another.

And not only love, but hate as well ; not only trust, but suspicion ;
not only kindness, generosity, courage, but also malevolence and greed
and fear.

Divisive emotions; but the fact that they can be interchanged, can be
transferred from mind to mind and retain all their original passion, is
a demonstration of the fundamental unity of minds.

613

EYELESS IN GAZA

Reality of unity, but equal reality of division—greater reality, indeed,
of division. No need to meditate the fact of division. One is constantly
aware of it. Constantly aware of being unique and separate ; only
sometimes, and then most often only intellectually, only as the result
of a process of discursive thought, aware of being one with other minds,
other lives and all being. Occasionally an intuition of unity, an
intuition coming at random, or sought for, step by step, in meditation.

One, one, one, he repeated ; but one in division ; united and yet
separate.

Evil is the accentuation of division ; good, whatever makes for unity
with other lives and other beings. Pride, hatred, anger—the essentially
evil sentiments ; and essentially evil because they are all
intensifications of the given reality of scparatcncss, because they
insist upon division and uniqueness, because they reject and deny other
lives and beings.

Lust and greed are also insistences upon uniqueness, but insistences
which do not entail any negative awareness of the others from whom the
unique being is divided. Lust only says, ' I must have pleasure,' not '
You must have pain/ Greed in its pure state is merely a demand for my
satisfaction, not for your exclusion from satisfaction. They are wrong
in emphasizing the separate self; but less wrong than pride or hatred or
anger, because their self-emphasis is not accompanied by denial of
others.

But why division at all? Why, unavoidably, even in the completest love,
and, at the other end of the scale

614


CHAPTER LIV

of being, even in that which is or seems to be below right and wrong,
why must the evil of separation persist ? Separation even of saint from
saint, and separation even of mere physical pattern from mere physical
pattern. One man cannot eat for another. The best must think, must enjoy
and suffer, must touch, see, smell, hear, taste in isolation. The good
man is merely a less completely closed universe than the bad ; but still
closed, even as the atom is closed.

And, of course, if there is to be existence—existence as we know
it—being must be organized in closed universes. Minds like ours can only
perceive undiffer-entiated unity as nothing. Unescapable paradox that we
should desire that n should be equal to one, but that, in fact, we
should always find that one is equal to nought.

Separation, diversity—conditions of our existence. Conditions upon which
we possess life and consciousness, know right and wrong and have the
power to choose between them, recognize truth, have experience of
beauty. But separation is evil. Evil, then, is the condition of life,
the condition of being aware, of knowing what is good and beautiful.

That which is demanded, that which men come finally to demand of
themselves, is the realization of union between beings who would be
nothing if they were not separate ; is the actualization of goodness by
creatures who, if they were not evil, would not exist.

Impossibility—but none the less demanded.

615

EYELESS IN GAZA

' Born under one law, to another bound.' He himself, Anthony went on to
think, he himself had chosen to regard the whole process as either
pointless or a practical joke.

Yes, chosen. For it had been an act of the will. If it were all nonsense
or a joke, then he was at liberty to read his books and exercise his
talents for sarcastic comment; there was no reason why he shouldn't
sleep with any presentable woman who was ready to sleep with him. If it
weren't nonsense, if there were some significance, then he could no
longer live irresponsibly. There were duties towards himself and others
and the nature of things.

Duties with whose fulfilment the sleeping and the indiscriminate reading
and the habit of detached irony would interfere. He had chosen to think
it nonsense, and nonsense for more than twenty years the thing had
seemed to be—nonsense, in spite of occasional uncomfortable intimations
that there might be a point, and that the point was precisely in what he
had chosen to regard as the pointless-ness, the practical joke. And now
at last it was clear, now by some kind of immediate experience he knew
that the point was in the paradox, in the fact that unity was the
beginning and unity the end, and that in the meantime the condition of
life and all existence was separation, which was equivalent to evil.
Yes, the point, he insisted, is that one demands of oneself the
achievement of the impossible. The point is that, even with the best
will in the world, the separate, evil universe of a person or a physical
pattern can never unite itself completely with 616


CHAPTER LIV

other lives and beings, or the totality of life and being. Even for the
highest goodness the struggle is without end ; for never in the nature
of present things can the shut become the wholly open ; goodness can
never free itself completely from evil. It is a test, an education—
searching, difficult, drawn out through a lifetime, perhaps through long
series of lifetimes. Lifetimes passed in the attempt to open up further
and a little further the closed universe that perpetually tends to
spring shut the moment that effort is relaxed.

Passed in overcoming the separating passions of hate and malice and
pride. Passed in making still the self-emphasizing cravings. Passed in
constant efforts to realize unity with other lives and other modes of
being. To experience it in the act of love and compassion.

To experience it on another plane through meditation, in the insight of
direct intuition.

Unity beyond the turmoil of separations and divisions. Goodness beyond
the possibility of evil. But always the fact of separation persists,
always evil remains the very condition of life and being. There must be
no relaxation of the opening pressure. But even for the best of us, the
consummation is still immeasurably remote.

Meanwhile there are love and compassion. Constantly obstructed. But, oh,
let them be made indefatigable, implacable to surmount all obstacles,
the inner sloth, the distaste, the intellectual scorn; and, from
without, the other's aversions and suspicions. Affection, compassion—and
also, meanwhile, this contemplative

6i7

EYELESS IN GAZA

approach, this effort to realize the unity of lives and being with the
intellect, and at last, perhaps, intuitively in an act of complete
understanding. From one argument to another, step by step, towards a
consummation where there is no more discourse, only experience, only
unmediated knowledge, as of a colour, a perfume, a musical sound. Step
by step towards the experience of being no longer wholly separate, but
united at the depths with other lives, with the rest of being. United in
peace. In peace, he repeated, in peace, in peace. In the depth of every
mind, peace. The same peace for all, continuous between mind and mind.
At the surface, the separate waves, the whirlpools, the spray ; but
below them the continuous and undifferentiated expanse of sea, becoming
calmer as it deepens, till at last there is an absolute stillness. Dark
peace in the depths. A dark peace that is the same for all who can
descend to it. Peace that by a strange paradox is the substance and
source of the storm at the surface. Born of peace, the waves yet destroy
peace ; destroy it, but are necessary ; for without the storm on the
surface there would be no existence, no knowledge of goodness, no effort
to allay the leaping frenzy of evil, no rediscovery of the underlying
calm, no realization that the substance of the frenzy is the same as the
substance of peace.

Frenzy of evil and separation. In peace there is unity. Unity with other
lives. Unity with all being. For beneath all being, beneath the
countless identical but separate patterns, beneath the attractions and
repulsions,

6x8


CHAPTER LIV

lies peace. The same peace as underlies the frenzy of the mind. Dark
peace, immeasurably deep. Peace from pride and hatred and anger, peace
from cravings and aversions, peace from all the separating frenzies.
Peace through liberation, for peace is achieved freedom. Freedom and at
the same time truth. The truth of unity actually experienced. Peace in
the depths, under the storm, far down below the leaping of the waves,
the frantically flying spray. Peace in this profound subaqueous night,
peace in this silence, this still emptiness where there is no more time,
where there are no more images, no more words. Nothing but the
experience of peace ; peace as a dark void beyond all personal life, and
yet itself a form of life more intense, for all its diffuseness, for all
the absence of aim or desire, richer and of finer quality than ordinary
life. Peace beyond peace, focussed at first, brought together, then
opening out in a kind of boundless space.

Peace at the tip, as it were, of a narrowing cone of concentration and
elimination, a cone with its base in the distractions of the heaving
surface of life and its point in the underlying darkness. And in die
darkness the tip of one cone meets the tip of another ; and, from a
single, focal point, peace expands and expands towards a base
immeasurably distant and so wide that its circle is the ground and
source of all life, all being. Cone reversed from the broken and
shifting light of the surface ; cone reversed and descending to a point
of concentrated darkness ; thence, in another cone, expanding and
expanding through the darkness towards,

619

EYELESS IN GAZA

yes ! some other light, steady, untroubled, as utterly calm as the
darkness out of which it emerges. Cone reversed into cone upright.
Passage from wide stormy light to the still focus of darkness ; and
thence, beyond the focus, through widening darkness into another light.
From storm to calm and on through yet profounder and intenser peace to
the final consummation, the ultimate light that is the source and
substance of all things ; source of the darkness, the void, the
submarine night of living calm ; source finally of the waves and the
frenzy of the spray—forgotten now. For now there is only the darkness
expanding and deepening, deepening into light ; there is only this final
peace, this consciousness of being no more separate, this illumination
...

The clock struck seven. Slowly and cautiously he allowed himself to
lapse out of the light, back dirough the darkness into the broken gleams
and shadows of everyday existence. He rose at last and went to the
kitchen to prepare himself some food. There was not much time ; the
meeting was at eight, and it would take him a good half-hour to reach
the hall. He put a couple of eggs to boil, and sat down meanwhile to
bread and cheese. Dispassionately, and with a serene lucidity, he
thought of what was in store for him. Whatever it might be, he knew now
that all would be well.

Pnn ted in Great Britain

by T. and A. Constable Ltd., Hopetoun Street

Printers to the University of Edinburgh


