THE ART OF SEEING

By

ALDOUS HUXLEY

1974

CHATTO & WINDUS

LONDON

PUBLISHED BY

Chatto & Windus

LONDON

•

Clarke, Irwin & Co. Ltd.

TORONTO

ISBN O 7011 0788 X

_First published 1943_

_Second impression 1943_

_Third impression 1943_

_Fourth impression 1943_

_Fifth impression 1944_

_Sixth impression 1948_

_Seventh impression 1937_

_Eighth impression 1963_

_First issued in this edition 1971_

_Second impression 1974_

Applications regarding translation rights in any

work by Aldous Huxley should be addressed to

Chatto & Windus, 40 William IV Street, London,

W.C.2

_All rights reserved. No part of this publication may_

_be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or_

_transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic,_

_mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without_

_the prior permission of Chatto_ & _Windus Ltd._

_©_ Mrs. Laura Huxley 1943

Printed in Great Britain by

Redwood Burn Limited, Trowbridge & Esher

CONTENTS

PREFACE

1

CHAPTER I _Medicine and Defective Vision_

3

CHAPTER II _A Method of Visual Re-Education_

6

CHAPTER III _Sensing+ Selecting+ Perceiving= Seeing_

11

CHAPTER IV _Variability of Bodily and Mental Functioning_

14

CHAPTER V _Causes of Visual Mal-Functioning: Disease and Emotional
Disturbances_

17

CHAPTER VI _Relaxation_

23

CHAPTER VII _Blinking and Breathing_

26

CHAPTER VIII _The Eye, Organ of Light_

29

CHAPTER IX _Central Fixation_

33

CHAPTER X _Methods of Teaching the Eyes and Mind to Move_

36

CHAPTER XI _Flashing_

40

CHAPTER XII _Shifting_

43

CHAPTER XIII _The Mental Side of Seeing_

48

CHAPTER XIV _Memory and Imagination_

50

CHAPTER XV _Myopia_

57

CHAPTER XVI _Long Sight, Astigmatism, Squint_

61

CHAPTER XVII _Some Difficult Seeing-Situations_

66

CHAPTER XVIII _Lighting Conditions_

71

APPENDIX I

74

APPENDIX II

76

PREFACE

T sixteen, I had a violent attack of _keratitis punctata,_ which left me
(after

Aei ghteen months of near-blindness, during which I had to depend on
Braille for

my reading and a guide for my walking) with one eye just capable of
light

perception, and the other with enough vision to permit of my detecting
the

two-hundred-foot letter on the Snellen Chart at ten feet. My inability
to see was

mainly due to the presence of opacities in the cornea; but this
condition was

complicated by hyperopia and astigmatism. For the first few years, my
doctors

advised me to do my reading with the aid of a powerful hand magnifying
glass. But

later on I was promoted to spectacles. With the aid of these I was able
to recognize

the seventy-foot line at ten feet and to read tolerably well—provided
always that I

kept my better pupil dilated with atropine, so that I might see round a
particularly

heavy patch of opacity at the centre of the cornea. True, a measure of
strain and

fatigue was always present, and there were occasions when I was overcome
by that

sense of complete physical and mental exhaustion which only eye-strain
can

produce. Still, I was grateful to be able to see as well as I could.

Things went on in this way until the year 1939, when, in spite of
greatly

strengthened glasses, I found the task of reading increasingly difficult
and fatiguing.

There could be no doubt of it: my capacity to see was steadily and quite
rapidly

failing. But just as I was wondering apprehensively what on earth I
should do, if

reading were to become impossible, I happened to hear of a method of
visual

re-education and of a teacher who was said to make use of this method
with

conspicuous success. Education sounded harmless enough and, since
optical glass

was no longer doing me any good, I decided to take the plunge. Within a
couple of

months I was reading without spectacles and, what was better still,
without strain

and fatigue. The chronic tensions, and the occasional spells of complete
exhaustion,

were things of the past. Moreover, there were definite signs that the
opacity in the

cornea, which had remained unchanged for upwards of twenty-five years,
was

beginning to clear up. At the present time, my vision, though very far
from normal,

is about twice as good as it used to be when I wore spectacles, and
before I had

learnt the art of seeing; and the opacity has cleared sufficiently to
permit the worse

eye, which for years could do no more than distinguish light from
darkness, to

recognize the ten-foot line on the chart at one foot.

It is, first of all, to repay a debt of gratitude that I have written
this little

book—gratitude to the pioneer of visual education, the late Dr. W. H.
Bates, and to

his disciple, Mrs. Margaret D. Corbett, to whose skill as a teacher I
owe the

improvement in my own vision.

A number of other books on visual education have been published—notably
Dr.

Bates's own, _Perfect Sight Without Glasses_ (New York, 1920), Mrs.
Corbett's _How_

_to Improve Your Eyes_ (Los Angeles, 1938) and _The Improvement of Sight
by_

_Natural Methods,_ by C. S. Price, M.B.E., D.O. (London, 1934). All have
their

merits; but in none (of those, at least, that I have read) has an
attempt been made to

do what I have tried to do in the present volume: namely, to correlate
the methods

of visual education with the findings of modern psychology and critical
philosophy.

My purpose in making this correlation is to demonstrate the essential

reasonableness of a method, which turns out to be nothing more nor less
than the

practical application to the problems of vision of certain theoretical
principles,

universally accepted as true.

Why, it may be asked, have orthodox ophthalmologists failed to make
these

applications of universally accepted principles? The answer is clear.
Ever since

ophthalmology became a science, its practitioners have been obsessively

preoccupied with only one aspect of the total, complex process of
seeing—the

physiological. They have paid attention exclusively to eyes, not at all
to the mind

which makes use of the eyes to see with. I have been treated by men of
the highest

eminence in their profession; but never once did they so much as faintly
hint that

1

there might be a mental side to vision, or that there might be wrong
ways of using

the eyes and mind as well as right ways, unnatural and abnormal modes of
visual

functioning as well as natural and normal ones. After checking the acute
infection

in my eyes, which they did with the greatest skill, they gave me some
artificial

lenses and let me go. Whether I used my mind and be-spectacled eyes well
or badly,

and what might be the effect upon my vision of improper use, were to
them, as to

practically all other orthodox ophthalmologists, matters of perfect
indifference. To

Dr. Bates, on the contrary, these things were not matters of
indifference; and

because they were not, he worked out, through long years of experiment
and

clinical practice, his peculiar method of visual education. That this
method was

essentially sound, is proved by its efficacy.

My own case is in no way unique; thousands of other sufferers from
defects of

vision have benefited by following the simple rules of that Art of
Seeing which we

owe to Bates and his followers. To make this Art more widely known is
the final

purpose of the present volume.

2

CHAPTER I

_Medicine and Defective Vision_

EDICUS CURAT, NATURA SANAT—the doctor treats, nature heals. The old

Maphori

sm sums up the whole scope and purpose of medicine, which is to

provide sick organisms with the internal and external conditions most
favourable to

the exercise of their own self-regulative and restorative powers. If
there were no _vis_

_medicatrix naturae,_ no natural healing powers, medicine would be
helpless, and

every small derangement would either kill outright or settle down into
chronic

disease.

When conditions are favourable, sick organisms tend to recover through
their

own inherent powers of self-healing. If they do not recover, it means
either that the

case is hopeless, or that the conditions are not favourable—in other
words, that the

medical treatment being applied is failing to achieve what an adequate
treatment

ought to achieve.

ORDINARY TREATMENT OF DEFECTIVE SIGHT

In the light of these general principles let us consider the current
medical

treatment of defects of vision. In the great majority of cases the only
treatment

consists in fitting the patient with artificial lenses, designed to
correct the particular

error of refraction which is held to be responsible for the defect.
_Medicus curat;_ and

in most cases the patient is rewarded by an immediate improvement in
vision. But

in the meanwhile, what about Nature and her healing process? Do glasses
eliminate

the causes of defective vision? Do the organs of sight tend to revert to
normal

functioning as the result of the treatment with artificial lenses? The
answer to these

questions is, No. Artificial lenses neutralize the symptoms, but do not
get rid of the

causes of defective vision. And so far from improving, eyes fitted with
these

devices tend to grow progressively weaker and to require progressively
stronger

lenses for the correction of their symptoms. In a word, _medicus curat,
natura NON_

_sanat._ From this we can draw one of two conclusions: either defects in
the organs of

seeing are incurable, and can only be palliated by mechanical
neutralization of

symptoms; or else something is radically wrong with the current methods
of

treatment.

Orthodox opinion accepts the first and more pessimistic alternatives,
and insists

that the mechanical palliation of symptoms is the only kind of treatment
to which

defective organs of vision will respond. (I am leaving out of account
all cases of

more or less acute disease of the eyes, which are treated by surgery and
medication,

and confining myself to those much more common-place visual defects now
treated

by means of lenses.)

CURE OR PALLIATION OF SYMPTOMS?

If orthodox opinion is right—if the organs of vision are in-capable of
curing

themselves, and if their defects can only be palliated by mechanical
devices—then

the eyes must be totally different in kind from other parts of the body.
Given

favourable conditions, all other organs tend to free themselves from
their defects.

Not so the eyes. When they show symptoms of weakness, it is foolish,
according to

orthodox theory, to make any serious effort to get rid of the causes of
those

symptoms; it is a waste of time even to try to discover a treatment
which will assist

nature in accomplishing its normal task of healing. Defective eyes are,
_ex hypothesi,_

practically incurable; they lack the _vis medicatrix naturae._ The only
thing that

ophthalmological science can do for them is to provide them with the
purely

mechanical means for neutralizing their symptoms. The only
qualifications to this

strange theory come from those who have made it their business to look
into

external conditions of seeing. Here, for example, are some relevant
remarks taken

from the book _Seeing and Human Welfare_ by Dr. Matthew Luckiesh,
Director of

the General Electric Company's Lighting Research Laboratory. Eyeglasses
(those

3

'valuable crutches,' as Dr. Luckiesh calls them) 'counteract effects of
heredity, age,

and _abuse;_ they do not deal with causes.' 'Suppose that crippled eyes
could be

transformed into crippled legs. What a heart-rending parade we would
witness on a

busy street! Nearly every other person would go limping by. Many would
be on

crutches and some on wheel chairs. How many of these defects of the eye
are due to

poor conditions for seeing, that is, to indifference towards seeing?
Statistics are not

available, but a knowledge of seeing and its requirements indicates that
most of

them are preventable and most of the remainder can be improved or
arrested by

adequate and proper conditions.' And again, 'even the refractive defects
and other

abnormalities of eyes induced by abuses are not necessarily permanent.
When we

become ill, Nature does her part, if we do ours, towards getting well.
Eyes have

various recuperative powers, at least to some degree. Reducing their
abuse by im-

proving seeing conditions is always helpful, and there are many cases on
record

where great improvement has followed on this procedure. Indeed, without

correction of the abuse, the disorder generally becomes progressively
worse.' These

are encouraging words that leave us with the hope that we are to be
given a de-

scription of some new and genuinely aetiological treatment of visual
defects, to

take the place of the purely symptomatic treatment at present in vogue.
But this

hope is only imperfectly fulfilled. ' Poor lighting,' Dr. Luckiesh goes
on, ' is the

most important and universal cause of eye-strain, often leading to
progressive

defects and disorders.' His whole book is an elaboration of this theme.
Let me

hasten to add that, within its limitations, it is an admirable book. To
those suffering

from defects of vision the importance of good lighting is very great
indeed; and one

can only be grateful to Dr. Luckiesh for his scientific clarification of
the meaning

'good lighting' in terms of standard, measurable entities such as
foot-candles. One's

only complaint is that foot-candles are not enough. In treating other
parts of the

organism doctors are not content to ameliorate merely the external
conditions of

functioning; they also seek to improve the internal conditions, to work
directly on

the physiological environment of the sick organ as well as on the
physical

environment outside the body. Thus when legs are crippled, doctors
refuse to let

their patients rely indefinitely on crutches. Nor do they consider that
the laying

down of rules for avoiding accidents constitutes sufficient treatment
for the

condition of being crippled. On the contrary, they regard the use of
crutches as

merely a palliative and temporary expedient, and while paying attention
to external

conditions, they also do their best to improve the internal conditions
of the

defective part, so that nature maybe helped to do its work of healing.
Some of these

measures, such as rest, massage, applications of heat and light, make no
appeal to

the patient's mind, but are aimed directly at the affected organs, their
purpose being

to relax, to increase circulation and to preserve mobility. Other
measures are

educational and involve, on the patient's part, a co-ordination of mind
and body. By

means of this appeal to the psychological factor astonishing results are
often

obtained. A good teacher, using the right technique, can often educate a
victim of

accident or paralysis into gradual recovery of his lost functions, and
through that

recovery of function, into the re-establishment of the health and
integrity of the

defective organ. If such things can be done for crippled legs, why
should it not be

possible to do something analogous for defective eyes? To this question
the

orthodox theory provides no answer—merely takes it for granted that the
defective

eye is incurable and cannot, in spite of its peculiarly intimate
relationship with the

psyche, be re-educated towards normality by any process of mind-body

co-ordination.

The orthodox theory is, on the face of it, so implausible, so
intrinsically unlikely

to be true, that one can only be astonished that it should be so
generally and so

unquestioningly accepted. Nevertheless, such is the force of habit and
authority that

we all do accept it. At the present time it is rejected only by those
who have

personal reasons for knowing it to be untrue. I myself happen to be one
of these. By

the greatest of good fortune I was given the opportunity to discover by
personal

experience that eyes do not lack the _vis medicatrix naturae,_ that the
palliation of

symptoms is not the only treatment for defective vision, that the
function of sight

can be re-educated towards normality by appropriate body-mind
co-ordination, and

4

finally that the improvement in functioning is accompanied by an
improvement in

the condition of the damaged organ. This personal experience has been
confirmed

by my observation of many others who have gone through the same process
of

visual education. It is there-fore no longer possible for me to accept
the currently

orthodox theory, with its hopelessly pessimistic practical corollaries.

5

CHAPTER II

_A Method of Visual Re-Education_

N the early years of the present century Dr. W. H. Bates, a New York
oculist,

Ibec

ame dissatisfied with the ordinary symptomatic treatment of eyes.
Seeking a

substitute for artificial lenses, he set himself to discover if there
was any way of

re-educating defective vision into a condition of normality.

As the result of his work with a large number of patients he came to the

conclusion that the great majority of visual defects were functional and
due to

faulty habits of use. These faulty habits of use were invariably
related, he found, to

a condition of strain and tension. As was to be expected from the
unitary nature of

the human organism, the strain affected both the body and the mind.

Dr. Bates discovered that, by means of appropriate techniques, this
condition of

strain could be relieved. When it had been relieved—when patients had
learnt to

use their eyes and mind in a relaxed way—vision was improved and
refractive

errors tended to correct themselves. Practice in the educational
techniques served to

build up good seeing habits in place of the faulty habits responsible
for defective

vision, and in many cases function came to be completely and permanently

normalized.

Now, it is a well-established physiological principle that improved
functioning

always tends to result in an improvement in the organic condition of the
tissues

involved. The eye, Dr. Bates discovered, was no exception to this
general rule.

When the patient learnt to relax his tenseness and acquired proper
seeing-habits, the

_vis medicatrix naturae_ was given a chance to operate—with the result
that, in many

cases, the improvement of functioning was followed by a complete
restoration of

the health and organic integrity of the diseased eye.

Dr. Bates died in 1931, and up to the time of his death he continued to
perfect and

develop his methods for the improvement of visual function. Furthermore,
during

the last years of Dr. Bates's life and since his death, his pupils, in
various parts of

the world, have devised a number of valuable new applications of the
general

principles which he laid down. By means of these techniques large
numbers of men,

women and children, suffering from visual defects of every kind, have
been

successfully re-educated into normality or towards normality. For anyone
who has

studied a selection of these cases, or who has himself undergone the
process of

visual re-education, it is impossible to doubt that here at last is a
method of treating

imperfect sight which is not merely symptomatic, but genuinely
aetiological—a

method which does not confine itself to _the_ mechanical neutralization
of defects but

aims at the removal of their physiological and psychological causes. And
yet, in

spite of the long period during which it has been known, in spite of the
quality and

quantity of the results obtained through its employment by competent
instructors,

Dr. Bates's technique still remains unrecognized by the medical and
optometrical

professions. It is, I think, worth while, before going any further, to
enumerate and

discuss the principal reasons for this, to my mind, deplorable state of
things.

REASONS FOR ORTHODOX DISAPPROVAL

In the __ first place, the very fact that the method is unrecognized and
lies outside

the pale of orthodoxy is a sufficient invitation to the petty
adventurers and

charlatans who hang upon the skirts of society, ever ready and eager to
take

advantage of human suffering. There exist, scattered about the world,
some scores

or perhaps hundreds of well-trained and thoroughly conscientious
teachers of Dr.

Bates's method. But there are also, unfortunately, a number of ignorant
and

unscrupulous quacks, who know little more of the system than its name.
The fact is

deplorable, but not at all surprising. The number of those who fail to
obtain relief

from the current symptomatic treatment of visual defect is considerable,
and the

Bates Method has a high reputation for effectiveness in such cases.
Moreover, the

technique is unorthodox; therefore no standards of competence are
legally imposed

6

upon its teachers. A large potential clientele, a desperate need of
help, and no

questions asked as to knowledge, character and ability! These are the
ideal

conditions for the practice of charlatanism. What wonder, then, if
certain un-

scrupulous people have taken advantage of the opportunities thus
offered? But

because _some_ unorthodox practitioners are charlatans, it does not
logically follow

that _all_ must be. I repeat that it does not logically follow; but,
alas, as the history of

almost any professional group clearly demonstrates, orthodox opinion
would

always very much like it to follow. That is one of the reasons why, in
this particular

case, the unwarranted assumption that the whole business is mere
quackery is

widely accepted, in spite of all evidence to the contrary. The cure for
charlatanism

is not the suppression of an intrinsically sound method, but proper
education for,

and control of, its teachers. Proper education and control are equally
the cure for that

licensed charlatanism among opticians, which has been described and
denounced in

articles appearing in _The Reader's Digest_ (1937) and the New York

_World-Telegram_ (1942).

The second reason for the non-acceptance of the method may be summed up
in

three words: habit, authority and professionalism. The symptomatic
treatment of

defective sight has been going on for a long time, has been carried to a
high degree

of perfection, and, within its limitations, is reasonably successful. If
it fails in a

certain proportion of cases to provide even adequate palliation of the
symptoms,

that is nobody's fault, but a condition inherent in the nature of
things. For years, the

highest medical authorities have all asserted this to be the case—and
who will

venture to question a recognized authority? Certainly not the members of
the

profession to which the authority belongs. Every guild and trade has its
own _esprit_

_de corps,_ its private patriotism, which makes it resent all rebellion
from within and

all competition or criticism from without.

Next there is the matter of vested interest. The manufacture of optical
glass is

now a considerable industry, and its retail sale, a profitable branch of
commerce, to

which access can be had only by persons who have undertaken a special
technical

training. That there should be, among these licensed persons, a strong
dislike to any

new technique, which threatens to make the use of optical glass
unnecessary, is

only natural. (It is perhaps worth remarking that, even if the value of
Dr. Bates's

technique were generally recognized, there would be small likelihood of
any

immediate or considerable decline in the consumption of optical glass.
Visual

re-education demands from the pupil a certain amount of thought, time
and trouble.

But thought, time and trouble are precisely what the overwhelming
majority of men

and women are not prepared to give, unless motivated by a passionate
desire or an

imperious need. Most of those who can get along more or less
satisfactorily with

the help of mechanical seeing-aids, will continue to do so, even when
they know

that there exists a system of training which would make it possible for
them, not

merely to palliate symptoms, but actually get rid of the causes of
visual defect. So

long as the art of seeing is not taught to children as a part of their
normal education,

the trade in artificial lenses is not likely to suffer more than a
trifling loss by reason

of the official recognition of the new technique. Human sloth and
inertia will

guarantee the opticians at least nine-tenths of their present business.)

Another reason for the orthodox attitude in this matter is of a strictly
empirical

nature. Oculists and optometrists affirm that they have never witnessed
the

phenomena of self-regulation and cure described by Bates and his
followers.

Therefore they conclude that such phenomena never take place. In this
syllogism

the premises are true, but the conclusion is unsound. It is quite true
that oculists and

optometrists have never observed such phenomena as are described by
Bates and

his followers. But this is because they have never had any dealings with
patients

who had learned to use their organs of vision in a relaxed, unstrained
way. So long

as the organs of vision are used under a condition of mental and
physical tension,

the _vis medicatrix naturae_ will not manifest itself, and the visual
defects will persist,

or actually become worse. Oculists and optometrists will observe the
phenomena

described by Bates as soon as they begin to relieve the strain in their
patients' eyes

by means of Bates's method of visual education. Because the phenomena
cannot

occur under the conditions imposed by orthodox practitioners, it does
not follow

7

that they will not occur when these conditions are changed, so that the
healing

powers of the organism are no longer hindered, but given free play.

To this empirical reason for rejecting the Batesian technique must be
added one

more—this time in the realm of theory. In the course of his practice as
an oculist, Dr.

Bates came to doubt the truth of the currently accepted hypothesis
regarding the

eye's power of accommodation to near and distant vision. This matter was
for long

the subject of heated debate, until finally, a couple of generations
ago, orthodox

medical opinion decided in favour of the Helmholtz hypothesis, which
attributes

the eye's power of accommodation to the action of the ciliary muscle
upon the lens.

Working with cases of defective vision, Dr. Bates observed a number of
facts which

the Helmholtz theory seemed powerless to explain. After numerous
experiments on

animals and human beings, he came to the conclusion that the principal
factor in

accommodation was not the lens, but the extrinsic muscles of the
eyeball, and that

the focussing of the eye for near and distant objects was accomplished
by the

lengthening and shortening of the globe as a whole. The papers
describing his

experiments were printed in various medical journals at the time, and
have been

summarized in the opening chapters of his book, _Perfect Sight Without
Glasses._

Whether Dr. Bates was right or wrong in his rejection of the Helmholtz
theory of

accommodation, I am entirely unqualified to say. My own guess, after
reading the

evidence, would be that both the extrinsic muscles and the lens play
their part in

accommodation.

This guess may be correct; or it may be incorrect. I do not greatly
care. For my

concern is not with the anatomical mechanism of accommodation, but with
the art

of seeing—and the art of seeing does not stand or fall with any
particular physio-

logical hypothesis. Believing that Bates's theory of accommodation was
untrue, the

orthodox have concluded that his technique of visual education must be
unsound.

Once again this is an unwarranted conclusion, due to a failure to
understand the

nature of an art, or psycho-physical skill (see Appendix I).

THE NATURE OF AN ART

Every psycho-physical skill, including the art of seeing, is governed by
its own

laws. These laws are established empirically by people who have wished
to acquire

a certain accomplishment, such as playing the piano, or singing, or
walking the

tight rope, and who have discovered, as the result of long practice, the
best and

most economical method of using their psycho-physical organism to this
particular

end. Such people may have the most fantastic views about physiology; but
this will

make no difference so long as their theory and practice of
psycho-physical func-

tioning remain adequate to their purpose. If psycho-physical skills
depended for

their development on a correct knowledge of physiology, then nobody
would ever

have learnt any art whatsoever. It is probable, for example, that Bach
never thought

about the physiology of muscular activity; if he ever did, it is quite
certain that he

thought incorrectly. That, however, did not prevent him from using his
muscles to

play the organ with incomparable dexterity. Any given art, I repeat,
obeys only its

own laws; and these laws are the laws of effective psycho-physical
functioning, as

applied to the particular activities connected with that art.

The art of seeing is like the other fundamental or primary
psycho-physical skills,

such as talking, walking and using the hands. These fundamental skills
are

normally acquired in early infancy or childhood by a process of mainly

unconscious self-instruction. It takes apparently several years for
adequate seeing

habits to be formed. Once formed, however, the habit of using the mental
and

physiological organs of vision correctly becomes automatic—in exactly
the same

way as does the habit of using the throat, tongue and palate for
talking, or the legs

for walking. But whereas it takes a very serious mental or physical
shock to break

down the automatic habit of talking or walking correctly, the habit of
using the

seeing organs as they should be used can be lost as the result of
relatively trivial

disturbances. Habits of correct use are replaced by habits of incorrect
use; vision

suffers, and in some cases the mal-functioning contributes to the
appearance of

diseases and chronic organic defects of the eyes. Occasionally nature
effects a

8

spontaneous cure, and the old habits of correct seeing are restored
almost

instantaneously. But the majority must consciously re-acquire the art
which, as

infants, they were able to learn unconsciously. The technique of this
process of

re-education has been worked out by Dr. Bates and his followers.

BASIC PRINCIPLE UNDERLYING THE PRACTICE OF EVERY ART

How can we be sure, it may be asked, that this is the correct technique?
The proof

of the pudding is in the eating, and the first and most convincing test
of the system

is that it works. Moreover, the nature of the training is such that we
should expect it

to work. For the Bates Method is based upon precisely the same
principles as those

which underlie every successful system ever devised for the teaching of

psycho-physical skill. Whatever the art you may wish to learn—whether it
be

acrobatics or violin playing, mental prayer or golf, acting, singing,
dancing or what

you will—there is one thing that every good teacher will always say:
Learn to

combine relaxation with activity; learn to do what you have to do
without strain;

work hard, but never under tension.

To speak of combining activity with relaxation may seem paradoxical ;
but in fact

it is not. For relaxation is of two kinds, passive and dynamic. Passive
relaxation is

achieved in a state of complete repose, by a process of consciously '
letting go.' As

an antidote to fatigue, as a method of temporarily relieving excessive
muscular

tensions, together with the psychological tensions that always accompany
them,

passive relaxation is excellent. But it can never, in the nature of
things, be enough.

We cannot spend our whole lives at rest, consequently cannot be always
passively

relaxing. But there is also something to which it is legitimate to give
the name of

dynamic relaxation. Dynamic relaxation is that state of the body and
mind which is

associated with normal and natural functioning. In the case of what I
have called

the fundamental or primary psycho-physical skills, normal and natural
functioning

of the organs involved may sometimes be lost. But having been lost, it
may

subsequently be consciously re-acquired by anyone who has learnt the
suitable

techniques. When it has been re-acquired, the strain associated with
impaired

functioning disappears and the organs involved do their work in a
condition of

dynamic relaxation.

Mal-functioning and strain tend to appear whenever the conscious 'I'
interferes

with instinctively acquired habits of proper use, either by trying too
hard to do well,

or by feeling unduly anxious about possible mistakes. In the building up
of any

psycho-physical skill the conscious 'I' must give orders, but not too
many

orders—must supervise the forming of habits of proper functioning, but
without

fuss and in a modest, self-denying way. The great truth discovered on
the spiritual

level by the masters of prayer, that' the more there is of the " I," the
less there is of

God,' has been discovered again and again on the physiological level by
the masters

of the various arts and skills. The more there is of the 'I,' the less
there is of

Nature—of the right and normal functioning of the organism. The part
played by

the conscious 'I* in lowering resistance and preparing the body for
disease has long

been recognized by medical science. When it frets too much, or is
frightened, or

worries and grieves too long and too intensely, the conscious 'I' may
reduce its body

to such a state that the poor thing will develop, for example, gastric
ulcers,

tuberculosis, coronary disease and a whole host of functional disorders
of every

kind and degree of seriousness. Even decay of the teeth has been shown,
in the case

of children, to be frequently correlated with emotional tensions
experienced by the

conscious 'I.' That a function so intimately related to our
psychological life as

vision should remain unaffected by tensions having their origin in the
conscious 'I'

is inconceivable. And, indeed, it is a matter of common experience that
the power

of seeing is greatly lowered by distressing emotional states. As one
practises the

techniques of visual education, one discovers the extent to which this
same

conscious 'I' can interfere with the processes of seeing even at times
when no

distressing emotions are present. And it interferes, we discover, in
exactly the same

way as it interferes with the process of playing tennis, for example, or
singing—by

being too anxious to achieve the desired end. But in seeing, as in all
other

9

psycho-physical skills, the anxious effort to do well defeats its own
object; for this

anxiety produces psychological and physiological strains, and strain is

incompatible with the proper means for achieving our end, namely normal
and

natural functioning.

10

CHAPTER III

_Sensing+ Selecting+ Perceiving= Seeing_

EFORE undertaking a detailed description of the techniques employed by
Dr.

BBa

tes and his followers, I propose to devote a few pages to a discussion
of the

process of seeing. Such a discussion will serve, I hope, to throw some
light on the

underlying reasons for these techniques, some of which might otherwise
appear

inexplicable and arbitrary.

When we see, our minds become acquainted with events in the outside
world

through the instrumentality of the eyes and the nervous system. In the
process of

seeing, mind, eyes and nervous system are intimately associated to form
a single

whole. Anything which affects one element in this whole exercises an
influence

upon the other elements. In practice, we find that it is possible to act
directly only

upon the eyes and the mind. The nervous system which connects them
cannot be

influenced except indirectly.

The structure and mechanism of the eye have been studied in minute
detail, and

good descriptions of these things can be found in any text-book of
ophthalmology

or physiological optics. I will not attempt to summarize them in this
place; for my

concern is not with anatomical structures and physiological mechanisms,
but with

the process of seeing—the process whereby these structures and
mechanisms are

used to provide our mind with visual knowledge of the external world.

In the paragraphs that follow I shall make use of the vocabulary
employed by Dr.

C. D. Broad in _The Mind and Its Place in Nature,_ a book which, for
subtlety and

exhaustiveness of analysis and limpid clarity of exposition, takes rank
among the

masterpieces of modern philosophical literature.

The process of seeing may be analysed into three subsidiary processes—a

process of sensing, a process of selecting and a process of perceiving.

That which is sensed is a set of _sensa_ within a field. (A visual
_sensum_ is one of

the coloured patches which form, so to say, the raw material of seeing,
and the

visual field is the totality of such coloured patches which may be
sensed at any

given moment.)

Sensing is followed by selecting, a process in which a part of the
visual field is

discriminated, singled out from the rest. This process has, as its
physiological basis,

the fact that the eye records its clearest images at the central point
of the retina, the

macular region with its minute _fovea centralis,_ the point of sharpest
vision. There is

also, of course, a psychological basis for selection; for on any given
occasion there

is generally something in the visual field which it is in our interest
to discriminate

more clearly than any other part of the field.

The final process is that of perceiving. This process entails the
recognition of the

sensed and selected _sensum_ as the appearance of a physical object
existing in the

external world. It is important to remember that physical objects are
not given as

primary data. What is given is only a set of _sensa; and a sensum,_ in
Dr. Broad's

language, is something 'non-referential.' In other words, the _sensum,_
as such, is a

mere coloured patch having no reference to an external physical object.
The

external physical object makes its appearance only when we have
discriminatively

selected the _sensum_ and used it to perceive with. It is our minds
which interpret the

_sensum_ as the appearance of a physical object out in space.

It is clear from the behaviour of infants that we do not enter the world
with

full-fledged perceptions of objects. The newborn child starts by sensing
a mass of

vague, indeterminate _sensa,_ which it does not even select, much less
perceive as

physical objects. Little by little, it learns to discriminate the
_sensa_ that have, for its

particular purposes, the greatest interest and significance, and with
these selected

_sensa_ it gradually comes, through a process of suitable
interpretation, to perceive

external objects. This faculty for interpreting _sensa_ in terms of
external physical

objects is probably inborn; but it requires, for its adequate
manifestation, a store of

accumulated experiences and a memory capable of retaining such a store.
The

interpretation of _sensa_ in terms of physical objects becomes rapid and
automatic

11

only when the mind can draw on its past experience of similar _sensa_
successfully

interpreted in a similar way.

In adults, the three processes of sensing, selecting and perceiving are
for all

intents and purposes simultaneous. We are aware only of the total
process of seeing

objects, and not of the subsidiary processes which culminate in seeing.
It is possible,

by inhibiting the activity of the interpreting mind, to catch a hint of
the raw _sensum,_

as it presents itself to the eyes of the new-born child. But such hints
are very

imperfect at the best, and of brief duration. For the adult, a complete
recapture of

the experience of pure sensation, without perception of physical
objects, is possible,

in most cases, only in certain abnormal conditions, when the upper
levels of the

mind have been put out of action by drugs or disease. Such experiences
cannot be

introspected while they are going on; but they can often be remembered,
when the

mind has recovered its normal condition. By calling up these memories,
we can

provide ourselves with an actual picture of those processes of sensing,
selecting and

perceiving, which culminate in the end-process of seeing physical
objects in the

external world.

AN ILLUSTRATION

Here, by way of example, is an account of an experience of my own, while

'coming out' of an anaesthetic administered in the dentist's chair.
Returning

awareness began with pure visual sensations completely devoid of
significance.

These, as I can remember them, were not of objects existing 'out there'
in the

familiar, three-dimensional world of everyday experience. They were just
coloured

patches, existing in and for themselves, unrelated not only to the
external world, but

also to myself—for the knowledge of self was still wholly lacking, and
these

meaningless and unattached sense impressions were not _mine;_ they
simply _were._

This kind of awareness lasted for a minute or two; then as the effect of
the

anaesthetic wore off a little further, a notable change took place. The
coloured

patches were no longer sensed merely as coloured patches, but became
associated

with certain objects 'out there' in the external three-dimensional
world—

specifically, the façades of houses seen through the window facing the
chair in

which I was reclining. Attention travelled across the visual field
selecting

successive parts of it and perceiving these selected parts as physical
objects. From

being vague and meaningless, the _sensa_ had developed into
manifestations of de-

finite things belonging to a familiar category and situated in a
familiar world of

solid objects. Thus recognized and classified, these perceptions (I do
not call them

'my' perceptions, for 'I' had not yet made my appearance on the scene)
became

immediately clearer, while all sorts of details, unnoticed so long as
the _sensa_ lacked

significance, were now perceived and evaluated. That which was now being

apprehended was no longer a set of mere coloured patches, but a set of
aspects of the

known, because remembered, world. Known and remembered by whom? For a

time there was no indication of an answer. But after a little while,
imperceptibly,

there emerged myself, the subject of the experience. And with this
emergence there

came, as I remember, a further clarification of vision. What had been at
first raw

_sensa_ and had then become, by interpretation, the appearances of known
varieties of

objects, underwent a further transformation and became objects
consciously related

to a self, an organized pattern of memories, habits and desires. By
becoming related

to the self, the perceived objects became more visible, inasmuch as the
self, to

which they had now entered into relation, was interested in more aspects
of external

reality than had been the merely physiological being which had sensed
the coloured

patches, and the more developed, but still un-self-conscious being which
had

perceived these _sensa_ as appearances of familiar objects 'out there'
in a familiar kind

of world. 'I' had now returned; and since 'I' happened to take an
interest in

architectural details and their history, the things seen through the
window were

immediately thought of as a member of a new category—not merely as
houses, but

as houses of a particular style and date, and as such possessed of
distinguishing

characteristics which,, when looked for, could be seen even by eyes as
inadequate

as my own then were. These distinguishing characteristics were now
perceived, not

12

because my eyes had suddenly improved, but simply because my mind was
once

more in a condition to look for them and register their significance.

I have dwelt at some length on this experience, not because it is in any
way

remarkable or strange, but simply because it illustrates certain facts
which every

student of the art of seeing must constantly bear in mind. These facts
may be

formulated as follows.

Sensing is not the same as perceiving.

The eyes and nervous system do the sensing, the mind does the
perceiving.

The faculty of perceiving is related to the individual's accumulated
experiences,

in other words, to memory.

Clear seeing is the product of accurate sensing and correct perceiving.

Any improvement in the power of perceiving tends to be accompanied by an

improvement in the power of sensing and of that product of sensing and
perceiving

which is seeing.

PERCEPTION DETERMINED BY MEMORY

The fact that heightened powers of perception tend to improve the
individual's

capacity for sensing and seeing is demonstrated, not merely under such
abnormal

circumstances as I have described, but in the most ordinary activities
of everyday

life. The experienced microscopist will see certain details on a slide;
the novice will

fail to see them. Walking through a wood, a city dweller will be blind
to a multitude

of things which the trained naturalist will see without difficulty. At
sea, the sailor

will detect distant objects which, for the landsman, are simply not
there at all. And

so on, indefinitely. In all such cases improved sensing and seeing are
the result of

heightened powers of perceiving, themselves due to the memory of similar

situations in the past. In the orthodox treatment of defective vision
attention is paid

to only one element in the total process of seeing, namely the
physiological

mechanism of the sensing-apparatus. Perception and the capacity to
remember,

upon which perception depends, are completely ignored. Why and with what

theoretical justification, goodness only knows. For in view of the
enormous part

which mind is known to play in the total process of seeing, it seems
obvious that

any adequate and genuinely aetiological treatment of defective vision
must take

account, not only of sensing, but also of the process of perceiving, as
well as that

other process of remembering, without which perceiving is impossible. It
is a

highly significant fact that, in Dr. Bates's method for re-educating
sufferers from

defective vision, these mental elements in the total process of seeing
are not

neglected. On the contrary, many of his most valuable techniques are
directed

specifically to the improvement of perception and of that necessary
condition of

perception, memory.

13

CHAPTER IV

_Variability of Bodily and Mental Functioning_

HE most characteristic fact about the functioning of the total organism,
or of any

Tpart

of the organism, is that it is not constant, but highly variable.
Sometimes

we feel well, sometimes we feel poorly; sometimes our digestion is good,
some-

times it is bad; sometimes we can face the most trying situations with
calm and

poise, sometimes the most trifling mishap will leave us irritable and
nervous. This

non-uniformity of functioning _is_ the penalty we pay for being living
and

self-conscious organisms, unremittingly involved in the process of
adapting

ourselves to changing conditions.

The functioning of the organs of vision—the sensing eye, the
transmitting

nervous system and the mind that selects and perceives—is no less
variable than the

functioning of the organism as a whole, or of any other part of the
organism. People

with unimpaired eyes and good habits of using them possess, so to speak,
a wide

margin of visual safety. Even when their seeing organs are functioning
badly, they

still see well enough for most practical purposes. Consequently they are
not so

acutely conscious of variations in visual functioning as are those with
bad seeing

habits and impaired eyes. These last have little or no margin of safety;
consequently

any diminution in seeing power produces noticeable and often distressing
results.

Eyes can be impaired by a number of diseases. Some of these affect only
the eye;

in others, the impairment of the eye is a symptom of disease in some
other part of

the body—in the kidneys, for example, or the pancreas, or the tonsils.
Many other

diseases and many conditions of mild, chronic disorder cause no organic

impairment of the eye, but interfere with proper functioning—often, it
would seem,

by a general lowering of physical and mental vitality.

Faulty diet and improper posture may also affect vision (see Appendix
II).

Other causes of poor visual functioning are strictly psychological.
Grief, anxiety,

irritation, fear, and indeed any of the negative emotions may cause a
temporary, or,

if chronic, an enduring condition of mal-functioning.

In the light of these facts, which are matters of everyday experience,
we are able

to recognize the essential absurdity of the average person's behaviour,
when there is

a falling off in the quality of his seeing. Ignoring completely the
general condition

of his body and his mind, he hurries off to the nearest spectacle shop
and there gets

himself fitted for a pair of glasses. The fitting is generally done by
someone who

has never seen him before and who therefore can have no knowledge of him
either

as a physical organism or as a human individual. Regardless of the
possibility that

the failure to see properly may be due to temporary malfunctioning
caused by some

bodily or psychological derangement, the customer gets his artificial
lenses and,

after a short, sometimes a long, period of more or less acute
discomfort, while they

are being 'broken in,' generally registers an improvement in vision.
This

improvement, however, is won at a cost. The chances are that he will
never be able

to dispense with what Dr. Luckiesh calls those 'valuable crutches,' but
that, on the

contrary, the strength of the crutches will have to be increased as his
power of

seeing progressively diminishes under their influence. This is what
happens when

things go well. But there is always a minority of cases in which things
go badly, and

for these the prognosis is thoroughly depressing.

In children, visual functioning is very easily disturbed by emotional
shock, worry

and strain. But instead of taking steps to get rid of these distressing
psychological

conditions and to restore proper habits of visual functioning, the
parents of a child

who reports a difficulty in seeing, immediately hurry him off to have
his symptoms

palliated by artificial lenses. As light-heartedly as they would buy
their little boy a

pair of socks or their little girl a pinafore, they have the child
fitted with glasses,

thus committing him or her to a complete life-time of dependence upon a

mechanical device which may neutralize the symptoms of faulty
functioning, but

only, it would seem, by adding to its causes.

14

DEFECTIVE EYES CAPABLE OF HAVING FLASHES OF NORMAL VISION

At an early stage in the process of visual re-education one makes a very

remarkable discovery. It is this. As soon as the defective organs of
vision acquire a

certain degree of what I have called dynamic relaxation, flashes of
almost or

completely normal vision are experienced. In some cases these flashes
last only a

few seconds; in others, for somewhat longer periods.

Occasionally—but this is rare—the old bad habits of improper use
disappear at once and

permanently, and with the return to normal functioning there is a
complete

normalization of the vision. In the great majority of cases, however,
the flash goes

as suddenly as it came. The old habits of improper use have re-asserted
themselves;

and there will not be another flash until the eyes and their mind have
been coaxed

back towards that condition of dynamic relaxation, in which alone
perfect seeing is possible.

To long-standing sufferers from defective vision, the first flash often
comes with

such a shock of happy amazement that they cannot refrain from crying
out, or even

bursting into tears. As the art of dynamic relaxation is more and more
completely

acquired, as habits of improper use are replaced by better habits, as
visual functioning improves, the

flashes of better vision become more frequent and of longer duration,
until at last they

coalesce into a continuous state of normal seeing. To perpetuate the
flash—such is

the aim and purpose of the educational techniques developed by Dr. Bates
and his

followers.

The flash of improved vision is an empirical fact which can be
Demonstrated by

anyone who chooses to fulfil the conditions on which it depends. The
fact that,

during a flash, one may see with extreme clarity objects that, at
ordinary times, are

blurred or quite invisible, shows that temporary alleviation of mental
and muscular

strain results in improved functioning and the temporary disappearance
of

refractive error.

VARIABLE EYES VERSUS INVARIABLE SPECTACLES

Under changing conditions, the defective eye can vary the degree of
deformation

imposed upon it by habits of improper use. This capacity for variation
which may

be towards normality or away from it is mechanically diminished or even
inhibited

altogether by the wearing of artificial lenses. The reason is simple.
Every artificial

lens is ground to correct a specific error of refraction. This means
that an eye cannot

see clearly through a lens, unless it is exhibiting exactly that error
of refraction which

the lens was intended to correct. Any attempt on the part of the
spectacled eyes to

exercise their natural variability is at once checked, because it always
results in

poorer vision. And this is true even in cases where the eye varies in
the direction of

normality; for the eye without errors of refraction cannot see clearly
through a lens

designed to correct an error it no longer has.

It will thus be seen that the wearing of spectacles confines the eyes to
a state of rigid

and unvarying structural immobility. In this respect artificial lenses
resemble, not the crutches to

which Dr. Luckiesh has compared them, but splints, iron braces and
plaster casts.

In this context it seems worth while to mention certain recent and
revolutionary

advances in the treatment of infantile paralysis. These new techniques
were

developed by the Australian nurse, Sister Elizabeth Kenny, and have been

successfully used in her own country and in the United States. Under the
old

method of treatment the paralysed muscle groups were immobilized by
means of

splints and plaster casts. Sister Kenny will have nothing to do with
these devices.

Instead, she makes use, from the first onset of the disease, of a
variety of techniques

aimed at relaxing and re-educating the affected muscles, some of which
are in a

spastic condition of over-contraction, while others (incapable of moving
owing to

the spasm in neighbouring muscle groups) rapidly 'forget' how to perform
their

proper functions. Physiological treatment, such as the application of
heat, is com-

bined with an appeal to the patient's conscious mind, through verbal
instruction and

demonstration. The results are remarkable. Under the new treatment, the

recovery-rate is from seventy-five to one hundred per cent., depending
on the site

of the paralysis. Between the Kenny method and the method developed by
Dr.

Bates there are close and significant analogies. Both protest against
the artificial

15

immobilization of sick organs. Both insist on the importance of
relaxation. Both

affirm that defective functioning can be re-educated towards normality
by proper

mind-/ body co-ordination. And, finally, both work.

16

CHAPTER V

_Causes of Visual Mal-Functioning: Disease and Emotional Disturbances_

N the preceding chapter I spoke of the impairment of visual functioning
due, first,

Ito diseases having their seat in the eye itself or elsewhere in the
body and, second,

to psychological derangements connected with the negative emotions of
fear, anger,

worry, grief and the like. It goes without saying that in these cases
the restoration of

perfect functioning is contingent upon the removal of its physiological
and

psychological causes of dysfunction. Meanwhile, however, very
considerable

improvement can almost always be made by the acquisition and practice of
the art

of seeing.

It can be laid down as a general physiological principle that
improvements in the

functioning of a part of the body always tend to be followed by organic

improvements within that part. In the case of diseases which have their
seat in the

eye itself, old habits of improper functioning are very often a
causative or pre-

disposing factor. Consequently, the acquisition of new and better habits
often leads

to rapid improvement in the organic condition of the impaired eye.

Even in those cases where the impairment of the eye is only a symptom of
a

disease having its seat in some other part of the body, the acquisition
of habits of

proper use will generally produce a certain improvement in the organic
condition of

the eye.

It is the same with psychological disorders. Perfect functioning can
scarcely be

expected so long as there is a persistence of the condition of negative
emotion

which produced the dysfunction. Nevertheless, consistent practice of the
art of

seeing can do much to improve functioning, even while the undesirable

psychological condition persists; and without practice of the art of
seeing it will be

very difficult, even when the disturbing conditions have passed, to get
rid of the

habits of improper use contracted while these conditions were present.
Moreover,

improvement of visual function may react favourably upon the disturbing
condition

of mind. Most kinds of improper functioning result in nervous tensions.
(In the case

of long-sighted persons, especially those having a tendency to outward
squint, the

nervous tension is often extreme, and the victim may be reduced to a
condition of

almost insane restlessness and agitation.) Such nervous tensions
aggravate the

disturbing psychological conditions. The intensification of the
disturbance

increases the dysfunction and so heightens the tensions; the heightened
tensions

further aggravate the disturbing conditions. And so on, in a vicious
circle. But

luckily there are also virtuous circles. Improvement of functioning
relieves the

tensions associated with dysfunction, and this relief of tension acts
favourably upon

the general conditions. Relief of tension will not, of course, get rid
of the disturbing

conditions; but it may help to make them progressively more bearable and
less

harmful in their effects on visual function.

The moral of all this is clear. Where there is reason to believe that
improper

visual functioning is caused, wholly or in part, by disease or
disturbing emotional

conditions, take all necessary steps to get rid of these causes; but in
the meanwhile

learn the art of seeing.

CAUSES OF VISUAL MAL-FUNCTIONING: BOREDOM

Another common impediment to good seeing is boredom, which lowers the

general bodily and mental vitality, including that of the organs of
vision. From a

paper by Joseph E. Barmack, entitled' Boredom and Other Factors in the

Physiology of Mental Effort' and published (New York, 1937) in the
_Archives of_

_Psychology,_ I select a couple of passages which have a certain
relevance to our

present subject.

'Reports of boredom are accompanied very frequently by reports of
increased

appreciation of such distracting stimuli as pains, aches, eye-strain,
hunger.'

17

The increased appreciation of eye-strain leads to an increased effort to
see; and

this increased effort, coupled with the increased effort to fix the
attention in spite of

being bored, results (in a manner which will be explained in the next
section) in a

lowering of vision and consequent enhanced sense of eye-strain.

In regard to the effect of mental states upon the condition of the body,
Mr.

Barmack writes as follows:

'Where there is boredom, the situation seems unpleasant, because one is

responding to it with inadequate physiological adjustments, caused in
turn by

inadequate motivation.'

The converse of this statement is also true. Inadequate physiological
adjustments,

due to organic or functional defects (in this instance of the organs of
seeing), react

unfavourably upon motivation by diminishing the individual's desire to
perform a

given task, because it is so difficult for him to do it well. This in
turn enhances the

inadequacy of physiological adaptation, and so on in a vicious circle,
boredom

increasing functional defect and functional defect increasing boredom.
The process

is clearly illustrated in children suffering from defective vision.
Because the

hyperope finds reading uncomfortable, he tends to be bored with close
work, and

his boredom increases the mal-functioning which makes him long-sighted.

Similarly, the myope is handicapped when playing games or associating
with

people, whose faces he cannot clearly see at more than a short distance;

consequently, he is bored with sports and social life, and the boredom
reacts

unfavourably on his visual defect. An improvement in vision changes the
quality of

motivation, and reduces the field in which boredom is experienced.
Diminished

boredom and improved motivation result in improved physiological
adjustments

and so help forward the improvement of vision.

Once more, the moral is plain. Avoid, if possible, being bored yourself
or boring

others. But if you can't help being bored or boring, learn the art of
seeing for your

own benefit, and teach it to your victims for theirs.

CAUSES OF VISUAL MAL-FUNCTIONING: MISDIRECTED ATTENTION

All the above-mentioned physical and psychological factors making for

improper visual functioning are factors that lie, so to speak, outside
the process of

seeing. We have now to consider an even more fertile source of
dysfunction lying

within the seeing-process, namely improperly directed attention.

Attention is the indispensable condition of the two mental elements in
the total

process of seeing; for without attention there can be no selection from
the general

sense-field and no perception of the selected _sensa_ as the appearances
of physical

objects.

As with all other psycho-physical activities, there is a right way of
directing

attention, and there is also a wrong way. When attention is directed in
the right way,

visual functioning is good; when it is directed in the wrong way, proper
functioning

is interfered with, and the ability to see falls off.

Much has been written on the subject of attention, and many experiments
have

been performed with a view to measuring its intensity, its span, its
effective

duration, its bodily correlations. Only a few of these general
considerations and

particular facts are relevant to our present subject, and I shall
therefore confine

myself solely to these.

Attention is essentially a process of discrimination—an act of
separating and

isolating one particular thing or thought from all the other things in
the sense-field

and thoughts in the mind. In the total process of seeing, attention is
closely

associated with selection; indeed, it is almost identical with that
activity.

The various kinds and degrees of attention may be classified in a number
of

different ways. So far as seeing is concerned, the most significant
classification is

that which divides all acts of attention into the two main classes of
spontaneous

attention and voluntary attention.

Spontaneous attention is the kind of attention we share with the higher

animals—the unforced act of selective awareness which is determined by
the

18

biological necessities of keeping alive and reproducing the species, or
by the

exigencies of our second nature, in other words, of our habits and
established

patterns of thought, feeling and behaviour. This kind of attention
involves no effort

when it is shifting and transitory and not much effort when it is
prolonged—for

spontaneous attention may be prolonged, even in the animals. (The cat
lying in wait

beside a mouse hole is an obvious example.)

Voluntary attention is, so to speak, the cultivated variety of the wild,
spontaneous

growth. It is found only in man, and in animals subjected by human
beings to some

form of training. It is the attention associated with intrinsically
difficult tasks, or

with tasks which we have to perform, even though we don't particularly
want to. A

small boy studying algebra exhibits voluntary attention—that is, if he
exhibits any

attention at all. The same boy playing a game exhibits spontaneous
attention.

Voluntary attention is always associated with effort, and tends more or
less rapidly

to produce fatigue.

We must now consider the bodily correlations of attention, in so far as
these

affect the art of seeing. The first and most significant fact is that
sensing, selecting

and perceiving cannot take place without some degree of bodily movement.

'Without motor elements,' writes Ribot, in his classical study, _The
Psychology_

_of Attention,_ ' perception [and it is clear from the context that he
includes under

this term sensing and selecting as well as perceiving] is impossible. If
the eye be

kept fixed upon a given object without moving, perception after a while
grows

dim, and then disappears. Rest the tips of the fingers upon a table
without

pressing, and the contact at the end of a few minutes will no longer be
felt. But a

motion of the eye or of the finger, be it ever so slight, will re-arouse
perception.

Consciousness is only possible through change; change is only possible
through

movement. It would be easy to expatiate at great length upon this
subject; for

although the facts are very manifest and of common experience,
psychology has

nevertheless so neglected the role sustained by movements, that it
actually forgot

at last that they are the fundamental condition of cognition in that
they are the

instrument of the fundamental law of consciousness, which is relativity,
change.

Enough has now been said to warrant the unconditional statement that,
where

there is no movement, there is no perception.'

It is more than fifty years since Ribot enunciated this Important truth
about the

connection between movement and perception. In theory, everyone now
agrees that

Ribot was right; and yet orthodox ophthalmologists have made no effort
to discover

how this principle could be applied in practice, so as to improve visual
functioning.

That task was left to Dr. Bates, in whose system the fundamental
importance of

movement as an aid to seeing is continually stressed.

Meanwhile the researches of the experimental psychologists have
confirmed

Ribot's categorical conclusion, and furnished theoretical justification
for many of

the practices and techniques taught by Dr. Bates and his followers.

In the paper already cited, Dr. J. E. Barmack lays it down that 'freely
shifting

attention is an important prop of vital activity. If attention is
restricted to an

inadequately motivating task, vital activity is apt to be depressed.'
And the

importance of mobility is similarly stressed by Professor Abraham Wolf,
in his

article on 'Attention' in the last edition of the _Encyclopaedia
Britannica._ ' The

concentration of attention upon some object or thought may continue for
a

considerable time among normal people. But what is commonly called an
object or

a thought is something very complex, having many parts or aspects, and
our

attention really passes from part to part, backwards and forwards all
the time. Our

attention to what may be seriously called a single thing, affording no
opportunities

for the movement of attention from part to part, say a small patch of
colour, cannot

be held for more than about a second, without serious risk of falling
into a hypnotic

trance, or some similar pathological condition.' Where seeing is
concerned, this

continuous movement of attention from part to part of the object under
inspection is

normally accompanied by a corresponding movement of the physical

sensing-apparatus. The reason for this is simple. The clearest images
are recorded

in the macular area in the centre of the retina, and particularly at the
minute _fovea_

19

_centralis._ The mind, as it selects part after part of the object for
perception, causes

its eyes to move in such a way that each successive part of the object
is seen in turn

by that portion of the eye which records the clearest image. (Ears have
nothing

corresponding to the _fovea centralis;_ consequently the indispensable
shifting of

attention within the auditory field does not involve any parallel
shifting of the

bodily organ. The discriminating and selecting of auditory _sensa_ can
be done by the

mind alone, and do not require corresponding movements of the ears.)

We have seen that, to be effective, attention must be continuously on
the move,

and that, because of the existence of _the fovea centralis,_ the eyes
must shift as

continuously as the attention of the mind controlling them. But while
attention is

always associated, in normal subjects, with continuous eye movements, it
is also

associated with the inhibition of movements in other parts of the body.
Every

bodily movement is accompanied by a more or less vague sensation; and
when we

are trying to pay attention to something, these sensations act as
distracting stimuli.

To get rid of such distractions, we do what we can to prevent our bodies
from

moving. If the act of attention is accompanied by manual or other
activities

connected with the object being attended to, we strive to eliminate all
movements

except those strictly necessary to our task. If we have no task to
perform, we try to

inhibit all our movements, and to keep our bodies perfectly still. We
are all familiar

with the behaviour of an audience at a concert. While the music is being
played, the

people sit without stirring. As the last chord dies away, there breaks
out, along with

the applause (or apart from it, if the intermission is between two
movements of a

symphony), a positive tornado of coughs, sneezes and random fidgetings.
The

explosive intensity of this outburst is an indication of the strength
and completeness

of the inhibitions imposed by attention to the music. Francis Galton
once took the

trouble to count the number of bodily movements observable in an
audience of fifty

persons who were listening to a rather boring lecture. The average rate
was

forty-five movements a minute, or one fidget, more or less, for each
member of the

audience. On the rare occasions when the lecturer deviated into
liveliness, the

fidget-rate declined by upwards of fifty per cent. Inhibition of
unconscious

activities goes hand in hand with that of conscious movements. Here are
some of

the findings in regard to respiration and heart beat, as summarized by
R. Philip in a

paper on _The Measurement of Attention_ published (1928) by the Catholic
University

of America.

'In visual attention respiration is decreased in amplitude, but the rate
is

sometimes quickened, sometimes slowed; in auditory attention, the rate
is always

slowed, but the effect upon amplitude is variable. Restricted breathing
often

gives a slower heart rate, particularly in the first moments of
attention. This

slowed rate is to be explained from inhibited breathing, rather than
from direct

influence of attention.'

Continuous movement of the eyes, inhibition of movement in the rest of
the

body—such is the rule where visual attention is concerned. And so long
as this rule

is observed, and there is no disease or psychological disturbance,
visual functioning

will remain normal. Abnormality sets in when the inhibition of movement,
which is

right and proper in the other parts of the body, is carried over to the
eyes, where it is

entirely out of place. This inhibition of the movement of the eyes—a
movement of

which we are mainly unconscious—is brought about by a too greedy desire
to see.

In our over-eagerness we unconsciously immobilize the eyes, in the same
way as

we have immobilized the other parts of the body. The result is that we
begin to stare

at that part of the sense-field which we are trying to perceive. But a
stare always

defeats its own object; for, instead of seeing more, a person who has
immobilized

his sensing-apparatus (an act which also immobilizes the closely
correlated

attention) thereby automatically lowers his power of seeing, which
depends, as we

have learnt, upon the uninterrupted mobility of the sensing eyes and of
the

attending, selecting and perceiving mind associated with the eyes.

Moreover, the act of staring (since it represents an effort to repress
movements

which are normal and habitual) is always accompanied by excessive and

continuous tension, and this, in its turn, produces a sense of
psychological strain.

20

But where there is excessive and continuous tension, normal functioning
becomes

impossible, circulation is reduced, the tissues lose their resistance
and their powers

of recovery. To overcome the effects of impaired functioning, the victim
of bad

seeing habits stares yet harder, and consequently sees less with greater
strain. And

so on, in a descending spiral.

There is good reason to suppose that improperly directed attention,
resulting in

the immobilization of the eyes and mind, is the greatest single cause of
visual

mal-functioning. The reader will notice, when I come to describe them in
detail,

that many of the techniques developed by Dr. Bates and his followers are
speci-

fically aimed at restoring to the eye and mind that mobility, without
which, as the

experimental psychologists all agree, there cannot be normal sensation
or

perception.

21

SECTION II

22

CHAPTER VI

_Relaxation_

N this second section, I shall describe in some detail a number of
beneficial

Itec

hniques developed by Dr. Bates and other exponents of the art of seeing.

Printed instructions can never replace the personal ministrations of a
competent

teacher; nor is it possible, in a short book, to indicate exactly how
much stress

should be laid on any given technique in any given case of visual
mal-functioning.

Every individual has his or her own particular problems. Equipped with
adequate

knowledge, any individual can discover the solution of those problems.
But

(especially in difficult cases) a gifted and experienced teacher will
certainly make

the discovery much more expeditiously, and be able to apply his
knowledge much

more effectively, than the sufferer can do for himself. And yet, in
spite of all this,

printed instructions still have their use. For the art of seeing
includes a number of

techniques which are profitable to all, whatever the nature and degree
of their

mal-functioning. Most of these techniques are extremely simple;
consequently

there is very little danger of their being misunderstood by those who
read

descriptions of them. A text-book can never be as good as a competent
teacher; but

it can certainly be better than nothing.

PASSIVE RELAXATION: PALMING

Relaxation, as we have seen, is of two kinds, passive and dynamic. The
art of

seeing includes techniques for producing either kind—passive relaxation
of the

visual organs during periods of rest, and dynamic relaxation, through
normal and

natural functioning in times of activity. Where the organs of vision are
concerned,

complete passive relaxation can be achieved, but is less beneficial than
a mixed

state, combining elements of both kinds of relaxation.

The most important of these techniques of (predominantly) passive
relaxation is

the process which Dr. Bates called 'palming.' In palming the eyes are
closed and

covered with the palms of the hands. To avoid exerting any pressure upon
the

eyeballs (which should never be pressed, rubbed, massaged or otherwise
handled)

the lower part of the palms should rest upon the cheek bones, the
fingers upon the

forehead. In this way light can be completely excluded from the eyes,
even though

the eyeballs remain untouched.

Palming can be done most satisfactorily when one is seated with the
elbows

resting upon a table, or upon a large, solidly stuffed cushion laid
across the knees.

When the eyes are closed and all light has been excluded by the hands,
people with

relaxed organs of vision find their sense-field uniformly filled with
blackness. This

is not the case with those whose visual functioning is abnormal. Instead
of

blackness, these people may see moving grey clouds, darkness streaked
with light,

patches of colour, all in an endless variety of permutations and
combinations. With

the achievement of passive relaxation of the eyes and the mind
associated with

them, these illusions of movement, light and colour tend to disappear,
and are

replaced by uniform blackness.

In his book, _Perfect Sight Without Glasses,_ Dr. Bates advises the
candidate for

relaxation to 'imagine black,' while palming. The purpose of this is to
come,

through imagination, to an actual seeing of black. The technique he
describes

works satisfactorily in some cases; but in others (and they probably
constitute a

majority of all sufferers from defective vision) the attempt to imagine
black

frequently leads to conscious effort and strain. Thus the technique
defeats its own

object, which is relaxation. Towards the end of his life, Dr. Bates
modified his

procedure in this matter, and the most successful of his followers have
done the

same. The person who palms his eyes is no longer told to imagine
blackness, but to

occupy his mind by remembering pleasant scenes and incidents out of his
own

personal history. After a period more or less long, according to the
intensity of the

strain involved, the field of vision will be found to be uniformly
black. Thus, the

23

same goal is reached as is done by imagining black—but without risk of
making

efforts or creating tensions. Care should be taken, when remembering
past episodes,

to avoid anything in the nature of a 'mental stare.' By fixing the mind
too rigidly

upon a single memory image, one may easily produce a corresponding
fixation and

immobilization of the eyes. (There is nothing surprising or mysterious
in this;

indeed, in view of the unitary nature of the human organism, or
mind-body, this is

just the sort of phenomenon one would expect to happen.) To avoid mental
staring,

with its concomitant fixation of the eyes, one should always, while
palming,

remember objects that are in movement.

For example, one may wish to revisit in imagination the scenes of one's
childhood.

If this is done, one should imagine oneself walking about through the
remembered

landscape, noticing how its constituent parts change their aspects as
one moves. At

the same time, the scenes thus evoked may be peopled with human beings,
dogs,

traffic, all going about their business, while a brisk wind stirs the
leaves of the trees

and hurries the clouds across the sky. In such a world of phantasy,
where nothing is

fixed or rigid, there will be no danger of immobilizing the inward eye
in a fixed

stare; and where the inward eye moves without restraint, the outward,
physical eye

will enjoy a similar freedom. By using the memory and imagination in the
way I

have described it is possible to combine, in the single act of palming,
the beneficial

features of both passive and dynamic relaxation—rest and natural
functioning.

This, I believe, is one of the principal reasons why palming is better
for the

organs of vision than any form of wholly passive relaxation. When the
activities of

the memory and imagination are completely inhibited, such wholly passive

relaxation can be carried, after some practice, to the point where the
eyelids and the

eyeball itself lose their tone and go soft. This condition is so remote
from the

normal state of the eyes that its attainment does little or nothing to
help in

improving vision. Palming, on the contrary, keeps the mental powers of
attention

and perception at work in the effortless, freely shifting way which is
natural to them,

at the same time as it rests the eyes.

The other main reasons for the efficacy of palming are of a physical
nature. There

is refreshment in the temporary exclusion of light, and comfort in the
warmth of the

hands. Moreover, all parts of the body carry their own characteristic
potentials ; and

it is possible that the placing of the hands over the eyes does
something to the

electrical condition of the fatigued organs —something that
re-invigorates the

tissues and indirectly soothes the mind.

Be this as it may, the results of palming are remarkable. Fatigue is
rapidly

relieved; and when the eyes are uncovered, vision is often noticeably
improved, at

any rate for a time.

When there is strain and when vision is defective, there can never be
too much

palming. Many who have experienced its benefits deliberately set aside
regular

periods for palming. Others prefer to take such opportunities as each
day may

casually offer, or as their own fatigue may make it urgently necessary
for them to

create. In even the busiest lives there are blank and unoccupied
intervals, which

may profitably be used to relax the eyes and mind, and so to gain
improved vision

for further work. In all cases, the important thing to remember is that
prevention is

better than cure, and that, by devoting a few minutes to relaxation, one
may spare

oneself many hours of fatigue and lowered visual efficiency. In the
words of Mr. F.

M. Alexander, we all tend to be greedy 'end-gainers,' paying no
attention to our

'means-whereby.' And yet it must be obvious to anyone who will give the
subject a

moment's thought, that the nature of the means employed will always
determine the

nature of the end attained. In the case of the eyes and the mind
controlling them,

means that involve unrelieved strain result in lowered vision and
general physical

and mental fatigue. By allowing ourselves intervals of the right sort of
relaxation,

we can improve the means-whereby and so arrive more easily at our end,
which is,

proximately, good vision and, ultimately, the accomplishment of tasks
for which

good vision is necessary.

'Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all the
rest shall be

added.' This saying is as profoundly true on the plane of the
psycho-physiological

skills as it is upon the planes of spirituality, ethics and politics. By
seeking first

24

relaxed visual functioning of the kind that Nature intended us to have,
we shall find

that all the rest will be added to us, in the form of better sight and
heightened

powers of work. If, on the contrary, we persist in behaving as greedy
and

thoughtless end-gainers, aiming directly at better vision (through
mechanical

devices for neutralizing symptoms) and increased efficiency (through
unremitting

strain and effort), we shall end by seeing worse and getting less work
done.

Where circumstances make it difficult or embarrassing to assume the
attitude of

palming, it is possible to obtain a certain measure of relaxation by
palming

mentally—that is, by closing the eyes, imagining that they are covered
with the

hands and remembering some pleasant scene or episode, as suggested in an
earlier

paragraph. This should be accompanied by a conscious 'letting go' of the
eyes—a

'thinking of looseness' in relation to the strained and tired tissues.
Purely mental

palming is not so beneficial as palming, which is both mental and
physical; but it is

a good second-best.

25

CHAPTER VII

_Blinking and Breathing_

T is hard to say whether the kind of relaxation achieved through the
techniques

Idescri

bed in the present and subsequent chapters is predominantly passive or

predominantly dynamic. Luckily, it is of no practical importance how we
answer the

question. The significant facts about them are that all of them are
designed to

relieve strain and tension; that all may and should be practised as
relaxation drills in

periods specially set aside for the purpose; and that all may and should
be

incorporated into the everyday business of seeing, so as to produce and
maintain

the state of dynamic relaxation associated with normal functioning. I
shall begin

with a brief account of blinking, and its importance in the art of
seeing.

NORMAL AND ABNORMAL BLINKING HABITS

Blinking has two main functions: to lubricate and cleanse the eyes with
tears; and

to rest them by periodically excluding light. Dryness of the eyes
predisposes them

to inflammation, and is often associated with blurring of vision. Hence
the

imperative need for frequent lubrication—that is to say, for frequent
blinking.

Moreover, dust (as everyone knows who has ever cleaned a window) will
stick to

even the smoothest surface, and render the most transparent material
opaque. The

eyelids, as they blink, wash the exposed surfaces of the eyes with
tears, and prevent

them from becoming dirty. At the same time, when blinking is frequent,
as it should

be, light is excluded from the eyes during perhaps five per cent, or
more of all the

waking hours.

Eyes in a condition of dynamic relaxation blink often and easily. But
where there

is strain, blinking tends to occur less frequently, and the eyelids work
tensely. This

would seem to be due to that same misdirection of the attention, which
causes the

improper immobilization of the sensing-apparatus.

The inhibition of movement, natural and normal in the other parts of the
body, is

carried over, not only to the eyes, but to their lids as well. A person
who stares

closes the eyelids only at long intervals. This fact is a matter of such
common

observation that, when novelists write about a stare, they generally
qualify the word

with the epithet, 'unwinking.'

Movement, as the psychologists have long been insisting, is one of the

indispensable conditions of sensing and perceiving. But so long as the
eyelids are

kept tense and relatively immobile, the eyes themselves will remain
tense and

relatively immobile. Consequently, anyone who wishes to acquire the art
of seeing

we1! must cultivate the habit of frequent and effortless blinking. When
mobility

has been restored to the eyelids, the restoration of mobility to the
sensing-apparatus

will be comparatively easy. Also, the eyes will enjoy better
lubrication, more rest,

and the improved circulation that is always associated with, unstrained
muscular

movement.

Those who blink too little and too tensely—and they comprise a majority
of the

sufferers from defective vision—must consciously acquire, or re-acquire,
the habit

of blinking often and easily. This can be done by pausing every now and
then to

perform a brief blinking-drill—half a dozen light, butterfly-wing
blinks; then a few

seconds of relaxed closure of the lids; then more blinks, and another
closing. And

so on for half a minute or a minute. Repeated at frequent intervals
(say, every hour

or so) these drills will help to build up the habit of frequent blinking
during the rest

of the day. A person who has become 'blink-conscious' will also be
conscious of his

own tendencies to immobilize the eyes and lids, and will be able to
check the

incipient stare by frequent and easy closures of the lids. Frequent
blinking is

especially important for those engaged in any form of difficult and
detailed work,

requiring close attention. When busy with such tasks, it is fatally easy
to fix the

eyes and lids, with resulting strain, fatigue, dryness of the cornea,
inflammation and

impairment of vision. Frequent and easy blinking will often bring a
measure of

26

relief that seems out of all proportion to the simplicity of the means
employed.

Besides blinking, one may, with advantage, periodically squeeze the eyes
tight shut,

reinforcing the action of the lids with that of the other facial
muscles. This should

be done on all occasions when one is tempted to rub the eyes—a barbarous
and

brutal method of doing with the knuckles what the beautifully adjusted
eyelids can

do much more safely and just as effectively. It may also be done
occasionally, even

when there is no itching or other discomfort in the eyes—merely to
increase local

circulation and stimulate the secretion of tears.

Massage of the eyes themselves is always undesirable; but a gentle
rubbing of the

temples will often be found soothing and refreshing. Eye fatigue may
also be

relieved by rubbing and kneading the muscles of the upper part of the
nape of the

neck. (In certain cases of defective vision, appropriate treatment by a
capable

osteopath will often produce excellent results.) People who are subject
to eye-strain

may profitably use this rudimentary kind of massage upon themselves two
or three

times a day and follow it up by a period of palming.

NORMAL AND ABNORMAL BREATHING HABITS

As was pointed out in the first section of this book, experimental
psychologists

have noted a fairly regular correlation between the state of
attentiveness and a

modification of the normal rate and amplitude of breathing. To put it
more simply,

they have noticed that, when we look at something attentively, we tend
either to

hold our breath for many seconds at a stretch, or alternatively, if we
do breathe, to

breathe less deeply than at ordinary times. The reason for this is that,
when we are

trying to concentrate our attention, we find that the sounds and the
sense of

muscular movement, associated with breathing, are sources of
distraction. We try

to get rid of these distractions, either by breathing less deeply, or by
suspending our

breathing altogether during relatively prolonged periods of time.

In their strained effort to see, people with defective vision tend to
carry this

normal interference with breathing to entirely abnormal extremes. Many
of them,

when paying close attention to something they are particularly anxious
to see,

behave almost as if they were diving for pearls, and remain for
incredibly long

periods without drawing breath. But vision depends to a remarkable
extent upon

good circulation; and circulation can be described as good only when it
is sufficient

in quantity (which it is not when the mind is under strain and the eyes
are in a

condition of nervous muscular tension), and at the same time of good
quality (which

it certainly is not when restricted breathing has left the blood
imperfectly

oxygenated).

The quantity of circulation in and around the eyes may be increased by
means of

relaxation, passive and dynamic. The quality can be improved by learning

consciously to breathe, even while paying attention. Some of the
techniques of

relaxation have already been described, and I shall have occasion, later
on, to

mention several others. In this sub-section our concern is only with
breathing.

In correcting abnormal breathing habits, the first thing to do is to
become aware

that they _are_ abnormal. Impress upon yourself the fact that, among
persons with

defective sight, there is a regular correlation between attentive
looking and a quite

unnecessary, indeed positively harmful, interference with breathing.
Kept in the

back of the mind, this thought will periodically pop out into
consciousness; and if it

does this at a time when you are paying close attention to something,
the chances

are that you will catch yourself behaving as though you were a pearl
fisher ten

fathoms under the surface of the sea. But you are not a pearl fisher,
and the element

in which you live is not water, but life-giving air. Therefore, fill
your lungs with the

stuff—not violently, as though you were doing deep-breathing exercises,
but in an

easy, effortless way, expiration following inspiration in a natural
rhythm. Continue,

while breathing in this way, to pay attention to the thing you want to
see. (In later

chapters of this book I shall describe the proper way of paying
attention.) You will

find it possible, after a little practice, to be just as concentratedly
attentive when

breathing normally, or even rather more deeply than at ordinary times,
as it is when

behaving like a pearl fisher. In a little while, you will find that
breathing while

27

paying attention has become habitual and automatic. Any improvement in
the

quality of circulation is reflected immediately in better vision; and
when, through

relaxation, quantity has also been increased, this improvement in vision
will be

even greater.

In cases of failing sight, due to old age or other causes, and in
certain pathological

conditions of the eye, some doctors, particularly those of the Viennese
school, make

successful use of mechanical methods for increasing local circulation.
Temporary

hyperaemia of the regions round the eye is produced by dry cupping of
the temples,

or by the application of leeches, or sometimes by fastening round the
neck a

specially made elastic collar, so adjusted as to permit the blood to
flow freely into

the head through the arteries, while reducing the amount to return by
slightly

constricting the veins. None of these procedures should be tried out,
except under

expert medical advice; nor, indeed, is it necessary in most cases that
they should be

tried. Relaxation and proper breathing will bring about an equal
improvement in

circulation, more slowly indeed, but more safely and naturally, and by
methods

which are entirely under the control of the person employing them.
Moreover, the

resulting improvement in visual functioning and in the organic condition
of the

eyes will be the same, whichever means of increasing circulation are
employed. The

mechanical methods are no better than the self-directed, psycho-physical
methods

here described. Indeed, in so far as they _are_ mechanical, they are
intrinsically less

satisfactory. If I mention them at all, it is merely in order to
corroborate the

assertion that vision and the organic health of the eyes depend upon
adequate

circulation.

The extent of this dependence can be demonstrated in a very simple way.
As you

read, draw a deep breath and then exhale. While the air is being
breathed out, you

will notice that the print before your eyes becomes perceptibly clearer,
blacker and

more distinct. This temporary improvement of vision is due to a slight
temporary

hyperaemia in the head; and this, in turn, is due to the slight
constriction of the

veins in the neck caused by the act of expiration. More than the usual
amount of

blood is present in and around the eyes—with the result that the
sensing-apparatus

does its work more efficiently, and the mind is given better material
with which to

do its perceiving and seeing.

28

CHAPTER VIII

_The Eye, Organ of Light_

N insects and fishes, in birds and beasts and men, eyes have been
developed with

Ithe

express purpose of responding to light waves. Light is their element;
and when

they are deprived of light, either wholly or in part, they lose their
power and even

develop serious diseases, such as the nystagmus of coal miners. This
does not mean,

of course, that eyes must be perpetually exposed to light. Sleep is
necessary to the

mind that perceives, and for seven or eight hours at least out of the
twenty-four,

darkness is necessary to the sensing-apparatus. The eyes do their work
most easily

and efficiently when they are allowed to alternate between good solid
darkness and

good bright light.

THE CURRENT FEAR OF LIGHT

In recent years there has grown up a most pernicious and entirely
unfounded

belief that light is bad for the eyes. An organ which, for some scores
of millions of

years, has been adapting itself very successfully to sunshine of all
degrees of

intensity, is now supposed to be incapable of tolerating daylight
without the

mitigating intervention of tinted goggles, or lamplight, except when
diffused through

ground glass or reflected from the ceiling. This extraordinary notion
that the organ

of light perception is unfitted to stand light has become popular only
in the last

twenty years or so. Before the war of 1914 it was, I remember, the
rarest thing to

see anyone wearing dark glasses. As a small boy, I would look at a
be-goggled man

or woman with that mixture of awed sympathy and rather macabre curiosity
which

children reserve for those afflicted with any kind of unusual or
disfiguring physical

handicap. Today, all that is changed. The wearing of black spectacles
has become

not merely common, but creditable. Just how creditable is proved by the
fact that

the girls in bathing suits, represented on the covers of fashion
magazines in summer

time, invariably wear goggles. Black glasses have ceased to be the badge
of the

afflicted, and are now compatible with youth, smartness and sex appeal.

This fantastic craze for blacking out the eyes had its origin in certain
medical

circles, where a panic terror of the ultra-violet radiations in ordinary
sunlight

developed about a generation back; it has been fostered and popularized
by the

manufacturers and vendors of coloured glass and celluloid spectacle
frames. Their

propaganda has been effective. In the Western world, millions of people
now wear

dark glasses, not merely on the beach, or when driving their cars, but
even at dusk,

or in the dim-lit corridors of public buildings. Needless to say, the
more they wear

them, the weaker their eyes become and the greater their need for '
protection' from

the light. One can acquire an addiction to goggles, just as one can
acquire an

addiction to tobacco or alcohol.

This addiction has its origin in the fear of light—a fear which those
who have it

feel to be justified by the discomfort they experience when their eyes
are exposed to

too intense a brightness. The question arises: why this fear and this
discomfort?

Animals get on very happily without goggles; so do primitive men. And
even in

civilized societies, even in these days when the virtues of coloured
glass are

everywhere persuasively advertised, millions of people face the sunlight
without

goggles and, so far from suffering any ill effects, see all the better
for it. There is

every reason to suppose that, physiologically, the eyes are so
constructed that they

can tolerate illuminations of very high intensity. Why, then, do so many
people in

the contemporary world experience discomfort when exposed to light even
of

relatively low intensity?

REASONS FOR THE FEAR OF LIGHT

There seem to be two main reasons for this state of things. The first is
connected

with the silly craze for shutting out the light, described in an earlier
paragraph.

Medical alarmists and the advertisers, who exploit the opinions of these
learned

29

gentlemen for their own profit, have convinced large sections of the
public that

light is harmful to the eyes. This is not true; but the belief that it
is true can cause a

great deal of harm to those who entertain it. If faith can move
mountains, it can also

ruin vision —as anyone may see for himself who has watched the behaviour
of

light-fearing people when suddenly exposed to sunshine. They _know_ that
light is bad

for them. Consequently, what grimaces! What frowns! What narrowings of
the

lids! What screwings-up of the eyes! In a word, what manifest symptoms
of strain

and tension! Originating in a false belief, the purely mental terror of
light expresses

itself physically in terms of a strained and thoroughly abnormal
condition of the

sensing-apparatus. Eyes in such a condition are no longer capable of
reacting as they

should to the external environment. Instead of accepting the sunlight
easily and as a

blessing, they suffer discomfort and even develop an inflammation of the
tissues.

Hence more pain and a heightening of fear, a confirmation of the false
faith that light

is harmful. There is also another reason for the discomfort which so
many people

now experience when exposed to light. They may not start with any _a
priori_ terror

of light; but because their seeing organs are strained and defective,
owing to habits

of wrong use, their eyes and mind may be incapable of reacting normally
to the

external environment. Strong light is painful to the tense, strained
seeing organs.

Because it is painful, a fear of light develops in the mind; and this
fear becomes, in

its turn, a cause of further strain and discomfort.

CASTING OUT FEAR

The fear of light, like all other kinds of fear, can be cast out of the
mind; and the

physical discomfort experienced when the sensing-apparatus is exposed to
light

can be prevented by means of suitable techniques. When this has been
done, it will

no longer be necessary to black out the eyes with tinted goggles. Nor is
this all. In

the process of learning to react to light in a normal and natural way,
defective

seeing organs can do much to relieve the strain that impairs their
visual power.

Acquiring normal reactions to light is one of the essential procedures
in the art of

seeing. Appropriate drill in connection with sunlight will produce a
valuable kind

of passive relaxation; and the power so acquired of dealing easily and
effortlessly

with the strongest illuminations can be carried over into active life,
to become an

element in that dynamic relaxation of the seeing organs, without which
there can

never be perfect vision.

In all cases where light causes discomfort, the first thing to do is to
cultivate an

attitude of confidence. We must bear steadily in mind that light is not
harmful, at

least in any degree of intensity we are ever likely to meet with; and
that, if in fact it

produces discomfort, the fault is ours for being afraid of it, or for
having habitually

used our eyes in the wrong way.

PRACTICAL TECHNIQUES

Confidence in the harmlessness of light should be translated into
practice by a

process of gradual habituation. If the eyes shrink from sunlight when
open, start by

accustoming them to sunlight when they are closed. Sitting comfortably,
lean back

and, 'letting go and thinking looseness,' close the eyes and turn them
towards the

sun. To avoid internal staring and the possibility of too prolonged an
exposure to

the light of any given portion of the retina, move the head gently but
fairly rapidly

from side to side. A lateral swing of a few inches will be quite
sufficient, so long as

it is kept up continuously.

In some persons sunning of the eyes will produce discomfort even when
the lids

are closed. Where this is the case, it will be as well to start by
directing the eyes at

the sky, and not directly at the sun. When the light of the sky seems
tolerable, one

may turn for short periods to the sun. As soon as any discomfort is
felt, one should

turn away, palm the eyes for a little, and then start again. The closed
lids may be

sunned for several minutes at a stretch (with brief interruptions for
palming, if the

need of it is felt); and the process should be repeated several times in
the course of

the day.

After a very little while most people will find that they can, without
discomfort,

30

take the sunlight upon the open eyes. The most satisfactory procedure is
as follows.

Cover one eye with the palm of the hand and, taking care to swing the
head from

side to side as before, allow the other eye to travel back and forth
three or four times

across the sun, blinking rapidly, lightly and easily as you do so. Then
cover the eye

that has been exposed to the sunlight and repeat the same process with
the other eye.

Alternate for a minute or so; then palm until the after-images
disappear. When the

eyes are uncovered, it will generally be found that vision has
distinctly improved,

while the organs feel relaxed and suffused with a warm sense of
well-being.

When the open eyes are sunned one at a time, in the manner described
above, the

light seems far less dazzling than when both are sunned simultaneously.
Because

the illumination seems more intense, simultaneous sunning of both eyes
may result

in involuntary shrinking, which is then overcome by an effort of will
that results, in

its turn, in a state of tension. This condition may postpone the
achievement of the

complete relaxation which should normally follow the process of sunning.

Nevertheless, those who wish to sun both eyes simultaneously may do so
in

moderation without any fear of harm. It may be noted that the process is

accompanied, at first, by a copious discharge of tears and followed by
after-images

brighter and more lasting than those which attend the sunning of each
eye

separately. The tears are refreshing, and the after-images soon
disappear with

palming. On the whole, however, the method of sunning one eye at a time
is to be

preferred.

HARMLESSNESS OF SUNNING

The enemies of Dr. Bates's method are fond of telling hair-raising
stories about

the effects of sunning the eyes. Those who do it are solemnly warned
that they will

go blind, either at once or (when in fact this doesn't happen) at some
future date.

From personal experience, as well as from fairly extensive enquiries
among people

who have taught and practised the technique, I am convinced that these
stories are

wholly untrue. When the eyes are sunned in the manner described in the
preceding

paragraphs, no harmful effects ever follow. On the contrary, the organs
are

agreeably relaxed, circulation is speeded up, and the vision is
improved. Moreover,

many forms of inflammation, both of the eye and its lids, tend to clear
up very

rapidly when the eyes are sunned. There is nothing particularly
surprising about

these facts. Sunlight is a powerful germicide and, used in moderation,
it acts as a

valuable therapeutic agent when directed on the human body. There is no
reason

why it should not act upon the eyes in the same beneficial way as it
acts on other

external organs.

The sun produces harmful effects upon the eyes only when people stare
fixedly at

it. For example, after following the phases of an eclipse, many persons
report a

temporary impairment of vision, mounting sometimes to partial or even
complete

blindness. In almost all cases, the condition disappears after a short
time, leaving

the sufferer none the worse. Among the many thousands who have used the

technique developed by Dr. Bates and his followers, a very few have had
a similar

experience. Neglecting their teachers' advice to keep the head
continuously

swinging from side to side, they have stared fixedly at the sun. If the
results are bad,

they have only themselves to blame.

The truth of the matter is that, like everything else in the world,
sunlight is good

for us in reasonable quantities, bad when taken to excess or in the
wrong way. If

people are foolish enough to eat ten pounds of strawberries at a
sitting, or swallow a

quart of castor oil, or take a hundred aspirin tablets, they will have
to suffer for their

folly. Nevertheless, strawberries, castor oil and aspirin are freely
sold. The fools

must take their chance. It is the same with sunlight. Every summer a
great many

silly people sun-bathe to the point of burning their skin, running a
high fever and

even enlarging their spleens. Nevertheless, sun-bathing is permitted and

encouraged, because it is pleasant and beneficial for people who do it
reasonably.

So too with the eyes. In spite of all the good advice that may be given,
some

imbeciles will stare fixedly at the sun and so temporarily impair their
vision. This is

no reason for discouraging those who have the sense to sun their eyes
wisely from

31

undertaking a practice which will certainly do them good.

Those who have learnt to take the sun on the closed and open eyes, will
note a

progressive diminution of their susceptibility to glare and bright
illuminations. The

fear of light and the discomfort caused by light will vanish, and along
with them

will go the tinted goggles, the frowns and grimaces, and the strain that
is always

associated with fear and discomfort.

To maintain normal reactions to light, one should carry over into active
life a

modified version of the sunning technique, which is practised during
periods

specially set aside for the purpose. If the light seems unpleasantly
bright when one

goes out of doors, one should close the eyes for a moment, 'let go and
think loose-

ness,' then re-open as gently and relaxedly as possible. After this the
eyes should be

raised to the sun, which may be taken for a few seconds on the closed
lids and

afterwards (always with a swing of the head) on the open eyes. When one
looks

down again, the brightness of the world around will seem very tolerable,
and there

will be no sense of strain or tension. These procedures should be
repeated at

frequent intervals when one is out of doors on a bright day. They will
help to keep

the eyes in a state of dynamic relaxation and to improve the vision.

At night one may use a bright source of artificial light in lieu of the
sun. For this

purpose, as well as for reading, I have found a 150-watt spot- or
flood-light very

useful. These bulbs, which are like self-contained head-lamps, with a
curved and

silvered back and a circular transparent front, through which the
concentrated beam

of light is projected, will give a thousand foot-candles at three or
four feet. Using

the same procedure as with the sun, one may take this light on the
closed and open

eyes. Improved relaxation, circulation and vision follow exactly as with
the sun.

Those who wish to increase the illumination may do so by reflecting the
light from

a spot-lamp into their eyes by means of a convex shaving mirror. At the
focus of the

mirror there will be warmth and illumination not greatly inferior to
that of the sun

itself, when looked at on a bright summer's day.

32

CHAPTER IX

_Central Fixation_

N the present chapter and the two which follow I shall give an account
of certain

Iproce

dures designed to encourage mobility in the defective organs of vision.
For

more than half a century, as we have seen, experimental psychologists
have

proclaimed that adequate cognition of the external world depends upon
movement.

This fact is, obviously and on the face of it, enormously significant
for vision. And

yet, for some inexplicable reason, orthodox ophthalmologists have never
paid the

smallest attention to it. As a class, they have been, and still are,
content to prescribe

crutches for the mechanical palliation of symptoms, and to leave the
matter at that.

The first person to devote any serious thought to this manifestly
important problem

was Dr. W. H. Bates—and all he got for his pains was the professional
cold

shoulder and the reputation of being a crank, or even a quack.

Before describing any of the procedures designed to encourage habits of
mobility,

I shall give a brief account of the mental and physiological conditions
which make

such procedures necessary. As explained in the first section of this
book, attention

is naturally mobile, and shifts continually from one part of the
apprehended

physical object to another part, one aspect of the thought under
consideration to

another aspect. Where seeing is concerned, this continuous shifting of
the mind is

normally accompanied by continuous shifting of the sensing-apparatus.
The reason

for this must be sought in the structure of the eye, which records
perfectly clear

images only at the central portion of the retina known as the _macula
lutea,_ with its

point of sharpest precision, the _fovea centralis._

This rule, that we see best only that small area at which we are looking
directly,

out of the centre of sight, has one important exception. At night, when
there is a

minimum of light, we do our best and clearest sensing with the outer
portions of the

retina. This fact was discovered centuries ago by the astronomers, who
found that,

when looking directly at a constellation, they could see only the
brighter stars,

whereas, when they looked somewhat to one side of it, they could detect
other stars

of smaller magnitude. In the words of the eminent French physicist,
François Arago,

'in order to see a very dimly lighted object, it is necessary not to
look at it.' For this

reason, when trying to find your way in the dark, you should not look
straight

ahead; for then you will not see the dimmer objects immediately in front
of you. If,

on the contrary, you turn your head, first to one side, then to the
other, you will see

what is directly in front of you' out of the corner of your eye.'

Exactly the opposite is the case where vision in the daytime, or under
bright

artificial illumination, is concerned. In these circumstances (and all
that follows

applies to vision under good illumination), one senses and sees best
only that

portion of the visible environment which throws its image upon the
_macula_ and

_fovea:_ images recorded by the outer portions of the retina are less
distinct as to form,

and less accurate as to colour, than those recorded by the minute
central area.

At average reading distance from the eyes—say fourteen inches—one can
easily

see the whole page of a book. But the area seen with greatest clarity
will be a circle

of about half an inch in diameter, while the maximum degree of precision
will be

confined to a single letter at the centre of that circle. This single
letter represents

that part of the total visible environment whose image falls, at a given
moment,

upon _the fovea centralis;_ the half-inch circle, that part whose image
falls upon the

_macula_ surrounding _the fovea centralis._ All the rest of the printed
page gets

recorded by the outer portions of the retina, and is consequently sensed
less clearly.

Because of the existence of this central area of clearer sensing, the
mobility of

attention necessarily entails a corresponding mobility of the eyes. For,
as the mind

shifts its attention to a given part of the regarded object, the eyes
are moved

automatically and unconsciously, so that the part being attended to
shall be the part

most clearly sensed—or, to put the matter in physiological terms, so
that the light

rays reflected from the part that is being attended to shall fall
directly upon the

_macula_ and _fovea centralis._ When this happens we are said to be
sensing with

33

central fixation. In order to sense every part of an object with central
fixation, or in

other words, with maximum clarity, the eye must make an enormous number
of

minute and rapid shifts from point to point. When it fails to shift, it
fails to see all

parts of the object with central fixation and therefore with maximum
clarity.

Mobility, then, is the normal and natural condition of the selecting and

perceiving mind; and, because of the need for central fixation, mobility
is also the

normal and natural condition of the sensing eye. During infancy and
childhood,

most people learn unconsciously to keep their eyes and mind in this
condition of

mobility, and to do their sensing with central fixation. But
unfortunately, for any

one of a great variety of reasons, the habits of proper use may be lost.
In one way or

another, the conscious 'I' interferes with natural and normal
functioning. The result

is that attention comes to be directed fixedly, instead of with a
continuous easy

movement from point to point, while the eyes cease to shift, and develop
a stare.

Mal-functioning produces mental and physical strains, which, in their
turn, produce

more malfunctioning. Owing to strain and mal-functioning, the
sensing-apparatus

undergoes distortion, and errors of refraction and other undesirable
physical

conditions result. Vision deteriorates, and as the bad habits of use
become

ingrained with time, the eyes (above all, when fitted with spectacles)
lose more and

more of their power of self-regulation and resistance to disease.

That staring should always be accompanied by strain and an impairment of

vision is not in the least surprising. For when people stare, they try
to achieve the

impossible; they try to see every part of a large area as clearly as
every other part.

But the structure of the eye is such that it _cannot_ sense every part
of the area as

clearly as it senses that one small part which is being looked at with
central

fixation—in other words, that part whose image falls upon the _macula_
and _fovea_

_centralis._ And the nature of the mind is such that it _cannot_ do a
proper job of

perceiving, unless its attention is continually shifting from point to
point of the

regarded object. To stare is to ignore these necessary conditions of
normal sensing

and normal seeing. In his greedy anxiety to achieve his end, which is to
do the

greatest possible amount of good seeing in the shortest possible time,
the starer

neglects the only means whereby this end can be achieved. Instead, he
tries to do

the impossible. The results are just as bad as one would expect them to
be—strain,

with consequent errors of refraction and poor vision.

Occasionally, the habit of central fixation is never acquired, most
often owing to

diseases of the eye during infancy. In the great majority of cases,
however, it is

acquired, along with the other habits of normal use, and only lost at a
later

date—owing, generally, to the interference of the conscious 'I,' whose
fears and

worries, whose cravings and griefs and ambitions are for ever
interfering with the

normal functioning of the physical organs, the nervous system and the
mind. When

the habit of central fixation has been lost for some time, the _macula
and. fovea_ seem

to lose some of their natural sensibility through disuse. At the same
time the habit of

trying to sense objects equally clearly with all parts of the retina
leads to an

over-stimulation of some or all of the eccentric areas, which do their
best to

increase their sensibility in order to respond to this stimulation.
Sometimes this

process goes so far that a person will, so to speak, manufacture for
himself a false

_macula_ somewhere on the outer edges of his retina. When this happens,
he gets his

clearest vision, not when looking straight in front of him, but only
when the object

is regarded at an angle. This sideways vision can never be anything like
so clear as

normal vision in the central, macular area. But owing to the _macula's_
loss of

sensibility through disuse, and to the strength of long-established bad
habits, it is the

best vision that such an eye and mind can have.

In the majority of cases, however, the loss of the good habits of
mobility and

central fixation, and the acquisition of the bad habit of staring, or
trying to see every

part of a large area equally well, do not result in this extreme degree
of eccentric

fixation. The starer still looks straight ahead. But because he tries to
see everything

equally well, he reduces the sensibility of his _macula_ and _fovea_ and
builds up an

undesirable and abnormal relationship between the perceiving mind and
the

peripheral areas of the retina, which are now used for sensing as much
as, or more

than, the central areas. Eccentric fixation is diffused over the whole
retina, instead

34

of being confined, as in the extreme cases, to a false _macula_ at one
particular point.

Without central fixation and mobility there cannot be normal vision.
Hence the

great importance of procedures which teach the normal-sighted person how
to

preserve the good habits, on which (though he generally does not know
it) his good

sight depends, and which help the person with defective vision to
overcome the bad

habits, responsible for his bad sight. For those who have never learnt
central

fixation, and for those whose eccentric fixation is extreme, the
services of a skilled

and experienced teacher will probably be indispensable. The rest, if
they are shown

how, can do much to help themselves. It is for them that I describe the
simple, but

effective, techniques which follow.

35

CHAPTER X

_Methods of Teaching the Eyes and Mind to Move_

ENTRAL fixation can be taught directly, by methods which permit the
pupil to

Cexpe

rience the fact that he cannot see every part of a large area with equal

clarity. Or it may be taught indirectly, by methods which build up
habits of

mobility— methods which compel the mind to shift its attention and the
eye to shift

its area of greatest sensitivity from point to point of the regarded
object.

Use of the direct method entails a certain danger of increasing me
strains from

which the pupil already suffers. It seems best, there fore, to approach
the goal

indirectly. Just as, in the case of palming, the best way to see black
is not to try to

see it, but to remember pleasant scenes and events out of the past, so
the best way to

achieve central fixation is not to try to see one small area better than
all others, but

to cultivate the mobility which is the necessary condition for seeing
successive

small areas of an object with maximum clarity. Accordingly, I shall
begin by

describing a number of procedures for increasing the mobility of the
eyes and mind;

and only when this has been done shall I give an account of methods
aimed directly

at making the pupil conscious of central fixation. Those whose sight is
defective

will be well advised to follow the same order in their educational
practice. First

learn to keep the eyes and the attention in constant easy movement;
then, when

movement has re-activated them, learn consciously to recognize the
manifestations

of central fixation and, by recognizing them, to increase their
intensity.

SWINGING

Whenever we move, objects in the external world appear to move in the
opposite

direction. Those which are nearest to us seem to move most rapidly, and
the rate of

apparent movement diminishes with the increase of distance from the
eyes, so that

objects at a great distance seem to be almost stationary, even when
viewed from an

express train or a speeding car.

The various procedures, to which Dr. Bates gave the name of 'swinging,'
are

primarily designed to make the person who practises them aware of this
apparent

movement of external objects and, by this means, to encourage a
condition of free

mobility in the sensing-apparatus and the controlling mind. Where such
mobility

exists, psychological and ocular tensions are relaxed, staring is
replaced by rapidly

shifting central fixation, and there is a marked improvement in vision.

It is possible to invent and practise a great number of swings; but all
of them are

variations on one or other of a few fundamental types, which alone will
be

described.

The Short Swing should be performed while standing in front of a window,
or in

a doorway, or anywhere else where one can arrange to look past some
near-by

object at some more distant object. For example, the upright bar of a
window frame

may serve as the near-by object, while a tree or part of a house on the
other side of

the street will serve as the more distant object. Inside a room, the
near-by object can

be a tall standard lamp, or a piece of string hanging from the ceiling
light, while a

picture on the wall or an ornament on the mantelpiece will do for the
more distant

object. Standing with the feet about eighteen inches apart, one should
swing the

body, regularly, gently and not too rapidly, from side to side, throwing
the weight

on to each foot alternately. The swing should not be wide—less than a
foot in all is

quite sufficient—and the head should not be turned in relation to the
shoulders, but

should remain looking straight ahead, moving in unison with the trunk.
As one

swings to the right, the near-by object (say the window bar) will appear
to move to

the left across the more distant object. As one swings to the left, it
will appear to

move to the right. This apparent movement should be noted during a
number of

swings _;_ then the eyes should be closed. Still swinging from side to
side, visualize

the apparent movement of the window bar across the tree at the end of
the garden or

the house across the street. Then open again and, during a few more
swings, watch

36

the real bar as it moves back and forth. Close again and visualize. And
so on for a

minute or two, or longer.

This procedure has several advantages. It makes the mind aware of
movement

and, so to say, friendly to it. It helps to break the defective eye's
bad habit of staring.

It produces automatically a shifting of attention and of the _fovea
centralis._ All these

contribute directly to the dynamic relaxation of the organs of seeing.
An indirect

contribution to the same result comes from the rhythmic movement of
swinging,

which acts upon mind and body in the same soothing way as do the
movements of

the cradle and the rocking-chair.

To these soothing effects of the Short Swing, the Long Swing adds direct
and

beneficial action upon the spine by gentle and repeated twisting. When
practising

this swing, one stands with the feet apart, as before; but instead of
confining the

movement of the body to a pendulum-like short sway, one swings in a
wider arc,

turning the trunk upon the hips and the head upon the shoulders as one
does so. As

one swings to the left, the weight is thrown on to the left foot, while
the heel of the

right is lifted. Conversely, the left heel is lifted as one rums to the
right. The eyes, as

they travel from one side to the other, cover an arc of one hundred and
eighty

degrees, or even more, and the external world seems to oscillate back
and forth in a

wide sweep. No attempt should be made to pay attention to anything in
the eyes'

moving sense-field. The attitude of mind, while one is practising this
swing, should

be one of complete passivity and indifference. One just 'lets the world
go by'

without caring, without even making any effort to perceive what it is
that is going

by. The selecting and perceiving mind is out of action, and one is down
to pure

sensing—a physiological organism taking a holiday from the conscious
'I.'

Such a holiday from the self is extremely restful. Moreover, since it is
generally

the conscious 'I' that is responsible for poor seeing (either through
harbouring

negative emotions, or through misdirecting its attention, or in some
other way

ignoring nature's rules for normal visual functioning), this temporary
inhibition of

the self's activities is helpful in breaking the old habits of improper
use and clearing

the ground for the building up of new and better habits. In the Long
Swing, the

sensing-apparatus temporarily escapes from its bondage to a mind that
misuses it

by immobilizing it into a rigid stare, and learns once more how to
function in a

condition of free and unstrained mobility.

A variant of the Short Swing, which may be practised while sitting and
in an

inconspicuous manner, has been called the Pencil Swing. In this swing,
the near-by

object is a pencil (or one's own forefinger will do just as well) held
vertically about

six inches in front of the nose. Swinging the head from side to side,
one notes the

apparent movement of the pencil across the more distant features of
one's

environment. The eyes should be closed from time to time, and this
apparent

movement should be followed with the inward eye of the imagination. When
the

eyes are opened, they may be focussed alternately on the pencil and on
the more

distant objects across which it seems to pass.

Swinging can and should be carried over from the periods specially set
aside for

it into the activities of daily life. Perfect vision is impossible
without continuous

movement of the sensing-apparatus and the attention; and it is by
cultivating an

awareness of the apparent movements of external objects that the staring
eyes and

immobilized mind can most easily and rapidly be educated out of their

sight-impairing habits. Hence, for those with defective vision, the
importance of

applying the principle of the swing in every variety of visual
situation.

To begin with, whenever you move, let the world go by and be aware of
its going

by. Note, as you walk or travel by car or bus, the approach and passing
of trees,

houses, lamp-posts, pavements. Indoors, when you turn your head, be
conscious of

the way in which near-by objects move across more distant objects. By
becoming

conscious of the seeming mobility of the environment, you increase the
mobility of

the eyes and mind and so create the conditions for better vision.

OTHER AIDS TO MOBILITY

Swinging is of fundamental importance in the re-establishment of normal
visual

37

functioning, and should be practised as much as possible. But there are
also other

procedures for cultivating habits of mobility and, indirectly, of
central fixation.

Here are a few of them.

Throw up a rubber ball with the right hand, and catch it, as it falls,
in the left. Or,

better, take a ball in either hand, throw up that in the right hand and,
while it is in

the air, transfer the ball in the left hand to the right hand, then use
the left hand to

catch the other ball as it comes down. By means of this rudimentary form
of

juggling one can impart to simple ball throwing a continuous easy
rhythm, not

present when a single ball is used. The eyes should be on the ball as it
is thrown up

by the right hand, should follow it up to the top of its trajectory and
down again till

it is caught by the left hand. (They should _not_ stare up into the sky,
waiting for the

ball to appear within their field of vision.) After a long spell of
close work, a brief

interlude of this simple juggling will do much to loosen and relax the
eyes.

Out of doors, this procedure can be used, not only to remind the eyes to
move, but

also to establish habits of light tolerance. Start by throwing the ball
up against a

dark background, such as a tree. Then move so that the ball has to be
watched as it

traverses the less brightly illuminated portions of the sky. ' Think
looseness' as you

watch it rise and fall, and blink frequently. Then, as the eyes and mind
become

accustomed to the light, move again, so that the ball has a yet brighter
background.

The last two or three throws may be made while one is almost faring the
sun.

Dice and dominoes may also be used to restore to eyes and mind the
mobility

without which there can be no proper central fixation and, consequently,
no normal

seeing.

Take three or four dice, throw them on a table, glance quickly from one
to

another and then, after a second, turn away or close the eyes and name
the numbers

appearing on their upper faces. If the game is played by two people (as
it always

must be in the case of children), the instructor should throw the dice,
give the pupil

a second in which to glance from one to the other, then cover them with
his hand

and ask for the numbers. This procedure encourages rapid shifting of the
attention

and the eyes, and at the same time stimulates the interpreting mind in
ways which

will be described when we come to the subject of' flashing.'

Dominoes can also be used to break the habit of staring, and to spur the
eyes and

mind into the indispensable condition of mobility. Procure a set of

dominoes—preferably a set which goes up to double nine, or even to
double twelve.

Arrange a random selection of the dominoes in, say, three rows of eight
or ten each,

within the lid of a cardboard box. Wedge them tightly, or glue them into
place, so

that the lid may be handled without upsetting the dominoes. Stand the
lid on edge

upon a table, so that the mosaic of dominoes faces you, as you sit at a
convenient

distance regarding them. Alternatively, if distant vision is beyond your
powers,

hold the lid in your hand, where the dominoes can be easily seen,
increasing the

distance as vision improves. Now, as rapidly as you can, name the
numbers in the

upper halves of the first row of dominoes; then in the lower halves;
then in the

upper and lower halves, successively, of the other rows. Do this without
any

thought of test-passing, with mind relaxed and eyes easily moving from
domino to

domino, and blinking at frequent intervals. Close the eyes for a few
seconds

between each row. Then start again, and name the number of dots, first,
in each

horizontal line of every figure on the upper and lower halves of the
dominoes, next

in each vertical line, next in the diagonals. Then complicate the
procedure a little

by counting the total number of dots in the vertical lines of the upper
and lower

figures of each domino taken together.

Valuable in all cases of defective vision associated with strain and
staring, these

domino drills, together with the others which will be described in the
chapter on

'flashing,' are particularly useful in cases of astigmatism.

Astigmatism occurs when the radius of curvature of the cornea is not the
same in

all meridians. Light rays passing through this distorted medium are
focussed in an

irregular way. In many sufferers, the condition shows a considerable
measure of

variability. Spectacles tend to fix the cornea rigidly in that
particular condition of

distortion present at the moment of the oculist's examination.
Consequently there is

little hope of recovery, so long as one wears artificial lenses. But if
the astigmatic

38

person will discard his artificial lenses, learn the art of passive and
dynamic

relaxation, and cultivate habits of mental and ocular mobility, he can
do much to

diminish, or even altogether eliminate his disability. Dominoes are very
easy to see;

consequently the rapid shifting of eyes and mind, encouraged by the
domino drills,

is almost effortless. Tension is relaxed, and at the same time, as the
eyes move from

dot to dot, an enormous number of acts of sensing are performed, in this
relaxed

condition, through every part of the cornea. This seems to have the
effect of' ironing

out' the distortions in the cornea. Exactly how, we do not know. But if,
as seems

likely, the disability was originally due to mental and muscular
tensions, there is no

cause for surprise if the disability should disappear when the sufferer
has learnt the

art of sensing and perceiving without tension. Anyhow, the fact remains
that

astigmatic persons see distinctly better after the domino drills than
before. As old

habits of visual functioning are broken down and replaced by new and
better habits,

the improvement tends to become permanent.

The 'ironing-out' process can often be accelerated by a procedure which
may be

described as a kind of concentrated or streamlined version of the domino
drills.

Take the lid, in which the rows of dominoes have been firmly fixed, and,
holding it

in both hands three or four inches before the face, move it backwards
and forwards

horizontally. This side-to-side movement should not be greater than six
or eight

inches, and should be accompanied by a corresponding movement of the
head in

the opposite direction. Thus, when the lid is moved to the left, the
head should be

turned slightly to the right, and vice versa. No effort should be made
to see the

numbers on the individual dominoes, and the combined movement of lid and
head

should be just great enough to create the illusion that one is not
looking at separate

dots, but at more or less continuous lines, created by the apparent
running together

of the dots. After a minute or two of this horizontal swinging, the
direction of

movement should be changed to the vertical plane. Hold the lid with its
long axis at

right angles to the floor, and move it up and down, accompanying the
movement of

the hands with a movement of the head in an opposite direction, exactly
as in the

horizontal swing.

These exercises may seem rather odd, undignified and pointless. But the

significant thing about them is that (in conjunction with the other
procedures here

described) they have helped many astigmatic people to improve their
vision, first

temporarily and later permanently.

39

CHAPTER XI

_Flashing_

HE procedure which Dr. Bates called 'flashing' is important for what it
does to

Tfos

ter mobility, and to increase the powers of the perceiving and
interpreting

mind.

Flashing may be described as the antithesis of staring. Instead of
fixing the object

with one's regard, instead of immobilizing eyes and mind, and straining
to see all

parts of it equally well at the same time, one glances quickly at it
(flashes it), then

closes the eyes and remembers what has been sensed in the course of this
rapid dart

into the unknown.

After a little practice in flashing, one makes the interesting discovery
that the

sensing-apparatus takes in a good deal more than the perceiving mind is
aware

of—especially when the perceiving mind has built up bad habits of strain
and effort.

There is a sense in which we see without knowing it. It will be worth
while, I think,

to devote a few paragraphs to the discussion of this 'unconscious
vision'; for the

subject is of considerable theoretical interest, as well as of great
practical

importance.

UNCONSCIOUS VISION

'Unconscious vision' is a somewhat inaccurate expression, which is
applied to

several distinct classes of phenomena.

There is, to begin with, the 'unconscious vision' we have when we make a
rapid

reflex movement to avoid some danger, which the eyes sense and the
muscles react

to, before the mind has had time to interpret the menacing _sensum_ as a
potentially

dangerous external object. In such cases the nervous system works more
quickly

than the mind, which does not perceive and consciously see until after
the

danger-avoiding reaction has been initiated. During a fraction of a
second, there

has been unconscious vision and unconscious muscular activity.

Of a similar nature is the kind of 'unconscious vision' exhibited by a
man who

threads his way through traffic, or walks across difficult country,
while engaged in

conversation or sunk in thought. He has no distinct conscious awareness
of the

objects around him, and yet his body behaves as though he were aware—
stopping

and going, turning and avoiding obstacles, just as it would do, if his
mind were on

the problem of walking with safety, instead of being on his talk or his
thoughts. In

this case, the mind is in a position at any moment to become fully aware
of what is

being sensed, and occasionally it actually does become aware. In the
intervals,

however, there is a measure of unconscious vision—of sensing with a
minimum of

perceiving.

Finally, there is that most normal and commonplace kind of unconscious
vision,

which we have, at any given moment, of all those parts of the
sense-field which we

do not select for the purpose of perception. The world is filled with an
infinity of

objects; but at any given moment our concern is only with a very few of
them. From

the total visual field we select those _sensa_ which happen to interest
us, and leave the

rest unattended to and un-perceived. Where vision is normal, it is
always

physiologically and psychologically possible for us to select the
_sensa_ which in fact

we do not choose to attend to or perceive. This type of unconscious
vision is, in the

last analysis, voluntary; if we don't consciously see, it is simply
because we don't

want to see, because it doesn't suit us to see.

There are other cases, however, in which the unconsciousness is
involuntary, in

which the mind is incapable of making itself aware of what the eyes are
sensing.

When this happens, we look, but do not see. This may be due to the fact
that nothing

is sensed, or that the _sensa_ are so extremely indistinct that they
cannot possibly be

interpreted. But this is by no means always the case. Sometimes sensing
takes place,

and the _sensa_ are sufficiently distinct to be used for perceiving
with. But in fact

they are not so used; and though theoretically we might see what we look
at,

40

actually we do not see it. In such cases there is always a measure of
ocular and

mental strain, which is often related (primarily as cause and
secondarily as

consequence) to some habitual error of refraction. It is true that the
unperceived

_sensa_ belonging to persons in such a condition of strain are more or
less faint and

indistinct. Nevertheless they _can_ be interpreted and perceived as
appearances of

external objects. The fact that they are not so interpreted and
perceived is due to the

condition of strain, which interposes a kind of barrier between the
sensing eyes and

the perceiving mind.

Now, _sensa_ (as Dr. Broad has concluded after considering all the
available

evidence) always leave 'mnemic traces' of the kind that may subsequently
be

revived and give rise to a memory-image. (Concerning the nature of these
mnemic

traces, or 'engrams,' nobody as yet knows anything at all. They may be
purely

physical, or purely psychological, or simultaneously physical and
psychological.

The only thing we are justified in assuming about them is that they
exist and can

give rise, under favourable conditions, to memory-images.)

The experience of those who have undertaken a course of visual
re-education

adds further weight to the evidence for the hypothesis that _sensa_
leave traces, and

can therefore be remembered, even when, at the time, they were
unperceived by the

conscious mind. When people with defective vision take a flashing glance
at some

object, it often happens that they do not see it at all, or see it only
as a dim blur. But

on turning away and closing the eyes, they frequently discover that they
have a

memory-image of what was sensed. Often this image is so extremely
tenuous, that

they are hardly conscious of its being there at all. But if they stop
anxiously trying

to bring it up into consciousness, and just make a random guess at its
nature, it very

frequently turns out that the guess is correct. From this we may
conclude that it is

possible for us to remember what we sensed, but did not see, provided
always that

the mental tensions associated with the conscious ‘I’ are relaxed,
either through

hypnosis, or by other, less drastic methods.

This final proviso is of the highest practical significance. Strain, as
I have said,

erects a barrier between the sensing eyes and the perceiving mind. But
if the

strained organs of vision are relaxed, as they can be by palming,
sunning and

swinging, the barrier is lowered; and though it may not be possible at
first to

perceive what the sensing-apparatus takes in, as it regards a given
external object, it

becomes increasingly easy, when the eyes are closed, to make a correct
guess at the

nature of the memory-image arising from the traces left by the act of
sensing.

A good teacher can do much to help one in bringing up into consciousness
the

memory-images of what was merely sensed, not actually seen. Children,
who are

less self-conscious than their elders, respond particularly well to such
a teacher's

suggestions and encouragements. For example, a child is shown some
object, say a

domino, or a printed letter, or word, from a distance at which he cannot
normally

see it. He is told to take a flashing glance at it, then close his eyes
and 'reach up into

the air for it.' The child obeys the order quite literally, raises a
hand, closes it on

emptiness, then lowers it, opens it, looks into his palm and gives the
correct answer,

as though he were reading from notes.

After a certain amount of practice, the barrier between sensing and
perceiving

(always present in persons with defective vision) is so far lowered that
unconscious

vision (or the revival through memory of the traces left by sensing)
gives place to

conscious vision (or the perceiving of what is sensed in the same moment
as it is

sensed). In the early stages, there is generally a rather long interval
between the act

of sensing and the act of perceiving. Several seconds may elapse before
the person

can say what he has seen. The psychological barrier interposed by strain
between

the eyes and the mind has been lowered, indeed, but not yet completely
eliminated.

But as time goes on the interval is progressively shortened, until at
last sensing and

perceiving take place as they normally should, almost simultaneously.

TECHNIQUES OF FLASHING

Flashing, like swinging, can be practised during the activities of
everyday life.

For those whose vision is defective, the temptation to stare is always
strong. Resist

41

it, and acquire instead the habit of taking rapid glances at things,
then averting or

momentarily closing the eyes and remembering what was sensed. Billboards
and

shop-fronts provide excellent material on which to practise flashing, as
one walks

or is carried past them in car or bus. The mental attitude of one who is
looking at the

world in quick, brief flashes should be one of easy indifference. Just
as, while

swinging, one lets the world go by without making any effort to get to
know it in

detail, so, while flashing, one should rid one's mind of any
over-anxious desire to

see, and just be content to glance, first outwards at the physical
object, then inwards

at the memory-image of it. If the inward image corresponds with the
outward object,

as seen at a second and nearer glance, well and good. If it fails to
correspond, but is

merely a blur, that also is well and good. Nothing is so unfavourable to
seeing as the

competitive, prize-winning, test-passing spirit. Efforts on the part of
the conscious

'I' defeat their own object. It is when you stop trying to see that
seeing comes to you.

Casual flashing should be supplemented by drills during periods
specifically set

aside for the purpose. The objects used in these drills should be fairly
small, simple,

clear-cut and familiar. Here, for example, are some effective
procedures, in which

use is made of a set of dominoes.

Relax the eyes by palming for a few moments; then pick up a domino at
random,

hold it out at arm's length, pass the eyes across it in a quick glance
and immediately

close them. Even if the dots were not distinctly seen, it is probable
that they were

sensed, and that the sensing will have left a trace which can be revived
as a

memory-image. With the eyes still closed tell yourself what you remember
to have

made out of the upper half of the domino, then of the lower half. Open
the eyes and,

if necessary, bring the domino nearer for a verification of your guess.
If the guess

was right, well and good. If it was wrong, well and good. Take another
domino

and start again.

A more elaborate version of the same procedure is as follows. Take a
dozen

dominoes and stand them in a row along the edge of a table. Seat
yourself in front of

them at the limit of convenient seeing. Swing your eyes from left to
right along the

row, counting the dominoes as rapidly as you possibly can. (This sets
the

immobilized eyes and attention shifting at unaccustomed speed, and is a
most

salutary exercise in itself.) Then bring the eyes back to the first
domino and, closing

the lids, name the numbers in the upper and lower halves respectively.
Open the

eyes again and verify your guess. Then count the whole row once again
and,

glancing back to the second domino, flash, close, and name the numbers.
Continue

counting and flashing, until you reach the end of the line.

If your eyes are myopic, and it is hard to see at anything but short
range, perform

this drill for the first time within easy seeing distance; then move
back and repeat.

Familiarity with the dominoes will eliminate mental hazards and make the
more

distant seeing easier. It is possible in this way gradually to stretch
the range of

vision.

Where distant vision is easy, and difficulty is experienced only at the
near point,

this process should be reversed. Begin at some distance away; then move
closer and

go through the drill again.

42

CHAPTER XII

_Shifting_

RIMARILY designed to encourage mental and ocular mobility, the exercises

Pdescri

bed in the preceding chapters also serve, indirectly, to teach the art
of

central fixation. Having learnt, by means of them, to keep the eyes and
attention in

constant movement, and being there fore less subject than before to the
vice of

mental and physical staring, we may safely proceed to a somewhat more
direct

approach to central fixation. Even now, however, the approach will not
be

completely direct. Before attempting to become fully conscious of the
fact that we

always see one small area more distinctly than all the rest, we shall be
well advised

to take some simple lessons in the art of continuous and concentrated
looking.

Swinging encourages the eyes and mind to make movements of considerable

amplitude, and flashing teaches rapidity of motion and interpretative
reaction. It is

now necessary to teach ourselves small-scale shifting; for it is upon
this small-scale

shifting of eyes and mind that continuous, concentrated and attentive
seeing

depends. As I have pointed out before, the structure of the eyes and the
nature of the

mind are such that normal vision simply cannot take place without
incessant

small-scale shifting.

When regarding any object continuously and attentively, people with
normal

vision keep their eyes and attention shifting unconsciously in a series
of almost

imperceptibly small movements from point to point. People with defective
vision,

on the contrary, greatly reduce the number of such movements and tend to
stare. It

is therefore necessary for them to build up consciously the habit of
small-scale

shifting which they acquired unconsciously during childhood and
subsequently

lost.

ANALYTICAL LOOKING

The best way to do this is to learn to 'look analytically' at any object
you wish to

consider with close attention. Do not stare; stop trying to see all
parts of the object

equally clearly at the same time. Instead, deliberately tell yourself to
see it

piece-meal, sensing and perceiving, one at a time, all the more
significant parts of

which it is composed.

For example, when looking at a house, note the number of windows,
chimneys

and doors. Follow with your eyes the outline of its silhouette against
the sky. Let

your glance run horizontally along the line of the eaves, and vertically
up and down

the wall spaces between the windows. And so on.

This kind of analytical looking is recommended in all systems designed
to

improve the powers of memory and concentration. It enables the looker to
form

clear mental concepts of what he has seen. Instead of staring and
vaguely recording

an image, to which he gives the name of 'house,' the person who does his
looking

analytically will be able to tell you a number of interesting and
significant facts

about that house—that it has, let us say, four windows and a front door
on the

ground floor and five windows above, one chimney at either end, and a
tiled roof.

This detailed knowledge of the house, which is the result of analytical
looking, will

tend to improve the vision of the same object when regarded on
subsequent

occasions. For we see most clearly things which are familiar; and an
increase in our

conceptual knowledge of an object always tends to facilitate the sensing
of that

object in the future. Thus we see that analytical looking not merely
improves vision

there and then, by compelling the eyes and mind to shift continuously
from point to

point; it also helps to improve vision at all later dates, by increasing
our conceptual

knowledge of the object regarded, and so making it seem more familiar
and there

fore easier to sense and perceive.

The process of analytical looking can be profitably applied even to such

extremely familiar objects as letters, numerals, advertising slogans and
the faces of

one's relatives and friends. However well we may think we know such
things, we

43

shall almost certainly find, if we take to looking at them analytically,
that we can

get to know them a good deal better. When you look at letters or
numerals, run the

eyes over their outlines; observe the shapes of the pieces of background
in contact

with them, or included within them; count the number of corners on a
block capital

letter or large numeral. If you do this, the eyes and attention will be
forced to do a

great deal of small-scale shifting, which will improve the vision; and
at the same

time you will learn a great many hitherto unrecognized facts, the
knowledge of

which will help you to do a better and more rapid job of sensing on
future

occasions.

Persons with defective sight tend to do some of their intensest and most
rigid

staring when conversing with their fellow humans. Faces are very
important to us,

since it is by observing their changes of expression that we acquire
much of our

most valuable information about the thoughts, feelings and dispositions
of those

with whom we come in contact. To obtain this information, people with
defective

vision make the most strenuous efforts to see the faces of those who
surround them.

In other words, they stare harder than usual. The result is discomfort
and

embarrassment for the persons stared at, and poorer vision for the
starer. The

remedy is analytical looking. Do not stare at faces, in the vain hope of
seeing every

part of them as clearly as every other part. Instead, shift the regard
rapidly over the

face you are looking at—from eye to eye, from ear to ear, from mouth to
forehead.

You will see the details of the face and its expression more clearly;
and at the same

time, to the person you are looking at, you will not seem to be
staring—merely

looking in a relaxed and easy way, with eyes to which your rapid,
small-scale

shifting imparts the brilliancy and sparkle of mobility.

Habits of continuous and small-scale shifting should be deliberately
cultivated

on all occasions, during the day's activities, when there is need for
prolonged and

concentrated seeing, either at the near or the far point. There are also
certain drills,

which it is well to practise during periods specially set aside for the
purpose.

Teachers of the art of seeing have devised a considerable number of
shifting

drills, all of them effective if properly practised. In this place I
shall mention only

one—a particularly good example of its kind—developed by Mrs. Margaret
D.

Corbett, and described in her book, _How to Improve Your Eyes._

The only piece of material needed for the practice of this drill is a
sheet from one

of those large, tear-off calendars, in which the current month is
printed in large type

across the upper part of the page, while the previous and succeeding
months appear

below in much smaller type. Inasmuch as it offers type of different
sizes, such a

sheet possesses most of the advantages of the graduated Snellen Chart,
used by

oculists for testing vision. Inasmuch as a row of consecutive numbers
presents no

mental

hazards,

it

possesses

none

of

the

Snellen

Chart's

disadvantages—unfamiliarity and the intent to confuse and deceive,
almost always

present in the minds of those who design such devices for testing
vision. Since our

aim is not to test, but to improve sight, we shall do well to make use
of the most

familiar, and therefore the most visible and confidence-creating objects
upon which

to exercise. A calendar fulfils these conditions perfectly, and
possesses the further

merit of not having the unpleasant associations of the Snellen Chart.
Most children

and many adults dislike having their eyes examined, and become so
nervous, when

tested, that they see much worse than at ordinary times. Consequently,
the Snellen

Chart is apt to be surrounded, for them, by a kind of aura of
disagreeableness, which

makes it one of the least visible of objects. That is why Snellen Charts
should be

used for visual self-education only by those to whom they are
emotionally neutral,

and only when the user is completely familiar with every line of
graduated type,

from the big two-hundred-foot letter at the top to the tiny ten-foot
letters at the

bottom of the card. If these conditions are not fulfilled, the Snellen
Chart may

easily prove a source of anxiety and strain. A good teacher will note
his pupil's

tendency towards strain and take steps to prevent it from coming to a
head.

Consequently, it is always safe for a good teacher to make use of the
Snellen Chart

as an instrument of visual training. The self-instructed will do better
to start, at any

rate, with other training material.

44

THE CALENDAR DRILL

In working with the calendar, we begin by loosening up the staring mind
and eyes

by means of a procedure very similar to that employed in one of the
domino drills.

Hang the calendar on a wall, at a level with your eyes when you are
seated. See that

the sheet is well illuminated, either by direct or reflected sunlight,
or (if the sun is not

shining) by ordinary daylight or a strong lamp. Draw up a chair, and sit
down in

front of it, at a point from which the larger print can be seen without
difficulty.

Palm the eyes for a little, then set to work in the following way.

Turn the head to the left, as though you were glancing over your
shoulder; then

swing it back, gently and not too fast, until the eyes rest on the
figure ' one' of the

large-type calendar. Take note of the figure, then close the eyes and
breathe deeply

and easily, swinging your head a little as you do so, in order to keep
the rhythm of

your movement unbroken. After a few seconds turn to look over the right
shoulder,

re-open the eyes and swing them back until they rest on the figure
'two.' Close again

as before, turn to the left and swing back to the 'three.' And so on.

When swinging down the line towards the selected figure, always let the
regard

travel in the white space immediately below the print. A blank surface,
such as the

background to printed words or numerals, presents no difficulties to the

interpreting mind and cannot, there fore, be a source of strain.
Consequently, when

the regard is made to move along the white space immediately under the
line of

type, the mind reaches its objective in a state of relaxation—with the
result that the

attention and the eyes can do their work of rapid, small-scale shifting
and central

fixation under the best possible conditions.

After going through the whole month, or as much of it as you have time
for, palm

the eyes for a little, and proceed to the next phase of the drill. As
this procedure

demands a more attentive kind of looking than the preceding exercise,
you will find

yourself more than ordinarily tempted to hold the breath. Resist the
temptation and,

during all the time you are at practice, keep the breathing going
consciously at a

little more than ITS average amplitude.

Glance at the figure ' one' in the large-type calendar, then drop the
eyes to the

corresponding figure in the small-type calendar at the bottom of the
sheet to the left.

Look at it only for a moment, then close and relax for a few seconds.
Open the eyes

once more on the figure 'one' in the large-type calendar, and drop to
the 'one' in the

small-type calendar to the right. Close the eyes again in an easy,
relaxed way, and

keep the breathing going. Then re-open—this time on the large ' two.'
Drop to the

small 'two' on the left. Close, breathe, re-open on the large 'two,' and
drop to the

small 'two' on the right. Close again, breathe, and continue with the
other numbers

in the same way, either to the end of the month or, if the drill seems
tiring, to the

end of the first week or fortnight.

At first there may be difficulty in seeing the small-type numerals. If
there is, do

not linger over them, or make an effort to see them. Instead of that,
adopt the

technique described in the chapter on flashing. Glance easily and
unconcernedly at

the small number; then, in the brief period during which the eyes are
closed, note

whether there is any memory-image of it. You will be aided in this
search for the

indistinct image of the smaller numeral by your clearer memory of the
larger but

otherwise exactly similar numeral. Knowing just what it is you should
have seen,

you will soon find yourself seeing it—at first, perhaps, unconsciously,
as the

memory-image of something only dimly sensed; then consciously and with

increasing clarity, at the moment of sensing.

After an interval of palming, proceed to the next phase of the drill.
With eyes

closed, think of any number between one and thirty-one. Let us assume
that you

begin by thinking of the number 'seventeen.' Open the eyes and, as
quickly as you

possibly can, locate 'seventeen,' first on the large-type calendar, then
on the small

calendar on the left. Close and breathe. Then re-open on the large
'seventeen' and

drop to the corresponding small number on the right. Close once more,
breathe,

think of another number, and go through the same procedure. After ten or
a dozen

repetitions, you will be ready to go on to the next phase.

In this drill we return to the small-scale shift, which we learn to
practise

45

systematically, with a very short rhythmic swing, on such objects as
letters and

numerals. Look at the large 'one.' Pay attention first to the top of the
numeral, then

to the base; then shift the eyes and mind once more to the top and again
to the base.

Up and down, up and down, two or three times. When you have done this,
close the

eyes in a relaxed way and breathe deeply but gently. Then re-open the
eyes and

repeat the procedure on the large 'two.' After going through half the
month in this

way, drop to one of the small-type calendars and begin again, drawing
your chair a

little nearer, if necessary.

The procedure should be varied by sometimes making the shift
horizontally,

swinging from one side of the numeral to the other side, instead of up
and down, in

a vertical direction. Furthermore, do not confine yourself exclusively
to the

numerals. Work also on letters—the SUN., MON., TUE., and so on, of the
abbreviated

days of the week. Do the small-scale swinging shift from top to bottom
of these

letters, and from side to side, and, in the case of the broader and more
angular ones,

from corner to corner, diagonally. Letters and numerals are among the
most

familiar objects in our artificial world, and among the objects which it
is most

important for us to see clearly. It is therefore specially desirable
that we should

acquire the habit of small-scale shifting when we regard these objects.
Conscious

practice of the swinging shift, just described, will end by building up
a beneficent

automatism. Whenever we regard a letter or numeral, we shall tend,
unconsciously

and automatically, to practise the small-scale shift, which compels the
eyes and

mind to do their work by central fixation and, in this way, improves our
sensing,

our perceiving and that end-product of sensing and perceiving, our
vision. In the

chapters dealing with the mental side of seeing, I shall describe
procedures in

which this technique of the small-scale swinging shift is combined with
techniques

for the development of memory and imagination, and so rendered still
more

valuable. But even in its simple form, as I have described it in the
preceding

paragraphs, the procedure is remarkably effective. While practising
these calendar

drills you will constantly be struck by the way in which vision improves
when the

small-scale swinging shift is made use of. The numeral or letter, which
appeared so

dim and hazy when you first looked at it, will come up into clear
definition as you

shift your attention a few times from top to base, or from side to side.
The same

technique should be carried over into the ordinary activities of life.
When

confronted by letters or numerals you cannot clearly distinguish, try
the small-scale

swinging shift on them, and they will tend to brighten and grow more
definite.

This particular kind of shirting is simply analytical looking with a
regular rhythm.

Regular rhythmic movement is always relaxing, even when repeated only a
few

times, and this is why the small-scale swinging shift is so effective in
promoting

good vision. It is, unfortunately, impracticable to use this swinging
shift on all

classes of objects. On such small, clearly demarcated and thoroughly
familiar

objects as numerals and letters it is easy to perform the swinging
shift. But where

the object is large, relatively unfamiliar, indeterminate or in motion,
it is not feasible,

for the simple reason that either there are no known and definite
land-marks, no

clearly outlined boundaries, between which to do the repeated shift, or,
if there are

such land-marks and boundaries, the area covered by the eyes, as they
shift back

and forth from one to the other, will be so small in comparison with the
total area of

the object that an improved knowledge of that area will not necessarily
give an

improved knowledge of the whole. Consequently, in the case of large,

indeterminate and unfamiliar objects, the best technique of looking
remains the

rapid analytical regard, without repetitive rhythm. The effectiveness of
this

analytical regard may be enhanced by counting the salient features of
the object. If

there are many such features, do not try to count them with pedantic
accuracy.

What is important is not to know the correct total, but to make the
attention realize

that large numbers of such features exist and must be noted. So count
only the first

three or four; then skim over the rest and make a guess at the total,
not caring

whether your guess is correct or not. Your goal is to see more clearly,
and that goal

will have been achieved, if the pretence at counting stimulates the eyes
and attention

to do their work of rapid, small-scale shifting, in act after act of
central fixation.

And now, having learnt the means whereby central fixation may be
rendered

46

habitual and automatic, let us take the last step in this long series of
exercises, and

make ourselves fully conscious of the fact that we see best only a small
part of what

we are looking at. For many of those who have undertaken the exercises,
there will

be no need to take this step, for the good reason that they have already
acquired that

awareness. It is hard to look at things analytically, or to practise the
small-scale

swinging shift, without discovering the fact of central fixation.

Those who have not yet observed the phenomenon may now, without any
serious

risk of strain or effort, take the following steps to convince
themselves of its regular

occurrence. Hold up the forefingers of either hand about two feet from
the face and

about eighteen inches apart. Look first at the right forefinger. It will
be seen more

distinctly than the left, which appears at the extreme edge of the field
of vision.

Now turn the head and pay attention to the left finger, which will at
once be seen

more clearly than the right. Now bring the fingers closer together. Look
from one to

the other when they are a foot apart, then six inches, then three
inches, then one

inch, then when they are actually touching. In all cases, the finger
regarded by the

eyes and attended to by the mind, will be seen more distinctly than the
other.

Repeat the same process on a letter—say a large E from a front-page
newspaper

headline. Pay attention first to the top bar of the E, and notice that
it seems clearer

and blacker than the other two bars. Then shift attention to the bottom
bar, and note

how _that_ is now the clearest of the three. Do the same with the middle
bar. Next pick

out a smaller E from some less strident headline and repeat the process.
You will

find, if the eyes and mind have lost their old bad habit of staring,
that even in the

smaller letter there is a perceptible difference in distinctness between
the bar which

is actually being attended to and the bars which are not being attended
to. As time

goes on, it will be possible to observe differences in distinctness
between the upper

and lower part even of a small twelve-point or eight-point letter. The
more perfect

the sight, the smaller the area which can be seen with maximum
distinctness.

To confirm the fact of central fixation, one may reverse the process
described

above and do one's best to see every part of a large letter, or every
feature of a

friend's face, equally clearly at the same time. The result will be an
almost

immediate sense of strain and a lowering of vision. One cannot with
impunity

attempt to do the physically and psychologically impossible. But that,
precisely, is

what the person with defective sight is perpetually doing when he peers
with such

an anxious intentness at the world around him. Once you have convinced
yourself

experimentally of this fact, and of the other, complementary fact that
good vision

comes only when the eyes and mind make innumerable successive acts of
central

fixation, you will never again be tempted to stare, to strain, to try
hard to see. Vision

is not won by making an effort to get it; it comes to those who have
learnt to put

their minds and eyes into a state of alert passivity, of dynamic
relaxation.

47

CHAPTER XIII

_The Mental Side of Seeing_

HE eyes provide us with the visual sense impressions, which are the raw

Tm aterials of sight. The mind takes these raw materials and works them
up into

the finished product—normal vision of external objects.

When sight is sub-normal, the defect may be due to causes belonging to
one or

other of two main categories, physical and mental. The eyes, or the
nervous system

connected with them, may suffer accidental injury, or be affected by
disease—in

which case the supply of the raw materials of vision will be cut off at
the source.

Alternatively, the efficiency of the mind, as the interpreter of crude
_sensa,_ may be

impaired, owing to any one of a great number of possible psychological

maladjustments. When this happens, the efficiency of the eye as a

sensing-apparatus is also impaired; for the human mind-body is a single
unit, and

psychological mal-functioning is reflected in physiological
mal-functioning. With

the impairment of the physiological functioning of the eye, the quality
of the raw

materials, which it furnishes, falls off; and this in turn increases the
inefficiency of

the mind as a worker-up of such materials.

Orthodox ophthalmologists are content to palliate the symptoms of poor
sight by

means of' those valuable crutches,' artificial lenses. They work only on
the sensing

eye and ignore completely the selecting, perceiving and seeing mind. It
is a case of

_Hamlet_ without the Prince of Denmark. Obviously and on the face of it,
any

rational, any genuinely aetiological treatment of defective vision must
take account

of the mental side of seeing. In the method of visual re-education
developed by Dr.

W. H. Bates and his followers, due attention is paid, not merely to the
provider of

raw materials, but also to the producer of the finished article.

Of the psychological factors which prevent the mind from doing a good
job of

interpretation, some are closely related to the process of perceiving
and seeing,

while others are not. In the latter category we must place all those
negative

emotions which are so fruitful a source of mal-functioning and, finally,
of organic

disease in every part of the body, including the eyes. To the former
belong certain

negative emotions specifically related to the act of seeing, and certain

mal-functionings of the memory and imagination—mal-functionings which
lower

the mind's efficiency as an interpreter of _sensa._

To treat of the methods by which negative emotions may be avoided or
dispelled

is beyond the scope of this little book. I can only repeat in different
words what was

said in the opening section. When the conscious 'I' is afflicted to
excess by such

emotions as fear, anger, worry, grief, envy, ambition, the mind and body
are likely

to suffer. One of the important psychophysical functions most commonly
impaired

is that of vision. Negative emotions impair vision, partly through
direct action upon

the nervous, glandular and circulatory systems, partly by lowering the
efficiency of

the mind. It is literally true that people become 'blind with rage';
that fear may make

the world 'go black' or 'swim before the eyes'; that worry can be so
'numbing' that

people cease to be able to see or hear properly, and are there fore
frequently

involved in serious accidents. Nor are the effects of such negative
emotions merely

transient and temporary. If they are intense enough and sufficiently
protracted,

negative feelings such as worry, disappointed love and competitiveness,
can

produce in their victims serious organic derangements—for example,
gastric ulcer,

tuberculosis and coronary disease. They can also produce lasting
mal-functioning

of the seeing organs, mental and physical—mal-functioning that manifests
itself in

mental strain, nervous muscular tension and errors of refraction.
Anybody who

wants normal vision should there fore do everything possible to avoid or
get rid of

these pernicious negative emotions, and in the meanwhile should learn
the art of

seeing, by means of which the disastrous effects of such emotions upon
the eyes

and mind can be completely or partially undone.

This seems to be all that can be usefully said, in this place at any
rate, about those

mental obstacles to normal vision which are not immediately connected
with the

48

act of seeing. For a full discussion of negative emotions, and for
methods of dealing

with them, one must turn to the psychiatrists, the moralists and the
writers on

ascetical and mystical religion. In a brief introduction to the art of
seeing, I can only

mention the problem, and pass on.

We have now to consider those mental obstacles to normal vision which
are

intimately bound up with the actual seeing process. Certain negative
emotions,

habitually associated with the act of seeing by people with sub-normal
vision, have

already been discussed. Thus, I have described the fear of light, and
the means by

which that fear may be cast out. I have also mentioned that greed for
vision, that

over-anxiety to see too much too well, which results in misdirection of
attention

and in mental and physical staring; and I have dwelt at great length on
the

procedures, by means of which these bad habits may be changed, and the

undesirable emotions, responsible for them, dispelled.

We have now to consider another fear, intimately connected, in the minds
of

those suffering from defective vision, with the act of seeing, and
responsible in

some degree for the perpetuation of visual mal-functioning. I refer to
the fear of not

seeing properly.

Let us trace the genealogy of this fear.. The art of seeing in a normal
and natural

way is acquired unconsciously during infancy and childhood. Then, owing
to

physical disease or, more often, to mental strain, good seeing habits
are lost; normal

and natural functioning is replaced by abnormal and unnatural
functioning; the

mind loses its efficiency as an interpreter, the physical conformation
of the eye is

distorted and the net result is that vision is impaired. From sub-normal
vision there

springs, in most cases, a certain chronic apprehension. The person who
is used to

seeing badly is afraid that he will see badly next time. In the minds of
many

afflicted men and women, this fearful anticipation amounts to a fixed,
intense,

pessimistic _conviction_ that, for them, normal seeing is henceforth
impossible.

Such an attitude is paralysing to the minds and eyes of those who
entertain it.

They go into every new seeing-situation afraid that they won't see, or
even

convinced in advance that they can't see. The result, not unnaturally,
is that they

don't see. Positive faith enables a man to move mountains. Conversely,
negative

faith can prevent him from lifting a straw.

In seeing, as in all other activities of mind and mind-body, it is
essential, if we are

to do our work adequately, that we should cultivate an attitude of
confidence

combined with indifference— confidence in our capacity to do the job,
and

indifference to possible failure. We must feel sure that we can succeed
some time, if

we use the proper means and exercise sufficient patience; and we must
not feel

disappointed or annoyed if in fact we don't succeed this particular
time.

Confidence untempered by indifference may be almost as disastrous as the
lack

of confidence; for if we feel sure that we are going to succeed, and are
distressed

and affronted every time we fail, confidence will only be a source of
negative

emotions, which will, in their turn, increase the probability of
failure.

For the person whose sight is sub-normal, the correct mental attitude
may be

expressed in some such words as these. ' I know theoretically that
defective vision

can be improved. I feel certain that, if I learn the art of seeing, I
can improve my

own defective vision. I am practising the art of seeing as I look now,
and it is likely

that I shall see better than I did; but if I don't see as well as I
hope, I shall not feel

wretched or aggrieved, but go on, until better vision comes to me.

49

CHAPTER XIV

_Memory and Imagination_

HE capacity for perception depends, as I have shown in an earlier
chapter, upon

Tth e amount, the kind and the availability of past experiences. But
past

experiences exist for us only in the memory. Therefore it is true to say
that

perception depends upon memory.

Closely related to memory is imagination, which is the power of
recombining

memories in novel ways, so as to make mental constructions different
from

anything actually experienced in the past. The mind's ability to
interpret _sensa_ is

affected by the imagination as well as the memory.

The extent to which perception and, consequently, vision are dependent
upon

memory and imagination is a matter of everyday experience. We see
familiar things

more clearly than we see objects about which we have no stock of
memories. And

when, under emotional stress or excitement, our imagination is more than

ordinarily active, it often happens that we interpret _sensa_ as
manifestations of the

objects with which our imagination is busy, rather than as
manifestations of the

objects actually present in the external world.

The old sempstress, who cannot read without glasses, can see to thread
her needle

with the naked eye. Why? Because she is more familiar with needles than
with

print.

In the book he is reading, a person with normal vision comes upon a
strange,

polysyllabic, technical word, or a phrase in some foreign language of
which he is

ignorant. The letters of which these words are composed are precisely
similar to

those in which the rest of the book is printed; and yet this person
finds it definitely

harder to see them. Why? Because the rest of the book is in plain
English, while the

illegible words are in German, hall we say, or Russian, or the
Graeco-Latin jargon

of one of the sciences.

A man who can work all day at the office without undue fatigue of the
eyes, is

worn out by an hour at a museum, and comes home with a splitting
headache.

Why? Because, at the office, he is following a regular routine and
looking at words

and figures the like of which he looks at every day; whereas, in the
museum,

everything is strange, novel and outlandish.

Or take the case of the lady who is terrified of snakes, and who
mistakes what to

everyone else is obviously a length of rubber tubing for an enormous
viper. Her

vision, as tested on the Snellen Chart, is normal. Why, then, does she
see what isn't

there? Because her imagination had been in the habit of using old
memories of

snakes to construct alarming images of the creatures, and because, under
the

influence of her imagination, her mind misinterpreted the _sensa_
connected with the

rubber tubing in such a way that she vividly 'saw' a viper.

Such examples, which could be multiplied almost indefinitely, leave no
doubt

that perception and therefore vision depend upon memory and, to a lesser
degree,

imagination. We see best the things about which, or the likes of which,
we have a

good stock of memories. And the more accurate these memories are, the
more

thorough-going and analytical the knowledge they embody, the better (all
other

things being equal) will be the vision. Indeed, the vision may be
better, even when

other things are not equal. Thus, the veteran microscopist may have
worse sight, as

measured on the Snellen Chart, than the first-year undergraduate whom he
is

instructing. Nevertheless, when he looks through his instrument, he will
be able,

thanks to his accurate memories of similar objects, to see the slide
much more

clearly than the novice can.

The truth that perception and vision are largely dependent upon past
experiences,

as recorded by the memory, has been recognized for centuries. But, so
far as I am

aware, the first person ever to pay any serious thought to what I may
call the

utilitarian and therapeutic corollaries of this truth was Dr. W. H.
Bates. He it was

who first asked the question: 'How can this dependence of perception and
vision

upon memory and, to a lesser degree, imagination be exploited so as to
improve

50

people's sight?' And having asked the question, he did not rest until he
had found a

number of simple and practical answers. His followers have been working
for many

years on the same problem, and they too have produced their quota of
devices for

improving vision by working on the memory and imagination. Here, I shall
give an

account of some of the more effective of these procedures. But first a
few more

words about certain significant characteristics of that most mysterious
mental

activity, remembering.

Perhaps the most important fact about memory, in its relation to
perception and

vision, is that it will not work well under strain. Everyone is familiar
with the

experience of forgetting a name, straining to recapture it and
ignominiously failing.

Then, if one is wise, one will stop trying to remember and allow the
mind to sink

into a condition of alert passivity; the chances are that the name will
come bobbing

up into consciousness of its own accord. Memory works best, it would
seem, when

the mind is in a state of dynamic relaxation.

Experience has taught the great majority of people that there is a
correlation

between good memory and dynamic relaxation of mind—a condition which
always

tends to be accompanied by dynamic relaxation of the body as well.

They have never formulated the fact explicitly to themselves; but they
know it

unconsciously, or, to be more precise, they consistently act as though
they knew it

unconsciously. When they try to remember something, they instinctively
'let go,'

because they have learnt, in the course of innumerable repetitions of
the act of

remembering, that the condition of 'letting go' is the most favourable
for good

memory. Now, this habit of 'letting go' in order to remember persists,
in many cases,

even when bad habits of mental and physical tension have been built up
in relation

to other activities, such as seeing. Consequently it often happens that,
when people

start remembering, they automatically and unconsciously put themselves
into that

condition of dynamic mental relaxation which is propitious, not only for
memory,

but also for vision. This would seem to be the explanation of the fact
(first observed,

so far as I know, by Dr. Bates, but easily observable by anyone who is
ready to

fulfil the necessary conditions) that the simple act of remembering
something

clearly and distinctly brings an immediate improvement of vision.

In some cases of defective vision, the state of mental and physical
tension is so

extreme, that the sufferers have lost the habit of' letting go,' even
when

remembering. The result is that they have the greatest difficulty in
recalling

anything. Experienced teachers of the Bates Method have told me of
pupils who

came to them, incapable of remembering, ten seconds after the event,
whether they

had been looking at letters, numerals or pictures. As soon as the eyes
and mind had

been somewhat relaxed by means of palming, sunning, swinging and
shifting, the

power to remember returned. The imperfect vision and the state of
virtual

imbecility, into which the inability to remember had plunged these
unfortunate

people, were due to the same fundamental cause—improper functioning,

associated with a high degree of mental and nervous muscular strain.

Fortunately, such cases are not common; and the majority of those who
suffer

from defects of vision, due to, or aggravated by, mental and physical
strain, still

preserve the good habit, acquired unconsciously through the teachings of
everyday

experience, of 'letting go' whenever they make an act of remembering.
That is why

it is possible, with most individuals, to make use of memory as an aid
to mind-body

relaxation and, through mind-body relaxation, to vision. A person with
defective

sight looks, let us say, at a printed letter and fails to see it
distinctly. If he closes his

eyes,' lets go' and remembers something which it is easy for him to

remember—remembers it clearly and distinctly—he will find, on re-opening
his

eyes, that his vision has perceptibly improved.

Because it is impossible to remember anything clearly without 'letting
go,'

improvement of vision will follow the act of remembering any object or
episode,

even one totally unconnected with the thing which, at the moment, it is
desired to

see. But if the memory is actually of this thing, or of some similar
thing seen in the

past, then the act of remembering will be doubly effective in improving
vision; for

it will result, not only in producing a beneficent relaxation of the
mind-body, but

also in an increased familiarity with the object under consideration.
But we see

51

most clearly those things with which we are most familiar. Consequently,
any

procedure which makes us more familiar with the object we are trying to
see makes

it easier for us to see it. But every act of remembering that object, or
another one

like it, increases our familiarity with it, and so improves our vision
of it. It is

because of this fact that several of the most important memory and
imagination

drills are concerned with the detailed remembering or visualizing of the
letters and

figures which we are so constantly being called upon to see, both at the
near point

and in the distance.

In the light of these preliminary explanations it will be easy, I hope,
for the reader

to understand the various procedures now to be described.

MEMORY AS AN AID TO VISION

The value of what I have called analytical looking can be enhanced by

supplementing this procedure with deliberate acts of memory. Look at
objects in

the way described in an earlier chapter—shifting the attention rapidly
from point to

point, following the outlines and counting the salient features of what
you are

looking at. Then close your eyes, 'let go' and conjure up the clearest
possible

memory-image of what you have just seen. Re-open the eyes, compare this
image

with the reality, and repeat the process of analytical looking. Close
the eyes, and

once more evoke the memory-image of what you have seen. After a few
repetitions,

there will be an improvement in the clarity and accuracy both of the
memory-image

and of the visual image recorded when the eyes are open.

It is a good thing to practise these acts of analytical looking and
remembering in

relation to the objects of one's everyday environment, such as the
furniture of the

rooms in which one lives and works, the shops and billboards, trees and
houses of

the streets one ordinarily frequents. This will have three good results:
it will break

up the habit of staring, and encourage central fixation; it will compel
the mind to

put itself into the state of alert passivity, of dynamic relaxation,
which alone is

conducive to accurate remembering, and, incidentally, to clear vision;
and it will

greatly increase the mind's knowledge of and familiarity with the
objects it must

see most frequently, and, by doing so, will greatly facilitate the task
of seeing these

objects.

Nor is this all. The procedure outlined above is also beneficial
inasmuch as it

teaches a proper co-ordination between the mind and its
sensing-apparatus. Too

many of us spend altogether too much of our time looking at one thing
and thinking

of another—seeing just enough to avoid running into trees or under
buses, but at the

same time day-dreaming so much that, if anyone were to ask us what we
had seen,

we should find it almost impossible to answer, for the good reason that,
though we

had sensed a great deal, we had consciously perceived almost nothing .
This

dissociation of the mind from its eyes is a fruitful cause of impairment
of vision,

particularly when, as is very frequently the case, the day-dreaming
person sits with

open eyes, staring fixedly and unblinkingly at one point. If you must
day-dream,

close your eyes, and, with your inward vision, consciously follow the

wish-fulfilling episodes fabricated by the imagination. Similarly, when
engaged in

logical thought, do not stare at some external object unconnected with
the problem

under consideration. If the eyes are kept open, use them to do something
relevant to

the intellectual processes going on within the mind. For example, write
notes

which the eyes can read, or draw diagrams for them to study.
Alternatively, if the

eyes are kept closed, resist the temptation of immobilizing them—a
temptation

which is always strong when one is making an effort at mental
concentration. Let

the inward eye travel over imaginary words, diagrams or other
constructions

relevant to the thought process which is taking place. The aim at all
times should be

to prevent the occurrence of dissociations between mind and
sensing-apparatus.

When the eyes are open, make a point of seeing and of being conscious of
what you

see. When you don't want to see, but to dream or think, make a point of
associating

the eyes with your dreaming or thinking. By allowing the mind to go one
way and

the eyes another, you run the risk of impairing your vision, which is a
product of the

52

co-operation between a physical sensing-apparatus and a selecting and
perceiving

intelligence.

IMPROVING THE MEMORY OF LETTERS

For good as well as for evil, reading has now become one of the
principal

occupations of civilized humanity. Inability to read easily, whether at
the near point

or at a distance, is a serious handicap in the contemporary world. The
art of reading

will be discussed at length in one of the later chapters of this book.
Here, I shall

describe certain procedures, by means of which the forces of memory and

imagination can be mobilized for the improvement of our vision of those
basic

constituents of all literature and science, the twenty-six letters of
the alphabet and

the ten numerals.

One of the curious facts discovered by teachers who undertake the
re-education of

sufferers from defective vision is that very large numbers of people do
not have a

clear mental image of the letters of the alphabet. Capitals, it is true,
are familiar to

almost everyone—perhaps because it is upon capital letters that the
young child

first practises the art of reading. But lower-case letters, though
looked at hundreds

of times each day, are so imperfectly known that many persons find it
hard to

reproduce them exactly, or to recognize a given letter from its
description in words.

This widespread ignorance of the forms of letters bears eloquent witness
to the

dissociation between eyes and mind, described in the preceding
paragraphs.

In this matter of reading, we are such greedy end-gainers that we
neglect to

consider, not merely the psycho-physical means whereby we may accomplish
the

task most effectively, but also the external, objective means, upon
which the whole

process of reading depends, namely the letters of the alphabet. There
can be no

improvement in our ability to read until we have made ourselves
thoroughly

familiar with the letters, of which all reading matter is composed. Here
again it is a

question of combining analytical looking with acts of remembering.

Examine a letter, not with a fixed stare, but easily and with a rapid
shift of the

attention from one point to another. Close the eyes, 'let go' and evoke
the

memory-image of what you have seen. Re-open the eyes, and check the
accuracy of

your memory. Repeat the process until the memory-image is thoroughly
accurate,

distinct and clear. Do the same with all the letters—and, of course, all
the numerals

as well. The exercise may be repeated occasionally, even when you think
you know

all the letters perfectly. Memory can always be improved; besides, the
act of

remembering brings relaxation, and this relaxation, combined with the
heightened

familiarity which comes of better memory, will always tend to improve
the vision.

When looking at letters, with the aim of familiarizing oneself with
their forms, it

is well to pay attention, not only to the black print, but also and
above all to the white

background immediately surrounding the letters and included within them.
These

areas of whiteness around and within letters and numerals have curious
and striking

shapes, which the mind enjoys getting to know and, because of its
interest in them,

remembers easily. At the same time, there is less possibility of mental
strain

involved in considering the blank background than in considering the
black marks

upon that background. It is often easier to see a letter when it is
regarded as an

interruption to the whiteness of the paper than when it is looked at
without

conscious reference to the background, merely as a pattern of straight
and curved

black lines.

This process of familiarizing oneself with letters, by analytical
looking and

remembering, may profitably be supplemented by a drill involving the
systematic

use of imagination. Examine the letter as before, paying attention to
the shapes of

the background around and within it. Then close the eyes, 'let go,'
evoke a

memory-image of the letter and then deliberately imagine that the white

background around and within it is whiter than it was actually seen to
be—as white

as snow or sunlit cloud or porcelain.

Re-open the eyes and look again at the letter, shifting as before from

background-shape to background-shape, and trying to see these shapes as
white as

you imagined them with your eyes shut. In a little while you will find
that you can,

53

without difficulty, create this beneficent illusion. When you succeed in
doing so the

black of the printer's ink will seem blacker by contrast, and there will
be a

perceptible improvement in vision.

Sometimes, by way of change, one may use the imagination in an analogous
way

upon the black letter itself. Seated before the calendar, pay attention
first to the top

of a numeral or letter, then to the base (or first to the left side and
then to the right).

After a few repetitions, close the eyes, ‘let go' and continue to do the
same thing to

your memory-image of the numeral or letter. Then, in imagination, apply
two spots

of intenser blackness, one to the top and the other to the base, or one
on the left and

the other on the right. If you find it helpful, imagine yourself
applying these spots

with a fine paint brush impregnated with India ink.

Shift from one blacker spot to the other several times; then open the
eyes and try

to see the same blacker spots at the top and base, or on the left and
right sides, of the

real letter. This will not be difficult, because, owing to central
fixation, you actually

will see that part of the letter or numeral, which you are attending to,
more clearly

than the rest. But imagine the spots to be even blacker than central
fixation warrants.

When you succeed in doing this, the whole letter will seem blacker than
before, and

will therefore be seen more clearly and remembered more distinctly for
future

reference.

These two procedures—shifting first in imagination, then in reality,
from one

area of whiter-than-actual whiteness to another area of
whiter-than-actual whiteness,

and from one more intensely black dot to another more intensely black
dot at the

opposite end of the letter—are particularly helpful in improving vision,
and should

be used (in conjunction, if possible, with palming and sunning) whenever
the print

of a book, or a distant billboard or notice, shows signs of blurring.

Certain other procedures involving imagination have also proved their
worth in

visual education. The first three closely resemble the small-scale
swinging

shift—indeed, _are_ swinging shifts, but of an exclusively mental kind.

Imagine yourself seated at a writing-table, with a pad of thick white
notepaper

before you. Still in imagination, take a pen or a fine paint brush, dip
it in India ink

and, at the centre of the first sheet of paper, make a round black dot.
Now pay atten-

tion to the white background immediately adjoining the right side of the
dot, then to

that immediately adjoining the left, and repeat, swinging rhythmically
back and

forth. As in reality, the imaginary dot will appear to move to the left,
when you shift

attention to the right, and to the right, when you shift attention to
the left.

The following variant on the single dot may be used if desired. On
another sheet of

imaginary paper inscribe two dots, about four inches apart, and between
them, but

about an inch below them, a circle of about half an inch in diameter.
Imagine this

circle very black, and the white space within it intensely white. Then
shift the

inward eye from the dot on the right, to the dot on the left, and repeat
the action

rhythmically. The movement of the circle will be in the opposite
direction to that

of the attention.

Next, in your imagination, take another sheet of paper and trace upon it
a giant

colon, composed of two big dots about half an inch apart, and next to
it, half an inch

to the right, a semi-colon of the same proportions. Now, shift the
attention from the

upper dot of the colon to the upper dot of the semi-colon; then down to
the comma

of the semi-colon; then, left, to the lower dot of the colon; and from
that, vertically,

to the upper dot. Repeat this rhythmic shifting round and round the
square com-

posed by the three round dots and the comma. As the mind's eye travels
to the right,

the constellation of punctuation marks will appear to move to the left;
as the

attention descends, it will seem to go up; as it shifts to the left, the
apparent

movement will be to the right; and as it moves up to its original
starting point, the

dots will seem to descend.

These three procedures combine the merits of the small-scale swinging
shift with

those of the imagination drill. The mind has to relax enough to be able
to mobilize

its memory-images of punctuation marks, and combine them into simple
patterns,

while the attention (and consequently the physical eyes) is made to
cultivate the

sight-producing habit of the small-scale swinging shift—a shift which,
in the third

procedure, becomes a rhythmic version of the analytical regard.

54

The following procedure was devised by a Spanish follower of Dr. Bates,
and the

author of a book and various articles on the method, Dr. R. Arnau.

It is a kind of imaginary shifting swing—but a shifting swing with a
difference,

inasmuch as it seems to involve the physical apparatus of accommodation
in ways

which the ordinary swinging shift does not.

Imagine yourself holding between the thumb and forefinger a ring of
stout rubber

or wire, sufficiently rigid to retain its circular shape when not
interfered with, but

sufficiently elastic to assume, when squeezed, the form of an ellipse.
Close the lids,

and regard this imaginary ring, running the inward eye all around it.
Then, with your

imaginary hand, gently squeeze the ring laterally, so that it is
deformed into an

ellipse with the long axis running vertically. Look at this ellipse for
a moment, then

relax the pressure of your hand and allow the ring to return to its
circular form. Now,

shift the position of the thumb and forefinger from the sides of the
ring to the top

and bottom, and squeeze. The ring will be distorted into an ellipse with
the long

axis running horizontally. Relax the pressure, watch the ellipse
re-transform itself

into a circle, shift the position of thumb and forefinger to the sides
of the ring and

repeat the whole procedure ten or fifteen times, rhythmically. Exactly
what happens,

physiologically, as one watches, in imagination, the successive
transformations of

circle into vertically orientated ellipse, vertically orientated ellipse
into circle,

circle into horizontally orientated ellipse, and horizontally orientated
ellipse into

circle, it is hard to say. But there can be no doubt, from the
sensations one feels in

and around the eye, that considerable muscular adjustments and
re-adjustments are

continually taking place as one goes through this cycle of
visualizations.

Subjectively, these sensations seem to be the same as those experienced
when one

shifts the attention rapidly from the distance to a point very near the
eyes and back

again. Why the apparatus of accommodation should come into play under
these

conditions, it is not easy to understand. But the fact remains that it
seems to do so. It

is found empirically that this drill, while valuable in all forms of
visual defect, is

particularly useful in cases of myopia.

Another excellent procedure, which is simultaneously an exercise in
mind-body

co-ordination, an imagination drill, and a small-scale shift, is
'nose-writing.' Sitting

down comfortably in an easy chair, close your eyes and imagine that you
have a

good long pencil attached to the end of your nose. (Lovers of Edward
Lear will

remember his pictures of the 'Dong.') Equipped with this instrument,
move your

head and neck so as to write with your protracted nose upon an imaginary
sheet of

paper (or, if the pencil is thought of as being white, on an imaginary
blackboard)

eight or nine inches in front of your face. Begin by drawing a
good-sized circle.

Since your control over the movements of the head and neck is less
perfect than

your control of the hand, this circle will certainly look a bit angular
and lopsided to

the eyes of your imagination. Go over it half a dozen times, round and
round, until

the thickened circumference comes to look presentable. Then draw a line
from the

top of your circle to the bottom, and go over it six times. Draw another
line at right

angles to the first and go over that in the same way. Your circle will
now contain a

St. George's Cross. Superimpose upon it a St. Andrew's Cross, by drawing
two

diagonals, and finish off by jabbing with your imaginary pencil at the
central

meeting-place of the four lines.

Tear off your scribbled sheet of paper, or, if you prefer to work in
white on a

blackboard, visualize yourself wiping away the chalk with a duster.
Then, turning

the head gently and easily from one shoulder to the other, draw a large
infinity

sign— a figure of eight, lying on its side. Go over it a dozen times,
paying attention,

as the inward eye travels with the imaginary pencil, to the way in which
the

successive repetitions of the figure coincide or diverge.

Wipe the blackboard once more, or prepare another clean sheet of paper,
and, this

time, use your pencil to do a little writing. Begin with your own
signature. Because

your head and neck move so jerkily, it will look like the signature of
an alcoholic

illiterate. But practice makes perfect; take a new sheet and begin
again. Do this four

or five times; then write any other word or phrase that appeals to you.

Like some of the other procedures described above, these drills may seem
rather

silly, childish and undignified. But this is not important. The
important thing is that

55

they work. A little nose-writing, followed by a few minutes of palming,
will do

wonders in relieving the fatigue of a strained mind and staring eyes,
and will result

in a perceptible temporary improvement of defective vision. This
temporary

improvement will become permanent, as the normal and natural functioning

fostered by nose-writing and the other procedures described in this
book, becomes

habitual and automatic.

Mind and body form a single unitary whole. Consequently, such mental

processes as remembering and imagining are facilitated by the
performance of

bodily movements conformable to the objects of our thoughts—the kind of

movements we would make if, instead of merely remembering and imagining,
we

were actually at work upon the things we are thinking about. For
example, when

remembering or imagining letters or numerals, it is often helpful to
place the ball of

the thumb in contact with the forefinger and, with it, to print the
letters you are

working on. Or, alternatively, they may be printed in nose-writing. Or
again, if you

prefer a more realistic gesture, you may pick up an imaginary pen and
trace the

signs upon an imaginary notebook.

The aid of the body may also be enlisted through speech. As you remember
or

imagine a letter, form its name with your lips, or even utter it aloud.
The spoken

word is so intimately associated with all our processes of thought that
any familiar

movement of the mouth and vocal cords tends automatically to evoke an
image of

the thing represented by the articulate sound, which is the product of
that

movement. Consequently, it is always easier to see what one is reading,
when one

pronounces the words aloud. People for whom reading is a novelty or a
rather

difficult and infrequent task—such as children, for example, and the
imperfectly

educated—realize this fact instinctively. In order to sharpen their
vision for the

unfamiliar symbols on the page before them, they habitually read aloud.
People with

defective vision are people whom their disability has reduced, so to
speak, to the

cultural ranks. However great their learning, they have become like
children or

illiterates, for whom the printed word is something strange and hard to
decipher.

This being so, they should, while re-acquiring the art of seeing, do the
same as the

primitives do—form the words they read with their lips and point at them
with their

fingers. The movement of the organs of speech will evoke auditory and
visual

images of the words associated with them. Memory and imagination will be

stimulated, and the mind will do its work of interpretation, perception
and seeing

with increased efficiency. Meanwhile the pointing finger (particularly
if it is kept

almost imperceptibly moving beneath the word which is being looked at)
will help

to keep the eyes centralized and rapidly shifting over a small area of
maximum

clarity of vision. In his own way and for his own purposes, the child is
eminently

wise. When disease or mal-functioning has reduced us, so far as reading
is

concerned, to the child's level, we should not be ashamed to avail
ourselves of this

instinctive wisdom.

56

CHAPTER XV

_Myopia_

LL persons suffering from defective vision will derive benefit from
practising

t

A he

fundamental techniques of the art of seeing described in the preceding

chapters. In the present chapter and that which follows I shall indicate
ways in

which certain of these fundamental techniques may be adapted to the
needs of

persons suffering specifically from short sight, long sight, astigmatism
and squint,

and shall also give an account of some new procedures, particularly
effective in

these various manifestations of disease, hereditary idiosyncrasy and,
above all,

mal-functioning.

ITS CAUSES

Myopia is almost invariably an acquired condition, which makes its
appearance

during childhood. It has been attributed to the close work which school
children are

compelled to perform; and great efforts have been made in all civilized
countries to

reduce the amount of such work done within a given period, to enlarge
the type of

text-books and to improve lighting conditions in schools. The effects of
these

reforms have been entirely disappointing. Myopia is even commoner today
than it

was in the past.

This deplorable state of things seems to be due to three principal
causes. First,

the attempt to improve the environmental conditions prevailing in
schools have

failed, in certain respects, to go far enough. Second, in other
respects, the reforms

carried out have been misguided. And third, the reformers have almost
completely

neglected the psychological reasons for defective vision—a neglect which
is

particularly serious in the case of children.

It is in the direction of better lighting that the reformers have as yet
not gone far

enough. Dr. Luckiesh has demonstrated experimentally that visual tasks
become

easier, and that muscular nervous tension declines, as the intensity of
illumination

on a given task is increased from one to a hundred foot-candles. He made
no

experiments with higher intensities, but considers that mere is every
reason to

suppose that muscular nervous tension (the index of strain and fatigue)
would

continue to fall off with a further increase of illumination to a
thousand

foot-candles. Now, a child in a well-built, well-lit modern school may
think himself

extremely lucky if he gets as much as twenty foot-candles of
illumination to work

with. In many schools he will be given as little as ten or even five.
There is reason

to believe that many boys and girls might be saved from myopia if they
were given

sufficient light. In existing conditions, only children with the most
perfect seeing

habits can hope to get through their schooling without straining their
organs of

vision. But strain is the principal cause of mal-functioning, and this,
so far as many

children are concerned, means myopia.

In their attempt to improve lighting, the reformers have not gone far
enough. In

their attempt to improve the typography of school books they have gone
too far in a

wrong direction. For the purposes of clear, unstrained seeing, the best
print is not

necessarily the largest. Large print, it is true, has a specious air of
being very easy to

read; but precisely because it seems so easy, it lures the eyes and mind
into

temptation. They try to see whole lines of this all too legible print
with equal clarity

at the same time. Central fixation is lost, the eyes and attention cease
to shift, habits

of staring are developed and, instead of being improved, vision is
actually impaired.

For good seeing, the best print is one that is not too large, but fairly
heavy, so that

there is plenty of strong contrast between the black letters and their
background.

When confronted by such print, the mind and its eyes are not tempted by
any

obvious excess of legibility to try to see too much too well. Instead,
the smaller

type encourages them to read with central fixation and in a state of
dynamic

relaxation. Dr. Bates, indeed, made use of the smallest available print
for

re-educating defective vision. He would give his pupils not merely
diamond type to

57

read (the smallest that a printer can set up), but even those
microscopic reductions

of print which can only be made by the camera. This microscopic type
cannot be

read except when the eyes and mind are in a state of complete dynamic
relaxation,

and are doing their looking with perfect central fixation. With a good
teacher to help

him, a person with even very serious defects of sight (I speak here from
personal

experience) can be got into the condition in which he can read words
printed in

microscopic type. And the result is not eye-strain or fatigue, but a
marked

temporary improvement of vision for other objects. Working with
microscopic type

without a teacher is not too easy, and the unwary enthusiast may be
tempted to set

about it in the wrong way. Consequently I have not included any detailed

description of this procedure. If I mention it here, it is merely to
show that the

correlation between large print and good seeing is not the obvious and
self-evident

thing which the designers of school books have commonly imagined it to
be.

By neglecting the psychological reasons why school children develop
defects of

vision the reformers have absolutely guaranteed at least a partial
failure of their

efforts. Even if the lighting of schools were improved out of all
recognition, even if

the best possible print were used in all the primers and textbooks,
large numbers of

children would still undoubtedly develop myopia and other defects of
vision. They

would do so because they are often bored and sometimes frightened,
because they

dislike sitting cooped up for long hours, reading and listening to stuff
which seems

to them largely nonsensical, and compelled to perform tasks which they
find not

only difficult, but pointless. Further, the spirit of competition and
the dread of

blame or ridicule foster, in many childish minds, a chronic anxiety,
which adversely

affects every part of the organism, not excluding the eyes and the
mental functions

associated with seeing. Nor is this all; the exigencies of schooling are
such that

children must constantly be given novel and unfamiliar things to look
at. Every

time a new mathematical formula is inscribed on the blackboard, every
time the

class is set the task of learning a new page of Latin grammar, or to
study a new set of

features on a map, every child concerned is being forced to pay close
and

concentrated attention to something completely unfamiliar—that is to
say,

something which it is peculiarly difficult to see, something which sets
up a certain

amount of strain in the eyes and minds even of those who have the best
of seeing

habits.

About seventy per cent, of children are sufficiently stolid and well
balanced to be

able to go through school without visual mishap. The rest emerge from
the

educational ordeal with myopia or some other defect of vision.

Some of the psychological reasons for bad sight can probably never be

eliminated from the school; for they seem to be inherent in the very
process of

herding children together and imposing upon them discipline and book
learning.

Others can be got rid of—but only by a rare combination of good will and

intelligence. (For instance, until all teachers become angels and
geniuses, how are

you going to prevent a considerable number of children in every
generation from

being frightened and bored?)

There is, however, one field in which the reasons for bad seeing can be
eliminated

fairly certainly and without much difficulty: it is possible to mitigate
the ocular and

mental strain, caused by the constant recurrence of situations in which
children are

called upon to look at something unfamiliar. The extremely simple
technique for

achieving this end was devised by Dr. Bates, and for some years was used

successfully in a number of schools in different parts of the United
States. Owing to

changes in the administration of these schools and to pressure exerted
by organized

orthodoxy, the practices suggested by Dr. Bates were gradually
abandoned. The

fact is regrettable; for there is evidence that they actually did good
in preserving the

children's vision, while the nature of the practices was such that it
was absolutely

impossible that they should ever do anyone any harm.

Dr. Bates's technique for relieving the strain caused by constantly
looking at

unfamiliar objects was exceedingly simple. It consisted merely in
hanging a

Snellen Chart in some conspicuous position in the schoolroom, and
instructing the

children, as soon as the chart was thoroughly familiar, to look at it
for a few

moments whenever they had any difficulty in seeing the blackboard, or a
map, or

58

the pages, say, of a grammar or geometry book. Because the chart was an
old friend,

the children had no difficulty in seeing its graduated letters. The act
of reading gave

them new faith in their own powers and relieved the strain caused by
having to pay

concentrated attention to something strange and unfamiliar. Strong in
their

newfound confidence and relaxation, the children then turned back to
their work

and found that their power of seeing it had markedly improved.

The Snellen Chart possesses, as we have seen, certain disadvantages.
Therefore it

will probably be advisable to substitute for it a large commercial
calendar of the

kind described in an earlier chapter. Alternatively, children may be
instructed to

turn, whenever vision falls off or fatigue sets in, to one of the
notices or mottoes

which generally hang in schoolrooms. All that is necessary is that the
words, letters

or numerals regarded shall be perfectly familiar; for it is by
familiarity that the ill

effects of unfamiliarity are neutralized.

I need hardly add that there is no reason why this procedure should be
confined to

the schoolroom. A calendar or any other perfectly memorized piece of
printed

matter is a valuable addition to the furniture in any room, where people
have to do

concentrated work involving the seeing of unfamiliar objects, or strange

combinations of familiar elements. Incipient strain may be very rapidly
relieved by

looking—analytically, or with a small-scale swinging shift—at the
well-known

words or numerals. Add an occasional period of palming and, if possible,
of

sunning—and there is no reason why the incipient strain should ever
mature into

fatigue and impairment of vision.

TECHNIQUES OF RE-EDUCATION

From this long, but not irrelevant, digression, let us return to a
consideration of

the procedures for re-educating the myope towards normality. In the more
serious

cases, the help of a capable teacher will probably be necessary, if any
considerable

improvement is to be achieved. But all can derive benefit, often a great
deal of

benefit, from following the fundamental rules of the art of seeing,
particularly as

these rules are adapted to the special needs of the short-sighted.

Palming, which the myope should practise as often and as long as he
possibly can,

may be made doubly valuable if the scenes and episodes remembered, while
the

eyes are closed and covered, are so chosen that the inward eye has to
range from

near to far over considerable distances. At one time or another, most of
us have

stood on railway bridges watching the trains as they approached and
receded again

across the landscape. Such memories are very profitable to the myope;
for they

stimulate the mind to come out of its narrow world of short sight and
plunge into

the distance. At the same time, the apparatus of accommodation, which is
closely

correlated with the mind, is set unconsciously to work.

Friends approaching along familiar roads, horses galloping away across
fields, boats

gliding along rivers, buses arriving and departing—all such memories of
depth and distance

are valuable. Sometimes, too, it may be profitable to supplement them
with scenes

constructed by the fancy. Thus, one may imagine oneself rolling billiard
balls down

an enormously long table, or flinging a stone onto the ice of a great
lake and

watching it skim away into the distance.

Sunning and swinging require no special modification for the myope. The
drills

designed to cure the bad habit of staring and to foster mobility and
central fixation

can also be performed without modification, except in the case of the
calendar drill,

which may be adapted to the needs of the short-sighted person in the
following

ways.

Begin by doing the drills at the distance from which the large numerals
can be

seen most easily. Do them first with both eyes together, then (covering
one eye with

a patch or handkerchief) with each eye separately. If one eye does its
work of

sensing less well than the other, give it more work—but lengthen the
periods of

palming between drills, so as to avoid fatigue. After a few days, when
the eyes and

mind have become accustomed to doing a certain amount of seeing without
the aid

of spectacles (which will still have to be worn in times of emergency,
or of potential

danger to oneself or others, as when driving a car or walking in crowded
streets),

59

move the chair a foot or two further from the calendar and repeat the
drills at that

distance. In a few weeks it should be possible to increase very
considerably the

distance from which things can be clearly seen.

Myopic eyes should be given plenty of practice in changing the focus
from the

near point to the distance. To do this, procure a small pocket calendar
of the same

model as the commercial calendar on the wall—that is to say, with one
month

printed in large type, and the preceding and succeeding months in
smaller type

below. Hold the pocket calendar a few inches in front of the eyes,
glance at the

figure 'one' on the large-type month, then look away and locate the
'one' on the

large-type month of the wall calendar. Close the eyes and relax. Then
proceed to do

the same with the succeeding figures. All the steps of the drill may be
done in this

way on the two calendars, with both eyes together and each eye
separately and at

progressively greater and greater distances from the wall calendar.
Short-sighted

people will find this a pretty strenuous exercise, and should therefore
be

particularly careful to interrupt the drill at frequent intervals for
periods of palming

and, if possible, sunning. If a small pocket calendar does not happen,
on some

occasion, to be available, the face of a watch may be used instead. Hold
it close to

the eyes, glance at the 'one' and then away to the corresponding numeral
on the wall

calendar. Close the eyes, relax and go on in the same way round the
whole dial.

Myopes can read without glasses, but at a point abnormally close to the
eyes. It is

possible for them, however, to read without undue strain at points an
inch or two

further away. Practice in reading at these further points will gradually
eliminate any

slight feeling of discomfort associated with the more distant
vision—provided

always, of course, that attention be properly directed and staring (the
great vice of

the short-sighted) avoided. At the end of every page, or even of every
paragraph,

the myope should look up for a few seconds to glance at some thoroughly
familiar

object at a distance, such as a calendar on the wall, or the view out of
the window.

Further hints on the art of reading will be given in the chapter
especially devoted to

that subject.

When travelling by bus or car, myopes should take the opportunity
provided of

glancing with quick, 'flashing' regards at the lettering on billboards,
shop-fronts and

the like. No attempt should be made to 'hold' the words so regarded,
until they are

clearly seen. Glance for a moment, and close the eyes. Then, if the
movement of the

vehicle permits it, glance again. If you see, well and good; if you
don't see, that also

is well and good—for there is every reason to believe that you will see
better some

time.

A few hints on the art of seeing movies will be given in a later
chapter. Here, I

will only remark that, for anyone who can bear to look at a picture more
than once,

the movie theatre may be made to provide material for a valuable
exercise. On your

first visit, look at the picture from a place in one of the front rows.
On the next, take

a seat twenty feet further back. Because of its familiarity, the picture
will be more

visible than it was the first time; and you will see it well even at the
increased

distance. Yet greater familiarity will, on a third visit, permit of a
further retreat

towards the back of the theatre. And, of course, if your courage, time
and money

are sufficient, you can view the picture for a fourth, a fifth, a sixth,
a seventy times

seventh time, creeping further and further away from the screen on each
occasion.

60

CHAPTER XVI

_Long Sight, Astigmatism, Squint_

ONG sight is of two main types—hyperopia, often found in / young people
and

Lpersist

ing into later life; and presbyopia, which commonly makes its onset in

later middle age. All forms of long sight can be re-educated into or
towards

normality.

Hyperopia often causes discomfort and pain, and when associated (as it
not

infrequently is) with a very slight degree of outward squint in one of
the eyes, may

bring on frequent severe headaches, giddiness, fits of nausea and
vomiting. The

neutralizing of hyperopic symptoms by means of artificial lenses
sometimes puts a

stop to these painful disabilities; but sometimes it fails to do so, and
the migraines

and nausea persist until such time as the sufferer learns the art of
seeing.

Presbyopia is commonly regarded as one of the inevitable results of
ageing. Like

the bones of the skeleton, the lens of the eye hardens with age, and
this hardening is

supposed to prevent all elderly eyes from being able to accommodate at
the near

point. Nevertheless, many old people continue to accommodate up to the
day of

their death; and when sufferers from presbyopia undertake a suitable
course of

visual re-education, they soon learn to read at a normal distance,
without the aid of

spectacles. From this we may conclude that there is nothing inevitable
or

predestined about the long sight of old age.

Palming, sunning, swinging and shifting will do much to relieve the
discomfort

associated with hyperopia, and will put the mind and eyes into the
condition of

dynamic relaxation which makes normal seeing possible. These should be

supplemented by imagination drills, which are particularly valuable in
improving

the long-sighted person's ability to read.

Print seems grey and blurred when the hyperope looks at it.T his state
of things

can be improved indirectly by a constant practice of the fundamental
procedures of

the art of seeing— palming, sunning, swinging and shifting; and,
directly, through

memory and imagination. The hyperope should look at one of the large
numerals

on his calendar, and then with closed eyes, 'letting go,' remember the
intense

blackness of the ink and reflect at the same time that exactly the same
ink is used for

printing the small letters, which he sees as grey and misty. Next,
calling

imagination into play, he should remember one of these smaller letters,
imagine a

blacker dot at its base and another at the top. After shifting from dot
to dot with the

inward eye, he should look at the real letter and do the same on that.
It will soon

blacken and, for a few seconds, he will be able to see it and the other
letters on the

page quite distinctly. Then all will blur again, and he will have to
repeat his acts of

memory and imagination.

After paying attention for a little to the blackness of the letters, he
should

consider the whiteness of the background within and around the letters,
and should

exercise himself in first imagining and then, with the aid of the
imagination, actually

seeing it whiter than it is in reality. The vision for reading and other
close work may

be markedly improved in this way. This is not surprising; for between
the eyes and

the mind there exists a two-way connection. A mental strain will cause
strain and

physical distortion in the eyes; and physical distortion in the eyes
will cause the

mind to perceive an imperfect image of the external object, and so
increase its

strain. But, conversely, if the mind is able, through memory and
imagination, to

form within itself a perfect image of an external object, the existence
of this perfect

image in the mind will automatically improve the condition of the
strained and

distorted eyes. The more perfect the image in the mind, the greater the

improvement in the physical condition of the eyes. For the eyes will
tend to assume

the physical conformation, which eyes must have, if they are to transmit
the sort of

_sensa_ that a mind can perceive in terms of a perfect image of an
external object. Not

only is the connection between eyes and mind a reversible, two-way
connection; it

is also a connection for mutual benefit as well as for mutual harm. This
is a very

important fact to remember; for we tend, for some curious reason, to
think only of

61

the mischief that the eyes can inflict upon the mind and the mind upon
the eyes—of

blurred vision, due to strain and refractive error, and of visual
delusions produced

by the imagination, of temporary failures of vision caused by sudden
outbursts of

rage or grief, and of diseases of the eyes brought on by chronic
negative emotion.

But if eyes and mind can harm, they can also help one another. An
unstrained mind

has undistorted eyes, and undistorted eyes do then-work so well that
they never add

anything to the burdens of the mind. Moreover, when, through mental
strain or for

some other reason, a distortion of the eyes has been produced, the mind
can help to

remedy this distortion by doing the right, the beneficial thing at its
end of the

two-way communication line. It can perform acts of remembering, which
are

always accompanied by the condition of relaxation that permits the eyes
to return to

their normal shape and normal functioning. And it can call up, by
imagination,

representations of external objects more perfect than those it
ordinarily sees on the

basis of the poor _sensa_ transmitted by the distorted eyes. But when
the mind has a

perfectly clear image of an object, the eyes tend automatically to
revert to the

condition which would enable them to furnish the proper raw materials
for making

such an image. Just as the emotions and their outward physical
expression (in the

form of gesture, metabolic change, glandular activity and so forth) are
indissolubly

connected, so too there is an indissoluble connection, for good as well
as for evil,

between the visual image, whether produced by memory, imagination or the

interpretation of _sensa,_ and the physical condition of the eyes.
Impair or improve

the mental image, and you automatically impair or improve the condition
of the

eyes. By means of repeated acts of memory and imagination it is possible
to

improve, temporarily at first, then permanently, the quality of the
mental images of

external objects. When this has been achieved, there is first a
temporary, then a

permanent improvement in the physical condition of the eyes. Hence the
value of

memory and imagination drills in conditions, such as hyperopia, in which
_sensa_ and

the perceptions based upon them are of poor quality.

Exercises which compel the mind and eyes to change their focus rapidly
from

distance to the near point are as useful to the hyperope as to the
myope. Such drills

have already been described in the chapter on short sight.

Presbyopia is essentially an inability to accommodate the eyes, so that
they will

do clear and accurate sensing at the near point. This failure to
accommodate seems

to be the result of a habit, to the building up of which middle-aged and
elderly

people are predisposed by the hardening of the lens. This habit can, as
experience

shows, be modified, even though the physical condition of the lens may
remain, as

it presumably does, unchanged. Like all other sufferers from defects of
vision,

presbyopes should follow the fundamental rules of the art of seeing,
adapting them

to their own particular needs and, where necessary, supplementing them.
To the

procedures which are helpful to all longsighted persons, they should add
the

following techniques for improving their reading.

Print can be read without undue strain somewhat nearer to the eyes than
the point

of maximum comfort and habitual usage. The presbyope can coax his eyes
and

mind to get used to seeing at this nearer point, provided always that he
interrupts his

reading to keep the visual organs relaxed by means of palming, swinging
and

sunning. Little by little, the reading distance can be considerably
shortened in this

way, while the eyes and mind acquire a renewal of flexibility.

Oliver Wendell Holmes records the case of an old gentleman of his
acquaintance

who, 'perceiving his sight to fail, immediately took to exercising it on
the finest

print, and in this way fairly bullied nature out of her foolish habit of
taking liberties

at five-and-forty, or thereabout. And now the old gentleman performs the
most

extraordinary feats with his pen, showing that his eyes must be a pair
of

microscopes. I should be afraid to say how much he writes on the compass
of a

half-dime—whether the Psalms or the Gospels, or the Psalms and the
Gospels, I

won't be positive.'

This old gentleman had evidently discovered for himself what Dr. Bates
was later

to re-discover and proclaim to the world— the value, for people with
defective sight,

of very small and even microscopic print. Oliver Wendell Holmes is
wrong,

however, in saying that he 'fairly bullied nature out of her habit' of
giving people

62

presbyopia. The sensing eyes and the perceiving mind cannot successfully
be

bullied. Any attempt to force them to sense and perceive always results,
within a

very short time, not in the improvement of vision, but its impairment.
The old

gentleman who trained his eyes to become a pair of microscopes, cannot
possibly

have bullied; he must have coaxed them. And provided they do the same,
all

presbyopes may profitably follow his example.

Procure a specimen of very small print. (In any second-hand bookshop you
may

find thick little duodecimos of the early nineteenth century, containing
the complete

works of the great and the forgotten, and printed in a diamond type so
small that our

ancestors must indeed have had good vision to get through whole volumes
of it.)

Take the sunlight on the closed eyes, or, if there is no sun, bathe them
in the light of

a strong electric lamp. Palm for a few minutes, and then give the closed
eyes a few

more seconds of light. Thus relaxed, you can set to work on your small
print.

Holding the page either in full sunlight, or in the best possible
substitute for

sunlight, look at it easily, effortlessly, breathing and blinking as you
do so. Make no

attempt to see the words, but let the eyes wander back and forth along
the white

spaces between the lines of print. No mental hazards are involved in
looking at a

plain surface; consequently, there will be no temptation to strain, if
you keep the

eyes and attention shifting on the white spaces between the lines. From
far out,

move the page to within a foot of the eyes, still paying attention to
the white spaces

rather than the print, and still taking care to breathe and blink, so as
to prevent the

attention from becoming unduly fixed and immobile. (By changing the
outward

expression of an undesirable mental state, one acts upon the mental
state itself.

Attention cannot be misdirected, if we take pains to correct the
external symptoms

of misdirected attention.) Interrupt this procedure at frequent
intervals to palm and

take the sun. This is essential; for, as we have seen, there can be no
bullying of the

sensing eyes and the perceiving mind. If they are to co-operate in doing
a good job

of seeing, they must be relaxed and coaxed into working as they should.

After a little time devoted to this drill, it will generally be found
that individual

words and whole phrases of the small-type reading matter will come up
almost

suddenly into distinct visibility. Do not allow yourself to be tempted
by these first

successes into trying to read continuously. Your aim at this time is not
to reach the

immediate and obvious goal of reading the page before you; it is to
acquire the

means whereby this and similar goals may be reached in the future,
without strain

or fatigue, and with enhanced efficiency. Do not, I repeat, attempt to
read, but go on

effortlessly regarding the page, and especially the white spaces between
the lines,

at varying distances from the eyes. From time to time, when a word in
the small

type has come up into visibility, pick up a book with print of ordinary
dimensions

and read a paragraph or two. It is quite likely that you will find you
can read it more

easily and closer to the eyes than you could before starting your work
on the

smaller print.

ASTIGMATISM AND SQUINT

Defects of vision, due to astigmatism, can be markedly diminished or
even

eliminated by anyone who will diligently practise the art of seeing and
thereby

learn how to get his mind and eyes to function naturally and normally.
Procedures

apecially valuable for the astigmatic have already been described in the
paragraphs

devoted to the domino drills. It is therefore unnecessary to go any
further into the

matter here.

Sufferers from any of the more serious kinds of squint will find it
extremely

difficult to re-educate themselves into normality, and should seek the
assistance of

an experienced teacher, who will show them how to achieve dynamic
relaxation,

how to strengthen the sight of the weaker eye, and (final and most
difficult step)

how to re-acquire the mental faculty of fusing the two sets of _sensa_
delivered by the

two eyes into a single representation of an external object.

For those who suffer from slight muscle imbalance—and even an almost

imperceptible divergence of one or both eyes may be the source of
extreme

discomfort and often of serious disabilities —the following simple
'double-image

63

drill' will prove of considerable benefit.

Relax the eyes and mind by palming; then hold a pencil at arm's length,
the tip

pointed towards your nose. Bring the pencil towards you, blinking as you
do so.

When the pencil is close to the face, change its position from
horizontal to vertical,

holding it upright immediately in front of, and about three inches away
from, the tip

of the nose. Focus on the pencil; but, to avoid staring, shift the
attention rapidly

from top to bottom. Do this half a dozen times; then look away, just
above the top

of the pencil, to some distant object at the other end of the room. When
the eyes are

focussed on this distant object, the pencil at the near point will seem
to become two

pencils. To eyes in perfect alignment, these two pencils will look as
though they

were about three inches apart. But where there is muscular imbalance,
the distance

separating the two images will appear to be a good deal less. (And if
the squint is

pronounced, the phenomenon will not be observed at all.) Should the two
images be

seen too close together, shut the eyes, 'let go' and imagine yourself
still looking at

the distant object, but with the two images of the near-by pencil
somewhat further

apart than they were when you actually saw them. When we distinctly
imagine a

normal image, our eyes will tend automatically to put themselves into
the condition,

in which they would have to be, in order to supply our mind with the
materials for

seeing such an image. Consequently, when you re-open the eyes and look
once

more in reality at the distant object, the two pencils at the near point
will seem, if

your visualization has been clear and distinct, perceptibly further
apart than they

were. Close the eyes again and repeat the visualizing process, this time
imagining

the pencils to be yet a little further apart than before; then re-open
and verify. Go on

doing this, until you have pushed the two images to something like their
normal

distance one from the other. When this has been achieved, start to swing
the head

very gently from side to side, blinking and breathing easily as you do
so— and, of

course, still looking at the distant object. The two images of the
pencil will appear

to move back and forth in the opposite direction to the head, but will
still keep their

positions relative to one another.

Provided that this drill be prepared for by palming and accompanied by
easy

blinking and breathing, it may be repeated at frequent intervals through
out the day.

The immediate result will be, not fatigue, but relaxation and
de-tensioning; and the

long-range consequences will be the gradual correction of
old-established habits of

muscular imbalance.

DISEASES OF THE EYES

The art of seeing is not primarily a therapy. It does not, that is to
say, aim directly

at the cure of pathological conditions of the sensing-apparatus. Its
purpose is to

promote normal and natural functioning of the organs of vision—the
sensing eyes

and the selecting, perceiving and seeing mind. When normal and natural

functioning has been restored, it generally happens that there is a
marked

improvement in the organic condition of the tissues involved in that
functioning.

In this particular case, the tissues involved are those of the eyes and
the nerves

and muscles connected with them. When people have learnt the art of
seeing and

conscientiously follow its simple rules, their eyes, if these are
diseased, tend to get

better. Even when the disease has its origin in some other part of the
body, normal

and natural visual functioning will often bring a certain amelioration
in the local

condition of the eyes. It cannot, of course, eliminate the condition
altogether; for

the simple reason that the sickness of the eyes is only a symptom of
another

sickness having its seat elsewhere. It can, however, help the eyes while
the cause of

their disorder is being treated, and may do much to prevent the vision
from

suffering permanent impairment.

In cases where the pathological condition of the eyes is not a symptom
of a

disease in some other part of the body, the re-establishment of normal
and natural

functioning may lead indirectly to a complete cure. This, as I have said
before, is

only to be expected; for habitual mal-functioning results in chronic
nervous

muscular tension and reduction in the volume of circulation. But any
part of the

body in which circulation is inadequate is particularly susceptible to
disease;

64

furthermore, once disease has set in, the innate capacity of the organ
to regulate and

heal itself will be abnormally reduced. Any procedure which restores
normal

functioning to the psycho-physical organs of vision will tend to reduce
nervous

muscular tension, increase circulation and bring back the _vis
medicatrix naturae_ to

its normal potency. Experience shows that this is what in effect
generally occurs

when persons suffering from such conditions as glaucoma, cataract,
iritis,

detachment of the retina, learn how to use their eyes and minds properly
instead of

improperly. The art of seeing, I repeat, is not primarily a therapy;
but, at one

remove and indirectly, it results in the relief or cure of many serious
diseases of the

eyes.

65

CHAPTER XVII

_Some Difficult Seeing-Situations_

N the present chapter I propose to discuss the ways in which the
fundamental

Irul

es of the art of seeing may be applied to certain common situations,
which

persons with defective vision are apt to find particularly trying.

READING

When we read, we are assailed, if our vision is at all defective, by
particularly

strong temptations to use our eyes and mind in the wrong way. Our
interest in what

we read intensifies our all too human proclivity towards end-gaining. We
are so

greedy to see the greatest possible amount of print in the shortest
possible time, that

we utterly neglect the normal and natural means whereby such an end may
be

achieved. Improper functioning becomes habitual with us, and our vision
is further

impaired.

The first tiling we have to do is to realize that end-gaining is
self-stultifying, and

that, where reading is concerned, we ourselves are end-gainers. The next
is to

inhibit, whenever we read, the manifestations of our impatience and our
intellectual

gluttony.

In the early stages of visual re-education, clear and effortless reading
cannot be

accomplished without plenty of rest and relaxation. In other words,
relaxation is

one of the principal means whereby we can achieve our end, which is to
see as

much print as possible, in the shortest possible time, with the least
possible fatigue

and the highest degree of intellectual efficiency. Consequently, when we
inhibit the

manifestations of our impatience and greed, this should be done, first
of all, for the

sake of giving our eyes and minds the relaxation which they so urgently
need, but

of which they are perpetually depriving themselves through their habits
of

improper use.

To provide the eyes and mind with adequate relaxation, one should, while

reading, adopt the following simple procedures:

First: Close the eyes for a second or two at the end of every sentence,
or every

other sentence. 'Let go' and visualize the last word you have read and
the

punctuation mark by which it is followed. When you open your eyes again,
look

first at this remembered word and punctuation mark, which will seem to
be

perceptibly more distinct than they were when originally read. Then go
on to the

next sentence.

Second: At the end of every page or two, interrupt yourself for a couple
of

minutes to palm the eyes. To greedy end-gainers, this will seem the most

intolerable hardship. But let them reflect that these interruptions will
bring them

more easily and expeditiously to their goal. Also that this
'mortification' of their

impatience will probably be very good for their characters!

Third: If sunlight is available, take the sun on the closed and open
eyes before

palming, and again, on the closed lids, after. If there is no sun, bathe
the eyes in the

light of a strong electric lamp.

Fourth: While reading, sit where you can see a calendar or other
perfectly

familiar piece of large-type reading matter hanging on a distant wall.
Raise your

eyes from your book occasionally and look analytically at the letters or
numerals. If

you are reading by daylight, look out of the window sometimes into the
far

distance.

Fifth: Memory and imagination can be enlisted in the service of better
reading.

Pause from time to time, 'let go' and remember a single letter or word
recently

regarded. See it with the inward eye in terms of the white background
surrounding

it and contained within it. Then imagine the whiteness of the background
as being

whiter than you actually saw it. Re-open, look at the whiteness around
and within

the real letters and try to see it as white as the imaginary background
you visualized

with your eyes shut. Close the eyes once more, and begin again. After
two or three

66

repetitions, palm for a little while and then go on reading.

As an alternative exercise, close your eyes, remember a recently seen
letter, take

an imaginary pen and place a dot of intenser blackness at its top and
base, or at its

left-hand and right-hand extremities. Shift the attention from dot to
dot half a dozen

times; then open the eyes and, imagining that you see similar dots of
intenser

blackness of the real letter, do the same. Repeat this procedure several
times, palm,

and continue your reading.

Sixth: In the chapter on long sight, I gave an account of the way in
which

presbyopes could improve their reading vision by looking effortlessly at
very small

print—more especially at the white spaces between the lines. The
benefits of this

drill are not confined to elderly people with failing sight. Anyone who
has

difficulty in reading may profitably make use of this procedure at the
beginning of a

period of study, and at intervals during the period.

So much for the simple relaxation techniques, by which a session with
book or

newspaper should be prefaced and interrupted. Let us now consider the
proper way

of performing the act of reading itself.

Here, as in all other seeing-situations, the great enemies of normal
vision are

strain, misdirected attention, staring. In order to overcome these
enemies, one must

be careful, while reading, to obey the following simple rules:

First: Do not hold your breath or keep the eyelids rigid and unmoving
for long

periods. Blink frequently and breathe regularly, gently and fully.

Second: Do not stare or try to see every part of a whole line or phrase
equally

well. Keep the eyes and attention continually moving, and so bring
central fixation

into play. This is best accomplished by making the eyes hurry
continuously back

and forth in the white space immediately under the line of print which
is being read.

Words and letters are thus caught, as it were, between a succession of
short swings.

At first this technique of reading by rapid movements of the eyes in the
white

spaces between the lines may seem somewhat disconcerting. But after a
little time

we shall discover that it contributes not a little to clear and
effortless reading.

Letters and words are seen more easily when they are, so to speak, on
the wing than

when immobilized by a fixed stare—more easily, too, when they are
considered as

interruptions to a plain white background than when looked at as things
existing in

their own right and requiring to be deciphered.

Third: Do not frown when you read. Frowning is a symptom of the nervous

muscular tension produced in and around the eyes by misdirected
attention and the

effort to see. With the achievement of dynamic relaxation and normal
functioning,

the habit of frowning will disappear of itself. But its departure may be
accelerated,

and the physical and mental tensions relieved, by frequent and
deliberate acts of

inhibition. In the midst of reading, suddenly turn round upon yourself
and catch

your facial muscles at their tricks. Then close the eyes for a moment,
'let go' and

deliberately smooth the brows.

Fourth: Do not half-close the eyelids when you read. Unlike frowning,
this

procedure has a purpose. By half-closing the eyelids, we reduce the size
of the

normal visual field and, in this way, eliminate some of the distracting
stimuli and

diffused illumination coming to the eyes from those parts of the page
which are not

being looked at. Most persons with defects of vision do their reading
through a

narrow loophole between their eyelashes; but the tendency is especially
marked

among those who have opacities in the cornea or other normally
transparent tissues

of the eyes. Such opacities act in much the same way as do the particles
of water

vapour suspended in the air on an autumn morning: they disperse the
light in a kind

of luminous fog, through which it is hard to see distinctly. Partial
closure of the

lids has the effect of cutting off much of the illuminated field and so
reducing the

density of the fog caused by the scattering of light.

But the narrowing of the aperture between the lids demands a continuous

muscular effort. This effort increases the tension in and around the
eyes, and is

reflected by an intensification of the psychological tensions in the
mind. Looking

between half-closed lids is undoubtedly a way of getting an immediate
im-

provement of vision; but this immediate improvement must be paid for in
the

future—for it can be had only at the high cost of increased strain and
fatigue, and a

67

progressive further impairment of the power of seeing. It is therefore
very

important to find a method for correcting this most undesirable
tendency.

Conscious relaxation of the lids, so that they remain untensed and open
at their

normal span, will not be sufficient. Indeed, it is likely to result in
our seeing a good

deal worse than before, so that, in mere self-protection, we shall have
to turn back

to our old bad habits.

Fortunately, however, there is a very simple mechanical method for
getting the

results achieved by half-closing the eyes. Instead of cutting out
distractions and

unneeded illumination at the receiving end, that is to say, in the eye,
we cut them

out at the source—on the printed page. All that is needed is a sheet of
stout black

paper, a ruler and a sharp knife. Take as much of the black paper as
will cover, say,

half an average page of print. Across the centre of this cut a slot
slightly longer than

the average line of print and wide enough to take in about two lines.
(The width of

the slot may be varied to suit individual tastes and to fit different
sizes of type. This

can be done by taking a strip of black paper, drawing it down across the
top edge of

the slot until the aperture is of the width desired, and fastening it
into place by paper

dips.)

When everything is ready, hold the black paper flat on the page with the
lower

edge of the slot about an eighth of an inch below the line you are
reading. When

you have come to the end of the line, move the slot down to the next
line. And so

on.

This absurdly simple little device will be found helpful by all who have
any

difficulty in reading. For those who suffer from corneal or other
opacities, it may

double the clarity of their reading vision—and this when the eyelids are
fully open

and relaxed.

Reading through a slot facilitates that anti-stare technique, of which I
have

already spoken—the rapid shifting to and fro on the white space
immediately under

the print. The straight edge of the black paper acts as a sort of
railway track, along

which the eyes travel easily and smoothly. Furthermore, the task of
imaginatively

seeing the white spaces between lines as whiter than they really are is
facilitated,

when these white spaces are regarded (and afterwards remembered) in
contact with

a contrasting black frame.

In certain cases, the habit of trying to see clearly too much print at
the same time

may be rapidly corrected by making use of a small slot, not more than

three-quarters of an inch long. Such a slot will permit its user to see
only so much of

any given line as can be taken in by the _macula lutea;_ and rapid
shifting within this

confined space will bring the _fovea_ into play. In this way the central
area of the

retina will be stimulated and set to work as it never was when the
impossible

attempt was made to see whole phrases and lines equally well at the same
time. The

short slot will have to be moved rapidly from word to word along the
line, and

reading with its aid will probably be found rather exasperating, at any
rate in the

beginning. To minimize this inconvenience, alternate between the long
slot and the

short. It is easy to put up with brief annoyances, particularly if one
reflects that, by

doing so, one is building up profitable habits of corneal visual
functioning.

LOOKING AT UNFAMILIAR OBJECTS

This is perhaps the most trying of all seeing-situations and also one of
frequent

occurrence. We are called upon to look intensively at unfamiliar objects
every

time we go shopping, visit a museum, search for books in the shelves of
a library,

hunt through drawers and cupboards for some lost article, tidy up a
box-room or

attic, pack and unpack baggage, or repair a machine. The problem is how
to avoid or

reduce the strain and fatigue that ordinarily follows such looking.

First of all, make sure, if this is in your power, that what you are
looking at is

brightly illuminated. Draw back curtains, turn on lights, use a
flash-lamp. However,

if the looking has to be done in some public place, you will have to put
up with the

lighting, which others consider sufficient, but which will almost
certainly be

inadequate.

Second, resist the temptation to stare, and do not try to see clearly
more than a

68

small part of the total visual field. Look analytically at what is
before you, and keep

the eyes and attention continuously shifting.

Third, do not hold your breath, and blink your eyes frequently.

Fourth, rest as often as you can, either closing the eyes, 'letting go'
and

remembering some familiar object, or, preferably, palming. If possible
sun the eyes

from time to time, or bathe them in the light of an electric lamp.

If these simple rules are followed, it should be possible to come
through the

ordeal without serious fatigue, discomfort or strain.

MOVIES

For many people with defective vision, a visit to the pictures may be
the cause of

much fatigue and discomfort. There is no need for this. Looked at in the
right way,

movies do not strain the eyes and, indeed, may be made to pay handsome
dividends

in improved vision. Here are the rules which must be followed, if an
evening at the

picture theatre is to be a pleasure, not a torture.

First: Refrain from staring. Do not try to see the whole of the screen
equally

well. Do not try to 'hold' any detail. On the contrary, keep the eyes
and attention

continuously on the move.

Second: Do not forget to breathe and blink regularly.

Third: Take the opportunity offered by boring sequences to rest, by
closing the

eyes for a few seconds and 'letting go.' Even during the more exciting
parts of the

picture, you can find time occasionally to glance away for an instant
into the

darkness surrounding the illuminated screen. Use any intermission for
palming.

One way in which the movies may be used for improving vision has already
been

described in the chapter on myopia. Movies are also helpful in other
ways, above

all by making it possible for us to become familiar with objects and
situations

which are frequently met with in real life.

In an essay on the relationship between life and art, Roger Fry has
written a

passage which casts a very interesting light on the way in which the
movies can be

used to improve defective vision. 'We can get a curious side glimpse,'
he writes in

_Vision and Design,_ 'of the nature of the imaginative life from the
cinematograph.

This resembles actual life in almost every respect, except that what the

psychologists call the conative part of our reaction to sensations, that
is to say, the

appropriate resultant action, is cut off. If, in a cinematograph, we see
a runaway

horse and cart, we do not have to think of getting out of the way, or
heroically

interposing ourselves. The result is that, in the first place, we _see_
the event much

more clearly; see a number of quite interesting but irrelevant things,
which in real

life could not struggle into our consciousness, bent, as it would be,
entirely upon

the problems of our appropriate reaction. I remember seeing in a
cinematograph the

arrival of a train at a foreign station, and the people descending from
the carriages;

there was no platform, and to my intense surprise, I saw several people
turn right

round, after reaching the ground, as though to orientate themselves; an
almost

ridiculous performance, which I had never noticed in all the many
hundred

occasions on which such a scene had passed before my eyes in real life.
The fact

being that, at a station, one is never really a spectator of events, but
an actor

engaged in the drama of luggage or prospective seats; and one actually
sees only so

much as may help to the appropriate action.'

These lines express a very important truth: there is a fundamental
psychological

difference between a spectator and an actor, between looking on at a
work of art and

looking on (which can rarely be done without intervening) at an episode
of real life.

Spectators see more, and more clearly, than do actors. Owing to this
fact, it is

possible to make use of the movies to improve our vision for objects and
events in

real life. Because you are not a participant in the drama, you will be
able to see,

more clearly than you could in real life, the way in which people on the
screen

perform such ordinary acts as opening a door, getting into a cab,
helping

themselves to food and so forth. Make yourself conscious of seeing more
on the

screen than you are normally able to do in real life, and, after the
show, deliberately

call back the memory-images of what you saw there. This will make such
ordinary

69

actions seem more familiar than before; and this increased familiarity
will cause

similar actions to be more visible to you, when they occur at some
future date in

real life.

Close-ups provide a means whereby persons with defective vision may
overcome

one of their most embarrassing handicaps —the inability to recognize
faces, or to

catch the fine shades of meaning which people normally convey through
facial

expression. In real life, faces sixteen feet high and eight feet wide
are unknown; but

on the screen they are one of the most ordinary of phenomena. Exploit
this fact in

such a way as to improve your vision for real faces of ordinary
dimensions. Look

carefully at the gigantic face. Carefully, but always analytically.
Never fix a greedy

stare upon a close-up, even if it should belong to your favourite star.
Examine it in

all its details, noting the structure of the bones, the way the hair
grows, and how the

head moves on the neck and the eyes within their orbits. And when the
colossal face

registers grief, desire, anger, doubt and the rest, follow the workings
of lips and eyes,

of the muscles of cheek and brow, with the closest attention. The more
carefully

and analytically you observe these things, the better and clearer will
be your

memories of the commoner facial expressions, and the easier will it be,
at some

later date, to see similar expressions on the faces of real people.

70

CHAPTER XVIII

_Lighting Conditions_

EOPLE with normal vision, who consistently do their sensing and
perceiving in a

Pcondi

tion of dynamic relaxation, can afford in large measure to disregard the

external conditions of seeing. Not so the men and women whose sight is
defective.

For them, favourable external conditions are of the greatest importance,
and the

failure to secure such favourable conditions may do much to increase
their

disability, or, if they have undertaken a course of visual re-education,
to retard their

progress towards normality.

The most important of all the external conditions of good seeing is
adequate

illumination. Where lighting is poor, it is very hard for people with
defective vision

to get better, very easy for them to get worse.

The question now arises, what _is_ adequate illumination?

The best illumination we have is full sunshine on a clear summer's day.
If you

read in such sunshine, the intensity of the light falling upon the page
of your book

will be in the neighbourhood of ten thousand foot-candles—that is to
say, the light

of direct summer sunshine is equal to the light thrown by ten thousand
wax candles

placed at the distance of one foot from the book. Move from full
sunlight to the

shade of a tree or house. The light on your page will still have an
intensity of about

one thousand foot-candles. On overcast days, the light reflected from
white clouds

has an intensity of several thousand foot-candles; and the weather must
be very

gloomy for general outdoor intensities to fall as low as a thousand
foot-candles.

Indoors, the light near an unobstructed window may have an intensity of

anything from one hundred to five hundred foot-candles, depending upon
the

brightness of the day. Ten or from the window the illumination may fall
to as little

as two foot-candles or even less, if the room is papered and furnished
in dark

colours.

The intensity of illumination diminishes as the square of the distance.
A 6o-watt

lamp will provide about eighty foot-candles at one foot, about twenty at
two feet,

about nine at three feet, and, at ten feet, only four-fifths of one
foot-candle. Owing

to this rapid falling off in intensity with increase of distance, most
parts of the

average artificially lighted rooms are very poorly illuminated. It is
common to find

people reading and doing other forms of close work under an illumination
of one or

two foot-candles. In public buildings, such as schools and libraries,
you will be

lucky if you get as much as five foot-candles of illumination.

That it should be possible to do close work under illuminations so
fantastically

low compared with those which are met with out of doors in daytime is a

remarkable tribute to the native endurance and flexibility of the
sensing eyes and

the perceiving mind. So great is this flexibility and endurance that a
person whose

eyes are unimpaired, and who uses them in the way that nature intended
them to be

used, can submit for long periods to bad lighting conditions and suffer
no harm. But

for a person whose eyes have undergone some organic impairment, or whose

habitual functioning is so unnatural that he can only see with effort
and under strain,

these same conditions may be disastrous.

In his book, _Seeing and Human Welfare,_ Dr. Luckiesh has described some
very

interesting experiments, which demonstrate the undesirable consequences
of poor

lighting. These experiments were designed to measure nervous muscular
tension

(an accurate indicator, as Dr. Luckiesh points out, of' strain, fatigue,
wasted effort

and internal losses') under varying conditions of illumination. The task
assigned to

the subjects of these experiments was reading; and the amount of nervous
muscular

strain was recorded by a device which measured the pressure exerted by
two fingers

of the left hand resting upon a large flat knob. The subjects were kept
unaware of

the nature and purpose of the investigation—indeed, were deliberately
thrown on a

wrong scent. This eliminated the possibility of any conscious or
voluntary

interference with the results. A very large number of tests showed
conclusively that,

in all cases, 'there was a large decrease in nervous muscular tension as
the intensity

71

increased from one to one hundred foot-candles. The latter was the
highest intensity

investigated, because this is far above prevailing levels of
illumination in the

artificial world. There was impressive evidence that this tension would
continue to

decrease if the level of illumination were increased to one thousand
foot-candles.'

In other tests the subjects were exposed to improperly placed lights
that threw a

glare in their eyes. This glare was not excessive—just the average,
moderate glare

that millions of human beings habitually work and play by. Nevertheless
it was

quite sufficient to increase the tell-tale nervous muscular tension to a
marked

degree.

There is, so far as I know, only one kind of electric light bulb from
which one can

obtain a thousand foot-candles of illumination without excessive
consumption of

current. That is the 150-watt spotlight, described in the chapter on
sunning. The

parabolic and silvered back of this bulb acts as a reflector, and the
light issues in a

powerful beam, in which reading, sewing and other tasks requiring close
attention

and precise seeing can be performed in the best possible conditions.

During the daytime, people with defective sight should always make use
of the

best illumination available. Whenever possible, close work should be
done near a

window or out of doors. I myself have derived great benefit from reading
for long

periods at a stretch in full sunlight, either falling directly on the
page, or, if the

weather was too hot, reflected by means of an adjustable mirror, so that
it was

possible to sit in the shade, or indoors, and to enjoy the advantage of
seven or eight

thousand foot-candles upon the book. For some months, indeed, after
giving up the

wearing of spectacles, it was only in full sunlight, or under a spot
lamp, that I could

read comfortably for any length of time. But as vision improved, it
became possible

for me to make use of less intense illuminations. I still, however,
prefer the spot-

light to all others, and frequently work in full sunlight.

When reading in full sunlight, it is necessary to keep the eyes
thoroughly relaxed

by means of periodical brief sunnings and palmings. Many people will
also find it

easier to read if they make use of a slot cut in black paper, as
described in an earlier

chapter. When these precautions are taken, reading under ten thousand
foot-candles

can be very helpful to those whose vision is defective. Falling upon the
centre of

sight, the image of the intensely illuminated print stimulates a
_macula_ which has

become sluggish and insensitive through habitual wrong use of the organs
of seeing.

At the same time, the clarity and distinctness of the sunlit letters
exercise a most

wholesome influence upon the mind, which loses its habitual strained
anxiety about

seeing and acquires instead an easy confidence in its ability to
interpret the _sensa_

brought to it by the eyes. Thanks to this confidence and to the
stimulation of the

sluggish _macula,_ it becomes possible, after a time, to do one's seeing
no less

effectively under lower intensities of illumination. Ten thousand
foot-candle

reading is a preparation and an education for hundred foot-candle
reading.

Owing sometimes to organic defects of the eyes, sometimes to ingrained
habits

of improper functioning, sometimes to generalized ill-health, certain
persons are

peculiarly sensitive to intense light. For these it would be unwise to
plunge directly

into ten thousand foot-candle reading. Following the techniques
described in the

chapter on sunning, they should gradually accustom themselves to
tolerate greater

and greater intensities of illumination, not only directly on the closed
and open eyes,

but also on the printed page before them. In this way, they will come by
slow

degrees to be able to enjoy the advantages of good lighting—advantages
from

which their organic or functional photophobia had previously cut them
off, forcing

them to strain for vision in a perpetual twilight.

In conclusion, it seems worth while to say a few words about the
fluorescent

lighting, now so extensively used in factories, shops and offices, on
account of its

cheapness. There is good evidence that this kind of lighting adversely
affects the

vision of a minority of those who have to do close work under it. One
reason for this

must be sought in the composition of the light itself, which does not
come from an

incandescent source, as does natural sunlight or the light from a
filament bulb. Nor

is this all. Fluorescent lighting throws almost no shadows. Consequently
the

element of contrast, so immensely important to normal seeing, is
conspicuously

absent from rooms illuminated by fluorescent tubes. Shadows, moreover,
help us in

72

our estimation of distances, forms and textures. When shadows are
absent, we are

deprived of one of our most valuable guide-posts to reality, and the
accurate

interpretation of _sensa_ becomes much harder. This is one of the
reasons why the

organs of vision tire so much more easily on a day of uniform high cloud
than on

one of bright sunshine. Fluorescent lighting produces an effect somewhat
similar to

that produced by the diffused glare reflected from high thin clouds. To
eyes that

have been evolved to adapt themselves to light proceeding from an
incandescent

source, and to minds that have learnt to make use of shadows as guides
to correct

interpretation, perception and judgment, fluorescent lighting cannot but
seem

strange and baffling. The wonder is that it is only a minority of people
who react

unfavourably to such lighting.

If you happen to belong to the unlucky ten or fifteen per cent, of the
population

which cannot work under fluorescent light without suffering from
bloodshot eyes,

swollen eyelids and lowered vision, the best thing you can do, of
course, is to find a

job which permits you to work out of doors, or by the light of
incandescent filament

lamps. The next best thing is to palm frequently, and get out of the
fluorescence as

often as possible for a few minutes of sunning. At night, as a
substitute for sunning,

take the light of a strong incandescent filament lamp upon the closed
and open eyes.

The movies constitute another excellent therapeutic measure for those
who suffer

in this way. Looked at in the proper way, they can be wonderfully
restful and

refreshing to eyes which react badly to the peculiar composition of
fluorescent light

and to minds which are baffled by the shadowless world of low contrasts,
in which

that light compels them to work.

73

APPENDIX I

FTER I had completed the manuscript of this book, a correspondent sent
me a

Acopy

of the following article, which appeared as an unsigned editorial

annotation in the _British Medical Journal_ of September 13th, 1941.

PERFECT SIGHT WITHOUT GLASSES

A letter in this week's _Journal_ from Dr. J. Parness draws attention to
a statement

recently broadcast by Dr. Julian Huxley on the practice of correcting
visual defects

without the use of glasses. Before condemning such a practice it would
be as well to

examine the evidence in support of it. There are a variety of methods
based on

hypotheses of varying degrees of tenuity. The system expounded by W. H.
Bates in

his _Cure of Imperfect Sight by Treatment Without Glasses_ (New York,
1920) has

the advantage over competitive systems in that its principles are
publicly stated.

Bates holds that the refractive state is dynamic and is constantly
changing. The

changes in refraction are produced by the nerves and tissues of the
extra-ocular

muscles, the lens itself playing no part in accommodation. Defective
vision is a

psychic phenomenon, affection of the brain centres first disturbing the
_macula_ and

then the whole retina. Treatment aims at inducing 'cerebral relaxation,'
for when the

mind is at rest vision is normal. In thirty years' work on refraction
Bates found few

people who could maintain 'perfect sight' for more than a few minutes at
a time, and

he often saw 'the refraction change half a dozen times or more in a
second, the

variation ranging all the way from twenty dioptres of myopia to normal.'
As no

ophthalmologist has the necessary skill and speed to observe half a
dozen or more

changes in refraction in the space of a second ('blitz retinoscopy,' as
it might be

called), no one is in a position to contradict this basic tenet of
Bates. And

ophthalmologists still cling to the theory, based upon physiological
evidence, that

accommodation is brought about by the changing curvature of the lens.
Bates

illustrates the influence of the mind on refraction by the effect of
strain. Since strain

implies mental unrest, changes in refraction occur in all conditions
inducing such

unrest. Thus 'a patient 25 years old had no error of refraction when he
looked at a

blank wall without trying to see ( _i.e._ under complete relaxation and
total absence of

strain); but if he said he was 26, or someone else said he was 26, he
became myopic

(as shown by Bates's rapid retinoscopy). The same thing happened when he
said or

tried to imagine that he was 24. When he stated or remembered the truth
his vision

was normal, but when he stated or imagined an error he had an error of
refraction.'

There is also the case of the little girl who told a lie. The
retinoscope revealed a

change towards myopia the moment she replied 'No' to the question, 'Did
you have

an ice-cream?'; while she was giving truthful answers 'the retinoscope
indicated no

error of refraction.' This appears to be, so to say, a physical
expression of the

inward eye of the conscience.

A queer assortment of evidence is brought forward to prove that the
refractive

changes in the eye are produced by the extraocular muscles. There is,
for example,

the 'proof that aphakic patients are able to read small type with
distance glasses.

That the daily experience of ophthalmologists is to the contrary is
perhaps of some

significance, though obviously not as significant as the few instances
Bates records,

for which, incidentally, perfectly good explanations are available, as
anyone

acquainted with the literature knows ( _Amer.J. Ophthal.,_ 1921, 4,
296). There is,

indeed, an extensive and controversial literature on the actual
mechanism whereby

the contour of the lens changes during accommodation j the facts
themselves are not

disputed—except by Bates, who produces experimental evidence that in the
fish

removal of the lens does not interfere with accommodation. The fish
experiment is

amply illustrated by photographs, but there is no reference to the fact
that accom-

modation in the fish is different physiologically and anatomically from
that of the

mammal. Mammalian experiments, mainly on the rabbit and cat, are
recorded, and

here the rather startling point emerges that a nerve or muscle cut
across and tied up

again will carry an impulse on being tied, though physiologists would
not expect

74

any such result before days or weeks had elapsed. Mammalian anatomy is
also

illuminated in these experiments. Apparently the standard teaching that
the cat is

endowed with a superior oblique muscle is not correct. It should be
added that this

is only an incidental observation; but that pharmacologists err in
believing that

atropine acts only on unstriped muscle is part of the general argument,
for Bates

found that this drug will paralyse the extrinsic muscles which produce

accommodation. One experiment, illustrated in fig. 23, appears to show
that the

dead fish still has a living mind; its brain is pithed to induce
relaxation.

The treatment based on these revolutionary observations aims at mental

relaxation, and the pithed fish appears to be its prototype. The Bates
system of

treatment seems to have many devotees, and one incident may be worth
noting. In

1931 the Republican Ministry of Public Health of Prussia warned against
this

method as a form of quackery ( _Klin. Mbl. Augenheilk_., 1931, 87, 514),
but in

Hitlerite Germany a voluminous literature on the subject has spread the
cult and

there is apparently no lack of practitioners and patients.

It will be noticed that this article contains two main lines of
argument.

First: Bates's method of visual education cannot be sound, because it is
used by

Germans.

Second: Bates's method of visual education cannot be sound, because
certain

experiments devised to confirm the hypothesis, by which Bates sought to
explain

the success of his method, were not conducted properly.

The first argument is exactly like that which was used, more than a
century ago,

to discredit the stethoscope. Readers of John Elliotson's papers will
recall his

account of this ludicrous episode in the history of English medicine.
Owing to

anti-French prejudice, it was twenty years or more before Laennec's
invention

came into general use among English physicians.

In precisely the same way, owing to prejudice against magnetizers and

mesmerists, hypnotism was under the ban of official British medicine for
an even

longer period. For half a century after Braid had formulated his
classical hypothesis

and Esdaile had performed scores of major operations under hypnotic
anaesthesia,

the British Medical Association officially held that there was nothing
in hypnotism

but fraud and quackery.

Medical history has a dismal way of repeating itself in these matters,
and it looks

as though visual education were to suffer the same fate as hypnotism and
the

stethoscope.

I may add that the argument from nationalism hardly seems justified in
the

present instance. The art of seeing was worked out by an American
physician and is

extensively taught at the present time in the United States and England.

'Seeing-schools' have also existed for many years in Germany. Some of
these

schools were doubtless bad and deserved the censure of the Republican
Health

Ministry; but others, as it would appear from an article contributed in
1934 by an

army surgeon to the _Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift,_ must have
been

excellent. In this article, Dr. Drenkhahn records that, in many cases of
refractive

error among army recruits, he found that marksmanship was better when
the men

wore no corrective glasses, but underwent a course of visual training at
a

seeing-school. To those who notice any falling-off of vision, Dr.
Drenkhahn gives

the following advice: not to go immediately to an eye specialist, who
will generally

prescribe glasses, but to consult the family physician and, when he has
taken steps

to correct the general physical and psychological condition, to go to a
seeing-school

and learn the proper way to use the eyes and mind.

So much for the first line of argument. The second is equally
irrelevant, being

based, not on prejudice this time, but on mental confusion and bad
logic. For,

incredible as it may seem, the writer of the article entirely fails to
distinguish

between two totally different things: the primary evidence confirming
the existence

of certain phenomena, and the secondary evidence adduced to substantiate
the

hypothesis, in terms of which those phenomena are explained. The
phenomena,

which Bates sought to explain in terms of his unorthodox theory of
accommodation,

were those marked improvements in vision .which regularly followed the
practice

of certain educational techniques. The evidence for the occurrence of
such

75

phenomena can be supplied by the thousands of persons who, like myself,
have

derived benefit from following the procedures in question, and by the
scores of

conscientious and experienced instructors who teach the method. If the
writer

really wanted to know about this evidence, he would get in touch with a
few

reliable teachers, ask permission to watch them at work and, if his own
vision is de-

fective, take a course of visual re-education. Instead of that, he seeks
to discredit

the whole idea of visual re-education by denying the validity of the
experiments

used by Bates to support his explanatory hypothesis.

Needless to say, the idea of visual education emerges unscathed from
this

hopelessly misdirected attack. For it is obvious that, even if this
secondary

evidence were untrustworthy, even if the hypothesis supported by that
evidence

could be proved to be incorrect, this would make absolutely no
difference to the

facts which that hypothesis was originally intended to explain. In the
history of

human effort, effective arts have always preceded correct explanatory
hypotheses.

Thus, an art of metallurgy existed for several thousands of years before
the

formulation, in the present century, of satisfactory hypotheses to
account for the

phenomena of tempering and alloying. According to the view expressed in
the

article, the incorrectness of their hypotheses should have made it
impossible for the

old smiths and founders to possess an art of metal working. Again, if
the writer's

argument made sense, there could be no such thing as modern medicine.
Our

knowledge of the human mind-body is limited and patchy, and our theories
about it

are admittedly inadequate. Nevertheless, an effective art of medicine
exists, in spite

of the fact that many medical hypotheses will, in the future, certainly
be proved

false, while new hypotheses will be formulated, of which contemporary
physicians

cannot even dream. Bates's theory of accommodation may be as incorrect
as were

the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century explanations of the efficacy of
lime-juice in

cases of scurvy. Nevertheless scurvy was cured by lime-juice, and
Bates's method

of visual education actually works.

APPENDIX II

N myopes especially, posture tends to be extremely bad. This may be
directly due

Iin some cases to the short sight, which encourages stooping and a
hanging of the

head. Conversely, the myopia may be due in part at least to the bad
posture. F. M.

Alexander records cases in which myopic children regained normal vision
after

being taught the proper way of carrying the head and neck in relation to
the trunk.

In adults, the correction of improper posture does not seem to be
sufficient of

itself to restore normal vision. Improvement in vision will be
accelerated by those

who learn to correct faulty habits of using the organism as a whole; but
the

simultaneous learning of the specific art of seeing is indispensable.

76



DOCUMENT OUTLINE


-   PREFACE
-   CHAPTER I Medicine and Defective Vision
    -   ORDINARY TREATMENT OF DEFECTIVE SIGHT
    -   CURE OR PALLIATION OF SYMPTOMS?
-   CHAPTER II A Method of Visual Re-Education
    -   REASONS FOR ORTHODOX DISAPPROVAL
    -   THE NATURE OF AN ART
    -   BASIC PRINCIPLE UNDERLYING THE PRACTICE OF EVERY ART
-   CHAPTER III Sensing+ Selecting+ Perceiving= Seeing
    -   AN ILLUSTRATION
    -   PERCEPTION DETERMINED BY MEMORY
-   CHAPTER IV Variability of Bodily and Mental Functioning
    -   DEFECTIVE EYES CAPABLE OF HAVING FLASHES OF NORMAL VISION
    -   VARIABLE EYES VERSUS INVARIABLE SPECTACLES
-   CHAPTER V Causes of Visual Mal-Functioning: Disease and Emotional
    Disturbances
    -   CAUSES OF VISUAL MAL-FUNCTIONING: BOREDOM
    -   CAUSES OF VISUAL MAL-FUNCTIONING: MISDIRECTED ATTENTION
-   CHAPTER VI Relaxation
    -   PASSIVE RELAXATION: PALMING
-   CHAPTER VII Blinking and Breathing
    -   NORMAL AND ABNORMAL BLINKING HABITS
    -   NORMAL AND ABNORMAL BREATHING HABITS
-   CHAPTER VIII The Eye, Organ of Light
    -   THE CURRENT FEAR OF LIGHT
    -   REASONS FOR THE FEAR OF LIGHT
    -   CASTING OUT FEAR
    -   PRACTICAL TECHNIQUES
    -   HARMLESSNESS OF SUNNING
-   CHAPTER IX Central Fixation
-   CHAPTER X Methods of Teaching the Eyes and Mind to Move
    -   SWINGING
    -   OTHER AIDS TO MOBILITY
-   CHAPTER XI Flashing
    -   UNCONSCIOUS VISION
    -   TECHNIQUES OF FLASHING
-   CHAPTER XII Shifting
    -   ANALYTICAL LOOKING
    -   THE CALENDAR DRILL
-   CHAPTER XIII The Mental Side of Seeing
-   CHAPTER XIV Memory and Imagination
    -   MEMORY AS AN AID TO VISION
    -   IMPROVING THE MEMORY OF LETTERS
-   CHAPTER XV Myopia
    -   ITS CAUSES
    -   TECHNIQUES OF RE-EDUCATION
-   CHAPTER XVI Long Sight, Astigmatism, Squint
    -   ASTIGMATISM AND SQUINT
    -   DISEASES OF THE EYES
-   CHAPTER XVII Some Difficult Seeing-Situations
    -   READING
    -   LOOKING AT UNFAMILIAR OBJECTS
    -   MOVIES
-   CHAPTER XVIII Lighting Conditions
-   APPENDIX I
    -   PERFECT SIGHT WITHOUT GLASSES
-   APPENDIX II

