[]

 

AFTER MANY A SUMMER
DIES THE SWAN

 

Aldous Huxley was born in 1894, the third son of Leonard Huxley and
grandson of T. H. Huxley. From a preparatory school (described in
Eyeless in Gaza) he went on to Eton, which he left at seventeen owing to
serious eye trouble which left him nearly blind. One eye recovered
sufficiently for him to enter Oxford in 1913, but he had to abandon his
hope of becoming a physician and was rejected for military service in
1914. In 1919 he married Maria Nys, a Belgian, and joined the Athenaeum
magazine, writing biographical and architectural articles and reviews of
fiction, drama, music, and art Having already published three books of
verse, he began with Limbo and Crome Yellow the series of stories and
novels which combined dazzling intellectual dialogue and a surface
cynicism with a ground of clear moral convictions, and exerted a stroņg
emancipating influence. In the twenties Huxley lived mostly in Italy; in
the thirties his home was near Toulon, France. To this period belonged
Brave New World, a pessimistic futurist novel and his best known. In
1937 the state of his eyes led him to move to California, where he
became convinced of the value of mystical experience, the theme of
several of his later works. After the death of his first wife in 1955,
Huxley married Laura Archera. Their home was destroyed by fire in 1961;
little survived apart from the manuscript of Island, his last novel.
Aldous Huxley died in November 1963.

 

AFTER MANY A SUMMER
DIES THE SWAN

Aldous Huxley

 

 

 

 

 

[]
Elephant Paperbacks
IVAN R. DEE, PUBLISHER, CHICAGO

 

 

 

AFTER MANY A SUMMER DIES THE SWAN. Copyright © 1939 by Aldous Leonard
Huxley. This book was originally published in 1939 and is here reprinted
by arrangement with the Estate of Aldous Huxley.

First ELEPHANT PAPERBACK edition published 1993 by Ivan R. Dee, Inc.,
1332 North Halsted Street, Chicago 60622. Manufactured in the United
States of America and printed on acid-free paper.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Huxley, Aldous, 1894–1963.

After many a summer dies the swan / by Aldous Huxley. —1st Elephant pbk.
ed.

   p. cm.

“Elephant paperbacks”

Originally published: New York : London : Harper, 1939.

ISBN 1-56663-018-5 (pbk.)

1. Millionaires—California—Los Angeles—Fiction. 2. Hollywood (Los
Angeles, Calif.)—Fiction. I. Title.

  --------------------- ----------
  PR6015.U9A77   1993   92-43906
  823'.912—dc20         
  --------------------- ----------



PART I


Chapter I

IT HAD all been arranged by telegram; Jeremy Pordage was to look out for
a coloured chauffeur in a grey uniform with a carnation in his
button-hole; and the coloured chauffeur was to look out for a
middle-aged Englishman carrying the Poetical Works of Wordsworth. In
spite of the crowds at the station, they found one another without
difficulty.

“Mr. Stoyte’s chauffeur?”

“Mr. Pordage, sah?”

Jeremy nodded and, his Wordsworth in one hand, his umbrella in the
other, half extended his arms in the gesture of a self-deprecatory
mannequin exhibiting, with a full and humorous consciousness of their
defects, a deplorable figure accentuated by the most ridiculous clothes.
“A poor thing,” he seemed to be implying, “but myself.” A defensive and,
so to say, prophylactic disparagement had become a habit with him. He
resorted to it on every sort of occasion. Suddenly a new idea came into
his head. Anxiously, he began to wonder whether, in this democratic Far
West of theirs, one shook hands with the chauffeur—particularly if he
happened to be a blackamoor, just to demonstrate that one wasn’t a pukka
sahib even if one’s country did happen to be bearing the White Man’s
burden. In the end he decided to do nothing. Or, to be more accurate,
the decision was forced upon him—as usual, he said to himself, deriving
a curious wry pleasure from the recognition of his own shortcomings.
While he was hesitating what to do, the chauffeur took off his cap and,
slightly over-acting the part of an old-world Negro retainer, bowed,
smiled toothily and said:

“Welcome to Los Angeles, Mr. Pordage, sah!” Then, changing the tone of
his chanting drawl from the dramatic to the confidential, “I should have
knowed you by your voice, Mr. Pordage,” he went on, “even without the
book.”

Jeremy laughed a little uncomfortably. A week in America had made him
self-conscious about that voice of his. A product of Trinity College
Cambridge, ten years before the War, it was a small, fluty voice,
suggestive of evensong in an English cathedral. At home, when he used
it, nobody paid any particular attention. He had never had to make jokes
about it, as he had done, in self-protection, about his appearance, for
example, or his age. Here, in America, things were different. He had
only to order a cup of coffee or ask the way to the lavatory (which,
anyhow, wasn’t called the lavatory in this disconcerting country) for
people to stare at him with an amused and attentive curiosity, as though
he were a freak on show in an amusement park. It had not been at all
agreeable.

“Where’s my porter?” he said fussily in order to change the subject.

A few minutes later they were on their way. Cradled in the back seat of
the car, out of range, he hoped, of the chauffeur’s conversation, Jeremy
Pordage abandoned himself to the pleasure of merely looking. Southern
California rolled past the windows; all he had to do was to keep his
eyes open.

The first thing to present itself was a slum of Africans and Filipinos,
Japanese and Mexicans. And what permutations and combinations of black,
yellow and brown! What complex bastardies! And the girls—how beautiful
in their artificial silk! “And Negro ladies in white muslin gowns.” His
favourite line in The Prelude. He smiled to himself. And meanwhile the
slum had given place to the tall buildings of a business district. The
population took on a more Caucasian tinge. At every corner there was a
drug-store. The newspaper boys were selling headlines about Franco’s
drive on Barcelona. Most of the girls, as they walked along, seemed to
be absorbed in silent prayer; but he supposed, on second thought, it was
only gum that they were thus incessantly ruminating. Gum, not God. Then
suddenly the car plunged into a tunnel and emerged into another world, a
vast, untidy, suburban world of filling stations and billboards, of low
houses in gardens, of vacant lots and waste paper, of occasional shops
and office buildings and churches—primitive Methodist churches built,
surprisingly enough, in the style of the Cartuja at Granada, Catholic
churches like Canterbury Cathedral, synagogues disguised as Hagia
Sophia, Christian Science churches with pillars and pediments, like
banks. It was a winter day and early in the morning; but the sun shone
brilliantly, the sky was without a cloud. The car was travelling
westwards and the sunshine, slanting from behind them as they advanced,
lit up each building, each sky sign and billboard as though with a
spot-light, as though on purpose to show the new arrival all the sights.

EATS. COCKTAILS. OPEN NITES.

JUMBO MALTS.

DO THINGS, GO PLACES WITH CONSOL SUPER-GAS!

AT BEVERLY PANTHEON FINE FUNERALS ARE NOT EXPENSIVE.

The car sped onwards, and here in the middle of a vacant lot was a
restaurant in the form of a seated bulldog, the entrance between the
front paws, the eyes illuminated.

“Zoomorph,” Jeremy Pordage murmured to himself, and again, “zoomorph.”
He had the scholar’s taste for words. The bulldog shot back into the
past.

ASTROLOGY, NUMEROLOGY, PSYCHIC READINGS.

DRIVE IN FOR NUTBURGERS—whatever they were. He resolved at the earliest
opportunity to have one. A nut-burger and a jumbo malt.

STOP HERE FOR CONSOL SUPER-GAS.

Surprisingly, the chauffeur stopped. “Ten gallons of Super-Super,” he
ordered; then, turning back to Jeremy, “This is our company,” he added.
“Mr. Stoyte, he’s the president.” He pointed to a billboard across the
street. CASH LOANS IN FIFTEEN MINUTES, Jeremy read; CONSULT COMMUNITY
SERVICE FINANCE CORPORATION. “That’s another of ours,” said the
chauffeur proudly.

They drove on. The face of a beautiful young woman, distorted, like a
Magdalene’s, with grief, stared out of a giant billboard, BROKEN
ROMANCE, proclaimed the caption. SCIENCE PROVES THAT 73 PER CENT OF ALL
ADULTS HAVE HALITOSIS.

IN TIME OF SORROW LET BEVERLY PANTHEON BE YOUR FRIEND.

FACIALS, PERMANENTS, MANICURES.

BETTY’S BEAUTY SHOPPE.

Next door to the beauty shoppe was a Western Union office. That cable to
his mother . . . Heavens, he had almost forgotten! Jeremy leaned forward
and, in the apologetic tone he always used when speaking to servants,
asked the chauffeur to stop for a moment. The car came to a halt. With a
preoccupied expression on his mild, rabbit-like face, Jeremy got out and
hurried across the pavement, into the office.

“Mrs. Pordage, The Araucarias, Woking, England,” he wrote, smiling a
little as he did so. The exquisite absurdity of that address was a
standing source of amusement. “The Araucarias, Woking.” His mother, when
she bought the house, had wanted to change the name, as being too
ingenuously middle-class, too much like a joke by Hilaire Belloc “But
that’s the beauty of it,” he had protested. “That’s the charm.” And he
had tried to make her see how utterly right it would be for them to live
at such an address. The deliciously comic incongruity between the name
of the house and the nature of its occupants! And what a beautiful,
topsyturvy appositeness in the fact that Oscar Wilde’s old friend, the
witty and cultured Mrs. Pordage, should write her sparkling letters from
The Araucarias, and that from these same Araucarias, these Araucarias,
mark you, at Woking, should come the works of mingled scholarship and
curiously rarefied wit for which her son had gained his reputation. Mrs.
Pordage had almost instantly seen what he was driving at. No need, thank
goodness, to labour your points where she was concerned. You could talk
entirely in hints and anacoluthons; she could be relied on to
understand. The Araucarias had remained The Araucarias.

Having written the address, Jeremy paused, pensively frowned and
initiated the familiar gesture of biting his pencil—only to find,
disconcertingly, that this particular pencil was tipped with brass and
fastened to a chain. “Mrs. Pordage, The Araucarias, Woking, England,” he
read out loud, in the hope that the words would inspire him to compose
the right, the perfect message—the message his mother expected of him,
at once tender and witty, charged with a genuine devotion ironically
worded, acknowledging her maternal domination, but at the same time
making fun of it, so that the old lady could salve her conscience by
pretending that her son was entirely free, and herself, the least
tyrannical of mothers. It wasn’t easy—particularly with this pencil on a
chain. After several abortive essays, he decided, though it was
definitely unsatisfactory, on: “Climate being subtropical shall break
vow re underclothes. Stop. Wish you were here my sake not yours as you
would scarcely appreciate this unfinished Bournemouth indefinitely
magnified. Stop.”

“Unfinished what?” questioned the young woman on the further side of the
counter.

“B-o-u-r-n-e-m-o-u-t-h,” Jeremy spelled out. He smiled; behind the
bifocal lenses of his spectacles his blue eyes twinkled, and, with a
gesture of which he was quite unconscious, but which he always
automatically made when he was about to utter one of his little jokes,
he stroked the smooth bald spot on the top of his head. “You know,” he
said, in a particularly fluty tone, “the bourne to which no traveller
goes, if he can possibly help it.”

The girl looked at him blankly then, inferring from his expression that
something funny had been said and remembering that Courteous Service was
Western Union’s slogan, gave the bright smile for which the poor old
chump was evidently asking, and went on reading: “Hope you have fun at
Grasse. Stop. Tendresses. Jeremy.”

It was an expensive message; but luckily, he reflected, as he took out
his pocketbook, luckily Mr. Stoyte was grossly over-paying him. Three
months’ work, six thousand dollars. So damn the expense.

He returned to the car and they drove on. Mile after mile they went, and
the suburban houses, the gas stations, the vacant lots, the churches,
the shops went along with them, interminably. To right and left, between
palms, or pepper trees, or acacias, the streets of enormous residential
quarters receded to the vanishing point.

CLASSY EATS. MILE HIGH CONES.

JESUS SAVES.

HAMBURGERS.

Yet once more, the traffic lights turned red. A paper boy came to the
window. “Franco claims gains in Catalonia,” Jeremy read, and turned
away. The frightfulness of the world had reached a point at which it had
become for him merely boring. From the halted car in front of them, two
elderly ladies, both with permanently waved white hair and both wearing
crimson trousers, descended, each carrying a Yorkshire terrier. The dogs
were set down at the foot of the traffic signal. Before the animals
could make up their minds to use the convenience, the lights had
changed. The Negro shifted into first, and the car swerved forward, into
the future. Jeremy was thinking of his mother. Disquietingly enough, she
too had a Yorkshire terrier.

FINE LIQUORS.

TURKEY SANDWICHES.

GO TO CHURCH AND FEEL BETTER ALL THE WEEK.

WHAT IS GOOD FOR BUSINESS IS GOOD FOR YOU.

Another zoomorph presented itself, this time a real estate agent’s
office in the form of an Egyptian sphinx.

JESUS IS COMING SOON.

YOU TOO CAN HAVE ABIDING YOUTH WITH THRILL-PHORM BRASSIERES.

BEVERLY PANTHEON, THE CEMETERY THAT IS DIFFERENT.

With the triumphant expression of Puss in Boots enumerating the
possessions of the Marquis of Carabas, the Negro shot a glance over his
shoulder at Jeremy, waved his hand towards the billboard and said,
“That’s ours, too.”

“You mean, the Beverly Pantheon?”

The man nodded. “Finest cemetery in the world, I guess,” he said; and
added, after a moment’s pause, “Maybe you’s like to see it. It wouldn’t
hardly be out of our way.”

“That would be very nice,” said Jeremy with upper-class English
graciousness. Then, feeling that he ought to express his acceptance
rather more warmly and democratically, he cleared his throat and, with a
conscious effort to reproduce the local vernacular, added that it would
be swell. Pronounced in his Trinity College Cambridge voice, the word
sounded so unnatural that he began to blush with embarrassment.
Fortunately, the chauffeur was too busy with the traffic to notice.

They turned to the right, sped past a Rosicrucian Temple, past two
cat-and-dog hospitals, past a School for Drum-Majorettes and two more
advertisements of the Beverly Pantheon. As they turned to the left on
Sunset Boulevard, Jeremy had a glimpse of a young woman who was doing
her shopping in a hydrangea-blue strapless bathing suit, platinum curls
and a black fur jacket. Then she too was whirled back into the past.

The present was a road at the foot of a line of steep hills, a road
flanked by small, expensive-looking shops, by restaurants, by
night-clubs shuttered against the sunlight, by offices and apartment
houses. Then they too had taken their places in the irrevocable. A sign
proclaimed that they were crossing the city limits of Beverly Hills. The
surroundings changed. The road was flanked by the gardens of a rich
residential quarter. Through trees, Jeremy saw the facades of houses,
all new, almost all in good taste—elegant and witty pastiches of Lutyens
manor houses, of Little Trianons, of Monticellos; light-hearted parodies
of Le Corbusier’s solemn machines-for-living-in; fantastic adaptations
of Mexican haciendas and New England farms.

They turned to the right. Enormous palm trees lined the road. In the
sunlight, masses of mesembryanthemums blazed with an intense magenta
glare. The houses succeeded one another, like the pavilions at some
endless international exhibition. Gloucestershire followed Andalusia and
gave place in turn to Touraine and Oaxaca, Düsseldorff and
Massachusetts.

“That’s Harold Lloyd’s place,” said the chauffeur, indicating a kind of
Boboli. “And that’s Charlie Chaplin’s. And that’s Pickfair.”

The road began to mount, vertiginously. The chauffeur pointed across an
intervening gulf of shadow at what seemed a Tibetan lamasery on the
opposite hill. “That’s where Ginger Rogers lives. Yes, sir,” he nodded
triumphantly, as he twirled the steering wheel.

Five or six more turns brought the car to the top of the hill. Below and
behind lay the plain, with the city like a map extending indefinitely
into a pink haze.

Before and to either hand were mountains—ridge after ridge as far as the
eye could reach, a desiccated Scotland, empty under the blue desert sky.

The car turned a shoulder of orange rock, and there all at once, on a
summit hitherto concealed from view, was a huge sky sign, with the words
BEVERLY PANTHEON, THE PERSONALITY CEMETERY, in six-foot neon tubes and,
above it, on the very crest, a full-scale reproduction of the Leaning
Tower of Pisa—only this one didn’t lean.

“See that?” said the Negro impressively. “That’s the Tower of
Resurrection. Two hundred thousand dollars, that’s what it cost. Yes,
sir.” He spoke with an emphatic solemnity. One was made to feel that the
money had all come out of his own pocket.


Chapter II

AN HOUR later, they were on their way again, having seen everything.
Everything. The sloping lawns, like a green oasis in the mountain
desolation. The groups of trees. The tombstones in the grass. The Pets’
Cemetery, with its marble group after Landseer’s Dignity and Impudence.
The Tiny Church of the Poet—a miniature reproduction of Holy Trinity at
Stratford-on-Avon, complete with Shakespeare’s tomb and a
twenty-four-hour service of organ music played automatically by the
Perpetual Wurlitzer and broadcast by concealed loud speakers all over
the cemetery.

Then, leading out of the vestry, the Bride’s Apartment (for one was
married at the Tiny Church as well as buried from it)—the Bride’s
Apartment that had just been redecorated, said the chauffeur, in the
style of Norma Shearer’s boudoir in Marie Antoinette. And, next to the
Bride’s Apartment, the exquisite black marble Vestibule of Ashes,
leading to the Crematorium, where three super-modern oil-burning
mortuary furnaces were always under heat and ready for any emergency.

Accompanied wherever they went by the tremolos of the Perpetual
Wurlitzer, they had driven next to look at the Tower of
Resurrection—from the outside only; for it housed the executive offices
of the West Coast Cemeteries Corporation. Then the Children’s Corner
with its statues of Peter Pan and the Infant Jesus, its groups of
alabaster babies playing with bronze rabbits, its lily pool and an
apparatus labelled The Fountain of Rainbow Music, from which there
spouted simultaneously water, coloured lights and the inescapable
strains of the Perpetual Wurlitzer. Then, in rapid succession, the
Garden of Quiet, the Tiny Taj Mahal, the Old World Mortuary. And,
reserved by the chauffeur to the last, as the final and crowning proof
of his employer’s glory, the Pantheon itself.

Was it possible, Jeremy asked himself, that such an object existed? It
was certainly not probable. The Beverly Pantheon lacked all
verisimilitude, was something entirely beyond his powers to invent. The
fact that the idea of it was now in his mind proved, therefore, that he
must really have seen it. He shut his eyes against the landscape and
recalled to his memory the details of that incredible reality. The
external architecture, modelled on that of Boecklin’s Toteninsel. The
circular vestibule. The replica of Rodin’s Le Baiser, illuminated by
concealed pink floodlights. The flights of black marble stairs. The
seven-storey columbarium, with its endless galleries, its tiers on tiers
of slab-sealed tombs. The bronze and silver urns of the cremated, like
athletic trophies. The stained glass windows after Burne-Jones. The
texts inscribed on marble scrolls. The Perpetual Wurlitzer crooning on
every floor. The sculpture . . .

That was the hardest to believe, Jeremy reflected, behind closed
eyelids. Sculpture almost as ubiquitous as the Wurlitzer. Statues
wherever you turned your eyes. Hundreds of them, bought wholesale, one
would guess, from some monumental masonry concern at Carrara or
Pietrasanta. All nudes, all female, all exuberantly nubile. The sort of
statues one would expect to see in the reception room of a high-class
brothel in Rio de Janeiro. “Oh Death,” demanded a marble scroll at the
entrance to every gallery, “where is thy sting?” Mutely, but eloquently,
the statues gave their reassuring reply. Statues of young ladies in
nothing but a very tight belt imbedded, with Bernini-like realism, in
the Parian flesh. Statues of young ladies crouching; young ladies using
both hands to be modest; young ladies stretching, writhing,
callipygously stooping to tie their sandals, reclining. Young ladies
with doves, with panthers, with other young ladies, with upturned eyes
expressive of the soul’s awakening. “I am the Resurrection and the
Life,” proclaimed the scrolls. “The Lord is my shepherd; therefore shall
I want nothing.” Nothing, not even Wurlitzer, not even girls in tightly
buckled belts. “Death is swallowed up in victory”—the victory no longer
of the spirit but of the body—the well-fed body, for ever youthful,
immortally athletic, indefatigably sexy. The Moslem paradise had had
copulations six centuries long. In this new Christian heaven, progress,
no doubt, would have stepped up the period to a millennium and added the
joys of everlasting tennis, eternal golf and swimming.

All at once the car began to descend. Jeremy opened his eyes again, and
saw that they had reached the further edge of the range of hills, among
which the Pantheon was built.

Below lay a great tawny plain, chequered with patches of green and
dotted with white houses. On its further side, fifteen or twenty miles
away, ranges of pinkish mountains fretted the horizon.

“What’s this?” Jeremy asked.

“The San Fernando Valley,” said the chauffeur. He pointed into the
middle distance. “That’s where Groucho Marx has his place,” he said.
“Yes, sir.”

At the bottom of the hill the car turned to the left along a wide road
that ran, a ribbon of concrete and suburban buildings, through the
plain. The chauffeur put on speed; sign succeeded sign with bewildering
rapidity. MALTS CABINS DINE AND DANCE AT THE CHATEAU HONOLULU SPIRITUAL
HEALING AND COLONIC IRRIGATION BLOCK-LONG HOT DOGS BUY YOUR DREAM HOME
NOW. And behind the signs the mathematically planted rows of apricot and
walnut trees flicked past—a succession of glimpsed perspectives preceded
and followed every time by fan-like approaches and retirements.

Dark-green and gold, enormous orange orchards manœuvred, each one a
mile-square regiment glittering in the sunlight. Far off, the mountains
traced their un-interpretable graph of boom and slump.

“Tarzana,” said the chauffeur startlingly; and there, sure enough, was
the name suspended, in white letters, across the road. “There’s Tarzana
College,” the man went on, pointing to a group of Spanish-Colonial
palaces clustering round a Romanesque basilica. “Mr. Stoyte, he’s just
given them an auditorium.”

They turned to the right along a less important road. The orange groves
gave place for a few miles to huge fields of alfalfa and dusty grass,
then returned again more luxuriant than ever. Meanwhile the mountains on
the northern edge of the valley were approaching and, slanting in from
the west, another range was looming up to the left. They drove on. The
road took a sudden turn, aiming, it seemed, at the point where the two
ranges must come together. All at once, through a gap between two
orchards, Jeremy Pordage saw a most surprising sight. About half a mile
from the foot of the mountains, like an island off a cliff-bound coast,
a rocky hill rose abruptly, in places almost precipitously, from the
plain. On the summit of the bluff and as though growing out of it in a
kind of stony efflorescence, stood a castle. But what a castle! The
donjon was like a skyscraper, the bastions plunged headlong with the
effortless swoop of concrete dams. The thing was Gothic, mediaeval,
baronial—doubly baronial, Gothic with a Gothicity raised, so to speak,
to a higher power, more mediaeval than any building of the thirteenth
century. For this . . . this object, as Jeremy was reduced to calling
it, was mediaeval, not out of vulgar historical necessity, like Coucy,
say, or Alnwick, but out of pure fun and wantonness, platonically, one
might say. It was mediaeval as only a witty and irresponsible modern
architect would wish to be mediaeval, as only the most competent modern
engineers are technically equipped to be.

Jeremy was startled into speech. “What on earth is that?” he asked,
pointing at the nightmare on the hilltop.

“Why, that’s Mr. Stoyte’s place,” said the retainer; and smiling yet
once more with the pride of vicarious ownership, he added: “It’s a
pretty fine home, I guess.”

The orange groves closed in again; leaning back in his seat, Jeremy
Pordage began to wonder, rather apprehensively, what he had let himself
in for when he accepted Mr. Stoyte’s offer. The pay was princely; the
work, which was to catalogue the almost legendary Hauberk Papers, would
be delightful. But that cemetery, this Object—Jeremy shook his head. He
had known, of course, that Mr. Stoyte was rich, collected pictures,
owned a show place in California. But no one had ever led him to expect
this. The humorous puritanism of his good taste was shocked; he was
appalled at the prospect of meeting the person capable of committing
such an enormity. Between that person and oneself, what contact, what
community of thought or feeling could possibly exist? Why had he sent
for one? For it was obvious that he couldn’t conceivably like one’s
books. But had he even read one’s books? Did he have the faintest idea
of what one was like? Would he be capable, for example, of understanding
why one had insisted on the name of The Araucarias remaining unchanged?
Would he appreciate one’s point of view about . . .

These anxious questionings were interrupted by the noise of the horn,
which the chauffeur was sounding with a loud and offensive insistence.
Jeremy looked up. Fifty yards ahead, an ancient Ford was creeping
tremulously along the road. It carried, lashed insecurely to roof and
running boards and luggage rack, a squalid cargo of household
goods—rolls of bedding, an old iron stove, a crate of pots and pans, a
folded tent, a tin bath. As they flashed past, Jeremy had a glimpse of
three dull-eyed, anaemic children, of a woman with a piece of sacking
wrapped around her shoulders, of a haggard, unshaved man.

“Transients,” the chauffeur explained in a tone of contempt.

“What’s that?” Jeremy asked.

“Why, transients” the Negro repeated, as though the emphasis were an
explanation, “Guess that lot’s from the dust bowl. Kansas licence plate.
Come to pick our navels.”

“Come to pick your navels?” Jeremy echoed incredulously.

“Navel oranges,” said the chauffeur. “It’s the season. Pretty good year
for navels, I guess.”

They emerged once more into the open and there once more was the Object,
larger than ever. Jeremy had time to study the details of its
construction. A wall with towers encircled the base of the hill, and
there was a second line of defence, in the most approved post-Crusades
manner, half way up. On the summit stood the square keep, surrounded by
subsidiary buildings.

From the donjon, Jeremy’s eyes travelled down to a group of buildings in
the plain, not far from the foot of the hill. Across the façade of the
largest of them the words “Stoyte Home for Sick Children” were written
in gilded letters. Two flags, one the stars and stripes, the other a
white banner with the letter S in scarlet, fluttered in the breeze. Then
a grove of leafless walnut trees shut out the view once again. Almost at
the same moment the chauffeur threw his engine out of gear and put on
the brakes. The car came gently to a halt beside a man who was walking
at a brisk pace along the grassy verge of the road.

“Want a ride, Mr. Propter?” the Negro called.

The stranger turned his head, gave the man a smile of recognition and
came to the window of the car. He was a large man, broad shouldered, but
rather stooping, with brown hair turning grey and a face, Jeremy
thought, like the face of one of those statues which Gothic sculptors
carve for a place high up on a West front—a face of sudden prominences
and deeply shadowed folds and hollows, emphatically rough-hewn so as to
be expressive even at a distance. But this particular face, he went on
to notice, was not merely emphatic, not only for the distance; it was a
face also for the near point, also for intimacy, a subtle face, in which
there were the signs of sensibility and intelligence as well as of
power, of a gentle and humorous serenity no less than of energy and
strength.

“Hullo, George,” the stranger said, addressing the chauffeur; “nice of
you to stop for me.”

“Well, I’m sure glad to see you, Mr. Propter,” said the Negro cordially.
Then, he half turned in his seat, waved a hand towards Jeremy and with a
florid formality of tone and manner, said, “I’d like to have you meet
Mr. Pordage of England. Mr. Pordage, this is Mr. Propter.”

The two men shook hands, and, after an exchange of courtesies, Mr.
Propter got into the car.

“You’re visiting with Mr. Stoyte?” he asked, as the chauffeur drove on.

Jeremy shook his head. He was here on business; had come to look at some
manuscripts—the Hauberk Papers, to be precise.

Mr. Propter listened attentively, nodded from time to time, and, when
Jeremy had finished, sat for a moment in silence.

“Take a decayed Christian,” he said at last in a meditative tone, “and
the remains of a Stoic; mix thoroughly with good manners, a bit of money
and an old-fashioned education; simmer for several years in a
university. Result: a scholar and a gentleman. Well, there were worse
types of human being.” He uttered a little laugh. “I might almost claim
to have been one myself, once, long ago.”

Jeremy looked at him inquiringly. “You’re not William Propter, are you?”
he asked. “Not ‘Short Studies in the Counter Reformation,’ by any
chance?”

The other inclined his head.

Jeremy looked at him in amazement and delight. Was it possible? he asked
himself. Those “Short Studies” had been one of his favourite books—a
model, he had always thought, of their kind.

“Well, I’m jiggered,” he said aloud, using the school boyish locution
deliberately and as though between inverted commas. He had found that,
both in writing and in conversation, there were exquisite effects to be
obtained by the judicious employment, in a solemn or cultural context,
of a phrase of slang, a piece of childish profanity or obscenity. “I’ll
be damned,” he exploded again, and his consciousness of the intentional
silliness of the words made him stroke his bald head and cough.

There was another moment of silence. Then, instead of talking, as Jeremy
had expected, about the “Short Studies,” Mr. Propter merely shook his
head and said, “We mostly are.”

“Mostly are what?” asked Jeremy.

“Jiggered,” Mr. Propter answered. “Damned. In the psychological sense of
the word,” he added.

The walnut trees came to an end and there once more, on the starboard
bow, was the Object. Mr. Propter pointed in its direction. “Poor Jo
Stoyte!” he said. “Think of having that millstone round one’s neck. Not
to mention, of course, all the other millstones that go with it. What
luck we’ve had, don’t you think?—we who’ve never been given the
opportunity of being anything much worse than scholars and gentlemen!”
After another little silence, “Poor Jo,” he went on with a smile, “he
isn’t either of them. You’ll find him a bit trying. Because of course
he’ll want to bully you, just because tradition says that your type is
superior to his type. Not to mention the fact,” he added, looking into
Jeremy’s face with an expression of mingled amusement and sympathy,
“that you’re probably the sort of person that invites persecution. A bit
of a murderee, I’m afraid, as well as a scholar and gentleman.”

Feeling simultaneously annoyed by the man’s indiscretion and touched by
his friendliness, Jeremy smiled rather nervously and nodded his head.

“Maybe,” Mr. Propter went on, “maybe it would help you to be less of a
murderee towards Jo Stoyte, if you knew what gave him the original
impulsion to get damned in just that way”—and he pointed again towards
the Object. “We were at school together, Jo and I; only nobody called
him Jo in those days. We called him Slob, or Jelly-Belly. Because, you
see, poor Jo was the local fat boy, the only fat boy in the school
during those years.” He paused for a moment; then went on in another
tone, “I’ve often wondered why people have always made fun of fatness.
Perhaps there’s something intrinsically wrong with fat. For example,
there isn’t a single fat saint—except, of course, old Thomas Aquinas;
and I cannot see any reason to suppose that he was a real saint, a saint
in the popular sense of the word, which happens to be the true sense. If
Thomas is a saint, then Vincent de Paul isn’t. And if Vincent’s a saint,
which he obviously is, then Thomas isn’t. And perhaps that enormous
belly of his had something to do with it. Who knows? But anyhow, that’s
by the way. We’re talking about Jo Stoyte. And poor Jo, as I say, was a
fat boy and, being fat, was fair game for the rest of us. God, how we
punished him for his glandular deficiencies! And how disastrously he
reacted to that punishment! Overcompensation . . . But here I am at
home,” he added, looking out of the window as the car slackened speed
and came to a halt in front of a small white bungalow set in the midst
of a clump of eucalyptus trees. “We’ll go on with this another time. But
remember, if poor Jo gets too offensive, think of what he was at school
and be sorry for him—and don’t be sorry for yourself.” He got out of the
car, closed the door behind him and, waving a hand to the chauffeur,
walked quickly up the path and entered the little house.

The car rolled on again. At once bewildered and reassured by his
encounter with the author of the “Short Studies,” Jeremy sat, inertly
looking out of the window. They were very near the Object now; and
suddenly he noticed, for the first time, that the castle hill was
surrounded by a moat. Some few hundred yards from the water’s edge, the
car passed between two pillars, topped by heraldic lions. Its passage,
it was evident, interrupted a beam of invisible light directed on a
photoelectric cell; for no sooner were they past the lions than a
draw-bridge began to descend. Five seconds before they reached the moat,
it was in place; the car rolled smoothly across and came to a halt in
front of the main gateway of the castle’s outer walls. The chauffeur got
out and, speaking into a telephone receiver concealed in a convenient
loophole, announced his presence. The chromium-plated portcullis rose
noiselessly, the double doors of stainless steel swung back. They drove
in. The car began to climb. The second line of walls was pierced by
another gate, which opened automatically as they approached. Between the
inner side of this second wall and the slope of the hill a
ferro-concrete bridge had been constructed, large enough to accommodate
a tennis court. In the shadowy space beneath, Jeremy caught sight of
something familiar. An instant later he had recognized it as a replica
of the grotto of Lourdes.

“Miss Maunciple, she’s a Catholic,” remarked the chauffeur, jerking his
thumb in the direction of the grotto. “That’s why he had it made for
her. We’s Presbyterians in our family,” he added.

“And who is Miss Maunciple?”

The chauffeur hesitated for a moment. “Well, she’s a young lady Mr.
Stoyte’s kind of friendly with,” he explained at last; then changed the
subject.

The car climbed on. Beyond the grotto all the hillside was a cactus
garden. Then the road swung round to the northern slope of the bluff,
and the cactuses gave place to grass and shrubs. On a little terrace,
over-elegant like a fashion-plate from some mythological Vogue for
goddesses, a bronze nymph by Giambologna spouted two streams of water
from her deliciously polished breasts. A little further on, behind wire
netting, a group of baboons squatted among the rocks or paraded the
obscenity of their hairless rumps.

Still climbing, the car turned again and finally drew up on a circular
concrete platform, carried out on cantilevers over a precipice. Once
more the old-fashioned retainer, the chauffeur, taking off his cap, did
a final impersonation of himself welcoming the young master home to the
plantation, then set to work to unload the luggage.

Jeremy Pordage Walked to the balustrade and looked over. The ground fell
almost sheer for about a hundred feet, then sloped steeply to the inner
circle of walls and, below them, to the outer fortifications. Beyond lay
the moat and, on the further side of the moat, stretched the orange
orchards. “In dunkeln Laub die Gold-Orangen glühn,” he murmured to
himself; and then: “He hangs in shades the orange bright, Like golden
lamps in a green night.” Marvell’s rendering, he decided, was better
than Goethe’s. And, meanwhile, the oranges seemed to have become
brighter and more significant. For Jeremy, direct, unmediated experience
was always hard to take in, always more or less disquieting. Life became
safe, things assumed meaning, only when they had been translated into
words and confined between the covers of a book. The oranges were
beautifully pigeon-holed; but what about the castle? He turned round
and, leaning back against the parapet, looked up. The Object impended,
insolently enormous. Nobody had dealt poetically with that. Not Childe
Roland, not the King of Thule, not Marmion, not the Lady of Shalott, not
Sir Leoline. Sir Leoline, he repeated to himself with a connoisseur’s
appreciation of romantic absurdity, Sir Leoline, the baron rich,
had—what? A toothless mastiff bitch. But Mr. Stoyte had baboons and a
sacred grotto, Mr. Stoyte had a chromium portcullis and the Hauberk
Papers, Mr. Stoyte had a cemetery like an amusement park and a donjon
like . . .

There was a sudden rumbling sound; the great nail-studded doors of the
Early English entrance porch rolled back and from between them, as
though propelled by a hurricane, a small, thick-set man, with a red face
and a mass of snow white hair, darted out on to the terrace and bore
down upon Jeremy, His expression, as he advanced, did not change. The
face wore that shut, unsmiling mask which American workmen tend to put
on in their dealings with strangers—in order to prove, by not making the
ingratiating grimaces of courtesy, that theirs is a free country and
you’re not going to come it over them.

Not having been brought up in a free country, Jeremy had automatically
begun to smile as this person, whom he guessed to be his host and
employer, came hurrying towards him. Confronted by the unwavering
grimness of the other’s face, he suddenly became conscious of this
smile—conscious that it was out of place, that it must be making him
look a fool. Profoundly embarrassed, he tried to readjust his face.

“Mr. Pordage?” said the stranger in a harsh, barking voice. “Pleased to
meet you. My name’s Stoyte.” As they shook hands, he peered, still
unsmiling, into Jeremy’s face. “You’re older than I thought,” he added.

For the second time that morning, Jeremy made his mannequin’s gesture of
apologetic self-exhibition.

“The sere and withered leaf,” he said. “One’s sinking into senility.
One’s . . .”

Mr. Stoyte cut him short. “What’s your age?” he asked in a loud
peremptory tone, like that of a police sergeant interrogating a captured
thief.

“Fifty-four.”

“Only fifty-four?” Mr. Stoyte shook his head. “Ought to be full of pep
at fifty-four. How’s your sex life?” he added disconcertingly.

Jeremy tried to laugh off his embarrassment. He twinkled; he patted his
bald head. “Mon beau printemps et mon iti ont fait le saut par la
fenitre” he quoted.

“What’s that?” said Mr. Stoyte frowning. “No use talking foreign
languages to me. I never had any education.” He broke into a sudden
braying of laughter. “I’m head of an oil company here,” he said. “Got
two thousand filling stations in California alone. And not one man in
any of those filling stations that isn’t a college graduate!” He brayed
again, triumphantly. “Go and talk foreign languages to them” He was
silent for a moment; then, pursuing an unexplicit association of ideas,
“My agent in London,” he went on, “the man who picks up things for me
there—he gave me your name. Told me you were the right man for
those—what do you call them? You know, those papers I bought this
summer. Roebuck? Hobuck?”

“Hauberk,” said Jeremy, and with a gloomy satisfaction noted that he had
been quite right. The man had never read one’s books, never even heard
of one’s existence. Still, one had to remember that he had been called
Jelly-Belly when he was young.

“Hauberk,” Mr. Stoyte repeated with a contemptuous impatience. “Anyhow,
he said you were the man.” Then, without pause or transition, “What was
it you were saying, about your sex life, when you started that foreign
stuff on me?”

Jeremy laughed uncomfortably. “One was implying that it was normal for
one’s age.”

“What do you know about what’s normal at your age?” said Mr. Stoyte. “Go
and talk to Dr. Obispo about it. It won’t cost you anything. Obispo’s on
salary. He’s the house physician.” Abruptly changing the subject, “Would
you like to see the castle?” he asked. “I’ll take you round.”

“Oh, that’s very kind of you,” said Jeremy effusively. And for the sake
of making a little polite conversation, he added: “I’ve already seen
your burial ground.”

“Seen my burial ground?” Mr. Stoyte repeated in a tone of suspicion:
suspicion turned suddenly to anger. “What the hell do you mean?” he
shouted.

Quailing before his fury, Jeremy stammered something about the Beverly
Pantheon and that he had understood from the chauffeur that Mr. Stoyte
had a financial interest in the company.

“I see,” said the other, somewhat mollified, but still frowning. “I
thought you meant . . .” Mr. Stoyte broke off in the middle of the
sentence, leaving the bewildered Jeremy to guess what he had thought.
“Come on,” he barked; and, bursting into movement, he hurried towards
the entrance to the house.


Chapter III

THERE was silence in Ward Sixteen of the Stoyte Home for Sick Children;
silence and the luminous twilight of drawn Venetian blinds. It was the
mid-morning rest period. Three of the five small convalescents were
asleep. A fourth lay staring at the ceiling, pensively picking his nose.
The fifth, a little girl, was whispering to a doll as curly and Aryan as
herself. Seated by one of the windows, a young nurse was absorbed in the
latest issue of True Confessions.

“His heart gave a lurch,” she read. “With a strangled cry he pressed me
closer. For months we’d been fighting against just this; but the magnet
of our passion was too strong for us. The clamorous pressure of his lips
had struck an answering spark within my melting body.

‘Germaine,’ he whispered. ‘Don’t make me wait. Won’t you be good to me
now, darling?’

He was so gentle, but so ruthless too—as a girl in love wants a man to
be ruthless. I felt myself swept away by the rising tide of . . .”

There was a noise outside in the corridor. The door of the ward flew
open, as though before the blast of a hurricane, and someone came
rushing into the room.

The nurse looked up with a start of surprise which the completeness of
her absorption in “The Price of a Thrill” rendered positively agonizing.
Her almost immediate reaction to the shock was one of anger.

“What’s the idea?” she began indignantly; then she recognized the
intruder and her expression changed. “Why, Mr. Stoyte!”

Disturbed by the noise, the young nose-picker dropped his eyes from the
ceiling, the little girl turned away from her doll.

“Uncle Jo!” they shouted simultaneously. “Uncle Jo!”

Starting out of sleep, the others took up the cry.

“Uncle Jo! Uncle Jo!”

Mr. Stoyte was touched by the warmth of his reception. The face which
Jeremy had found so disquietingly grim relaxed into a smile. In mock
protest, he covered his ears with his hands. “You’ll make me deaf,” he
cried. Then, in an aside to the nurse, “Poor kids,” he murmured. “Makes
me feel I’d kind of like to cry,” His voice became husky with sentiment.
“And when one thinks how sick they’ve been . . .” He shook his head,
leaving the sentence unfinished; then, in another tone, “By the way,” he
added, waving a large square hand in the direction of Jeremy Pordage,
who had followed him into the ward and was standing near the door,
wearing an expression of bewildered embarrassment, “This is Mr. . . .
Mr. . . . Hell! I’ve forgotten your name.”

“Pordage,” said Jeremy, and reminded himself that Mr. Stoyte’s name had
once been Slob.

“Pordage, that’s it. Ask him about history and literature,” he added
derisively to the nurse. “He knows it all.”

Jeremy was modestly protesting that his period was only from the
invention of Ossian to the death of Keats, when Mr. Stoyte turned back
to the children and in a voice that drowned the other’s faintly fluted
disclaimers, shouted: “Guess what Uncle Jo’s brought you!”

They guessed. Candies, bubble gum, balloons, guinea pigs. Mr. Stoyte
continued triumphantly to shake his head. Finally, when the children had
exhausted their powers of imagination, he dipped into the pocket of his
old tweed jacket and produced, first, a whistle, then a mouth organ,
then a small musical box, then a trumpet, then a wooden rattle, then an
automatic pistol. This, however, he hastily put back.

“Now play,” he said, when he had distributed the instruments. “All
together. One, two, three.” And, beating time with both arms, he began
to sing “Way down upon the Swanee River.”

At this latest in a long series of shocks and surprises, Jeremy’s mild
face took on an expression of more intense bewilderment.

What a morning! The arrival at dawn. The Negro retainer. The
interminable suburb. The Beverly Pantheon. The Object among the orange
trees and his meeting with William Propter and this really dreadful
Stoyte. Then, inside the castle, the Rubens and the great El Greco in
the hall, the Vermeer in the elevator, the Rembrandt etchings along the
corridors, the Winter-halter in the butler’s pantry.

Then Miss Maunciple’s Louis XV boudoir, with the Watteau and the two
Lancrets and the fully equipped soda fountain in a rococo embrasure, and
Miss Maunciple herself, in an orange kimono, drinking a raspberry and
peppermint ice cream soda at her own counter. He had been introduced,
had refused the offer of a sundae and been hurried on again, always at
top speed, always as though on the wings of a tornado, to see the other
sights of the castle. The Rumpus Room, for example, with frescoes of
elephants by Sert. The library with its woodwork by Grinling Gibbons,
but with no books, because Mr. Stoyte had not yet brought himself to buy
any. The small dining-room, with its Fra Angelico and its furniture from
Brighton Pavilion. The large dining-room, modelled on the interior of
the mosque at Fatehpur Sikri. The ballroom with its mirrors and coffered
ceiling. The thirteenth-century stained glass in the eleventh-floor W.C.
The morning room, with Boucher’s picture of La Petite Morphil bottom
upwards on a pink satin sofa. The chapel, imported in fragments from
Goa, with the walnut confessional used by St. Francois de Sales at
Annecy. The functional billiard room. The indoor swimming pool. The
Second Empire bar, with its nudes by Ingres. The two gymnasiums. The
Christian Science Reading Room, dedicated to the memory of the late Mrs.
Stoyte. The dentist’s office. The Turkish bath. Then down, with Vermeer,
into the bowels of the hill, to look at the cellar in which the Hauberk
Papers had been stored. Down again yet deeper to the safe deposit
vaults, the power house, the air-conditioning plant, the well and
pumping station. Then up once more to ground level and the kitchens,
where the Chinese chef had shown Mr. Stoyte the newly arrived
consignment of turtles from the Caribbean. Up again to the bedroom which
Jeremy was to occupy during his stay. Then up another six storeys to the
business office, where Mr. Stoyte gave orders to his secretary, dictated
a couple of letters and had a long telephone conversation with his
brokers in Amsterdam. And when that was finished, it had been time to go
to the hospital.

Meanwhile, in Ward Sixteen, a group of nurses had collected and were
watching Uncle Jo, his white hair flying like Stokowski’s, frantically
spurring his orchestra to yet louder crescendos of cacophony.

“He’s like a great big kid himself,” said one of them, in a tone of
almost tender amusement.

Another, evidently with literary leanings, declared that it was like
something in Dickens. “Don’t you think so?” she insisted to Jeremy.

He smiled nervously and nodded a vague and noncommittal assent.

More practical, a third wished she had her Kodak with her. “Candid
Camera portrait of the President of Consol Oil, California Land and
Minerals Corporation, Bank of the Pacific, West Coast Cemeteries, etc.,
etc. . . .” She reeled off the names of Mr. Stoyte’s chief companies,
mock-heroically, indeed, but with admiring gusto, as a convinced
legitimist with a sense of humour might enumerate the titles of a
grandee of Spain. “The papers would pay you good money for a snap like
that,” she insisted. And to prove that what she was saying was true, she
went on to explain that she had a boy friend who worked with an
advertising firm, so that he ought to know, and only the week before he
had told her that . . .

Mr. Stoyte’s knobbed face, as he left the hospital, was still
illuminated with benevolence and happiness.

“Makes you feel kind of good, playing with those poor kids,” he kept
repeating to Jeremy.

A wide flight of steps led down from the hospital entrance to the
roadway. At the foot of these steps Mr. Stoyte’s blue Cadillac was
waiting. Behind it stood another smaller car, which had not been there
when they arrived. A look of suspicion clouded Mr. Stoyte’s beaming face
as he caught sight of it. Kidnappers, blackmailers—one never knew. His
hand went to the pocket of his coat. “Who’s there?” he shouted in a tone
of such loud fury that Jeremy thought for a moment that the man must
have suddenly gone mad.

Moon-like, a large, snub-featured face appeared at the car window,
smiling round the chewed butt of a cigar.

“Oh, it’s you, Clancy,” said Mr. Stoyte. “Why didn’t they tell me you
were here?” he went on. His face had flushed darkly; he was frowning and
a muscle in his cheek had begun to twitch. “I don’t like having strange
cars around. Do you hear, Peters?” he almost screamed at his
chauffeur—not because it was the man’s business, of course; simply
because he happened to be there, available. “Do you hear, I say?” Then,
suddenly, he remembered what Dr. Obispo had said to him that time he had
lost his temper with the fellow. “Do you really want to shorten your
life, Mr. Stoyte?” The doctor’s tone had been one of cool amusement; he
had smiled with an expression of politely sarcastic indulgence. “Are you
absolutely bent on having a stroke? A second stroke, remember; and you
won’t get off so lightly next time. Well, if so, then go on behaving as
you’re doing now. Go on.” With an enormous effort of will, Mr. Stoyte
swallowed his anger. “God is love,” he said to himself. “There is no
death.” The late Prudence McGladdery Stoyte had been a Christian
Scientist. “God is love,” he said again, and reflected that, if people
would only stop being so exasperating, he would never have to lose his
temper. “God is love.” It was all their fault.

Clancy, meanwhile, had left his car and, grotesquely pot-bellied over
spindly legs, was coming up the steps, mysteriously smiling and winking,
as he approached.

“What is it?” Mr. Stoyte inquired, and wished to God the man wouldn’t
make those faces. “Oh, by the way,” he added, “this is Mr. . . . Mr. . .
.”

“Pordage,” said Jeremy.

Clancy was pleased to meet him. The hand he gave to Jeremy was
disagreeably sweaty.

“I got some news for you,” said Clancy in a hoarse conspiratorial
whisper; and, speaking behind his hand, so that his words and the smell
of cigar should be for Mr. Stoyte alone, “You remember Tittelbaum?” he
added.

“That chap in the City Engineer’s Department?”

Clancy nodded. “One of the boys,” he affirmed enigmatically, and again
winked.

“Well, what about him?” asked Mr. Stoyte; and in spite of God’s being
love, there was a note in his voice of renascent exasperation.

Clancy shot a glance at Jeremy Pordage; then, with the elaborate by-play
of Guy Fawkes talking to Catesby on the stage of a provincial theatre,
he took Mr. Stoyte by the arm and led him a few feet away, up the steps.
“Do you know what Tittelbaum told me today?” he asked rhetorically.

“How the devil should I know?” (But no, no. God is love. There is no
death.)

Undeterred by the signs of Mr. Stoyte’s irritation, Clancy went on with
his performance. “He told me what they’ve decided about . . .” he
lowered his voice still further, “about the San Felipe Valley.”

“Well, what have they decided?” Once more Mr. Stoyte was at the limits
of his patience.

Before answering, Clancy removed the cigar butt from his mouth, threw it
away, produced another cigar out of his waistcoat pocket, tore off the
cellophane wrapping and stuck it, unlighted, in the place occupied by
the old one.

“They’ve decided,” he said very slowly, so as to give each word its full
dramatic effect, “they’ve decided to pipe the water into it.”

Mr. Stoyte’s expression of exasperation gave place at last to one of
interest. “Enough to irrigate the whole valley?” he asked.

“Enough to irrigate the whole valley,” Clancy repeated with solemnity.

Mr. Stoyte was silent for a moment. “How much time have we got?” he
asked at last.

“Tittelbaum thought the news wouldn’t break for another six weeks.”

“Six weeks?” Mr. Stoyte hesitated for a moment; then made his decision.
“All right. Get busy at once,” he said with the peremptory manners of
one accustomed to command. “Go down yourself and take a few of the other
boys along with you. Independent purchasers—interested in cattle
raising; want to start a Dude Ranch. Buy all you can. What’s the price,
by the way?”

“Averages twelve dollars an acre.”

“Twelve,” Mr. Stoyte repeated, and reflected that it would go to a
hundred as soon as they started laying the pipe. “How many acres do you
figure you can get?” he asked.

“Maybe thirty thousand.”

Mr. Stoyte’s face beamed with satisfaction. “Good,” he said briskly.
“Very good. No mention of my name, of course,” he added, and then,
without pause or transition: “What’s Tittelbaum going to cost?”

Clancy smiled contemptuously. “Oh, I’ll give him four or five hundred
bucks.”

“That all?”

The other nodded. “Tittelbaum’s in the bargain basement,” he said.
“Can’t afford to ask any fancy prices. He needs the money—needs it awful
bad,”

“What for?” asked Mr. Stoyte, who had a professional interest in human
nature. “Gambling? Women?”

Clancy shook his head. “Doctors” he explained. “He’s got a kid that’s
paralysed.”

“Paralysed?” Mr. Stoyte echoed in a tone of genuine sympathy. “That’s
too bad.” He hesitated for a moment; then, in a sudden burst of
generosity, “Tell him to send the kid here,” he went on, making a large
gesture towards the hospital. “Best place in the State for infantile
paralysis, and it won’t cost him anything. Not a red cent.”

“Hell, that’s kind of you, Mr. Stoyte,” said Clancy admiringly. “That’s
real kind.”

“Oh, it’s nothing,” said Mr. Stoyte, as he moved towards his car. “I’m
glad to be able to do it. Remember what it says in the Bible about
children. You know,” he added, “I get a real kick out of being with
those poor kids in there. Makes you feel kind of warm inside.” He patted
the barrel of his chest. “Tell Tittelbaum to send in an application for
the kid. Send it to me personally. I’ll see that it goes through at
once.” He climbed into the car and shut the door after him; then,
catching sight of Jeremy, opened it again without a word. Mumbling
apologetically, Jeremy scrambled in. Mr. Stoyte slammed the door once
more, lowered the glass and looked out.

“So long,” he said. “And don’t lose any time about that San Felipe
business. Make a good job of it, Clancy, and I’ll let you have ten per
cent of all the acreage over twenty thousand.” He raised the window and
signalled to the chauffeur to start. The car swung out of the drive and
headed towards the castle. Leaning back in his seat, Mr. Stoyte thought
of those poor kids and the money he would make out of the San Felipe
business. “God is love,” he said yet once more, with momentary
conviction and again, in a whisper that was audible to his companion.
“God is love.” Jeremy felt more uncomfortable than ever.

The drawbridge came down as the blue Cadillac approached, the chromium
portcullis went up, the gates of the inner rampart rolled back to let it
pass. On the concrete tennis court, the seven children of the Chinese
cook were roller-skating. Below, in the sacred grotto, a group of masons
were at work. At the sight of them, Mr. Stoyte shouted to the chauffeur
to stop.

“They’re putting up a tomb for some nuns,” he said to Jeremy as they got
out of the car.

“Some nuns?” Jeremy echoed in surprise.

Mr. Stoyte nodded and explained that his Spanish agents had bought some
sculpture and iron work from the chapel of a convent that had been
wrecked by the anarchists at the beginning of the civil war. “They sent
some nuns along too,” he added. “Embalmed, I guess. Or maybe just
sun-dried. I don’t know. Anyhow, there they are. Luckily I happened to
have something nice to put them in.” He pointed to the monument which
the masons were in process of fixing to the south wall of the grotto. On
a marble shelf above a large Roman sarcophagus were the statues by some
nameless Jacobean stonemason of a gentleman and lady, both in ruffs,
kneeling, and behind them in three rows of three, nine daughters
diminishing from adolescence to infancy. “Hie jacet Carolus Franciscus
Beals, Armiger . . .” Jeremy began to read.

“Bought it in England, two years ago,” said Mr. Stoyte, interrupting
him. Then, turning to the workmen, “When will you boys be through?” he
asked.

“Tomorrow noon. Maybe tonight.”

“That’s all I wanted to know,” said Mr. Stoyte, and turned away. “I must
have those nuns taken out of storage,” he said, as they walked back to
the car.

They drove on. Poised on the almost invisible vibration of its wings, a
humming bird was drinking at the jet that spouted from the left nipple
of Giambologna’s nymph. From the enclosure of the baboons came the
shrill noise of battle and copulation. Mr. Stoyte shut his eyes. “God is
love,” he repeated, trying deliberately to prolong the delightful
condition of euphoria into which those poor kids and Clancy’s good news
had plunged him. “God is love. There is no death.” He waited to feel
that sense of inward warmth, like the after-effect of whisky, which had
followed his previous utterance of the words. Instead, as though some
immanent fiend were playing a practical joke on him, he found himself
thinking of the shrunken leathery corpses of those nuns, and of his own
corpse, and of judgment and the flames. Prudence McGladdery Stoyte had
been a Christian Scientist; but Joseph Budge Stoyte, his father, had
been a Sandemanian; and Letitia Morgan, his maternal grandmother, had
lived and died a Plymouth Sister. Over his cot in the attic room of the
little frame house in Nashville, Tennessee, had hung the text, in vivid
orange on a black background: “IT IS A TERRIBLE THING TO FALL INTO THE
HANDS OF THE LIVING GOD.” “God is love,” Mr.Stoyte desperately
reaffirmed. “There is no death.” But for sinners, such as himself, it
was only the worm that never died.

“If you’re always scared of dying,” Obispo had said, “you’ll surely die.
Fear’s a poison; and not such a slow poison either.”

Making another enormous effort, Mr. Stoyte suddenly began to whistle.
The tune was “I’m making hay in the moonlight in my baby’s arms,” but
the face which Jeremy Pordage saw and, as though from some horrible and
indecent secret, immediately averted his eyes from, was the face of a
man in the condemned cell.

“Old sour-puss,” the chauffeur muttered to himself, as he watched his
employer get out of the car and walk away.

Followed by Jeremy, Mr. Stoyte hurried in silence through the Gothic
portal, crossed a pillared Romanesque lobby like the Lady Chapel at
Durham and, his hat still pulled down over his eyes, stepped into the
cathedral twilight of the great hall.

A hundred feet overhead, the sound of the two men’s footsteps echoed in
the vaulting. Like iron ghosts, the suits of armour stood immobile round
the walls. Above them, sumptuously dim, the fifteenth-century tapestries
opened windows upon a leafy world of phantasy. At one end of the
cavernous room, lit by a hidden searchlight, El Greco’s Crucifixion of
St. Peter blazed out in the darkness like the beautiful revelation of
something incomprehensible and profoundly sinister. At the other, no
less brilliantly illuminated, hung a full-length portrait of Hélène
Fourment, dressed only in a bearskin cape. Jeremy looked from one to the
other—from the ectoplasm of the inverted saint to the unequivocal skin
and fat and muscle which Rubens had so loved to see and touch; from
unearthly flesh tints of green-white ochre and carmine, shadowed with
transparent black, to the creams and warm pinks, the nacreous blues and
greens of Flemish nudity. Two shining symbols, incomparably powerful and
expressive—but of what, of what? That, of course, was the question.

Mr. Stoyte paid attention to none of his treasures, but strode across
the hall, inwardly cursing his buried wife for having made him think
about death by insisting that there wasn’t any.

The door of the elevator was in an embrasure between pillars. Mr. Stoyte
opened it, and the light came on revealing a Dutch lady in blue satin
sitting at a harpsichord—sitting, Jeremy reflected, at the very heart of
an equation, in a world where beauty and logic, painting and analytical
geometry, had become one. With what intention? To express, symbolically,
what truths about the nature of things? Again, that was the question.
Where art was concerned, Jeremy said to himself, that was always the
question.

“Shut the door,” Mr. Stoyte ordered; then when it was done, “We’ll have
a swim before lunch,” he added, and pressed the topmost of a long row of
buttons.


Chapter IV

MORE than a dozen families of transients were already at work in the
orange grove, as the man from Kansas, with his wife and his three
children and his yellow dog, hurried down the line towards the trees
which the overseer had assigned to him. They walked in silence, for they
had nothing to say to one another and no energy to waste on words.

Only half a day, the man was thinking; only four hours till work would
be stopped. They’d be lucky if they made as much as seventy-five cents.
Seventy-five cents. Seventy-five cents; and that right front tire wasn’t
going to last much longer. If they meant to get up to Fresno and then
Salinas, they’d just have to get a better one. But even the rottenest
old second-hand tire cost money. And money was food. And did they eat!
he thought with sudden resentment. If he were alone, if he didn’t have
to drag the kids and Minnie around, then he could rent a little place
somewhere. Near the highway, so that he could make a bit extra by
selling eggs and fruit and things to the people that rode past in their
automobiles, sell a lot cheaper than the markets and still make good
money. And then, maybe, he’d be able to buy a cow and a couple of hogs;
and then he’d find a girl—one of those fat ones; he liked them rather
fat; fat and young, with . . .

His wife started coughing again; the dream was shattered. Did they eat!
More than they were worth. Three kids with no strength in them. And
Minnie going sick on you half the time so that you had to do her work as
well as yours I

The dog had paused to sniff at a post. With sudden and surprising
agility, the man from Kansas took two quick steps forward and kicked the
animal squarely in the ribs. “You goddam dog!” he shouted. “Get out of
the way!” It ran off, yelping. The man from Kansas turned his head in
the hope of catching in his children’s faces an expression of
disapproval or commiseration. But the children had learnt better than to
give him an excuse for going on from the dog to themselves. Under the
tousled hair, the three pale, small faces were entirely blank and
vacant. Disappointed, the man turned away grumbling indistinctly that
he’d belt the hell out of them if they weren’t careful. The mother did
not even turn her head. She was feeling too sick and tired to do
anything but walk straight on. Silence settled down again over the
party.

Then, suddenly, the youngest of the three children let out a shrill cry.
“Look there!” she pointed. In front of them was the castle. From the
summit of its highest tower rose a spidery metal structure, carrying a
succession of platforms to a height of twenty or thirty feet above the
parapet. On the highest of these platforms, black against the shining
sky, stood a tiny human figure. As they looked, the figure spread its
arms and plunged head foremost out of sight behind the battlements. The
children’s shrill outcry of astonishment gave the man from Kansas the
pretext which, a moment before, they had denied him. He turned on them
furiously. “Stop that yellin’,” he yelled; then rushed at them, hitting
out—a slap on the side of the head for each of them. With an enormous
effort, the woman lifted herself from the abyss of fatigue into which
she had fallen; she halted, she turned, she cried out protestingly, she
caught her husband’s arm. He pushed her away, so violently that she
almost fell.

“You’re as bad as the kids,” he shouted at her. “Just layin’ around and
eatin’. Not worth a damn. I tell you, I’m just sick and tired of the
whole lot of you. Sick and tired,” he repeated. “So you keep your mouth
shut, see!” He turned away and, feeling a good deal better for his
outburst, walked briskly on, at a rate which he knew his wife would find
exhausting, between the rows of loaded orange trees.

From that swimming pool at the top of the donjon the view was
prodigious. Floating on the translucent water, one had only to turn
one’s head to see, between the battlement, successive vistas of plain
and mountain, of green and tawny and violet and faint blue. One floated,
one looked and one thought, that is, if one were Jeremy Pordage, of that
tower in Epipsychidion, that tower with its chambers

Looking towards the golden Eastern air
And level with the living winds.

Not so, however, if one were Miss Virginia Maunciple. Virginia neither
floated, nor looked, nor thought of Epipsychidion, but took another sip
of whisky and soda, climbed to the highest platform of the diving tower,
spread her arms, plunged, glided under water and, coming up immediately
beneath the unsuspecting Pordage, caught him by the belt of his bathing
pants and pulled him under.

“You asked for it,” she said, as he came up again, gasping and
spluttering, to the surface. “Lying there without moving, like a silly
old Buddha.” She smiled at him with an entirely good-natured contempt.

These people that Uncle Jo kept bringing to the castle! An Englishman
with a monocle to look at the armour; a man with a stammer to clean the
pictures; a man who couldn’t speak anything but German to look at some
silly old pots and plates; and today this other ridiculous Englishman
with a face like a rabbit’s and a voice like Songs without Words on the
saxophone.

Jeremy Pordage blinked the water out of his eyes and, dimly, since he
was presbyopic and without his spectacles, saw the young laughing face
very close to his own, the body foreshortened and wavering uncertainly
through the water. It was not often that he found himself in such
proximity to such a being. He swallowed his annoyance and smiled at her.

Miss Maunciple stretched out a hand and patted the bald patch at the top
of Jeremy’s head. “Boy,” she said, “does it shine! Talk of billiard
balls. I know what I shall call you: Ivory. Good-bye, Ivory.” She
turned, swam to the ladder, climbed out, walked to the table on which
the bottles and glasses were standing, drank the rest of her whisky and
soda, then went and sat down on the edge of the couch on which, in black
spectacles and bathing drawers, Mr. Stoyte was taking his sun bath.

“Well, Uncle Jo,” she said in a tone of affectionate playfulness,
“feeling kind of good?”

“Feeling fine, baby,” he answered. It was true; the sun had melted away
his dismal forebodings; he was living again in the present, that
delightful present in which one brought happiness to sick children; in
which there were Tittelbaums prepared, for five hundred bucks, to give
one information worth at the very least a million; in which the sky was
blue and the sunshine a caressing warmth upon the stomach; in which
finally, one stirred out of a delicious somnolence to see little
Virginia smiling down at one as though she really cared for her old
Uncle Jo, and cared for him, what was more, not merely as an old
uncle—no, sir; because when all’s said and done, a man is only as old as
he feels and acts; and where his baby was concerned did he feel young?
did he act young? Yes, sir. Mr. Stoyte smiled to himself, a smile of
triumphant self-satisfaction.

“Well, baby,” he said aloud, and laid a square, thick-fingered hand on
the young woman’s bare knee.

Through half-closed eyelids, Miss Maunciple gave him a secret and
somehow indecent look of understanding and complicity; then uttered a
little laugh and stretched her arms. “Doesn’t the sun feel good!” she
said; and, closing her lids completely, she lowered her raised arms,
clasped her hands behind her neck and threw back her shoulders. It was a
pose that lifted the breasts, that emphasized the inward curve of the
loins and the contrary swell of the buttocks—the sort of pose that a new
arrival in the seraglio would be taught by the eunuchs to assume at her
first interview with the sultan; the very pose, Jeremy recognized, as he
had chanced to look her way, of that quite particularly unsuitable
statue on the third floor of the Beverly Pantheon.

Through his dark glasses, Mr. Stoyte looked up at her with an expression
of possessiveness at once gluttonous and paternal. Virginia was his
baby, not only figuratively and colloquially, but also in the literal
sense of the word. His sentiments were simultaneously those of the
purest father-love and the most violent eroticism.

He looked up at her. By contrast with the shiny white satin of her
breech clout and brassière the sunburnt skin seemed more richly brown.
The planes of the young body flowed in smooth continuous curves,
effortlessly solid, three-dimensional without accent or abrupt
transition. Mr. Stoyte’s regard travelled up to the auburn hair and came
down by way of the rounded forehead, of the wide-set eyes, and small,
straight, impudent nose to the mouth. That mouth—it was her most
striking feature. For it was to the mouth’s short upper lip that
Virginia’s face owed its characteristic expression of child-like
innocence—an expression that persisted through all her moods, that was
noticeable whatever she might be doing, whether it was telling smutty
stories or making conversation with the Bishop, taking tea in Pasadena
or getting tight with the boys, enjoying what she called “a bit of
yum-yum” or attending Mass. Chronologically, Miss Maunciple was a young
woman of twenty-two; but that abbreviated upper lip gave her, in all
circumstances, an air of being hardly adolescent, of not having reached
the age of consent. For Mr. Stoyte, at sixty, the curiously perverse
contrast between childishness and maturity, between the appearance of
innocence and the fact of experience, was intoxicatingly attractive. It
was not only so far as he was concerned that Virginia was both kinds of
baby; she was also both kinds of baby objectively, in herself.

Delicious creature! The hand that had lain inert, hitherto, upon her
knee slowly contracted. Between the broad spatulate thumb and the strong
fingers, what smoothness, what a sumptuous and substantial resilience!

“Jinny,” he said. “My baby!”

The baby opened her large blue eyes and dropped her arms to her sides.
The tense back relaxed, the lifted breasts moved downwards and forwards
like soft living creatures sinking to repose. She smiled at him.

“What are you pinching me for, Uncle Jo?”

“I’d like to eat you,” her Uncle Jo replied in a tone of cannibalistic
sentimentality.

“I’m tough.”

Mr. Stoyte uttered a maudlin chuckle. “Little tough kid!” he said.

The tough kid stooped down and kissed him.

Jeremy Pordage who had been quietly looking at the panorama and
continuing his silent recitation of Epipsychidion, happened at this
moment to turn once more in the direction of the couch and was so much
embarrassed by what he saw that he began to sink and had to strike out
violently with arms and legs to prevent himself from going under.
Turning round in the water, he swam to the ladder, climbed out and,
without waiting to dry himself, hurried to the elevator.

“Really,” he said to himself as he looked at the Vermeer. “Really!”

“I did some business this morning,” said Mr. Stoyte when the baby had
straightened herself up again.

“What sort of business?”

“Good business,” he answered. “Might make a lot of money. Real money,”
he insisted.

“How much?”

“Maybe half a million,” he said cautiously understating his hopes;
“maybe a million; maybe even more.”

“Uncle Jo,” she said, “I think you’re wonderful.” Her voice had the ring
of complete sincerity. She genuinely did think him wonderful. In the
world in which she had lived it was axiomatic that a man who could make
a million dollars must be wonderful. Parents, friends, teachers,
newspapers, radio, advertisements—explicitly or by implication, all were
unanimous in proclaiming his wonderfulness. And besides, Virginia was
very fond of her Uncle Jo. He had given her a wonderful time, and she
was grateful. Besides, she liked to like people if she possibly could;
she liked to please them. Pleasing them made her feel good—even when
they were elderly, like Uncle Jo, and when some of the ways in which she
was called upon to please them didn’t happen to be very appetizing. “I
think you’re wonderful,” she repeated.

Her admiration gave him an intense satisfaction. “Oh, it’s quite easy,”
he said with hypocritical modesty, angling for more.

Virginia gave it him. “Easy, nothing!” she said firmly. “I say you are
wonderful. So just keep your mouth shut.”

Enchanted, Mr. Stoyte took another handful of firm flesh and squeezed it
affectionately. “I’ll give you a present, if the deal goes through,” he
said. “What would you like, baby?”

“What would I like?” she repeated. “But I don’t want anything.”

Her disinterestedness was not assumed. For it was true; she never did
want things this way, in cold blood. At the moment a want occurred, for
an ice cream soda, for example, for a bit of yum-yum, for a mink coat
seen in a shop window—at such moments, she did want things, and wanted
them badly, couldn’t wait to have them. But as for long-range wants,
wants that had to be thought about in advance—no, she never had wanted
like that. The best part of Virginia’s life was spent in enjoying the
successive instants of present contentment of which it was composed; and
if ever circumstances forced her out of this mindless eternity into the
world of time, it was a narrow little universe in which she found
herself, a world whose farthest boundaries were never more than a week
or two away in the future. Even as a show-girl, at eighteen dollars a
week, she had found it difficult to bother much about money and security
and what would happen if you had an accident and couldn’t show your legs
any more. Then Uncle Jo had come along, and everything was there, as
though it grew on trees—a swimming-pool tree, a cocktail tree, a
Schia-parelli tree. You just had to reach out your hand and there it
was, like an apple in the orchard, back home in Oregon. So where did
presents come in? Why should she want anything? Besides, it was obvious
that Uncle Jo got a tremendous kick out of her not wanting things; and
to be able to give Uncle Jo a kick always made her feel good. “I tell
you, Uncle Jo, I don’t want anything”

“Don’t you?” said a strange voice, startlingly close behind them. “Well,
I do.”

Dark-haired and dapper, glossily Levantine, Dr. Sig-mund Obispo stepped
briskly up to the side of the couch.

“To be precise,” he went on, “I want to inject one-point-five cubic
centimetres of testosterone into the great man’s gluteus medius. So off
you go, my angel,” he said to Virginia in a tone of derision, but with a
smile of unabashed desire. “Hop!” He gave her a familiar little pat on
the shoulder and another, when she got up to make room for him, on the
white satin posterior.

Virginia turned round sharply, with the intention of telling him not to
be so fresh; then, as her glance travelled from that barrel of hairy
flesh which was Mr. Stoyte to the other’s handsome face, so insultingly
sarcastic and at the same time so flatteringly concupiscent, she changed
her mind and, instead of telling him, loudly, just where he got off, she
made a grimace and stuck out her tongue at him. What was begun as a
rebuke had ended, before she knew it, as the acquiescence in an
impertinence, as an act of complicity with the offender and of
disloyalty to Uncle Jo. Poor Uncle Jo! she thought, with a rush of
affectionate pity for the old gentleman. For a moment she felt quite
ashamed of herself. The trouble, of course, was that Dr. Obispo was so
handsome; that he made her laugh; that she liked his admiration; that it
was fun to lead him on and see how he’d act. She even enjoyed getting
mad at him, when he was rude, which he constantly was.

“I suppose you think you’re Douglas Fairbanks, Junior,” she said, making
an attempt to be scathing; then walked away with as much dignity as her
two little strips of white satin would permit her to assume and, leaning
against a battlement, looked down at the plain below. Ant-like figures
moved among the orange trees. She wondered idly what they were doing;
then her mind wandered to other, more interesting and personal matters.
To Sig and the fact that she couldn’t help feeling rather thrilled when
he was around, even when he acted the way he had done just now. Some
day, maybe—some day, just to see what it was like and if things got a
bit dull out here at the castle . . . Poor Uncle Jo! she reflected. But
then what could he expect—at his age and at hers? The unexpected thing
was that, in all these months, she hadn’t yet given him any reason for
being jealous—unless, of course, you counted Enid and Mary Lou; which
she didn’t; because she really wasn’t that way at all; and when it did
happen, it was nothing more than a kind of little accident; nice, but
not a bit important. Whereas with Sig, if it ever happened, the thing
would be different; even though it wasn’t very serious; which it
wouldn’t be—not like with Walt, for example, or even with little Buster
back in Portland. It would be different from the accidents with Enid and
Mary Lou, because, with a man, those things generally did matter a good
deal, even when you didn’t mean them to matter. Which was the only
reason for not doing them, outside of their being sins, of course; but
somehow that never seemed to count very much when the boy was a real
good looker (which one had to admit Sig was, even though it was rather
in the style of Adolphe Menjou; but, come to think of it, it was those
dark ones with oil on their hair that had always given her the biggest
kick). And when you’d had a couple of drinks, maybe, and you felt you’d
like some thrills, why then it never even occurred to you that it was a
sin; and then one thing led to another and before you knew what had
happened—well, it had happened; and really she just couldn’t believe it
was as bad as Father O’Reilly said it was; and anyhow Our Lady would be
a lot more understanding and forgiving than he was; and what about the
way Father O’Reilly ate his food, whenever he came to dinner? like a
hog, there wasn’t any other word for it; and wasn’t gluttony just as bad
as the other thing? So who was he to talk like that?

“Well, and how’s the patient?” Dr. Obispo inquired in the parody of a
bedside manner, as he took Virginia’s place on the couch. He was in the
highest of spirits. His work in the laboratory was coming along
unexpectedly well; that new preparation of bile salts had done wonders
for his liver; the rearmament boom had sent his aircraft shares up
another three points; and it was obvious that Virginia wasn’t going to
hold out much longer. “How’s the little invalid this morning?” he went
on, enriching his parody with the caricature of an English accent; for
he had done a year of postgraduate work at Oxford.

Mr. Stoyte growled inarticulately. There was something about Dr.
Obispo’s facetiousness that always enraged him. In some not easily
definable way it had the quality of a deliberate insult. Mr. Stoyte was
always made to feel that Obispo’s apparently good-natured banter was in
reality the expression of a calculated and malignant contempt. The
thought of it made Mr. Stoyte’s blood boil. But when his blood boiled,
his blood pressure, he knew, went up, his life was shortened. He could
not afford to be as angry with Obispo as he would have liked. And what
was more, he couldn’t afford to get rid of the man. Obispo was an
indispensable evil. “God is love; there is no death.” But Mr. Stoyte
remembered with terror that he had had a stroke, that he was growing
old. Obispo had put him on his feet again when he was almost dying, had
promised him ten more years of life even if those researches didn’t work
out as well as he hoped; and if they did work out—then more, much more.
Twenty years, thirty, forty. Or it might even be that the loathsome
little brute would find some way of proving that Mrs. Eddy was right,
after all. Perhaps there really and truly wouldn’t be any death—not for
Uncle Jo, at any rate. Glorious prospect! Meanwhile . . . Mr. Stoyte
sighed, resignedly, profoundly. “We all have our cross to bear,” he said
to himself, echoing, across the intervening years, the words his
grandmother used to repeat when she made him take castor oil.

Dr. Obispo, meanwhile, had sterilized his needle, filed the top off a
glass ampoule, filled his syringe. His movements, as he worked, were
characterized by a certain studied exquisiteness, by a florid and
self-conscious precision. It was as though the man were simultaneously
his own ballet and his own audience—a sophisticated and highly critical
audience, it was true; but then, what a ballet! Nijinsky, Karsavina,
Pavlova, Massine—all on a single stage. However terrific the applause,
it was always merited.

“Ready,” he called at last.

Obediently and in silence, like a trained elephant, Mr. Stoyte rolled
over on to his stomach.


Chapter V

JEREMY had dressed again and was sitting in the subterranean store-room
that was to serve as his study. The dry acrid dust of old documents had
gone to his head, like a kind of intoxicating snuff. His face was
flushed as he prepared his files and sharpened his pencils; his bald
head shone with perspiration; behind their bifocal lenses, his eyes were
bright with excitement.

There! Everything was ready. He turned round in his swivel chair and sat
for a little while quite still, voluptuously savouring his
anticipations. Tied up in innumerable brown paper parcels, the Hauberk
Papers awaited their first reader. Twenty-seven crates of still
unravished brides of quietness. He smiled to himself at the thought that
he was to be their Bluebeard. Thousands of brides of quietness
accumulated through centuries by successive generations of indefatigable
Hauberks. Hauberk after Hauberk; barony after knighthood; earldom after
barony; and then Earl of Gonister after Earl of Gonister down to the
last, the eighth. And, after the eighth, nothing but death duties and an
old house and two old spinster ladies, sinking ever deeper into solitude
and eccentricity, into poverty and family pride, but finally, poor pets!
more deeply into poverty than pride. They had sworn they would never
sell; but in the end they had accepted Mr. Stoyte’s offer. The papers
had been shipped to California. They would be able, now, to buy
themselves a couple of really sumptuous funerals. And that would be the
end of the Hauberks. Delicious fragments of English history! Cautionary
perhaps, or perhaps, and more probably, merely senseless, merely a tale
told by an idiot. A tale of cutthroats and conspirators, of patrons of
learning and shady speculators, of bishops and kings’ catamites and
minor poets, of admirals and pimps, of saints and heroines and
nymphomaniacs, of imbeciles and prime ministers, of art collectors and
sadists. And here was all that remained of them, in twenty-seven crates,
higgledy-piggledy, never catalogued, never even looked at, utterly
virgin. Gloating over his treasure, Jeremy forgot the fatigues of the
journey, forgot Los Angeles and the chauffeur, forgot the cemetery and
the castle, forgot even Mr. Stoyte. He had the Hauberk Papers, had them
all to himself. Like a child dipping blindly into a bran pie for a
present which he knows will be exciting, Jeremy picked up one of the
brown paper parcels with which the first crate was filled and cut the
string. What rich confusion awaited him within! A book of household
accounts for the year 1576 and 1577; a narrative by some Hauberk cadet
of Sir Kenelm Digby’s expedition to Scanderoon; eleven letters in
Spanish from Miguel de Molinos to that Lady Hauberk who had scandalized
her family by turning papist; a collection, in early eighteenth-century
handwriting, of sickroom recipes; a copy of Drelincourt’s “On Death”;
and an odd volume of Andréa de Nerciat’s “Felicia, ou Mes Fredaines.” He
had just cut the string of the second bundle and was wondering whose was
the lock of pale brown hair preserved between the pages of the Third
Earl’s holograph, “Reflections of the Late Popish Plot,” when there was
a knock at the door. He looked up and saw a small, dark man in a white
overall advancing towards him. The stranger smiled, said, “Don’t let me
disturb you,” but nevertheless disturbed him. “My name’s Obispo,” he
went on, “Dr. Sigmund Obispo. Physician in ordinary to His Majesty King
Stoyte the First—and let’s hope also the last.”

Evidently delighted by his own joke, he broke into a peal of startlingly
loud, metallic laughter. Then, with the elegantly fastidious gesture of
an aristocrat in a dust heap, he picked up one of Molinos’s letters and
started, slowly, and out loud, to decipher the first line of the flowing
seventeenth-century calligraphy that met his eyes. “ ‘Ame a Dios como es
en si y no como se lo dice y forma su imaginacion.’ ” He looked up at
Jeremy with an amused smile. “Easier said than done, I should think.
Why, you can’t even love a woman as she is in herself; and after all,
there is some sort of objective physical basis for the phenomenon we
call a female. A pretty nice basis in some cases. Whereas poor old Dios
is only a spirit—in other words, pure imagination. And here’s this
idiot, whoever he is, telling some other idiot that people mustn’t love
God as He is in their imagination.” Once again self-consciously the
aristocrat, he threw down the letter with a contemptuous flick of the
wrist. “What drivel it all is!” he went on. “A string of words called
religion. Another string of words called philosophy. Half a dozen other
strings called political ideals. And all the words either ambiguous or
meaningless. And people getting so excited about them they’ll murder
their neighbours for using a word they don’t happen to like. A word that
probably doesn’t mean as much as a good belch. Just a noise without even
the excuse of gas on the stomach. ‘Ame a Dios como es en si,’ ” he
repeated derisively. “It’s about as sensible as saying ‘hiccough a
hiccough como es en hiccough.’ I don’t know how you litterae humaniores
boys manage to stand it. Don’t you pine for some sense once in a while?”

Jeremy smiled with an expression of nervous apology. “One doesn’t bother
too much about the meanings,” he said. Then, anticipating further
criticism by disparaging himself and the things he loved most dearly,
“One gets a lot of fun, you know,” he went on; “just scrabbling about in
the dust heaps.” Dr. Obispo laughed and patted Jeremy encouragingly on
the shoulder. “Good for you!” he said. “You’re frank. I like that. Most
of the Ph.D. boys one meets are such damned Pecksniffs. Trying to pull
that high-moral culture stuff on you! You know: wisdom rather than
knowledge; Sophocles instead of science. ‘Funny,’ I always say to them
when they try that on me, ‘funny that the thing you get your income from
should happen to be the thing that’s going to save humanity.’ Whereas
you don’t try to glorify your little racket. You’re honest. You admit
you’re in the thing merely for the fun of it. Well, that’s why I’m in my
little racket. For the fun. Though of course if you’d given me any of
that Sophocles stuff, I’d just have let you have my piece about science
and progress, science and happiness, even science and ultimate truth, if
you’d been obstinate.” He showed his white teeth in a happy derision of
everybody.

His amusement was infectious. Jeremy also smiled. “I’m glad I wasn’t
obstinate,” he said in a tone whose fluty demureness implied how much he
objected to disquisitions on ultimate truth.

“Mind you,” Dr. Obispo went on, “I’m not entirely blind to the charms of
your racket. I’d draw the line at Sophocles, of course. And I’d be
deadly bored with this sort of stuff.” He nodded towards the
twenty-seven crates. “But I must admit,” he concluded handsomely, “I’ve
had a lot of fun out of old books in my time. Really, a lot of fun.”

Jeremy coughed and caressed his scalp; his eyes twinkled in anticipation
of the deliciously dry little jokes he was just about to make. But
unfortunately Dr. Obispo gave him no time. Serenely unaware of Jeremy’s
preparations he looked at his watch; then rose to his feet. “I’d like to
show you my laboratory,” he said. “There’s plenty of time before lunch.”

“Instead of asking if I’d like to see his bloody laboratory,” Jeremy
protested inwardly, as he swallowed his joke; and it had been such a
good onel He would have liked, of course, to go on unpacking the Hauberk
Papers; but, lacking the courage to say so, he rose obediently and
followed Dr. Obispo towards the door.

Longevity, the doctor explained, as they left the room. That was his
subject. Had been ever since he left medi cal school. But of course, so
long as he was in practice, he hadn’t been able to do any serious work
on it. Practice was fatal to serious work, he added parenthetically. How
could you do anything sensible when you had to spend all your time
looking after patients? Patients belonged to three classes: those that
imagined they were sick, but weren’t; those that were sick, but would
get well anyhow; those that were sick and would be much better dead. For
anybody capable of serious work to waste his time with patients was
simply idiotic. And, of course, nothing but economic pressure would ever
have driven him to do it. And he might have gone on in that groove for
ever. Wasting himself on morons. But then, quite suddenly, his luck had
turned. Jo Stoyte had come to consult him. It had been positively
providential.

“Most awfully a godsend,” Jeremy murmured, quoting his favourite phrase
of Coleridge.

Jo Stoyte, Dr. Obispo repeated, Jo Stoyte on the verge of breaking up
completely. Forty pounds overweight and having had a stroke. Not a bad
one, luckily; but enough to put the old bastard into a sweat. Talk of
being scared of death! (Dr. Obispo’s white teeth flashed again in
wolfish good humour.) In Jo’s case it had been a panic. Out of that
panic had come Dr. Obispo’s liberation from his patients; had come his
income, his laboratory for work on the problems of longevity, his
excellent assistant; had come, too, the financing of that pharmaceutical
work at Berkeley, of those experiments with monkeys in Brazil, of that
expedition to study the tortoises on the Galapagos Islands. Everything a
research worker could ask for, with old Jo himself thrown in as the
perfect guinea-pig—ready to submit to practically anything short of
vivisection without anaesthetics, provided it offered some hope of
keeping him above ground a few years longer.

Not that he was doing anything spectacular with the old buzzard at the
moment. Just keeping his weight down; and taking care of his kidneys;
and pepping him up with periodical shots of synthetic sex hormone; and
watching out for those arteries. The ordinary, common-sense treatment
for a man of Jo Stoyte’s age and medical history. Meanwhile, however, he
was on the track of something new, something that promised to be
important. In a few months, perhaps in a few weeks, he’d be in a
position to make a definite pronouncement.

“That’s very interesting,” said Jeremy with hypocritical politeness.

They were walking along a narrow corridor, whitewashed and bleakly
illuminated by a series of electric bulbs. Through open doors, Jeremy
had occasional glimpses of vast cellars crammed with totem poles and
armour, with stuffed orang-utans and marble groups by Thorwaldsen, with
gilded Bodhisattvas and early steam engines, with lingams and stage
coaches and Peruvian pottery, with crucifixes and mineralogical
specimens.

Dr. Obispo, meanwhile, had begun to talk again about longevity. The
subject, he insisted, was still in the pre-scientific stage. A lot of
observations without any explanatory hypothesis. A mere chaos of facts.
And what odd, what essentially eccentric facts! What was it, for
example, that made a cicada live as long as a bull? Or a canary outlast
three generations of sheep? Why should dogs be senile at fourteen and
parrots sprightly at a hundred? Why should female humans become sterile
in the forties, while female crocodiles continued to lay eggs into their
third century? Why in heaven’s name should a pike live to two hundred
without showing any signs of senility? Whereas poor old Jo Stoyte . . .

From a side passage two men suddenly emerged carrying between them on a
stretcher a couple of mummified nuns. There was a collision.

“Damned fools!” Dr. Obispo shouted angrily.

“Damned fool yourself!”

“Can’t you look where you’re going?”

“Keep your face shut!”

Dr. Obispo turned contemptuously away and walked on.

“Who the hell do you think you are?” they called after him.

Jeremy meanwhile had been looking with lively curiosity at the mummies.
“Discalced Carmelites,” he said to nobody in particular; and enjoying
the flavour of that curious combination of syllables, he repeated them
with a certain emphatic relish. “Discalced Carmelites.”

“Discalce your ass,” said the foremost of the two men, turning fiercely
upon this new antagonist.

Jeremy gave one glance at that red and angry face, then, with
ignominious haste, hurried after his guide.

Dr. Obispo halted at last. “Here we are,” he said, opening a door. A
smell of mice and absolute alcohol floated out into the corridor. “Come
on in,” he said cordially.

Jeremy entered. There were the mice all right—cage upon cage of them, in
tiers along the wall directly in front of him. To the left, three
windows, hewn in the rock, gave on to the tennis court and a distant
panorama of orange trees and mountains. Seated at a table in front of
one of these windows, a man was looking through a microscope. He raised
his fair, tousled head as they approached and turned towards them a face
of almost child-like candour and openness. “Hullo, doc,” he said with a
charming smile.

“My assistant,” Dr. Obispo explained, “Peter Boone. Pete, this is Mr.
Pordage.” Pete rose and revealed himself an athletic young giant.

“Call me Pete,” he said, when Jeremy had called him Mr. Boone. “Everyone
calls me Pete.”

Jeremy wondered whether he ought to invite the young man to call him
Jeremy—but wondered, as usual, so long that the appropriate moment for
doing so passed, irrevocably.

“Pete’s a bright boy,” Dr. Obispo began again in a tone that was
affectionate in intention, but a little patronizing in fact. “Knows his
physiology. Good with his hands, too. Best mouse surgeon I ever saw.” He
patted the young man on the shoulder.

Pete smiled—a little uncomfortably, it seemed to Jeremy, as though he
found it rather difficult to make the right response to the other’s
cordiality.

“Takes his politics a bit too seriously,” Dr. Obispo went on. “That’s
his only defect. I’m trying to cure him of that. Not very successfully
so far, I’m afraid. Eh, Pete?”

The young man smiled again, more confidently; this time he knew exactly
where he stood and what to do.

“Not very successfully,” he echoed. Then, turning to Jeremy, “Did you
see the Spanish news this morning?” he asked. The expression on his
large, fair, open face changed to one of concern.

Jeremy shook his head.

“It’s something awful,” said Pete gloomily. “When I think of those poor
devils without planes or artillery or . . .”

“Well, don’t think of them,” Dr. Obispo cheerfully advised. “You’ll feel
better.”

The young man looked at him, then looked away again without saying
anything. After a moment of silence he pulled out his watch. “I think
I’ll go and have a swim before lunch,” he said and walked towards the
door.

Dr. Obispo picked up a cage of mice and held it within a few inches of
Jeremy’s nose. “These are the sex-hormone boys,” he said with a
jocularity that the other found curiously offensive. The animals
squeaked as he shook the cage. “Lively enough while the effect lasts.
The trouble is that the effects are only temporary.”

Not that temporary effects were to be despised, he added, as he replaced
the cage. It was always better to feel temporarily good than temporarily
bad. That was why he was giving old Jo a course of that testosterone
stuff. Not that the old bastard had any great need of it with that
Maunciple girl around . . .

Dr. Obispo suddenly put his hand over his mouth and looked round towards
the window. “Thank God,” he said, “he’s out of the room. Poor old Pete!”
A derisive smile appeared on his face. “Is he in love?” He tapped his
forehead. “Thinks she’s like something in the works of Tennyson. You
know, chemically pure. Last month he nearly killed a man for suggesting
that she and the old boy . . . Well, you know. God knows what he figures
the girl is doing here. Telling Uncle Jo about the spiral nebulae, I
suppose. Well, if it makes him happy to think that way, I’m not the one
that’s going to spoil his fun.” Dr. Obispo laughed indulgently. “But to
come back to what I was saying about Uncle Jo . . .”

Just having that girl around the house was the equivalent of a hormone
treatment. But it wouldn’t last. It never did. Brown-Sequard and
Voronoff and all the rest of them—they’d been on the wrong track. They’d
thought that the decay of sexual power was the cause of senility.
Whereas it was only one of the symptoms. Senescence started somewhere
else and involved the sex mechanism along with the rest of the body.
Hormone treatments were just palliatives and pick-me-ups. Helped you for
a time, but didn’t prevent your growing old.

Jeremy stifled a yawn.

For example, Dr. Obispo went on, why should some animals live much
longer than human beings and yet show no signs of old age? Somehow,
somewhere we had made a biological mistake. Crocodiles had avoided that
mistake; so had tortoises. The same was true of certain species of fish.

“Look at this,” he said; and, crossing the room, he drew back a rubber
curtain, revealing as he did so the glass front of a large aquarium
recessed into the wall. Jeremy approached and looked in.

In the green and shadowy translucence, two huge fish hung suspended,
their snouts almost touching, motionless except for the occasional
ripple of a fin and the rhythmic panting of their gills. A few inches
from their staring eyes, a rosary of bubbles streamed ceaselessly up
towards the light and all around them the water was spasmodically silver
with the dartings of smaller fish. Sunk in their mindless ecstasy, the
monsters paid no attention.

Carp, Dr. Obispo explained; carp from the fishponds of a castle in
Franconia—he had forgotten the name; but it was somewhere near Bamberg.
The family was impoverished; but the fish were heirlooms, unpurchasable.
Jo Stoyte had had to spend a lot of money to have these two stolen and
smuggled out of the country in a specially constructed automobile with a
tank under the back seats. Sixty pounders they were; over four feet
long; and those rings in their tails were dated 1761.

“The beginning of my period,” Jeremy murmured in a sudden access of
interest. 1761 was the year of “Fingal.” He smiled to himself; the
juxtaposition of carp and Ossian, carp and Napoleon’s favourite poet,
carp and the first premonitions of the Celtic Twilight, gave him a
peculiar pleasure. What a delightful subject for one of his little
essays! Twenty pages of erudition and absurdity—of sacrilege in
lavender—of a scholar’s delicately canaille irreverence for the
illustrious or unillustrious dead.

But Dr. Obispo would not allow him to think his thoughts in peace.
Indefatigably riding his own hobby, he began again. There they were, he
said, pointing at the huge fish; nearly two hundred years old; perfectly
healthy; no symptoms of senility; no apparent reason why they shouldn’t
go on for another three or four centuries. There they were; and here
were you. He turned back accusingly towards Jeremy. Here were you! no
more than middle-aged, but already bald, already longsighted and
short-winded; already more or less edentate; incapable of prolonged
physical exertion; chronically constipated (could you deny it?); your
memory already not so good as it was; your digestion capricious; your
potency falling off, if it hadn’t, indeed, already disappeared for good.

Jeremy forced himself to smile and, at every fresh item, nodded his head
in what was meant to look like an amused assent. Inwardly, he was
writhing with a mixture of distress at this all too truthful diagnosis
and anger against the diagnostician for the ruthlessness of his
scientific detachment. Talking with a humorous self-deprecation about
one’s own advancing senility was very different from being bluntly told
about it by someone who took no interest in you except as an animal that
happened to be unlike a fish. Nevertheless, he continued to nod and
smile.

Here you were, Dr. Obispo repeated at the end of his diagnosis, and
there were the carp. How was it that you didn’t manage your
physiological affairs as well as they did? Just where and how and why
did you make the mistake that had already robbed you of your teeth and
hair and would bring you in a very few years to the grave?

Old Metchnikoff had asked those questions and made a bold attempt to
answer. Everything he said happened to be wrong; phagocytosis didn’t
occur; intestinal autointoxication wasn’t the sole cause of senility;
neurono-phages were mythological monsters; drinking sour milk didn’t
materially prolong life; whereas the removal of the large gut did
materially shorten it. Chuckling, he recalled those operations that were
so fashionable just before the War—old ladies and gentlemen with their
colons cut out, and in consequence being forced to evacuate every few
minutes, like canaries! All to no purpose, needless to say; because of
course the operation that was meant to make them live to a hundred
killed them all off within a year or two. Dr. Obispo threw back his
glossy head and uttered one of those peals of brazen laughter which were
his regular response to any tale of human stupidity resulting in
misfortune. Poor old Metchnikoff, he went on, wiping the tears of
merriment from his eyes. Consistently wrong. And yet almost certainly
not nearly so wrong as people had thought. Wrong, yes, in supposing that
it was all a matter of intestinal stasis and auto-intoxication. But
probably right, in thinking that the secret was somewhere down there, in
the gut. Somewhere in the gut, Dr. Obispo repeated; and, what was more,
he believed that he was on its track.

He paused and stood for a moment in silence, drumming with his fingers
on the glass of the aquarium. Poised between mud and air, the two obese
and aged carps hung in their greenish twilight, serenely unaware of him.
Dr. Obispo shook his head at them. The worst experimental animals in the
world, he said in a tone of resentment mingled with a certain gloomy
pride. Nobody had a right to talk about technical difficulties who
hadn’t tried to work with fish. Take the simplest operation; it was a
nightmare. Had you ever tried to keep its gills properly wet while it
was anaesthetized on the operating table? Or, alternatively, to do your
surgery under water? Had you ever set out to determine a fish’s basal
metabolism, or take an electro-cardiograph of its heart action, or
measure its blood pressure? Had you ever wanted to analyse its excreta?
And, if so, did you know how hard it was even to collect them? Had you
ever attempted to study the chemistry of a fish’s digestion and
assimilation? To determine its blood picture under different conditions?
To measure the speed of its nervous reactions?

No, you had not, said Dr. Obispo contemptuously. And until you had, you
had no right to complain about anything.

He drew the curtain on his fish, took Jeremy by the arm and led him back
to the mice.

“Look at those,” he said, pointing to a batch of cages on an upper
shelf.

Jeremy looked. The mice in question were exactly like all other mice.
“What’s wrong with them?” he asked.

Dr. Obispo laughed. “If those animals were human beings,” he said
dramatically, “they’d all be over a hundred years old.”

And he began to talk, very rapidly and excitedly, about fatty alcohols
and the intestinal flora of carp. For the secret was there, the key to
the whole problem of senility and longevity. There, between the sterols
and the peculiar flora of the carp’s intestine.

Those sterols! (Dr. Obispo frowned and shook his head over them.) Always
linked up with senility. The most obvious case, of course, was
cholesterol. A senile animal might be defined as one with an
accumulation of cholesterol in the walls of its arteries. Potassium
thiocyanate seemed to dissolve those accumulations. Senile rabbits would
show signs of rejuvenation under a treatment with potassium thiocyanate.
So would senile humans. But, again, not for very long. Cholesterol in
the arteries was evidently only one of the troubles. But then
cholesterol was only one of the sterols. They were a closely related
group, those fatty alcohols. It didn’t take much to transform one into
another. But if you’d read old Schneeglock’s work and the stuff they’d
been publishing at Upsala, you’d know that some of the sterols were
definitely poisonous—much more than cholesterol, even in large
accumulations. Longbotham had even sug gested a connexion between fatty
alcohols and neoplasms. In other words, cancer might be regarded, in a
final analysis, as a symptom of sterol-poisoning. He himself would go
even further and say that such sterol-poisoning was responsible for the
entire degenerative process of senescence in man and the other mammals.
What nobody had done hitherto was to look into the part played by fatty
alcohols in the life of such animals as carp. That was the work he had
been doing for the last year. His researches had convinced him of three
things: first, that the fatty alcohols in carp did not accumulate in
excessive quantity; second, that they did not undergo transformation
into the more poisonous sterols; and third, that both of these
immunities were due to the peculiar nature of the carp’s intestinal
flora. What a flora! Dr. Obispo cried enthusiastically. So rich, so
wonderfully varied! He had not yet succeeded in isolating the organism
responsible for the carp’s immunity to old age, nor did he fully
understand the nature of the chemical mechanisms involved. Nevertheless,
the main fact was certain. In one way or another, in combination or in
isolation, these organisms contrived to keep the fish’s sterols from
turning into poisons. That was why a carp could live a couple of hundred
years and show no signs of senility.

Could the intestinal flora of a carp be transferred to the gut of a
mammal? And, if transferable, would it achieve the same chemical and
biological results? That was what he had been trying, for the past few
months, to discover. With no success, to begin with. Recently, however,
they had experimented with a new technique—a technique that protected
the flora from the processes of digestion, gave it time to adapt itself
to the unfamiliar conditions. It had taken root. The effect on the mice
had been immediate and significant. Senescence had been halted, even
reversed. Physiologically, the animals were younger than they had been
for at least eighteen months—younger at the equivalent of a hundred than
they had been at the equivalent of sixty.

Outside in the corridor an electric bell began to ring. It was lunch
time. The two men left the room and walked towards the elevator. Dr.
Obispo went on talking. Mice, he said, were apt to be a bit deceptive.
He had now begun to try the thing out on larger animals. If it worked
all right on dogs and baboons, it ought to work on Uncle Jo.


Chapter VI

IN THE small dining-room, most of the furnishings came from the Pavilion
at Brighton. Four gilded dragons supported the red lacquered table and
two more served as caryatids on either side of a chimney piece in the
same material. It was the Regency’s dream of the Gorgeous East. The kind
of thing, Jeremy reflected, as he sat down on his scarlet and gold
chair, the kind of thing that the word “Cathay” would have conjured up
in Keats’s mind, for example, or Shelley’s, or Lord Byron’s—just as that
charming Leda by Etty, over there, next to the Fra Angelico
Annunciation, was an accurate embodiment of their fancies on the subject
of pagan mythology; was an authentic illustration (he chuckled inwardly
at the thought) to the Odes to Psyche and the Grecian Urn, to “Endymion”
and “Prometheus Unbound.” An age’s habits of thought and feeling and
imagination are shared by all who live and work within that age—by all,
from the journeyman up to the genius. Regency is always Regency, whether
you take your sample from the top of the basket or from the bottom. In
1820, the man who shut his eyes and tried to visualize magic casements
opening on the foam of faery seas would see—what? The turrets of
Brighton Pavilion. At the thought, Jeremy smiled to himself with
pleasure. Etty and Keats, Brighton and Percy Bysshe Shelley—what a
delightful subject! Much better than carp and Ossian; better inasmuch as
Nash and the Prince Regent were funnier than even the most aged fish.
But for conversational purposes and at the luncheon table, even the best
of subjects is worthless if there is nobody to discuss it with. And who
was there, Jeremy asked himself, who was there in this room desirous or
capable of talking with him on such a theme? Not Mr. Stoyte; not,
certainly, Miss Maunciple, nor the two young women who had come over
from Hollywood to have lunch with her; not Dr. Obispo, who cared more
for mice than books; nor Peter Boone who probably didn’t even know that
there were any books to care for. The only person who might conceivably
be expected to take an interest in the manifestations of the
later-Georgian time spirit was the individual who had been introduced to
him as Dr. Herbert Mulge, Ph.D., D.D., Principal of Tarzana College. But
at the moment Dr. Mulge was talking in a rich vein of something that
sounded almost like pulpit eloquence about the new Auditorium which Mr.
Stoyte had just presented to the College and which was shortly to be
given its formal opening. Dr. Mulge was a large and handsome man with a
voice to match—a voice at once sonorous and suave, unctuous and ringing.
The flow of his language was slow, but steady and apparently stanchless.
In phrases full of the audible equivalents of Capital Letters, he now
went on to assure Mr. Stoyte and any one else who cared to listen that
it would be a Real Inspiration for the boys and girls of Tarzana to come
together in the beautiful new building for their Com munity Activities.
For Non-Denominational Worship, for example; for the Enjoyment of the
Best in Drama and Music. Yes, what an inspiration! The name of Stoyte
would be remembered with love and reverence by successive generations of
the College’s Alumni and Alumnae—would be remembered, he might say, for
ever; for the Auditorium was a monumentum aere perennius, a Footprint on
the Sand of Time—definitely a Footprint. And now, Dr. Mulge continued,
between the mouthfuls of creamed chicken, now Tarzana’s Crying Need was
for a new art school. Because, after all, Art, as we were now
discovering, was one of the most potent of educational forces. Art was
the aspect under which, in this twentieth century of ours, the Religious
Spirit most clearly manifested itself. Art was the means by which
Personalities could best achieve Creative Self-Expression and . . .

“Cripes!” Jeremy said to himself; and then: “Golly!” He smiled ruefully
at the thought that he hoped to talk to this imbecile about the relation
between Keats and Brighton Pavilion.

Peter Boone found himself separated from Virginia by the blonder of her
two young friends from Hollywood, so that he could only look at her past
a foreground of rouge and eyelashes, of golden curls and a thick, almost
visible perfume of gardenias. To any one else, this foreground might
have seemed a bit distracting; but for Pete it was of no more
significance than the equivalent amount of mud. He was interested only
in what was beyond the foreground—in that exquisitely abbreviated upper
lip, in the little nose that made you want to cry when you looked at it,
it was so elegant and impertinent, so ridiculous and angelic; in that
long Florentine bob of lustrous auburn hair; in those wide-set, widely
opened eyes with their twinkling surface of humour and their dark blue
depths of what he was sure was an infinite tenderness, a plumbless
feminine wisdom. He loved her so much that, where his heart should have
been, he could feel only an aching breathlessness, a cavity which she
alone could fill.

Meanwhile, she was talking to the blonde Foreground about that new job
which the Foreground had landed with Cosmopolis-Perimutter Studios. The
picture was called Say It with Stockings and the Foreground was to play
the part of a rich debutante who runs away from home to make a career of
her own, becomes a strip-tease dancer in a Western mining camp and
finally marries a cowpuncher, who turns out to be the son of a
millionaire.

“Sounds like a swell story,” said Virginia. “Don’t you think so, Pete?”

Pete thought so; he was ready to think almost anything if she wanted him
to.

“That reminds me of Spain,” Virginia announced. And while Jeremy, who
had been eavesdropping on the conversation, frantically tried to imagine
what train of associations had taken her from Say It with Stockings to
the Civil War—whether it had been Cosmopolis-Perimutter, Anti-Semitism,
Nazis, Franco—or débutante, class war, Moscow, Negrin; or strip-tease,
mo dernity, radicalism, Republicans—while he was vainly speculating
thus, Virginia went on to ask the young man to tell them about what he
had done in Spain; and when he demurred, insisted—because it was so
thrilling, because the Foreground had never heard about it, because,
finally, she wanted him to.

Pete obeyed. Only half articulately, in a vocabulary composed of slang
and cliches, and adorned by expletives and grunts—the vocabulary, Jeremy
reflected as he listened surreptitiously through the booming of Dr.
Mulge’s eloquence, the characteristically squalid and poverty-stricken
vocabulary to which the fear of being thought unsocially different or
undemocratically superior, or unsportingly highbrow, condemns most young
Englishmen and Americans—he began to describe his experiences as a
volunteer in the International Brigade during the heroic days of 1937.
It was a touching narrative. Through the hopelessly inadequate language,
Jeremy could divine the young man’s enthusiasm for liberty and justice;
his courage; his love for his comrades; his nostalgia, even in the
neighbourhood of that short upper lip, even in the midst of an absorbing
piece of scientific research, for the life of men united in devotion to
a cause, made one in the face of hardship and shared danger and
impending death.

“Gee,” he kept repeating, “they were swell guys.”

They were all swell—Knud, who had saved his life one day, up there in
Aragon; Anton and Chuck and poor little Dino, who had been killed.
André, who had lost a leg; Jan, who had a wife and two children; Fritz,
who’d had six months in a Nazi concentration camp; and all the
others—the finest bunch of boys in the world. And what did he do but go
and get rheumatic fever on them, and then myocarditis—which meant no
more active service; no more anything except sitting around. That was
why he was here, he explained apologetically. But, gee, it had been good
while it lasted! That time, for example, when he and Knud had gone out
at night and climbed a precipice in the dark and taken a whole platoon
of Moors by surprise and killed half a dozen of them and come back with
a machine gun and three prisoners . . .

“And what is your opinion of Creative Work, Mr, Pordage?”

Surprised in flagrant inattention, Jeremy started guiltily. “Creative
work?” he mumbled, trying to gain a little time. “Creative work? Well,
of course one’s all for it. Definitely,” he insisted.

“I’m glad to hear you say so,” said Dr. Mulge. “Because that’s what I
want at Tarzana. Creative Work—ever more and more Creative. Shall I tell
you what is my highest ambition?” Neither Mr. Stoyte nor Jeremy made any
reply. But Dr. Mulge proceeded, nevertheless, to tell them. “It is to
make of Tarzana the living Centre of the New Civilization that is coming
to blossom here in the West.” He raised a large fleshy hand in solemn
asseveration. “The Athens of the twentieth century is on the point of
emerging here, in the Los Angeles Metropolitan Area. I want Tarzana to
be its Parthenon and its Academe, its Stoa and its Temple of the Muses.
Religion, Art, Philosophy, Science—I want them all to find their home in
Tarzana, to radiate their influence from our campus, to . . .”

In the middle of his story about the Moors and the precipice, Pete
became aware that only the Foreground was listening to him. Virginia’s
attention had wandered, surreptitiously at first, then frankly and
avowedly—had wandered to where, on her left, the less blonde of her two
friends was having something almost whispered to her by Dr. Obispo.

“What’s that?” Virginia asked.

Dr. Obispo leaned towards her and began again. The three heads, the
oil-smooth black, the elaborately curly brown, the lustrous auburn, were
almost touching. By the expression on their faces Pete could see that
the doctor was telling one of his dirty stories. Alleviated for a moment
by the smile she had given him when she asked him to tell them about
Spain, the anguish in that panting void where his heart ought to have
been came back with redoubled intensity. It was a complicated pain, made
up of jealousy and a despairing sense of loss and personal unworthiness,
of a fear that his angel was being corrupted and another, deeper fear,
which his conscious mind refused to formulate, a fear that there wasn’t
much further corruption to be done, that the angel was not as angelic as
his love had made him assume. The flow of his narrative suddenly dried
up. He was silent.

“Well, what happened then?” the Foreground inquired with an eagerness
and an expression of hero worshipping admiration that any other young
man would have found delightfully flattering.

He shook his head. “Oh, nothing much.”

“But those Moors . . .”

“Hell,” he said impatiently, “what does it matter, anyhow?”

His words were drowned by a violent explosion of laughter that sent the
three conspiratorial heads, the black, the brown, the lovely auburn,
flying apart from one another. He looked up at Virginia and saw a face
distorted with mirth. At what? he asked himself in agony, trying to
measure the extent of her corruption; and a kind of telescoped and
synthetic memory of all the schoolboy stories, all the jokes and
Limericks he had ever heard rushed in upon him. Was it at that one that
she was laughing? Or at that? Or, God, perhaps at that? He hoped and
prayed it wasn’t at that; and the more he hoped and prayed, the more
insanely sure he became that that was the one it had been.

“. . . above all,” Dr. Mulge was saying, “Creative Work in the Arts.
Hence the crying need for a new Art School, an Art School worthy of
Tarzana, worthy of the highest traditions of . . .”

The girls’ shrill laughter exploded with a force of hilarity
proportionate to the strength of the surrounding social taboos. Mr.
Stoyte turned sharply in the direction from which the noise had come.

“What’s the joke?” he asked suspiciously. He wasn’t going to have his
Baby listen to smut. He disapproved of smut in mixed company almost as
whole-heartedly as his grandmother, the Plymouth Sister, had done.
“What’s all that noise about?”

It was Dr. Obispo who answered. He’d been telling them a funny story
he’d heard over the radio, he explained with that suave politeness that
was like a sarcasm. Something delightfully amusing. Perhaps Mr. Stoyte
would like to have him repeat it.

Mr. Stoyte grunted ferociously and turned away.

A glance at his host’s scowling face convinced Dr. Mulge that it would
be better to postpone discussion of the Art School to another, more
propitious occasion. It was disappointing; for it seemed to him that he
had been making good progress. But, therel Such things would happen. Dr.
Mulge was a college president chronically in quest of endowments; he
knew all about the rich. Knew, for example, that they were like
gorillas, creatures not easily domesticated, deeply suspicious,
alternately bored and bad tempered. You had to approach them with
caution, to handle them gently and with a boundless cunning. And even
then they might suddenly turn savage on you and show their teeth. Half a
life-time of experience with bankers and steel magnates and retired meat
packers had taught Dr. Mulge to take such little set-backs as today’s
with a truly philosophic patience. Brightly, with a smile on his large,
imperial-Roman face, he turned to Jeremy. “And what do you think of our
California weather, Mr. Pordage?” he asked.

Meanwhile, Virginia had noticed the expression on Pete’s face and
immediately divined the causes of his misery. Poor Pete! I But really if
he thought she had nothing better to do than always be listening to his
talk about that silly old war in Spain—or if it wasn’t Spain, it was the
laboratory; and they did vivisection there, which was just awful;
because, after all, when you were hunting, the animals had a chance of
getting away, particularly if you were a bad shot, like she was;
besides, hunting was full of thrills and you got such a kick from being
up there in the mountains in the good air; whereas Pete cut them up
underground in that cellar place. . . . No, if he thought she had
nothing better to do than that, he made a big mistake. All the same he
was a nice boy; and talk about being in love! It was nice having people
around who felt that way about you; made you feel kind of good. Though
it could be rather a nuisance sometimes. Because they got to feel they
had some claim on you; they figured they had a right to tell you things
and interfere. Pete didn’t do that in so many words; but he had a way of
looking at you—like a dog would do if it suddenly started criticizing
you for taking another cocktail. Saying it with eyes, like Hedy
Lamarr—only it wasn’t the same thing as Hedy was saying with her eyes;
in fact, just the opposite. It was just the opposite now—and what had
she done? Got bored with that silly old war and listened in to what Sig
was saying to Mary Lou. Well, all she could say was that she wasn’t
going to have any one interfering with the way she chose to live her own
life. That was her business. Why, he was almost as bad, the way he
looked at her, as Uncle Jo, or her mother, or Father O’Reilly. Only, of
course, they didn’t just look; they said things. Not that he meant
badly, of course, poor Pete; he was just a kid, just unsophisticated
and, on top of everything, in love the way a kid is—like the high-school
boy in Deanna Durbin’s last picture. Poor Pete, she thought again. It
was tough luck on him; but the fact was she never had been attracted by
that big, fair, Cary Grant sort of boy. They just didn’t appeal to her;
that was all there was to it. She liked him; and she enjoyed his being
in love with her. But that was all.

Across the corner of the table she caught his eye, gave him a dazzling
smile and invited him, if he had half an hour to spare after lunch, to
come and teach her and the girls how to pitch horseshoes.


Chapter VII

THE meal was over at last; the party broke up. Dr. Mulge had an
appointment in Pasadena to see a rubber goods manufacturer’s widow, who
might perhaps give fifty thousand dollars for a new girls’ dormitory.
Mr. Stoyte drove into Los Angeles for his regular Friday afternoon board
meetings and business consultations. Dr. Obispo was going to operate on
some rabbits and went down to the laboratory to prepare his instruments.
Pete had a batch of scientific journals to look at, but gave himself,
meanwhile, a few minutes of happiness in Virginia’s company. And for
Jeremy, of course, there were the Hauberk Papers. It was with a sense of
almost physical relief, a feeling that he was going home to where he
belonged, that he returned to his cellar. The afternoon slipped past—how
delightfully, how profitably! Within three hours, another batch of
letters from Molinos had turned up among the account books and the
business correspondence. So had the third and fourth volumes of
“Félicia.” So had an illustrated edition of “Le Portier des Carmes”;
and, bound like a prayer book, so had a copy of that rarest of all works
of the Divine Marquis, “Les Cent-Vingt Jours de Sodome.” What a
treasure! What unexpected fortune! Or perhaps, Jeremy reflected, not so
unexpected if one remembered the history of the Hauberk family. For the
date of the books made it likely that they had been the property of the
Fifth Earl—the one who had held the title for more than half a century
and died at more than ninety, under William IV, completely unregenerate.
Given the character of that old gentleman, one had no reason to feel
surprised at the finding of a store of pornography—one had every reason,
indeed, to hope for more.

Jeremy’s spirits mounted with each new discovery. Always, with him, a
sure sign of happiness, he began to hum the tunes that had been popular
during his childhood. Molinos evoked “Tara-rara Boom-de-ay!” “Félicia”
and the “Portier des Carmes” shared the romantic lilt of “The
Honeysuckle and the Bee.” As for the “Cent-Vingt Jours,” which he had
never previously read or even seen a copy of—the finding of that
delighted him so much that when, as a matter of bibliographical routine,
he raised the ecclesiastical cover and, expecting the Anglican ritual,
found instead the coldly elegant prose of the Marquis de Sade, he broke
out into that rhyme from “The Rose and the Ring,” the rhyme his mother
had taught him to repeat when he was only three years old and which had
remained with him as the symbol of child-like wonder and delight, as the
only completely adequate reaction to any sudden blessing, any
providentially happy surprise:

Oh, what fun to have a plum bun!
How I wish it never was done!

And fortunately it wasn’t done, wasn’t even begun; the book was still
unread, the hours of entertainment and instruction still lay before him.
Remembering that pang of jealousy he had felt up there, in the swimming
pool, he smiled indulgently. Let Mr. Stoyte have all the girls he
wanted; a well-written piece of eighteenth-century pornography was
better than any Maunciple. He closed the volume he was holding. The
tooled morocco was austerely elegant; on the back, the words “The Book
of Common Prayer” were stamped in a gold which the years had hardly
tarnished. He put it down with the other curiosa on a corner of the
table. When he had finished for the afternoon, he would take the whole
collection up to his bedroom.

“Oh, what fun to have a plum bun,” he chanted to himself, as he opened
another bundle of papers, and then, “On a summer’s afternoon, where the
honeysuckles bloom and all Nature seems at rest.” That Wordsworthian
touch about Nature always gave him a special pleasure. The new batch of
papers turned out to be a correspondence between the Fifth Earl and a
number of prominent Whigs regarding the enclosure, for his benefit, of
three thousand acres of common land in Nottinghamshire. Jeremy slipped
them into a file, wrote a brief preliminary description of the contents
on a card, put the file in a cupboard and the card in its cabinet, and,
dipping again into the bran pie, reached down for another bundle. He cut
the string. “You are my honey, honey, honeysuckle, I am the bee.” What
would Dr. Freud have thought of that, he wondered? Anonymous pamphlets
against deism were a bore; he threw them aside. But here was a copy of
Law’s “Serious Call” with manuscript notes by Edward Gibbon; and here
were some accounts rendered to the Fifth Earl by Mr. Rogers of
Liverpool; accounts of the expenses and profits of three slave trading
expeditions which the earl had helped to finance. The second voyage, it
appeared, had been particularly auspicious; less than a fifth of the
cargo had perished on the way, and the prices realized at Savannah were
gratifyingly high. Mr. Rogers begged to enclose his draft for seventeen
thousand two hundred and twenty-four pounds, eleven shillings and
fourpence. Written from Venice, in Italian, another letter announced to
the same Fifth Earl the appearance upon the market of a half length Mary
Magdalen by Titian, at a price which his correspondent described as
derisory. Other offers had already been made; but out of respect for the
not less learned than illustrious English cognoscente, the vendor would
wait until a reply had been received from his lordship. In spite of
which, his lordship would be well advised not to delay too long; for
otherwise . . .

It was five o’clock; the sun was low in the sky. Dressed in white shoes
and socks, white shorts, a yachting cap and a pink silk sweater,
Virginia had come to see the feeding of the baboons.

Its engine turned off, her rose-coloured motor scooter stood parked at
the side of the road thirty or forty feet above the cage. In company
with Dr. Obispo and Pete, she had gone down to have a closer look at the
animals.

Just opposite the point at which they were standing, on a shelf of
artificial rock, sat a baboon mother, holding in her arms the withered
and disintegrating corpse of the baby she would not abandon even though
it had been dead for a fortnight. Every now and then, with an intense,
automatic affection, she would lick the little cadaver. Tufts of
greenish fur and even pieces of skin detached themselves under the
vigorous action of her tongue. Delicately, with black fingers, she would
pick the hairs out of her mouth, then begin again. Above her, at the
mouth of a little cave, two young males suddenly got into a fight. The
air was filled with screams and barks and the gnashing of teeth. Then
one of the two combatants ran away and, in a moment, the other had
forgotten all about the fight and was searching for pieces of dandruff
on his chest. To the right, on another shelf of rock a formidable old
male, leather-snouted, with the grey bobbed hair of a
seventeenth-century Anglican divine, stood guard over his submissive
female. It was a vigilant watch; for if she ventured to move without his
leave, he turned and bit her; and meanwhile the small black eyes, the
staring nostrils at the end of the truncated snout, kept glancing this
way and that with an unsleeping suspicion. From the basket he was
carrying, Pete threw a potato in his direction, then a carrot and
another potato. With a vivid flash of magenta buttocks the old baboon
darted down from his perch on the artificial mountain, seized the carrot
and, while he was eating it, stuffed one potato into his left cheek, the
other into the right; then, still biting at the carrot, advanced towards
the wire and looked up for more. The coast was clear. The young male,
who had been looking for dandruff suddenly saw his opportunity.
Chattering with excitement, he bounded down to the shelf on which, too
frightened to follow her master, the little female was still squatting.
Within ten seconds they had begun to copulate.

Virginia clapped her hands with pleasure. “Aren’t they cute!” she cried.
“Aren’t they human!

Another burst of screaming and barking almost drowned her words.

Pete interrupted his distribution of food to say that it was a long
while since he had seen Mr. Propter. Why shouldn’t they all go down the
hill and pay a call on him.

“From the monkey cage to the Propter paddock,” said Dr. Obispo, “and
from the Propter paddock back to the Stoyte house and the Maunciple
kennel. What do you say, angel?”

Virginia was throwing potatoes to the old male—throwing them in such a
way as to induce him to turn, to retrace his steps towards the shelf on
which he had left his female. Her hope was that, if she got him to go
back far enough, he’d see how the girl friend passed the time when he
was away. “Yes, let’s go and see old Proppy,” she said, without turning
round. She tossed another potato into the enclosure. With a flutter of
grey bobbed hair the baboon pounced on it; but instead of looking up and
catching Mrs. B. having her romance with the ice-man, the exasperating
animal immediately turned round towards the wire, asking for more.
“Stupid old fool!” Virginia shouted and this time threw the potato
straight at him; it caught him on the nose. She laughed and turned
towards the others. “I like old Proppy,” she said. “He scares me a bit;
but I like him.”

“All right then,” said Dr. Obispo, “let’s go and rout out Mr. Pordage,
while we’re about it.”

“Yes, let’s go and fetch old Ivory,” Virginia agreed, patting her own
auburn curls in reference to Jeremy’s baldness. “He’s kind of cute,
don’t you think?”

Leaving Pete to go on with the feeding of the baboons, they climbed back
to the road and up a flight of steps on the further side, leading
directly to the rock-cut windows of Jeremy’s room. Virginia pushed open
the glass door.

“Ivory,” she called, “we’ve come to disturb you.”

Jeremy began to murmur something humorously gallant; then broke off in
the middle of a sentence. He had suddenly remembered that pile of
curious literature on the corner of the table. To get up and put the
books into a cupboard would be to invite attention to them; he had no
newspaper with which to cover them, no other books to mix them up with.
There was nothing to be done. Nothing, except to hope for the best.
Fervently he hoped for it; and almost immediately the worst happened.
Idly, out of the need to perform some muscular action, however
pointless, Virginia picked up a volume of Nerciat, opened it on one of
its conscientiously detailed engravings, looked, then with wider eyes
looked again and let out a whoop of startled excitement. Dr. Obispo
glanced and yelled in turn; then both broke out into enormous laughter.

Jeremy sat in a misery of embarrassment, sicklily smiling, while they
asked him if that was how he spent his time, if this was the sort of
thing he was studying. If only people weren’t so wearisome, he was
thinking, so deplorably unsubtle!

Virginia turned over the pages until she found another illustration.
Once more, there was an outcry of delight, astonishment and, this time,
incredulity. Was it possible? Could it really be done? She spelled out
the caption under the engraving: “La volupté frappait à toutes les
portes”; then petulantly shook her head. It was no good; she couldn’t
understand it. Those French lessons at high school—just lousy; that was
all you could say about them. They hadn’t taught her anything except a
lot of nonsense about le crayon de mon oncle and savez-vous planter le
chou. She’d always said that studying was mostly a waste of time; this
proved it. And why did they have to print this stuff in French anyhow?
At the thought that the deficiencies in the educational system of the
State of Oregon might for ever prevent her from reading Andréa de
Nerciat, the tears came into Virginia’s eyes. It was really too bad!

A brilliant idea occurred to Jeremy. Why shouldn’t he offer to translate
the book for her—viva voce and sentence by sentence, like an interpreter
at a Council Meeting of the League of Nations? Yes, why not? The more he
thought of it, the better the idea seemed to him to be. His decision was
made and he had begun to consider how most felicitously to phrase his
offer, when Dr. Obispo quietly took the volume Virginia was hold ing,
picked up the three companion volumes from the table, along with “Le
Portier des Carmes” and the “Cent-Vingt Jours de Sodome” and slipped the
entire collection into the side pocket of his jacket.

“Don’t worry,” he said to Virginia. “I’ll translate them for you. And
now let’s go back to the baboons. Pete’ll be wondering what’s happened
to us. Come on, Mr. Pordage.”

In silence, but boiling inwardly with self-reproach for his own
inefficiency and indignation at the doctor’s impudence, Jeremy followed
them out of the French window and down the steps.

Pete had emptied his basket and was leaning against the wire, intently
following with his eyes the movements of the animals within. At their
approach he turned towards them. His pleasant young face was bright with
excitement.

“Do you know, doc,” he said, “I believe it’s working.”

“What’s working?” asked Virginia.

Pete’s answering smile was beautiful with happiness. For, oh, how happy
he was! Doubly and trebly happy. By the sweetness of her subsequent
behaviour, Virginia had more than made up for the pain she had inflicted
by turning away to listen to that smutty story. And after all it
probably wasn’t a smutty story; he had been maligning her, thinking
gratuitous evil of her. No, it certainly hadn’t been a smutty story—not
smutty because, when she turned back to him, her face had looked like
the face of that child in the illustrated Bible at home, that child who
was gazing so innocently and cutely while Jesus said, “Of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven.” And that was not the only reason for his happiness.
He was happy, too, because it looked as though those cultures of the
carp’s intestinal flora were really having an effect on the baboons they
had tried them on.

“I believe they’re livelier,” he explained. “And their fur—it’s kind of
glossier.”

The fact gave him almost as great a satisfaction as did Virginia’s
presence here in the transfiguring richness of the evening sunlight, as
did the memory of her sweetness, the uplifting conviction of her
essential innocence. Indeed, in some obscure way, the rejuvenation of
the baboons and Virginia’s adorableness seemed to him to have a profound
connexion—a connexion not only with one another, but also and at the
same time with Loyalist Spain and Anti-Fascism. Three separate things,
and yet one thing. There was a bit of poetry he had been made to learn
at school—how did it go?

I could not love thee, dear, so much,

Loved I not something or other (he could not at the moment remember
what) more.

He did not love anything more than Virginia. But the fact that he cared
so enormously much for science and justice, for this research and the
boys back in Spain, did something to make his love for her more profound
and, though it seemed a paradox, more whole-hearted.

“Well, what about moving on?” he suggested at last.

Dr. Obispo looked at his wrist watch. “I’d forgotten,” he said, “I’ve
got some letters I ought to write before dinner. Guess I’ll have to see
Mr. Propter some other time.”

“That’s too bad!” Pete did his best to impart to his tone and expression
the cordiality of regret he did not feel. In fact, he was delighted. He
admired Dr. Obispo, thought him a remarkable research worker—but not the
sort of person a young innocent girl like Virginia ought to associate
with. He dreaded for her the influence of so much cynicism and
hard-boiledness. Besides, so far as his own relations to Virginia were
concerned, Dr. Obispo was always in the way. “That’s too bad,” he
repeated, and the intensity of his pleasure was such that he fairly ran
up the steps leading from the baboon-enclosure to the drive—ran so fast
that his heart began palpitating and missing beats. Damn that rheumatic
fever!

Dr. Obispo stepped back to allow Virginia to pass and, as he did so,
gave a little tap to the pocket containing “Les Cent-Vingt Jours de
Sodome” and tipped her a wink. Virginia winked back and followed Pete up
the steps.

A few moments later Dr. Obispo was walking up the drive, the others
down. Or to be more exact, Pete-and Jeremy were walking, while Virginia,
to whom the idea of using one’s legs to get from anywhere to anywhere
else was practically unthinkable, sat on her
strawberry-and-cream-coloured scooter and, with one hand affectionately
laid on Pete’s shoulder, allowed herself to be carried down by the force
of gravity.

The noise of the baboons faded behind them, and at the next turn of the
road there was Giambologna’s nymph, still indefatigably spouting from
her polished breasts. Virginia suddenly interrupted a conversation about
Clark Gable to say, in the righteously indignant tone of a vice
crusader: “I just can’t figure why Uncle Jo allows that thing to stand
there. It’s disgusting!”

“Disgusting?” Jeremy echoed in astonishment.

“Disgusting!” she repeated emphatically.

“Do you object to her not having any clothes on?” he asked, remembering,
as he did so, those two little satin asymptotes to nudity which she
herself had worn up there, in the swimming pool.

She shook her head impatiently. “It’s the way the water comes out.” She
made the grimace of one who had tasted something revolting. “I think
it’s horrible.”

“But why?” Jeremy insisted.

“Because it’s horrible,” was all the explanation she could give. A child
of her age, which was the age, in this context, of bottle-feeding and
contraception, she felt herself outraged by this monstrous piece of
indelicacy from an earlier time. It was just horrible; that was all that
could be said about it. Turning back to Pete, she went on talking about
Clark Gable.

Opposite the entrance to the Grotto, Virginia parked her scooter. The
masons had finished their work on the tomb and were gone; the place was
empty. Virginia straightened her rakishly tilted yachting cap as a sign
of respect; then ran up the steps, paused on the threshold to cross
herself, and, entering, knelt for a few moments before the image. The
others waited silently, in the roadway.

“Our Lady was so wonderful to me when I had sinus trouble last summer,”
Virginia explained to Jeremy when she emerged again. “That’s why I got
Uncle Jo to make this Grotto for Her. Wasn’t it gorgeous when the
Archbishop came for the consecration!” she added, turning to Pete.

Pete nodded affirmatively.

“I haven’t even had a cold since She’s been here,” Virginia went on, as
she took her seat on the scooter. Her face fairly shone with triumph;
every victory for the Queen of Heaven was also a personal success for
Virginia Maunciple. Then abruptly and without warning, as though she
were doing a screen test and had received the order to register fatigue
and self-pity, she passed a hand across her forehead, sighed profoundly
and, in a tone of utter dejection and discouragement, said, “All the
same, I’m feeling pretty tired this evening. Guess I was in the sun too
much right after lunch. Maybe I’d better go and lie down a bit,” And
affectionately but very firmly rejecting Pete’s offer to go back with
her to the castle, she wheeled her scooter round, so that it faced
uphill, gave the young man a last, particularly charming, almost amorous
smile and look, said, “Good-bye, Pete darling,” and, opening the
throttle of the engine, shot off with gathering momentum and an
accelerating roll of explosions up the steep curving road, out of sight.
Five minutes later she was in her boudoir, fixing a chocolate and banana
split at the soda fountain. Seated in a gilded armchair upholstered in
satin couleur fesse de nymphe, Dr. Obispo was reading aloud and
translating as he went along from the first volume of “Les Cent-Vingt
Jours.”


Chapter VIII

MR. PROPTER was sitting on a bench under the largest of his eucalyptus
trees. To the west the mountains were already a flat silhouette against
the evening sky, but in front of him, to the north the upper slopes were
still alive with light and shadow, with rosy gold and depths of indigo.
In the foreground, the castle had put on a garment of utterly improbable
splendour and romance. Mr. Propter looked at it and at the hills and up
through the motionless leaves of the eucalyptus at the pale sky; then
closed his eyes and noiselessly repeated Cardinal Bérulle’s answer to
the question: What is man? It was more than thirty years before, when he
was writing his study of the Cardinal, that he had first read those
words. They had impressed him even then by the splendour and precision
of their eloquence. With the lapse of time and the growth of his
experience they had come to seem more than eloquent, had come to take on
ever richer connotations, ever profounder significances. “What is man?”
he whispered to himself. “Cest un niant environné de Dieu, indigent de
Dieu, capable de Dieu, et rempli de Dieu, s’il veut.” A nothingness
surrounded by God; indigent and capable of God, filled with God if he so
desires. And what is this God of which men are capable? Mr. Propter
answered with the definition given by John Tauler in the first paragraph
of his “Following of Christ”: “God is a being withdrawn from creatures,
a free power, a pure working.” Man, then, is as nothingness surrounded
by, and indigent of, a being withdrawn from creatures, a nothingness
capable of free power, filled with a pure working if he so desires. If
he so desires, Mr. Propter was distracted into reflecting, with a sudden
but rather bitter sadness. But how few men ever do desire or, desiring,
ever know what to wish for or how to get it! Right knowledge is hardly
less rare than the sustained good will to act on it. Of those few who
look for God, most find, through ignorance, only such reflections of
their own self-will as the God of battles, the God of the chosen people,
the Prayer-Answerer, the Saviour.

Having deviated thus far into negativity, Mr. Propter was led on,
through a continuing failure of vigilance, into an even less profitable
preoccupation with the concrete and particular miseries of the day. He
remembered his interview that morning, with Hansen, who was the agent
for Jo Stoyte’s estates in the valley. Hansen’s treatment of the
migrants who came to pick the fruit was worse even than the average. He
had taken advantage of their number and their desperate need to force
down wages. In the groves he managed, young children were being made to
work all day in the sun at the rate of two or three cents an hour. And
when the day’s work was finished, the homes to which they returned were
a row of verminous sties in the waste land beside the bed of the river.
For these sties, Hansen was charging a rent of ten dollars a month. Ten
dollars a month for the privilege of freezing or suffocating; of
sleeping in a filthy promiscuity; of being eaten up by bed bugs and
lice; of picking up ophthalmia and perhaps hookworm and amoebic
dysentery. And yet Hansen was a very decent, kindly man. One who would
be shocked and indignant if he saw you hurting a dog; one who would fly
to the protection of a maltreated woman or a crying child. When Mr.
Propter drew this fact to his attention, Hansen had flushed darkly with
anger.

“That’s different,” he had said.

Mr. Propter had tried to find out why it was different.

It was his duty, Hansen had said.

But how could it be his duty to treat children worse than slaves and
inoculate them with hookworm?

It was his duty to the estates. He wasn’t doing anything for himself.

But why should doing wrong for someone else be different from doing
wrong on your own behalf? The results were exactly the same in either
case. The victims didn’t suffer any less when you were doing what you
called your duty than when you were acting in what you imagined might be
your own interest.

This time the anger had exploded in violent abuse. It was the anger, Mr.
Propter had perceived, of the well-meaning but stupid man who is
compelled against his will to ask himself indiscreet questions about
what he has been doing as a matter of course. He doesn’t want to ask
these questions because he knows that if he does he will be forced
either to go on with what he is doing, but with the cynic’s awareness
that he is doing wrong, or else, if he doesn’t want to be a cynic, to
change the entire pattern of his life so as to bring his desire to do
right into harmony with the real facts as revealed in the course of
self-interrogation. To most people radical change is even more odious
than cynicism. The only way between the horns of the dilemma is to
persist at all costs in the ignorance which permits one to go on doing
wrong in the comforting belief that by doing so one is accomplishing
one’s duty—one’s duty to the company, to the shareholders, to the
family, the city, the state, the fatherland, the Church. For, of course,
poor Hansen’s case wasn’t in any way unique; on a smaller scale and
therefore with less power to do evil, he was acting like all those civil
servants and statesmen and prelates, who go through life, spreading
misery and destruction, in the name of their ideals and under orders
from their categorical imperatives.

Well, he hadn’t got very far with Hansen, Mr. Propter sadly concluded.
He’d have to try again with Jo Stoyte. In the past, Jo had always
refused to listen, on the ground that the estates were Hansen’s
business. The alibi was so convenient that it would be hard, he foresaw,
to break it down.

From Hansen and Jo Stoyte his thoughts wandered to that newly arrived
family of transients from Kansas, to whom he had given one of his
cabins. The three undernourished children, with the teeth already
rotting in their mouths; the woman, emaciated by God knew what
complication of diseases, deep-sunken already in apathy and weakness;
the husband alternately resentful and self-pitying, violent and morose.

He had gone with the man to get some vegetables from the garden plots
and a rabbit for the family supper. Sitting there, skinning the rabbit,
he had had to listen to outbursts of incoherent complaint and
indignation. Complaint and indignation against the wheat market, which
had broken each time he had begun to do well. Against the banks he had
borrowed money from and been unable to repay. Against the droughts and
winds that had reduced his farm to a hundred and sixty acres of dust and
wilderness. Against the luck that had always been against him. Against
the folks who had treated him so meanly, everywhere, all his life.

Dismally familiar story! With inconsiderable variations, he had heard it
a thousand times before. Sometimes they were sharecroppers from further
south, dispossessed by the owners in a desperate effort to make the
farming pay. Sometimes, like this man, they had owned their own place
and been dispossessed, not by financiers, but by the forces of
nature—forces of nature which they themselves had made destructive by
tearing up the grass and planting nothing but wheat. Sometimes they had
been hired men, displaced by the tractors. All of them had come to
California as to a promised land; and California had already reduced
them to a condition of wandering peonage and was fast transforming them
into Untouchables. Only a saint, Mr. Propter reflected, only a saint
could be a peon and a pariah with impunity, because only a saint would
accept the position gladly and as though he had chosen it of his own
free will. Poverty and suffering ennoble only when they are voluntary.
By involuntary poverty and suffering men are made worse. It is easier
for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for an
involuntarily poor man to enter the kingdom of heaven. Here, for
example, was this poor devil from Kansas. How had he reacted to
involuntary poverty and suffering? So far as Mr. Propter could judge, he
was compensating himself for his misfortunes by brutality to those
weaker than himself. The way he yelled at the children ... It was an all
too familiar symptom.

When the rabbit was skinned and gutted, Mr. Propter had interrupted his
companion’s monologue.

“Do you know which is the stupidest text in the Bible?” he had suddenly
asked.

Startled and evidently a bit shocked, the man from Kansas had shaken his
head.

“It’s this,” Mr, Propter had said, as he got up and handed him the
carcass of the rabbit. “ ‘They hated me without a cause.’ ”

Under the eucalyptus tree, Mr. Propter wearily sighed. Pointing out to
unfortunate people that, in part at any rate, they were pretty certainly
responsible for their own misfortunes; explaining to them that ignorance
and stupidity are no less severely punished by the nature of things than
deliberate malice—these were never agreeable tasks. Never agreeable,
but, so far as he could see, always necessary. For what hope, he asked
himself, what faintest glimmer of hope is there for a man who really
believes that “they hated me without a cause” and that he had no part in
his own disasters? Obviously, no hope whatever. We see, as a matter of
brute fact, that disasters and hatreds are never without causes; we also
see that some at least of those causes are generally under the control
of the people who suffer the disasters or are the object of the hatred.
In some measure they are directly or indirectly responsible. Directly,
by the commission of stupid or malicious acts. Indirectly, by the
omission to be as intelligent and compassionate as they might be. And if
they make this omission, it is generally because they choose to conform
unthinkingly to local standards, and the current way of living. Mr.
Propter’s thoughts returned to the poor fellow from Kansas.
Self-righteous, no doubt disagreeable to the neighbours, an incompetent
farmer; but that wasn’t the whole story. His gravest offence had been to
accept the world in which he found himself as normal, rational and
right. Like all the others he had allowed the advertisers to multiply
his wants; he had learnt to equate happiness with possessions, and
prosperity, with money to spend in a shop. Like all the others, he had
abandoned any idea of subsistence farming to think exclusively in terms
of a cash crop; and he had gone on thinking in those terms, even when
the crop no longer gave him any cash. Then, like all the others, he had
got into debt with the banks. And finally, like all the others, he had
learnt that what the experts had been saying for a generation was
perfectly true: in a semi-arid country, it is grass that holds down the
soil; tear up the grass, the soil will go. In due course, it had gone.

The man from Kansas was now a peon and a pariah; and the experience was
making a worse man of him.

St. Peter Claver was another of the historical personages to whom Mr.
Propter had devoted a study. When the slave ships came into the harbour
of Cartagena, Peter Claver was the only white man to venture down into
the holds. There, in the unspeakable stench and heat, in the vapours of
pus and excrement, he tended the sick, he dressed the ulcers of those
whom their manacles had wounded, he held in his arms the men who had
given way to despair and spoke to them words of comfort and
affection—and in the intervals talked to them about their sins. Their
sins! The modern humanitarian would laugh, if he were not shocked. And
yet—such was the conclusion to which Mr. Propter had gradually and
reluctantly come—and yet St. Peter Claver was probably right. Not
completely right, of course; for acting on wrong knowledge, no man,
however well intentioned, can be more than partially right. But as
nearly right, at any rate, as a good man with a counter-reformation
Catholic philosophy could expect to be. Right in insisting that,
whatever the circumstances in which he finds himself, a human being
always has omissions to make good, commissions whose effects must if
possible be neutralized. Right in believing that it is well even for the
most brutally sinned against to be reminded of their own shortcomings.

Peter Claver’s conception of the world had the defect of being
erroneous, but the merit of being simple and dramatic. Given a personal
God, dispenser of forgiveness; given heaven and hell and the absolute
reality of human personalities; given the meritoriousness of mere good
intentions and of unquestioning faith in a set of incorrect opinions;
given the one true Church, the efficacy of priestly mediation, the magic
of sacraments—given all these, it was really quite easy to convince even
a newly imported slave of his sinfulness and to explain exactly what he
ought to do about it. But if there is no single inspired book, no
uniquely holy Church, no mediating priesthood nor sacramental magic; if
there is no personal God to be placated into forgiving offences; if
there are, even in the moral world, only causes and effects and the
enormous complexity of interrelationships—then clearly, the task of
telling people what to do about their shortcomings is much more
difficult. For every individual is called on to display not only
unsleeping good will but also unsleeping intelligence. And this is not
all. For, if individuality is not absolute, if personalities are
illusory figments of a self-will disastrously blind to the reality of a
more-than-personal consciousness, of which it is the limitation and
denial, then all of every human being’s efforts must be directed, in the
last resort, to the actualization of that more-than-personal
consciousness. So that even intelligence is not sufficient as an adjunct
to good will; there must also be the recollection which seeks to
transform and transcend intelligence. Many are called, but few are
chosen—because few even know in what salvation consists. Con sider again
this man from Kansas . . . Mr. Propter sadly shook his head. Everything
was against the poor fellow—his fundamentalist orthodoxy, his wounded
and inflamed egotism, his nervous irritability, his low intelligence.
The first three disadvantages might perhaps be removed. But could
anything be done about the fourth? The nature of things is implacable
towards weakness. “From him that hath not shall be taken away even that
which he hath.” And what were those words of Spinoza’s? “A man may be
excusable and nevertheless be tormented in many ways. A horse is
excusable for not being a man; but nevertheless he must needs be a
horse, and not a man.” All the same, there must surely be something to
be done for people like the man from Kansas—something that didn’t entail
telling harmful untruths about the nature of things. The untruth, for
example, that there is a person up aloft or the other more modern
untruth to the effect that human values are absolute and that God is the
nation or the party or the human race as a whole. Surely, Mr. Propter
insisteo surely, there was something to be done for such people The man
from Kansas had begun by resenting what ht had said about the chain of
cause and effect, the network of relationships—resenting it as a
personal insult. But afterwards, when he saw that he was not being
blamed, that no attempt was being made to come it over him, he had begun
to take an interest, to see that after all there was something in it.
Little by little it might be possible to make him think a bit more
realistically at least about the world of everyday life, the outside
world of appearances. And when he had done that, then it mightn’t be so
overwhelmingly difficult for him to think a bit more realistically about
himself—to conceive of that all-important ego of his as a fiction, a
kind of nightmare, a frantically agitated nothingness capable, when once
its frenzy had been quieted, of being filled with God, with a God
conceived and experienced as a more than personal consciousness, as a
free power, a pure working, a being withdrawn. . . . Suddenly, as he
thus returned to his starting point, Mr. Propter became aware of the
long, circuitous, unprofitable way he had travelled in order to reach
it. He had come to this bench under the eucalyptus tree in order to
recollect himself, in order to realize for a moment the existence of
that other consciousness behind his private thoughts and feelings, that
free, pure power greater than his own. He had come for this; but
memories had slipped in while he was off his guard; speculations had
started up, cloud upon cloud, like sea-birds rising from their nesting
place to darken and eclipse the sun. Bondage is the life of personality,
and for bondage the personal self will fight with tireless
resourcefulness and the most stubborn cunning. The price of freedom is
eternal vigilance; and he had failed to be vigilant. It wasn’t a case,
he reflected ruefully, of the spirit being willing and the flesh weak.
That was altogether the wrong antithesis. The spirit is always willing;
but the person, who is a mind as well as a body, is always unwilling—and
the person, incidentally, is not weak but extremely strong.

He looked again at the mountains, at the pale sky between the leaves, at
the soft russet pinks and purples and greys of the eucalyptus trunks;
then shut his eyes once more.

“A nothingness surrounded by God, indigent of God, capable of God and
filled with God if man so desires.” And what is God? A being withdrawn
from creatures, a free power, a pure working. His vigilance gradually
ceased to be an act of the will, a deliberate thrusting back of
irrelevant personal thoughts and wishes and feelings. For little by
little these thoughts and wishes and feelings had settled like a muddy
sediment in a jar of water, and as they settled, his vigilance was free
to transform itself into a kind of effortless unattached awareness, at
once intense and still, alert and passive—an awareness whose object was
the words he had spoken and at the same time that which surrounded the
words. But that which surrounded the words was the awareness itself; for
this vigilance which was now an effortless awareness—what was it but an
aspect, a partial expression, of that impersonal and untroubled
consciousness into which the words had been dropped and through which
they were slowly sinking? And as they sank they took a new significance
for the awareness that was following them down into the depths of
itself—a significance new not in respect to the entities connoted by the
words, but rather in the mode of their comprehension, which, from being
intellectual in character, had become intuitive and direct, so that the
nature of man in his potentiality and of God in actuality was realized
by an analogue of sensuous experience, by a kind of unmediated
participation. The busy nothingness of his being experienced itself as
transcended in the felt capacity for peace and purity, for the
withdrawal from revulsions and desires, for the blissful freedom from
personality. . . .

The sound of approaching footsteps made him open his eyes. Peter Boone
and that Englishman he had sat with in the car were advancing up the
path towards his seat under the eucalyptus trees. Mr. Propter raised his
hand in welcome and smiled. He was fond of young Pete. There was native
intelligence there and native kindliness; there was sensitiveness,
generosity, a spontaneous decency of impulse and reaction. Charming and
beautiful qualities! The pity was that by themselves and undirected as
they were by a right knowledge of the nature of things, they should be
so impotent for good, so inadequate to anything a reasonable man could
call salvation. Fine gold, but still in the ore, unsmelted, unworked.
Some day, perhaps, the boy would learn to use his gold. He would have to
wish to learn first—and wish also to unlearn a lot of things he now
regarded as self-evident and right. It would be hard for him, as hard,
but for other reasons, as it would be for that poor fellow from Kansas.

“Well, Pete,” he called, “come and sit with me here. And you’ve brought
Mr. Pordage; that’s good.” He moved to the middle of the bench so that
they could sit, one on either side of him. “And did you meet the Ogre?”
he said to Jeremy, pointing in the direction of the castle.

Jeremy made a grimace and nodded. “I remembered the name you used to
call him at school,” he said. “That made it a little easier.”

“Poor Jo,” said Mr. Propter. “Fat people are always supposed to be so
happy. But who ever enjoyed being laughed at? That jolly manner they
sometimes have, and the jokes they make at their own expense—it’s just a
case of alibis and prophylactics. They vaccinate themselves with their
own ridicule so that they shan’t react too violently to other people’s.”

Jeremy smiled. He knew all about that. “It’s a good way out of an
unpleasant predicament,” he said.

Mr. Propter nodded. “But unfortunately,” he said, “it didn’t happen to
be Jo’s way. Jo was the kind of fat boy who bluffs it out. The kind that
fights. The kind that bullies or patronizes. The kind that boasts and
shows off. The kind that buys popularity by treating the girls to
ice-creams, even if he has to steal a dime from his grandmother’s purse
to do it. The kind that goes on stealing, even if he’s found out and
gets beaten and believes it when they tell him he’ll go to hell. Poor
Jo, he’s been that sort of fat boy all his life.” He pointed once again
in the direction of the castle. “That’s his monument to a faulty
pituitary. And talking of pituitaries,” he went on, turning to Pete,
“how’s the work been going?”

Pete had been thinking gloomily of Virginia—wondering for the hundredth
time why she had left them, whether he had done anything to offend her,
whether she was really tired or if there might be some other reason. At
Mr. Propter’s mention of work, he looked up, and his face brightened.
“It’s going just fine,” he answered and, in quick eager phrases,
strangely compounded of slang and technical terms, he told Mr. Propter
about the results they had already got with their mice and were
beginning to get, so it seemed, with the baboons and the dogs.

“And if you succeed,” Mr. Propter asked, “what happens to your dogs?”

“Why, their life’s prolonged,” Pete answered triumphantly.

“Yes, yes, I know that,” said the older man. “What I meant to ask was
something different. A dog’s a wolf that hasn’t fully developed. It’s
more like the foetus of a wolf than an adult wolf; isn’t that so?”

Pete nodded.

“In other words,” Mr. Propter went on, “it’s a mild, tractable animal
because it has never grown up into savagery. Isn’t that supposed to be
one of the mechanisms of evolutionary development?”

Pete nodded again. “There’s a kind of glandular equilibrium,” he
explained. “Then a mutation comes along and knocks it sideways. You get
a new equilibrium that happens to retard the development rate. You grow
up; but you do it so slowly that you’re dead before you’ve stopped being
like your great-great-grandfather’s foetus.”

“Exactly,” said Mr. Propter. “So what happens if you prolong the life of
an animal that has evolved that way?”

Pete laughed and shrugged his shoulders. “Guess we’ll have to wait and
see,” he said.

“It would be a bit disquieting,” said Mr. Propter, “if your dogs grew
back in the process of growing up.”

Pete laughed again delightedly. “Think of the dowagers being chased by
their own Pekinese,” he said.

Mr. Propter looked at him curiously and was silent for a moment, as
though waiting to see whether Pete would make any further comment. The
comment did not come. “I’m glad you feel so happy about it,” he said.
Then, turning to Jeremy, “It is not, if I remember rightly, Mr.
Pordage,” he went on, “it is not growing like a tree in bulk doth make
men better be.”

“Or standing long an oak, three hundred years,” said Jeremy, smiling
with the pleasure which an apt quotation always gave him.

“What shall we all be doing at three hundred?” Mr. Propter speculated.
“Do you suppose you’d still be a scholar and a gentleman?”

Jeremy coughed and patted his bald head. “One will certainly have
stopped being a gentleman,” he answered. “One’s begun to stop even now,
thank heaven.”

“But the scholar will stay the course?”

“There’s a lot of books in the British Museum.”

“And you, Pete?” said Mr. Propter. “Do you suppose you’ll still be doing
scientific research?”

“Why not? What’s to prevent you from going on with it for ever?” the
young man answered emphatically.

“For ever?” Mr. Propter repeated. “You don’t think you’d get a bit
bored? One experiment after another. Or one book after another,” he
added in an aside to Jeremy. “In general, one damned thing after
another. You don’t think that would prey on your mind a bit?”

“I don’t see why,” said Pete.

“Time doesn’t bother you, then?”

Pete shook his head. “Why should it?”

“Why shouldn’t it?” said Mr. Propter, smiling at him with an amused
affection. “Time’s a pretty bothersome thing, you know.”

“Not if you aren’t scared of dying or growing old.”

“Yes, it is,” Mr. Propter insisted; “even if you’re not scared. It’s
nightmarish in itself—intrinsically nightmarish, if you see what I
mean.”

“Intrinsically?” Pete looked at him perplexed. “I don’t get it,” he
said. “Intrinsically nightmarish . . . ?”

“Nightmarish in the present tense, of course,” Jeremy put in. “But if
one takes it in the fossil state—in the form of the Hauberk Papers, for
example . . .” He left the sentence unfinished.

“Oh, pleasant enough,” said Mr. Propter, agreeing with his implied
conclusion. “But after all, history isn’t the real thing. Past time is
only evil at a distance; and, of course, the study of past time is
itself a process in time. Cataloguing bits of fossil evil can never be
more than an ersatz for the experience of eternity.” He glanced
curiously at Pete, wondering how the boy would respond to what he was
saying. Plunging like this into the heart of the matter, beginning at
the very core and centre of the mystery—it was risky; there was a danger
of evoking nothing but bewilderment, or alternatively nothing but angry
derision. Pete’s, he could see, was more nearly the first reaction; but
it was a bewilderment that seemed to be tempered by interest; he looked
as though he wanted to find out what it was all about.

Meanwhile, Jeremy had begun to feel that this conversation was taking a
most undesirable turn. “What precisely are we supposed to be talking
about?” he asked acidulously. “The New Jerusalem?”

Mr. Propter smiled at him good-humouredly. “It’s all right,” he said. “I
won’t say a word about harps or wings.”

“Well, that’s something,” said Jeremy.

“I never could get much satisfaction out of meaningless discourse,” Mr.
Propter continued. “I like the words I use to bear some relation to
facts. That’s why I’m interested in eternity—psychological eternity.
Because it’s a fact.”

“For you, perhaps,” said Jeremy in a tone which implied that more
civilized people didn’t suffer from these hallucinations.

“For any one who chooses to fulfil the conditions under which it can be
experienced.”

“And why should any one choose to fulfil them?”

“Why should any one choose to go to Athens to see the Parthenon? Because
it’s worth the bother. And the same is true of eternity. The experience
of timeless good is worth all the trouble it involves.”

“Timeless good,” Jeremy repeated with distaste. “I don’t know what the
words mean.”

“Why should you?” said Mr. Propter. “One doesn’t know the full meaning
of the word ‘Parthenon’ until one has actually seen the thing.”

“Yes, but at least I’ve seen photographs of the Parthenon; I’ve read
descriptions.”

“You’ve read descriptions of timeless good,” Mr. Propter answered.
“Dozens of them. In all the literatures of philosophy and religion.
You’ve read them; but you’ve never bought your ticket for Athens.”

In a resentful silence, Jeremy had to admit to himself that this was
true. The fact that it was true made him disapprove of the conversation
even more profoundly than he had done before.

“As for time,” Mr. Propter was saying to Pete, “what is it, in this
particular context, but the medium in which evil propagates itself, the
element in which evil lives and outside of which it dies? Indeed, it’s
more than the element of evil, more than merely its medium. If you carry
your analysis far enough, you’ll find that time is evil. One of the
aspects of its essential substance.”

Jeremy listened with growing discomfort and a mounting irritation. His
fears had been justified; the old boy was launching out into the worst
kind of theology. Eternity, timeless experience of good, time as the
substance of evil—it was bad enough, God knew, in books; but, fired at
you like this, point blank by somebody who really took it seriously,
why, it was really frightful. Why on earth couldn’t people live their
lives in a rational, civilized way? Why couldn’t they take things as
they came? Breakfast at nine, lunch at one-thirty, tea at five. And
conversation. And the daily walk with Mr. Gladstone, the Yorkshire
terrier. And the library; the Works of Voltaire in eighty-three volumes;
the inexhaustible treasure of Horace Walpole; and for a change the
“Divine Comedy”; and then in case you might be tempted to take the
Middle Ages too seriously, Salimbene’s autobiography and the “Miller’s
Tale.” And sometimes calls in the afternoon—the Rector, Lady Fredegond
with her ear trumpet, Mr. Veal. And political discussions—except that in
these last months, since the Anschluss and Munich one had found that
political discussion was one of the unpleasant things it was wise to
avoid. And the weekly journey to London, with lunch at the Reform, and
always dinner with old Thripp of the British Museum; and a chat with
one’s poor brother Tom at the Foreign Office (only that too was rapidly
becoming one of the things to be avoided). And then, of course, the
London Library, and Vespers at Westminster Cathedral, if they happened
to be singing Palestrina, and every alternate week, between five and
six-thirty, an hour and a half with Mae or Doris in their flat in Maida
Vale. Infinite squalor in a little room, as he liked to call it;
abysmally delightful. Those were the things that came; why couldn’t they
take them, quietly and sensibly? But no, they had to gibber about
eternity and all the rest. That sort of stuff always made Jeremy want to
be blasphemous—to ask whether God had a boyau rectum, to protest, like
the Japanese in the anecdote, that he was altogether flummoxed and
perplexed by position of Honourable Bird. But unfortunately, the present
was one of those peculiarly exasperating cases where such reactions were
out of place. For, after all, old Propter had written “Short Studies”;
what he said couldn’t just be dismissed as the vapourings of a deficient
mind. Besides, he hadn’t talked Christianity, so that jokes about
anthropomorphism were beside the point. It was really too exasperating!
He assumed an expression of haughty detachment and even started to hum
“The Honeysuckle and the Bee.” The impression he wanted to give was that
of a superior being who really couldn’t be expected to waste his time
listening to stuff like this.

A comic spectacle, Mr. Propter reflected as he looked at him; except, of
course, that it was so extremely depressing.


Chapter IX

“TIME and craving,” said Mr. Propter, “craving and time—two aspects of
the same thing; and that thing is the raw material of evil. So you see,
Pete,” he added in another tone, “you see what a queer sort of present
you’ll be making us, if you’re successful in your work. Another century
or so of time and craving. A couple of extra life-times of potential
evil.”

“And potential good,” the young man insisted with a note of protest in
his voice.

“And potential good,” Mr. Propter agreed. “But only at a far remove from
that extra time you’re giving us.”

“Why do you say that?” Pete asked.

“Because potential evil is in time; potential good isn’t. The longer you
live, the more evil you automatically come into contact with. Nobody
comes automatically into contact with good. Men don’t find more good by
merely existing longer. It’s curious,” he went on reflectively, “that
people should always have concentrated on the problem of evil.
Exclusively. As though the nature of good were something self-evident.
But it isn’t self-evident. There’s a problem of good at least as
difficult as the problem of evil.”

“And what’s the solution?” Pete asked.

“The solution is very simple and profoundly unacceptable. Actual good is
outside time.”

“Outside time? But then how . . . ?”

“I told you it was unacceptable,” said Mr. Propter.

“But if it’s outside time, then . . .”

“. . . then nothing within time can be actual good. Time is potential
evil, and craving converts the potentiality into actual evil. Whereas a
temporal act can never be more than potentially good, with a
potentiality, what’s more, that can’t be actualized except out of time.”

“But inside time, here—you know, just doing the ordinary things—hell! we
do sometimes do right. What acts are good?”

“Strictly speaking, none,” Mr. Propter answered. “But in practice, I
think one’s justified in applying the word to certain acts. Any act that
contributes towards the liberation of those concerned in it—I’d call it
a good act.”

“Liberation?” the young man repeated dubiously. The words, in his mind,
carried only economic and revolutionary connotations. But it was evident
that Mr. Propter wasn’t talking about the necessity for getting rid of
capitalism. “Liberation from what?”

Mr. Propter hesitated before replying. Should he go on with this? he
wondered. The Englishman was hostile; the time short; the boy himself
entirely ignorant. But it was an ignorance evidently mitigated by good
will and a touching nostalgia for perfection. He decided to take a
chance and go on.

“Liberation from time,” he said. “Liberation from craving and revulsion.
Liberation from personality.”

“But, heck,” said Pete, “you’re always talking about democracy. Doesn’t
that mean respecting personality?”

“Of course,” Mr. Propter agreed. “Respecting it in order that it may be
able to transcend itself. Slavery and fanaticism intensify the obsession
with time and evil and the self. Hence the value of democratic
institutions and a sceptical attitude of mind. The more you respect a
personality, the better its chance of discovering that all personality
is a prison. Potential good is anything that helps you to get out of
prison. Actualized good lies outside the prison, in timelessness, in the
state of pure, disinterested consciousness.”

“I’m not much good at abstractions,” said the young man. “Let’s take
some concrete examples. What about science, for instance? Is that good?”

“Good, bad and indifferent, according to how it’s pursued and what it’s
used for. Good, bad and indifferent, first of all, for the scientists
themselves—just as art and scholarship may be good, bad or indifferent
for artists and scholars. Good if it facilitates liberation; indifferent
if it neither helps nor hinders; bad if it makes liberation more
difficult by intensifying the obsession with personality. And, remember,
the apparent selflessness of the scientist, or the artist, is not
necessarily a genuine freedom from the bondage of personality.
Scientists and artists are men devoted to what we vaguely call an ideal.
But what is an ideal? An ideal is merely the projection, on an
enormously enlarged scale, of some aspect of personality.”

“Say that again,” Pete requested, while even Jeremy so far forgot his
pose of superior detachment to lend his most careful attention.

Mr. Propter said it again. “And that’s true,” he went on, “of every
ideal except the highest, which is the ideal of liberation—liberation
from personality, liberation from time and craving, liberation into
union with God, if you don’t object to the word, Mr. Pordage. Many
people do,” he added. “It’s one of the words that the Mrs. Grundys of
the intellect find peculiarly shocking. I always try to spare their
sensibilities, if I can. Well, to return to our idealist,” he continued,
glad to see that Jeremy had been constrained, in spite of himself, to
smile. “If he serves any ideal except the highest—whether it’s the
artist’s ideal of beauty, or the scientist’s ideal of truth, or the
humanitarian’s ideal of what currently passes for goodness—he’s not
serving God; he’s serving a magnified aspect of himself. He may be
completely devoted; but, in the last analysis, his devotion turns out to
be directed towards an aspect of his own personality. His apparent
selflessness is really not a liberation from his ego, but merely another
form of bondage. This means that science may be bad for scientists even
when it appears to be a deliverer. And the same holds good of art, of
scholarship, of humanitarianism.”

Jeremy thought nostalgically of his library at The Araucarias. Why
couldn’t this old madman be content to take things as they came?

“And what about other people?” Pete was saying. “People who aren’t
scientists. Hasn’t it helped to set them free?”

Mr. Propter nodded. “And it has also helped to tie them more closely to
themselves. And what’s more, I should guess that it has increased
bondage more than it has diminished it—and will tend to go on increasing
it, progressively.”

“How do you figure that out?”

“Through its applications,” Mr. Propter answered. “Applications to
warfare, first of all. Better planes, better explosives, better guns and
gases—every improvement increases the sum of fear and hatred, widens the
incidence of nationalistic hysteria. In other words, every improvement
in armaments makes it more difficult for people to escape from their
egos, more difficult to forget those horrible projections of themselves
they call their ideals of patriotism, heroism, glory and all the rest.
And even the less destructive applications of science aren’t really much
more satisfactory. For what do such applications result in? The
multiplication of possessable objects; the invention of new instruments
of stimulation; the disseminations of new wants through propaganda aimed
at equating possession with well-being and incessant stimulation with
happiness. But incessant stimulation from without is a source of
bondage; and so the preoccupation with possessions. And now you’re
threatening to prolong our lives, so that we can go on being stimulated,
go on desiring possessions, go on waving flags and hating our enemies
and being afraid of air attack—go on and on, generation after
generation, sinking deeper and deeper into the stinking slough of our
personality.” He shook his head. “No, I can’t quite share your optimism
about science.”

There was a silence while Pete debated with himself whether to ask Mr.
Propter about love. In the end he decided he wouldn’t. Virginia was too
sacred. (But why, why had she turned back at the Grotto? What could he
have said or done to offend her?) As much to prevent himself from
brooding over these problems as because he wanted to know the old man’s
opinions on the last of the three things that seemed to him supremely
valuable, he looked up at Mr. Propter and asked, “What about social
justice? I mean, take the French Revolution. Or Russia. And what about
this Spanish business—fighting for liberty and democracy against Fascist
aggression?” He had tried to remain perfectly calm and scientific about
the whole thing; but his voice trembled a little as he spoke the last
words. In spite of their familiarity (perhaps because of their
familiarity), phrases like “Fascist aggression” still had power to move
him to the depths.

“Napoleon came out of the French Revolution,” said Mr. Propter after a
moment’s silence. “German nationalism came out of Napoleon. The war of
1870 came out of German nationalism. The war of 1914 came out of the war
of 1870. Hitler came out of the war of 1914. Those are the bad results
of the French Revolution. The good results were the enfranchisement of
the French peasants and the spread of political democracy. Put the good
results in one scale of your balance and the bad ones in the other, and
try which set is the heavier. Then perform the same operation with
Russia. Put the abolition of Czardom and capitalism in one scale; and in
the other put Stalin, put the secret police, put the famines, put twenty
years of hardship for a hundred and fifty million people, put the
liquidation of intellectuals and Kulaks and old Bolsheviks, put the
hordes of slaves in prison camps; put the military conscription of
everybody, male and female, from childhood to old age, put the
revolutionary propaganda which spurred the bourgeoisie to invent
Fascism.” Mr. Propter shook his head. “Or take the fight for democracy
in Spain,” he went on. “There was a fight for democracy all over Europe
not so long ago. Rational prognosis can only be based on past
experience. Look at the results of 1914 and then ask yourself what
chance the Loyalists ever had of establishing a liberal regime at the
end of a long war. The others are winning; so we shall never have the
opportunity of seeing what circumstances and their own passions would
have driven those well-intentioned liberals to become.”

“But, hell!” Pete broke out, “what do you expect people to do when
they’re attacked by the Fascists? Sit down and let their throats be
cut?”

“Of course not,” said Mr. Propter. “I expect them to fight. And the
expectation is based on my previous knowledge of human behaviour. But
the fact that people generally do react to that kind of situation in
that kind of way doesn’t prove that it’s the best way of reacting.
Experience makes me expect that they’ll behave like that. But experience
also makes me expect that, if they do behave like that, the results will
be disastrous.”

“Well, how do you want us to act? Do you want us to sit still and do
nothing?”

“Not nothing,” said Mr. Propter. “Merely something appropriate.”

“But what is appropriate?”

“Not war, anyhow. Nor violent revolution. Nor yet politics, to any
considerable extent, I should guess.” “Then what?”

“That’s what we’ve got to discover. The main lines are clear enough. But
there’s still a lot of work to be done on the practical details.”

Pete was not listening. His mind had gone back to that time in Aragon,
when life had seemed supremely significant. “But those boys, back there
in Spain,” he burst out. “You didn’t know them, Mr. Propter. They were
wonderful, really they were. Never mean to you, and brave, and loyal and
. . . and everything.” He wrestled with the inadequacies of his
vocabulary, with the fear of making an exhibition of himself by talking
big, like a highbrow. “They weren’t living for themselves, I can tell
you that, Mr. Propter.” He looked into the old man’s face almost
supplicatingly, as though imploring him to believe. “They were living
for something much bigger than themselves—like what you were talking
about just now; you know, something more than just personal.”

“And what about Hitler’s boys?” Mr. Propter asked. “What about
Mussolini’s boys? What about Stalin’s boys? Do you suppose they’re not
just as brave, just as kind to one another, just as loyal to their cause
and just as firmly convinced that it’s the cause of justice, truth,
freedom, right and honour?” He looked at Pete inquiringly; but Pete said
nothing. “The fact that people have a lot of virtues,” Mr. Propter went
on, “doesn’t prove anything about the goodness of their actions. You can
have all the virtues—that’s to say, all except the two that really
matter, understanding and compassion—you can have all the others, I say,
and be a thoroughly bad man. Indeed, you can’t be really bad unless you
do have most of the virtues. Look at Milton’s Satan for example. Brave,
strong, generous, loyal, prudent, temperate, self-sacrificing. And let’s
give the dictators the credit that’s due to them; some of them are
nearly as virtuous as Satan. Not quite, I admit, but nearly. That’s why
they can achieve so much evil.”

His elbows on his knees, Pete sat in silence, frowning. “But that
feeling,” he said at last, “that feeling there was between us. You
know—the friendship; only it was more than just ordinary friendship. And
the feeling of being there all together—fighting for the same thing—and
the thing being worth while—and then the danger, and the rain, and that
awful cold at nights, and the heat in summer, and being thirsty, and
even those lice and the dirt—share and share alike in everything, bad or
good—and knowing that tomorrow it might be your turn, or one of the
other boys’—your turn for the field hospital (and the chances were they
wouldn’t have enough anaesthetics, except maybe for an amputation or
something like that) or your turn for the burial party. All those
feelings, Mr. Propter—I just can’t believe they didn’t mean something.”

“They meant themselves,” said Mr. Propter.

Jeremy saw the opportunity for a counter-attack and, with a promptitude
unusual in him, immediately took it. “Doesn’t the same thing apply to
your feelings about eternity, or whatever it is?” he asked.

“Of course it does,” said Mr. Propter.

“Well, in that case, how can you claim any validity for it? The feeling
means itself, and that’s all there is to it.”

“It means itself,” Mr. Propter agreed. “But what precisely is this
‘itself? In other words, what is the nature of the feeling?”

“Don’t ask me,” said Jeremy with a shake of the head and a comically
puzzled lift of the eyebrows. “I really don’t know.”

Mr. Propter smiled. “I know you don’t want to know,” he said. “And I
won’t ask you. I’ll just state the facts. The feeling in question is a
non-personal experience of timeless peace. Accordingly, non-personality,
timelessness and peace are what it means. Now let’s consider the feeling
that Pete has been talking about. These are all personal feelings,
evoked by temporal situations, and characterized by a sense of
excitement. Intensification of the ego within the world of time and
craving—that’s what these feelings meant.”

“But you can’t call self-sacrifice an intensification of the ego,” said
Pete.

“I can and I do,” Mr. Propter insisted. “For the good reason that it
generally is. Self-sacrifice to any but the highest cause is sacrifice
to an ideal, which is simply a projection of the ego. What is commonly
called self-sacrifice is the sacrifice of one part of the ego to another
part, one set of personal feelings and passions for another set—as when
the feelings connected with money or sex are sacrificed in order that
the ego may have the feelings of superiority, solidarity and hatred
which are associated with patriotism, or any kind of political or
religious fanaticism.”

Pete shook his head. “Sometimes,” he said, with a smile of rueful
perplexity, “sometimes you almost talk like Dr. Obispo. You
know—cynically.”

Mr. Propter laughed. “It’s good to be cynical,” he said. “That is, if
you know when to stop. Most of the things that we’re all taught to
respect and reverence—they don’t deserve anything but cynicism. Take
your own case. You’ve been taught to worship ideals like patriotism,
social justice, science, romantic love. You’ve been told that such
virtues as loyalty, temperance, courage and prudence are good in
themselves, in any circumstances. You’ve been assured that
self-sacrifice is always splendid and fine feelings invariably good. And
it’s all nonsense, all a pack of lies that people have made up in order
to justify themselves in continuing to deny God and wallow in their own
egotism. Unless you’re steadily and unflaggingly cynical about the
solemn twaddle that’s talked by bishops and bankers and professors and
politicians and all the rest of them, you’re lost. Utterly lost. Doomed
to perpetual imprisonment in your ego—doomed to be a personality in a
world of personalities; and a world of personalities is this world, the
world of greed and fear and hatred, of war and capitalism and
dictatorship and slavery. Yes, you’ve got to be cynical, Pete. Specially
cynical about all the actions and feelings you’ve been taught to suppose
were good. Most of them are not good. They’re merely evils which happen
to be regarded as creditable. But unfortunately, creditable evil is just
as bad as discreditable evil. Scribes and Pharisees aren’t any better,
in the last analysis, than publicans and sinners. Indeed, they’re often
much worse. For several reasons. Being well thought of by others, they
think well of themselves; and nothing so confirms an egotism as thinking
well of oneself. In the next place, publicans and sinners are generally
just human animals, without enough energy or self-control to do much
harm. Whereas the scribes and Pharisees have all the virtues, except the
only two which count, and enough intelligence to understand everything
except the real nature of the world. Publicans and sinners merely
fornicate and over-eat, and get drunk. The people who make wars, the
people who reduce their fellows to slavery, the people who kill and
torture and tell lies in the name of their sacred causes, the really
evil people in a word—these are never the publicans and the sinners. No,
they’re the virtuous, respectable men, who have the finest feelings, the
best brains, the noblest ideals.”

“So what it all boils down to,” Pete concluded in a tone of angry
despair, “is that there just isn’t anything you can do. Is that it?”

“Yes and no,” said Mr. Propter, in his quiet judicial way. “On a
strictly human level, the level of time and craving, I should say that
it’s quite true: in the last resort, there isn’t anything you can do.”

“But that’s just defeatism!” Pete protested.

“Why is it defeatism to be realistic?”

“There must be something to do!”

“I see no ‘must’ about it.”

“Then what about the reformers and all those people? If you’re right,
they’re just wasting their time.”

“It depends on what they think they’re doing,” said Mr. Propter. “If
they think they’re just temporarily palliating particular distresses, if
they see themselves as people engaged in laboriously deflecting evil
from old channels into new and slightly different channels, then they
can justifiably claim to be successful. But if they think they’re making
good appear where evil was before, why then all history clearly shows
that they are wasting their time.”

“But why can’t they make good appear where evil was before?”

“Why do we fall when we jump out of a tenth-storey window? Because the
nature of things happens to be such that we do fall. And the nature of
things is such that, on the strictly human level of time and craving,
you can’t achieve anything but evil. If you choose to work exclusively
on that level and exclusively for the ideals and causes that are
characteristic of it, then you’re insane if you expect to transform evil
into good. You’re insane, because experience should have shown you that,
on that level, there doesn’t happen to be any good. There are only
different degrees and different kinds of evil.”

“Then what do you want people to do?”

“Don’t talk as though it were all my fault,” said Mr. Propter. “I didn’t
invent the universe.”

“What ought they to do, then?”

“Well, if they want fresh varieties of evil, let them go on with what
they’re doing now. But if they want good, they’ll have to change their
tactics. And the encouraging thing,” Mr. Propter added in another tone,
“the encouraging thing is that there are tactics which will produce
good. We’ve seen that there’s nothing to be done on the strictly human
level—or rather there are millions of things to be done, only none of
them will achieve any good. But there is something effective to be done
on the levels where good actually exists. So you see, Pete, I’m not a
defeatist. I’m a strategist. I believe that if a battle is to be fought,
it had better be fought under conditions in which there’s at least some
chance of winning. I believe that, if you want the golden fleece, it’s
more sensible to go to the place where it exists than to rush round
performing prodigies of valour in a country where all the fleeces happen
to be coal-black.”

“Then where ought we to fight for good?”

“Where good is.”

“But where is it?”

“On the level below the human and on the level above. On the animal
level and on the level . . . well, you can take your choice of names:
the level of eternity; the level, if you don’t object, of God; the level
of the spirit—only that happens to be about the most ambiguous word in
the language. On the lower level, good exists as the proper functioning
of the organism in accordance with the laws of its own being. On the
higher level, it exists in the form of a knowledge of the world without
desire or aversion; it exists as the experience of eternity, as the
transcendence of personality, the extension of consciousness beyond the
limits imposed by the ego. Strictly human activities are activities that
prevent the manifestation of good on the other two levels. For, insofar
as we’re human, we’re obsessed with time, we’re passionately concerned
with our personalities and with those magnified projections of our
personalities which we call our policies, our ideals, our religions. And
what are the results? Being obsessed with time and our egos, we are for
ever craving and worrying. But nothing impairs the normal functioning of
the organism like craving and revulsion, like greed and fear and worry.
Directly or indirectly, most of our physical ailments and disabilities
are due to worry and craving. We worry and crave ourselves into high
blood pressure, heart disease, tuberculosis, peptic ulcer, low
resistance to infection, neurasthenia, sexual aberrations, insanity,
suicide. Not to mention all the rest.” Mr. Propter waved his hand
comprehensively. “Craving even prevents us from seeing properly,” he
went on. “The harder we try to see, the graver our error of
accommodation. And it’s the same with bodily posture: the more we worry
about doing the thing immediately ahead of us in time, the more we
interfere with our correct body posture and the worse, in consequence,
becomes the functioning of the entire organism. In a word, insofar as
we’re human beings, we prevent ourselves from realizing the
physiological and instinctive good that we’re capable of as animals.
And, mutatis mutandis, the same thing is true in regard to the sphere
above. Insofar as we’re human beings, we prevent ourselves from
realizing the spiritual and timeless good that we’re capable of as
potential inhabitants of eternity, as potential enjoyers of the beatific
vision. We worry and crave ourselves out of the very possibility of
transcending personality and knowing, intellectually at first and then
by direct experience, the true nature of the world.”

Mr. Propter was silent for a moment; then, with a sudden smile,
“Luckily,” he went on, “most of us don’t manage to behave like human
beings all the time. We forget our wretched little egos and those
horrible great projections of our egos in the ideal world—forget them
and relapse for a while into harmless animality. The organism gets a
chance to function according to its own laws; in other words, it gets a
chance to realize such good as it’s capable of. That’s why we’re as
healthy and sane as we are. Even in great cities, as many as four
persons out of five manage to go through life without having to be
treated in a lunatic asylum. If we were consistently human, the
percentage of mental cases would rise from twenty to a hundred. But
fortunately most of us are incapable of consistency. The animal is
always trying to resume its rights. And to some people fairly
frequently, perhaps occasionally to all, there come little flashes of
illumination—momentary glimpses into the nature of the world as it is
for a consciousness liberated from appetite and time, of the world as it
might be if we didn’t choose to deny God by being our personal selves.
Those flashes come to us when we’re off our guard; then craving and
worry come rushing back and the light is eclipsed once more by our
personality and its lunatic ideals, its criminal policies and plans.”

There was silence. The sun had gone. Behind the mountains to the west, a
pale yellow light faded through green into a blue that deepened as it
climbed. At the zenith, it was all night. Pete sat quite still, staring
into the dark but still transparent sky above the northern peaks. That
voice, so calm at first and then at the end so powerfully resonant,
those words, now mercilessly critical of all the things to which he had
given his allegiance, now charged with the half comprehended promise of
things incommensurably worthier of loyalty, had left him profoundly
moved and at the same time perplexed and at a loss. Everything, he saw,
would have to be thought out again, from the beginning—science,
politics, perhaps even love, even Virginia. He was appalled by the
prospect and yet, in another part of his being, attracted; he felt
resentful at the thought of Mr. Propter, but at the same time loved the
disquieting old man; loved him for what he did and, above all, for what
he so admirably and, in Pete’s own experience, uniquely
was—disinterestedly friendly, at once serene and powerful, gentle and
strong, self-effacing and yet intensely there, more present, so to
speak, radiating more life than any one else.

Jeremy Pordage had also found himself taking an interest in what the old
man said, had even, like Pete, experienced the stirrings of a certain
disquiet—a disquiet none the less disquieting for having stirred in him
before. The substance of what Mr. Propter had said was familiar to him.
For, of course, he had read all the significant books on the
subject—would have thought himself barbarously uneducated if he
hadn’t—had read Sankara and Eckhart, the Pali texts and John of the
Cross, Charles de Condran and the Bardo and Patan-jali and the
Pseudo-Dionysius. He had read them and been moved by them into wondering
whether he oughtn’t to do something about them; and, because he had been
moved in this way, he had taken the most elaborate pains to make fun of
them, not only to other people, but also and above all to himself.
“You’ve never bought your ticket to Athens,” the man had said—damn his
eyes! Why did he want to go putting these things over on one? All one
asked was to be left in peace, to take things as they came. Things as
they came—one’s books, one’s little articles, and Lady Fredegond’s ear
trumpet, and Palestrina, and steak and kidney pudding at the Reform, and
Mae and Doris. Which reminded him that today was Friday; if he were in
England it would be his afternoon at the flat in Maida Vale.
Deliberately he turned his attention away from Mr. Propter and thought
instead of those alternate Friday afternoons; of the pink lampshades;
the smell of talcum powder and perspiration; the Trojan women, as he
called them because they worked so hard, in their kimonos from Marks and
Spencer’s; the framed reproductions of pictures by Poynter and Alma
Tadema (delicious irony that works which the Victorians had regarded as
art should have come to serve, a generation later, as pornography in a
trollop’s bedroom!); and, finally, the erotic routine, so
matter-of-factly sordid, so conscientiously and professionally low, with
a lowness and a sordidness that constituted, for Jeremy, their greatest
charm, that he prized more highly than any amount of moonlight and
romance, any number of lyrics and Lie-bestods. Infinite squalor in a
little room! It was the apotheosis of refinement, the logical conclusion
of good taste.


Chapter X

THIS Friday, Mr. Stoyte’s afternoon in town had been exceptionally
uneventful. Nothing untoward had occurred during the preceding week. In
the course of his various meetings and interviews nobody had said or
done anything to make him lose his temper. The reports on business
conditions had been very satisfactory. The Japs had bought another
hundred thousand barrels of oil. Copper was up two cents. The demand for
bentonite was definitely increasing. True, applications for bank credit
had been rather disappointing; but the influenza epidemic had raised the
weekly turnover of the Pantheon to a figure well above the average.

Things went so smoothly that Mr. Stoyte was through with all his
business more than an hour before he had expected. Finding himself with
time to spare, he stopped, on the way home, at his agent’s to find out
what was happening on the estate. The interview lasted only a few
minutes—long enough, however, to put Mr. Stoyte in a fury that sent him
rushing out to the car.

“Drive to Mr. Propter’s,” he ordered with a peremptory ferocity as he
slammed the door.

What the hell did Bill Propter think he was doing? he kept indignantly
asking himself. Shoving his nose into other people’s business. And all
on account of those lousy bums who had come to pick the oranges! All for
those tramps, those stinking, filthy hoboes! Mr. Stoyte had a peculiar
hatred for the ragged hordes of transients on whom he depended for the
harvesting of his crops, a hatred that was more than the rich man’s
ordinary dislike of the poor. Not that he didn’t experience that complex
mixture of fear and physical disgust, of stifled compassion and shame
transformed by repression into chronic exasperation. He did. But over
and above this common and generic dislike for poor people, he was moved
by other hatreds of his own. Mr. Stoyte was a rich man who had been
poor. In the six years between the time when he ran away from his father
and grandmother in Nashville and the time when he had been adopted by
the black sheep of the family, his Uncle Tom, in California, Jo Stoyte
had learnt, as he imagined, everything there was to be known about being
poor. Those years had left him with an ineradicable hatred for the
circumstances of poverty and at the same time an ineradicable contempt
for all those who had been too stupid, or too weak, or too unlucky to
climb out of the hell into which they had fallen or been born. The poor
were odious to him, not only because they were potentially a menace to
his position in society, not only because their misfortunes demanded a
sympathy he did not wish to give, but also because they reminded him of
what he himself had suffered in the past and at the same time because
the fact that they were still poor was a sufficient proof of their
contemptibleness and his own superiority. And since he had suffered what
they were now suffering, it was only right that they should go on
suffering what he had suffered. Also, since their continued poverty
proved them contemptible, it was proper that he, who was now rich,
should treat them in every way as the contemptible creatures they had
shown themselves to be. Such was the logic of Mr. Stoyte’s emotions. And
here was Bill Propter, running counter to this logic by telling the
agent that they oughtn’t to take advantage of the glut of transient
labour to force down wages; that they ought, on the contrary, to raise
them—raise them, if you please, at a time when these bums were swarming
over the state like a plague of Mormon crickets! And not only that; they
ought to build accommodations for them—cabins, like the ones that crazy
fool Bill had built for them himself; two-roomed cabins at six or seven
hundred dollars apiece—for bums like that, and their women, and those
disgusting children who were so filthy dirty, he wouldn’t have them in
his hospital; not unless they were really dying of appendicitis or
something—you couldn’t refuse them then, of course. But meanwhile, what
the hell did Bill Propter think he was doing? And it wasn’t the first
time either that he’d tried to interfere. Gliding through the twilight
of the orange groves, Mr. Stoyte kept striking the palm of his left hand
with his clenched right fist.

“I’ll let him have it,” he whispered to himself. “I’ll let him have it.”

Fifty years before, Bill Propter had been the only boy in the school
who, even though he was the older and stronger, didn’t make fun of him
for being fat. They had met again when Bill was teaching at Berkeley and
he himself had made good in the real estate game and had just gone into
oil. Partly in gratitude for the way Bill Propter had acted when they
were boys, partly also in order to display his power, to redress the
balance of superiority in his own favour, Jo Stoyte had wanted to do
something handsome for the young Assistant Professor. But in spite of
his modest salary and the two or three miserable thousand dollars a year
his father had left him, Bill Propter hadn’t wanted anything done for
him. He had seemed genuinely grateful, he had been perfectly courteous
and friendly; but he just didn’t want to come in on the ground floor of
Consol Oil—didn’t want to because, as he kept explaining, he had all he
needed and preferred not to have anything more. Jo’s effort to redress
the balance of superiority had failed. Failed disastrously, because by
refusing his offer, Bill had done something which, though he called him
a fool for doing it, compelled Jo Stoyte secretly to admire him more
than ever. Extorted against his will, this admiration bred a
corresponding resentment towards its object. Jo Stoyte felt aggrieved
that Bill had given him so many reasons for liking him. He would have
preferred to like him without a reason, in spite of his shortcomings.
But Bill had few shortcomings and many merits, merits which Jo himself
did not have and whose presence in Bill he therefore regarded as an
affront. Thus it was that all the reasons for liking Bill Propter were
also, in Jo’s eyes, equally valid reasons for disliking him. He
continued to call Bill a fool; but he felt him as a standing reproach.
And yet the nature of this standing reproach was such that he liked to
be in Bill’s company. It was because Bill had settled down on a ten-acre
patch of land in this part of the valley that Mr. Stoyte had decided to
build his castle on the site where it now stood. He wanted to be near
Bill Propter, even though, in practice, there was almost nothing that
Bill could do or say that didn’t annoy him. Today, this chronic
exasperation had been fanned by Mr. Stoyte’s hatred of the transients
into a passion of fury.

“I’ll let him have it,” he repeated again and again.

The car came to a halt and, before the chauffeur could open the door for
him, Mr. Stoyte had darted out and was hurrying in his determined way,
looking neither to right nor left, up the path that led from the road to
his old friend’s bungalow.

“Hullo, Jo,” a familiar voice called from the shadow under the
eucalyptus trees.

Mr. Stoyte turned, peered through the twilight, then, without a word,
hurried towards the bench on which the three men were sitting. There was
a chorus of “Good evenings,” and, as he approached, Pete rose politely
and offered him his place. Ignoring his gesture and his very presence,
Mr. Stoyte addressed himself immediately to Bill Propter.

“Why the hell can’t you leave my man alone?” he almost shouted.

Mr. Propter looked at him with only a moderate astonishment. He was used
to these outbursts from poor Jo; le had long since divined their
fundamental cause and knew by experience how to deal with them.

“Which man, Jo?” he asked.

“Bob Hansen, of course. What do you mean by going to him behind my
back?”

“When I went to you,” said Mr. Propter, “you told me it was Hansen’s
business. So I went to Hansen.”

This was so infuriatingly true that Mr. Stoyte could only resort to
roaring. He roared. “Interfering with him in his work! What’s the idea?”

“Pete’s offering you a seat,” Mr. Propter put in. “Or if you prefer it,
there’s an iron chair behind you. You’d better sit down, Jo.”

“I’m not going to sit down,” Mr. Stoyte bellowed. “And I want an answer.
What’s the idea?”

“The idea?” Mr. Propter repeated in his slow quiet way. “Well, it’s
quite an old one, you know, I didn’t invent it.”

“Can’t you answer me?”

“It’s the idea that men and women are human beings. Not vermin.”

“Those bums of yours!”

Mr. Propter turned to Pete. “You may as well sit down again,” he said.

“Those lousy bums! I tell you I won’t stand it,”

“Besides,” Mr. Propter went on, “I’m a practical man. You’re not.”

“Me not practical?” Mr. Stoyte echoed with indignant amazement. “Not
practical? Well, look at the place I live in and then look at this dump
of yours.”

“Exactly. That proves the point. You’re hopelessly romantic, Jo; so
romantic, you think people can work when they haven’t had enough to
eat.”

“You’re trying to make Communists of them.” The word Communist renewed
Mr. Stoyte’s passion and at the same time justified it; his indignation
ceased to be merely personal and became righteous. “You’re nothing but a
Communist agitator.” His voice trembled, Mr. Propter sadly noticed, just
as Pete’s had trembled half an hour before, at the words “Fascist
aggression.” He wondered if the boy had noticed or, having noticed,
would take the hint. “Nothing but a Communist agitator,” Mr, Stoyte
repeated with a crusader’s zeal.

“I thought we were talking about eating,” said Mr. Propter.

“You’re stalling!”

“Eating and working—wasn’t that it?”

“I’ve put up with you all these years,” Mr. Stoyte went on, “for old
times’ sake. But now I’m through. I’m sick of you. Talking Communism to
those bums! Making the place dangerous for decent people to live in.

“Decent?” Mr. Propter echoed, and was tempted to laugh, but immediately
checked the impulse. Being laughed at in the presence of Pete and Mr.
Pordage might goad the poor fellow into doing something irreparably
stupid.

“I’ll have you run out of the valley,” Mr. Stoyte was roaring. “I’ll see
that you’re . . .” He broke off in the middle of the sentence and stood
there for a few seconds in silence, his mouth still open and working,
his eyes staring. That drumming in the ears, that tingling heat in the
face—they had suddenly reminded him of his blood pressure, of Dr.
Obispo, of death. Death and that flame-coloured text in his bedroom at
home. Terrible to fall into the hands of the living God—not Prudence’s
God, of course; the other one, the real one, the God of his father and
his grandmother.

Mr. Stoyte drew a deep breath, pulled out his handkerchief, wiped his
face and neck, then, without uttering another word, turned and began to
walk away.

Mr. Propter got up, hurried after him and, in spite of the other’s angry
motion of recoil, took Mr. Stoyte’s arm and walked along beside him.

“I want to show you something, Jo,” he said. “Something that’ll interest
you, I think.”

“I don’t want to see it,” said Mr. Stoyte between his false teeth.

Mr. Propter paid no attention, but continued to lead him towards the
back of the house. “It’s a gadget that Abbot of the Smithsonian has been
working on for some time,” he continued. “A thing for making use of
solar energy.” He interrupted himself for a moment to call back to the
others to follow him; then turned again to Mr. Stoyte and resumed the
conversation. “Much more compact than anything of the kind that’s ever
been made before,” he said. “Much more efficient, too.” And he went on
to describe the system of trough-shaped reflectors, the tubes of oil
heated to a temperature of four or five hundred degrees Fahrenheit; the
boiler for raising steam, if you wanted to run a low-pressure engine;
the cooking range and water heater, if you were using it only for
domestic purposes. “Pity the sun’s down,” he said, as they stood in
front of the machine. “I’d have liked to show you the way it works the
engine. I’ve had two horse-power, eight hours a day, ever since I got
the thing working last week. Not bad considering we’re still in January.
We’ll have her working overtime all summer.”

Mr. Stoyte had intended to persist in his silence—just to show Bill that
he was still angry, that he hadn’t forgiven him; but his interest in the
machine and, above all, his exasperated concern with Bill’s idiotic,
crackpot notions were too much for him. “What the hell do you want with
two horse-power, eight hours a day?” he asked.

“To run my electric generator.”

“But what do you want with an electric generator? Haven’t you got your
current wired in from the city?”

“Of course. And I’m trying to see how far I can be independent of the
city.”

“But what for?”

Mr. Propter uttered a little laugh. “Because I believe in Jeffersonian
democracy.”

“What the hell has Jeffersonian democracy got to do with it?” said Mr.
Stoyte with mounting irritation. “Can’t you believe in Jefferson and
have your current wired in from the city?”

“That’s exactly it,” said Mr. Propter; “you almost certainly can’t.”

“What do you mean?”

“What I say,” Mr. Propter answered mildly.

“_I_ believe in democracy too,” Mr. Stoyte announced with a look of
defiance.

“I know you do. And you also believe in being the undisputed boss in all
your businesses.”

“I should hope so!”

“There’s another name for an undisputed boss,” said Mr. Propter. “
‘Dictator.’ “

“What are you trying to get at?”

“Merely at the facts. You believe in democracy; but you’re at the head
of businesses which have to be run dictatorially. And your subordinates
have to accept your dictatorship because they’re dependent on you for
their living. In Russia they’d depend on government officials for their
living. Perhaps you think that’s an improvement,” he added, turning to
Pete.

Pete nodded. “I’m all for the public ownership of the means of
production,” he said. It was the first time he had openly confessed his
faith in the presence of his employer; he felt happy at having dared to
be a Daniel.

“Public ownership of the means of production,” Mr. Propter repeated.
“But unfortunately governments have a way of regarding the individual
producers as being parts of the means. Frankly, I’d rather have Jo
Stoyte as my boss than Jo Stalin. This Jo” (he laid his hand on Mr.
Stoyte’s shoulder) “this Jo can’t have you executed; he can’t send you
to the Arctic; he can’t prevent you from getting a job under another
boss. Whereas the other Jo . . .” he shook his head. “Not that,” he
added, “I’m exactly longing to have even this Jo as my boss.”

“You’d be fired pretty quick,” growled Mr. Stoyte.

“I don’t want any boss,” Mr. Propter went on. “The more bosses, the less
democracy. But unless people can support themselves, they’ve got to have
a boss who’ll undertake to do it for them. So the less self-support, the
less democracy. In Jefferson’s day, a great many Americans did support
themselves. They were economically independent. Independent of
government and independent of big business. Hence the Constitution.”

“We’ve still got the Constitution,” said Mr. Stoyte.

“No doubt,” Mr. Propter agreed. “But if we had to make a new
Constitution today, what would it be like? A Constitution to fit the
facts of New York and Chicago and Detroit; of United States Steel and
the Public Utilities and General Motors and the CLO. and the government
departments. What on earth would it be like?” he repeated. “We respect
our old Constitution, but in fact we live under a new one. And if we
want to live under the first, we’ve got to recreate something like the
conditions under which the first was made. That’s why I’m interested in
this gadget.” He patted the frame of the machine. “Because it may help
to give independence to any one who desires independence. Not that many
do desire it,” he added parenthetically. “The propaganda in favour of
dependence is too strong. They’ve come to believe that you can’t be
happy unless you’re entirely dependent on government or centralized
business. But for the few who do care about democracy, who really want
to be free in the Jeffersonian sense, this thing may be a help. If it
makes them independent of fuel and power, that’s already a great deal.”

Mr. Stoyte looked anxious. “Do you really think it’ll do that?”

“Why not?” said Mr. Propter. “There’s a lot of sunshine running to waste
in this part of the country.”

Mr. Stoyte thought of his presidency of the Consol Oil Company. “It
won’t be good for the oil business,” he said.

“I should hate it to be good for the oil business,” Mr. Propter answered
cheerfully.

“And what about coal?” He had an interest in a group of West Virginia
mines. “And the railroads?” There was that big block of Union Pacific
shares that had belonged to Prudence. “The railroads can’t get on
without long hauls. And steel,” he added disinterestedly; for his
holdings in Bethlehem Steel were almost negligible. “What happens to
steel if you hurt the railroads and cut down trucking? You’re going
against progress,” he burst out in another access of righteous
indignation. “You’re turning back the clock,”

“Don’t worry, Jo,” said Mr. Propter. “It won’t affect your dividends for
quite a long while. There’ll be plenty of time to adjust to the new
conditions.”

With an admirable effort, Mr. Stoyte controlled his temper. “You seem to
figure I can’t think of anything but money,” he said with dignity.
“Well, it may interest you to know that I’ve decided to give Dr. Mulge
another thirty thousand dollars for his Art School.” (The decision had
been made there and then, for the sole purpose of serving as a weapon in
the perennial battle with Bill Propter.) “And if you think,” he added as
an afterthought, “if you think I’m only concerned with my own interests,
read the special World’s Fair number of the New York Times. Read that,”
he insisted with the solemnity of a fundamentalist recommending the Book
of Revelation. “You’ll see that the most forward-looking men in the
country think as I do.” He spoke with unaccustomed and incongruous
unction, in the phraseology of after-dinner eloquence. “The way of
progress is the way of better organization, more service from business,
more goods for the consumer!” Then, incoherently, “Look at the way a
housewife goes to her grocer,” he added, “and buys a package of some
nationally advertised cereal or something. That’s progress. Not your
crackpot idea of doing everything at home with this idiotic
contraption.” Mr. Stoyte had reverted completely to his ordinary style.
“You always were a fool, Bill, and I guess you always will be. And
remember what I told you about interfering with Bob Hansen. I won’t
stand for it.” In dramatic silence he walked away; but after taking a
few steps, he halted and called back over his shoulder. “Come up to
dinner, if you feel like it.”

“Thanks,” said Mr. Propter. “I will.”

Mr. Stoyte walked briskly towards his car. He had forgotten about high
blood pressure and the living God and felt all of a sudden unaccountably
and unreasonably happy. It was not that he had scored any notable
success in his battle with Bill Propter. He hadn’t; and, what was more,
in the process of not scoring a success he had made, and was even half
aware that he had made, a bit of a fool of himself. The source of his
happiness was elsewhere. He was happy, though he would never have
admitted the fact, because, in spite of everything, Bill seemed to like
him.

In the car, as he drove back to the castle, he whistled to himself.

Entering with his hat on, as usual (for even after all these years he
still derived a childish pleasure from the contrast between the palace
in which he lived and the proletarian manners he affected), Mr. Stoyte
crossed the great hall, stepped into the elevator and, from the
elevator, walked directly into Virginia’s boudoir.

When he opened the door, the two were sitting at least fifteen feet
apart. Virginia was at the soda counter, pensively eating a chocolate
and banana split; seated in an elegant pose on one of the pink satin
arm-chairs, Dr. Obispo was in the process of lighting a cigarette.

On Mr. Stoyte the impact of suspicion and jealousy was like the blow of
a fist directed (for the shock was physical and localized in the
midriff) straight to the solar plexus. His face contracted as though
with pain. And yet he had seen nothing; there was no apparent cause for
jealousy, no visible reason, in their attitudes, their actions, their
expressions, for suspicion. Dr. Obispo’s manner was perfectly easy and
natural; and the Baby’s smile of startled and delighted welcome was
angelic in its candour. “Uncle Jo!” She ran to meet him and threw her
arms round his neck. “Uncle Jo!”

The warmth of her tone, the softness of her lips had a magical effect on
Mr. Stoyte. Moved to a point at which he was using the word to the limit
of its double connotation, he murmured, “My Babyl” with a lingering
emphasis. The fact that he should have felt suspicious, even for a
moment, of this pure and adorable, this deliciously warm, resilient and
perfumed child, filled him with shame. And even Dr. Obispo now heaped
coals of fire on his head.

“I was a bit worried,” he said, as he got up from his chair, “by the way
you coughed after lunch. That’s why I came up here, to make sure of
catching you the moment you got in.” He put a hand in his pocket and,
after half drawing out and immediately replacing a little leather-bound
volume, like a prayer book, extracted a stethoscope. “Prevention’s
better than cure,” he went on. “I’m not going to let you get influenza,
if I can help it.”

Remembering what a good week they had had at the Beverly Pantheon on
account of the epidemic, Mr. Stoyte felt alarmed. “I don’t feel bad,” he
said. “I guess that cough wasn’t anything. Only my old—you know: the
chronic bronchitis.”

“Maybe it was only that. But all the same, I’d like to listen in.”
Briskly professional, Dr. Obispo hung the stethoscope round his neck.

“He’s right, Uncle Jo,” said the Baby.

Touched by so much solicitude and at the same time rather disturbed by
the thought that it might perhaps be influenza, Mr. Stoyte took off his
coat and waistcoat and began to undo his tie. A moment later he was
stand ing stripped to the waist under the crystals of the chandelier.
Modestly, Virginia retired again to her soda fountain. Dr. Obispo
slipped the ends of the curved nickel tubes of the stethoscope into his
ears. “Take a deep breath,” he said as he pressed the muzzle against Mr.
Stoyte’s chest. “Again,” he ordered. “Now cough.” Looking past that
thick barrel of hairy flesh, he could see, on the wall behind, the
inhabitants of Watteau’s mournful paradise as they prepared to set sail
for some other paradise, doubtless yet more heartbreaking.

“Say ninety-nine,” Dr. Obispo commanded, returning from the embarcation
for Cythera to a near view of Mr. Stoyte’s thorax and abdomen.

“Ninety-nine,” said Mr. Stoyte. “Ninety-nine. Ninety-nine.”

With professional thoroughness, Dr. Obispo shifted the muzzle of his
stethoscope from point to point on the curving barrel of flesh before
him. There was nothing wrong, of course, with the old buzzard. Just the
familiar set of râles and wheezes he always had. Perhaps it would make
things a bit more realistic if he were to take the creature down to his
office and stick him up in front of the fluoroscope. But, no; he really
couldn’t be bothered. And, besides, this farce would be quite enough.

“Cough again,” he said, planting his instrument among the grey hairs on
Mr. Stoyte’s left pap. And among other things, he went on to reflect,
while Mr. Stoyte forced out a succession of artificial coughs, among
other things, these old sacks of guts didn’t smell too good. How any
young girl could stand it, even for money, he really couldn’t imagine.
And yet the fact remained that there were thousands of them who not only
stood it, but actually enjoyed it. Or, perhaps, “enjoy” was the wrong
word. Because in most cases there probably wasn’t any question of
enjoyment in the proper, physiological sense of the word. It all
happened in the mind, not in the body. They loved their old gut-sacks
with their heads; loved them because they admired them, because they
were impressed by the gut-sack’s position in the world, or his
knowledge, or his celebrity. What they slept with wasn’t the man; it was
a reputation, it was the embodiment of a function. And then, of course,
some of the girls were future models for Mother’s Day advertisements;
some were little Florence Nightingales, on the lookout for a Crimean
War. In those cases, the very infirmities of their gut-sacks were added
attractions. They had the satisfaction of sleeping not only with a
reputation or a stock of wisdom, not only with a federal judgeship, for
example, or the presidency of a chamber of commerce, but also and
simultaneously with a wounded soldier, with an imbecile child, with a
lovely stinking little baby who still made messes in its bed. Even this
cutie (Dr. Obispo shot a sideways glance in the direction of the soda
fountain), even this one had something of the Florence Nightingale in
her, something of the Gold Star Mother. (And that in spite of the fact
that, with her conscious mind, she felt a kind of physical horror of
maternity.) Jo Stoyte was a little bit her baby and her patient; and at
the same time, of course, he was a great deal her own private Abraham

Lincoln. Incidentally, he also happened to be the man with the cheque
book. Which was a consideration, of course. But if he were only that,
Virginia wouldn’t have been so nearly happy as she obviously was. The
cheque book was made more attractive by being in the hands of a demigod
who had to have a nanny to change his diapers.

“Turn round, please.”

Mr. Stoyte obeyed. The back, Dr. Obispo reflected, was perceptibly less
revolting than the front. Perhaps because it was less personal.

“Take a deep breath,” he said; for he was going to play the farce all
over again on this new stage. “Another.”

Mr. Stoyte breathed enormously, like a cetacean.

“And again,” said Dr. Obispo, reflecting as the old man snorted, that
his own chief asset was a refreshing unlikeness to this smelly old
gut-sack. She would take him, and take him, what was more, on his own
terms. No Romeo-and-Juliet acts, no nonsense about Love with a large L,
none of that popular-song claptrap with its skies of blue, dreams come
true, heaven with you. Just sensuality for its own sake. The real,
essential, concrete thing; no less, it went without saying, but also
(and this most certainly didn’t go without saying for the bitches were
always trying to get you to stick them on pedestals, or be their
soul-mates), also no more. No more, to begin with, out of respect for
scientific truth. He believed in scientific truth. Facts were facts;
accept them as such. It was a fact, for example, that young girls in the
pay of rich old men could be seduced without much difficulty. It was
also a fact that rich old men, however successful at business, were
generally so frightened, ignorant and stupid that they could be
bamboozled by any intelligent person who chose to try.

“Say ninety-nine again,” he said aloud.

“Ninety-nine. Ninety-nine.”

Ninety-nine chances out of a hundred that they would never find out
anything. That was the fact about old men. The fact about love was that
it consisted essentially of tumescence and detumescence. So why
embroider the fact with unnecessary fictions? Why not be realistic? Why
not treat the whole business scientifically?

“Ninety-nine,” Mr. Stoyte went on repeating. “Ninety-nine.”

And then, Dr. Obispo went on to reflect, as he listened without interest
to the whisperings and crepitations inside the warm, smelly barrel
before him, then there were the more personal reasons for preferring to
take love unadorned, in the chemically pure condition. Personal reasons
that were, also, of course, a fact that had to be accepted. For it was a
fact that he personally found an added pleasure in the imposition of his
will upon the partner he had chosen. To be pleasurable, this imposition
of will must never be too easy, too much a matter of course. Which ruled
out all professionals. The partner had to be an amateur and, like all
amateurs, committed to the thesis that tumescence and detumescence
should always be associated with LOVE, PASSION, SOUL-MATING—all in
upper-case letters. In imposing his will, he imposed the contradictory
doctrine, the doctrine of tumescence and detumescence for tumescence^
and detumescence’s sake. All he asked was that a partner should give the
thesis a practical tryout—however reluctantly, however experimentally,
for just once only; he didn’t care. Just a single tryout. After that it
was up to him. If he couldn’t make a permanent and enthusiastic convert
of her, at any rate so far as he was concerned, then the fault was his.

“Ninety-nine, ninety-nine,” said Mr. Stoyte with exemplary patience.

“You can stop now,” Dr. Obispo told him graciously.

Just one tryout; he could practically guarantee himself success. It was
a branch of applied physiology; he was an expert, a specialist. The
Claude Bernard of the subject. And talk of imposing one’s will! You
began by forcing the girl to accept a thesis that was in flat
contradiction to all the ideas she had been brought up with, all the
dreams-come-true rigmarole of popular ideology. Quite a pleasant little
victory, to be sure. But it was only when you got down to the applied
physiology that the series of really satisfying triumphs began. You took
an ordinarily rational human being, a good hundred-percent American with
a background, a position in society, a set of conventions, a code of
ethics, a religion (Catholic in the present instance, Dr. Obispo
remembered parenthetically); you took this good citizen, with rights
fully and formally guaranteed by the Constitution, you took her (and
perhaps she had come to the place of assignation in her husband’s
Packard limousine and direct from a banquet, with speeches in honor,
say, of Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler or the retiring Archbishop of
Indianapolis), you took her and you proceeded, systematically and
scientifically, to reduce this unique personality to a mere epileptic
body, moaning and gibbering under the excruciations of a pleasure for
which you, the Claude Bernard of the subject, were responsible and of
which you remained the enjoying, but always detached, always ironically
amused, spectator.

“Just a few more deep breaths, if you don’t mind.”

Wheezily Mr. Stoyte inhaled, then with a snorting sigh emptied his
lungs.


Chapter XI

THERE was silence after Mr. Stoyte’s departure. A long silence, while
each of the three men thought his own private thoughts. It was Pete who
spoke first.

“Things like that,” he said gloomily, “they get me kind of wondering if
I ought to go on taking his money. What would you do, Mr. Propter, if
you were me?”

“What would I do?” Mr. Propter reflected for a moment. “I’d go on
working in Jo’s laboratory,” he said. “But only so long as I felt fairly
certain that what I was doing wouldn’t cause more harm than good. One
has to be a utilitarian in these matters. A utilitarian with a
difference,” he qualified. “Bentham crossed with Eckhart, say, or
Nagarjuna.”

“Poor Bentham!” said Jeremy, horrified by the thought of what was being
done to his namesake.

Mr. Propter smiled. “Poor Bentham, indeed! Such a good, sweet, absurd,
intelligent man! So nearly right; but so enormously wrong! Deluding
himself with the notion that the greatest happiness of the greatest
number could be achieved on the strictly human level—the level of time
and evil, the level of the absence of God. Poor Bentham!” he repeated.
“What a great man he would have been if only he could have grasped that
good can’t be had except where it exists!”

“That sort of utilitarian you’re talking about,” said Pete, “what would
he feel about the job I’m doing now?”

“I don’t know,” Mr. Propter answered. “I haven’t thought about it enough
to guess what he’d say. And anyhow we haven’t yet got the empirical
material on which a reasonable judgment could be based. All I know is
that if I were in on this I’d be cautious. Infinitely cautious,” he
insisted.

“And what about the money?” Pete went on. “Seeing where it comes from
and who it belongs to, do you think I ought to take it?”

“All money’s pretty dirty,” said Mr. Propter. “I don’t know that poor
Jo’s is appreciably dirtier than any one else’s. You may think it is;
but that’s only because, for the first time, you’re seeing money at its
source—its personal, human source. You’re like one of those city
children who have been used to getting their milk in sterilized bottles
from a shiny white delivery wagon. When they go into the country and see
it being pumped out of a big, fat, smelly old animal, they’re horrified,
they’re disgusted. It’s the same with money. You’ve been used to getting
it from behind a bronze grating in a magnificent marble bank. Now,
you’ve come out into the country and are living in the cow shed with the
animal that actually secretes the stuff. And the process doesn’t strike
you as very savoury or hygienic. But the same process was going on, even
when you didn’t know about it. And if you weren’t working for Jo Stoyte,
you’d probably be working for some college or university. But where do
colleges and universities get their money from? From rich men. In other
words, from people like Jo Stoyte. Again, it’s dirt served out in
sterile containers—by a gentleman in a cap and gown, this time.”

“So you figure it’s all right for me to go on like I am now?” said Pete.

“All right,” Mr. Propter answered, “in the sense that it’s not
conspicuously worse than anything else.” Suddenly smiling, “I was glad
to hear that Dr. Mulge had got his art school,” he said in another,
lighter tone. “Immediately after the Auditorium, too. It’s a lot of
money. But I suppose the prestige of being a patron of learning is worth
it. And, of course, there’s an enormous social pressure on the rich to
make them become patrons of learning. They’re being pushed by shame as
well as pulled by the longing to believe they’re the benefactors of
humanity. And happily with Dr. Mulge a rich man can have his kudos with
safety. No amount of art schools at Tarzana will ever disturb the status
quo. Whereas if I were to ask Jo for fifty thousand dollars to finance
research into the technique of democracy, he’d turn me down flat. Why?
Because he knows that sort of thing is dangerous. He likes speeches
about democracy. (Incidentally, Dr. Mulge is really terrific on the
subject.) But he doesn’t approve of the coarse materialists who try to
find out how to put those ideals into practice. You saw how angry he got
about my poor little sun machine. Because, in its tiny way, it’s a
menace to the sort of big business he makes his money from. And it’s the
same with these other little gadgets that I’ve talked to him about from
time to time. Come and look, if it doesn’t bore you.”

He took them into the house. Here was the little electric mill, hardly
larger than a coffee machine, in which he ground his own flour, as he
needed it. Here was the loom at which he had learnt and was now teaching
others to weave. Next he took them out to the shed in which, with a few
hundred dollars’ worth of electrically operated tools, he was equipped
to do any kind of carpentry and even some light metal work. Beyond the
shed were the still unfinished greenhouses; for the vegetable plots
weren’t adequate to supply the demands of his transients. There they
were, he added, pointing through the increasing darkness to the lights
of a row of cabins. He could put up only a few of them; the rest had to
live in a sort of garbage heap down in the dry bed of the river—paying
rent to Jo Stoyte for the privilege. Not the best material to work with,
of course. But such misery as theirs left one no choice. They simply had
to be attended to. A few had come through undemoralized; and, of these,
a few could see what had to be done, what you had to aim at. Two or
three were working with him here; and he had been able to raise money to
settle two or three more on some land near Santa Suzanna. Mere
beginnings—unsatisfactory, at that. Because, obviously, you could not
even start experimenting properly until you had a full-fledged community
working under the new conditions. But to set a community on its feet
would require money. A lot of money. But rich men wouldn’t touch the
work; they preferred art schools at Tarzana. The people who were
interested had no money; that was one of the reasons why they were
interested. Borrowing at the current commercial rates was dangerous.
Except in very favourable circumstances, the chances were that you’d
merely be selling yourself into slavery to a bank.

“It isn’t easy,” said Mr. Propter, as they walked back to the house.
“But the great point is that, easy or not easy, it’s there, waiting to
be done. Because, after all, Pete, there is something to do.”

Mr. Propter went into the bungalow for a moment to turn out the lights,
then emerged again on to the porch. Together, the three men walked down
the path to the road. Before them the castle was a vast black silhouette
punctured by occasional lights.

“There is something you can do,” Mr. Propter resumed; “but only on
condition that you know what the nature of the world happens to be. If
you know that the strictly human level is the level of evil, you won’t
waste your time trying to produce good on that level. Good manifests
itself only on the animal level and on the level of eternity. Knowing
that, you’ll realize that the best you can do on the human level is
preventive. You can see that purely human activities don’t interfere too
much with the manifestation of good on the other levels. That’s all. But
politicians don’t know the nature of reality. If they did, they wouldn’t
be politicians. Reactionary or revolutionary, they’re all humanists, all
romantics. They live in a world of illusion, a world that’s a mere
projection of their own human personalities. They act in ways which
would be appropriate if such a world as they think they live in really
existed. But unfortunately it doesn’t exist except in their
imaginations. Hence nothing that they do is appropriate to the real
world. All their actions are the actions of lunatics, and all, as
history is there to demonstrate, are more or less completely disastrous.
So much for the romantics. The realists who have studied the nature of
the world know that an exclusively humanistic attitude towards life is
always fatal, and that all strictly human activities must therefore be
made instrumental to animal and spiritual good. They know, in other
words, that men’s business is to make the human world safe for animals
and spirits. Or perhaps,” he added turning to Jeremy, “perhaps, as an
Englishman you prefer Lloyd George’s phrase to Wilson’s: A home fit for
heroes to live in—wasn’t that it? A home fit for animals and spirits,
for physiology and disinterested consciousness. At present, I’m afraid,
it’s profoundly unfit. The world we’ve made for ourselves is a world of
sick bodies and insane or criminal personalities. How shall we make this
world safe for ourselves as animals and as spirits? If we can answer
that question, we’ve discovered what to do.”

Mr. Propter halted at what appeared to be a wayside shrine, opened a
small steel door with a key he carried in his pocket, and, lifting the
receiver of the telephone within, announced their presence to an
invisible porter, somewhere on the other side of the moat. They walked
on.

“What are the things that make the world unsafe for animals and
spirits?” Mr. Propter continued. “Obviously, greed and fear, lust for
power, hatred, anger . . .”

At this moment, a dazzling light struck them full in the face and was
almost immediately turned out.

“What in heaven’s name . . . ?” Jeremy began.

“Don’t worry,” said Peter. “They only want to make sure it’s us, not a
set of gangsters. It’s just the searchlight.”

“Just our old friend Jo expressing his personality,” said Mr. Propter,
taking Jeremy’s arm. “In other words, proclaiming to the world that he’s
afraid because he’s been greedy and domineering. And he’s been greedy
and domineering, among other reasons, because the present system puts a
premium on those qualities. Our problem is to find a system that will
give the fewest possible opportunities for unfortunate people, like Jo
Stoyte, to realize their potentialities.”

The bridge had swung down as they approached the moat, and now the
boards rang hollow under their feet.

“You’d like Socialism, Pete,” Mr. Propter continued. “But Socialism
seems to be fatally committed to centralization and standardized urban
mass production all round. Besides, I see too many occasions for
bullying there—too many opportunities for bossy people to display their
bossiness, for sluggish people to sit back and be slaves.”

The portcullis rose, the gates slid back to receive them.

“If you want to make the world safe for animals and spirits, you must
have a system that reduces the amount of fear and greed and hatred and
domineering to their minimum, which means that you must have enough
economic security to get rid at least of that source of worry. Enough
personal responsibility to prevent people from wallowing in sloth.
Enough property to protect them from being bullied by the rich, but not
enough to permit them to bully. And the same thing with political rights
and authority—enough of the first for the protection of the many, too
little of the second for domination by the few.”

“Sounds like peasants to me,” said Pete dubiously.

“Peasants plus small machines and power. Which means that they’re no
longer peasants, except insofar as they’re largely self-sufficient.”

“And who makes the machines? More peasants?”

“No; the same sort of people as make them now. What can’t be made
satisfactorily except by mass production methods, obviously has to go on
being made that way. About a third of all production—that’s what it
seems to amount to. The other two-thirds are more economically produced
at home or in a small workshop. The immediate, practical problem is to
work out the technique of that small-scale production. At present, all
the research is going to the discovery of new fields for mass
production.”

In the Grotto a row of twenty-five-watt electric candles burned in
perpetual devotion before the Virgin. Above, on the tennis court, the
second butler, two maids and the head electrician were playing mixed
doubles by the light of arc lamps.

“And do you figure people will want to leave the cities and live the way
you’re telling us, on little farms?”

“Ah, now you’re talking, Pete!” said Mr. Propter approvingly. “Frankly,
then, I don’t expect them to leave the cities, any more than I expect
them to stop having wars and revolutions. All I expect is that if I do
my work and it’s reasonably good, there’ll be a few people who will want
to collaborate with me. That’s all.”

“But if you’re not going to get more than just a few, what’s the point?
Why not try to do something with the cities and the factories, seeing
that that’s where most people are going to stay? Wouldn’t that be more
practical?”

“It depends how one defines the word,” said Mr. Propter. “For example,
you seem to think that it’s practical to help a great many people to
pursue a policy which is known to be fatal; but that it isn’t practical
to help a very few people to pursue a policy which there is every reason
to regard as sound. I don’t agree with you.”

“But the many are there. You’ve got to do something about them.”

“You’ve got to do something about them,” Mr. Propter agreed. “But at the
same time, there are circumstances in which you can’t do anything. You
can’t do anything effective about any one if he doesn’t choose or isn’t
able to collaborate with you in doing the right thing. For example,
you’ve got to help people who are being killed off by malaria. But in
practice you can’t help them if they refuse to screen their windows and
insist on taking walks near stagnant water in the twilight. It’s exactly
the same with the diseases of the body politic. You’ve got to help
people if they’re faced by war or ruin or enslavement, if they’re under
the menace of sudden revolution or slow degeneration. You’ve got to
help. But the fact remains, nevertheless, that you can’t help if they
persist in the course of behaviour which originally got them into their
trouble. For example, you can’t preserve people from the horrors of war
if they won’t give up the pleasures of nationalism. You can’t save them
from slumps and depressions so long as they go on thinking exclusively
in terms of money and regarding money as the supreme good. You can’t
avert revolution and enslavement if they will identify progress with the
increase of centralization and prosperity with the intensifying of mass
production. You can’t preserve them from collective madness and suicide
if they persist in paying divine honours to ideals which are merely
projections of their own personalities—in other words, if they persist
in worshipping themselves rather than God. So much for conditional
clauses. Now let’s consider the actual facts of the present situation.
For our purposes, the most significant facts are these: the inhabitants
of every civilized country are menaced; all desire passionately to be
saved from impending disaster; the overwhelming majority refuse to
change the habits of thought, feeling and action which are directly
responsible for their present plight. In other words, they can’t be
helped, because they are not prepared to collaborate with any helper who
proposes a rational and realistic course of action. In these
circumstances, what ought the would-be helper do?”

“He’s got to do something” said Pete.

“Even if he thereby accelerates the process of destruction?” Mr. Propter
smiled sadly. “Doing for doing’s sake,” he went on. “I prefer Oscar
Wilde. Bad art can’t do so much harm as ill-considered political action.
Doing good on any but the tiniest scale requires more intelligence than
most people possess. They ought to be content with keeping out of
mischief; it’s easier and it doesn’t have such frightful results as
trying to do good in the wrong way. Twiddling the thumbs and having good
manners are much more helpful, in most cases, than rushing about with
good intentions, doing things.”

Floodlighted, Giambologna’s nymph was still inde-fatigably spouting away
against the velvet background of the darkness. Electricity and
sculpture, Jeremy was thinking as he looked at her—predestined partners.
The things that old Bernini could have done with a battery of
projectors! The startling lights, the rich fantastic shadows! The female
mystics in orgasm, the conglobulated angels, the skeletons whizzing up
out of papal tombs like sky-rockets, the saints in their private
hurricane of flapping draperies and wind-blown marble curls! What fun!
What splendour! What self-parodying emphasis! What staggering beauty!
What enormous bad taste! And what a shame that the man should have had
to be content with mere daylight and tallow candles!

“No,” Mr. Propter was saying in answer to a protesting question from the
young man, “no, I certainly wouldn’t advise their abandonment. I’d
advise the constant reiteration of the truths they’ve been told again
and again during the past three thousand years. And, in the intervals,
I’d do active work on the techniques of a better system, and, I’d
collaborate with the few who understand what the system is and are ready
to pay the price demanded for its realization. Incidentally, the price,
measured in human terms, is enormously high. Though, of course, much
lower than the price demanded by the nature of things from those who
persist in behaving in the standard human way. Much lower than the price
of war, for example—particularly war with contemporary weapons. Much
lower than the price of economic depression and political enslavement.”

“And what happens,” Jeremy asked in a fluting voice, “what happens when
you’ve had your war? Will the few be any better off than the many?”

“Oddly enough,” Mr. Propter answered, “there’s just a chance they may
be. For this reason. If they’ve learnt the technique of self-sufficiency
they’ll find it easier to survive a time of anarchy than the people who
depend for their livelihood on a highly centralized and specialized
organization. You can’t work for the good without incidentally preparing
yourself for the worst.”

He stopped speaking, and they walked on through a silence broken only by
the sound, from somewhere high overhead in the castle, of two radios
tuned to different stations. The baboons, on the contrary, were already
asleep.


Chapter XII

IN THE columned Lady Chapel, with its hat racks and its Magnascos, its
Brancusi and its Etruscan sarcophagus used as an umbrella stand, Jeremy
Pordage began, all of a sudden, to feel himself more cheerful and at
home.

“It’s as though one were walking into the mind of a lunatic,” he said
smiling happily, as he hung up his hat and followed the others into the
great hall. “Or, rather, an idiot,” he qualified. “Because I suppose a
lunatic’s a person with a one-track mind. Whereas this . . .” he made a
circular gesture . . . “this is a no-track mind. No-track because
infinity-track. It’s the mind of an idiot of genius. Positively stuffed
with the best that has been thought and said.” He pronounced the phrase
with a kind of old-maidish precision that made it sound entirely
ludicrous. “Greece, Mexico, backsides, crucifixions, machinery, George
IV, Amida Buddha, science, Christian science, Turkish baths—anything you
like to mention. And every item is perfectly irrelevant to every other
item.” He rubbed his hands together, he twinkled delightedly through his
bifocals. “Disquieting at first. But do you know? I’m beginning to enjoy
it. I find I really rather like living inside an idiot.”

“I don’t doubt it,” said Mr. Propter, matter-of-factly. “It’s a common
taste.”

Jeremy was offended. “One wouldn’t have thought this sort of thing was
very common,” he said, nodding in the direction of the Greco.

“It isn’t,” Mr. Propter agreed. “But you can live in an idiot-universe
without going to the expense of actually constructing it out of
ferro-concrete and filling it with works of art.”

There was a pause while they entered the lift.

“You can live inside a cultural idiot,” Mr. Propter went on. “Inside a
patchwork of mutually irrelevant words and bits of information. Or, if
you’re a lowbrow, you can live in the idiot world of the homme moyen
sensuel—the world where the irrelevances consist of newspapers and
baseball, of sex and worry, of advertising and money and halitosis and
keeping up with the Joneses. There’s a hierarchy of idiocies. Naturally,
you and I prefer the classiest variety.”

The elevator came to a halt. Pete opened the gate, and they stepped out
into the white-washed corridor of the sub-sub-basement.

“Nothing like an idiot-universe if you want a quiet irresponsible life.
That is, provided you can stand the idiocy,” Mr. Propter added. “A lot
of people can’t. After a time, they get tired of their no-track world.
They feel the need of being concentrated and directed. They want their
lives to have some sense. That’s when they go Communist, or join the
Church of Rome, or take up with the Oxford Group. Anything provided it
will make them one-trackers. And, of course, in the overwhelming
majority of cases they choose the wrong track. Inevitably. Because there
are a million wrong tracks and only one right—a million ideals, a
million projections of personality, and only one God and one beatific
vision. From no-track idiocy most of them pass on to some one-track
lunacy, generally criminal. It makes them feel better, of course; but,
pragmatically, the last state is always worse than the first. If you
don’t want the only thing worth having, my advice is: Stick to idiocy.
Is this where you work?” he went on in another tone, as Jeremy opened
the door of his vaulted study. “And those are the Hauberk Papers, I take
it. Plenty of them. The title’s extinct, isn’t it?”

Jeremy nodded. “And so’s the family—or very nearly. Nothing left but two
old maids in a haunted house without any money.” He twinkled, uttered
his little preparatory cough and, patting his bald crown, said with an
exaggerated precision: “Decayed gentlewomen.” Exquisite locution! It was
one of his favourites. “And the decay must have gone pretty far,” he
added. “Otherwise they wouldn’t have sold the papers. They’ve refused
all previous offers.”

“How fortunate one is not to belong to an ancient family!” said Mr.
Propter. “All those inherited loyalties to bricks and mortar, all those
obligations to tombstones and bits of paper and painted canvases!” He
shook his head. “What a dismal form of compulsory idolatry.”

Jeremy, meanwhile, had crossed the room, opened a drawer and returned
with a file of papers which he handed to Mr. Propter. “Look at these.”

Mr. Propter looked. “From Molinos!” he said in surprise.

“I thought that would be your cup of tea,” said Jeremy, deriving a sly
pleasure from talking about mysticism in the most absurdly inappropriate
language.

Mr. Propter smiled. “My cup of tea,” he repeated. “But not my favourite
blend. There was something not quite right about poor Molinos. A strain
of—how shall I put it?—of negative sensuality. He enjoyed suffering.
Mental suffering, the dark night of the soul—he really wallowed in it.
No doubt, poor fellow, he sincerely believed he was destroying
self-will; but without his being aware of it, he was always turning the
process of destruction into another affirmation of self-will. Which was
a pity,” Mr. Propter added, taking the letters to the light, to look at
them more closely, “because he certainly did have some first-hand
experience of reality. Which only shows that you’re never certain of
getting there, even when you’ve come near enough to see what sort of
thing you’re going to. Here’s a fine sentence,” he put in
parenthetically. “ ‘Ame a Dios,’ ” he read aloud, “ ‘como es en si y no
como se lo dice y forma su imagination.’ ”

Jeremy almost laughed. The coincidence that Mr. Propter should have
picked on the same passage as had caught Dr. Obispo’s eye that morning
gave him a peculiar satisfaction. “Pity he couldn’t have read a little
Kant,” he said. “Dios en si seems to be much the same as Ding an sich.
Unknowable by the human mind.”

“Unknowable by the personal human mind,” Mr. Propter agreed, “because
personality is self-will, and self-will is the negation of reality, the
denial of God. So far as the ordinary human personality is concerned,
Kant is perfectly right in saying that the thing in itself is
unknowable. Dios en si can’t be comprehended by a consciousness
dominated by an ego. But now suppose there were some way of eliminating
the ego from consciousness. If you could do this, you’d get close to
reality, you’d be in a position to comprehend Dios en si. Now, the
interesting thing is that, as a matter of brute fact, this can be done,
has been done again and again. Kant’s blind alley is for people who
choose to remain on the human level. If you choose to climb on to the
level of eternity, the impasse no longer exists.”

There was a silence. Mr. Propter turned over the sheets, pausing every
now and then to decipher a line or two of the fine caligraphy. “ ‘Tres
maneras hay de silencio,’ ” he read aloud after a moment. “ ‘El primero
es de palabras, el segundo de deseos y el tercero de pensamientos.’ He
writes nicely, don’t you think? Probably that had a lot to do with his
extraordinary success. How disastrous when a man knows how to say the
wrong things in the right way! Incidentally,” he added, looking up with
a smile into Jeremy’s face, “how few great stylists have ever said any
of the right things. That’s one of the troubles about education in the
humanities. The best that has been thought and said. Very nice. But best
in which way? Alas, only in form. The content is generally deplorable.”
He turned back to the letters. After a moment, another passage caught
his attention. “ ‘Oirá y leerd el hombre racional estas espirituales
materias, pero no llegerá, dice San Pablo, a comprenderlas: Animalis
homo non percipit ea quae sunt spiritus.’ And not merely animalis homo,”
Mr. Propter commented. “Also humanus homo. Indeed, above all humanus
homo. And you might even add that humanus homo non percipit ea quae sunt
animalis. Insofar as we think as strictly human beings, we fail to
understand what is below us no less than what is above. And then there’s
a further trouble. Suppose we stop thinking in a strictly human fashion;
suppose we make it possible for ourselves to have direct intuitions of
the non-human realities in which, so to speak, we’re imbedded. Well and
good. But what happens when we try to pass on the knowledge so acquired?
We’re floored. The only vocabulary at our disposal is a vocabulary
primarily intended for thinking strictly human thoughts about strictly
human concerns. But the things we want to talk about are non-human
realities and non-human ways of thinking. Hence the radical inadequacy
of all statements about our animal nature and, even more, of all
statements about God or spirit, or eternity.”

Jeremy uttered a little cough. “I can think of some pretty adequate
statements about . . .” he paused, beamed, caressed his polished scalp;
. . . “well, about the more intime aspects of our animal nature,” he
concluded demurely. His face suddenly clouded; he had remembered his
treasure trove and Dr. Obispo’s impudent theft.

“But what does their adequacy depend on?” Mr. Propter asked. “Not so
much on the writer’s skill as the reader’s response. The direct, animal
intuitions aren’t rendered by words; the words merely remind you of your
memories of similar experiences. Notus color is what Virgil says when
he’s talking about the sensations experienced by Vulcan in the embraces
of Venus. Familiar heat. No attempt at description or analysis; no
effort to get any kind of verbal equivalence to the facts. Just a
reminder. But that reminder is enough to make the passage one of the
most voluptuous affairs in Latin poetry. Virgil left the work to his
readers. And, by and large, that’s what most erotic writers are content
to do. The few who try to do the work themselves have to flounder about
with metaphors and similes and analogies. You know the sort of stuff:
fire, whirlwinds, heaven, darts.”

“ ‘The vale of lilies,’ ” Jeremy quoted, “ ‘And the bower of bliss.’ ”

“Not to mention the expense of spirit in a waste of shame,” said Mr.
Propter; “and all the other figures of speech. An endless variety, with
only one feature in common—they’re all composed of words which don’t
connote any aspect of the subject they’re supposed to describe.”

“Saying one thing in order to mean another,” Jeremy put in. “Isn’t that
one of the possible definitions of imaginative literature?”

“Maybe,” Mr. Propter answered. “But what chiefly interests me at the
moment is the fact that our immediate animal intuitions have never been
given any but the most summary and inadequate labels. We say ‘red,’ for
example, or ‘pleasant,’ and just leave it at that without trying to find
verbal equivalents for the various aspects of perceiving redness or
experiencing pleasure.”

“Well, isn’t that because you can’t go beyond ‘red’ or ‘pleasant’?” said
Pete. “They’re just facts, ultimate facts.”

“Like giraffes,” Jeremy added. “ ‘There ain’t no such animal,’ is what
the rationalist says, when he’s shown its portrait. And then in it
walks, neck and all!”

“You’re right,” said Mr. Propter. “A giraffe is an ultimate fact. You’ve
got to accept it, whether you like it or not. But accepting the giraffe
doesn’t prevent you from studying and describing it. And the same
applies to redness or pleasure or notus calor. They can be analysed, and
the results of the analysis can be described by means of suitable words.
But as a matter of historical fact, this hasn’t been done.”

Pete nodded slowly. “Why do you figure that should be?” he asked.

“Well,” said Mr. Propter, “I should say it’s because men have always
been more interested in doing and feeling than in understanding. Always
too busy making good and having thrills and doing what’s ‘done’ and
worshipping the local idols—too busy with all this even to feel any
desire to have an adequate verbal instrument for elucidating their
experiences. Look at the languages we’ve inherited—incomparably
effective in rousing violent and exciting emotions; an ever-present help
for those who want to get on in the world; worse than useless for any
one who aspires to disinterested understanding. Hence, even on the
strictly human level, the need for special impersonal languages like
mathematics and technical vocabularies of the various sciences. Wherever
men have felt the wish to understand, they’ve given up the traditional
language and substituted for it another special language, more precise
and, above all, less contaminated with self-interest.

“Now, here’s a very significant fact. Imaginative literature deals
mainly with the everyday life of men and women; and the everyday life of
men and women consists, to a large extent, of immediate animal
experiences. But the makers of imaginative literature have never forged
an impersonal, uncontaminated language for the elucidation of immediate
experiences. They’re content to use the bare, unanalysed names of
experiences as mere aids to their own and their reader’s memory. Every
direct intuition is notus calor, with the connotation of the words left
open, so to speak, for each individual reader to supply according to the
nature of his or her particular experiences in the past. Simple, but not
exactly scientific. But then people don’t read literature in order to
understand; they read it because they want to re-live the feelings and
sensations which they found exciting in the past. Art can be a lot of
things; but in actual practice, most of it is merely the mental
equivalent of alcohol and cantharides.”

Mr. Propter looked down again at the close-set lines of Molinos’
epistle. “ ‘Oirá y leerá el hombre racional estas espirituales
materias,’ ” he read out once more. “ ‘Pero non llegerá a comprenderlas’
He’ll hear and read these things, but he won’t succeed in understanding
them. And he won’t succeed,” said Mr. Propter, closing the file and
handing it back to Jeremy, “he won’t succeed for one of two excellent
reasons. Either he has never seen the giraffes in question, and so,
being an hombre racional, knows quite well that there ain’t no such
animal. Or else he has had glimpses of the creatures, or has some other
reason for believing in their existence, but can’t understand what the
experts say about them; can’t understand because of the inadequacy of
the language in which the fauna of the spiritual world are ordinarily
described. In other words, he either hasn’t had the immediate experience
of eternity and so has no reason to believe that eternity exists; or
else he does believe that eternity exists, but can’t make head or tail
of the language in which it’s talked about by those who have had
experience of it. Furthermore, when he wants to talk about eternity
himself—and he may wish to do so either in order to communicate his own
experiences to others or to understand them better, from the human point
of view, himself—he finds himself on the horns of a dilemma. For either
he recognizes that the existing language is unsuitable—in which case he
has only two rational choices: to say nothing at all, or to invent a new
and better technical language of his own, a calculus of eternity, so to
speak, a special algebra of spiritual experience (and if he does invent
it, nobody who hasn’t learnt it will know what he’s talking about). So
much for the first horn of the dilemma. The second horn is reserved for
those who don’t recognize the inadequacy of the existing language; or
else who do recognize it, but are irrationally hopeful enough to take a
chance with an instrument which they know to be worthless. These people
will write in the existing language, and their writing will be, in
consequence, more or less completely misunderstood by most of their
readers. Inevitably, because the words they use don’t correspond to the
things they’re talking about. Most of them are words taken from the
language of everyday life. But the language of everyday life refers
almost exclusively to strictly human affairs. What happens when you
apply words derived from that language to experiences on the plane of
the spirit, the plane of timeless experience? Obviously, you create a
misunderstanding; you say what you didn’t mean to say.”

Pete interrupted him. “I’d like an example, Mr. Propter,” he said.

“All right,” the other answered. “Let’s take the commonest word in all
religious literature: love. On the human level the word means—what?
Practically everything from Mother to the Marquis de Sade.”

The name reminded Jeremy yet again of what had happened to the
“Cent-Vingt Jours de Sodome.” Really it was too insufferable! The
impudence of it ... !

“We don’t even make the simple Greek distinction between erao and philo,
eros and agape. With us, everything is just love, whether it’s
self-sacrificing or possessive, whether it’s friendship or lust or
homicidal lunacy. It’s all just love,” he repeated. “Idiotic word! Even
on the human level it’s hopelessly ambiguous. And when you begin using
it in relation to experiences on the level of eternity—well, it’s simply
disastrous. ‘The love of God.’ ‘God’s love for us.’ ‘The saint’s love
for his fellows.’ What does the word stand for in such phrases? And in
what way is this related to what it stands for when it’s applied to a
young mother suckling her baby? Or to Romeo climbing into Juliet’s
bedroom? Or to Othello as he strangles Desdemona? Or to the research
worker who loves his science? Or to the patriot who’s ready to die for
his country—to die, and, in the meantime, to kill, steal, lie, swindle
and torture for it? Is there really anything in common between what the
word stands for in these contexts and what it stands for when one talks,
let us say, of the Buddha’s love for all sentient beings? Obviously, the
answer is: No, there isn’t. On the human level, the word stands for a
great many different states of mind and ways of behaving. Dissimilar in
many respects, but alike at least in this: they’re all accompanied by
emotional excitement and they all contain an element of craving. Whereas
the most characteristic features of the enlightened person’s experience
are serenity and disinterestedness. In other words, the absence of
excitement and the absence of craving.”

“The absence of excitement and the absence of craving,” Pete said to
himself, while the image of Virginia in her yachting cap, riding her
pink scooter, kneeling in her shorts under the arch of the Grotto, swam
before his inward eye.

“Distinctions in fact ought to be represented by distinctions in
language,” Mr. Propter was saying. “If they’re not, you can’t expect to
talk sense. In spite of which, we insist on using one word to connote
entirely different things. ‘God is love,’ we say. The word’s the same as
the one we use when we talk about ‘being in love,’ or ‘loving one’s
children’ or ‘being inspired by love of country.’ Consequently we tend
to think that the thing we’re talking about must be more or less the
same. We imagine in a vague, reverential way, that God is composed of a
kind of immensely magnified yearning.” Mr. Propter shook his head.
“Creating God in our own image. It flatters our vanity, and of course we
prefer vanity to understanding. Hence those confusions of language. If
we wanted to understand the world, if we wanted to think about it
realistically, we should say that we were in love, but that God was
x-love. In this way people who had never had any first-hand experience
on the level of eternity would at least be given a chance of knowing
intellectually that what happens on that level is not the same as what
happens on the strictly human level. They’d know, because they’d seen it
in print, that there was some kind of difference between love and
x-love. Consequently, they’d have less excuse than people have today for
imagining that God was like themselves, only a bit more so on the side
of respectability and a bit less so, of course, on the other side.

“And naturally what applies to the word ‘love’ applies to all the other
words taken over from the language of everyday life and used to describe
spiritual experience. Words like ‘knowledge,’ ‘wisdom,’ ‘power,’ ‘mind,’
‘peace,’ ‘joy,’ ‘freedom,’ ‘good.’ They stand for certain things on the
human level. But the things that writers force them to stand for when
they describe events on the level of eternity are quite different. Hence
the use of them merely confuses the issue. They just make it all but
impossible for any one to know what’s being talked about. And,
meanwhile, you must remember that these words from the language of
everyday life aren’t the only trouble-makers. People who write about
experiences on the level of eternity also make use of technical phrases
borrowed from various systems of philosophy.”

“Isn’t that your algebra of spiritual experience?” said Pete. “Isn’t
that the special, scientific language you’ve been talking about?”

“It’s an attempt at such an algebra,” Mr. Propter answered. “But
unfortunately a very unsuccessful attempt. Unsuccessful because this
particular algebra is derived from the language of metaphysics—bad
metaphysics, incidentally. The people who use it are committing
themselves, whether they like it or not, to an explanation of the facts
as well as a description. An explanation of actual experiences in terms
of metaphysical entities, whose existence is purely hypothetical and
can’t be demonstrated. In other words, they’re describing the facts in
terms of figments of the imagination; they’re explaining the known in
terms of the unknown. Take a few examples. Here’s one: ‘ecstasy.’ It’s a
technical term that refers to the soul’s ability to stand outside the
body—and of course it carries the further implication that we know what
the soul is and how it’s related to the body and the rest of the
universe. Or take another instance, a technical term that is essential
to the Catholic theory of mysticism, ‘infused contemplation’ Here the
implication is that there’s somebody outside us who pours a certain kind
of psychological experience into our minds. The further implication is
that we know who that somebody is. Or consider even ‘union with God.’
,What it means depends on the upbringing of the speaker. It may mean
‘union with the Jehovah of the Old Testament’ Or it may mean ‘union with
the personal deity of orthodox Christianity’ It may mean what it
probably would have meant, say, to Eckhart, ‘union with the impersonal
Godhead of which the God of orthodoxy is an aspect and a particular
limitation’ Similarly, if you were an Indian, it may mean ‘union with
Isvara’ or ‘union with Brahman’ In every case, the term implies a
previous knowledge about the nature of things which are either
completely unknowable, or at best only to be inferred from the nature of
the experiences which the term is supposed to describe. So there,” Mr.
Propter concluded, “you have the second horn of the dilemma—the horn on
which all those who use the current religious vocabulary to describe
their experiences on the level of eternity inevitably impale
themselves.”

“And the way between the horns?” Jeremy questioned. “Isn’t it the way of
the professional psychologists who have written about mysticism? They’ve
evolved a pretty sensible language. You haven’t mentioned them.”

“I haven’t mentioned them,” said Mr. Propter, “for the same reason as in
talking about beauty I shouldn’t mention professional aestheticians who
had never been inside a picture gallery.”

“You mean, they don’t know what they’re talking about?”

Mr. Propter smiled. “I’d put it another way,” he said. “They talk about
what they know. But what they know isn’t worth talking about. For what
they know is only the literature of mysticism—not the experience.”

“Then there’s no way between the horns,” Jeremy concluded. His eyes
twinkled behind his spectacles; he smiled like a child, taking a sly
triumph in some small consummation of naughtiness. “What fun it is when
there isn’t a way between!” he went on. “It makes the world seem so
deliciously cosy, when all the issues are barred and there’s nowhere to
go to with all your brass bands and shining armour. Onward, Christian
soldiers! Forward, the Light Brigade! Excelsior! And all the time you’re
just going round and round—head to tail, follow-my Fuehrer—like Fabre’s
caterpillars. That really gives me a great deal of pleasure!”

This time Mr. Propter laughed outright. “I’m sorry to have to disappoint
you,” he said. “But unfortunately there is a way between the horns. The
practical way. You can go and find out what it means for yourself, by
first-hand experience. Just as you can find out what El Greco’s
Crucifixion of St. Peter looks like by taking the elevator and going up
to the hall. Only in this case, I’m afraid, there isn’t any elevator.
You have to go up on your own legs. And make no mistake,” he added,
turning to Pete, “there’s an awful lot of stairs.”

Dr. Obispo straightened himself up, took the tubes of the stethoscope
out of his ears and stowed the instrument away in his pocket along with
the “Cent-Vingt Jours de Sodome.”

“Anything bad?” Mr. Stoyte asked anxiously.

Dr. Obispo shook his head and gave him a smile of reassurance. “No
influenza anyhow,” he said. “Just a slight intensification of the
bronchial condition. I’ll give you something for it tonight before you
go to bed.”

Mr. Stoyte’s face relaxed into cheerfulness. “Glad it was only a false
alarm,” he said and turned away to get his clothes, which were lying in
a heap on the sofa, under the Watteau.

From her seat at the soda counter, Virginia let out a whoop of triumph.
“Isn’t that just swell!” she cried. Then in another, graver tone, “You
know, Uncle Jo,” she added, “he’s got me panicked about that cough of
yours. Panicked,” she repeated.

Uncle Jo grinned triumphantly and slapped his chest so hard that its
hairy, almost female accumulations of flesh shivered like jellies under
the blow. “Nothing wrong with me” he boasted.

Virginia watched him over the top of her glass, as he got into his shirt
and knotted his tie. The expression on her innocent young face was one
of perfect serenity. But behind those limpid blue eyes her mind was
simmering with activity. “Was that a close call?” she kept saying to
herself. “Gee, was it close!” At the recollection of that sudden violent
start at the sound of the elevator gate being opened, of that wild
scramble as the footsteps approached along the corridor, she felt
herself tingling with a delicious mixture of fear and amusement, of
apprehension and triumph. It was the sensation she used to have as a
child, playing hide and seek in the dark. A close call! And hadn’t Sig
been wonderful! What presence of mind! And that stethoscope thing he
pulled out of his pocket—what a brain wave! It had saved the situation!
Because, without the stethoscope, Uncle Jo would have put on one of his
jealousy acts. Though what right he had to be jealous, Virginia went on
to reflect, with a strong sense of injury, she really didn’t know.
Seeing that nothing had happened except just a little reading aloud. And
anyhow why shouldn’t a girl be allowed to read that sort of thing if she
wanted to? Especially as it was in French. And, besides, who was Uncle
Jo to be prudish, she’d like to know? Getting mad with people only for
telling you a funny story, when just look what he himself was doing all
the time—and then expecting you to talk like Louisa M. Alcott, and
thinking you ought to be protected from hearing so much as a dirty word!
And the way he simply wouldn’t allow her to tell the truth about
herself, even if she had wanted to. Making a build-up of her as somebody
quite different from what she really was. Acting almost as though she
were Daisy Mae in the comic strip and he a sort of Little Abner rescuing
her in the nick of time. Though, of course, he had to admit that it had
happened at least once before he came along, because if it hadn’t,
there’d have been no excuse for him. It had happened, but quite
unwillingly—you know, practically a rape—or else some fellow taking
advantage of her being so dumb and innocent—at the Congo Club with
nothing on but a G-string and some talcum powder! And naturally she was
always supposed to have hated it; crying her eyes out all the time until
Uncle Jo came along; and then everything was different. But in that
case, it now suddenly occurred to Virginia, if that was the way he
thought about her, what the hell did he mean by coming home like this at
seven-fifteen, when he’d told her he wouldn’t be back till eight? The
old double-crosser! Was he trying to spy on her? Because, if so, she
wasn’t going to stand for it; if so, then it just served him right that
that was what Sig had been reading to her. He was just getting what he
deserved for snooping around, trying to catch her doing something that
wasn’t right. Well, if that was how he was going to act, she’d tell Sig
to come every day and read another chapter. Though how on earth the man
who wrote the book was going to keep it up for a hundred and twenty
days, she really couldn’t imagine. Considering what had happened already
in the first week—and here was she, figuring that there wasn’t anything
she didn’t know! Well, one lived and learnt. Though there was some of it
she really hadn’t in the least wanted to learn. Things that made you
feel sick to your stomach. Horrible! As bad as having babies! (She
shuddered.) Not that there weren’t a lot of funny things in the book
too. The piece she had made Sig read over again—that was grand, that had
given her a real kick. And that other bit where the girl . . .

“Well, Baby,” said Mr. Stoyte, as he did up the last button of his
waistcoat. “You’re not saying much, are you? A penny for your thoughts.”

Virginia raised that childishly short upper lip in a smile that made his
heart melt with tenderness and desire. “I was thinking about you, Uncle
Jo,” she said.


Chapter XIII

If thou appear untouch’d by solemn thought,

Thy nature is not therefore less divine;

Thou liest in Abraham’s bosom all the year;

And worshipps’t at the Temple’s inner shrine,

God being with thee when we know it not.

“AND very nice too,” Jeremy said aloud. Transparent was the word, he
reflected. The meaning was there like a fly in amber. Or, rather, there
was no fly; there was only the amber; and the amber was the meaning. He
looked at his watch. Three minutes to midnight. He closed his
Wordsworth—and to think, he went on bitterly to remind himself, to think
that he might have been refreshing his memory of “Félicia”!—laid the
volume down on the table beside his bed and took off his glasses.
Deprived of their six and a half diopters of correction, his eyes were
instantly reduced to a state of physiological despair. Curved crystal
had become their element; unspectacled, they were like a pair of jellied
sea creatures, suddenly taken out of water. Then the light went out; and
it was as though the poor things had been mercifully dropped, for safe
keeping, into an aquarium.

Jeremy stretched under the bed-clothes and yawned. What a day! But now,
thank God, the paradise of bed. The Blessed Damozel leaned out from the
gold bed of heaven. But these sheets were cotton ones, not linen; which
was really a bit discreditable in a house like this! A house full of
Rubenses and Grecos—and your sheets were cotton! But that Crucifixion of
St. Peter—what a really staggering machine! At least as good as the
Assumption at Toledo. Which had probably been blown up by this time,
incidentally. Just to demonstrate what happened when people took things
too seriously. Not but that, he went on to reflect, there wasn’t
something rather impressive about that old Propter-Object. (For that was
what he had decided to call the man in his own mind and when he wrote to
his mother; the Propter-Object.) A bit of an Ancient Mariner, perhaps.
The wedding guest, he beat his breast on occasions; ought perhaps to
have beaten it more often than he had done, seeing what a frightful
subversion of all the common decencies and, a fortiori, the common
indecencies (such as Félicia, such as every other Friday afternoon in
Maida Vale), the creature was inculcating. Not without a considerable
persuasiveness, damn his glittering eyes! For this particular Mariner
not only held you with that eye of his; he was also and simultaneously
the loud bassoon you wanted to hear. One listened without
reluctance—though of course one had no intention of permitting one’s own
particular little structure of decencies and indecencies to be
subverted. One was not going to allow religion (of all things!) to
invade the sanctities of private life. An Englishman’s home is his
castle; and curiously enough, an American’s castle, as he had discovered
after the first shock began to wear off, was turning out to be this
particular Englishman’s home. His spiritual home. Because it was the
embodiment of an imbecile’s no-track mind. Because there were no issues
and nothing led anywhere and the dilemmas had an infinity of horns and
you went round and round, like Fabre’s caterpillars, in a closed
universe of utter cosiness—round and round among the Hauberk Papers,
from St. Peter to La Petite Morphil to Giambologna to the gilded
Bodhisattvas in the cellar to the baboons to the Marquis de Sade to St.
François de Sales to Felicia and round again in due course to St. Peter.
Round and round, like caterpillars inside the mind of an imbecile; round
and round in an infinite cosiness of issueless thoughts and feelings and
actions, of hermetically bottled art and learning, of culture for its
own sake, of self-sufficient little decencies and indecencies, of
impassable dilemmas and moral questions sufficiently answered by the
circumambient idiocy.

Round and round, round and round, from Peter’s feet to Morphil’s little
buttocks to the baboons’, from the beautiful Chinese spiral of the folds
in the Buddha’s robe to the humming-bird drinking in mid-air to Peter’s
feet again with the nails in them . . . His drowsiness darkened into
sleep.

In another room on the same floor of the donjon Pete Boone was not even
trying to get to sleep; he was trying, on the contrary, to figure things
out. To figure out science and Mr. Propter, social justice and eternity
and Virginia and Anti-Fascism. It wasn’t easy. Because if Mr. Propter
was right, then you’d have to start thinking quite differently about
almost everything. “Disinterested quest for truth”—that was what you
said (if you were ever forced to say anything so embarrassing) about why
you were a biologist. And in the case of Socialism it was “humanity,” it
was “the greatest happiness of the greatest number,” it was
“progress”—and, of course, that linked up with biology again: happiness
and progress through science as well as Socialism. And while happiness
and progress were on the way there was loyalty to the cause. He
remembered a piece about loyalty by Josiah Royce, a piece he had had to
read in his sophomore year at college. Something about all loyal people
grasping in their own way some form of religious truth—winning some kind
of genuine religious insight. It had made a big impression on him at the
time. He had just lost his faith in that old Blood-of-the-Lamb business
he’d been brought up in, and this had come as a kind of reassurance, had
made him feel that after all he was religious even if he didn’t go to
church any more—religious because he was loyal. Loyal to causes, loyal
to friends. He had been religious, it had always seemed to him, over
there in Spain. Religious, again, when he felt that way about Virginia.
And yet, if Mr. Propter was right, old Royce’s ideas about loyalty were
all wrong. Being loyal didn’t of itself give you religious insight. On
the contrary, it might prevent you from having insight—indeed, was
absolutely certain to prevent you, if you gave your loyalty to anything
less than the highest cause of all and the highest cause of all (if Mr.
Propter was right) was almost terrible in its farness and strangeness.
Almost terrible; and yet the more he thought about it, the more dubious
he felt about everything else. Perhaps it really was the highest. But if
it was, then Socialism wasn’t enough. And it wasn’t enough, because
humanity wasn’t enough. Because the greatest happiness didn’t happen to
be in the place where people had thought it was, because you couldn’t
make it come by doing things in the sort of fields you worked in if you
were a social reformer. The best you could do in those fields was to
make it easier for people to go on to where the greatest happiness could
be had. And, of course, what applied to Socialism would apply to biology
or any other science, if you thought of it as a means to progress.
Because, if Mr. Propter was right, then what people called progress
wasn’t progress. That is, it wouldn’t be progress, unless it had made it
easier for people to go on to where the greatest happiness actually was.
Easier, in other words, to be loyal to the highest cause of all. And,
obviously, if that was your standard, you had to think twice about using
progress as a justification for science. And then there was that
disinterested quest for truth. But again, if Mr. Propter was right,
biology and the rest were the disinterested quest for only one aspect of
truth. But a half-truth was a falsehood, and it remained a falsehood
even when you’d told it in the belief that it was the whole truth. So it
looked as though that justification wouldn’t do either—or at any rate as
though it wouldn’t do unless you were at the same time disinterestedly
trying to discover the other aspect of truth, the aspect you were
looking for when you gave your loyalty to the highest cause of all. And
meanwhile what about Virginia, he asked himself in mounting anguish,
what about Virginia? For, if Mr. Propter was right, then even Virginia
wasn’t enough, even Virginia might actually be an obstacle to prevent
him from giving his loyalty to the highest cause of all. Even those eyes
and her innocence and that utterly adorable mouth; even what he felt
about her; even love itself, even the best kind of love (for he could
honestly say that he hated the other kind—that dreadful brothel in
Barcelona, for example, and here, at home, those huggings after the
third or fourth cocktail, those gropings by the roadside in a parked
car)—yes, even the best kind of love might be inadequate, might actually
be worse than inadequate. “I could not love thee, dear, so much, loved I
not something or other more.” Hitherto, something or other had been his
biology, his socialism. But now these had turned out to be inadequate,
or even, taken as ends in themselves, worse than inadequate. No loyalty
was good in itself, or brought religious insight, except loyalty to the
highest cause of all. “I could not love thee, dear, so much, loved I not
the highest cause of all more.” But the question, the agonizing
question, was this: Could you love the highest cause of all and go on
feeling as you did about Virginia? The worst love was obviously
incompatible with loyalty to the highest cause of all. Obviously so;
because the worst love was just being loyal to your own physiology,
whereas, if Mr. Propter was right, you couldn’t be loyal to the highest
cause of all without denying such loyalties to yourself. But was the
best love so fundamentally different, after all, from the worst? The
worst was being loyal to your physiology. It was hateful to admit it;
but so too was the best: being loyal to your physiology and at the same
time (which was its distinguishing mark) loyal also to your higher
feelings—to that empty ache of longing, to that infinity of tenderness,
to that adoration, that happiness, those pains, that sense of solitude,
that longing for identity. You were loyal to these, and being loyal to
these was the definition of the best kind of love, of what people called
romance and praised as the most wonderful thing in life. But being loyal
to these was being loyal to yourself; and you couldn’t be loyal to
yourself and loyal at the same time to the highest cause of all.

The practical conclusion was obvious. But Pete refused to draw it. Those
eyes were blue and limpid, that mouth, adorable in its innocence. And,
then, how sweet she was, how beautifully thoughtful! He remembered the
conversation they had had on the way into dinner. He had asked her how
her headache was. “Don’t talk about it,” she had whispered; “it might
upset Uncle Jo. Doc’s been going over him with his stethoscope; doesn’t
think he’s so good this evening. I don’t want to have him worrying about
me. And anyhow, what is a headache?” Not only beautiful, not only
innocent and sweet, but brave, too, and unselfish. And how adorable she
had been to him all the evening, asking him about his work, telling him
about her home in Oregon, making him talk about his home down in El
Paso. In the end Mr. Stoyte had come and sat down beside them—in
silence, and his face black as thunder. Pete had glanced inquiringly at
Virginia, and she had given him a look that said, “Please, go,” and
another when he rose to say good-night, so pleadingly apologetic, so
full of gratitude, so understanding, so sweet and affectionate, that the
recollection of it was enough to bring the tears into his eyes. Lying
there in the darkness, he cried with happiness.

That niche in the wall between the windows in Virginia’s bedroom had
been intended, no doubt, for a bookshelf. But Virginia was not very keen
on books; the recess had been fitted up instead as a little shrine. You
drew back a pair of short white velvet curtains (everything in the room
was white) and there, in a bower of artificial flowers, dressed in real
silk clothes, with the cutest little gold crown on her head and six
strings of seed pearls round her neck, stood Our Lady brilliantly
illuminated by an ingenious system of concealed electric bulbs.
Barefooted and in white satin pyjamas, Virginia was kneeling before this
sacred doll’s house, saying her evening prayers. Our Lady, it seemed to
her, was looking particularly sweet and kind tonight. Tomorrow, she
decided, while her lips pronounced the formulas of praise and
supplication, tomorrow morning, first thing, she’d go right down to the
sewing-room and get one of the girls to help her make a new mantle for
Our Lady out of that lovely piece of blue brocade she had bought last
week at the junk shop in Glendale. A blue brocade mantle, fastened in
front with a gold button—or, better still, with a little gold cord that
you could tie in a bow, with the ends hanging down, almost to Our Lady’s
feet. Oh, that would be just gorgeous! She wished it were morning so
that she could start right away.

The last prayer had been said; Virginia crossed herself and rose from
her knees. Happening to look down as she did so, she saw to her horror
that some of the cyclamen-coloured varnish had scaled off the nails of
the second and third toes of her left foot. A minute later she was
squatting on the floor beside the bed, the right leg outstretched, the
other foot drawn across it, making ready to repair the damage. An open
bottle stood beside her; she held a small paint brush in her hand, and a
horribly industrial aura of acetone had enveloped the Schiaparelli
“Shocking” with which her body was impregnated. She started to work and
as she bent forward, two strands of auburn hair broke loose from their
curly pattern and fell across her forehead. Under frowning brows, the
large blue eyes intently stared. To aid concentration, the tip of a pink
tongue was held between the teeth. “Helll” she suddenly said aloud, as
the little brush made a false stroke. Then, immediately, the teeth
clamped down again.

Interrupting her work to allow the first coat of varnish to dry, she
shifted her scrutiny from the toes to the calf and shin of her left leg.
The hairs were beginning to grow again, she noticed with annoyance; it
would soon be time for another of those wax treatments. Still pensively
caressing the leg, she let her mind travel back over the events of the
day. The memory of that close call with Uncle Jo still gave her shivers
of apprehensive excitement. Then she thought of Sig with his
stethoscope, and the upper lip lifted ravishingly in a smile of
amusement. And then there was that book, which it served Uncle Jo right
that she should have had Sig read to her. And Sig getting fresh with her
between the chapters and making passes; that also served Uncle Jo right
for trying to spy on her. She remembered how mad she got at Sig. Not so
much for what he actually did; for besides serving Uncle Jo right (of
course it was only afterwards that she discovered quite how right it
served him), what he actually did had been rather thrilling than
otherwise; because after all Sig was terribly attractive and in those
ways Uncle Jo didn’t hardly count; in fact you might almost say that he
counted the other way; in the red, so to speak; counted less than
nobody, so that anybody else who was attractive seemed still more
attractive when Uncle Jo had been around. No, it wasn’t what he actually
did that had made her mad at him. It was the way he did it. Laughing at
her, like that. She didn’t mind a bit of kidding at ordinary times. But
kidding while he was actually making passes—that was treating her like
she was a tart on Main Street. No romance, or anything; just that
sniggering sort of laugh and a lot of dirty cracks. Maybe it was
sophisticated; but she didn’t like it. And didn’t he see that it was
just plain dumb to act that way? Because, after all, when you’d been
reading that book with someone so attractive as Sig—well, you felt you’d
like a bit of romance. Real romance, like in the pictures, with
moonlight, and swing music, or perhaps a torch singer (because it was
nice to feel sad when you were happy), and a boy saying lovely things to
you, and a lot of kissing, and at the end of it, almost without your
knowing it, almost as if it weren’t happening to you, so that you never
felt there was anything wrong, anything that Our Lady would really mind
. . . Virginia sighed deeply and shut her eyes; her face took on an
expression of seraphic tranquillity. Then she sighed again, shook her
head and frowned. Instead of that, she was thinking angrily, instead of
that, Sig had to go and spoil it all by acting hard-boiled and
sophisticated. It just shot all the romance to pieces and made you feel
mad at him. And what was the sense in that? Virginia concluded
resentfully. What was the sense in that, either from his point of view
or from hers?

The first coat of varnish seemed to be dry. Bending over her foot, she
blew on her toes for a little, then started to apply the second coat.
Behind her, all of a sudden, the door of the bedroom was opened and as
gently closed again.

“Uncle Jo,” she said inquiringly and with a note of surprise in her
voice, but without looking up from her enamelling.

There was no answer, only the sound of an approach across the room.

“Uncle Jo?” she repeated and, this time, interrupted the painting of her
toes to turn round.

Dr. Obispo was standing over her. “Sig!” Her voice dropped to a whisper.
“What are you doing?”

Dr. Obispo smiled his smile of ironic admiration, of intense and at the
same time amused and mocking concupiscence. “I thought we might go on
with our French lesson,” he said.

“You’re crazy!” She looked apprehensively towards the door. “He’s just
across the hall. He might come in . . .”

Dr. Obispo’s smile broadened to a grin. “Don’t worry about Uncle Jo,” he
said.

“He’d kill you, if he found you here.”

“He won’t find me here,” Dr. Obispo answered. “I gave him a capsule of
Nembutal before he went to bed. He’ll sleep through the Last Trump.”

“I think you’re awful!” said Virginia emphatically; but she couldn’t
help laughing, partly out of relief and partly because it really was
rather funny to think of Uncle Jo snoring away next door, while Sig read
her that stuff.

Dr. Obispo pulled the Book of Common Prayer out of his pocket. “Don’t
let me interrupt your labours,” he said with the parody of chivalrous
politeness. “‘A woman’s work is never done.’ Just go right on as though
I weren’t there. I’ll find the place and start reading.” Smiling at her
with imperturbable impudence, he sat down on the edge of the rococo bed
and turned over the pages of the book.

Virginia opened her mouth to speak; then, catching hold of her left
foot, closed it again under the compulsion of a need even more urgent
than that of telling him exactly where he got off. The varnish was
drying in lumps; her toes would look just awful if she didn’t go on with
them at once. Hastily dipping her little brush in the bottle of acetone
enamel, she started painting again with the focussed intensity of a Van
Eyck at work on the microscopic details of the Adoration of the Lamb.

Dr. Obispo looked up from the book. “I admired the way you acted with
Pete this evening/’ he said. “Flirting with him all through dinner, so
that you got the old man hopping jealous of him. That was masterly. Or
should one say mistressly?”

Virginia released her tongue to say emphatically: “Pete’s a nice boy.”

“But dumb,” Dr. Obispo qualified, as he sprawled with conscious elegance
and a maddeningly insolent assumption of being at home, across the bed.
“Otherwise he wouldn’t be in love with you the way he is.” He uttered a
snort of laughter. “The poor chump thinks you’re an angel, a heavenly
little angel, complete with wings, harp and genuine eighteen-carat,
fully jewelled, Swiss-made virginity. Well, if that isn’t being dumb . .
.”

“You just wait till I get time for you,” said Virginia menacingly, but
without looking up; for she had reached a critical phase in the
execution of her work of art.

Dr. Obispo ignored the remark. “I used to underestimate the value of an
education in the humanities,” he said after a little silence. “Now, I
make that mistake no longer.” In a tone of deep solemnity, a tone, one
might imagine, like Whittier’s in a reading from his own works, “The
lessons of great literature!” he went on. “The deep truths! The gems of
wisdom!”

“Oh, shut up!” said Virginia.

“When I think what I owe Dante and Goethe,” said Dr. Obispo in the same
prophetic style. “Take the case of Paolo reading aloud to Francesca.
With the most fruitful results, if you remember. ‘Un giorno leggevamo
per diletto di Lancilotto, come amor lo strinse. Soli eravamo e
senz’alcun sospetto. Senz’alcun sospetto,’ ” Dr. Obispo repeated with
emphasis, looking, as he did so, at one of the engravings in the
“Cent-Vingt Jours.” “Not the smallest suspicion, mark you, of what was
going to happen.”

“Helll” said Virginia, who had made another slip.

“No, not even a suspicion of hell,” Dr. Obispo insisted. “Though, of
course, they ought to have been on the lookout for it. They ought to
have had the elementary prudence to guard against being sent there by
the accident of sudden death. A few simple precautions, and they could
have made the best of both worlds. Could have had their fun while the
brother was out of the way and, when the time for having fun was over,
could have repented and died in the odour of sanctity. But then it must
be admitted that they hadn’t the advantage of reading Goethe’s ‘Faust.’
They hadn’t learnt that inconvenient relatives could be given sleeping
draughts. And even if they had learnt, they wouldn’t have been able to
go to the drug-store and buy a bottle of Nembutal. Which shows that
education in the humanities isn’t enough; there must also be education
in science. Dante and Goethe to teach you what to do. And the professor
of pharmacology to show you how to put the old buzzard into a coma with
a pinch of barbiturate.”

The toes were finished. Still holding her left foot, so as to keep it
from any damaging contact until the varnish should be entirely dry,
Virginia turned on her visitor. “I won’t have you calling him an old
buzzard,” she said hotly.

“Well, shall we say ‘bastard’?” Dr. Obispo suggested.

“He’s a better man than you’ll ever be!” Virginia cried; and her voice
had the ring of sincerity. “I think he’s wonderful.”

“You think he’s wonderful,” Dr. Obispo repeated. “But all the same in
about fifteen minutes you’ll be sleeping with me.” He laughed as he
spoke and, leaning forwards from his place on the bed, caught her two
arms from behind, a little below the shoulders. “Look out for your
toes,” he said, as Virginia cried out and tried to wrench herself away
from him.

The fear of ruining her masterpiece made her check the movement before
it was more than barely initiated. Dr. Obispo took advantage of her
hesitation to stoop down, through the aura of acetone towards the nape
of that delicious neck, towards the perfume of ‘Shocking/ towards a firm
warmth against the mouth, a touch of hair like silk upon the cheeks.
Swearing, Virginia furiously jerked her head away. But a fine tingling
of agreeable sensation was running parallel, so to speak, with her
indignation, was incorporating itself in it.

This time, Dr. Obispo kissed her behind the ear. “Shall I tell you,” he
whispered, “what I’m going to do to you?” She answered by calling him a
lousy ape man. But he told her all the same, in considerable detail.

Less than the fifteen minutes had elapsed when Virginia opened her eyes
and, across the now darkened room, caught sight of Our Lady smiling
benignantly from among the flowers of her illuminated doll’s house. With
a cry of dismay she jumped up and, without waiting to put on any
clothes, ran to the shrine and drew the curtains. The lights went out
automatically. Stretching out her hands in the thick darkness, she
groped her way cautiously back to bed.



PART II


Chapter I

“AGAIN, no dearth of news,” Jeremy wrote to his mother three weeks
later. “News of every kind and from all the centuries. Here’s a bit of
news, to begin with, about the Second Earl. In the intervals of losing
battles for Charles I, the Second Earl was a poet. A bad poet, of course
(for the chances are always several thousands to one against any given
poet being good), but with occasional involuntary deviations into charm.
What about this, for example, which I found in manuscript only
yesterday?

One taper burns, but ‘tis too much;

Our loves demand complete eclipse.

Let sight give place to amorous touch,

And candle-light to limbs and lips!

Rather pretty, don’t you think? But alas, almost the only nugget so far
unearthed from the alluvium. If only the rest were silence! But that’s
the trouble with poets, good no less than bad. They will not keep their
traps shut, as we say in the Western hemisphere. What joy if the rest of
Wordsworth had been silence, the rest of Coleridge, the rest of Shelley!

“Meanwhile the Fifth Earl sprang a surprise on me yesterday in the form
of a note-book full of miscellaneous jottings. I have only just started
on them (for I mustn’t spend all my time on any one item till I have the
whole collection unpacked and roughly catalogued); but the fragments
I’ve read are decidedly appetizing. I found this on the first page:
‘Lord Chesterfield writes to his Son that a Gentleman never speaks to
his footman, nor even the beggar in the street, d’un ton brusque, but
“corrects the one coolly and refuses the other with humanity.” His
lordship should have added that there is an Art by which such coolness
may be rendered no less formidable than Anger and such humanity more
wounding than Insult.

“ ‘Furthermore, footmen and beggars are not the only objects on whom
this Art may be exercised. His lordship has been ungallant enough in
this instance to forget the Sex, for there is also an Art of coolly
outraging a devoted female, and of abusing her Person, with all the
bienstance befitting the most accomplished Gentleman.’

“Not a bad beginning! I will keep you posted of any subsequent
discoveries in this field.

“Meanwhile contemporary news is odd, confused and a bit disagreeable. To
begin with, Uncle Jo is chronically glum and ill-tempered these days. I
suspect the green-eyed monster; for the blue-eyed monster (in other
words Miss Maunciple, the Baby) has been rolling them, for some time
now, in the direction of young Pete. Whether she rolls more than the
eyes, I don’t know; but suspect the fact; for she has that inward,
dreamy look, that far-away sleep-walker’s expression, which one often
remarks on the faces of young ladies who have been doing a lot of
strenuous love-making. You know the expression I mean: exquisitely
spiritual and pre-Raphaelitish. One has only to look at such a face to
know that God Exists. The one incongruous feature in the present
instance is the costume. A pre-Raphaelite expression demands
pre-Raphaelite clothes: long sleeves, square yokes, yards and yards of
Liberty velveteen. When you see it, as I did today, in combination with
white shorts, a bandana and a cowboy hat, you’re disturbed, you’re all
put out. Meanwhile, in defence of Baby’s Honour, I must insist that all
this is mere hypothesis and guess-work. It may be, of course, that this
new, spiritual expression of hers is not the result of amorous fatigue.
For all I know to the contrary, Baby may have been converted by the
teachings of the Propter-Object and is now walking about in a state of
perpetual samadhi. On the other hand, I do see her giving the glad eye
to Pete. What’s more, Uncle Jo exhibits all the symptoms of being
suspicious of them and extremely cross with everybody else. With me
among others, of course. Perhaps even more with me than with others,
because I happen to have read more books than the rest and am therefore
more of a symbol of Culture. And Culture, of course, is a thing for
which he has positively a Tartar’s hatred. Only, unlike the Tartars, he
doesn’t want to burn the monuments of Culture, he wants to buy them up.
He expresses his superiority to talent and education by means of
possession rather than destruction; by hiring and then insulting the
talented and educated rather than by killing them. (Though perhaps he
would kill them, if he had the Tartar’s opportunities and power.) All
this means that, when I am not in bed or safely underground with the
Hauberks, I spend most of my time grinning and bearing, thinking of
Jellybelly and my nice salary, in order not to think too much of Uncle
Jo’s bad manners. It’s all very unpleasant; but fortunately not
unbearable—and the Hauberks are an immense consolation and compensation.

“So much for the erotic and cultural fronts. On the scientific front,
the news is that we’re all perceptibly nearer to living as long as
crocodiles. At the time of writing, I haven’t decided whether I really
want to live as long as a crocodile. (With the penning of the second
‘crocodile,’ Jeremy was seized by a sudden qualm. His mother would be
seventy-seven in August. Under that urbanity of hers, under the crackled
glaze of the admirable conversation, there was a passionate greed for
life. She would talk matter-of-factly enough about her own approaching
extinction; she would make little jokes about her death and funeral. But
behind the talk and the little jokes there lurked, as Jeremy knew, a
fierce determination to hold on to what was left, to go on doing what
she had always done, in the teeth of death, in defiance of old age. This
talk of crocodiles might give pain; this expression of doubt as to the
desirability of prolonging life might be interpreted as an unfavourable
criticism. Jeremy took a new sheet of paper and started the paragraph
afresh.)

“So much for the erotic and cultural fronts,” he wrote. “On the
scientific front, rien de nouveau, except that the Obispo is being more
bumptious than ever; which isn’t news, because he’s always more
bumptious than ever. Not one of my favourite characters, I’m afraid.
Though not unamusing when one feels inclined for a few moments of
ribaldry. Longevity, it appears, is making headway. Old Parr and the
Countess of Desmond are on the march.

“And what of the religious front? Well, our Propter-Object has given up
his attempts at edification, at any rate so far as I’m concerned. Thank
heaven 1 for when he dismounts from his hobby horse, what excellent
company he isl A mind full of all kinds of oddments; and the oddments
are pigeon-holed in apple-pie order. One rather envies him his
intellectual coherence; but consoles oneself by thinking that, if one
had them, they’d spoil one’s own particular little trick. When one has a
gift for standing gracefully on one’s head, one is foolish and
ungrateful to envy the Marathon-runner. A funny little literary article
in the hand is worth at least three Critiques of Pure Reason in the
bush.

“My final item is from the home front and refers to your last letter
from Grasse. What a feast! Your account of Mme. de Villemomble was
really Proustian. And as for the description of your drive to Cap d’Ail
and your day with what remains of the Princess and ce pauvre
Hunyadi—well, all I can say is that it was worthy of Murasaki: the
essence of all tragedy refined to a couple of tablespoonfuls of
amber-coloured tea in a porcelain cup no bigger than a magnolia flower.
What an admirable lesson in the art of literary chastity! My own
tendencies—only in the world of letters, I am thankful to say—are
towards a certain exhibitionism. This vestal prose of yours puts me to
shame.

“Well, there is nothing more to say, as I used to write when I was at
school—very large, do you remember? in an effort to make the words fill
up half a page of note-paper. There is nothing more to say, except, of
course, the unsayable, which I leave unsaid because you know it
already.”

Jeremy sealed up his letter, addressed it—to The Araucarias, for his
mother would be back from Grasse by the time it had crossed the
Atlantic—and slipped the envelope into his pocket. All around him, the
Hauberk Papers clamoured for his attention; but for some time he
remained idle. His elbow on the desk, in an attitude of prayer, he
meditatively scratched his head; scratched it with both hands where two
little spots had formed dry scabs at the roots of the hair that still
remained to him, scabs which it was an exquisite pleasure to prize up
with the finger-nails and carefully detach. He was thinking of his
mother and how curious it was, after all, that one should have read all
the Freudian literature about the Oedipus business, all the novels, from
“Sons and Lovers” downwards, about the dangers of too much filial
devotion, the menace of excessive maternal love—that one should have
read them all and still, with one’s eyes open, go on being what one was:
the victim of a greedy possessive mother. And perhaps even odder was the
fact that this possessive mother had also read all the relevant
literature and was also perfectly aware of what she was and what she had
done to her son. And yet she too went on being and doing what she had
always been and done, just as he did, and with eyes no less open than
his own. (There! the scab under the right hand had come loose. He pulled
it out through the thick tufted hair above his ears and, as he looked at
the tiny desiccated shred of tissue, was suddenly reminded of the
baboons. But, after all, why not? The most certain and abiding pleasures
are the tiniest, the simplest, the rudimentarily animal—the pleasure of
lying in a hot bath, for example, or under the bed-clothes, between
waking and sleeping, in the morning; the pleasure of answering the calls
of nature, the pleasure of being rubbed by a good masseur, the pleasure
finally of scratching when one itched. Why be ashamed? He dropped the
scab into the waste paper basket and continued to scratch with the left
hand.)

Nothing like self-knowledge, he reflected. To know why you do a thing
that is wrong or stupid is to have an excuse for going on doing it.
Justification by psychoanalysis—the modern substitute for justification
by faith. You know the distant causes which made you a sadist or a
money-grubber, a mother-worshipper or a son-cannibal; therefore you are
completely justified in continuing to be a son-cannibal,
mother-worshipper, money-grubber or sadist. No wonder if whole
generations had risen up to bless the name of Freud! Well, that was how
he and his mother managed things. “We bloodsucking matriarchs!” Mrs.
Pordage used to say of herself—in the presence of the Rector, what was
more. Or else it was into Lady Fredegond’s ear trumpet that she
proclaimed her innocence. “Old Jocasta’s like me, with a middle-aged son
in the house,” she would shout. And Jeremy would play up to her by
coming across the room and bellowing into that tomb of intelligent
conversation some feeble waggery about his being an old maid, for
example, or about erudition as a substitute for embroidery; any rot
would do. And the old harridan would utter that deep gangster’s laugh of
hers and wag her head till the stuffed sea-gulls, or the artificial
petunias, or whatever it was that she happened to be wearing in her
always extraordinary hat, nodded like the plumes of a horse in a French
pompe funèbre of the first class. Yes how curious it was, he said to
himself again; but how sensible considering that they both, his mother
and he, desired nothing better than to go on being just what they were.
Her reasons for wanting to go on being a matriarch were obvious enough;
it’s fun to be a queen, it’s delightful to receive homage and have a
faithful subject. Less obvious, perhaps, at any rate to an outsider,
were his own reasons for preferring the status quo. But looked into,
they turned out to be cogent enough. There was affection, to begin with;
for under a certain superficial irony and airiness, he was deeply
attached to his mother. Then there was habit—habit so long-standing that
his mother had come to be for him almost like an organ of his own body,
hardly less dispensable than his pancreas or his liver. There was even a
feeling of gratitude towards her for having done to him the things
which, at the time she did them, had seemed the most cruelly
unjustifiable. He had fallen in love, when he was thirty; he had wanted
to marry. Without making a single scene, without being anything but
sympathetically loving towards himself and charming in all her dealings
with dear little Eileen, Mrs. Pordage had set to work to undermine the
relationship between the two young people; and had succeeded so well
that, in the end, the relationship just fell in on itself, like a house
sapped from beneath. He had been very unhappy at the time, and with a
part of himself he had hated his mother for what she had done. But as
the years passed, he had felt less and less bitterly about the whole
business, until now he was positively grateful to her for having
delivered him from the horrors of responsibility, of a family, of
regular and remunerative labour, of a wife who would probably have
turned out to be a worse tyrant than his mother—indeed, who would
certainly have turned out to be a worse tyrant; for the bulging,
bustling matron into whom Eileen had by degrees transformed herself was
one of the most disastrous females of his acquaintance; a creature
passionately conventional, proud of her obtuseness, ant-like in her
efficiency, tyrannically benevolent. In short, a monster. But for his
mother’s strategy he would now be the unfortunate Mr. Welkin who was
Eileen’s husband and the father of no less than four little Welkins as
dreadful even in childhood and adolescence as Eileen had become in her
middle age. His mother was doubtless speaking the truth when she
jokingly called herself an old Jocasta, a blood-sucking matriarch; and
doubtless, too, his brother Tom was right when he called him, Jeremy, a
Peter Pan, and talked contemptuously of apron strings. But the fact
remained that he had had the opportunity to read what he liked and write
his little articles; and that his mother saw to all the practical
aspects of life, demanded in return an amount of devotion which it
really wasn’t very difficult to give and left him free, on alternate
Friday afternoons, to savour the refined pleasures of an infinite
squalor, in Maida Vale. Meanwhile, look what had happened to poor Tom!
Second Secretary at Tokyo; First Secretary at Oslo; Counsellor at La
Paz; and now back, more or less for good, in the Foreign Office,
climbing slowly up the hierarchy, towards posts of greater
responsibility and tasks of increasing turpitude. And as the salary rose
and the morality of what he was called upon to do correspondingly sank,
the poor fellow’s uneasiness had increased, until at last, with the row
over Abyssinia, he just hadn’t been able to stand it any longer. On the
brink of resignation or a nervous breakdown, he had managed, in the nick
of time, to get himself converted to Catholicism. Thenceforward, he had
been able to pack up the moral responsibility for his share in the
general iniquity, take it to Farm Street and leave it there, in camphor,
so to speak, with the Jesuit Fathers. Admirable arrangement! It had made
a new man of him. After fourteen years of childlessness, his wife had
suddenly had a baby—conceived, Jeremy had calculated, on the very night
that the Spanish Civil War began. Then, two days after the sack of
Nanking, Tom had published a volume of comic verses. (Curious how many
English Catholics take to comic versifying.) Meanwhile, he was steadily
gaining weight; between the Anschluss and Munich he had put on eleven
pounds. Another year or two of Farm Street and power politics, and Tom
would turn the scale at fourteen stone and have written the libretto of
a musical comedy. No! Jeremy said to himself with decision. No! it
simply wasn’t admissible. Better Peter Pan and apron strings and
infinite squalor in a little room. Better a thousand times. Better to
begin with, aesthetically; for this getting fat on realpolitik, this
scribbling of comic verses on the margins of an engraving of the
Crucifixion—really, it was too inelegant. And that wasn’t all; it was
better even ethically; for of course the old Propter-Object was right:
if you can’t be sure of doing positive good, at least keep out of
mischief. And there was poor old Tom, as busy as a beaver and, now that
he was a Papist, as happy as a lark, working away at the precise spot
where he could do the maximum amount of harm to the greatest possible
number of people.

(The other scab came loose. Jeremy sighed and leaned back in his chair.)

One scratched like a baboon, he concluded; one lived, at fifty-four, in
the security of one’s mother’s shadow; one’s sexual life was
simultaneously infantile and corrupt; by no stretch of the imagination
could one’s work be described as useful or important. But when one
compared oneself with other people, with Tom, for example, or even with
the eminent and august, with cabinet ministers and steel magnates and
bishops and celebrated novelists—well, really, one didn’t come out so
badly after all. Judged by the negative criterion of harmless-ness, one
even came out extremely well. So that, taking all things into
consideration, there was really no reason why one should do anything
much about anything. Having decided which, it was time to get back to
the Hauberks.


Chapter II

VIRGINIA did not wake up that morning till nearly ten; and even after
having had her bath and eaten her breakfast she remained in bed for
another hour or more, her eyes closed, leaning back motionless against
the heaped-up pillows, like a beautiful young convalescent newly emerged
from the valley of the shadow.

The valley of the shadow of death; of the greater deaths and all the
little deaths. Through deaths come transfigurations. He who would save
his life must lose it. Men and women are continually trying to lose
their lives, the stale, unprofitable, senseless lives of their ordinary
personalities. For ever trying to get rid of them, and in a thousand
different ways. In the frenzies of gambling and revivalism; in the
monomanias of avarice and perversion, of research and sectarianism and
ambition; in the compensatory lunacies of alcohol, of reading, of
day-dreaming, of morphia; in the hallucinations of opium and the cinema
and ritual; in the wild epilepsies of political enthusiasm and erotic
pleasure; in the stupors of veronal and exhaustion. To escape; to forget
one’s own, old, wearisome identity; to become someone else or, better,
some other thing—a mere body, strangely numbed or more than ordinarily
sentient; or else just a state of impersonal mind, a mode of
unindividualized consciousness. What happiness, what a blissful
alleviation! Even for such as were not previously aware that there was
anything in their condition that needed to be alleviated. Virginia had
been one of those—happy in limitation, not sufficiently conscious of her
personal self to realize its ugliness and inadequacy, or the fundamental
wretchedness of the human state. And yet, when Dr. Obispo had
scientifically engineered her escape into an erotic epilepsy more
excruciatingly intense than anything she had known before or even
imagined possible, Virginia had realized that after all there was
something in her existence that required alleviating and that this
headlong plunge through an intenser, utterly alien consciousness into
the darkness of a total oblivion was precisely the alleviation it
required.

But like all the other addictions, whether to drugs or books, to power
or applause, the addiction to pleasure tends to aggravate the condition
it temporarily alleviates. The addict goes down into the valley of the
shadow of his own particular little death—down indefatigably,
desperately down in search of something else, something not himself,
something other and better than the life he miserably lives as a human
person in the hideous world of human persons. He goes down and, either
violently or in delicious inertia, he dies and is transfigured; but dies
only for a little while, is transfigured only momentarily. After the
little death is a little resurrection, a resurrection out of
unconsciousness, out of self-annihilating excitement, back into the
misery of knowing oneself alone and weak and worthless, back into a
completer separateness, an acuter sense of personality. And the acuter
the sense of separate personality, the more urgent the demand for yet
another experience of assuaging death and transfiguration. The addiction
alleviates, but in doing so increases the pains demanding alleviation.

Lying there, propped up against her pillows, Virginia was suffering her
daily resurrection from the valley of the shadow of her nocturnal
deaths. From having been epileptically something else, she was becoming
her own self again—a self, it was true, still somewhat numbed and
bewildered by fatigue, still haunted by the memory of strange scenes and
overpowering sensations, but none the less recognizably the old
Virginia; the Virginia who admired Uncle Jo for his success and was
grateful to him for having given her such a wonderful time, the Virginia
who had always laughed and thought life grand and never bothered about
things, the Virginia who had made Uncle Jo build the Grotto and had
loved Our Lady ever since she was a kid. And now this Virginia was
double-crossing her poor old admired Uncle Jo—not just telling a few
little fibs, which might happen to any one, but deliberately and
systematically double-crossing him. And not only him; she was also
double-crossing poor Pete. Talking to him all the time; giving him the
glad eye (as glad an eye, at any rate, as she was capable of giving in
the circumstances); practically making love to him in public, so that
Uncle Jo wouldn’t suspect Sig. Not that she wouldn’t be glad in some
ways if Uncle Jo did suspect him. She’d love to see him getting a punch
on the jaw and being thrown out. Just love it! But meanwhile she was
doing everything she could to cover him up; and in the process making
that poor, idiot boy imagine she was stuck on him. A double-crosser—that
was all she was. A double-crosser. The knowledge of this worried her, it
made her feel unhappy and ashamed; it prevented her laughing at things
the way she used to; it kept her thinking, and feeling bad about what
she was doing, and resolving not to do it again; resolving, but not
being able to prevent herself doing it again, even though she really
hated herself for doing it and hated Sig for making her and, above all,
for telling her, in that horrible, hard-boiled, cynical way, just how he
made her and why she couldn’t resist it. And one of the reasons why she
had to do it again was that it stopped her feeling bad about having done
it before. But then, afterwards, she felt bad again. Felt so bad,
indeed, that she had been ashamed to look Our Lady in the face. For more
than a week now the white velvet curtains across the front of the sacred
doll’s house had remained drawn. She simply didn’t dare to open them,
because she knew that if she did and if she made a promise there, on her
knees, to Our Lady, it just wouldn’t be any good. When that awful Sig
came along again, she’d just go all funny inside, like her bones had all
turned into rubber, and the strength would go out of her and, before she
knew where she was, it would all be happening again. And that would be
much worse than the other times, because she’d made a promise about it
to Our Lady. So that it was better not to make any promise at all—not
now, at any rate; not until there seemed to be some chance of keeping
it. Because it just couldn’t last this way for ever; she simply refused
to believe she’d always have that awful rubber feeling in her bones.
Some day she’d feel strong enough to tell Sig to go to hell. And when
she did she’d make that promise. Till then, better not.

Virginia opened her eyes, and looked with a nostalgic expression at the
niche between the windows and the drawn white curtains that concealed
the treasure within—the cunning little crown, the seed pearls, the
mantle of blue silk, the benignant face, the adorable little hands.
Virginia sighed profoundly and, closing her eyes again, tried, by a
simulation of sleep, to recapture the happy oblivion from which the
light of morning had forced her unwillingly to emerge.


Chapter III

MR. STOYTE had spent his morning at the Beverly Pantheon. Very
reluctantly; for he had a horror of cemeteries, even his own. But the
claims of money-making were sacred; business was a duty to which all
merely personal considerations had to be sacrificed. And talk of
business! the Beverly Pantheon was the finest real estate proposition in
the country. The land had been bought during the War at five hundred
dollars an acre, improved (with roads, Tiny Tajes, Columbariums and
statuary) to the tune of about ten thousand an acre, and was now
selling, in grave sites, at the rate of a hundred and sixty thousand an
acre—selling so fast that the entire capital outlay had already been
amortized, so that everything from now on would be pure jam. And, of
course, as the population of Los Angeles increased, the jam would become
correspondingly more copious. And the population was increasing, at the
rate of nearly ten per cent per annum—and, what was more the main
accessions consisted of elderly retired people from other states of the
Union; the very people who would bring the greatest immediate profit to
the Pantheon. And so, when Charlie Habakkuk sent that urgent call for
him to come over and discuss the latest plans of improvements and
extensions, Mr. Stoyte had found it morally impossible to refuse.
Repressing his antipathies, he had done his duty. All that morning the
two men had sat with their cigars in Charlie’s office at the top of the
Tower of Resurrection; and Charlie had waved those hands of his, and
spouted cigar smoke from his nostrils, and talked—God, how he had
talked! As though he were one of those men in a red fez trying to make
you buy an Oriental carpet—and incidentally, Mr. Stoyte reflected
morosely, that was what Charlie looked like; only he was better fed than
most of those carpet boys, and therefore greasier.

“Cut the sales talk,” he growled out loud. “You seem to forget I own the
place.”

Charlie looked at him with an expression of pained surprise. Sales talk?
But this wasn’t sales talk. This was real, this was earnest. The
Pantheon was his baby; for all practical purposes, he had invented the
place. It was he who had thought up the Tiny Taj and the Church of the
Bard; he who, on his own initiative, had bought that bargain lot of
statues at Genoa; he who had first clearly formulated the policy of
injecting sex appeal into death; he who had resolutely resisted every
attempt to introduce into the cemetery any representation of grief or
age, any symbol of mortality, any image of the sufferings of Jesus. He
had had to fight for his ideas, he had had to listen to a lot of
criticism; but the results had proved him right. Any one who complained
that there was no Crucifixion in the place could be referred to the
published accounts. And here was Mr. Stoyte talking sarcastically about
sales talk. Sales talk, indeed, when the demand for space in the
Pantheon was so great that existing accommodation would soon be
inadequate. There would have to be enlargements. More space, more
buildings, more amenities. Bigger and better; progress; service.

At the top of the Tower of Resurrection, Charlie Habakkuk unfolded his
plans. The new extension was to have a Poet’s Corner, open to any bona
fide writer—though he was afraid they’d have to draw the line at the
authors of advertising copy, which was a pity, because a lot of them
made good money and might be persuaded to pay extra for the prestige of
being buried with the moving picture people. But that cut both
ways—because the scenario writers wouldn’t feel that the Poet’s Corner
was exclusive enough if you let in the advertising boys. And seeing that
the moving picture fellows made so much more than the others . . . well,
it stood to reason, Charlie had concluded, it stood to reason. And, of
course, they’d have to have a replica of Westminster Abbey in the Poet’s
Corner. Wee Westminster—it would sound kind of cute. And as they needed
a couple of extra mortuary furnaces anyhow, they’d have them installed
there in Dean’s Yard. And they’d put a new automatic record player in
the crypt, so that there’d be more variety in the music. Not that people
didn’t appreciate the Perpetual Wurlitzer; they did. But all the same it
got a bit monotonous. So he’d thought they might have some recordings of
a choir singing hymns and things, and perhaps, every now and then, just
for a change, some preacher giving an inspirational message, so that
you’d be able to sit in the Garden of Contemplation, for example, and
listen to the Wurlitzer for a few minutes and then the choir singing
“Abide with Me” and then a nice sort of Barrymore voice saying some
piece, like the Gettysburg Address or “Laugh and the World Laughs with
You,” or maybe some nice juicy bit by Mrs. Eddy or Ralph Waldo
Trine—anything would do so long as it was inspirational enough. And then
there was his idea of the Catacombs. And, boy, it was the best idea he’d
ever had. Leading Mr. Stoyte to the south-eastern window, he had pointed
across an intervening valley of tombs and cypresses and the miniature
monuments of bogus antiquity, to where the land sloped up again to a
serrated ridge on the further side. There, he had shouted excitedly,
there, in that hump in the middle; they’d tunnel down into that.
Hundreds of yards of Catacombs. Lined with reinforced concrete to make
them earthquake proof. The only class-A Catacombs in the world. And
little chapels, like the ones in Rome. And a lot of phony-looking
murals, looking like they were real old. You could get them done cheap
by one of those W.P.A. art projects. Not that those guys knew how to
paint, of course; but that was quite O.K., seeing that the murals had to
look phony anyhow. And they wouldn’t have anything but candles and
little lamps for people to carry around—no electric light at all, except
right at the very end of all those winding passages and stairs, where
there’d be a great big sort of underground church, with one of those big
nude statues that were going up at the San Francisco Fair and that
they’d be glad to sell for a thousand bucks or even less when the show
was over—one of those modernistic broads with muscles on them—and they’d
have her standing right in the middle, there with maybe some fountains
spouting all around her and concealed pink lighting in the water so
she’d look kind of real. Why, the tourists would come a thousand miles
to see it. Because there was nothing people liked so much as caves. Look
at those Carlsbad Caverns, for example; and all those caves in Virginia.
And those were just common-or-garden natural caves, without murals or
anything. Whereas these would be Catacombs. Yes, sir; real Catacombs,
like the things the Christian Martyrs lived in—and, by gum, that was
another idea! Martyrs! Why couldn’t they have a Chapel of the Martyrs
with a nice plaster group of some girls with no clothes on, just going
to be eaten by a lion? People wouldn’t stand for the Crucifixion; but
they’d get a real thrill out of that.

Mr. Stoyte had listened wearily and with repugnance. He loathed his
Pantheon and everything to do with it. Loathed it, because in spite of
statues and Wurlitzer, it spoke to him of nothing but disease and death
and corruption and final judgment; because it was here, in the Pantheon,
that they would bury him—at the foot of the pedestal of Rodin’s Baiser.
(An assistant manager had once inadvisedly pointed out the spot to him
and been immediately fired; but there was no dismissing the memory of
his offence.) Charlie’s enthusiasm for Catacombs and Wee Westminsters
elicited no answering warmth; only occasional grunts and a final sullen
O.K. for everything except the Chapel of the Martyrs. Not that the
Chapel of the Martyrs seemed to Mr. Stoyte a bad idea; on the contrary,
he was convinced that the public would go crazy over it. If he rejected
it, it was merely on principle—because it would never do to allow
Charlie Habakkuk to think he was always right.

“Get plans and estimates for everything else,” he ordered in a tone so
gruff that he might have been delivering a reprimand. “But no martyrs. I
won’t have any martyrs.”

Almost in tears, Charlie pleaded for just one lion, just one early
Christian Virgin with her hands tied behind her back—because people got
such a kick out of anything to do with ropes or handcuffs. Two or three
Virgins would have been much better, of course; but he’d be content with
one. “Just one, Mr. Stoyte,” he implored, clasping his eloquent hands.
“Only one.”

Obstinately deaf to all his entreaties, Mr. Stoyte shook his head. “No
martyrs here,” he said. “That’s final.” And to show that it was final,
he threw away the butt of his cigar and got up to go.

Five minutes later, Charlie Habakkuk was letting off steam to his
secretary. The ingratitude of people! The stupidity. He’d a good mind to
resign, just to show the old buzzard that they couldn’t get on without
him. Not for five minutes. Who was it that had made the place what it
was: the uniquest cemetery in the world? Absolutely the uniquest. Who?
(Charlie slapped himself on the chest.) And who made all the money? Jo
Stoyte. And what had he done to make the place a success? Absolutely
nothing at all. It was enough to make you want to be a Communist. And
the old devil wasn’t grateful or even decently polite. Pushing you
around as though you were a bum off the streets! Well, there was one
comfort: Old Jo hadn’t been looking any too good this morning. One of
these days, maybe, they’d have the pleasure of burying him. Down there
in the vestibule of the Columbarium, eight foot underground. And serve
him right!

It was not only that he didn’t look too good; leaning back in the car
which was taking him down to Beverly Hills on his way to see Clancy, Mr.
Stoyte was thinking, as he had thought so often during these last two or
three weeks, that he didn’t feel too good. He’d wake up in the morning
feeling kind of sluggish and heavy; and his mind didn’t seem to be as
clear as it was. Obispo called it suppressed influenza and made him take
those pills every night; but they didn’t seem to do him any good. He
went on feeling that way just the same. And, on top of everything else,
he was worrying himself sick about Virginia. The Baby was acting
strange, like someone that wasn’t really there; so quiet, and not
noticing anything, and starting when you spoke to her and asking what
you said. Acting for all the world like one of those advertisements for
Sal Hepatica or California Syrup of Figs; and that was what he’d have
thought it was, if it hadn’t been for the way she went on with that
Peter Boone fellow. Always talking to him at meals—and asking him to
come and have a swim; and wanting to take a squint down his
microscope—and what sort of a damn did she give for microscopes, he’d
like to know? Throwing herself at him—that was what it had looked like
on the surface. And that kind of syrup-of-figs way of acting (like
people at those Quaker Meetings that Prudence used to make him go to
before she took up with Christian Science)—that all fitted in. You’d say
she was kind of stuck on the fellow. But then why should it have
happened so suddenly? Because she’d never shown any signs of being stuck
on him before. Always treated him like you’d treat a great big
dog—friendly and all that, but not taking him too seriously; just a pat
on the head and then, when he’d wagged his tail, thinking of something
else. No, he couldn’t understand it; he just couldn’t figure it out. It
looked like she was stuck on him; but then, at the same time, it looked
like she just didn’t notice if he was a boy or a dog. Because that was
how she was acting even now. She paid a lot of attention to him—only the
way you’d pay attention to a nice big retriever. And that was what had
thrown him out. If she’d been stuck on Pete in the ordinary way, then
he’d have got mad, and raised hell, and thrown the boy out of the house.
But how could you raise hell over a dog? How could you get mad with a
girl for telling a retriever she’d like to have a squint down his
microscope? You couldn’t even if you tried; because getting mad didn’t
make any sense. All he’d been able to do was just worry, trying to
figure things out and not being able to. There was only one thing that
was clear, and that was that the Baby meant more to him than he had
thought, more than he had ever believed it possible that any one should
mean to him. It had begun by his just wanting her—wanting her to touch,
to hold, to handle, to eat; wanting her because she was warm and smelt
good; wanting her because she was young and he was old, because she was
so innocent and he too tired for anything not innocence to excite. That
was how it had begun; but almost immediately something else had
happened. That youth of hers, that innocence and sweetness—they were
more than just exciting. She was so cute and lovely and childish, he
almost felt like crying over her, even while he wanted to hold and
handle and devour. She did the strangest things to him—made him feel
good, like you felt when you’d tanked up a bit on Scotch, and at the
same time made him feel good, like you felt when you were at church, or
listening to William Jennings Bryan, or making some poor kid happy by
giving him a doll or something. And Virginia wasn’t just anybody’s kid,
like the ones at the hospital; she was his kid, his very own. Prudence
wasn’t able to have children; and at the time he’d been sore about it.
But now he was glad. Because if he’d had a row of kids, they’d be
standing in the way of the Baby. And Virginia meant more to him than any
daughter could mean. Because even if she were only a daughter, which she
wasn’t, she was probably a lot nicer than his own flesh-and-blood
daughter would have been—seeing that, after all, the Stoytes were all a
pretty sour-faced lot and Prudence had been kind of dumb even if she was
a good woman, which she certainly was—maybe a bit too good. Whereas with
the Baby everything was just right, just perfect. He had been happier
since he’d known her than he’d ever been in years, With her around,
things had seemed worth doing again. You didn’t have to go through life
asking “why?” The reason for everything was there in front of you,
wearing that cunning little yachting cap, maybe, or all dressed up with
her emeralds and everything for some party with the moving picture
crowd.

And now something had happened. The reason for carrying on was being
taken away from him. The Baby had changed; she was fading away from him;
she had gone somewhere else. Where had she gone? And why? Why did she
want to leave him? To leave him all alone. Absolutely alone, and he was
an old man, and the white slab was there in the vestibule of the
Columbarium, waiting for him.

“What’s the matter, Baby?” he had asked. Time and again he had asked
with anguish in his heart, too miserable to be angry, too much afraid of
being left alone to care about his dignity, or his rights, about
anything except keeping her, at whatever cost. “What’s the matter,
Baby?”

And all she ever did was to look at him as though she were looking at
him from some place a million miles away—to look at him like that and
say: Nothing; she was feeling fine; she hadn’t got anything on her mind;
and, no, there wasn’t anything he could do for her, because he’d given
her everything already, and she was perfectly happy.

And if he mentioned Pete (kind of casually, so she shouldn’t think he
suspected anything) she wouldn’t even bat an eyelid; just say, Yes, she
liked Pete; he was a nice boy, but unsophisticated—and that made her
laugh; and she liked laughing.

“But, Baby, you’re different,” he would say; and it was difficult for
him to keep his voice from breaking, he was so unhappy. “You don’t act
like you used to, Baby.”

And all she’d answer was that that was funny because she felt just the
same.

“You don’t feel the same about me,” he would say.

And she’d say she did. And he’d say no. And she’d say it wasn’t true.
Because what reasons did he have for saying she felt different about
him? And of course she was quite right; there weren’t any reasons you
could lay your finger on. He couldn’t honestly say she acted less
affectionate, or didn’t want to let him kiss her, or anything like that.
She was different because of something you couldn’t put a name to.
Something in the way she looked and moved and sat around. He couldn’t
describe it except by saying it was like she wasn’t really there where
you thought you were looking at her, but some place else; some place
where you couldn’t touch her, or talk to her, or even really see her.
That was how it was. But whenever he had tried to explain it to her, she
had just laughed at him and said he must be having some of those
feminine intuitions you read about in stories—only his feminine
intuitions were all wrong.

And so there he’d be, back where he started from, trying to figure it
out and not being able to, and worrying himself sick. Yes, worrying
himself sick. Because when he’d got over feeling sluggish and heavy,
like he always did in the mornings now, he felt so worried about the
Baby that he’d start bawling out the servants and being rude to that
god-damned Englishman and getting mad with Obispo. And the next thing
that happened was that he couldn’t digest his meals. He was getting
heartburn and sour stomach; and one day he had such a pain that he’d
thought it was appendicitis. But Obispo had said it was just gas;
because of his suppressed influenza. And then he’d got mad and told the
fellow he must be a lousy doctor if he couldn’t cure a little thing like
that. Which must have put the fear of God into Obispo, because he’d
said, “Just give me two or three days more. That’s all I need to
complete the treatment.” And he’d said that suppressed influenza was a
funny thing; didn’t seem to be anything, but poisoned the whole system,
so you couldn’t think straight any more; and you’d get to imagining
things that weren’t really there, and worrying about them.

Which might be true in a general way; but in this case he just knew it
wasn’t all imagination. The Baby was different; he had a reason for
being worried.

Sunk in his mood of perplexed and agitated gloom, Mr. Stoyte was carried
down the windings of the mountain road, through the bowery oasis of
Beverly Hills and eastward (for Clancy lived in Hollywood) along Santa
Monica Boulevard. Over the telephone, that morning, Clancy had put on
one of his melodramatic conspirator acts. From the rigmarole of hints
and dark allusions and altered names, Mr. Stoyte had gathered that the
news was good. Clancy and his boys had evidently succeeded in buying up
most of the best land in the San Felipe Valley. At another time, Mr.
Stoyte would have exulted in his triumph; today, even the prospect of
making a million or two of easy money gave him no sort of pleasure. In
the world he had been reduced to inhabiting, millions were irrelevant.
For what could millions do to allay his miseries? The miseries of an
old, tired, empty man; of a man who had no end in life but himself, no
philosophy, no knowledge but of his own interests, no appreciations, not
even any friends—only a daughter-mistress, a concubine-child,
frantically desired, cherished to the point of idolatry. And now this
being, on whom he had relied to give significance to his life, had begun
to fail him. He had come to doubt her fidelity—but to doubt without
tangible reasons, to doubt in such a way that none of the ordinary
satisfying reactions, of rage, of violence, of recrimination, was
appropriate. The sense was going out of his life and he could do
nothing; for he was in a situation with which he did not know how to
deal, hopelessly bewildered. And always, in the background of his mind,
there floated an image of that circular marble room, with Rodin’s image
of desire at the centre, and that white slab in the pavement at its
base—the slab that would someday have his name engraved upon it: Joseph
Panton Stoyte, and the dates of his birth and death. And along with that
inscription went another, in orange letters on a coal black ground: It
is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God. And
meanwhile here was Clancy, conspiratorially announcing victory. Good
news, good news!! A year or two from now he would be richer by another
million. But the millions were in one world and the old, unhappy,
frightened man was in another, and there was no communication between
the two.


Chapter IV

JEREMY worked for a couple of hours, unpacking, examining, provisionally
cataloguing, filing. There were no interesting finds this morning—merely
accounts and legal documents and business letters. Stuff for Coulton and
Tawney and the Hammonds; not at all his cup of tea.

By half past twelve the weight of boredom had become too much for him.
He broke off and, in search of a little spiritual refreshment turned to
the Fifth Earl’s vellum-bound note-book.

“July, 1780,” he read. “Sensuality is close allied with Sorrow, and it
sometimes happens that, on account of the very sincerity of her Grief,
the weeping Widow is betrayed by her own Feelings and finds herself
unable to resist the importunities of the funeral Guest, who knows the
Art of passing imperceptibly from Condolence to Familiarity. I myself
have posthumously cuckolded a Duke and two Viscounts (one of them no
later than last night) upon the very Beds from which but a few hours
before, they had been borne in Pomp to the ancestral Sepulchre.”

That was something for his mother, Jeremy reflected. The sort of thing
she really adored! He had a good mind, if it wasn’t too horribly
expensive, to cable it to her in a night letter.

He returned to the note-book.

“One of the Livings in my Gift having unexpected fallen vacant, my
Sister sent to me today a young Divine whom she commends, and I believe
her, for his singular Virtue. I will have no Parsons around me but such
as drink deep, ride to Hounds and caress the Wives and daughters of
their Parishioners. A Virtuous Parson does nothing to test or exercise
the Faith of his Flock; but as I have written to my Sister, it is by
Faith that we come to Salvation.”

The next entry was dated March, 1784:

“In old Tombs newly opened a kind of ropy Slime depends from the roof
and coats the walls. It is the condensation of decay.”

“January, 1786. Half a dozen pensées in as many years. If I am to fill a
volume at this rate, I must outlast the patriarchs. I regret my sloth,
but console myself with the thought that my fellow men are too
contemptible for me to waste my time instructing or entertaining them.”

Jeremy hurried over three pages of reflections on politics and
economics. Under the date of March 12, 1787, he found a more interesting
entry:

“Dying is almost the least spiritual of our acts, more strictly carnal
even than the act of love. There are Death Agonies that are like the
strainings of the Costive at stool. Today I saw M. B. die.”

“January 11th, 1788. This day fifty years ago I was born. From solitude
in the Womb, we emerge into solitude among our Fellows, and return again
to solitude within the Grave. We pass our lives in the attempt to
mitigate that solitude. But Propinquity is never fusion. The most
populous City is but an agglomeration of wildernesses. We exchange
Words, but exchange them from prison to prison, and without hope that
they will signify to others what they mean to ourselves. We marry, and
there are two solitudes in the house instead of one; we beget children,
and there are many solitudes. We reiterate the act of love; but again
propinquity is never fusion. The most intimate contact is only of
Surfaces and we couple, as I have seen the condemned Prisoners at
Newgate coupling with their Trulls, between the bars of our cages.
Pleasure cannot be shared; like Pain, it can only be experienced or
inflicted, and when we give Pleasure to our Lovers or bestow Charity
upon the Needy, we do so, not to gratify the object of our Benevolence,
but only ourselves. For the Truth is that we are kind for the same
reason as we are cruel, in order that we may enhance the sense of our
own Power; and this we are for ever trying to do, despite the fact that
by doing it we cause ourselves to feel more solitary than ever. The
reality of Solitude is the same in all men, there being no mitigation of
it, except in Forgetfulness, Stupidity or Illusion; but a man’s sense of
Solitude is proportionate to the sense and fact of his Power. In any set
of circumstances, the more Power we have, the more intensely do we feel
our solitude. I have enjoyed much Power in my life.”

“June, 1788. Captain Pavey came to pay his respects today, a round,
jovial, low man, whom even his awe of me could not entirely prevent from
breaking out into the vulgar Mirth which is native to him. I questioned
him concerning his last Voyage, and he very minutely described for me
the mode of packing the Slaves in the holds; the chains used to secure
them; the feeding of them and, in calm weather, the exercising on deck,
though always with Nets about the bulwarks, to prevent the more
desperate from casting themselves into the sea; the Punishments for the
refractory; the schools of hungry sharks accompanying the vessel; the
scurvy and other diseases, the wearing away of the negroes’ Skin by the
hardness of the planks on which they lie and the continual Motion of the
waves; the Stench so horrible that even the hardiest seaman will turn
pale and swoon away, if he ventures into the hold; the frequent Deaths
and almost incredibly rapid Putrefaction, especially in damp Weather
near the Line. When he took his leave, I made him a present of a gold
snuff box. Anticipating no such favour, he was so coarsely loud in his
expression of thanks and future devotion to my Interests, that I was
forced to cut him short. The snuff box cost me sixty guineas; Captain
Pavey’s last three Voyages have brought me upwards of forty thousand.
Power and wealth increase in direct proportion to a man’s distance from
the material objects from which wealth and power are ultimately derived.
For every risk taken by the General Officer, the private soldier takes a
hundred; and for every guinea earned by the latter the General earns a
hundred. So with myself and Pavey and the Slaves. The Slaves labour in
the Plantation for nothing but blows and their diet; Captain Pavey
undergoes the hardships and dangers of the Sea and lives not so well as
a Haberdasher or Vintner; I put my hand to nothing more material than a
Banker’s draft, and a shower of gold descends upon me for my pains. In a
world such as ours, a man is given but three choices. In the first
place, he may do as the multitude have always done and, too stupid to be
wholly a knave, mitigate his native baseness with a no less native
folly. Second, he may imitate those more consummate fools who painfully
deny their native Baseness in order to practise Virtue. Third, he may
choose to be a man of sense—one who, knowing his native Baseness,
thereby learns to make use of it and, by the act of knowledge, rises
superior to it and to his more foolish Fellows. For myself, I have
chosen to be a man of sense.”

“March, 1789. Reason promises Happiness; Feeling protests that it is
Happiness; Sense alone gives Happiness. And Happiness itself is like
dust in the mouth.”

“July, 1789. If Men and Women took their Pleasures as noisily as the
Cats, what Londoner could ever hope to sleep of nights?”

“July, 1789. The Bastille is fallen. Long live the Bastille!”

The next few pages were devoted to the Revolution. Jeremy skipped them.
In 1794 the Fifth Earl’s interest in the Revolution gave place to
interest in his own health.

“To those who visit me,” he had written, “I say that I have been sick
and am now well again. The words are quite untrue; for it was not I who
lay at Death’s door, nor is it I whom am recovered. The first was a
special creation of Fever, an embodiment of Pain and Lassitude; the
second is not I, but an old man, weak, shrunken and without desires. My
name and some memories are all that remain to me of the Being I once
was. It is as if a Man had died and willed to some surviving Friend a
handful of worthless trinkets to remember him by.”

“1794. A sick, rich Man is like one who lies wounded and alone in the
deserts of Egypt; the Vultures hover lower and lower above his head and
the Jackals and Hyenas prowl in ever narrowing circles about the place
where he lies. Not even a rich Man’s Heirs could be more unsleepingly
attentive. When I look into my Nephew’s face and read there, behind the
mask of Solicitude, his impatient longing for my Death and his
disappointment that I am not already gone, I feel an influx of new Life
and Strength. If for no other reason, I will live on to rob him of the
Happiness which he still believes (for he is confident of my Relapse) to
be within his Grasp.”

“1794. The World is a Mirror, reflecting his image to the Beholder.”

“January, 1795. I have tried King David’s remedy against old age and
found it wanting. Warmth cannot be imparted, but only evoked; and where
no lingering spark persists, even tinder will not raise a flame. It may
be as the Parsons say, that we are saved by another’s vicarious
suffering; but I can vouch for the fact that vicarious pleasure is
without efficacity, except only to enhance the sentiments of Superiority
and Power in him who inflicts it.”

“1795. As the Satisfactions of Sense decay, we compensate ourselves for
their loss by cultivating the sentiments of Pride and Vanity. The love
of Domination is independent of the bodily faculties and therefore, when
the body loses its powers, may easily take the place of vanished
Pleasure. For myself, I was never without the love of Dominion even when
in the Throes of Pleasure. Since my late Death, the Phantom that remains
of me is forced to content itself with the first, less substantial and,
above all, less harmless of these two Satisfactions.”

“July, 1796. The fish-ponds at Gonister were dug in the Ages of
Superstition by the monks of the Abbey upon whose foundations the
present House is built. Under King Charles I, my great-great-grandfather
caused a number of leaden Disks engraved with his cypher and the date,
to be attached by silver rings to the tails of fifty well-grown carp.
Not less than twenty of these fish are alive today, as one may count
whenever the bell is rung that call the Creatures to be fed. With them
come others even larger than they—survivors, it may be, from the monkish
times before King Henry’s Dissolution of the Religious Houses. Watching
them through the pellucid Water, I marvel at the strength and unimpaired
agility of these great Fishes, of which the oldest were perhaps alive
when the Utopia was written, while the youngest are co-eval with the
author of Paradise Lost. The latter attempted to justify God’s ways to
Man. He would have done a more useful Work in undertaking to explain the
ways of God to Fish. Philosophers have wasted their own and their
readers’ time in speculations upon the Immortality of the Soul; the
Alchemists have pored for centuries over their crucibles in the vain
hope of discovering the Elixir or the Stone. Meanwhile, in every pond
and river, one may find Carps that have outlived three Platos and half a
dozen Para-celsuses. The Secret of eternal Life is not to be found in
old Books, nor in liquid Gold, nor even in Heaven; it is to be found in
the Mud and only awaits a skilful Angler.”

Outside, in the corridor, the bell rang for lunch. Jeremy rose, put the
Fifth Earl’s note-book away and walked towards the lift, smiling to
himself at the thought of the pleasure he would derive from telling that
bumptious ass, Obispo, that all his best ideas about longevity had been
anticipated in the eighteenth century.


Chapter V

LUNCHEON, in the absence of Mr. Stoyte, was a very cheerful meal. The
servants went about their business unreprimanded. Jeremy could talk
without the risk of being snubbed or insulted. Dr. Obispo was able to
tell the story about the chimney sweep who applied for life insurance
after going on his honeymoon, and, from the far-away depths of that
almost trance-like state of fatigue—that state which she deliberately
fostered, so as not to have to think too much and feel too badly about
what was happening—Virginia was at liberty to laugh at it as loudly as
she liked. And though with one part of herself she would have liked not
to laugh at all, because she didn’t want to make Sig think she was
encouraging him in any way, with another part she wanted to laugh,
indeed couldn’t help laughing, because, after all, the story was really
very funny. Besides, it was such a relief not to have to put on that act
with Pete for the benefit of Uncle Jo. No double-crossing. For once, she
could be herself. The only fly in the ointment was that this self she
was being was such a miserable specimen; a self with bones that would go
like rubber whenever that horrible Sig chose to come along; a self
without the strength to keep a promise even to Our Lady. Her laughter
abruptly ceased.

Only Pete was consistently unhappy—about the chimney sweep, of course,
and Virginia’s burst of merriment; but also because Barcelona had fallen
and, with it, all his hopes of a speedy victory over Fascism, all
prospect of ever seeing any of his old comrades again. And that wasn’t
all. Laughing at the story of the chimney sweep was only a single
painful incident among many. Virginia had allowed the first two courses
of the meal to come and go without once paying any attention to him. But
why? Why? His distress was aggravated by bitter bewilderment. Why? In
the light of what had been happening during the past three weeks it was
inexplicable. Ever since the evening of the day she had turned back at
the Grotto, Virginia had been simply wonderful to him—going out of her
way to talk to him, inviting him to tell her things about Spain and even
about biology. Why, she had actually asked to look at something under
the microscope. Trembling with happiness, so that he could hardly adjust
the slide, he had focussed the instrument on a preparation of the carp’s
intestinal flora. Then she had sat down in his place and, as she bent
over the eyepiece, her auburn curls had swung down on either side of the
microscope and, above the edge of her pink sweater, the nape of her neck
had been uncovered, so white, so tangibly inviting that the enormous
effort he had had to make to prevent himself from kissing it had left
him feeling almost faint.

There had been times, during the ensuing days, when he wished that he
hadn’t made that effort. But then his better self would reassert its
rule and he was glad again that he had. Because, of course, it wouldn’t
have been right. For though he had long since given up the family belief
in that Blood-of-the-Lamb business, he still remembered what his pious
and conventional mother had said about kissing any one you weren’t
engaged to; he was still at heart the earnest adolescent whom Reverend
Schlitz’s eloquence had fired during the perplexities of puberty, with a
passionate determination to be continent, a conviction of the Sacredness
of Love, an enthusiasm for something wonderful called Christian
marriage. But at the moment, unfortunately, he wasn’t earning enough to
feel justified in asking Virginia to accept his sacred love and enter
into Christian marriage with him. And there was the added complication
that on his side the marriage wouldn’t be Christian, whereas Virginia
was attached to the institution which Reverend Schlitz sometimes called
the Whore of Babylon and the Marxists regarded as pre-eminently
detestable. An institution, moreover, that would think as poorly of him
as he thought of it—though he thought rather less poorly of it now that
Hitler was persecuting it in Germany and since he had been looked after
by those Sisters of Mercy in Spain. And even if those religious and
financial difficulties could somehow be miraculously smoothed away,
there remained the dreadful fact of Mr. Stoyte. He knew, of course, that
Mr. Stoyte was nothing more than a father to Virginia, or at most an
uncle—but knew it with that excessive certainty which is born of desire;
knew it in the same way as Don Quixote knew that the pasteboard vizor of
his helmet was as strong as steel. It was the kind of knowledge about
which it is prudent to make no inquiries; and of course, if he asked
Virginia to marry him, such inquiries, or the information such inquiries
might be expected to elicit, would almost inevitably be forced upon him.

Yet another complicating factor in the situation was Mr. Propter. For if
Mr. Propter was right, as Pete was coming to feel more and more certain
that he was, then it was obviously unwise to do something that would
make more difficult the passage from the human level to the level of
eternity. And though he loved Virginia, he found it difficult to believe
that marriage to her would be anything but an obstacle to the
enlightenment of everybody concerned.

Or rather, he had thought this; but in the course of the last week or
two his opinion had changed. Or to be more exact, he no longer had an
opinion; he was just uncertain and bewildered. For Virginia’s character
seemed almost suddenly to have changed. From being child-like, loud and
extraverted, her innocence had become quiet and inscrutable. In the
past, she had treated him with the jocular and casual friendliness of
mere good fellowship; but recently there had been a strange alteration.
The jokes had stopped and a kind of earnest solicitude had taken their
place. She had been simply wonderful to him—but not in the way a girl is
wonderful to a man she wants to fall in love with her. No, Virginia had
been wonderful like a sister—and not an ordinary sister, either: almost
a Sister of Mercy. Not just any Sister of Mercy; that particular Sister
who had nursed him when he was in hospital at Gerona; the young Sister
with the big eyes and the pale oval face, like the face of the Virgin
Mary in a picture; the one who always seemed to be secretly happy, not
because of anything that was going on around her, but because of
something inside, something extraordinary and beautiful behind her eyes
that she could look in at; and when she’d looked at it, there was no
reason any more why she should feel scared by an air raid, for example,
or upset by an amputation. She evidently saw things from what Mr.
Propter called the level of eternity; they didn’t affect her in the way
they’d affect a person living on the human level. On the human level you
were scared and angry; or, if you were calm, you made yourself calm by
an effort of will. But the Sister was calm without making an effort of
will. At the time, he had admired without comprehension. Now, thanks to
Mr. Propter, he could begin to understand as well as admire.

Well, that was the face that Virginia’s had reminded him of during the
past weeks. There had been a kind of sudden conversion from the
outward-looking life to the inward, from open responsiveness to secret
and mysterious abstraction. The cause of this conversion was beyond his
comprehension; but the fact was manifest, and he had respected it.
Respected it by not kissing her neck as she bent over the microscope; by
never even touching her arm or taking her hand; by not saying to her one
word of all he felt about her. In the strange inexplicable circumstances
of her transformation, such actions, he had felt, would have been
inappropriate to the point positively of sacrilege. It was as a sister
that she had chosen to be wonderful to him; it was therefore as a
brother that he had responded. And now, for no known reason, she seemed
suddenly to have become unaware of his existence. The sister had
forgotten her brother; and the Sister of Mercy had forgotten
herself—forgotten herself so far as to listen to Dr. Obispo’s ignoble
anecdote about the chimney sweep, even to laugh at it. And yet, Pete
noticed in bewilderment, the moment she stopped laughing, her face
resumed its expression of inwardness and secrecy and detachment. The
Sister of Mercy remembered herself as promptly as she had forgotten. It
was beyond him; he simply couldn’t figure it out.

With the arrival of the coffee, Dr. Obispo announced that he proposed to
take the afternoon off and, as there was nothing that urgently needed
doing in the laboratory, he advised Pete to do the same. Pete thanked
him and, pretending to be in a hurry (for he didn’t want to go through
the humiliation of being ignored when Virginia discussed her plans for
the afternoon), swallowed his coffee and, mumbling excuses, left the
room. A little later he was out in the sunshine, walking down towards
the plain.

As he went, he thought of some of the things Mr. Propter had said to him
in the course of his recent visits.

Of what he had said about the silliest text in the Bible and the most
sensible. “They hated me without a cause” and “God is not mocked; as a
man sows, so shall he reap.”

Of what he had said about nobody ever getting some thing for nothing—so
that a man would pay for too much money, for example, or too much power
or too much sex, by being shut up more tightly inside his own ego.

The baboons were gibbering as he passed. Pete recalled some of Mr.
Propter’s remarks about literature. About the wearisomeness, to an adult
mind, of all those merely descriptive plays and novels, which critics
expected one to admire. All the innumerable, interminable anecdotes and
romances and character-studies but no general theory of anecdotes, no
explanatory hypothesis of romance or character. Just a huge collection
of facts about lust and greed, fear and ambition, duty and affection;
just facts, and imaginary facts at that, with no co-ordinating
philosophy superior to common sense and the local system of conventions,
no principle of arrangement more rational than simple aesthetic
expediency. And then the astonishing nonsense talked by those who
undertake to elucidate and explain this hodge-podge of prettily
patterned facts and fancies! All that solemn tosh, for example, about
Regional Literature—as though there were some special and outstanding
merit in recording unco-ordinated facts about the lusts, greeds and
duties of people who happen to live in the country and speak in dialect!
Or else the facts were about the urban poor and there was an effort to
co-ordinate them in terms of some post-Marxian theory that might be
partly true, but was always inadequate. And in that case it was the
great Proletarian Novel. Or else somebody wrote yet another book
proclaiming that Life is Holy; by which he always meant that anything
people do in the way of fornicating, or getting drunk, or losing their
tempers, or feeling maudlin is entirely O.K. with God and should
therefore be regarded as permissible and even virtuous. In which case it
was up to the critics to talk about the author’s ripe humanity, his deep
and tender wisdom, his affinities with the great Goethe, and his
obligations to William Blake.

Pete smiled as he remembered, but with a certain ruefulness as well as
amusement; for he too had taken this sort of thing with the seriousness
its verbiage seemed to demand.

Misplaced seriousness—the source of some of our most fatal errors. One
should be serious, Mr. Propter had said, only about what deserves to be
taken seriously. And, on the strictly human level, there was nothing
that deserved to be taken seriously except the sufferings men inflicted
upon themselves by their crimes and follies. But, in the last analysis,
most of these crimes and follies arose from taking too seriously things
which did not deserve it. And that, Mr. Propter had continued, was
another of the enormous defects of so-called good literature; it
accepted the conventional scale of values; it respected power and
position; it admired success; it treated as though they were reasonable
the mainly lunatic preoccupations of statesmen, lovers, business men,
social climbers, parents. In a word, it took seriously the causes of
suffering as well as the suffering. It helped to perpetuate misery by
explicitly or implicitly approving the thoughts and feelings and
practices which could not fail to result in misery. And this approval
was bestowed in the most magnificent and persuasive language. So that
even when a tragedy ended badly, the reader was hypnotized by the
eloquence of the piece into imagining that it was all somehow noble and
worth while. Which, of course, it wasn’t. Because, if you considered
them dispassionately, nothing could be more silly and squalid than the
themes of “Phèdre,” or “Othello,” or “Wuthering Heights,” or the
“Agamemnon.” But the treatment of these themes had been in the highest
degree sublime and thrilling, so that the reader or the spectator was
left with the conviction that, in spite of the catastrophe, all was
really well with the world, the all too human world, which had produced
it. No, a good satire was much more deeply truthful and, of course, much
more profitable than a good tragedy. The trouble was that so few good
satires existed, because so few satirists were prepared to carry their
criticism of human values far enough. “Candide,” for example, was
admirable as far as it went; but it went no farther than debunking the
principal human activities in the name of the ideal of harmlessness.
Now, it was perfectly true that harmlessness was the highest ideal most
people could aspire to; for, though few had the power to do much
positive good, there was nobody who could not refrain, if he so desired,
from evil. Nevertheless mere harmlessness, however excellent, most
certainly didn’t represent the highest possible ideal. II faut cultiver
notre jardin was not the last word in human wisdom; at the best it was
only the last but one.

The sun was in such a position that, as he walked down the hill, Pete
saw two little rainbows spouting from the nipples of Giambologna’s
nymph. Thoughts of Noah immediately arose in conjunction with thoughts
of Virginia in her white satin bathing costume. He tried to repress the
latter as incompatible with the new thoughts he was trying to cultivate
about the Sister of Mercy; and since Noah was not a subject that would
bear much thinking about, he proceeded instead to concentrate on that
talk he had had with Mr. Propter about sex. It had begun with his own
puzzled questionings as to what sort of sexual behaviour was normal—not
statistically normal, of course, but normal in that absolute sense in
which perfect vision or unimpaired digestion may be called normal. What
sort of sexual behaviour was normal in that sense of the word? And Mr.
Propter had answered: None. But there must be, he had protested. If good
could be manifested on the animal level, then there must be some kind of
sexual behaviour that was absolutely normal and natural, just as there
was an absolutely normal and natural sort of digestive activity. But
man’s sexual behaviour, Mr. Propter had answered, wasn’t on the same
level as digestion. A rat’s love making—yes, that was on the same level
as digestion; for the entire process was instinctive; in other words,
was controlled by the physiological intelligence of the body—the same
physiological intelligence as correlated the actions of heart and lungs
and kidneys, as regulated temperature, as nourished the muscles and made
them do the work demanded of them by the central nervous system. Men’s
bodily activities were controlled by the same physiological
intelligence; and it was that intelligence which, on the animal level,
manifested good. In human beings, sexual behaviour was almost completely
outside the jurisdiction of this physiological intelligence. It
controlled only the cellular activities which made sexual behaviour
possible. All the rest was non-instinctive and took place on the
strictly human level of self-consciousness. Even when men thought that
they were being most exclusively animal in their sexuality, they were
still on the human level. Which meant that they were still
self-conscious, still dominated by words—and where there were words,
there, of necessity, were memories and wishes, judgment and imagination.
There, inevitably, were the past and the future, the actual and the
fantastic; regret and anticipation; good and evil; the creditable and
the discreditable; the beautiful and the ugly. Among men and women, even
the most apparently bestial acts of eroticism were associated with some
or all of these non-animal factors—factors which were injected into
every human situation by the existence of language. This meant that
there was no one type of human sexuality that could be called “normal”
in the sense in which one could say that there was a normality of vision
or digestion. In that sense, all kinds of human sexuality were strictly
abnormal. The different kinds of sexual behaviour could not be judged by
referring them to an absolute, natural norm. They could only be judged
in reference to ultimate aims of each individual and the results
observed in each case. Thus, if an individual wanted to be well thought
of in any given society, he or she could safely regard as “normal” the
type of sexual behaviour currently tolerated by that local religion and
approved by the “best people.” But there were some individuals who cared
little for the judgment of an angry God or even of the best people.
Their principal desire was for intense and reiterated stimulation of
their senses and feelings. For these, it was obvious, “normality” in
sexual behaviour would be quite different from what it was for the more
social-minded. Then there would be all the kinds of sexuality “normal”
to those desirous of making the best of both worlds—the personal world
of sensations and emotions, and the social world of moral and religious
conventions. The “normalities” of Tartufe and Pecksniff; of the
clergymen who can’t keep away from schoolgirls, the cabinet ministers
with a secret mania for handsome youths. And finally there were those
who were concerned neither to get on in society, nor to placate the
local deity, nor to enjoy repeated emotional and sensuous stimulations,
but whose chief preoccupation was with enlightenment and liberation,
with the problem of transcending personality, of passing from the human
level to the level of eternity. Their conceptions of “normality” in
sexual behaviour would not resemble those of the men and women in any of
the other categories.

From the concrete tennis court the children of the Chinese cook were
flying kites in the shape of birds and equipped with little whistles, so
that they warbled plaintively in the wind. The cheerful quacking sound
of Cantonese drifted down to Pete’s ears. Across the Pacific, he
reflected, millions upon millions of such children had died already or
were dying. Below them, in the Sacred Grotto, stood the plaster figure
of Our Lady. Pete thought of Virginia kneeling in white shorts and a
yachting cap, of the abusive eloquence of Reverend Schlitz, of Dr.
Obispo’s jokes, of Alexis Carrel on the subject of Lourdes, of Lee’s
“History of the Inquisition,” of Tawney in the relationship between
Protestantism and Capitalism, of Niemoller and John Knox and Torque-mada
and that Sister of Mercy and again of Virginia and finally of Mr.
Propter as the only person he knew who could make some sense out of the
absurd, insane, diabolical confusion of it all.


Chapter VI

SOMEWHAT to Jeremy’s disappointment, Dr. Obispo was not at all mortified
by the information that his ideas had been anticipated in the eighteenth
century.

“I’d like to hear some more about your Fifth Earl,” he had said, as they
glided down into the cellars with the Vermeer. “You say he lived to
ninety?”

“More than ninety,” Jeremy answered. “Ninety-six or seven, I forget
which. And died in the middle of a scandal, what’s more.”

“What sort of a scandal?”

Jeremy coughed and patted the top of his head. “The usual sort,” he
fluted.

“You mean, the old bozo was still at it?” Dr. Obispo asked
incredulously.

“Still at it,” Jeremy repeated. “There’s a passage about the affair in
the unpublished papers of Greville. He died just in time. They were
actually on the point of arresting him.”

“What for?”

Jeremy twinkled again and coughed. “Well,” he said slowly and in his
most Cranford-like manner, “it seems that he had a tendency to take his
pleasures rather homicidally.”

“You mean, he’d killed someone.”

“Not actually killed,” Jeremy answered: “just damaged.”

Dr. Obispo was rather disappointed, but consoled himself almost
immediately by the reflection that, at ninety-six, even damage was
pretty creditable. “I’d like to look into this a little further,” he
added.

“Well, the note-book’s at your disposal,” said Jeremy politely.

Dr. Obispo thanked him. Together, they walked towards Jeremy’s work
room.

“The handwriting’s rather difficult,” said Jeremy as they entered. “I
think it might be easier if I read it aloud to you.”

Dr. Obispo protested that he didn’t want to waste Jeremy’s time; but as
the other was anxious to find an excuse for putting off to another
occasion the wearisome task of sorting papers that didn’t interest him,
the protest was out-protested. Jeremy insisted on being altruistic. Dr.
Obispo thanked him and settled down to listen. Jeremy took his eyes out
of their native element for long enough to polish his spectacles, then
began to re-read aloud the passage he had been reading that morning,
when the bell rang for lunch.

“ ‘It is to be found in the Mud,’ ” he concluded, “ ‘and only awaits a
skilful Angler.’ ”

Dr. Obispo chuckled. “You might almost use it as a definition of
science,” he said. “What is science? Science is angling in the
mud—angling for immortality and for anything else that may happen to
turn up.” He laughed again and added that he liked the old bastard.

Jeremy went on reading.

“ ‘August, 1796. Today my gabbling niece, Caroline, reproached me with
what she called the Inconsistency of my Conduct. A man who is humane
with the Horses in his stables, the Deer in his park and the Carp in his
fishponds should show his Consistency by being more sociable than I am,
more tolerant of the company of Fools, more charitable towards the poor
and humble. To which I answered by remarking that the word, Man, is the
general Name applied to successions of inconsistent Conduct, having
their source within a two-legged and feath-erless Body, and that such
words as Caroline, John and the like are the proper names applied to
particular successions of inconsistent Conduct within particular Bodies.
The only Consistency exhibited by the mass of Mankind is a Consistency
of Inconsistency. In other words, the nature of any particular
succession of inconsistent Conduct depends upon the history of the
individual and his ancestors. Each succession of Inconsistencies is
determined and obeys the Laws imposed upon it by its own antecedent
Circumstances. A Character may be said to be consistent in the sense
that its Inconsistencies are predestined and cannot pass beyond the
boundaries ordained for it. The Consistency demanded by such Fools as
Caroline is of quite another kind. These reproach us because our
successive Acts are not consistent with some arbitrarily selected set of
Prejudices, or ridiculous code of rules, such as the Hebrew, the stoic,
the Iroquois, the Christian. Such Consistency is not to be achieved, and
the attempt to achieve it results only in Imbecility or Hypocrisy.
Consider, I said to Caroline, your own Conduct. What Consistency, pray,
do you find between your conversations with the Dean upon Redemption and
your Draconian birchings of the younger Maids? between your conspicuous
charities and the setting of man-traps on your estates? between your
appearances at Court and your chaise percée? or between divine service
on Sunday morning and the pleasures enjoyed on Saturday night with your
husband and on Friday or Thursday, as all the world suspects, with a
certain Baronet who shall be nameless? But before I had concluded my
final question, Caroline had left the room.’ ”

“Poor Caroline,” said Dr. Obispo, with a laugh. “Still, she got what she
asked for.”

Jeremy read out the next entry.

“ ‘December, 1796. After this second attack of pulmonary congestion,
Convalescence has come more slowly than before and advanced less far. I
hang here suspended above the pit as though by a single thread, and the
substance of that thread is Misery.’ ”

With an elegantly bent little finger, Dr. Obispo flicked the ash of his
cigarette on to the floor.

“One of those pharmaceutical tragedies,” he commented. “With a course of
thiamine chloride and some testosterone, I could have made him as happy
as a sand-boy. Has it ever struck you,” he added, “what a lot of the
finest romantic literature is the result of bad doctoring?”

I could lie down like a tired child

And weep away this life of care.

“Lovely! But if they’d known how to clear up poor Shelley’s chronic
tuberculous pleurisy it would never have been written. Lying down like a
tired child and weeping life away happens to be one of the most
characteristic symptoms of chronic tuberculous pleurisy. And most of the
other Weltschmerz boys were either sick men or alcoholics or dope
addicts. I could have prevented every one of them from writing as he
did.” Dr. Obispo looked at Jeremy with a wolfish smile that was almost
child-like in the candour of its triumphant cynicism. “Well, let’s hear
how the Old Boy gets over his troubles.”

“ ‘December, 1796,’ ” Jeremy read out. “ ‘The prowlings of my attendant
hyaenas became so intolerable to me that yesterday I resolved to put an
end to them. When I asked them to leave me alone in the future, Caroline
and John protested their more than filial Affection. In the end I was
forced to say that, unless they were gone by noon today, I would order
my Steward to bring a score of men and eject them from my House. This
morning, from my window, I watched them take their departure.’ ”

The next note was dated January 11, 1797: “This year the anniversary of
my birth calls up Thoughts more gloomy than ever before. I am too weary
to record them. The day being fine and remarkably warm for the Season, I
had myself carried in my chair to the fishponds. The bell was rung, and
the Carp at once came hurrying to be fed. The spectacle of the brute
Creation provides me with almost my sole remaining pleasures. The
stupidity of the Brutes is without pretensions and their malignity
depends on Appetite and is therefore only intermittent. Men are
systematically and continuously cruel, while their Follies are justified
in the names of Religion and Politics, and their Ignorance is muffled up
in the pompous garments of Philosophy.

“Meanwhile, as I watched the fishes pushing and jostling for their
dinner, like a crowd of Divines in search of Preferment, my Thoughts
returned to the perplexing Question upon which I have so often
speculated in the past. Why should a man die at three score years and
ten, when a Fish can retain its Youth for two or three centuries? I have
debated with myself a number of possible answers. There was a time, for
example, when I thought that the longer life of Carp and Pike might be
due to the superiority of their Watery Element over our Air. But the
lives of some subaqueous Creatures are short, while those of certain
Birds exceed the human span.

“Again, I have asked myself if the Fish’s longer years might not be due
to its peculiar mode of begetting and bearing its young. But again I am
met by fatal Objections. The Males of Parrots and Ravens do not onanize,
but copulate; the females of Elephants do not lay eggs but bear their
young, if we are to believe M. de Buffon, for a period of not less than
four and twenty months. But Parrots, Ravens and Elephants are long-lived
Creatures; from which we must conclude that the Brevity of human Life is
due to other Causes than the manner in which Men beget and Females
reproduce their Kind.

“The only Hypotheses to which I can see no manifest Objections are
these: the Diet of such fish as Carp and Pike contains some substance
which preserves their Bodies from the Decay which overtakes the greater
number of Creatures even while they are alive; alternatively the
substance which prevents Decay is to be found within the Body of the
Fish, especially, it would be reasonable to guess, in the Stomach,
Liver, Bowels and other Organs of Concoction and Assimilation. In the
short-lived animals, such as Man, the Substances preventive of Decay
must be presumed to be lacking. The question then arises whether these
Substances can be introduced into the human Body from that of the Fish.
History does not record any remarkable instances of longevity among the
Ichthyophagi, nor have I ever observed that the Inhabitants of sea ports
and other places where there is an abundance of Fish were specially
long-lived. But we need not conclude from this that the Substance
preventive of Decay can never be conveyed from Fish to Man. For Man
cooks his Food before eating it, and we know by a thousand instances
that the application of Heat profoundly modifies the nature of many
Substances; moreover, he throws away, as unfit for his Consumption,
precisely those Organs of the Fish in which it is most reasonable to
assume that the Substance preventive of Decay is continued.”

“Christ!” said Dr. Obispo, unable to contain himself any longer. “Don’t
tell me that the old buzzard is going to eat raw fish guts!”

Bright behind their bifocals, Jeremy’s eyes had darted down to the
bottom of the page and were already at the top of the next. “That’s
exactly what he is doing,” he cried delightedly. “Listen to this. ‘My
first three attempts provoked an uncontrollable retching; at the fourth
I contrived to swallow what I had placed in my mouth, but within two or
three minutes my triumph was cut short by an access of vomiting. It was
only after the ninth or tenth essay that I was able to swallow and
retain even a few spoonfuls of the nauseating mince meat.’ ”

“Talk of courage!” said Dr. Obispo. “I’d rather go through an air raid
than that.”

Jeremy, meanwhile, had not so much as raised his eyes from the book.

“ ‘It is now a month,’ ” he said, “ ‘since I began to test the truth of
my Hypothesis, and I am now ingesting each day not less than six ounces
of the raw, triturated Viscera of freshly opened Carp.’ ”

“And the fish,” said Dr. Obispo, slowly shaking his head, “has a greater
variety of parasitic worms than any other animal. It makes my blood run
cold even to hear about it.”

“You needn’t worry,” said Jeremy, who had gone on reading. “His Lordship
does nothing but get better and better. Here’s a ‘singular accession of
Strength and Vigour during the month of March.’ Not to mention ‘Revival
of appetite and Improved memory and powers of ratiocination.’ I like
that ratiocination,” Jeremy put in appreciatively. “Such a nice period
piece, don’t you think? A real Chippendale word!” He went on reading to
himself, and, after a little silence, announced triumphantly: “By April
he’s riding again ‘an hour on the bay gelding every afternoon.’ And the
dose of what he calls his ‘visceral and stercoraceous pap’ has been
raised to ten ounces a day.”

Dr. Obispo jumped up from his chair and began to walk excitedly up and
down the room. “Damn it all!” he shouted. “This is more than a joke.
This is serious. Raw fish guts; intestinal flora; prevention of sterol
poisoning; and rejuvenation. Rejuvenation!” he repeated.

“The Earl’s more cautious than you are,” said Jeremy. “Listen to this.
‘Whether I owe my recovery to the Carp, to the Return of Spring, or to
the Vis medicatrix Naturae, I am not yet able to determine.’ ”

Dr. Obispo nodded approvingly. “That’s the right spirit,” he said.

“ ‘Time,’ ” Jeremy continued, “ ‘will show; that is, if I can force it
to show, which I intend to do by persisting in my present Regimen. For I
take it that my Hypothesis will be substantiated if, after persisting in
it for some time longer, I shall have recovered not only my former state
of Health, but a measure of Vigour not enjoyed since the passing of
Youth.’ ”

“Good for him!” Dr. Obispo exclaimed. “I only wish old Uncle Jo could
look at things in that scientific way. Or, maybe,” he added, suddenly
remembering the Nembutal and Mr. Stoyte’s child-like faith in his
medical omniscience, “maybe I don’t wish it. It might have its
inconveniences.” He chuckled to himself over his private joke. “Well,
let’s go on with our case history,” he added.

“In September he can ride for three hours at a stretch without fatigue,”
said Jeremy. “And he’s renewing his acquaintance with Greek literature,
and thinks very poorly of Plato, I notice. After which we have no entry
till 1799.”

“No entry till 1799!” Dr. Obispo repeated indignantly. “The old bastard!
Just when his case is getting really interesting, he goes and leaves us
in the dark.”

Jeremy looked up from the note-book smiling. “Not entirely in the dark,”
he said. “I’ll read you his first entry after the two years of silence
and you can draw your own conclusions about the state of his intestinal
flora.” He uttered a little cough and began to read in his Mrs. Gaskell
manner. “ ‘May, 1799. The most promiscuously abandoned Females,
especially among Women of Quality, are often those to whom an unkind
Nature has denied the ordinary Reason and Excuse for Gallantry. Cut off
by a constitutional Frigidity from the enjoyments of Pleasure, they are
in everlasting rebellion against their Fate. The power which drives them
on to multiply the number of their Gallantries is not Sensuality, but
Hope; not the wish to reiterate the experience of a familiar Bliss, but
rather the aspiration towards a common and much vaunted Felicity which
they themselves have had the misfortune never to know. To the
Voluptuary, the woman of easy Virtue is often no less obnoxious, though
for other reasons, than she seems to the severe Moralist. God preserve
me in Future from any such Conquests as that which I made this Spring at
Bath!’ ” Jeremy put down the book. “Do you still feel that you’ve been
left in the dark?” he asked.


Chapter VII

WITH a deafening shriek the electric smoothing tool whirled its band of
sandpaper against the rough surface of the wood. Bent over the
carpenter’s bench, Mr. Propter did not hear the sound of Pete’s entrance
and approach. For a long half minute the young man stood in silence,
watching him while he moved the smoothing tool back and forth over the
board before him. There was sawdust, Pete noticed, in the shaggy
eyebrows, and on the sunburnt forehead a black smear where he had
touched his face with oily fingers.

Pete felt a sudden twinge of compunction. It wasn’t right to spy on a
man if he didn’t know you were there. It was underhand; you might be
seeing something he didn’t want you to see. He called Mr. Propter’s
name.

The old man looked up, smiled and stopped the motor of his little
machine.

“Well, Pete,” he said. “You’re just the man I want. That is, if you’ll
do some work for me. Will you? But I’d forgotten,” he added,
interrupting Pete’s affirmative answer, “I’d forgotten about that heart
of yours. These miserable rheumatic fevers! Do you think you ought to?”

Pete blushed a little; for he had not yet had time to live down a
certain sense of shame in regard to his disability. “You’re not going to
make me run the quarter mile, are you?”

Mr. Propter ignored the jocular question. “You’re sure it’s all right?”
he insisted, looking with an affectionate earnestness into the young
man’s face.

“Quite sure, if it’s only this sort of thing.” Pete waved his hand in
the direction of the carpenter’s bench.

“Honest?”

Pete was touched and warmed by the other’s solicitude. “Honest!” he
affirmed.

“Very well then,” said Mr. Propter, reassured. “You’re hired. Or rather
you’re not hired, because you’ll be lucky if you get as much as a
Coca-Cola for your work. You’re conscribed.”

All the other people round the place, he went on to explain, were busy.
He had been left to run the entire furniture factory single-handed. And
the trouble was that it had to be run under pressure; three of the
migrant families down at the cabins were still without any chairs or
tables.

“Here are the measurements,” he said, pointing to a typewritten sheet of
paper pinned to the wall. “And there’s the lumber. Now, I’ll tell you
what I’d like you to do first,” he added, as he picked up a board and
laid it on the bench.

The two men worked for some time without trying to speak against the
noise of their electric tools. Then there was an interim of less noisy
activity. Too shy to embark directly upon the subject of his own
perplexities, Pete started to talk about Professor Pearl’s new book on
population. Forty inhabitants to the square mile for the entire land
area of the planet. Sixteen acres per head. Take away at least half for
unproductive land, and you were left with eight acres. And with average
agricultural methods a human being could be supported on the produce of
two and a half acres. With five and a half acres to spare for every
person, why should a third of the world be hungry?

“I should have thought you’d have discovered the answer in Spain,” said
Mr. Propter. “They’re hungry because man cannot live by bread alone.”

“What has that got to do with it?”

“Everything,” Mr. Propter answered. “Men can’t live by bread alone,
because they need to feel that their life has a point. That’s why they
take to idealism. But it’s a matter of experience and observation that
most idealism leads to war, persecution and mass insanity. Man cannot
live by bread alone; but if he chooses to nourish his mind on the wrong
kind of spiritual food, he won’t even get bread. He won’t even get
bread, because he’ll be so busy killing or preparing to kill his
neighbours in the name of God, or Country, or Social Justice that he
won’t be able to cultivate his fields. Nothing could be simpler or more
obvious. But at the same time,” Mr. Propter concluded, “nothing is
unfortunately more certain than that most people will go on choosing the
wrong spiritual food and thereby indirectly choosing their own
destruction.”

He turned on the current and once more the smoothing tool set up its
rasping shriek. There was another cessation of talk.

“In a climate like this,” said Mr. Propter, in the next interval of
silence, “and with all the water that’ll be available when the Colorado
River aqueduct starts running next year, you could do practically
anything you liked.” He unplugged the smoothing tool and went to fetch a
drill. “Take a township of a thousand inhabitants; give it three or four
thousand acres of land and a good system of producers’ and consumers’
co-operatives—it could feed itself completely; it could supply about
two-thirds of its other needs on the spot; and it could produce a
surplus to exchange for such things as it couldn’t produce itself. You
could cover the state with such townships. That is,” he added, smiling
rather mournfully, “that is, if you could get the permission from the
banks and a supply of people intelligent and virtuous enough to run a
genuine democracy.”

“You certainly wouldn’t get the banks to agree,” said Pete.

“And you probably couldn’t find more than quite a few of the right
people,” Mr. Propter added. “And of course nothing’s more disastrous
than starting a social experiment with the wrong people. Look at all the
efforts to start communities in this country. Robert Owen, for example,
and the Fourierists and the rest of them. Dozens of social experiments
and they all failed. Why? Because the men in charge didn’t choose their
people. There was no entrance examination and no novitiate. They
accepted any one who came along. That’s what comes of being unduly
optimistic about human beings.”

He started the drill and Pete took his turn with the smoothing tool.

“Do you think one oughtn’t to be optimistic?” the young man asked.

Mr. Propter smiled. “What a curious question!” he answered. “What would
you say about a man who installed a vacuum pump in a fifty-foot well?
Would you call him an optimist?”

“I’d call him a fool.”

“So would I,” said Mr. Propter. “And that’s the answer to your question;
a man’s a fool if he’s optimistic about any situation in which
experience has shown that there’s no justification for optimism. When
Robert Owen took in a crowd of defectives and incompetents and habitual
crooks, and expected them to organize themselves into a new and better
sort of human society, he was just a damned fool.”

There was silence for a time while Pete did some sawing.

“I suppose I’ve been too optimistic,” the young man said reflectively,
when it was over.

Mr. Propter nodded. “Too optimistic in certain directions,” he agreed.
“And at the same time too pessimistic in others.”

“For instance?” Pete questioned.

“Well, to begin with,” said Mr. Propter, “too optimistic about social
reforms. Imagining that good can be fabricated by mass production
methods. But, unfortunately, good doesn’t happen to be that sort of
commodity. Good is a matter of moral craftsmanship. It can’t be produced
except by individuals. And, of course, if individuals don’t know what
good consists in, or don’t wish to work for it, then it won’t be
manifested, however perfect the social machinery. There!” he added, in
another tone and blew the sawdust out of the hole he had been drilling.
“Now for these chair legs and battens.” He crossed the room and began to
adjust the lathe.

“And what do you think I’ve been too pessimistic about?” Pete asked.

Mr. Propter answered, without looking up from his work, “About human
nature.”

Pete was surprised. “I’d have expected you to say I was too optimistic
about human nature,” he said.

“Well, of course, in certain respects that’s true,” Mr. Propter agreed.
“Like most people nowadays you’re insanely optimistic about people as
they are, people living exclusively on the human level. You seem to
imagine that people can remain as they are and yet be the inhabitants of
a world conspicuously better than the world we live in. But the world we
live in is a consequence of what men have been and a projection of what
they are now. If men continue to be like what they are now and have been
in the past, it’s obvious that the world they live in can’t become
better. If you imagine it can, you’re wildly optimistic about human
nature. But on the other hand you’re wildly pessimistic if you imagine
that men and women are condemned by their nature to pass their whole
lives on the strictly human level. Thank God,” he said emphatically,
“they’re not. They have it in their power to climb out and up, on to the
level of eternity. No human society can become conspicuously better than
it is now, unless it contains a fair proportion of individuals who know
that their humanity isn’t the last word and who consciously attempt to
transcend it. That’s why one should be profoundly pessimistic about the
things most people are optimistic about—such as applied science, and
social reform, and human nature as it is in the average man or woman.
And that’s also why one should be profoundly optimistic about the thing
they’re so pessimistic about that they don’t even know it exists—I mean,
the possibility of transforming and transcending human nature. Not by
evolutionary growth, not in some remote future, but at any time—here and
now, if you like—by the use of properly directed intelligence and good
will.”

Tentatively he started the lathe, then stopped it again for further
adjustments.

“It’s the kind of pessimism and the kind of optimism you find in all the
great religions,” he added. “Pessimism about the world at large and
human nature as it displays itself in the majority of men and women.
Optimism about the things that can be achieved by any one who wants to
and knows how.” He started the lathe again and, this time, kept it
going.

“You know the pessimism of the New Testament,” he went on through the
noise of the machine. “Pessimism about the mass of mankind: many are
called, few chosen. Pessimism about weakness and ignorance: from those
that have not shall be taken away even that which they have. Pessimism
about life as lived on the ordinary human level: for that life must be
lost if the other eternal life is to be gained. Pessimism about even the
highest forms of worldly morality: there’s no access to the kingdom of
heaven for any one whose righteousness fails to exceed that of the
Scribes and Pharisees. But who are the Scribes and Pharisees? Simply the
best citizens; the pillars of society; all right-thinking men. In spite
of which, or rather because of which, Jesus calls them a generation of
vipers. Poor dear Dr. Mulge,” he added parenthetically, “how pained he’d
be if he ever had the misfortune to meet his Saviour!” Mr. Propter
smiled to himself over his work. “Well, that’s the pessimistic side of
the Gospel teaching,” he went on. “And, more systematically and
philosophically, you’ll find the same things set forth in the Buddhist
and Hindu scriptures. The world as it is and people on the strictly
human level—they’re beyond hope: that’s the universal verdict. Hope
begins only when human beings start to realize that the kingdom of
heaven, or whatever other name you care to give it, is within and can be
experienced by anybody who’s prepared to take the necessary trouble.
That’s the optimistic side of Christianity and the other world
religions.”

Mr. Propter stopped the lathe, took out the chair leg he had been
turning and put another in its place.

“It isn’t the sort of optimism they teach you in the liberal churches,”
said Pete, thinking of his transition period between Reverend Schlitz
and militant Anti-Fascism.

“No, it isn’t,” Mr. Propter agreed. “What they teach you in liberal
churches hasn’t got anything to do with Christianity or any other
realistic religion. It’s mainly drivel.”

“Drivel?”

“Drivel,” Mr. Propter repeated. “Early twentieth century humanism
seasoned with nineteenth-century evangelicalism. What a combination!
Humanism affirms that good can be achieved on a level where it doesn’t
exist and denies the fact of eternity. Evangelicalism denies the
relationship between causes and effects by affirming the existence of a
personal deity who forgives offences. They’re like Jack Spratt and his
wife: between the two of them, they lick the platter clean of all sense
whatsoever. No, I’m wrong,” Mr. Propter added, through the buzz of the
machine, “not all sense. The humanists don’t talk of more than one race,
and the evangelicals only worship one God. It’s left to the patriots to
polish off that last shred of sense. The patriots and the political
sectarians. A hundred mutually exclusive idolatries. ‘There are many
gods and the local bosses are their respective prophets.’ The amiable
silliness of the liberal churches is good enough for quiet times; but
note that it’s always supplemented by the ferocious lunacies of
nationalism, for use in times of crisis. And those are the philosophies
young people are brought up on. The philosophies your optimistic elders
expect you to reform the world with.” Mr. Propter paused for a moment,
then added, “As a man sows, so shall he reap. God is not mocked. Not
mocked,” he repeated. “But people simply refuse to believe it. They go
on thinking they can cock a snook at the nature of things and get away
with it. I’ve sometimes thought of writing a little treatise, like a
cook-book. ‘One Hundred Ways of Mocking God,’ I’d call it. And I’d take
a hundred examples from history and contemporary life, illustrating what
happens when people undertake to do things without paying regard to the
nature of reality. And the book would be divided into sections, such as
‘Mocking God in Agriculture,’ ‘Mocking God in Politics,’ ‘Mocking God in
Education,’ ‘Mocking God in Philosophy,’ ‘Mocking God in Economics.’ It
would be an instructive little book. But a bit depressing,” Mr. Propter
added.


Chapter VIII

THE news that the Fifth Earl had had three illegitimate children at the
age of eighty-one was announced in the note-book with a truly
aristocratic understatement. No boasting, no self-congratulation. Just a
brief, quiet statement, sandwiched between the record of a conversation
with the Duke of Wellington and a note on the music of Mozart. One
hundred twenty years after the event, Dr. Obispo, who was not an English
gentleman, exulted noisily, as though the achievement had been his own.

“Three of them,” he shouted in his proletarian enthusiasm. “Three! What
do you think of that?”

Brought up in the same tradition as the Fifth Earl, Jeremy thought that
it wasn’t bad, and went on reading.

In 1820 the Earl had been ill again; but not severely; and a three
months’ course of raw carp’s entrails had restored him to his normal
health, “the health,” as he put it, “of a man in the flower of his age.”

A year later, for the first time in a quarter of a century, he visited
his nephew and niece, and was delighted to find that Caroline had become
a shrew, that John was already bald and asthmatic, and that their eldest
daughter was so monstrously fat that nobody would marry her.

On the news of the death of Bonaparte he had written philosophically
that a man must be a great fool if he could not satisfy his desire for
glory, power and excitement except by undergoing the hardships of war
and the tedium of civil government. “The language of polite
conversation,” he concluded, “reveals with a sufficient clarity that
such exploits as those of Alexander and Bonaparte have their peaceful
and domestic equivalents. We speak of amorous Adventures, of the
Conquest of a desired Female and the Possession of her Person. For the
Man of sense, such tropes are eloquent indeed. Considering their
significance he perceives that War and the pursuit of Empire are wrong
because foolish, foolish because unnecessary and unnecessary because the
satisfactions derivable from Victory and Dominion may be obtained with
vastly less trouble, pain and ennui behind the silken curtains of the
Duchess’s Alcove or on the straw Pallet of the Dairy Maid. And if at any
time such simple Pleasures should prove insipid, if, like the antique
Hero, he should find himself crying for new Worlds to conquer, then by
the offer of a supplementary guinea, or in very many instances, as I
have found, gratuitously, by the mere elicitation of a latent Desire for
Humiliation and even Pain, a man may enjoy the privilege of using the
Birch, the Manacles, the Cage and any such other Emblems of absolute
Power as the Fancy of the Conqueror may suggest and the hired Patience
of the Conquered will tolerate or her consenting Taste approve. I recall
a remark by Dr. Johnson to the effect that a man is seldom more
innocently employed than when making Money. Making Love is an even more
innocent employment than making Money. If Bonaparte had had the Wisdom
to vent his Desire for Domination in the Saloons, and Bed Chambers of
his native Corsica, he would have expired in Freedom among his own
people, and many hundreds of thousands of men now dead or maimed or
blind would be alive and enjoying the use of their faculties. True, they
would doubtless be employing their Eyes, Limbs and Lives as foolishly
and malignantly as those whom Bonaparte did not murder are employing
them today. But though a Superior Being might applaud the one-time
Emperor for having removed so great a quantity of Vermin from the Earth,
the Vermin themselves will always be of another Opinion. As a mere Man
of Sense, and not a Superior Being, I am on the side of the Vermin.”

“Have you ever noticed,” said Dr. Obispo, reflectively, “the way even
the most hard-boiled people always try to make out they’re really good?
Even this old buzzard—you’d think he wouldn’t care how he rated, so long
as he got his fun. But no; he has to write a long screed proving what a
much better man he is than Napoleon. Which, of course, he is by any
reasonable standard. But you wouldn’t expect him to go out of his way to
say so.”

“Well, nobody else was likely to say so,” Jeremy put in.

“So he had to do it himself,” Dr. Obispo concluded. “Which just proves
my point. Iagos don’t exist. People will do everything Iago did; but
they’ll never say they’re villains. They’ll construct a beautiful verbal
world in which all their villainies are right and reasonable. I’d hoped
that old carp-guts would be an exception. But he isn’t. It’s really
rather a disappointment.”

Jeremy giggled with a certain patronizing disdain. “You’d have liked him
to do the Don-Juan-in-hell act. The calme héros courbé sur sa rapière.
You’re more romantic than I thought.” He turned back to the notebook
and, after a pause, announced that in 1823, the Fifth Earl had spent
some hours with Coleridge and found his conversation deep, but
singularly muddy—“characteristics,” he had added, “which are admirable
in Fish Ponds, but deplorable in rational Discourse, which should be
pellucid and always shallow enough for a man to wade through without
risk of drowning himself in an abyss of nonsense.” Jeremy beamed with
pleasure. Coleridge was not a favourite of his. “When I think of the rot
people are still talking about the rubbish that old dope-addict wrote .
. .”

Dr. Obispo cut him short. “Let’s hear some more about the Earl,” he
said.

Jeremy returned to the note-book.

In 1824 the old gentleman was lamenting the passage of the Bill which
assimilated the transportation of slaves to piracy and so made the trade
a capital offence. Henceforward, he would be a matter of eight or nine
thousand a year the poorer. But he consoled himself by thinking of
Horace living in philosophic tranquillity on his Sabine farm.

In 1826 he was deriving his keenest pleasure from a re-persual of
Theocritus and the company of a young female, called Kate, whom he had
made his housekeeper. In the same year, despite the curtailment of his
income, he had been unable to resist the temptation of purchasing an
exquisite Assumption of the Virgin by Murillo.

1827 had been a year of financial reverses; reverses that were
connected, apparently, with the death, following an abortion, of a very
young maid employed by the housekeeper as her personal attendant. The
entry in the note-book was brief and obscure; but it seemed to imply
that the girl’s parents had had to be paid a very substantial sum. A
little later, he was unwell again and wrote a long and minute
description of the successive stages of decay in the human corpse, with
special reference to the eyes and lips. A short course of triturated
carp restored him to a more cheerful frame of mind, and, in 1828, he
made a voyage to Athens, Constantinople and Egypt.

In 1831 he was in negotiations for the purchase of a house near Farnham.

“That must be Selford,” Jeremy put in. “The house where these things
came from.” He indicated the twenty-seven packing cases. “Where the two
old ladies are living.” He continued his reading. “ ‘The house is old,
dark and inconvenient, but stands in sufficiently extensive Grounds upon
an Eminence above the River Wey, whose southern bank at this point rises
almost perpendicularly in a Cliff of yellow sandstone, to the height of
perhaps one hundred and twenty feet. The Stone is soft and easily
worked, a Circumstance which accounts for the existence beneath the
house of very extensive Cellars which were dug, it would seem, about a
Century ago, when the Vaults were used for the storage of smuggled
Spirits and other goods on their way from the coasts of Hampshire and
Sussex to the Metropolis. To allay the fears of his Wife, who dreads to
lose a child in their subterranean meanders, the Farmer who now owns the
House has walled off the greater part of his Cellarage; but even that
which remains presents the appearance of a veritable Catacomb. In Vaults
such as these a man could be assured of all the Privacy required for the
satisfaction of even the most eccentric Tastes.’ ” Jeremy looked up over
the top of his book. “That sounds a bit sinister, don’t you think?”

Dr. Obispo shrugged his shoulders. “Nobody can have enough privacy,” he
said emphatically. “When I think of all the trouble I’ve had for want of
some nice cellars like the ones you’ve been reading about . . .” He left
the sentence unfinished, and a shadow crossed his face: he was thinking
that he couldn’t go on giving Jo Stoyte those Nembutal capsules
indefinitely, damn him!

“Well, he buys the house,” said Jeremy, who had been reading to himself.
“And he has repairs and additions made in the Gothic manner. And an
apartment is fitted up in the cellars, forty-five feet underground and
at the end of a long passage. And to his delight he finds that there’s a
subterranean well, and another shaft that goes down to a great depth and
can be used as a privy. And the place is perfectly dry and has an ample
supply of air, and . . .”

“But what does he do down there?” Dr. Obispo asked impatiently.

“How should I know?” Jeremy answered. He ran his eyes down the page. “At
the moment,” he went on, “the old boy’s making a speech to the House of
Lords in favour of the Reform Bill.”

“In favour of it?” said Obispo in surprise.

“ ‘In the first days of the French Revolution,’ ” Jeremy read out, “ ‘I
infuriated the adherents of every political Party by saying: The
Bastille is fallen; long live the Bastille. Forty-three years have
elapsed since the occurrence of that singularly futile Event, and the
correctness of my Prognostications has been demonstrated by the rise of
new Tyrannies and the restoration of old ones. It is therefore with
perfect Confidence that I now say: Privilege is dead; long live
Privilege. The masses of mankind are incapable of Emancipation and too
inept to direct their own Destinies. Government must always be by
Tyrants or Oligarchs. My opinion of the Peerage and the landed Gentry is
exceedingly low; but their own opinion of themselves must be even lower
than mine. They believe that the Ballot will rob them of their Power and
Privileges, whereas I am sure that, by the exercise of even such little
Prudence and Cunning as parsimonious Nature has endowed them with, they
can with ease maintain themselves in their present pre-eminence. This
being so, let the Rabble amuse itself by voting. An Election is no more
than a gratuitous Punch and Judy Show, offered by the Rulers in order to
distract the attention of the Ruled.’ ”

“How he’d have enjoyed a modern Communist or Fascist election!” said Dr.
Obispo. “By the way, how old was he when he made this speech?”

“Let me see.” Jeremy paused for a moment to make the calculation, then
answered: “Ninety-four.”

“Ninety-four!” Dr. Obispo repeated. “Well, if it wasn’t those fish guts,
I don’t know what it was.”

Jeremy turned back to the note-book. “At the beginning of 1833 he sees
his nephew and niece again, on the occasion of Caroline’s sixty-fifth
birthday. Caroline now wears a red wig, her eldest daughter is dead of
cancer, the younger is unhappy with her husband and is addicted to
piety, the son, who is now a Colonel, has gambling debts which he
expects his parents to pay. Altogether, as the Earl remarks, ‘a most
enjoyable evening.’ ”

“Nothing about those cellars,” Dr. Obispo complained.

“No; but his housekeeper, Kate, has been ill and he’s giving her the
carp diet.”

Dr. Obispo showed a renewal of interest. “And what happens?” he asked.

Jeremy shook his head. “The next entry’s about Milton,” he said.

“Milton?” exclaimed Dr. Obispo in a tone of indignant disgust.

“He says that Milton’s writings prove that religion depends for its
existence upon the picturesque use of intemperate language.”

“He may be right,” said Dr. Obispo irritably. “But what I want to know
is what happened to that housekeeper.”

“She’s evidently alive,” said Jeremy. “Because here’s a little note in
which he complains about the tediousness of too much female devotion.”

“Tedious!” Dr. Obispo repeated. “That’s putting it mildly. I’ve known
women who were like fly paper.”

“She doesn’t seem to have objected to an occasional infidelity. There’s
a reference here to a young mulatto girl.” He paused; then, smiling, “
‘Delicious creature,’ ” he said. “ ‘She combines the brutish imbecility
of the Hottentot with the malice and cupidity of the European.’ After
which the old gentleman goes out to dinner at Farnham Castle with the
Bishop of Winchester and finds his claret poor, his port execrable and
his intellectual powers beneath contempt.”

“Nothing about Kate’s health?” Dr. Obispo persisted.

“Why should he talk about it? He takes it for granted.”

“I’d hoped he was a man of science,” said Dr. Obispo almost plaintively.

Jeremy laughed. “You must have very odd ideas about Fifth Earls and
Eleventh Barons. Why on earth should they be men of science?” Dr. Obispo
was unable to answer. There was a silence, while Jeremy started a new
page. “Well, I’m damned,” he broke out. “He’s been reading James Mill’s
‘Analysis of the Human Mind.’ At ninety-five. I think that’s even more
remarkable than having a rejuvenated housekeeper and a mulatto. ‘The
Common Fool is merely stupid and ignorant. To be a Great Fool a man must
have much learning and high abilities. To the everlasting credit of Mr.
Bentham and his Lieutenants it must be said that their Folly has always
been upon the grandest scale. Mr. Mill’s Analysis is a veritable
Coliseum of silliness.’ And the next note is about the Marquis de Sade.
By the way,” Jeremy interpolated, looking up at Dr. Obispo, “when are
you going to return me my books?”

Dr. Obispo shrugged his shoulders. “Whenever you like,” he answered.
“I’m through with them.”

Jeremy tried not to show his delight and, with a cough, returned to the
note-book. “ ‘The Marquis de Sade,’ ” he read aloud, “ ‘was a man of
powerful genius, unhappily deranged. In my opinion, an Author would
achieve Perfection if he combined the qualities of the Marquis with
those of Bishop Butler and Sterne.’ ” Jeremy paused. “The Marquis,
Bishop Butler and Sterne,” he repeated slowly. “My word, you’d have a
pretty remarkable book!” He went on reading. “ ‘October, 1833. To
degrade oneself is pleasurable in proportion to the height of the
worldly and intellectual Eminence from which one descends and to which
one returns when the act of Degradation is concluded.’ That’s pretty
good,” he commented, thinking of the Trojan Women and alternate Friday
afternoons in Maida Vale. “Yes, that’s pretty good. Let me see, where
are we? Oh, yes. ‘The Christians talk much of Pain, but nothing of what
they say is to the point. For the most remarkable Characteristics of
Pain are these: the Disproportion between the enormity of physical
suffering and its often trifling causes; and the manner in which, by
annihilating every faculty and reducing the body to helplessness, it
defeats the Object for which it was apparently devised by Nature: viz.:
to warn the sufferer of the approach of Danger, whether from within or
without. In relation to Pain, that empty word, Infinity, comes near to
having a meaning. This is not the case with Pleasure; for Pleasure is
strictly finite and any attempt to extend its boundaries results in its
transformation into Pain. For this reason, the infliction of Pleasure
can never be so delightful to the aspiring Mind as the infliction of
Pain. To give a finite quantity of Pleasure is a merely human act; the
infliction of the Infinity we call Pain is truly god-like and divine.’ ”

“The old bastard’s going mystical in his old age,” Dr. Obispo
complained. “Almost reminds me of Mr. Propter.” He lit a cigarette.
There was a silence.

“Listen to this,” Jeremy suddenly cried in a tone of excitement. “
‘March, 1834. By the criminal negligence of Kate, Priscilla has been
allowed to escape from the subterranean place of confinement. Bearing as
she does upon her Person the evidence that she has been for some weeks
past the subject of my Investigations, she holds in her hands my
Reputation and perhaps even my Liberty and Life.’ ”

“I suppose this is what you were talking about before we started
reading,” said Dr. Obispo. “The final scandal. What happened?”

“Well, I suppose the girl must have told her story,” Jeremy answered
without looking up from the page be fore him. “Otherwise how do you
account for the presence of this ‘hostile Rabble’ he’s suddenly started
talking about? ‘The Humanity of men and women is inversely proportional
to their Numbers. A Crowd is no more human than an Avalanche or a
Whirlwind. A rabble of men and women stands lower in the scale of moral
and intellectual being than a herd of Swine or of Jackals.’ ”

Dr. Obispo threw back his head and uttered a peal of his surprisingly
loud, metallic laughter. “That’s exquisite!” he said. “Exquisite! You
couldn’t have a better example of typically human behaviour. Homo
conducting himself like sub-homo and then being sapiens in order to
prove that he’s really super-homo.” He rubbed his hands together. “This
is really heavenly!” he said; then added, “Let’s hear what happens now.”

“Well, as far as I can make out,” said Jeremy, “they have to send a
company of militia from Guildford to protect the house from the rabble.
And a magistrate has issued a warrant for his arrest; but they’re not
doing anything for the time being, on account of his age and position
and the scandal of a public trial. Oh, and now they’ve sent for John and
Caroline. Which makes the old gentleman wildly angry. But he’s helpless.
So they arrive at Selford; ‘Caroline in her orange wig and John, at
seventy-two, looking at least twenty years older than I, who was already
twenty-four when my Brother, then scarcely of age, had the imprudence to
marry an Attorney’s Daughter and the richly merited misfortune to beget
this Attorney’s Grandson whom I have always treated with the Contempt
which his low Origin and feeble Intellect deserve, but to whom the
negligence of a Strumpet has now given the Power to impose his Will upon
me.’ ”

“One of those delightful family reunions,” said Dr. Obispo. “But I
suppose he doesn’t give us any of the details?”

Jeremy shook his head. “No details,” he said. “Just an outline of the
negotiations. On March the seventeenth, they tell him that he can avoid
prosecution if he makes over his unentailed property by deed of gift,
assigns them the revenues of the entailed estates, and consents to enter
a private asylum.”

“Pretty stiff conditions!”

“Which he refuses,” Jeremy continued, “on the morning of the
eighteenth.”

“Good for him!”

“ ‘Private madhouses,’ ” Jeremy read out, “ ‘are private prisons in
which, uncontrolled by Parliament or Judiciary, subject to no inspection
by the Police and closed even to the humanitarian visitations of
Philanthropists, hired Torturers and Gaolers execute the dark designs of
family Vengeance and personal Spite.’ ”

Dr. Obispo clapped his hands with delight. “There’s another beautiful
human touch!” he cried. “Those humanitarian visitations of
philanthropists!” he laughed aloud. “And hired torturers! It’s like a
speech by one of the Foundling Fathers. Magnificent! And then one thinks
of those slave ships and little Miss Priscilla. It’s almost as good as
Field-Marshal Goering, denouncing un-kindness to animals. Hired
torturers and gaolers,” he repeated with relish, as though the phrase
were a delicious sweetmeat, slowly melting upon the palate. “What’s the
next move?” he asked.

“They tell him he’ll be tried, condemned and transported. To which he
answers that he prefers transportation to a private asylum. ‘At this it
was evident that my precious nephew and niece were nonplussed. They
swore that my treatment in the Madhouse should be humane. I answered
that I would not accept their word. John talked of his honour. I said,
An Attorney’s honour, no doubt, and spoke of the manner in which a
lawyer sells his convictions for a Fee. They then implored me for the
good name of the Family to accept their offers. I answered that the good
name of the Family was indifferent to me, but that I had no desire to
undergo the Humiliations of a Public Trial or the pains and discomforts
of Transportation. I was ready, I said, to accept any reasonable
Alternative to Trial and Transportation; but I would regard no
Alternative as reasonable which did not in some sort guarantee my proper
treatment at their hands. Their word of honour I did not regard as such
a Guarantee; nor could I accept to be placed in an Institution where I
should be entrusted to the care of Doctors and Keepers in the pay of
those whose Interest it was that I should perish with all possible
Celerity. I therefore refused to subscribe to any Arrangement which left
me at their Mercy without placing them to a corresponding extent at
mine.’ ”

“The principles of diplomacy in a nutshell!” said Dr. Obispo. “If only
Chamberlain had understood them a little better before he went to
Munich! Not that it would have made much difference in the long run,” he
added. “Because, after all, it doesn’t really matter what the
politicians do: nationalism will always produce at least one war each
generation. It has done in the past and I suppose we can rely on it to
do the same in the future. But how does the old gentleman propose to put
his principles into practice? He’s at their mercy all right. How’s he
going to put them at his?”

“I don’t know yet,” Jeremy answered from the depths of the recorded
past. “He’s gone off on one of his philosophizing jaunts again.”

“Now?” said Dr. Obispo in astonishment. “When he’s got a warrant out
against him?”

“ ‘There was a time,’ “ Jeremy read, “ ‘when I believed that all the
Efforts of Humanity were directed towards a Point located approximately
at the Centre of the female Person. Today I am inclined to think that
Vanity and Avarice play a more considerable part even than Lust in
shaping the course of men’s Actions and determining the nature of their
Thoughts.’ And so on. Where the devil does he get back to the point
again? Perhaps he never does; it would be just like him. No, here’s
something. ‘March 20th. Today, Robert Parsons, my Factor, returned from
London bringing with him in the Coach, three strong boxes containing
Gold coin and Bank Notes to the value of two hundred and eighteen
thousand pounds, the product of the sale of my Securities and such
Jewels, Plate and works of Art as it was possible to dispose of at such
short notice and for cash. With more time I could have realized at least
three hundred and fifty thousand pounds. This loss I can bear
philosophically; for the sum I have in hand is amply sufficient for my
purposes.’ ”

“What purpose?” asked Dr. Obispo.

Jeremy did not answer for a little while. Then he shook his head in
bewilderment. “What on earth is happening now?” he said. “Listen to
this. ‘My funeral will be conducted with all the Pomp befitting my
exalted Rank and the eminence of my Virtues. John and Caroline were
miserly and ungrateful enough to object to the expense; but I have
insisted that my Obsequies shall cost not a penny less than Four
Thousand Pounds. My only Regret is that I shall be unable to leave my
subterranean Retreat to see the Pageantry of Woe and to study the
expression of grief upon the withered faces of the new Earl and his
Countess. Tonight I shall go down with Kate to our Quarters in the
Cellarage; and tomorrow morning the World will hear the news of my
death. The body of an aged Pauper has already been conveyed hither in
Secret from Haslemere, and will take my place in the Coffin. After the
Interment the New Earl and Countess will proceed at once to Gonister,
where they will take up their Residence, leaving this house untenanted
except for Parsons, who will serve as Caretaker and provide for our
material wants. The Gold and Bank Notes brought by Parsons from London
are already bestowed in a subterranean hiding place known only to
myself, and it has been arranged that, every First of June, so long as I
live, five thousand pounds in cash shall be handed over by myself to
John, or to Caroline, or, in the event of their predeceasing me, to
their Heir, or to some duly authorized Representative of the Family. By
this arrangement, I flatter myself, I have placed them hardly less in my
power than I have been placed in theirs. The betrayal of my secret would
cost them the Title and Estates, and would expose them, moreover, to a
prosecution for Perjury. Nor is this all. My Life is worth to them five
thousand pounds a year in Cash, and they know that, at the first
suspicion of foul play, I should at once destroy the sources of their
supply. I rely upon Cupidity and Fear to fortify their Honour and to
fill the Place left vacant by the Affection they most certainly do not
feel.’ And that’s all,” said Jeremy, looking up. “There’s nothing else.
Just two more blank pages, and that’s the end of the book. Not another
word of writing.”

There was a long silence. Once more, Dr. Obispo got up and began to walk
about the room.

“And nobody knows how long the old buzzard lived on?” he said at last.

Jeremy shook his head. “Not outside the family. Perhaps those two old
ladies . . .”

Dr. Obispo halted in front of him, and banged the table with his fist.
“I’m taking the next boat to England,” he announced dramatically.


Chapter IX

TODAY, even the Children’s Hospital brought Mr. Stoyte no consolations.
The nurses had welcomed him with their friendliest smiles. The young
House Physician encountered in the corridor was flatteringly
deferential. The convalescents shouted “Uncle Jo!” with all their
customary enthusiasm, and, as he paused beside their beds, the faces of
the sick were momentarily illuminated with pleasure. His gifts of toys
were received as usual, sometimes with noisy rapture, sometimes (more
touchingly) in the silence of a happiness speechless with amazement and
incredulity. On his round of the various wards, he saw, as on other
days, the pitiful succession of small bodies distorted by scrofula and
paralysis, of small emaciated faces resigned to suffering, of little
angels dying, and martyred innocents, and snub-faced imps of mischief
tortured into a reluctant stillness.

Ordinarily it all made him feel good—like he wanted to cry, but at the
same time like he wanted to shout and be proud: proud of just being
human, because these kids were human and you’d never seen anything so
brave as they were; and proud that he had done this thing for them,
given them the finest hospital in the state, and all the best that money
could buy. But today his visit brought none of the customary reactions.
He had no impulsion either to cry or to shout. He felt neither pride,
nor the anguish of sympathy, nor the exquisite happiness that resulted
from their combination. He felt nothing—nothing except the dull, gnawing
misery which had been with him all that day, at the Pantheon, with
Clancy, in his down-town office. Driving out from the city, he had
looked forward to his visit to the hospital as an asthma patient might
look forward to a dose of adrenalin or an opium smoker to a
long-postponed pipe. But the looked-for relief had not come. The kids
had let him down.

Taking his cue from what had happened at the end of previous visits, the
porter smiled at Mr. Stoyte as he left the hospital and said something
about it being the finest bunch of great little kids he ever knew. Mr.
Stoyte looked at him blankly, nodded without speaking and passed on.

The porter watched him go. “Jeepers Creepers!” he said to himself,
remembering the expression on Mr. Stoyte’s face.

Mr. Stoyte drove back to the castle, feeling as unhappy as he had felt
when he left it in the morning. He went up with the Vermeer to the
fourteenth floor; Virginia was not in her boudoir. He went down to the
tenth; but she was not in the billiard room. He dropped to the second;
but she was being neither manicured nor massaged. In a sudden access of
suspicion, he descended to the sub-sub-basement and almost ran to see if
she were in the laboratory with Pete; the laboratory was empty. A mouse
squeaked in its cage and behind the glass of the aquarium one of the
aged carp glided slowly from shadow into light and from light once more
into green shadow. Mr. Stoyte hurried back to the elevator, shut himself
in with the Dutchman’s dream of everyday life mysteriously raised to the
pitch of mathematical perfection, and pressed the topmost of the
twenty-three buttons.

Arrived at his destination, Mr. Stoyte slid back the gate of the
elevator and looked out through the glass panel in the second door.

The water of the swimming pool was perfectly still. Between the
battlements, the mountains had taken on their evening richness of golden
light and indigo shadow. The sky was cloudless and transparently blue. A
tray with bottles and glasses had been set on the iron table at the
further side of the pool, and behind the table stood one of the low
couches on which Mr. Stoyte was accustomed to take his sun baths.
Virginia was lying on this couch, as though anaesthetized, her lips
parted, her eyes closed, one arm dropped limply and its palm lying
upwards on the floor, like a flower carelessly thrown aside and
forgotten. Half concealed by the table, Dr. Obispo, the Claude Bernard
of his subject, was looking down into her face with an expression of
slightly amused scientific curiosity.

In its first irrepressible uprush, Mr. Stoyte’s fury came near to
defeating its own homicidal object. With a great effort, he checked the
impulse to shout, to charge headlong out of the elevator, waving his
fists and foaming at the mouth. Trembling under the internal pressure of
pent-up rage and hatred, he groped in the pocket of his jacket. Except
for a child’s rattle and two packets of chewing gum left over from his
distribution of gifts at the hospital, it was empty. For the first time
in months, he had forgotten his automatic.

For a few seconds, Mr. Stoyte stood hesitating, undecided what to do.
Should he rush out, as he had first been moved to do, and kill the man
with his bare hands? Or should he go down and fetch his gun? In the end,
he decided to get the gun. He pressed the button, and the lift dropped
silently down its shaft. Unseeing, Mr. Stoyte glared at the Vermeer; and
from her universe of perfected geometrical beauty, the young lady in
blue satin turned her head from the open harpsichord and looked out,
past the draped curtain, over the black and white tessellated floor—out
through the window of the picture frame into that other universe in
which Mr. Stoyte and his fellow creatures had their ugly and untidy
being.

Mr. Stoyte ran to his bedroom, opened the drawer in which his
handkerchiefs were kept, rummaged furiously among the silks and
cambrics, and found nothing. Then he remembered. Yesterday morning he
had worn no jacket. The gun had been in his hip pocket. Then Pedersen
had come to give him his Swedish exercises. But a gun in the hip pocket
was uncomfortable, if you did things on your back, on the floor. He had
taken it out and put it away in the writing desk in his study.

Mr. Stoyte ran back to the elevator, went down four floors and ran to
the study. The gun was in the top left-hand drawer of the writing table;
he remembered exactly.

The top left-hand drawer of the writing table was locked. So were all
the other drawers.

“God damn that old bitch!” Mr. Stoyte shouted, as he tugged at the
handles.

Thoughtful and conscientious in every detail, Miss Grogram, his
secretary, always locked up everything before she went home.

Still cursing Miss Grogram, whom he hated at the moment almost as
bitterly as he hated that swine there on the roof, Mr. Stoyte hurried
back to the elevator. The gate was locked. During his absence in the
study, somebody must have pressed the recall button on some other floor.
Through the closed door he could hear the faint hum of the machinery.
The elevator was in use. God only knew how long he would have to wait.

Mr. Stoyte let out an inarticulate bellow, rushed along the corridor,
turned to the right, opened a swing door, turned to the right again and
was at the gate of the service lift. He seized the handle and pulled. It
was locked. He pressed the recall button. Nothing happened. The service
elevator was also in use.

Mr. Stoyte ran back along the corridor, through the swing door, then
through another swing door. Spiralled round a central well that went
down two hundred feet into the depths of the cellars, the staircase
mounted and descended. Mr. Stoyte started to climb. Breathless after
only two floors, he ran back to the elevators. The service elevator was
still in use; but the other responded to the call of the button.
Dropping from somewhere overhead, it came to a halt in front of him. The
locked door un locked itself. He pulled it open and stepped in. The
young lady in satin still occupied her position of equilibrium in a
perfectly calculated universe. The distance of her left eye from the
left side of the picture was to its distance from the right side as one
is to the square root of two minus one; and the distance of the same eye
from the bottom of the picture was equal to its distance from the left
side. As for the knot of ribbons on her right shoulder—that was
precisely at the corner of an imaginary square with the sides equal to
the longer of the two golden sections into which the base of the picture
was divisible. A deep fold in the satin skirt indicated the position of
the right side of this square and the lid of the harpsichord marked the
top. The tapestry in the upper right-hand corner stretched exactly
one-third of the way across the picture and had its lower edge at a
height equal to the base. Pushed forward by the browns and dusky ochres
of the background, the blue satin encountered the black and white marble
slabs of the floor and was pushed back, to be held suspended in mid
picture-space, like a piece of steel between two magnets of opposite
sign. Within the frame nothing could have been different; the stillness
of that world was not the mere immobility of old paint and canvas; it
was also the spirited repose of consummated perfection.

“The old bitch,” Mr. Stoyte kept growling to himself and then, turning
in memory from his secretary to Dr. Obispo, “The swine!”

The elevator came to a stop. Mr. Stoyte darted out and hurried along the
corridor to Miss Grogram’s empty office. He thought he knew where she
kept the keys; but it turned out that he was wrong. They were somewhere
else. But where? where? where? Frustration churned up his rage into a
foam of frenzy. He opened drawers and flung their contents on the floor,
he scattered the neatly filed papers about the room, he overturned the
dictaphone, he even went to the trouble of emptying the bookshelves and
upsetting the potted cyclamen and the bowl of Japanese goldfish which
Miss Grogram kept on the window sill. Red scales flashed among the
broken glass and the reference books. One gauzy tail was black with
spilled ink. Mr. Stoyte picked up a bottle of glue and, with all his
might, threw it down among the dying fish.

“Bitch!” he shouted. “Bitch!”

Then suddenly he saw the keys, hanging in a neat little bunch on a hook
near the mantelpiece, where, he suddenly remembered, he had seen them a
thousand times before.

“Bitch!” he shouted with redoubled fury, as he seized them. He hurried
towards the door, pausing only to push the typewriter off its table. It
fell with a crash into the chaos of torn paper and glue and goldfish.
That would serve the old bitch right, Mr. Stoyte reflected with a kind
of maniacal glee as he ran towards the elevator.


Chapter X

BARCELONA had fallen.

But even if it had not fallen, even if it had never been besieged, what
then?

Like every other community, Barcelona was part machine, part sub-human
organism, part nightmare-huge projection and embodiment of men’s
passions and insanities—their avarice, their pride, their lust for
power, their obsession with meaningless words, their worship of lunatic
ideals.

Captured or uncaptured, every city and nation has its being on the plane
of the absence of God. Has its being on the plane of the absence of God,
and is therefore foredoomed to perpetual self-stultification, to
endlessly reiterated attempts at self-destruction.

Barcelona had fallen. But even the prosperity of human societies is a
continual process of gradual or catastrophic falling. Those who build up
the structures of civilization are the same as those who undermine the
structures of civilization. Men are their own termites, and must remain
their own termites for just so long as they persist in being only men.

The towers rise, the palaces, the temples, the dwellings, the workshops;
but the heart of every beam is gnawed to dust even as it is laid, the
joists are riddled, the floors eaten away under the feet.

What poetry, what statues—but on the brink of the Peloponnesian War! And
now the Vatican is painted—just in time for the sack of Rome. And the
Eroica is composed—but for a hero who turns out to be just another
bandit. And the nature of the atom is elucidated—by the same physicists
as volunteer in war-time to improve the arts of murder.

On the plane of the absence of God, men can do nothing else except
destroy what they have built—destroy even while they build—build with
the elements of destruction. Madness consists in not recognizing the
facts; in making wishes the fathers of thoughts; in conceiving things to
be other than they really are; in trying to realize desired ends by
means which countless previous experiments have shown to be
inappropriate.

Madness consists, for example, in thinking of oneself as a soul, a
coherent and enduring human entity. But, between the animal below and
the spirit above, there is nothing on the human level except a swarm of
constellated impulses and sentiments and notions; a swarm brought
together by the accidents of heredity and language; a swarm of
incongruous and often contradictory thoughts and desires. Memory and the
slowly changing body constitute a kind of spatio-temporal cage, within
which the swarm is enclosed. To talk of it as though it were a coherent
and enduring “soul” is madness. On the strictly human level there is no
such thing as a soul.

Though constellations, feeling-arrangements, desire-patterns. Each of
these is strictly conditioned by the nature of its fortuitous origin.
Our “souls” are so little “us” that we cannot even form the remotest
conception how “we” should react to the universe, if we were ignorant of
language in general, or even of our own particular language. The nature
of our “souls” and of the world they inhabit would be entirely different
from what it is, if we had never learnt to talk, or if we had learnt to
talk Eskimo instead of English. Madness consists, among other things, in
imagining that our “soul” exists apart from the language our nurses
happen to have taught us.

Every psychological pattern is determined; and, within the cage of flesh
and memory, the total swarm of such patterns is no more free than any of
its members. To talk of freedom in connexion with acts which in reality
are determined is madness. On the strictly human level no acts are free.
By their insane refusal to recognize facts as they are, men and women
condemn themselves to have their desires stultified and their lives
distorted or extinguished. No less than the cities and nations of which
they are members, men and women are for ever falling, for ever
destroying what they have built and are building. But whereas cities and
nations obey the laws that come into play whenever large numbers are
involved, individuals do not. Or rather need not; for though in actual
fact most individuals allow themselves to be subjected to these laws,
they are under no necessity to do so. For they are under no necessity to
remain exclusively on the human level of existence. It is in their power
to pass from the level of the absence of God to that of God’s presence.
Each member of the psychological swarm is determined; and so is the
conduct of the total swarm. But beyond the swarm, and yet containing and
interpenetrating it, lies eternity, ready and waiting to experience
itself. But if eternity is to experience itself within the temporal and
spatial cage of any individual human being, the swarm we call the “sour”
must voluntarily renounce the frenzy of its activity, must make room, as
it were, for the other timeless consciousness, must be silent to render
possible the emergence of pro-founder silence. God is completely present
only in the complete absence of what we call our humanity. No iron
necessity condems the individual to the futile torment of being merely
human. Even the swarm we call the soul has it in its power temporarily
to inhibit its insane activity, to absent itself, if only for a moment,
in order that, if only for a moment, God may be present. But let
eternity experience itself, let God be sufficiently often present in the
absence of human desires and feelings and preoccupations: the result
will be a transformation of that life which must be lived, in the
intervals, upon the human level. Even the swarm of our passions and
opinions is susceptible to the beauty of eternity; and being susceptible
becomes dissatisfied with its own ugliness; and being dissatisfied
undertakes to change itself. Chaos gives place to order—not the
arbitrary, purely human order that comes from the subordination of the
swarm to some lunatic “ideal,” but an order that reflects the real order
of the world. Bondage gives place to liberty—for choices are no longer
dictated by the chance occurrences of earlier history, but are made
teleologically and in the light of a direct insight into the nature of
things. Violence and mere inertia give place to peace—for violence is
the manic, and inertia the depressive, phase of that cyclic insanity,
which consists in regarding the ego or its social projections as real
entities. Peace is the serene activity which springs from the knowledge
that our ‘‘souls” are illusory and their creations insane, that all
beings are potentially united in eternity. Compassion is an aspect of
peace and a result of the same act of knowledge.

Walking at sunset up the castle hill, Pete kept thinking with a kind of
tranquil exultation of all the things Mr. Propter had said to him.
Barcelona had fallen. Spain, England, France, Germany, America—all were
falling; falling even at such times as they seemed to be rising;
destroying what they built in the very act of building. But any
individual has it in his power to refrain from falling, to stop
destroying himself. The solidarity with evil is optional, not
compulsory.

On their way out of the carpenter’s shop Pete had brought himself to ask
Mr. Propter if he would tell him what he ought to do.

Mr. Propter had looked at him intently. “If you want it,” he had said,
“I mean, if you really want it . . .”

Pete had nodded without speaking.

The sun had set; and now the twilight was like the embodiment of
peace—the peace of God, Pete said to himself, as he looked across the
plain to the distant mountains, the peace that passes all understanding.
To part with such loveliness was unbearable. Entering the castle, he
went straight to the elevator, recalled the cage from somewhere up
aloft, shut himself up with the Vermeer and pressed the highest of the
buttons. Up there, at the top of the keep, he would be at the very heart
of this celestial peace.

The elevator came to a halt. He opened the gates and stepped out. The
swimming pool reflected a luminous tranquillity. He turped his eyes from
the water to the sky and from the sky to the mountains; then walked
round the pool in order to look down over the battlements on the further
side.

“Go away!” a muffled voice suddenly said.

Pete started violently, turned and saw Virginia lying in the shadow
almost at his feet.

“Go away,” the voice repeated. “I hate you.”

“I’m sorry,” he stammered, “I didn’t know . . .”

“Oh, it’s you.” She opened her eyes, and in the dim light he was able to
see that she had been crying. “I thought it was Sig. He went to get a
comb for my hair.” She was silent for a little; then suddenly she burst
out, “I’m so unhappy, Pete.”

“Unhappy?” The word and her tone had utterly shattered the peace of God.
In an anguish of love and anxiety he sat down beside her on the couch.
(Under her bath robe, he couldn’t help noticing, she didn’t seem to be
wearing anything at all.) “Unhappy?”

Virginia covered her face with her hands and began to sob. “Not even Our
Lady,” she gasped in an inco-herency of grief. “I can’t even tell her. I
feel so mean. . .”

“Darling.” he said in a voice of entreaty, as though imploring her to be
happy. He began to stroke her hair. “My darling.”

Suddenly there was a violent commotion on the further side of the pool.
A crash as the elevator gates were flung back; a rush of feet; an
inarticulate yell of rage. Pete turned his head and was in time to see
Mr. Stoyte rushing towards them, holding something in his hand,
something that might almost have been an automatic pistol.

He had half risen to his feet, when Mr. Stoyte fired.

Arriving two or three minutes later with the comb for Virginia’s hair,
Dr. Obispo found the old man on his knees, trying, with a pocket
handkerchief, to staunch the blood that was still pouring out of the two
wounds, one clean and small, the other cavernous, which the bullet had
made as it passed through Pete’s head.

Crouching in the shadow of the battlements, the Baby was praying.
“Holy-Mary-Mother-of-God-pray-for-us-sinners-now-and-in-the-hour-of-our-death-Amen,”
she repeated, again and again, as fast as her sobs would permit her.
Every now and then she would be seized and shaken by an access of
nausea, and the praying would be interrupted for a moment. Then it began
again where she had left off: “. . .
us-sinners-now-and-in-the-hour-of-our-death-Amen-Holy-Mary-Mother-of-God
. . .”

Dr. Obispo opened his mouth to make an exclamation, then closed it
again, whispered, “Christ!” and walked quickly and silently round the
pool. Before making his presence known, he took the precaution of
picking up the pistol and slipping it into his pocket. One never knew.
Then he called Mr. Stoyte’s name. The old man started and a hideous
expression of terror appeared on his face. Fear gave place to relief as
he turned round and saw who it was that had spoken to him.

“Thank God, it’s you,” he said; then suddenly remembered that this was
the man he had meant to kill. But all that had been a million years ago,
a million miles away. The near, immediate, urgent fact was not the Baby,
not love or anger; it was fear and this thing that lay here on the
ground.

“You got to save him,” he said in a hoarse whisper. “We can say it was
an accident. I’ll pay him anything he likes. Anything in reason,” an old
reflex impelled him to add. “But you got to save him.” Laboriously, he
heaved himself to his feet and motioned Dr. Obispo to his vacated place.

The only movement Dr. Obispo made was one of withdrawal. The old man was
covered with blood, and he had no wish to spoil a ninety-five dollar
suit. “Save him?” he repeated. “You’re mad. Look at all the brain lying
there on the floor.”

From the shadows behind him, Virginia interrupted the sobbing mutter of
her prayers to scream. “On the floor,” she kept wailing. “On the floor.”

Dr. Obispo turned on her savagely. “Shut up, do you hear?”

The screams abruptly ceased; but a few seconds later there was a sound
of violent retching; then
“Holy-Mary-Mother-of-God-pray-for-us-sinners-now-and-in-the-hour
of-our-death-Amen-Holy-Mary-Mother-of-God-pray-for-us-sinners . . .”

“If we’re going to try and save anybody” Dr. Obispo went on, “it had
better be you. And believe me,” he added emphatically, throwing all his
weight on his left leg and using the toe of his right shoe to point at
the body, “you need some saving. It’s either the gas chamber or San
Quentin for life.”

“But it was an accident,” Mr, Stoyte began to protest with a breathless
eagerness. “I mean, it was all a mistake. I never wanted to shoot him. I
meant to . . .” He broke off and stood in silence, his mouth working, as
though he were trying to swallow some unspoken word.

“You meant to kill me,” said Dr. Obispo completing the sentence for him
and smiling, as he did so, with the expression of wolfish good humour
which was characteristic of him in any situation where the joke was at
all embarrassing or painful. Secure in the knowledge that the old
buzzard was much too scared to be angry and that anyhow the gun was in
his own pocket, he prolonged the joke by saying, “Well,” sententiously,
“that’s what comes of snooping.”

“. . . now-and-in-the-hour-of-our-death-Amen,” Virginia gabbled in the
ensuing silence. “Holy-Mary-Mother . . .”

“I never meant it,” Mr. Stoyte reiterated. “I just got mad. Guess I
didn’t really figure out what I was doing . . .”

“Tell that to the jury,” said Dr. Obispo sarcastically.

“But I swear it: I didn’t really know,” Mr. Stoyte pro tested. His harsh
voice broke grotesquely into a squeak. His face was white with fear.

The doctor shrugged his shoulders. “Maybe,” he said. “But not knowing
doesn’t make any difference to that.” He stood on one leg again to point
an elegantly shod foot in the direction of the body.

“But what shall I do?” Mr. Stoyte almost screamed in the anguish of his
terror.

“Don’t ask me.”

Mr. Stoyte initiated the gesture of laying his hand imploringly on the
other’s sleeve; but Dr. Obispo quickly drew back; “No, don’t touch me,”
he said, “Just look at your hands.”

Mr. Stoyte looked. The thick, carrot-like fingers were red; under the
horny nails the blood was already caked and dry, like clay. “God!” he
whispered. “Oh, my God!”

“. . . and-at-the-hour-of-our-death-Amen-Holy-Mary . . .”

At the word “death,” the old man started as though he had been struck
with a whip. “Obispo,” he began again, breathless with apprehension,
“Obispo! Listen here—you got to help me out of this. You got to help
me,” he entreated.

“After you did your best to do that to me?” The white-and-tan shoe shot
out again.

“You wouldn’t let them get me?” Mr. Stoyte wheedled, abject in his
terror.

“Why wouldn’t I?”

“But you can’t,” he almost shouted. “You can’t.”

Dr. Obispo bent down to make quite sure, in the fading light, that there
was no blood on the couch; then, pulling up his fawn-coloured trousers,
sat down. “One gets tired of standing,” he said in a pleasant
conversational tone.

Mr. Stoyte went on pleading. “I’ll make it worth your while,” he said.
“You can have anything you care to ask for. Anything,” he repeated
without any qualifying reference, this time, to reason.

“Ah,” said Dr. Obispo, “now you’re talking turkey.”

“. . . Mother-of-God,” muttered the Baby,
“pray-for-us-sinners-now-and-in-the-hour-of-our-death-Amen-Holy-Mary-Mother-of-God-pray-for-us-sinners-now
. . .”

“You’re talking turkey,” Dr. Obispo repeated.



PART III


Chapter I

THERE was a tap at the door of Jeremy’s work room; it was Mr. Propter
who entered. He was wearing, Jeremy noticed, the same dark grey suit and
black tie as he had worn at Pete’s funeral. The urban costume diminished
him; he seemed smaller than in his working clothes and at the same time
less himself. That weather-beaten, emphatically featured face of
his—that face of a statue high up on the west front of a
cathedral—looked curiously incongruous above a starched collar.

“You’ve not forgotten?” he said, when they had shaken hands.

For all reply, Jeremy pointed to his own black jacket and sponge-bag
trousers. They were expected at Tarzana for the ceremonial opening of
the new Stoyte Auditorium.

Mr. Propter looked at his watch. “We’ve got another few minutes before
we need think of starting.” He sat down. “What’s the news?”

“Couldn’t be better,” Jeremy answered.

Mr. Propter nodded. “Now that poor Jo and the others have gone, it must
be quite agreeable here.”

“All alone with twelve million dollars worth of bric-a-brac,” said
Jeremy. “I have the most enormous fun.”

“How little fun you’d be having,” said Mr. Propter meditatively, “if
you’d been left in company with the people who actually made the
bric-a-brac. With Greco, and Rubens, and Turner, and Fra Angelico.”

“God preserve us!” said Jeremy, throwing up his hands.

“That’s the charm of art,” Mr. Propter went on. “It represents only the
most amiable aspects of the most talented human beings. That’s why I’ve
never been able to believe that the art of any period threw much light
on the life of that period. Take a Martian; show him a representative
collection of Botticellis, Peruginos and Raphaels. Could he infer from
them the conditions described by Machiavelli?”

“No, he couldn’t,” Jeremy agreed. “But meanwhile, here’s another
question. The conditions described by Machiavelli—were they the real
conditions? Not that Machiavelli didn’t tell the truth. The things he
described really happened. But did contemporaries think them as awful as
they seem to us when we read about them now? We think they ought to have
been miserable about what was happening. But were they?”

“Were they?” Mr. Propter repeated. “We ask the historians; and of course
they can’t answer—because obviously there’s no way of compiling
statistics about the sum of happiness, nor any way of comparing the
feelings of people living under one set of conditions with the feelings
of people living under another and quite different set. The real
conditions at any given moment are the subjective conditions of the
people then alive. And the historian has no way of finding out what
those conditions were.”

“No way except through looking at works of art,” said Jeremy. “I’d say
they do throw light on the subjective conditions. Take one of your
examples. Perugino’s a contemporary of Machiavelli. That means that at
least one person contrived to be cheerful all through an unpleasant
period. And if one could be, why not many?” He cleared the way for a
quotation with a little cough. “ ‘The state of the country never put a
man off his dinner.’ ”

“Massive wisdom!” said Mr. Propter. “But remember that the state of Dr.
Johnson’s England was excellent, even at its worst. What about the state
of a country like China, say, or Spain—a country where a man can’t be
put off his dinner, for the simple reason that there isn’t any dinner?
And conversely, what about all the losses of appetite at times when
everything’s going well?” He paused, smiled inquiringly at Jeremy, then
shook his head. “Sometimes there’s a lot of cheerfulness as well as a
lot of misery; sometimes there seems to be almost nothing but misery.
That’s all the historian can say insofar as he’s a historian. Insofar as
he’s a theologian, of course, or a metaphysician, he can maunder on
indefinitely, like Marx or St. Augustine or Spengler.” Mr. Propter made
a little grimace of distaste. “God, what a lot of bosh we’ve managed to
talk in the last few thousand years!” he said.

“But it has its charm,” Jeremy insisted. “Really good bosh . . .”

“I’m barbarous enough to prefer sense,” said Mr. Propter. “That’s why,
if I want a philosophy of history, I go to the psychologist.”

“ ‘Totem and Tabu?” Jeremy questioned in some astonishment.

“No, no,” said Mr. Propter with a certain impatience. “Not that kind of
psychologist. I mean the religious psychologist; the one who knows by
direct experience that men are capable of liberation and enlightenment.
He’s the only philosopher of history whose hypothesis has been
experimentally verified; therefore the only one who can make a
generalization that covers the facts.”

“And what are his generalizations?” said Jeremy. “Just the usual thing?”

Mr. Propter laughed. “Just the usual thing,” he answered. “The old,
boring, inescapable truths. On the human level, men live in ignorance,
craving and fear. Ignorance, craving and fear result in some temporary
pleasures, in many lasting miseries, in final frustration. The nature of
the cure is obvious; the difficulties in the way of achieving it, almost
insuperable. We have to choose between almost insuperable difficulties
on the one hand and absolutely certain misery and frustration on the
other. Meanwhile, the general hypothesis remains as the intellectual key
to history. Only the religious psychologist can make any sense of
Perugino and Machia-velli, for example; or of all this.” He pointed
towards the Hauberk Papers.

Jeremy twinkled behind his glasses and patted his bald patch. “Your true
scholar,” he fluted, “doesn’t even want to make sense of it.”

“Yes, I always tend to forget that,” said Mr. Propter rather sadly.

Jeremy coughed. “ ‘Gave us the doctrine of the enclitic De,’ ” he quoted
from the “Grammarian’s Funeral.”

“Gave it for his own sake,” said Mr. Propter, getting out of his chair.
“Gave it regardless of the fact that the grammar he was studying was
hopelessly unscientific, riddled with concealed metaphysics, utterly
provincial and antiquated. Well,” he added, “that’s what one would
expect, I suppose.” He took Jeremy’s arm, and they walked together
towards the elevator. “What a curious figure old Browning is!” he
continued, his mind harking back to the Grammarian. “Such a first-rate
intelligence, and at the same time such a fool. All that preposterous
stuff about romantic love! Bringing God into it, putting it into heaven,
talking as though marriage and the higher forms of adultery were
identical with the beatific vision. The silliness of it! But, again,
that’s what one has to expect.” He sighed. “I don’t know why,” he added
after a pause, “I often find myself remembering that rhyme of his—I
can’t even recall which poem it comes from—the one that goes: ‘One night
he kissed My soul out in a burning mist.’ My soul out in a burning mist,
indeed!” he repeated. “Really, how much I prefer Chaucer on the subject.
Do you remember? ‘Thus swivfèd is this carpenterès wife.’ So beautifully
objective and unemphatic and free of verbiage! Browning was always
rambling on about God; but I suspect he was much further away from
reality than Chaucer was, even though Chaucer never thought about God,
if he could possibly help it. Chaucer had nothing between himself and
eternity but his appetites. Browning had his appetites, plus a great
barrage of nonsense—nonsense, what’s more, with a purpose. For, of
course, that bogus mysticism wasn’t merely gratuitous bosh. It had an
object. It existed in order that Browning might be able to persuade
himself that his appetites were identical with God. ‘Thus swivèd is this
carpenterès wife,’ ” he repeated, as they entered the elevator and went
up with Vermeer to the great hall. “ ‘My soul out in a burning mist.’
It’s extraordinary the way the whole quality of our existence can be
changed by altering the words in which we think and talk about it. We
float in language like icebergs—four-fifths under the surface and only
one-fifth of us projecting into the open air of immediate,
non-linguistic experience.”

They crossed the hall. Mr. Propter’s car was standing outside the front
door. He took the wheel; Jeremy got in beside him. They drove off, down
the curving road, past the baboons, past Giambologna’s nymph, past the
Grotto, under the portcullis and across the drawbridge.

“I so often think of that poor boy,” said Mr. Propter, breaking a long
silence. “Dying so suddenly.”

“I’d no idea his heart was as bad as that,” said Jeremy.

“In a certain sense,” Mr. Propter went on, “I feel responsible for what
happened. I asked him to help me in the carpenter’s shop. Made him work
too hard, I guess—though he insisted it was all right for him. I ought
to have realized that he had his pride—that he was young enough to feel
ashamed of admitting he couldn’t take it. One’s punished for being
insensitive and unaware. And so are the people one’s insensitive about.”

They drove past the hospital and through the orange groves in silence.
“There’s a kind of pointlessness about sudden and premature death,” said
Jeremy at last. “A kind of specially acute irrelevance . . .”

“Specially acute?” Mr. Propter questioned. “No, I shouldn’t say so. It’s
no more irrelevant than any other human event. If it seems more
irrelevant, that’s only because, of all possible events, premature death
is the most glaringly out of harmony with what we imagine ourselves to
be.”

“What do you mean?” Jeremy asked.

Mr. Propter smiled. “I mean what I presume you mean,” he answered. “If a
thing seems irrelevant, there must be something it’s irrelevant to. In
this case, that something is our conception of what we are. We think of
ourselves as free, purposive beings. But every now and then, things
happen to us that are incompatible with this conception. We speak of
them as accidents; we call them pointless and irrelevant. But what’s the
criterion by which we judge? The criterion is the picture we paint of
ourselves in our own fancy—the highly flattering portrait of the free
soul making creative choices and being the master of its fate.
Unfortunately, the picture bears no resemblance to ordinary human
reality. It’s the picture of what we’d like to be, of what, indeed, we
might become if we took the trouble. To a being who is in fact the slave
of circumstance there’s nothing specially irrelevant about premature
death. It’s the sort of event that’s characteristic of the universe in
which he actually lives—though not, of course, of the universe he
foolishly imagines he lives in. An accident is the collision of a train
of events on the level of determinism with another train of events on
the level of freedom. We imagine that our life is full of accidents,
because we imagine that our human existence is passed on the level of
freedom. In fact, it isn’t. Most of us live on the mechanical level,
where events happen in accordance with the laws of large numbers. The
things we call accidental and irrelevant belong to the very essence of
the world in which we elect to live,”

Annoyed at having, by an inconsidered word, landed himself in a position
which Mr, Propter could show to be unwarrantably “idealistic,” Jeremy
was silent. They drove on for a time without speaking.

“That funeral!” Jeremy said at last; for his chronically anecdotal mind
had wandered back to what was concrete, particular and odd in the
situation under discussion. “Like something out of Ronald Firbank!” He
giggled. “I told Mr. Habakkuk he ought to put steam heat into the
statues. They’re dreadfully unlifelike to the touch.” He moved his
cupped hand over an imaginary marble protuberance.

Mr. Propter, who had been thinking about liberation, nodded and politely
smiled.

“And Dr. Mulge’s reading of the service!” Jeremy went on. “Talk of
unction! It couldn’t have been oilier even in an English cathedral. Like
vaseline with a flavour of port wine. And the way he said, ‘I am the
resurrection and the life’—as though he really meant it, as though he,
Mulge, could personally guarantee it, in writing, on a money-back basis:
the entire cost of the funeral refunded if the next world fails to give
complete satisfaction.”

“He probably even believes it,” said Mr. Propter meditatively. “In some
curious Pickwickian way, of course. You know: it’s true, but you
consistently act as though it weren’t; it’s the most important fact in
the universe, but you never think about it if you can possibly avoid
it.”

“And how do you believe in it?” Jeremy asked. “Pick-wickianly or
un-Pickwickianly?” And when Mr. Propter answered that he didn’t believe
in that sort of resurrection and life, “Oho!” he went on in the tone of
an indulgent father who has caught his son kissing the housemaid. “Oho!
So there’s also a Pickwickian resurrection?”

Mr. Propter laughed. “I think there may be,” he said.

“In which case what has become of poor Pete?”

“Well, to start with,” said Mr. Propter slowly, “I should say that Pete,
qua Pete, doesn’t exist any longer.”

“Super-Pickwickian!” Jeremy interjected.

“But Pete’s ignorance,” Mr. Propter went on, “Pete’s fears and
cravings—well, I think it’s quite possible that they’re still somehow
making trouble in the world. Making trouble for everything and everyone,
especially for themselves. Themselves in whatever form they happen to be
taking.”

“And if by any chance Pete hadn’t been ignorant and concupiscent, what
then?”

“Well, obviously,” said Mr. Propter, “there wouldn’t be anything to make
further trouble.” After a moment’s silence, he quoted Tauler’s
definition of God. “ ‘God is a being withdrawn from creatures, a free
power, a pure working.’ ”

He turned the car off the main road, into the avenue of pepper trees
that wound across the green lawns of the Tarzana campus. The new
Auditorium loomed up, austerely romanesque. Mr. Propter parked his old
Ford among the lustrous Cadillacs and Chryslers and Packards already
lined up in front of it, and they entered. The press photographers at
the entrance looked them over, saw at a glance that they were neither
bankers, nor movie stars, nor corporation lawyers, nor dignitaries of
any church, nor Senators, and turned away contemptuously.

The students were already in their places. Under their stares, Jeremy
and Mr. Propter were ushered down the aisle to the rows of seats
reserved for distinguished guests. And what distinction! There, in the
front row, was Sol R. Katzenblum, the President of Abraham Lincoln
Pictures; there, beside him, was the Bishop of Santa Monica; there too
was Mr. Pescecagniolo, of the Bank of the Far West. The Grand Duchess
Eulalie was sitting next to Senator Bardolph; and in the next row were
two of the Engels Brothers and Gloria Bossom, who was chatting with
Rear-Admiral Shotover. The orange robe and permanently waved beard
belonged to Swami Yogalinga, founder of the School of Personality.
Beside him sat the Vice-President of Consol Oil and Mrs. Wagner. . . .

Suddenly the organ burst out, full blast, into the Tarzana Anthem. The
academic procession filed in. Two by two, in their gowns and hoods and
tasselled mortar boards, the Doctors of Divinity, of Philosophy, of
Science, of Law, of Letters, of Music, shuffled down the aisle and up
the steps on to the platform, where their seats had been prepared for
them in a wide arc close to the back drop. At the centre of the stage
stood a reading desk and at the reading desk stood Dr. Mulge. Not that
he did any reading, of course; for Dr. Mulge prided himself on being
able to speak almost indefinitely without a note. The reading desk was
there to be intimately leaned over, to be caught hold of and
passionately leaned back from, to be struck emphatically with the palm
of the hand, to be dramatically walked away from and returned to.

The organ was silent. Dr. Mulge began his address—began it with a
reference, of course, to Mr. Stoyte. Mr. Stoyte whose generosity . . .
The realization of a Dream . . . This embodiment of an ideal in stone .
. . Without Vision the people perish . . . But this Man had had Vision .
. . The Vision of what Tarzana was destined to become . . . The centre,
the focus, the torch bearer . . . California . . . New Culture, richer
science, higher spirituality . . . (Dr. Mulge’s voice modulated from
bassoon to trumpet. From vaseline with a mere flavour of port wine to
undiluted fatty alcohol.) But, alas (and here the voice subsided
pathetically into saxophone and lanoline), alas . . . Unable to be with
us today ... A sudden distressing event . . . Carried off on the
threshold of life ... A young collaborator in those scientific fields
which he ventured to say were as close to Mr. Stoyte’s heart as the
fields of social service and culture . . . The shock . . . The
exquisitely sensitive heart under the sometimes rough exterior . . . His
physician had ordered a complete and immediate change of scene . . . But
in spite of physical absence, his spirit . . . We feel it among us today
. . . An inspiration to all, young and old alike . . . The torch of
Culture . . . The Future . . . The Ideal . . . The spirit of man . . .
Great things already accomplished . . . Strengthened and guided . . .
Forward . . . Onward . . . Upward . . . Faith and Hope . . . Democracy .
. . Freedom . . . The imperishable heritage of Washington and Lincoln .
. . The glory that was Greece reborn beside the waters of the Pacific .
. . The flag . . . The mission . . . The manifest destiny . . . The will
of God . . . Tarzana . . .

It was over at last. The organ played. The academic procession filed
back up the aisle. The distinguished guests straggled after it.

Outside in the sunshine, Mr. Propter was buttonholed by Mrs.
Pescecagniolo.

“I thought that was a wonderfully inspirational address,” she said with
enthusiasm.

Mr. Propter nodded. “Almost the most inspirational address I ever
listened to. And God knows,” he added, “I’ve heard a lot of them in the
course of my life.”


Chapter II

EVEN in London there was a little diluted sunshine—sunshine that
brightened and grew stronger as they drove through the diminishing smoke
of the outer suburbs, until at last, somewhere near Esher, they had
travelled into the most brilliant of early spring mornings.

Under a fur rug, Mr. Stoyte sprawled diagonally across the rear seat of
the car. More for his own good, this time, than for his physician’s, he
was back again on sedatives, and found it hard, before lunch, to keep
awake. With a fitful stertorousness he had dozed almost from the moment
they drove away from the Ritz.

Pale and with sad eyes, silently ruminating an unhappiness which five
days of rain on the Atlantic and three more of London gloom had done
nothing to alleviate, Virginia sat aloof in the front seat.

At the wheel (for he had thought it best to take no chauffeur on this
expedition) Dr. Obispo whistled to himself and, occasionally, even sang
aloud—sang “Stretti, stretti, nell-estasí d’amor” ; sang “Do you think a
1-ittle drink’U do us any harm?”; sang “I dreamt I dwelt in marble
halls.” It was partly the fine weather that made him so
cheerful—spring-time, he said to himself, the only merry ring-time, not
to mention the lesser celandines, the wind flowers, whatever they might
be; the primroses in the copse. And should he ever forget his
bewilderment when English people had started talking about cops in the
singular and in contexts where policemen seemed deliriously out of
place? “Let’s go and pick some primroses in the cops.” Surprising
intestinal flora! Better even than the carp’s. Which brought him to the
second reason for his satisfaction with life. They were on their way to
see the two old Hauberk ladies—on their way, perhaps, to finding
something interesting about the Fifth Earl, something significant about
the relationship between senility and sterols and the intestinal flora
o£ the carp.

With mock-operatic emphasis he burst again into song. “I drea-heamt I
dwe-helt in mar-harble halls,” he proclaimed, “with vas-s-als and serfs
at my si-hi-hide. And of all who assembled with-hin those walls, that I
was the hope and the pri-hi-hide.”

Virginia, who had been sitting beside him, stony with misery, turned
round in sudden exasperation. “Oh, for heaven’s sake!” she almost
screamed, breaking a silence that had lasted all the way from
Kingston-on-Thames. “Can’t you be quiet?”

Dr. Obispo ignored her protests. “I had riches,” he sang on (and
reflected, with an inward chuckle of satisfaction as he did so, that the
statement now happened to be true); “I had riches too grea-heat to
cou-hount.” No; that was an exaggeration. Not at all too great to count.
Just a nice little competence. Enough to give him security and the means
to continue his researches without having to waste his time on a lot of
sick people who ought to be dead. Two hundred thousand dollars in cash
and forty-five hundred acres of land in the San Felipe Valley—land that
Uncle Jo had positively sworn was just on the point of getting its
irrigation water. (And if it didn’t get it, God! how he’d twist the old
buzzard’s tail for him!) “Heart failure due to myocarditis of rheumatic
origin.” He could have asked a lot more than two hundred thousand for
that death certificate. Particularly as it hadn’t been his only service.
No, sir! There had been all the mess to clear up. (The ninety-five
dollar, fawn-coloured suit was ruined after all.) There had been the
servants to keep away; the Baby to put to bed with a big shot of
morphia; the permission to cremate the body to be obtained from the next
of kin, who was a sister, living, thank God, in straitened
circumstances, and at Pensacola, Florida, so that she fortunately
couldn’t afford to come out to California for the funeral. And then
(most ticklish of all) there had been the search for a dishonest
undertaker; the discovery of a possible crook; the interview, with its
veiled hints of an unfortunate accident to be hushed up, of money that
was, practically speaking, no object; then, when the fellow had fired
off his sanctimonious little speech about its being a duty to help a
leading citizen to avoid unpleasant publicity, the abrupt change of
manner, the business-like statement of the unavoidable facts and the
necessary fictions, the negotiations as to price. In the end, Mr. Pengo
had agreed not to notice the holes in Pete’s skull for as little as
twenty-five thousand dollars.

“I had riches too gre-heat to cou-hount, could boast of a hi-high
ancestral name.” Yes, decidedly, Dr. Obispo reflected, as he sang,
decidedly he could have asked for a great deal more. But what would have
been the point? He was a reasonable man; almost, you might say, a
philosopher; modest in his ambitions, uninterested in worldly success
and with tastes so simple that the most besetting of them, outside the
sphere of scientific research, could be satisfied in the great majority
of cases at practically no expense whatsoever, sometimes even with a net
profit, as when Mrs. Bojanus had given him that solid gold cigarette
case as a token of her esteem—and then there were Josephine’s pearl
studs, and the green enamel cuff links with his monogram in diamonds
from little what’s-her-name . . .

“But I a-halso drea-heamt which plea-heased me most,” he sang, raising
his voice for this final affirmation and putting in a passionate
tremolo, “that you lo-hoved me sti-hill the same, that you lo-hoved me
sti-hill the same, that you loved me,” he repeated turning away for a
moment from the Portsmouth road to peer with raised eyebrows and a look
of amused, ironical inquiry into Virginia’s averted face, “you lo-hoved
me sti-hill the same,” and, for the third time with tremendous emphasis
and pathos, “that you lo-ho-ho-hoved me sti-hi-hill the same,”

He shot another glance at Virginia. She was staring straight in front of
her, holding her lower lip between her teeth, as though she were in
pain, but determined not to cry out.

“Did I dream correctly?” His smile was wolfish.

The Baby did not answer. From the back seat Mr. Stoyte snored like a
bulldog.

“Do you lo-ho-hove me sti-hi-hill the same?” he insisted, making the car
swerve to the right, as he spoke, and putting on speed to pass a row of
Army lorries.

The Baby released her lip and said, “I could kill you.”

“Of course you could,” Dr. Obispo agreed. “But you won’t. Because you
lo-ho-ho-hove me too much. Or rather,” he added, and his smile became
more gleefully canine with every word, “you don’t lo-ho-ho-hove me; you
lo-ho-ho-hove . . .” he paused for an instant: “Well, let’s say it in a
more poetical way—because one can never have too much poetry, don’t you
agree? you’re in lo-ho-hove with Lo-ho-ho-hove, so much in lo-ho-ho-hove
that, when it came to the point, you simply couldn’t bring yourself to
bump me off. Because whatever you may feel about me, I’m the boy that
produces the lo-ho-ho-hoves.” He began to sing again, “I drea-heamt I
ki-hilled the goo-hoo-hoo-hoose that lai-haid the go-holden e-he-heggs.”

Virginia covered her ears with her hands in an effort to shut out the
sound of his voice—the hideous sound of the truth. Because, of course,
it was true. Even after Pete’s death, even after she had promised Our
Lady that it would never, never happen again—well, it had happened
again.

Dr. Obispo continued his improvisation. “And that thu-hus I’d lo-host my
so-hole excuse for showing the skin of my le-he-hegs.”

Virginia pressed her fingers more tightly over her ears. It had happened
again, even though she’d said no, even though she’d got mad at him,
fought with him, scratched him; but he’d only laughed and gone on; and
then suddenly she was just too tired to fight any more. Too tired and
too miserable. He got what he wanted; and the awful thing was that it
seemed to be what she wanted—or, rather, what her unhappiness wanted;
for the misery had been relieved for a time; she had been able to forget
the blood; she had been able to sleep. The next morning she had despised
and hated herself more than ever.

“I had grottoes and candles and doodahs galore,” Dr. Obispo sang on;
then relapsed into speech: “not to mention fetishes, relics, mantras,
prayer wheels, gibberish, vestments. But I also dreamt which pleased me
most—or rather more, seeing that we have to rhyme with galore” (he
opened his mouth and let out his richest and most tremulous notes),
“that you lo-hoved me sti-hill the same, that you
lo-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-ho-hoved me . . .”

“Stopl” Virginia shouted at the top of her voice.

Uncle Jo woke up with a start. “What’s the matter?” he asked.

“She objects to my singing,” Dr. Obispo called back to him. “Goodness
knows why. I have a charming voice. Particularly well adapted to a small
auditorium, like this car.” He laughed with whole-hearted merriment. The
Baby’s antics, as she vacillated between Priapus and the Sacred Grotto,
gave him the most exquisite amusement. Along with the fine weather, the
primroses in the copse and the prospect of learning something decisive
about sterols and senility, they accounted for the ebullience of his
good humour.

It was about half past eleven when they reached their destination. The
lodge was untenanted; Dr. Obispo had to get out and open the gates
himself.

Within, grass was growing over the drive and the park had sunk back
towards the squalor of unmodified nature. Uprooted by past storms, dead
trees lay rotting where they had fallen. On the boles of the living,
great funguses grew like pale buns. The ornamental plantations had
turned into little jungles, impenetrable with brambles. Perched on its
knoll above the drive, the Grecian gazebo was in ruins. They rounded a
curve and there was the house, Jacobean at on6 end, with strange
accretions of nineteenth-century Gothic at the other. The yew hedges had
grown up into high walls of shaggy greenery. The position of what had
once been formal flower beds was marked by rich green circles of docks,
oblongs and crescents of sow thistles and nettles. From the tufted grass
of a long untended lawn emerged the tops of rusty croquet hoops.

Dr. Obispo stopped the car at the foot of the front steps and got out.
As he did so, a little girl, perhaps eight or nine years old, darted out
of a tunnel in the yew hedge. At the sight of the car and its occupants,
the child halted, made a movement of retreat, then, reassured by a
second glance, came forward.

“Look what I got,” she said in sub-standard Southern English, and held
out, snout downwards, a gas mask half filled with primroses and dog’s
mercury.

Gleefully, Dr. Obispo laughed. “The copsel” he cried. “You picked them
in the copsel” He patted the child’s tow-coloured head. “What’s your
name?”

“Millie,” the little girl answered; and then added, with a note of pride
in her voice: “I ‘aven’t been somewhere for five days now.”

“Five days?”

Millie nodded triumphantly. “Granny says she’ll ‘ave to take me to the
doctor.” She nodded again and smiled up at him with the expression of
one who has just announced his forthcoming trip to Bali.

“Well, I think your Granny’s entirely right,” said Dr. Obispo. “Does
your Granny live here?”

The child nodded affirmatively. “She’s in the kitchen,” she answered;
and added irrelevantly. “She’s deaf.”

“And what about Lady Jane Hauberk?” Dr. Obispo went on. “Does she live
here? And the other one—Lady Anne, isn’t that it?”

Again the child nodded. Then an expression of sly mischief appeared on
her face, “Do you know what Lady Anne does?” she asked.

“What does she do?”

Millie beckoned to him to bend down so that she could put her mouth to
his ear. “She makes noises in ’er stomick,” she whispered.

“You don’t say so!”

“Like birds singing,” the child added poetically. “She does it after
lunch.”

Dr. Obispo patted the tow-coloured head again and said, “We’d like to
see Lady Anne and Lady Jane.”

“See them?” the little girl repeated in a tone almost of alarm.

“Do you think you could go and ask your Granny to show us in?”

Millie shook her head. “She wouldn’t do it. Granny won’t let nobody come
in. Some people came about these things.” She held up the gas mask.
“Lady Jane, she got so angry I was frightened. But then she broke one of
the lamps with her stick—you know, by mistake: bang! and the glass was
all in bits, all over the floor. That made me laugh.”

“Good for you,” said Dr. Obispo. “Why shouldn’t we make you laugh
again?”

The child looked at him suspiciously. “What do you mean?” Dr. Obispo
assumed a conspiratorial expression and dropped his voice to a whisper.
“I mean, you might let us in by one of the side doors, and we’d all walk
on tiptoes, like this”—he gave a demonstration across the gravel. “And
then we’d pop into the room where they’re sitting and give them a
surprise. And then maybe Lady Jane will smash another lamp, and we’ll
all laugh and laugh and laugh. What do you say to that?”

“Granny’d be awfully cross,” the child said dubiously.

“We won’t tell her you did it.”

“She’d find out.”

“No, she wouldn’t,” said Dr. Obispo confidently. Then, changing his
tone, “Do you like candies?” he added.

The child looked at him blankly.

“Lovely candies?” he repeated voluptuously; then suddenly remembered
that, in this damned country, candies weren’t called candies. What the
hell did they call them? He remembered. “Lovely sweets!” He darted back
to the car and returned with the expensive-looking box of chocolates
that had been bought in case Virginia should feel hungry by the way. He
opened the lid, let the child take one sniff, then closed it again. “Let
us in,” he said, “and you can have them all.”

Five minutes later they were squeezing their way through an ogival
French window at the nineteenth-century end of the house. Within, there
was a twilight that smelt of dust and dry-rot and moth balls. Gradually,
as the eyes became accustomed to the gloom, a draped billiard table
emerged into view, a mantelpiece with a gilt clock, a bookshelf,
containing the Waverly novels in crimson leather, and the eighth edition
of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, a large brown painting representing the
baptism of the future Edward VII, the heads of five or six stags.
Hanging on the wall near the dooj was a map of the Crimea; little flags
on pins marked the position of Sebastopol and the Alma.

Still carrying the flower-filled gas mask in one hand and with the
forefinger of the other pressed to her lips, Millie led the way on
tiptoes along a corridor, across a darkened drawing room, through a
lobby, down an other passage. Then she halted and, waiting for Dr.
Obispo to come up with her, pointed.

“That’s the door,” she whispered. “They’re in there.”

Without a word, Dr. Obispo handed her the box of chocolates; the child
snatched it and, like an animal with a stolen tit-bit, slipped past
Virginia and Mr. Stoyte, and hurried away down the dark passage to enjoy
her prize in safety. Dr. Obispo watched her go, then turned to his
companions.

There was a whispered consultation, and in the end, it was agreed that
Dr. Obispo should go on alone.

He walked forward, quietly opened the door, slipped through and closed
it behind him.

Outside, in the corridor, the Baby and Uncle Jo waited for what seemed
to them hours. Then, all at once, there was a crescendo of confused
noise which culminated in the sudden emergence of Dr. Obispo. He slammed
the door, pushed a key into the lock and turned it.

An instant later, from within, the door handle was violently rattled, a
shrill old voice cried, “How dare you?” Then an ebony cane delivered a
series of peremptory raps and the voice almost screamed, “Give me back
those keys. Give them back at once.”

Dr. Obispo put the key of the door in his pocket and came down the
corridor beaming with satisfaction.

“The two god-damndest looking old hags you ever saw,” he said. “One on
each side of the fire, like Queen Victoria and Queen Victoria.”

A second voice joined the first; the rattling and the rapping were
redoubled.

“Bang away!” Dr. Obispo shouted derisively; then, pushing Mr. Stoyte
with one hand and with the other giving the Baby a familiar little slap
on the buttocks, “Come on,” he said. “Come on.”

“Come on where?” Mr. Stoyte asked in a tone of resentful bewilderment.
He’d never been able to figure out what this damn fool expedition across
the Atlantic was for—except of course to get away from the castle. Oh,
yes, they’d had to get away from the castle. No question about that; in
fact the only question was whether they’d ever be able to go back to it,
after what had happened—whether they’d ever be able to bathe in that
pool again, for example. Christ! when he thought of it . . .

But, then, why go to England? At this season? Why not Florida or Hawaii?
But no; Obispo had insisted it must be England. Because of his work,
because there might be something important to be found out there. Well,
he couldn’t say no to Obispo—not now, not yet. And besides he couldn’t
do without the man. His nerves, his digestion—all shot to pieces. And he
couldn’t sleep without dope; he couldn’t pass a cop on the street
without his heart missing a beat or two. And you could say, “God is
love, there is no death,” till you were blue in the face; but it didn’t
make any difference. He was old, he was sick; death was coming closer
and closer, and unless Obispo did something quick, unless he found out
something soon . . .

In the dim corridor, Mr. Stoyte suddenly halted. “Obispo,” he said
anxiously, while the Hauberk ladies hammered with ebony on the door of
their prison, “Obispo, are you absolutely certain there’s no such thing
as hell? Can you prove it?”

Dr. Obispo laughed. “Can you prove that the back side of the moon isn’t
inhabited by green elephants?” he asked.

“No, but seriously . . .” Mr. Stoyte insisted, in anguish.

“Seriously,” Dr. Obispo gaily answered. “I can’t prove anything about
any assertion that can’t be verified.” Mr. Stoyte and he had had this
sort of conversation before. There was something, to his mind,
exquisitely comic about chopping logic with the old man’s unreasoning
terror.

The Baby listened in silence. She knew about hell; she knew what
happened if you committed mortal sins—sins like letting it happen again,
after you’d promised Our Lady that it wouldn’t. But Our Lady was so kind
and so wonderful. And after all it had really been all that beast Sig’s
fault. Her own intentions had been absolutely pure; and then Sig had
come along and just made her break her word. Our Lady would understand.
The awful thing was that it had happened again, when he hadn’t forced
her. But even then it hadn’t really been her fault—because after all
she’d been through that terrible experience; she wasn’t well; she . . .

“But do you think hell’s possible?” Mr. Stoyte began again.

“Everything is possible,” said Dr. Obispo cheerfully. He cocked an ear
to listen to what the old hags were yelling back there behind the door.

“Do you think there’s one chance in a thousand it may be true? Or one in
a million?”

Grinning, Dr. Obispo shrugged his shoulders. “Ask Pascal,” he suggested.

“Who’s Pascal?” Mr. Stoyte inquired, clutching despairingly at any and
every straw.

“He’s dead,” Dr. Obispo positively shouted in his glee. “Dead as a door
nail. And now, for God’s sake.” He seized Uncle Jo by the arm and fairly
dragged him along the passage.

The terrible word reverberated through Mr. Stoyte’s imagination. “But I
want to be certain,” he protested.

“Certain about what you can’t know!”

“There must be a way.”

“There isn’t. No way except dying and then seeing what happens. Where
the hell is that child?” he added in another tone, and called, “Millie!”

Her face smeared with chocolate, the little girl popped up from behind
an umbrella stand in the lobby. “Did you see ‘em?” she asked with her
mouth full.

Dr. Obispo nodded. “They thought I was the Air Raid Precautions.”

“That’s it!” the child cried excitedly. “That was the one that made her
break the lamp.”

“Come here, Millie,” Dr. Obispo commanded. The child came. “Where’s the
door to the cellar?”

An expression of fear passed over Millie’s face. “It’s locked,” she
answered.

Dr. Obispo nodded. “I know it,” he said. “But Lady Jane gave me the
keys.” He pulled out of his pocket a ring on which were suspended three
large keys.

“There’s bogies down there,” the child whispered.

“We don’t worry about bogies.”

“Granny says they’re awful,” Millie went on. “She says they’re something
chronic.” Her voice broke into a whimper. “She says if I don’t go
somewhere more regular-like, the bogies will come after me. But I can’t
‘elp it.” The tears began to glow. “It isn’t my fault.”

“Of course it isn’t,” said Dr. Obispo impatiently. “Nothing is ever
anybody’s fault. Even constipation. But now I want you to show us the
door of the cellar.”

Still in tears, Millie shook her head. “I’m frightened.”

“But you won’t have to go down into the cellar. Just show us where the
door is, that’s all.”

“I don’t want to.”

“Won’t you be a nice little girl,” Dr. Obispo wheedled, “and take us to
the dopr?”

Stubborn with fear, Millie continued to shake her head.

Dr. Obispo’s hand shot out and snatched the box of chocolates out of the
child’s grasp. “If you don’t tell me, you won’t have any candies,” he
said, and added, irritably, “sweets, I mean.”

Millie let out a scream of anguish and tried to get back at the box; but
he held it high up, beyond her reach. “Only when you show us the door of
the cellar,” he said; and to show that he was in earnest, he opened the
box, took a handful of chocolates and popped them one after another into
his mouth. “Aren’t they good!” he said, as he munched. “Aren’t they just
wonderful! Do you know, I’m glad you won’t show us the door, because
then I can eat them all.” He took another bite, made a grimace of
ecstasy. “Ooh, goody, goody!” He smacked his lips. “Poor little Millie!
She isn’t going to get any more of them.” He helped himself again.

“Oh, don’t, don’t!” the child entreated each time she saw one of the
brown nuggets of bliss disappearing between Dr. Obispo’s jaws. Then a
moment came when greed was stronger than fear. “I’ll show you where it
is,” she screamed, like a victim succumbing to torture and promising to
confess.

The effect was magical. Dr. Obispo replaced in the box the three
chocolates he was still holding and closed the lid. “Come on,” he said,
and held out his hand for the child to take.

“Give me the box,” she demanded.

Dr. Obispo, who understood the principles of diplomacy, shook his head.
“Not till you’ve taken us to the door,” he said.

Millie hesitated for a moment; then, resigned to the hard necessity of
keeping to her side of the bargain, took his hand.

Followed by Uncle Jo and the Baby, they made their way out of the lobby,
back through the drawing-room, along the passage, past the map of the
Crimea and across the billiard room, along another passage and into a
large library. The red plush curtains were drawn; but a little light
filtered between them. All round the room the brown and blue and crimson
strata of classic literature ran up to within three feet of the high
ceiling, and at regular intervals along the mahogany cornice stood busts
of the illustrious dead. Millie pointed to Dante. “That’s Lady Jane,”
she whispered confidentially.

“For Christ’s sake.” Mr. Stoyte broke out startlingly. “What’s the big
idea? What the hell do you figure we’re doing?”

Dr. Obispo ignored him. “Where’s the door?” he asked.

The child pointed.

“What do you mean?” he started angrily to shout. Then he saw that what
he had taken for just another section of the book-filled shelves was in
fact a mere false front of wood and leather simulating thirty-three
volumes of the Collected Sermons of Archbishop Stilling-fleet and (he
recognized the Fifth Earl’s touch) the Complete Works, in seventy-seven
volumes, of Donatien Alphonse Francois, Marquis de Sade. A key-hole
revealed itself to a closer scrutiny.

“Give me my sweets,” the child demanded.

But Dr. Obispo was taking no risks, “Not till we see if the key fits.”

He tried and, at the second attempt, succeeded. “There you are.” He
handed Millie her chocolates and at the same time opened the door. The
child uttered a scream of terror and rushed away.

“What’s the big idea?” Mr. Stoyte repeated uneasily.

“The big idea,” said Dr. Obispo, as he looked down the flight of steps
that descended, after a few feet, into an impenetrable darkness, “the
big idea is that you may not have to find out whether there’s such a
place as hell. Not yet awhile, that’s to say; not for a very long time
maybe. Ah, thank God,” he added, “we shall have some light.”

Two old-fashioned bull’s-eye lanterns were standing on a shelf just
inside the door. Dr. Obispo picked one of them up, shook it, held it to
his nose. There was oil in it. He lit them both, handed one to Mr.
Stoyte and, taking the other himself, led the way cautiously down the
stairs.

A long descent; then a circular chamber cut out of the yellow sandstone.
There were four doorways. They chose one of them and passed, along a
narrow corridor, into a second chamber with two more doorways. A blind
alley first; then another flight of steps leading to a cave full of
ancient refuse. There was no second issue; laboriously, with two wrong
turnings on the way, they retraced their steps to the circular chamber
from which they had started, and made trial of its second doorway. A
flight of descending steps; a succession of small rooms. One of these
had been plastered and upon its walls early eighteenth-century hands had
scratched obscene graffiti. They hurried on, down another short flight
of steps into a large square room with an air shaft leading at an angle
through the rock to a tiny, far-away ellipse of white light. That was
all. They turned back again. Mr. Stoyte began to swear; but the doctor
insisted on going on. They tried the third doorway. A passage, a suite
of three rooms. Two outlets from the last, one mounting, but walled up
with masonry after a little way; the other descending to a corridor on a
lower level. Thirty or forty feet brought them to an opening on the
left. Dr. Obispo turned his lantern into it, and the light revealed a
vaulted recess, at the end of which, on a stuccoed pedestal, stood a
replica in marble of the Medici Venus.

“Well, I’m damned!” said Mr. Stoyte, and then, on second thought, was
seized with a kind of panic. “How the hell did that get here, Obispo?”
he said, running to catch up with the doctor.

Dr. Obispo did not answer, but hurried impatiently forward.

“It’s crazy,” Mr. Stoyte went on apprehensively, as he trotted behind
the doctor. “It’s downright crazy. I tell you, I don’t like it.”

Dr. Obispo broke his silence. “We might see if we can get her for the
Beverly Pantheon,” he said with a wolfish joviality. “Hullo, what’s
this?” he added.

They emerged from the tunnel into a fair-sized room. At the centre of
the room was a circular drum of masonry, with two iron uprights rising
from either side of it, and a cross-piece, from which hung a pulley.

“The well!” said Dr. Obispo, remembering a passage in the Fifth Earl’s
note-book.

He almost ran towards the tunnel on the further side of the room. Ten
feet from the entrance, his progress was barred by a heavy, nail-studded
oak door. Dr. Obispo took out his bunch of keys, chose at random and
opened the door at the first trial. They were on the threshold of a
small oblong chamber. His bull’s-eye revealed a second door on the
opposite wall. He started at once towards it.

“Canned beef!” said Mr. Stoyte in astonishment, as he ran the beam of
his lantern over the rows of tins and jars on the shelves of a tall
dresser that occupied almost the whole of one of the sides of the room.
“Biloxi Shrimps. Sliced Pineapple. Boston Baked Beans,” he read out,
then turned towards Dr. Obispo. “I tell you, Obispo, I don’t like it.”

The Baby had taken out a handkerchief saturated in “Shocking” and was
holding it to her nose. “The smell!” she said indistinctly through its
folds, and shuddered with disgust. “The smell!”

Dr. Obispo, meanwhile, was trying his keys on the lock of the other
door. It opened at last. A draught of warm air flowed in, and at once
the little room was filled with an intolerable stench. “Christ!” said
Mr. Stoyte, and behind her handkerchief the Baby let out a scream of
nauseated horror.

Dr. Obispo made a grimace and advanced along the stream of foul air. At
the end of a short corridor was a third door, of iron bars, this time,
like the door (Dr. Obispo reflected) of a death cell in a prison. He
flashed his lantern between the bars, into the foetid darkness beyond.

From the little room Mr. Stoyte and the Baby suddenly heard an
astonished exclamation and then, after a moment’s silence, a violent,
explosive guffaw, succeeded by peal after peal of Dr. Obispo’s ferocious
metallic laughter. Paroxysm upon uncontrollable paroxysm, the noise
reverberated back and forth in the confined space. The hot, stinking air
vibrated with a deafening and almost maniacal merriment.

Followed by Virginia, Mr. Stoyte crossed the room and hastened through
the open door into the narrow tunnel beyond. Dr. Obispo’s laughter was
getting on his nerves. “What the hell . . .” he shouted angrily as he
advanced; then broke off in the middle of the sentence. “What’s that?”
he whispered.

“A foetal ape,” Dr. Obispo began; but was cut short by another explosion
of hilarity, that doubled him up as though with a blow in the solar
plexus.

“Holy Mary,” the Baby whispered through her handkerchief.

Beyond the bars, the light of the lanterns had scooped out of the
darkness a narrow world of forms and colours. On the edge of a low bed,
at the centre of this world, a man was sitting, staring, as though
fascinated, into the light. His legs, thickly covered with coarse
reddish hair, were bare. The shirt, which was his only garment, was torn
and filthy. Knotted diagonally across the powerful chest was a broad
silk ribbon that had evidently once been blue. From a piece of string
tied round his neck was suspended a little image of St. George and the
Dragon in gold and enamel. He sat hunched up, his head thrust forward
and at the same time sunk between his shoulders. With one of his huge
and strangely clumsy hands, he was scratching a sore place that showed
red between the hairs of his left calf.

“A foetal ape that’s had time to grow up,” Dr. Obispo managed at last to
say. “It’s too good!” Laughter overtook him again. “Just look at his
face!” he gasped, and pointed through the bars. Above the matted hair
that concealed the jaws and cheeks, blue eyes stared out of cavernous
sockets. There were no eyebrows; but under the dirty, wrinkled skin of
the forehead, a great ridge of bone projected like a shelf.

Suddenly, out of the black darkness, another simian face emerged into
the beam of the lantern—a face only slightly hairy, so that it was
possible to see, not only the ridge above the eyes, but also the curious
distortions of the lower jaws, the accretions of bone in front of the
ears. Clothed in an old check ulster and some glass beads, a body
followed the face into the light.

“It’s a woman,” said Virginia, almost sick with the horrified disgust
she felt at the sight of those pendulous and withered dugs.

The doctor exploded into even noisier merriment.

Mr. Stoyte seized him by the shoulder and violently shook him. “Who are
they?” he demanded.

Dr. Obispo wiped his eyes and drew a deep breath; the storm of his
laughter was flattened to a heaving calm. As he opened his mouth to
answer Mr. Stoyte’s question, the creature in the shirt suddenly turned
upon the creature in the ulster and hit out at her head. The palm of the
enormous hand struck the side of the face. The creature in the ulster
uttered a scream of pain and rage, and shrank back out of the light.
From the shadow came a shrill, furious gibbering that seemed perpetually
to tremble on the verge of articulate blasphemy.

“The one with the Order of the Garter,” said Dr. Obispo, raising his
voice against the tumult, “he’s the Fifth Earl of Gonister. The other’s
his housekeeper.”

“But what’s happened to them?”

“Just time,” said Dr. Obispo airily.

“Time?”

“I don’t know how old the female is,” Dr. Obispo went on. “But the Earl
there—let me see, he was two hundred and one last January.”

From the shadows the shrill voice continued to scream its all but
articulate abuse. Impassibly the Fifth Earl scratched the sore on his
leg and stared at the light.

Dr. Obispo went on talking. Slowing up of development rates . . . one of
the mechanisms of evolution • . . the older an anthropoid, the stupider
. . . senility and sterol poisoning , , . the intestinal flora of the
carp . . . the Fifth Earl had anticipated his own discovery ... no
sterol poisoning, no senility ... no death, perhaps, except through an
accident . . . but meanwhile the foetal anthropoid was able to come to
maturity . . . It was the finest joke he had ever known.

Without moving from where he was sitting, the Fifth Earl urinated on the
floor. A shriller chattering arose from the darkness. He turned in the
direction from which it came and bellowed the guttural distortions of
almost forgotten obscenities.

“No need of any further experiment,” Dr. Obispo was saying. “We know it
works. You can start taking the stuff at once. At once,” he repeated
with sarcastic emphasis.

Mr. Stoyte said nothing.

On the other side of the bars, the Fifth Earl rose to his feet,
stretched, scratched, yawned, then turned and took a couple of steps
towards the boundary that separated the light from the darkness. His
housekeeper’s chattering became more agitated and rapid. Affecting to
pay no attention, the Earl halted, smoothed the broad ribbon of his
order with the palm of his hand, then fingered the jewel at his neck,
making as he did so a curious humming noise that was like a simian
memory of the serenade in “Don Giovanni.” The creature in the ulster
whimpered apprehensively, and her voice seemed to retreat further into
the shadows. Suddenly, with a ferocious yell, the Fifth Earl sprang
forward, out of the narrow universe of lantern light into the darkness
beyond. There was a rush of footsteps, a succession of yelps; then a
scream and the sound of blows and more screams; then no more screams,
but only a stertorous growling in the dark and little cries.

Mr. Stoyte broke his silence. “How long do you figure it would take
before a person went like that?” he said in a slow hesitating voice. “I
mean, it wouldn’t happen at once . . . there’d be a long time while a
person . . . well, you know; while he wouldn’t change any. And once you
get over the first shock—well, they look like they were having a pretty
good time. I mean in their own way, of course. Don’t you think so,
Obispo?” he Insisted.

Dr. Obispo went on looking at him in silence; then threw back his head
and started to laugh again.

 


IVAN R. DEE PAPERBACKS

Literature, Arts, and Letters

Roger Angell, Once More Around the Park

Walter Bagehot, Physics and Politics

Sybille Bedford, Aldous Huxley

Stephen Vincent Benét, John Brown’s Body

Isaiah Berlin, The Hedgehog and the Fox

F. Bordewijk, Character

Robert Brustein, Cultural Calisthenics

Robert Brustein, Dumbocracy in America

Robert Brustein, The Siege of the Arts

Anthony Burgess, Shakespeare

Philip Callow, Chekhov

Philip Callow, From Noon to Starry Night

Philip Callow, Son and Lover: The Young D. H. Lawrence

Anton Chekhov, The Comic Stories

Bruce Cole, The Informed Eye

James Gould Cozzens, Castaway

James Gould Cozzens, Men and Brethren

Clarence Darrow, Verdicts Out of Court

Floyd Dell, Intellectual Vagabondage

Theodore Dreiser, Best Short Stories

Joseph Epstein, Ambition

André Gide, Madeleine

Gerald Graff, Literature Against Itself

John Gross, The Rise and Fall of the Man of Letters

Olivia Gude and Jeff Huebner, Urban Art Chicago

Paul Hilberg, The Politics of Memory

Irving Howe, Politics and the Novel

Irving Howe, William Faulkner

Aldous Huxley, After Many a Summer Dies the Swan

Aldous Huxley, Ape and Essence

Aldous Huxley, Collected Short Stories

Roger Kimball, Experiments Against Reality

Roger Kimball, Tenured Radicals

Hilton Kramer, The Twilight of the Intellectuals

Hilton Kramer and Roger Kimball, eds., Against the Grain

Hilton Kramer and Roger Kimball, eds., The Survival of Culture

F. R. Leavis, Revaluation

F. R. Leavis, The Living Principle

F. R. Leavis, The Critic as Anti-Philosopher

Marie-Anne Lescourret, Rubens: A Double Life

Sinclair Lewis, Selected Short Stories

Lynne Munson, Exhibitionism

William L. O’Neill, ed., Echoes of Revolt: The Masses, 1911-1917

Carl Rollyson, Reading Susan Sontag

Carl Sandburg, Poems for the People

Budd Schulberg, The Harder They Fall

Ramón J. Sender, Seven Red Sundays

Peter Shaw, Recovering American Literature

James B. Simpson, ed., Veil and Cowl

Tess Slesinger, On Being Told That Her Second Husband Has Taken His
First Lover, and Other Stories

Red Smith, Red Smith on Baseball

Donald Thomas, Swinburne

B. Traven, The Bridge in the Jungle

B. Traven, The Carreta

B. Traven, The Cotton-Pickers

B. Traven, General from the Jungle

B. Traven, Government

B. Traven, March to the Montería

B. Traven, The Night Visitor and Other Stories

B. Traven, The Rebellion of the Hanged

B. Traven, Trozas

Anthony Trollope, Trollope the Traveller

Ivan Turgenev, Literary Reminiscences

Rex Warner, The Aerodrome

Rebecca West, A Train of Powder

Thomas Wolfe, The Hills Beyond

Wilhelm Worringer, Abstraction and Empathy

The Shakespeare Handbooks by Alistair McCallum

Hamlet

King Lear

Macbeth

Romeo and Juliet

Theatre and Drama

Linda Apperson, Stage Managing and Theatre Etiquette

Robert Brustein, Cultural Calisthenics

Robert Brustein, Dumbocracy in America

Robert Brustein, Reimagining American Theatre

Robert Brustein, The Siege of the Arts

Robert Brustein, The Theatre of Revolt

Stephen Citron, The Musical from the Inside Out

Irina and Igor Levin, Working on the Play and the Role

Keith Newlin, ed., American Plays of the New Woman

Louis Rosen, The South Side

Bernard Sahlins, Days and Nights at The Second City

David Wood, with Janet Grant, Theatre for Children

Plays for Performance:

Aristophanes, Lysistrata

Pierre Augustin de Beaumarchais, The Barber of Seville

Pierre Augustin de Beaumarchais, The Marriage of Figaro

Georg Büchner, Woyzeck

Anton Chekhov, The Cherry Orchard

Anton Chekhov, Ivanov

Anton Chekhov, The Seagull

Anton Chekhov, Uncle Vanya

Euripides, The Bacchae

Euripides, Iphigenia in Aulis

Euripides, Iphigenia Among the Taurians

Euripides, Medea

Euripides, The Trojan Women

Georges Feydeau, Paradise Hotel

Henrik Ibsen, A Doll’s House

Henrik Ibsen, Ghosts

Henrik Ibsen, Hedda Gabler

Henrik Ibsen, The Master Builder

Henrik Ibsen, When We Dead Awaken

Henrik Ibsen, The Wild Duck

Heinrich von Kleist, The Prince of Homburg

Christopher Marlowe, Doctor Faustus

Molière, The Bourgeois Gentleman

The Mysteries: Creation

The Mysteries: The Passion

Luigi Pirandello, Enrico IV

Luigi Pirandello, Six Characters in Search of an Author

Budd Schulberg, with Stan Silverman, On the Waterfront (the play)

Sophocles, Antigone

Sophocles, Electra

Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonus

Sophocles, Oedipus the King

August Strindberg, The Father

August Strindberg, Miss Julie

The Shakespeare Handbooks by Alistair McCallum

Hamlet

King Lear

Macbeth

Romeo and Juliet

Philosophy

Philosophers in 90 Minutes by Paul Strathern

Thomas Aquinas in 90 Minutes

Aristotle in 90 Minutes

St. Augustine in 90 Minutes

Berkeley in 90 Minutes

Confucius in 90 Minutes

Derrida in 90 Minutes

Descartes in 90 Minutes

Dewey in 90 Minutes

Foucault in 90 Minutes

Hegel in 90 Minutes

Heidegger in 90 Minutes

Hume in 90 Minutes

Kant in 90 Minutes

Kierkegaard in 90 Minutes

Leibniz in 90 Minutes

Locke in 90 Minutes

Machiavelli in 90 Minutes

Marx in 90 Minutes

J. S. Mill in 90 Minutes

Nietzsche in 90 Minutes

Plato in 90 Minutes

Rousseau in 90 Minutes

Bertrand Russell in 90 Minutes

Sartre in 90 Minutes

Schopenhauer in 90 Minutes

Socrates in 90 Minutes

Spinoza in 90 Minutes

Wittgenstein in 90 Minutes

American History and American Studies

Anthony J. Badger, The New Deal

Stephen Vincent Benét, John Brown’s Body

Henry W. Berger, ed., A William Appleman Williams Reader

Andrew Bergman, We’re in the Money

Paul Boyer, ed., Reagan as President

William Brashler, Josh Gibson

Robert V. Bruce, 1877: Year of Violence

Douglas Bukowski, Navy Pier

Philip Callow, From Noon to Starry Night

Laurie Winn Carlson, A Fever in Salem

Laurie Winn Carlson, Cattle: An Informal Social History

Christopher Clausen, Faded Mosaic

Kendrick A. Clements, Woodrow Wilson

Richard E. Cohen, Rostenkowski

David Cowan and John Kuenster, To Sleep with the Angels

George Dangerfield, The Era of Good Feelings

Clarence Darrow, Verdicts Out of Court

Allen F. Davis, American Heroine

Floyd Dell, Intellectual Vagabondage

Elisha P. Douglass, Rebels and Democrats

Theodore Draper, The Roots of American Communism

Edward Jay Epstein, News from Nowhere

Joseph Epstein, Ambition

Peter G. Filene, In the Arms of Others

Richard Fried, ed., Bruce Barton’s The Man Nobody Knows

Lloyd C. Gardner, Pay Any Price

Lloyd C. Gardner, Spheres of Influence

Paul W. Glad, McKinley, Bryan, and the People

Eric F. Goldman, Rendezvous with Destiny

Sarah H. Gordon, Passage to Union

Daniel Horowitz, The Morality of Spending

Kenneth T. Jackson, The Ku Klux Klan in the City, 1915-1930

Edward Chase Kirkland, Dream and Thought in the Business Community,
1860-1900

Herbert S Klein, Slavery in the Americas

Aileen S. Kraditor, Means and Ends in American Abolitionism

Hilton Kramer, The Twilight of the Intellectuals

Hilton Kramer and Roger Kimball, eds., The Betrayal of Liberalism

Irving Kristol, Neoconservatism

Leonard W. Levy, Jefferson and Civil Liberties: The Darker Side

Leonard W. Levy, Original Intent and the Framers’ Constitution

Leonard W. Levy, Origins of the Fifth Amendment

Leonard W. Levy, The Palladium of Justice

Heather Mac Donald, The Burden of Bad Ideas

Myron Magnet, ed., The Millennial City

Myron Magnet, ed., Modern Sex

Seymour J. Mandelbaum, Boss Tweed’s New York

Thomas J. McCormick, China Market

John Harmon McElroy, American Beliefs

Wendy McElroy, ed., Liberty for Women

Gerald W. McFarland, A Scattered People

Walter Millis, The Martial Spirit

Nicolaus Mills, ed., Culture in an Age of Money

Nicolaus Mills, Like a Holy Crusade

Roderick Nash, The Nervous Generation

Keith Newlin, ed., American Plays of the New Woman

William L. O’Neill, ed., Echoes of Revolt: The Masses, 1911-1917

Gilbert Osofsky, Harlem: The Making of a Ghetto

Edward Pessen, Losing Our Souls

Glenn Porter and Harold C. Livesay, Merchants and Manufacturers

John Prados, The Hidden History of the Vietnam War

John Prados, Presidents’ Secret Wars

Patrick Renshaw, The Wobblies

Edward Reynolds, Stand the Storm

Louis Rosen, The South Side

Richard Schickel, The Disney Version

Richard Schickel, Intimate Strangers

Richard Schickel, Matinee Idylls

Richard Schickel, The Men Who Made the Movies

Edward A. Shils, The Torment of Secrecy

Robert Shogan, Bad News

Geoffrey S. Smith, To Save a Nation

John David Smith, Black Judas

Robert W. Snyder, The Voice of the City

Bernard Sternsher, ed., Hitting Home: The Great Depression in Town and
Country

Bernard Sternsher, ed., Hope Restored: How the New Deal Worked in Town
and Country

Bernard Sternsher and Judith Sealander, eds., Women of Valor

Athan Theoharis, From the Secret Files of J. Edgar Hoover

Nicholas von Hoffman, We Are the People Our Parents Warned Us Against

Norman Ware, The Industrial Worker, 1840–1860

Robert Weisbrot, Maximum Danger

Mark J. White, ed., The Kennedys and Cuba

Tom Wicker, JFK and LBJ: The Influence of Personality upon Politics

Robert H. Wiebe, Businessmen and Reform

T. Harry Williams, McClellan, Sherman and Grant

Miles Wolff, Lunch at the 5 & 10

Randall B. Woods and Howard Jones, Dawning of the Cold War

American Ways Series:

John A. Andrew III, Lyndon Johnson and the Great Society

Roger Daniels, Not Like Us

J. Matthew Gallman, The North Fights the Civil War: The Home Front

Lewis L. Gould, 1968: The Election That Changed America

John Earl Haynes, Red Scare or Red Menace?

Kenneth J. Heineman, Put Your Bodies Upon the Wheels

D. Clayton James and Anne Sharp Wells, From Pearl Harbor to V-J Day

John W. Jeffries, Wartime America

Curtis D. Johnson, Redeeming America

Maury Klein, The Flowering of the Third America

Larry M. Logue, To Appomattox and Beyond

Jean V. Matthews, Women’s Struggle for Equality

Iwan W. Morgan, Deficit Government

Robert Muccigrosso, Celebrating the New World

Daniel Nelson, Shifting Fortunes

Thomas R. Pegram, Battling Demon Rum

Burton W. Peretti, Jazz in American Culture

David Reynolds, From Munich to Pearl Harbor

Hal K. Rothman, Saving the Planet

John A. Salmond, “My Mind Set on Freedom”

William Earl Weeks, Building the Continental Empire

Kevin White, Sexual Liberation or Sexual License?

Mark J. White, Missiles in Cuba

European and World History

Laurie Winn Carlson, Cattle: An Informal Social History

John Charmley, Chamberlain and the Lost Peace

John K. Dickinson, German and Jew

Lee Feigon, China Rising

Lee Feigon, Demystifying Tibet

Mark Frankland, The Patriots’ Revolution

Lloyd C. Gardner, Spheres of Influence

David Gilmour, Cities of Spain

Paul Hilberg, The Politics of Memory

Paul Hilberg, et al., eds., The Warsaw Diary of Adam Czerniakow

Gertrude Himmelfarb, Darwin and the Darwinian Revolution

Gertrude Himmelfarb, Marriage and Morals Among the Victorians

Gertrude Himmelfarb, Victorian Minds

Thomas A. Idinopulos, Jerusalem

Thomas A. Idinopulos, Weathered by Miracles

Allan Janik and Stephen Toulmin, Wittgenstein’s Vienna

Hilton Kramer and Roger Kimball, eds., The Betrayal of Liberalism

Ronnie S. Landau, The Nazi Holocaust

Filip Müher, Eyewitness Auschwitz

Clive Ponting, 1940: Myth and Reality

David Pryce-Jones, The Closed Circle

A.L. Rowse, The Elizabethan Renaissance: The Life of the Society

A.L. Rowse, The Elizabethan Renaissance: The Cultural Achievement

Scott Shane, Dismantling Utopia

Paul Webster, Petain’s Crime

John Weiss, Ideology of Death

Sports

William Brashler, Josh Gibson

Jim Brosnan, The Long Season

Paul Hemphill, Long Gone

John Krich, El Beisbol

John Kuenster, Heartbreakers

John P. Rossi, The National Game

Budd Schulberg, The Harder They Fall

Budd Schulberg, Sparring with Hemingway

Red Smith, Red Smith on Baseball
