Aldous Huxley

POINT COUNTER POINT

 

(First published in 1928)

 

‘Oh, wearisome condition of humanity!

Born under one law, to another bound,

Vainly begot and yet forbidden vanity:

Created sick, commanded to be sound.

What meaneth Nature by these diverse laws—

Passion and reason, self-division’s cause?’

 

—Fulke Greville


CHAPTER I

‘You won’t be late?’ There was anxiety in Marjorie Carling’s voice,
there was something like entreaty.

‘No, I won’t be late,’ said Walter, unhappily and guiltily certain that
he would be. Her voice annoyed him. It drawled a little, it was too
refined-even in misery.

‘Not later than midnight.’ She might have reminded him of the time when
he never went out in the evenings without her. She might have done so;
but she wouldn’t; it was against her principles; she didn’t want to
force his love in any way.

‘Well, call it one. You know what these parties are.’ But as a matter of
fact, she didn’t know, for the good reason that, not being his wife, she
wasn’t invited to them. She had left her husband to live with Walter
Bidlake; and Carling, who had Christian scruples, was feebly a sadist
and wanted to take his revenge, refused to divorce her. It was two years
now since they had begun to live together. Only two years; and now,
already, he had ceased to love her, he had begun to love someone else.
The sin was losing its only excuse, the social discomfort its sole
palliation. And she was with child.

‘Halfpast twelve,’ she implored, though she knew that her importunity
would only annoy him, only make him love her the less. But she could not
prevent herself from speaking; she loved him too much, she was too
agonizingly jealous. The words broke out in spite of her principles. It
would have been better for her, and perhaps for Walter too, if she had
had fewer principles and given her feelings the violent expression they
demanded. But she had been well brought up in habits of the strictest
self-control. Only the uneducated, she knew, made ‘scenes.’ An imploring
‘Halfpast twelve, Walter’ was all that managed to break through her
principles. Too weak to move him, the feeble outburst would only annoy.
She knew it, and yet she could not hold her tongue.

‘If I can possibly manage it.’ (There; she had done it. There was
exasperation in his tone.) “But I can’t guarantee it; don’t expect me
too certainly.” For of course, he was thinking (with Lucy Tantamount’s
image unexorcizably haunting him), it certainly wouldn’t be halfpast
twelve.

He gave the final touches to his white tie. From the mirror her face
looked out at him, close beside his own. It was a pale face and so thin
that the down-thrown light of the electric lamp hanging above them made
a shadow in the hollows below the cheek-bones. Her eyes were darkly
ringed. Rather too long at the best of times, her straight nose
protruded bleakly from the unfleshed face. She looked ugly, tired and
ill. Six months from now her baby would be born. Something that had been
a single cell, a cluster of cells, a little sac of tissue, a kind of
worm, a potential fish with gills, stirred in her womb and would one day
become a man-a grown man, suffering and enjoying, loving and hating,
thinking, remembering, imagining. And what had been a blob of jelly
within her body would invent a god and worship; what had been a kind of
fish would create and, having created, would become the battle-ground of
disputing good and evil; what had blindly lived in her as a parasitic
worm would look at the stars, would listen to music, would read poetry.
A thing would grow into a person, a tiny lump of stuff would become a
human body, a human mind. The astounding process of creation was going
on within her; but Marjorie was conscious only of sickness and
lassitude; the mystery for her meant nothing but fatigue and ugliness
and a chronic anxiety about the future, pain of the mind as well as
discomfort of the body. She had been glad, or at least she had tried to
be glad, in spite of her haunting fears of physical and social
consequences, when she first recognized the symptoms Df her pregnancy.
The child, she believed, would bring Walter closer; (he had begun to
fade away from her even then). It would arouse in him new feelings which
would make up for whatever element it was that seemed to be lacking in
his love for her. She dreaded the pain, she dreaded the inevitable
difficulties and embarrassments. But the pains, ‘the difficulties would
have been worth while if they purchased a renewal, a strengthening of
Walter’s attachment. In spite of everything, she was glad. And at first
her previsions had seemed to be justified. The news that she was going
to have a child had quickened his tenderness. For two or three weeks she
was happy, she was reconciled to the pains and discomforts. Then, from
one day to another, everything was changed; Walter had met that woman.
He still did his best, in the intervals of running after Lucy, to keep
up a show of solicitude. But she could feel that the solicitude was
resentful, that he was tender and attentive out of a sense of duty, that
he hated the child for compelling him to be so considerate to its
mother. And because he hated it, she too began to hate it. No longer
overlaid by happiness, her fears came to the surface, filled her mind.
Pain and discomfort-that was all the future held. And meanwhile
ugliness, sickness, fatigue. How could she fight her battle when she was
in this state?

‘Do you love me, Walter?’ she suddenly asked.

Walter turned his brown eyes for a moment from the reflected tie and
looked into the image of her sad, intently gazing grey ones. He smiled.
But if only, he was thinking, she would leave me in peace! He pursed his
lips and parted them again in the suggestion of a kiss. But Marjorie did
not return his smile. Her face remained unmovingly sad, fixed in an
intent anxiety. Her eyes took on a tremulous brightness, and suddenly
there were tears on her lashes.

‘Couldn’t you stay here with me this evening?’ she begged, in the teeth
of all her heroic resolutions not to apply any sort of exasperating
compulsion to his love, to leave him free to do what he wanted.

At the sight of those tears, at the sound of that tremulous and
reproachful voice, Walter was filled with an emotion that was at once
remorse and resentment; anger, pity, and shame.

‘But can’t you understand,’ that was what he would have liked to say,
what he would have said if he had had the courage, ‘can’t you understand
that it isn’t the same as it was, that it can’t be the same? And
perhaps, if the truth be told, it never was what you believed it was our
love, I mean—it never was what I tried to pretend it was. Let’s be
friends, let’s be companions. I like you, I’m very fond of you. But for
goodness sake don’t envelop me in love, like this; don’t force love on
me. If you knew how dreadful love seems to somebody who doesn’t love,
what a violation, what an outrage…’

But she was crying. Through her closed eyelids the tears were welling
out, drop after drop. Her face was trembling into the grimace of agony.
And he was the tormentor. He hated himself. ‘But why should I let myself
be blackmailed by her tears?’ he asked, and, asking, he hated her also.
A drop ran down her long nose

‘She has no right to do this sort of thing, no right to be so
unreasonable. Why can’t she be reasonable?’

‘Because she loves me.’

‘But I don’t want her love, I don’t want it.’ He felt the anger mounting
up within him. She had no business to love him like that; not now, at
any rate. ‘It’s a blackmail,’ he repeated inwardly, ‘a blackmail. Why
must I be blackmailed by her love and the fact that once I loved too-or
did I ever love her, really?’

Marjorie took out a handkerchief and began to wipe her eyes. He felt
ashamed of his odious thoughts. But she was the cause of his shame; it
was her fault. She ought to have stuck to her husband. They could have
had an affair. Afternoons in a studio. It would have been romantic.

‘But after all, it was I who insisted on her coming away with me.’

‘But she ought to have had the sense to refuse. She ought to have known
that it couldn’t last for ever.’ But she had done what he had asked her;
she had given up everything, accepted social discomfort for his sake.
Another piece of blackmail. She blackmailed him with sacrifice. He
resented the appeal which her sacrifices made to his sense of decency
and honour

‘But if she had some decency and honour,’ he thought, ‘she wouldn’t
exploit mine.’

But there was the baby

‘Why on earth did she ever allow it to come into existence?’

He hated it. It increased his responsibility towards its mother,
increased his guiltiness in making her suffer. He looked at her wiping
her tear-wet face. Being with child had made her so ugly, so old. How
could a woman expect…? But no, no, no! Walter shut his eyes, gave an
almost imperceptible shuddering shake of the head. The ignoble thought
must be shut out, repudiated.

‘How can I think such things?’ he asked himself.

‘Don’t go,’ he heard her repeating. How that refined and drawling
shrillness got on his nerves! ‘Please don’t go, Walter.’

There was a sob in her voice. More blackmail. Ah, how could he be so
base? And yet, in spite of his shame and, in a sense, because of it, he
continued to feel the shameful emotions with an intensity that seemed to
increase rather than diminish. His dislike of her grew because he was
ashamed of it; the painful feelings of shame and self-hatred, which she
caused him to feel, constituted for him yet another ground of dislike.
Resentment bred shame, and shame in its turn bred more resentment.

‘Oh, why can’t she leave me in peace? He wished it furiously, intensely,
with an exasperation that was all the more’ savage for being suppressed.
(For he lacked the brutal courage to give it utterance; he was sorry for
her, he was fond of her in spite of everything; he was incapable of
being openly and frankly cruel-he was cruel only out of weakness,
against his will.)

‘Why can’t she leave me in peace?’ He would like her so much more if
only she left him in peace; and she herself would be so much happier.
Ever so much happier. It would be for her own good…. But suddenly he saw
through his own hypocrisy. ‘But all the same, why the devil can’t she
let me do what I want?’

What he wanted? But what he wanted was Lucy Tantamount. And he wanted
her against reason, against all his ideals and principles, madly,
against his own wishes, even against his own feelings—for he didn’t like
Lucy; he really hated her. A noble end may justify shameful means. But
when the end is shameful, what then? It was for Lucy that he was making
Marjorie suffer—Marjorie, who loved him, who had made sacrifices for
him, who was unhappy. But her unhappiness was blackmailing him.

‘Stay with me this evening,’ she implored once more.

There was a part of his mind that joined in her entreaties, that wanted
him to give up the party and stay at home. But the other part was
stronger. He answered her with lies—half lies, that were worse, for the
hypocritically justifying element of truth in them, than frank whole
lies.

He put his arm round her. The gesture was in itself a falsehood.

‘But my darling,’ he protested in the cajoling tone of one who implores
a child to behave reasonably, ‘I really must go. You see, my father’s
going to be there.’ That was true. Old Bidlake was always at the
Tantamounts’ parties. ‘And I must have a talk with him. About business,’
he added vaguely and importantly, releasing with the magical word a kind
of smoke-screen of masculine interests between himself and Marjorie. But
the lie, he reflected, must be transparently visible through the smoke.

‘Couldn’t you see him some other time? ‘

‘It’s important,’ he answered, shaking his head. ‘And besides,’ he
added, forgetting that several excuses are always less convincing than
one, ‘Lady Edward’s inviting an American editor specially for my sake.
He might be useful; you know how enormously they pay.’ Lady Edward had
told him that she would invite the man if he hadn’t started back to
America-she was afraid he had. ‘Quite preposterously much,’ he went on,
thickening his screen with impersonal irrelevancies. ‘It’s the only
place in the world where it’s possible for a writer to be overpaid.’ He
made an attempt at laughter. ‘And I really need a bit of overpaying to
make up for all this two-guineas-a-thousand business.’ He tightened his
embrace, he bent down to kiss her. But Marjorie averted her face.
‘Marjorie,’ he implored. ‘don’t cry. Please.’ He felt guilty and
unhappy. But oh! why couldn’t she leave him in peace, in peace?

‘I’m not crying,’ she answered. But her cheek was wet and cold to his
lips.

‘Marjorie, I won’t go, if you don’t want me to.’

‘But I do want you to,’ she answered, still keeping her face averted.

‘You don’t. I’ll stay.’

‘You mustn’t.’ Marjorie looked at him and made an effort to smile. ‘It’s
only my silliness. It would be stupid to miss your father and that
American man.’ Returned to him like this, his excuses sounded peculiarly
vain and improbable. He winced with a kind of disgust.

‘They can wait,’ he answered, and there was a note of anger in his
voice. He was angry with himself for having made such lying excuses (why
couldn’t he have told her the crude and brutal truth straight out? she
knew it, after all); and he was angry with her for reminding him of
them. He would have liked them to fall directly into the pit of
oblivion, to be as though they had never been uttered.

‘No, no; I insist. I was only being silly. I’m sorry.’

He resisted her at first, refused to go, demanded to stay. Now that
there was no danger of his having to stay, he could afford to insist.
For Marjorie, it was clear, was serious in her determination that he
should go. It was an opportunity for him to be noble and selfsacrificing
at a cheap rate, gratis even. What an odious comedy! But he played it.
In the end he consented to go, as though he were doing her a special
favour by not staying. Marjorie tied his scarf for him, brought him his
silk hat and his gloves, kissed him goodbye lightly, with a brave show
of gaiety. She had her pride and her code of amorous honour; and in
spite of unhappiness, in spite of jealousy, she stuck to her
principles—he ought to be free; she had no right to interfere with him.
And besides it was the best policy not to interfere. At least, she hoped
it was the best policy.

Walter shut the door behind him and stepped out into the cool of the
night. A criminal escaping from the scene of his crime, escaping from
the spectacle of the victim, escaping from compassion and remorse, could
not have felt more profoundly relieved. In the street he drew a deep
breath. He was free. Free from recollection and anticipation. Free, for
an hour or two, to refuse to admit the existence of past or future. Free
to live only now and here, in the place where his body happened at each
instant to be. Free-but the boast was idle; he went on remembering.
Escape was not so easy a matter. Her voice pursued him. ‘I insist on
your going.’ His crime had been a fraud as well as a murder. ‘I insist.’
How nobly he had protested! How magnanimously given in at last! It was
cardsharping on top of cruelty.

‘God!’ he said almost aloud. ‘How could I?’ He was astonished at himself
as well as disgusted. ‘But if only she’d leave me in peace! ‘ he went
on. ‘Why can’t she be reasonable?’ The weak and futile anger exploded
again within him.

He thought of the time when his wishes had been different. Not to be
left in peace by her had once been his whole ambition. He had encouraged
her devotion. He remembered the cottage they had lived in, alone with
one another, month after month, among the bare downs. What a view over
Berkshire! But it was a mile and a half to the nearest village. Oh, the
weight of that knapsack full of provisions! The mud when it rained! And
that bucket you had to wind up from the well. The well was more than a
hundred feet deep. But even when he wasn’t doing something tiresome,
like winding up the bucket, had it really been very satisfactory? Had he
ever really been happy with Marjorie —as happy, at any rate, as he had
imagined he was going to be, as he ought to have been in the
circumstances? It should have been like _Epipsychidion_; but it
wasn’t—perhaps because he had too consciously wanted it to be, because
he had deliberately tried to model his feelings and their life together
on Shelley’s poetry.

‘One shouldn’t take art too literally.’ He remembered what his
brother-in-law, Philip Quarles, had said one evening, when they were
talking about poetry. ‘Particularly where love is concerned.’

‘Not even if it’s true?’ Walter had asked.

‘It’s apt to be too true. Unadulterated, like distilled water. When
truth is nothing but the truth, it’s unnatural, it’s an abstraction that
resembles nothing in the real world. In nature there are always so many
other irrelevant things mixed up with the essential truth. That’s why
art moves you-precisely because it’s unadulterated with all the
irrelevancies of real life. Real orgies are never so exciting as
pornographic books. In a volume by Pierre Louys all the girls are young
and their figures perfect; there’s no hiccoughing or bad breath, no
fatigue or boredom, no sudden recollections of unpaid bills or business
letters unanswered, to interrupt the raptures. Art gives you the
sensation, the thought, the feeling quite pure—chemically pure, I mean,’
he had added with a laugh, ‘not morally.’

‘But _Epipsychidion_ isn’t pornography,’ Walter had objected.

‘No, but it’s equally pure from the chemist’s point of view. How does
that sonnet of Shakespeare’s go?

 

‘My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;

Coral is far more red than her lips’ red:

If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;

If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.

I have seen roses damask’d, red and white,

But no such roses see I in her cheeks;

And in some perfumes is there more delight

Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.

 

And so on. He’d taken the poets too literally and was reacting. Let him
be a warning to you.’

Philip had been right, of course. Those months in the cottage hadn’t
been at all like _Epipsychidion_ or _La Maison du Berger_. What with the
well and the walk to the village…. But even if there hadn’t been the
well and the walk, even if he had had Marjorie unadulterated, would it
have been any better? It might even have been worse. Marjorie
unadulterated might have been worse than Marjorie tempered by
irrelevancies.

That refinement of hers, for example, that rather cold virtuousness, so
bloodless and spiritual—from a distance and theoretically he admired.
But in practice and close at hand? It was with that virtue, that
refined, cultured, bloodless spirituality that he had fallen in
love—with that and with her unhappiness; for Carling was unspeakable.
Pity made him a knight errant. Love, he had then believed (for he was
only twenty-two at the time, ardently pure, with the adolescent purity
of sexual desires turned inside out, just down from Oxford and stuffed
with poetry and the lucubrations of philosophers and mystics), love was
talk, love was spiritual communion and companionship. That was real
love. The sexual business was only an irrelevancy, unavoidable, because
unfortunately human beings had bodies, but to be kept as far as possible
in the background. Afdently pure with the ardour of young desires taught
artificially to burn on the side of the angels, he had admired that
refined and quiet purity which, in Marjorie, was the product of a
natural coldness, a congenitally low vitality.

‘You’re so good,’ he had said. ‘It seems to come to you so easily. I
wish I could be good, like you.’

It was the equivalent, but he did not realize it, of wishing himself
half dead. Under the shy, diffident, sensitive skin of him, he was
ardently alive. It was indeed hard for him to be good, as Marjorie was
good. But he tried. And meanwhile, he admired her goodness and purity.
And he was touched-at least until it bored and exasperated him-by her
devotion to him, he was flattered by her admiration.

Walking now towards Chalk Farm station he suddenly remembered that story
his father used to tell about an Italian chauffeur he had once talked to
about love. (The old man had a genius for getting people to talk; all
sorts of people, even servants, even workmen. Walter envied him the
talent.) Some women, according to the chauffeur, are like wardrobes.
_Sono come cassettoni_. How richly old Bidlake used to tell the
anecdote! They may be as lovely as you like; but what’s the point of a
lovely wardrobe in your arms? What on earth’s the point? (And Marjorie,
Walter reflected, wasn’t even really good looking.) ‘Give me,’ said the
chauffeur, ‘the other kind, even if they’re ugly. My girl,’ he had
confided, ‘is the other kind. _Č un frullino, proprio un frullino_—a
regular egg-whisk.’ And the old man would twinkle like a jovial, wicked
old satyr behind his monocle. Stiff wardrobes or lively egg-whisks?
Walter had to admit that his preferences were the same as the
chauffeur’s. At any rate, he knew by personal experience that (whenever
‘real’ love was being tempered by the sexual irrelevancies) he didn’t
much like the wardrobe kind of woman. At a distance, theoretically,
purity and goodness and refined spirituality were admirable. But in
practice and close to they were less appealing. And from someone who
does not appeal to one, even devotion, even the flattery of admiration
are unbearable. Confusedly and simultaneously he hated Marjorie for her
patient, martyred coldness; he accused himself of swinish sensuality.
His love for Lucy was mad and shameful, but Marjorie was bloodless and
half dead. He was at once justified and without excuse. But more without
excuse, all the same; more without excuse. They were low, those sensual
feelings; they were ignoble. Eggwhisk and chest of drawers—could
anything be more base and ignoble than such a classification? In
imagination he heard his father’s rich and fleshy laugh. Horrible!
Walter’s whole conscious life had been orientated in opposition to his
father, in opposition to the old man’s jolly, careless sensuality.
Consciously he had always been on the side of his mother, on the side of
purity, refinement, the spirit. But his blood was at least half his
father’s. And now two years of Marjorie had made him consciously dislike
cold virtue. He consciously disliked it, even though at the same time he
was still ashamed of his dislike, ashamed of what he regarded as his
beastly sensual desires, ashamed of his love for Lucy. But oh, if only
Marjorie would leave him in peace! If only she’d refrain from clamouring
for a return to the unwelcome love she persisted in forcing on him! If
only she’d stop being so dreadfully devoted! He could give her
friendship-for he liked her, genuinely; she was so good and kind, so
loyal and devoted. He’d be glad of her friendship in return. But
love-that was suffocating. And when, imagining she was fighting the
other woman with her own weapons, she did violence to her own virtuous
coldness and tried to win him back by the ardour of her caresses-oh, it
was terrible, really terrible.

And then, he went on to reflect, she was really rather a bore with her
heavy, insensitive earnestness. Really rather stupid in spite of her
culture-because of it perhaps. The culture was genuine all right; she
had read the books, she remembered them. But did she understand them?
Could she understand them? The remarks with which she broke her long,
long silences, the cultured, earnest remarks-how heavy they were, how
humourless and without understanding! She was wise to be so silent;
silence is as full of potential wisdom and wit as the unhewn marble of
great sculpture. The silent bear no witness against themselves. Marjorie
knew how to listen well and sympathetically. And when she did break
silence, half her utterances were quotations. For Marjorie had a
retentive memory and had formed the habit of learning the great thoughts
and the purple passages by heart. It had taken Walter some time to
discover the heavy, pathetically uncomprehending stupidity that underlay
the silence and the quotations. And when he discovered, it was too late.

He thought of Carling. A drunkard and religious. Always chattering away
about chasubles and saints and the Immaculate Conception, and at the
same time a nasty drunken pervert. If the man hadn’t been quite so
detestably disgusting, if he hadn’t made Marjorie quite so wretched-what
then? Walter imagined his freedom. He wouldn’t have pitied, he wouldn’t
have loved. He remembered Marjorie’s red and swollen eyes after one of
those disgusting scenes with Carling. The dirty brute!

‘And what about me?’ he suddenly thought.

He knew that the moment the door had shut behind him, Marorie had
started to cry. Carling at least had the excuse of whiskey. Forgive
them, for they know not what they do. He himself was never anything but
sober. At this moment, he knew, she was crying.

‘I ought to go back,’ he said to himself. But instead, he quickened his
pace till he was almost running down the street. It was a flight from
his conscience and at the same time a hastening towards his desire.

‘I ought to go back, I ought.’

He hurried on, hating her because he had made her so unhappy.

A man looking into a tobacconist’s window suddenly stepped backwards as
he was passing. Walter violently collided with him.

‘Sorry,’ he said automatically, and hurried on without looking round.

‘Where yer going?’ the man shouted after him angrily. ‘Wotcher think
you’re doing? Being a bloody Derby winner?’

Two loitering street boys whooped with ferociously derisive mirth.

‘You in yer top ‘at,’ the man pursued contemptuously, hating the
uniformed gentleman.

The right thing would have been to turn round and give the fellow back
better than he gave. His father would have punctured him with a word.
But for Walter there was only flight. He dreaded these encounters, he
was frightened of the lower classes. The noise of the man’s abuse faded
in his ears.

Odious! He shuddered. His thoughts returned to Marorie.

‘Why can’t she be reasonable? ‘ he said to himself. ‘Just reasonable. If
only at least she had something to do, something to keep her occupied.’

She had too much time to think, that was the trouble with Marjorie. Too
much time to think about him. Though after all it was his fault; it was
he who had robbed her of her occupation and made her focus her mind
exclusively on himself. She had taken a partnership in a decorator’s
shop when he first knew her; one of those lady-like, artistic,
amateurish decorating establishments in Kensington. Lampshades and the
companionship of the young women who painted them and above all devotion
to Mrs. Cole, the senior partner, were Marjorie’s compensations for a
wretched marriage. She had created a little world of her own, apart from
Carling; a feminine world, with something of the girl’s school about it,
where she could talk about clothes and shops, and listen to gossip, and
indulge in what schoolgirls call a ‘ pash’ for an elder woman, and
imagine in the intervals that she was doing part of the world’s work and
helping on the cause of Art.

Walter had persuaded her to give it all up. Not without difficulty,
however. For her happiness in being devoted to Mrs. Cole, in having a
sentimental ‘pash’ for her, was almost a compensation for her misery
with Carling. But Carling turned out to be more than Mrs. Cole could
compensate for. Walter offered what the lady perhaps could not, and
certainly did not wish to, provide—a place of refuge, protection,
financial support. Besides, Walter was a man, and a man ought, by
tradition, to be loved, even when, as Walter had finally concluded about
Marjorie, one doesn’t really like men and is only naturally attuned to
the company of women. (The effect of literature again! He remembered
Philip Quarles’s comments on the disastrous influence which art can
exercise on life.) Yes, he was a man; but ‘different,’ as she had never
tired of telling him, from ordinary men. He had accepted his ‘
difference’ as a flattering distinction, then. But was it? He wondered.
Anyhow, ‘different’ she had then found him and so was able to get the
best of both worlds—a man who yet wasn’t a man. Charmed by Walter’s
persuasions, driven by Carling’s brutalities, she had consented to
abandon the shop and with it Mrs. Cole, whom Walter detested as a
bullying, slave-driving, blood-sucking embodiment of female will.

‘You’re too good to be an amateur upholsterer,’ he had flattered her out
of the depths of a then genuine belief in her intellectual capacities.

She should help him in some unspecified way with his literary work, she
should write herself. Under his influence she had taken to writing
essays and short stories. But they were obviously no good. From having
been encouraging, he became reticent; he said no more about her efforts.
In a little while Marjorie abandoned the unnatural and futile
occupation. She had nothing after that but Walter. He became the reason
of her existence, the foundation on which her whole life was
established. The foundation was moving away from under her.

‘If only,’ thought Walter, ‘she’d leave me in peace!’

He turned into the Underground station. At the entrance a man was
selling the evening papers. SOCIALIST ROBBERY SCHEME. FIRST READING. The
words glared out from the placard. Glad of an excuse to distract his
mind Walter bought a paper. The LiberalLabour Government’s Bill for the
nationalization of the mines had passed its first reading by the usual
majority. Walter read the news with pleasure. His political opinions
were advanced. Not so the opinions of the proprietor of the evening
paper. The language of the leading article was savagely violent.

‘The ruffians,’ thought Walter as he read it. The article evoked in him
a stimulating enthusiasm for all that it assailed, a delightful hatred
for Capitalists and Reactionaries. The barriers of his individuality
were momentarily thrown down, the personal complexities were abolished.
Possessed by the joy of political battle, he overflowed his boundaries,
he became, so to speak, larger than himself-larger and simpler.

‘The ruffians,’ he repeated, thinking of the oppressors, the
monopolizers.

At Camden Town station a wizened little man with a red handkerchief
round his neck took the seat next to his. The stink of the old man’s
pipe was so suffocating, that Walter looked up the car to see if there
were not another vacant seat. There was, as it happened; but on second
thoughts, he decided not to move. To retire from the stink would seem
too offensively pointed, might occasion comment from the stinker. The
acrid smoke rasped his throat; he coughed.

‘One should be loyal to one’s tastes and instincts,’ Philip Quarles used
to say. ‘What’s the good of a philosophy with a major premise that isn’t
the rationalization of your feelings? If you’ve never had a religious
experience, it’s folly to believe in God. You might as well believe in
the excellence of oysters, when you can’t eat them without being sick.’

A whiff of stale sweat came up with the nicotine fumes to Walter’s
nostrils. ‘The Socialists call it Nationalization,’ he read in his
paper; ‘but the rest of us have a shorter and homelier name for what
they propose to do. That name is Theft.’ But at least it was theft from
thieves and for the benefit of their victims. The little old man leaned
forward and spat, cautiously and perpendicularly, between his feet. With
the heel of his boot he spread the gob over the floor. Walter looked
away; he wished that he could personally like the oppressed and
personally hate the rich oppressors. One should be loyal to one’s tastes
and instincts. But one’s tastes and instincts were accidents. There were
eternal principles. But if the axiomatic principles didn’t happen to be
your personal major premiss…?

And suddenly he was nine years old and walking with his mother in the
fields near Gattenden. Each of them carried a bunch of cowslips. They
must have been up to Batt’s Corner; it was the only place where cowslips
grew in the neighbourhood.

‘We’ll stop for a minute and see poor Wetherington,’ his mother said.
‘He’s very ill.’ She knocked at a cottage door.

Wetherington had been the under-gardener at the Hall; but for the past
month he had not been working. Walter remembered him as a pale, thin man
with a cough, not at all communicative. He was not much interested in
Wetherington. A woman opened the door. ‘Good afternoon, Mrs.
Wetherington.’ They were shown in.

Wetherington was lying in bed propped up with pillows. His face was
terrible. A pair of enormous, large-pupilled eyes stared out of
cavernous sockets. Stretched over the starting bones, the skin was white
and clammy with sweat. But almost more appalling even than the face was
the neck, the unbelievably thin neck. And from the sleeves of his
nightshirt projected two knobbed sticks, his arms, with a pair of
immense skeleton hands fastened to the end of them, like rakes at the
end of their slender hafts. And then the smell in that sickroom! The
windows were tightly shut, a fire burned in the little grate. The air
was hot and heavy with a horrible odour of stale sick breath and the
exhalations of a sick body—an old inveterate smell that seemed to have
grown sickeningly sweetish with long ripening in the pent-up heat. A
new, fresh smell, however pungently disgusting, would have been less
horrible. It was the inveterateness, the sweet decaying over-ripeness of
this sickroom smell that made it so peculiarly unbearable. Walter
shuddered even now to think of it. He lit a cigarette to disinfect his
memory. He had been brought up on baths and open windows. The first time
that, as a child, he was taken to church, the stuffiness, the odour of
humanity made him sick; he had to be hurried out. His mother did not
take him to church again. Perhaps we’re brought up too wholesomely and
aseptically, he thought. An education -that results in one’s feeling
sick in the company of one’s fellow-men, one’s brothers-can it be good?
He would have liked to love them. But love does not flourish in an
atmosphere that nauseates the lover with an uncontrollable disgust.

In Wetherington’s sickroom even pity found it hard to flourish. He sat
there, while his mother talked to the dying man and his wife, gazing,
reluctant but compelled by the fascination of horror, at the ghastly
skeleton in the bed and breathing through his bunch of cowslips the warm
and sickening air. Even through the fresh delicious scent of the
cowslips he could smell the inveterate odours of the sickroom. He felt
almost no pity, only horror, fear and disgust. And even when Mrs.
Wetherington began to cry, turning her face away so that the sick man
should not see her tears, he felt not pitiful so much as uncomfortable,
embarrassed. The spectacle of her grief only made him more urgently long
to escape, to get out of that horrible room into the pure enormous air
and the sunshine.

He felt ashamed of these emotions as he remembered them. But that was
how he had felt, how he still felt. ‘One should be loyal to one’s
instincts.’ No, not to all, not to the bad ones; one should resist
these. But they were not so easily overcome. The old man in the next
seat relit his pipe. He remembered that he had held every breath for as
long as he possibly could, so as not to have to draw in and smell the
tainted air too often. A deep breath through the cowslips; then he
counted forty before he let it out again and inhaled another. The old
man once more leaned forward and spat. ‘The idea that nationalization
will increase the prosperity of the workers is entirely fallacious.
During the past years the tax-payer has learned to his cost the meaning
of bureaucratic control. If the workers imagine…’ He shut his eyes and
saw the sickroom. When the time came to say goodbye, he had shaken the
skeleton hand. It lay there, unmoving, on the bedclothes; he slipped his
fingers underneath those dead and bony ones, lifted the hand a moment
and let it fall again.

It was cold and wettish to the touch. Turning away, he surreptitiously
wiped his palm on his coat. He let out his long-contained breath with an
explosive sigh and inhaled another lungfull of the sickening air. It was
the last he had to take; his mother was already moving towards the door.
Her little Pekingese frisked round her, barking.

‘Be quiet, T’ang!’ she said in her clear, beautiful voice. She was
perhaps the only person in England, he now reflected, who regularly
pronounced the apostrophe in T’ang.

They walked home by the footpath across the fields. Fantastic and
improbable as a little Chinese dragon, T’ang ran on ahead of them
bounding lightly over what were to him enormous obstacles. His feathery
tail fluttered in the wind. Sometimes, when the grass was very long he
sat up on his little flat rump as though he were begging for sugar, and
looked out with his round bulgy eyes over the tussocks, taking his
bearings.

Under the bright dappled sky Walter had felt like a reprieved prisoner.
He ran, he shouted. His mother walked slowly, without speaking. Every
now and then she halted for a moment and shut her eyes. It was a habit
she had, when she felt pensive or perplexed. She was often perplexed,
Walter reflected, smiling tenderly to himself. Poor Wetherington must
have perplexed her a great deal. He remembered how often she had halted
on their way home.

‘Do hurry up, mother,’ he had shouted impatiently. ‘We shall be late for
tea.’

Cook had baked scones for tea and there was yesterday’s plum cake and a
newly opened pot of Tiptree’s cherry jam.

‘One should be loyal to one’s tastes and instincts.’ But an accident of
birth had determined them for him. Justice was eternal; charity and
brotherly love were beautiful in spite of the old man’s pipe and
Wetherington’s sickroom. Beautiful precisely because of such things. The
train slowed down. Leicester Square. He stepped out on to the platform
and made his way towards the lifts. But the personal major premiss, he
was thinking, is hard to deny; and the major premiss that isn’t personal
is hard, however excellent, to believe in. Honour, fidelity-these were
good things. But the personal major premiss of his present philosophy
was that Lucy Tantamount was the most beautiful, the most desirable…

‘All tickets, please!’

The debate threatened to start again. Deliberately he stifled it, the
liftman slammed the gates. The lift ascended. In the street he hailed a
taxi.

‘Tantamount House, Pall Mall.’


CHAPTER II

Three Italian ghosts unobtrusively haunt the eastern end of Pall Mall.
The wealth of newly industrialized England and the enthusiasm, the
architectural genius, of Charles Barry called them up out of the past
and their native sunshine. Under the encrusting grime of the Reform Club
the eye of faith recognizes something agreeably reminiscent of the
Farnese Palace. A few yards further down the street, Sir Charles’s
recollections of the house that Raphael designed for the Pandolfini loom
up through the filmy London air-the Travellers’ Club. And between them,
austerely classical, grim like a prison and black with soot, rises a
smaller (but still enormous) version of the Cancelleria. It is
Tantamount House.

Barry designed it in I839. A hundred workmen laboured for a year or two.
And the third marquess paid the bills. They were heavy; but the suburbs
of Leeds and Sheffield had begun to spread over the land which his
ancestors had stolen from the monasteries three hundred years before.
‘The Catholic Church, instructed by the Holy Spirit, has from the sacred
writings and the ancient traditions of the Fathers, taught that there is
a Purgatory and that the souls there detained are helped by the
suffrages of the faithful, but principally by the acceptable sacrifice
of the altar’ Rich men with uneasy consciences had left their land to
the monks that their souls might be helped through Purgatory by a
perpetual performance of the acceptable sacrifice of the altar. But
Henry vyi. had lusted after a young woman and desired a son; and because
Pope Clement vu. was in the power of Henry’s first wife’s daughter’s
cousin, he would not grant him a divorce. The monasteries were in
consequence suppressed. An army of beggars, of paupers, of the infirm
died miserably of hunger. But the Tantamounts acquired some scores of
square miles of ploughland, forest and pasture. A few years later, under
Edward VI., they stole the property of two disestablished grammar
schools; children remained uneducated that the Tantamounts might be
rich. They farmed their land scientifically with a view to the highest
profit. Their contemporaries regarded them as ‘ men that live as though
there were no God at all, men that would have all in their own hands,
men that would leave nothing to others, men that be never satisfied.’
From the pulpit of St. Paul’s, Lever accused them of having ‘ offended
God, and brought a common wealth into a common ruin.’ The Tantamounts
were unperturbed. The land was theirs, the money came in regularly.

The corn was sown, grew and was harvested, again and again. The beasts
were born, fattened and went to the slaughter. The ploughmen, the
shepherds, the cow-herds laboured from before dawn till sunset, year
after year, until they died. Their children took their places.
Tantamount succeeded Tantamount. Elizabeth made them barons; they became
viscounts under Charles n., earls under William and Mary, marquesses
under George n. They married heiress after heiressten square miles of
Nottinghamshire, fifty thousand pounds, two streets in Bloomsbury, half
a brewery, a bank, a plantation and six hundred slaves in Jamaica.
Meanwhile, obscure men were devising machines which made things more
rapidly than they could be made by hand. Villages were transformed into
towns, towns into great cities. On what had been the Tantamounts’
pasture and ploughland, houses and factories were built. Under the grass
of their meadows half-naked men hewed at the black and shining coal
face. The laden trucks were hauled by little boys and women. From Peru
the droppings of ten thousand generations of sea-gulls were brought in
ships to enrich their fields. The corn grew thicker; the new mouths were
fed. And year by year the Tantamounts grew richer and richer and the
souls of the Black Prince’s pious contemporaries continued, no doubt, to
writhe, unaided as they were by any acceptable sacrifice of the altar,
in the unquenchable fires of Purgatory. The money that might, if
suitably applied, have shortened their term among the flames served,
among other things, to call into existence a model of the Papal
Chancellery in Pall Mall.

The interior of Tantamount House is as nobly Roman as its facade. Round
a central quadrangle run two tiers of open arcades with an attic, lit by
small square windows, above. But instead of being left open to the sky,
the quadrangle is covered by a glass roof, which converts it into an
immense hall rising the whole height of the building. With its arcades
and gallery it makes a very noble room-but too large, too public, too
much like a swimming bath or a roller-skating rink to be much lived in.
To-night, however, it was justifying its existence. Lady Edward
Tantamount was giving one of her musical parties. The floor was crowded
with seated guests and in the hollow architectural space above them the
music intricately pulsed.

‘What a pantomime! ‘ said old John Bidlake to his hostess. ‘My dear
Hilda, you really must look.’

‘Sh-sh!’ Lady Edward protested behind her feather fan. ‘You mustn’t
interrupt the music. Besides I am looking.’

Her whisper was colonial and the r’s of ‘interrupt’ were rolled far back
in the throat; for Lady Edward came from Montreal and her mother had
been a Frenchwoman. In I897 the British Association met in Canada. Lord
Edward Tantamount read a much-admired paper to the Biological Section.
‘One of the coming men,’ the professors had called him., But for those
who weren’t professors, a Tantamount and a millionaire might be regarded
as already having arrived. Hilda Sutton was most decidedly of that
opinion. Lord Edward was the guest, during his stay in Montreal, of
Hilda’s father. She took her opportunity. The British Association went
home; but Lord Edward remained in Canada.

‘Believe me,’ Hilda had once confided to a friend, ‘ I never took so
much interest in osmosis before or since.’

The interest in osmosis roused Lord Edward’s attention. He became aware
of a fact which he had not previously noticed; that Hilda was
exceedingly pretty. Hilda also knew her woman’s business. Her task was
not difficult. At forty Lord Edward was in all but intellect a kind of
child. In the laboratory, at his desk, he was as old as science itself.
But his feelings, his intuitions, his instincts were those of a little
boy. Unexercised, the greater part of his spiritual being had never
developed. He was a kind of child, but with his childish habits
ingrained by forty years of living. Hilda helped him over his paralysing
twelve-year-old shynesses, and whenever terror prevented him from making
the necessary advances, came half or even all the way to meet him. His
ardours were boyish-at once violent and timid, desperate and dumb. Hilda
talked for two and was discreetly bold. Discreetly-for Lord Edward’s
notions of how young girls should behave were mainly derived from the
Pickwick Papers. Boldness undisguised would have alarmed him, would have
driven him away. Hilda kept up all the appearance of Dickensian
younggirlishness, but contrived at the same time to make all the
advances, create all the opportunities and lead the conversation into
all the properly amorous channels. She had her reward. In the spring of
i898 she was Lady Edward Tantamount.

‘But I assure you,’ she had once said to John Bidlake, quite angrily-for
he had been making fun of poor Edward, ‘I’m genuinely fond of him,
genuinely.’

‘In your own way, no doubt,’ mocked Bidlake. ‘In your own way. But you
must admit it’s a good thing it isn’t everybody’s way. Just look at
yourself in that mirror.’

She looked and saw the reflection of her naked body lying, half sunk in
deep cushions, on a divan.

‘Beast!’ she said. ‘But it doesn’t make any difference to my being fond
of him.’

‘Oh, not to your particular way of being fond, I’m sure.’ He laughed.
‘But I repeat that it’s perhaps a good thing that—’

She put her hand over his mouth. That was a quarter of a century ago.
Hilda had been married five years and was thirty. Lucy was a child of
four. John Bidlake was forty-seven, at the height of his powers and
reputation as a painter; handsome, huge, exuberant, careless; a great
laugher, a great worker, a great eater, drinker and taker of
virginities.

‘Painting’s a branch of sensuality,’ he’ retorted to those who reproved
him for his way of life. ‘Nobody can paint a nude who hasn’t learnt the
human body by heart with his hands and his lips and his own body. I take
my art seriously. I’m unremitting in my preliminary studies.’ And the
skin would tighten in laughing wrinkles round his monocle, his eyes
would twinkle like a genial satyr’s.

To Hilda, John Bidlake brought the revelation of her own body, her
physical potentialities. Lord Edward was only a kind of child, a fossil
boy preserved in the frame of a very large middleaged man.
Intellectually, in the laboratory, he understood the phenomena of sex
But in practice and emotionally he was a child, a fossil mid-Victorian
child, preserved intact, with all the natural childish timidities and
all the taboos acquired from the two beloved and very virtuous maiden
aunts, who had taken the place of his dead mother, all the amazing
principles and prejudices sucked in with the humours of Mr. Pickwick and
Micawber He loved his young wife, but loved her as a fossil child of
the’sixties might love-timidly and very apologetically; apologizing for
his ardours, apologizing for his body, apologizing for hers. Not in so
many words, of course; for the fossil child was dumb with shyness; but
by a silent ignoring, a silent pretending that the bodies weren’t really
involved in the ardours, which anyhow didn’t really exist. His love was
one long tacit apology for itself; and being nothing more than an
apology was therefore quite inexcusable. Love must justify itself by its
results in intimacy of mind and body, in warmth, in tender contact, in
pleasure. If it has to be justified from outside, it is thereby proved a
thing without justification. John Bidlake made no apologies for the kind
of love he had to offer. So far as it went, it entirely justified
itself. A healthy sensualist, he made his love straightforwardly,
naturally, with the good animal gusto of a child of nature.

‘Don’t expect me to talk about the stars and madonna lilies and the
cosmos,’ he said. ‘They’re not my line. I don’t believe in them. I
believe in—’ And his language became what a mysterious convention has
decreed to be unprintable.

It was a love without pretensions, but warm, natural, and, being
natural, good so far as it went—a decent, good-humoured, happy
sensuality. To Hilda, who had never known anything but a fossil child’s
reticent apology for love, it was a revelation. Things which had been
dead in her came alive. She discovered herself, rapturously. But not too
rapturously. She never lost her head. If she had lost her head, she
might have lost Tantamount House and the Tantamount millions and the
Tantamount title as well. She had no intention of losing these things.
So she kept her head, coolly and deliberately; kept it high and secure
above the tumultuous raptures, like a rock above the waves. She enjoyed
herself, but never to the detriment of her social position. She could
look on at her own enjoyment; her cool head, her will to retain her
social position remained apart from and above the turmoil. John Bidlake
approved the way she made the best of both worlds.

‘Thank God, Hilda,’ he had often said, ‘you’re a sensible woman.’

Women who believed the world well lost for love were apt to be a
terrible nuisance, as he knew only too well by personal experience. He
liked women; love was an indispensable enjoyment. But nobody was worth
involving oneself in tiresome complications for, nothing was worth
messing up one’s life for. With the women who hadn’t been sensible and
had taken love too seriously, John Bidlake had been ruthlessly cruel. It
was the battle of ‘all for love’ against ‘anything for a quiet life.’
John Bidlake always won. Fighting for his quiet life, he drew the line
at no sort of frightfulness.

Hilda Tantamount was as much attached to the quiet life as John himself.
Their affair had lasted, pleasantly enough, for a space of years and
slowly faded out of existence. They had been good lovers, they remained
good friends—conspirators, even, people called them, mischievous
conspirators leagued together to amuse themselves at the world’s
expense. They were laughing now. Or rather old John, who hated music,
was laughing alone. Lady Edward was trying to preserve the decorums.

‘You simply must be quiet,’ she whispered

‘But you’re not realizing how incredibly comic it is,’ Bidlake insisted.

‘Sh-sh.’

‘But I’m whispering.’ This continual shushing annoyed him. ‘Like a
lion.’

‘I can’t help that,’ he answered crossly. When he took the trouble to
whisper, he assumed that his voice was inaudible to all but the person
to whom his remarks were addressed. He did not like to be told that what
he chose to assume as true was not true.

‘Lion, indeed!’ he muttered indignantly. But his face suddenly
brightened again. ‘Look!’ he said. ‘Here’s another late arrival. What’s
the betting she’ll do the same as all the others?’

‘Sh-sh,’ Lady Edward repeated.

But John Bidlake paid no attention to her. He was looking in the
direction of the door, where the latest of the late-comers was still
standing, torn between the desire to disappear unobtrusively into the
silent crowd and the social duty of making her arrival known to her
hostess. She looked about her in embarrassment. Lady Edward hailed her
over the heads of the intervening crowd with a wave of her long feather
and a smile. The late arrival smiled back, blew a kiss, laid a finger to
her lips, pointed to an empty chair at the other side of the room, threw
out both hands in a little gesture that was meant to express apologies
for being late and despairing regret at being unable in the
circumstances to come and speak to Lady Edward, then shrugging up her
shoulders and shrinking into herself so as to occupy the smallest
possible amount of space, tiptoed with extraordinary precautions down
the gangway towards the vacant seat.

Bidlake was in ecstasies of merriment. He had echoed the poor lady’s
every gesture as she made it. Her blown kiss he had returned with
extravagant interest, and when she laid a finger to her lips, he had
covered his mouth with a whole hand. He had repeated her gesture of
regret, grotesquely magnifying it until it expressed a ludicrous
despair. And when she tiptoed away, he began to count on his fingers, to
make the gestures that, in Naples, avert the evil eye, and to tap his
forehead. He turned to Lady Edward in triumph.

‘I told you so,’ he whispered, and his whole face was wrinkled with
suppressed laughter. ‘It’s like being in a deaf and dumb asylum. Or
talking to pygmies in Central Africa.’ He opened his mouth and pointed
into it with a stretched forefinger; he went through the motions of
drinking from a glass. ‘Me hungly,’ he said, ‘me velly velly thirsty.’

Lady Edward flapped her ostrich at him.

Meanwhile the music played on—Bach’s Suite in B minor, for flute and
strings. Young Tolley conducted with his usual inimitable grace, bending
in swan-like undulations from the loins, and tracing luscious arabesques
on the air with his waving arms, as though he were dancing to the music.
A dozen anonymous fiddlers and ‘cellists scraped at his bidding. And the
great Pongileoni glueily kissed his flute. He blew across the mouth hole
and a cylindrical air column vibrated; Bach’s meditations filled the
Roman quadrangle. In the opening largo John Sebastian had, with the help
of Pongileoni’s snout and the air column, made a statement: There are
grand things in the world, noble things; there are men born kingly;
there are real conquerors, intrinsic lords of the earth. But of an earth
that is, oh! complex and multitudinous, he had gone on to reflect in the
fugal allegro. You seem to have found the truth; clear, definite,
unmistakable, it is announced by the violins; you have it, you
triumphantly hold it. But it slips out of your grasp to present itself
in a new aspect among the ‘cellos and yet again in terms of Pongileoni’s
vibrating air column. The parts live their separate lives; they touch,
their paths cross, they combine for a moment to create a seemingly final
and perfected harmony, only to break apart again. Each is always alone
and separate and individual. ‘I am I,’ asserts the violin; ‘the world
revolves round me.’ ‘Round me,’ calls the ‘cello. ‘Round me,’ the flute
insists. And all are equally right and equally wrong; and none of them
will listen to the others.

In the human fugue there are eighteen hundred million parts. The
resultant noise means something perhaps to the statistician, nothing to
the artist. It is only by considering one or two parts at a time that
the artist can understand anything. Here, for example, is one particular
part; and John Sebastian puts the case. The Rondeau begins, exquisitely
and simply melodious, almost a folk-song. It is a young girl singing to
herself of love, in solitude, tenderly mournful. A young girl singing
among the hills, with the clouds drifting overhead. But solitary as one
of the floating clouds, a poet had been listening to her song. The
thoughts that it provoked in him are the Sarabande that follows the
Rondeau. His is a slow and lovely meditation on the beauty (in spite of
squalor and stupidity), the profound goodness (in spite of all the
evil), the oneness (in spite of such bewildering diversity) of the
world. It is a beauty, a goodness, a unity that no intellectual research
can discover, that analysis dispels, but of whose reality the spirit is
from time to time suddenly and overwhelmingly convinced. A girl singing
to herself under the clouds suffices to create the certitude. Even a
fine morning is enough. Is it illusion or the revelation of profoundest
truth? Who knows? Pongileoni blew, the fiddlers drew their rosined
horse-hair across the stretched intestines of lambs; through the long
Sarabande the poet slowly meditated his lovely and consoling certitude.

‘This music is beginning to get rather tedious,’ John Bidlake whispered
to his hostess. ‘Is it going to last much longer?’

Old Bidlake had no taste or talent for music, and he had the frankness
to say so. He could afford to be frank. When one can paint as well as
John Bidlake, why should one pretend to like music, when in fact one
doesn’t? He looked over the seated audience and smiled.

‘They look as though they were in church,’ he said.

Lady Edward raised her fan protestingly.

‘Who’s that little woman in black,’ he went on, ‘rolling her eyes and
swaying her body like St. Teresa in an ecstasy? ‘

‘Fanny Logan,’ Lady Edward whispered back. ‘But do keep quiet.’

‘People talk of the tribute vice pays to virtue,’ John Bidlake went on,
incorrigibly. ‘But everything’s permitted nowadays-there’s no more need
of moral hypocrisy. There’s only intellectual hypocrisy now. The tribute
philistinism pays to art, what? Just look at them all paying it-in pious
grimaces and religious silence!’

‘You can be thankful they payyou in guineas,’ said Lady Edward. ‘And now
I absolutely insist that you should hold your tongue.’

Bidlake made a gesture of mock terror and put his hand over his mouth.
Tolley voluptuously waved his arms; Pongileoni blew, the fiddlers
scraped. And Bach, the poet, meditated of truth and beauty.

Fanny Logan felt the tears coming into her eyes. She was easily moved,
especially by music; and when she felt an emotion, she did not try to
repress it, but abandoned herself whole-heartedly to it. How beautiful
this music was, how sad, and yet how comforting! She felt it within her,
as a current of exquisite feeling, running smoothly but irresistibly
through all the labyrinthine intricacies of her being. Even her body
shook and swayed in time with the pulse and undulation of the melody.
She thought of her husband; the memory of him came to her on the current
of the music, of darling, darling Eric, dead now almost two years; dead,
and still so young. The tears came faster. She wiped them away. The
music was infinitely sad; and yet it consoled. It admitted everything,
so to speak-poor Eric’s dying before his time, the pain of his illness,
his reluctance to go-it admitted everything. It expressed the whole
sadness of the world, and from the depths of that sadness it was able to
affirm-deliberately, quietly, without protesting too much-that
everything was in some way right, acceptable. It included the sadness
within some vaster, more comprehensive happiness. The tears kept welling
up into Mrs. Logan’s eyes; but they were somehow happy tears, in spite
of her sadness. She would have liked to tell Polly, her daughter, what
she was feeling. But Polly was sitting in another row. Mrs. Logan could
see the back of her head, two rows further forward, and her slim little
neck with the pearls that darling Eric had given her on her eighteenth
birthday, only a few months before he died. And suddenly, as though she
had felt that her mother was looking at her, as though she understood
what she was feeling, Polly turned round and gave her a quick smile.
Mrs. Logan’s sad and musical happiness was complete. Her mother’s were
not the only eyes that looked in Polly’s direction. Advantageously
placed behind and to one side of her, Hugo Brockle admiringly studied
her profile. How lovely she was! He was wondering whether he would have
the courage to tell her that they had played together in Kensington
Gardens when they were children. He would come up to her when the music
was over and boldly say: ‘We were introduced in our perambulators, you
know.’ Or, if he wanted to be more unconventionally witty, ‘You’re the
person who hit me on the head with a battledore.’

Looking restlessly round the room, John Bidlake had suddenly caught
sight of Mary Betterton. Yes, Mary Betterton-that monster! He put his
hand under his chair, he touched wood. Whenever John Bidlake saw
something unpleasant, he always felt safer if he could touch wood. He
didn’t believe in God, of course; he liked to tell disobliging stories
about the clergy. But wood, wood-there was something about wood…. And to
think that he had been in love with her, wildly, twenty, twenty-two, he
dared not think how many years ago. How fat, how old and hideous! His
hand crept down again to the chair leg. He averted his eyes and tried to
think of something that wasn’t Mary Betterton. But the memories of the
time when Mary had been young imposed themselves upon him. He still used
to ride then. The image of himself on a black horse, of Mary on a bay,
rose up before him. They had often gone riding in those days. It was the
time he was painting the third and best of his groups of ‘ Bathers.’
What a picture, by God! Mary was already a little too plump for some
tastes, even then. Not for his; he had never objected to plumpness.
These women nowadays, wanting to look like drain-pipes…. He looked at
her again for a moment and shuddered. He hated her for being so
repulsive, for having once been so charming. And he was the best part of
twenty years her senior.


CHAPTER III

Two flights up, between the piano nobile and the servants’ quarters
under the roof, Lord Edward Tantamount was busy in his laboratory.

The younger Tantamounts were generally military. But the heir being a
cripple, Lord Edward’s father had destined him for the political career,
which the eldest sons had always traditionally begun in the Commons and
continued majestically in the Lords. Hardly had Lord Edward come of age,
when he was given a constituency to nurse. He nursed it dutifully. But
oh, how he hated public speaking! And when one met a potential voter,
what on earth was one to say? And he couldn’t even remember the main
items in the Conservative party programme, much less feel enthusiastic
about them. Decidedly, politics were not his line.

‘But what are you interested in? ‘ his father had asked. And the trouble
was that Lord Edward didn’t know. Going to concerts was about the only
thing he thoroughly enjoyed. But obviously, one couldn’t spend one’s
life going to concerts. The fourth marquess could not conceal his anger
and disappointment. ‘The boy’s an imbecile,’ he said, and Lord Edward
himself was inclined to agree. He was good for nothing, a failure; the
world had no place for him. There were times when he thought of suicide.

‘If only he’d sow a few wild oats!’ his father had complained. But the
young man was, if possible, even less interested in debauchery than in
politics. ‘And he’s not even a sportsman,’ the accusation continued. It
was true. The massacre of birds, even in the company of the Prince of
Wales, left Lord Edward quite unmoved, except perhaps by a faint
disgust. He preferred to sit at home and read, vaguely, desultorily, a
little of everything. But even reading seemed to him unsatisfactory. The
best that could be said of it was that it kept his mind from brooding
and killed time. But what was the good of that? Killing time with a book
was not intrinsically much better than killing pheasants and time with a
gun. He might go on reading like this for the rest of his days; but it
would never help him to achieve anything.

On the afternoon of April 18th, 1887, he was sitting in the library at
Tantamount House, wondering whether life was worth living and whether
drowning were preferable, as a mode of dying, to shooting. It was the
day that the Times had published the forged letter, supposed to be
Parnell’s, condoning the Phoenix Park murders. The fourth marquess had
been in a state of apoplectic agitation ever since breakfast. At the
clubs men talked of nothing else. ‘I suppose it’s very important,’ Lord
Edward kept saying to himself. But he found it impossible to take much
interest either in Parnellism or in crime. After listening for a little
to what people were saying at the club, he went home in despair. The
library door was open; he entered and dropped into a chair, feeling
utterly exhausted as though he had come in from a thirty-mile walk. ‘I
must be an idiot,’ he assured himself, when he thought of other people’s
political enthusiasms and his own indifference. He was too modest to
attribute the idiocy to the other people. ‘I’m hopeless, hopeless.’ He
groaned aloud, and in the learned silence of the vast library the sound
was appalling. Death; the end of everything; the river; the revolver….
Time passed. Even about death, Lord Edward found, he could not think
consecutively and attentively. Even death was a bore. The current
Quarterl1y lay on the table beside him. Perhaps it would bore him less
than death was doing. He picked it up, opened it casually and found
himself reading a paragraph in the middle of an article about someone
called Claude Bernard. He had never previously heard of Claude Bernard.
A Frenchman, he supposed. And what, he wondered, was the glycogenic
function of the liver? Some scientific business, evidently. His eyes
skimmed over the page There were inverted commas; it was a quotation
from Claude Bernard’s own writings.

‘The living being does not form an exception to the great natural
harmony which makes things adapt themselves to one another; it breaks no
concord; it is neither in contradiction to, nor struggling against,
general cosmic forces. Far from that, it is a member of the universal
concert of things, and the life of the animal, for example, is only a
fragment of the total life of the universe.’

He read the words, idly first, then more carefully, then several times
with a strained attention. ‘The life of the animal is only a fragment of
the total life of the universe.’ Then what about suicide? A fragment of
the universe would be destroying itself? No, not destroying; it couldn’t
destroy itself even if it tried. It would be changing its mode of
existence. Changing…. Bits of animals and plants became human beings.
What was one day a sheep’s hind leg and leaves of spinach was the next
part of the hand that wrote, the brain that conceived the slow movement
of the Jupiter Symphony. And another day had come when thirty-six years
of pleasures, pains, hungers, loves, thoughts, music, together with
infinite unrealized potentialities of melody and harmony had manured an
unknown corner of a Viennese cemetery, to be transformed into grass and
dandelions, which in their turn had been transformed into sheep, whose
hind legs had in their turn been transformed into other musicians, whose
bodies in their turn … It was all obvious, but to Lord Edward an
apocalypse. Suddenly and for the first time he realized his solidarity
with the world. The realization was extraordinarily exciting; he rose
from his chair and began to walk agitatedly up and down the room. His
thoughts were confused, but the muddle was bright and violent, not dim,
not foggily languid as at ordinary times. ‘Perhaps when I was at Vienna
last year, I actually consumed a piece of Mozart’s substance. It might
have been in a Wiener Schnitzel, or a sausage, or even a glass of beer.
Communion, physical communion. And that wonderful performance of The
Magic Flute—another sort of communion, or perhaps the same, really.
Transubstantiation, cannibalism, chemistry. It comes down to chemistry
in the end, of course. Legs of mutton and spinach … all chemistry.
Hydrogen, oxygen … What are the other things? God, how infuriating, how
infuriating not to know! All those years at Eton. Latin verses. What the
devil was the good? En! distenta ferunt perpingues ubera vaccae. Why
didn’t they teach me anything sensible? “A member of the universal
concert of things.” It’s all like music; harmonies and counterpoint and
modulations. But you’ve got to be trained to listen. Chinese music… we
can’t make head or tail of it. The universal concert—that’s Chinese
music for me, thanks to Eton. Glycogenic function of the liver… it might
be in Bantu, so far as I’m concerned. What a humiliation! But I can
learn, I will learn, I will…’

Lord Edward was filled with an extraordinary exultation; he had never
felt so happy in his life before.

That evening he told his father that he was not going to stand for
Parliament. Still agitated by the morning’s revelations of Parnellism,
the old gentleman was furious. Lord Edward was entirely unmoved; his
mind was made up. The next day he advertised for a tutor. In the spring
of the following year he was in Berlin working under Du Bois Reymond.

Forty years had passed since then. The studies of osmosis, which had
indirectly given him a wife, had also given him a reputation. His work
on assimilation and growth was celebrated. But what he regarded as the
real task of his life—the great theoretical treatise on physical
biology—was still unfinished. ‘The life of the animal is only a fragment
of the total life of the universe.’ Claude Bernard’s words had been his
lifelong theme as well as his original inspiration. The book on which he
had been working all these years was but an elaboration, a quantitative
and mathematical illustration of them.

Upstairs in the laboratory the day’s work had just begun. Lord Edward
preferred to work at night. He found the daylight hours disagreeably
noisy. Breakfasting at halfpast one, he would walk for an hour or two in
the afternoon and return to read or write till lunch-time at eight. At
nine or halfpast he would do some practical work with his assistant, and
when that was over they would sit down to work on the great book or to
discussion of its problems. At one, Lord Edward had his supper, and at
about four or five he would go to bed.

Diminished and in fragments the B minor Suite came floating up from the
great hall to the ears of the two men in the laboratory. They were too
busy to realize that they were hearing it.

‘Forceps,’ said Lord Edward to his assistant. He had a very deep voice,
indistinct and without, so to speak, a clearly defined contour. ‘A furry
voice,’ his daughter Lucy had called it, when she was a child.

Illidge handed him the fine bright instrument. Lord Edward made a deep
noise that signified thanks and turned back with the forceps to the
anaesthetized newt that lay stretched out on the diminutive operating
table. Illidge watched him critically, and approved. The Old Man was
doing the job extraordinarily well. Illidge was always astonished by
Lord Edward’s skill. You would never have expected a huge, lumbering
creature like the Old Man to be so exquisitely nleat. His big hands
could do the finest work; it was a pleasure to watch them.

‘There! ‘ said Lord Edward at last and straightened himself up as far as
his rheumatically bent back would allow him. ‘I think that’s all right,
don’t you? ‘

Illidge nodded. ‘Perfectly all right,’ he said in an accent that had
certainly not been formed in any of the ancient and expensive seats of
learning. It hinted of Lancashire origins. He was a small man, with a
boyishlooking freckled face and red hair.

The newt began to wake up. Mlidge put it away in a place of safety. The
animal had no tail; it had lost that eight days ago, and to-night the
little bud of regenerated tissue which would normally have grown into a
new tail had been removed and grafted on to the stump of its amputated
right foreleg. Transplanted to its new position, would the bud turn into
a foreleg, or continue incongruously to grow as a tail? Their first
experiment had been with a tail-bud only just formed; it had duly turned
into a leg. In the next, they had given the bud time to grow to a
considerable size before they transplanted it; it had proved too far
committed to tailhood to be able to adapt itself to the new conditions;
they had manufactured a monster with a tail where an arm should have
been. To-night they were experimenting on a bud of intermediate age.

Lord Edward took a pipe out of his pocket and began to fill it, looking
meditatively meanwhile at the newt. ‘Interesting to see what happens
this time,’ he said in his profound indistinct voice. ‘I should think we
must be just about on the border line between…’ He left the sentence
unfinished: it was always difficult for him to find the words to express
his meaning. ‘The bud will have a difficult choice.’

‘To be or not to be,’ said Illidge facetiously, and started to laugh;
but seeing that Lord Edward showed no signs of having been amused, he
checked himself. Almost put his foot in it again. He felt annoyed with
himself and also, unreasonably, with the Old Man.

Lord Edward filled his pipe. ‘Tail becomes leg,’ he said meditatively.
‘What’s the mechanism? Chemical peculiarities in the neighbouring…? It
can’t obviously be the blood. Or do you suppose it has something to do
with the electric tension? It does vary, of course, in different parts
of the body. Though why we don’t all just vaguely proliferate like
cancers… Growing in a definite shape is very unlikely, when you come to
think of it. Very mysterious and…’ His voice trailed off into a deep and
husky murmur.

Illidge listened disapprovingly. When the Old Man started off like this
about the major and fundamental problems of biology, you never knew
where he’d be getting to. Why, as likely as not he’d begin talking about
God. It really made one blush. He was determined to prevent anything so
discreditable happening this time. ‘The next step with these newts,’ he
said in his most briskly practical tone, ‘is to tinker with the nervous
system and see whether that has any influence on the grafts. Suppose,
for example, we excised a piece of the spine…’

But Lord Edward was not listening to his assistant. He had taken his
pipe out of his mouth, he had lifted his head and at the same time
slightly cocked it on one side. He was frowning, as though making an
effort to seize and remember something. He raised his hand in a gesture
that commanded silence; Illidge interrupted himself in the middle of his
sentence and also listened. A pattern of melody faintly traced itself
upon the silence.

‘Bach?’ said Lord Edward in a whisper.

Pongileoni’s blowing and the scraping of the anonymous fiddlers had
shaken the air in the great hall, had set the glass of the windows
looking on to it vibrating; and this in turn had shaken the air in Lord
Edward’s apartment on the further side. The shaking air rattled Lord
Edward’s membrana tympani; the interlocked malleus, incus and stirrup
bones were set in motion so as to agitate the membrane of the oval
window and raise an infinitesimal storm in the fluid of the labyrinth.
The hairy endings of the auditory nerve shuddered like weeds in a rough
sea; a vast number of obscure miracles were performed in the brain, and
Lord Edward ecstatically whispered ‘Bach! ‘ He smiled with pleasure, his
eyes lit up. The young girl was singing to herself in solitude under the
floating clouds. And then the cloud-solitary philosopher began
poetically to meditate. ‘We must really go downstairs and listen,’ said
Lord Edward. He got up. ‘Come,’ he said. ‘Work can wait. One doesn’t
hear this sort of thing every night.’

‘But what about clothes,’ said Illidge doubtfully. ‘I can’t come down
like this.’ He looked down at himself. It had been a cheap suit at the
best of times. Age had not improved it.

‘Oh, that doesn’t matter.’ A dog with the smell of rabbits in his
nostrils could hardly have shown a more indecent eagerness than Lord
Edward at the sound of Pongileoni’s flute. He took his assistant’s arm
and hurried him out of the door, and along the corridor towards the
stairs. ‘It’s just a little party,’ he went on. ‘I seem to remember my
wife having said… Quite informal. And besides,’ he added, inventing new
excuses to justify the violence of his musical appetite, ‘we can just
slip in without… Nobody will notice.’

Illidge had his doubts. ‘I’m afraid it’s not a very small party,’ he
began; he had seen the motors arriving.

‘Never mind, never mind,’ interrupted Lord Edward, lusting irrepressibly
for Bach.

Illidge abandoned himself. He would look like a horrible fool, he
reflected, in his shiny blue serge suit. But perhaps, on second
thoughts, it was better to appear in shiny blue—straight from the
laboratory, after all, and under the protection of the master of the
house (himself in a tweed jacket), than in that old and, as he had
perceived during previous excursions into Lady Edward’s luscious world,
deplorably shoddy and illmade evening suit of his. It was better to be
totally different from the rich and smart-a visitor from another
intellectual planet—than a fourth-rate and snobbish imitator. Dressed in
blue, one might be stared at as an oddity; in badly cut black (like a
waiter) one was contemptuously ignored, one was despised for trying
without success to be what one obviously wasn’t.

Illidge braced himself to play the part of the Martian visitor with
firmness, even assertively.

Their entrance was even more embarrassingly conspicuous than Illidge had
anticipated. The great staircase at Tantamount House comes down from the
first floor in two branches which join, like a pair of equal rivers, to
precipitate themselves in a single architectural cataract of Verona
marble into the hall. It debouches under the arcades, in the centre of
one of the sides of the covered quadrangle, opposite the vestibule and
the front door. Coming in from the street, one looks across the hall and
sees through the central arch of the opposite arcade the wide stairs and
shining balustrades climbing up to a landing on which a Venus by Canova,
the pride of the third marquess’s collection, stands pedestalled in an
alcove, screening with a modest but coquettish gesture of her two hands,
or rather failing to screen, her marble charms. It was at the foot of
this triumphal slope of marble that Lady Edward had posted the
orchestra; her guests were seated in serried rows confronting it. When
Illidge and Lord Edward turned the corner in front of Canova’s Venus,
tiptoeing, as they approached the music and the listening crowd, with
steps ever more laboriously conspiratorial, they found themselves
suddenly at the focus of a hundred pairs of eyes. A gust of curiosity
stirred the assembled guests. The apparition from a world so different
from theirs of this huge bent old man, pipe-smoking and tweed-jacketed,
seemed strangely portentous. He had a certain air of the skeleton in the
cupboard—broken loose; or of one of those monsters which haunt the
palaces of only the best and most aristocratic families. The Beastie of
Glamis, the Minotaur itself could hardly have aroused more interest than
did Lord Edward. Lorgnons were raised, there was a general craning to
left and right, as people tried to look round the well-fed obstacles in
front of them. Becoming suddenly aware of so many inquisitive glances,
Lord Edward took fright. A consciousness of social sin possessed him; he
took his pipe out of his mouth and put it away, still smoking, into the
pocket of his jacket. He halted irresolutely. Flight or advance? He
turned this way and that, pivoting his whole bent body from the hips
with a curious swinging motion, like the slow ponderous balancing of a
camel’s neck. For a moment he wanted to retreat. But love of Bach was
stronger than his terrors. He was the bear whom the smell of molasses
constrains in spite of all his fears to visit the hunters’ camp; the
lover who is ready to face an armed and outraged husband and the divorce
court for the sake of an hour in his mistress’s arms. He went forward,
tiptoeing down the stairs more conspiratorially than ever—Guy Fawkes
discovered, but yet irrationally hoping that he might escape notice by
acting as though the Gunpowder Plot were still unrolling itself
according to plan. Illidge followed him. His face had gone very red with
the embarrassment of the first moment; but in spite of this
embarrassment, or rather because of it, he came downstairs after Lord
Edward with a kind of swagger, one hand in his pocket, a smile on his
lips. He turned his eyes coolly this way and that over the crowd. The
expression on his face was one of contemptuous amusement. Too busy being
the Martian to look where he was going, Illidge suddenly missed his
footing on this unfamiliarly regal staircase with its inordinate treads
and dwarfishly low risers. His foot slipped, he staggered wildly on the
brink of a fall, waving his arms, to come to rest, however, still
miraculously on his feet, some two or three steps lower down. He resumed
his descent with such dignity as he could muster up. He felt exceedingly
angry, he hated Lady Edward’s guests one and all, without exception.


CHAPTER IV

Pongileoni surpassed himself in the final Badinerie. Euclidean axioms
made holiday with the formulae of elementary statics. Arithmetic held a
wild saturnalian kermesse; algebra cut capers. The music came to an end
in an orgy of mathematical merry-making. There was applause. Tolley
bowed, with all his usual grace; Pongileoni bowed, even the anonymous
fiddlers bowed. The audience pushed back its chairs and got up. Torrents
of pent-up chatter broke loose.

‘Wasn’t the Old Man too marvellously funny?’ Polly Logan had found a
friend.

‘And the little carroty man with him.’

‘Like Mutt and Jeff.’

‘I thought I should die of laughing,’ said Norah.

‘Such an old magician!’ Polly spoke in a thrilling whisper, leaning
forward and opening her eyes very wide, as though to express in dramatic
pantomime as well as words the mysteriousness of the magical old man. ‘A
wizard.’

‘But what does he do up there?’

‘Cuts up toads and salamanders and all that,’ Polly answered.

 

‘Eye of newt and toe of frog,

Wool of bat and tongue of dog…’

 

She recited with gusto, intoxicated by the words. ‘And he takes
guinea-pigs and makes them breed with serpents. Can you imagine it—a
cross between a cobra and a guinea-pig?’

‘Ugh!’ the other shuddered. ‘But why did he ever marry her, if that’s
the only sort of thing he’s interested in? That’s what I always wonder.’

‘Why did she marry him?’ Polly’s voice dropped again to a stage whisper.
She liked to make everything sound exciting-as exciting as she still
felt everything to be. She was only twenty. ‘There were very good
reasons for that.’

‘Yes, I suppose so.’

‘And she was a Canadian, remember, which made the reasons even more
cogent.’

‘One wonders how Lucy ever…’

‘Sh-sh.’

The other looked round. ‘Wasn’t Pongileoni splendid,’ she exclaimed very
loudly, and with altogether too much presence of mind.

‘Too wonderful!’ Polly bawled back, as though she were on the stage at
Drury Lane. ‘Ah, there’s Lady Edward.’ They were both enormously
surprised and delighted. ‘We were just saying how marvellous
Pongileoni’s playing was.’

‘Were you?’ said Lady Edward smiling and looking from one to the other.
She had a deep rich voice and spoke slowly, as though everything she
said were very serious and important. ‘That was very nice of you.’ The
‘r’ was most emphatically rolled. ‘He’s an Italian,’ she added, and her
face was now quite grave and unsmiling. ‘Which makes it even more
wonderful.’ And she passed on, leaving the two young girls haggardly
looking into one another’s blushing face.

Lady Edward was a small, thin woman, with an elegance of figure that, in
a low-cut dress, was visibly beginning to run to bones and angles, as
were also the aquiline good looks of a rather long and narrow face. A
French mother and perhaps, in these later days, the hairdresser’s art
accounted for the jetty blackness of her hair. Her skin was whitely
opaque. Under arched black eyebrows her eyes had that boldness and
insistence of regard which is the characteristic of all very dark eyes
set in a pale face. To this generic boldness Lady Edward added a certain
candid impertinence of fixed gaze and bright ingenuous expression that
was entirely her own. They were the eyes of a child, ‘mais d’un enfant
terrible,’ as John Bidlake had warned a French colleague whom he had
taken to see her. The French colleague had occasion to make the
discovery on his own account. At the luncheon table he found himself
sitting next to the critic who had written of his pictures that they
were the work either of an imbecile or of a practical joker. Wide-eyed
and innocent, Lady Edward had started a discussion on art…. John Bidlake
was furious. He drew her aside when the meal was over and gave her a
piece of his mind.

‘Damn it all,’ he said, ‘the man’s my friend. I bring him to see you.
And this is how you treat him. It’s a bit thick.’

Lady Edward’s bright black eyes had never been more candid, nor her
voice more disarmingly French-Canadian (for she could modify her accent
at will, making it more or less colonial according as it suited her to
be the simple-hearted child of the North American steppe or the English
aristocrat). ‘But what’s too thick?’ she asked. ‘What have I done this
time?’

‘None of your comedy with me,’ said Bidlake.

‘But it isn’t a comedy. I’ve no idea what’s thick. No idea.’

Bidlake explained about the critic. ‘You knew as well as I do,’ he
said.’ And now I come to think of it, we were talking about his article
only last week.’

Lady Edward frowned, as though trying to recapture a vanished memory.
‘so we were!’ she cried at last, and looked at him with an expression of
horror and repentance. ‘Too awful! But you know what a hopeless memory I
have.’

‘You have the best memory of any person I know,’ said Bidlake.

‘But I always forget,’ she protested.

‘Only what you know you ought to remember. It’s a damned sight too
regular to be accidental. You deliberately remember to forget.’

‘What nonsense!’ cried Lady Edward.

‘If you had a bad memory,’ Bidlake went on, ‘you might occasionally
forget that husbands oughtn’t to be asked to meet the notorious lovers
of their wives; you might sometimes forget that anarchists and leader
writers in the Morning Post aren’t likely to be the best friends, and
that pious Catholics don’t much enjoy listening to blasphemy from
professional atheists. You might occasionally forget, if your memory
were bad. But, I assure you, it needs a first-class memory to forget
every time. A first-class memory and a first-class love of mischief.’

For the first time since the conversation had begun Lady Edward relaxed
her ingenuous seriousness. She laughed. ‘You’re too absurd, my dear
John.’

Talking, Bidlake had recovered his good humour; he echoed her laughter.
‘Mind you,’ he said, ‘I don’t in the least object to your playing
practical jokes on other people. I enjoy it. But I do draw the line at
having them played on me.’

‘I’ll do my best to remember next time,’ she said meekly and looked at
him with an ingenuousness that was so impertinent, that he had to laugh.

That had been many years before; she had kept her word and played no
more tricks on him. But with other people, she was just as
embarrassingly innocent and forgetful as ever. Throughout the world in
which she moved her exploits were proverbial. People laughed. But there
were too many victims; she was feared, she was not liked. But her
parties were always thronged; her cook, her wine merchant and caterer
were of the first class. Much was forgiven her for her husband’s wealth.
Besides, the company at Tantamount House was always variously and often
eccentrically distinguished. People accepted her invitations and took
their revenge by speaking ill of her behind her back. They called her,
among other things, a snob and a lion hunter. But a snob, they had to
admit to her defenders, who laughed at the pomps and grandeurs for which
she lived. A hunter who collected lions in order that she might bait
them. Where a middle-class Englishwoman would have been serious and
abject, Lady Edward was mockingly irreverent. She hailed from the New
World; for her the traditional hierarchies were a joke—but a picturesque
joke and one worth living for.

‘She might have been the heroine of that anecdote,’ old Bidlake had once
remarked of her, ‘that anecdote about the American and the two English
peers. You remember? He got into conversation with two Englishmen in the
train, liked them very much, wanted to renew the acquaintance later and
asked their names. “My name,” says one of them, “is the Duke of
Hampshire and this is my friend the Master of Ballantrae.” “Glad to meet
you,” says the American. “Allow me to present my son Jesus Christ.”
That’s Hilda all over. And yet her whole life consists precisely in
asking and being asked out by the people whose titles seem to her so
comic. Queer.’ He shook his head.’very queer indeed.’

Turning way from the two discomfited young girls, Lady Edward was almost
run down by a very tall and burly man, who was hurrying with dangerous
speed across the crowded room.

‘Sorry,’ he said without looking down to see who it was he had almost
knocked over. His eyes were following the movements of somebody at the
other end of the room; he was only aware of a smallish obstacle,
presumably human, since all the obstacles in the neighbourhood were
human. He checked himself in mid career and took a step to the side, so
as to get round the obstacle. But the obstacle was not of the kind one
circumvents as easily as that.

Lady Edward reached out and caught him by the sleeve. ‘Webley!’
Pretending not to have felt the hand on his sleeve, not to have heard
the calling of his name, Everard Webley still moved on; he had no wish
and no leisure to talk to Lady Edward. But Lady Edward would not be
shaken off; she suffered herself to be dragged along, still tugging, at
his side.

‘Webley!’ she repeated.’Stop! Woa!’ And her imitation of a country
carter was so loud and so realistically rustic that Webley was compelled
to listen, for fear of attracting the laughing attention of his fellow
guests.

He looked down at her. ‘Oh, it’s you,’ he said gruffly. ‘Sorry I hadn’t
noticed.’ The annoyance, expressed in his frown and his ill-mannered
words, was partly genuine, partly assumed. Many people, he had found,
are frightened of anger; he cultivated his natural ferocity. It kept
people at a distance, saved him from being bothered.

‘Goodness!’ exclaimed Lady Edward with an expression of terror that was
frankly a caricature.

‘Did you want anything?’ he demanded in the tone in which he might have
addressed an importunate beggar in the street.

‘You do look cross.’

‘If that was all you wanted to say to me, I think I might as well…’

‘Lady Edward, meanwhile, had been examining him critically out of her
candidly impertinent eyes.

‘You know,’ she said, interrupting him in the middle of his sentence, as
though unable to delay for a moment longer the announcement of her great
and sudden discovery,’ you ought to play the part of Captain Hook in
Peter Pan. Yes, really. You have the ideal face for a pirate king.
Hasn’t he, Mr. Babbage?’ She caught at Illidge as he was passing,
disconsolately alien, through the crowd of strangers.

‘Good evening,’ he said. The cordiality of Lady Edward’s smile did not
entirely make up for the insult of his unremembered name.

‘Webley, this is Mr. Babbage, who helps my husband with his work.’
Webley nodded a distant acknowledgment of Illidge’s existence. ‘But
don’t you think he’s like a pirate king, Mr. Babbage? ‘ Lady Edward went
on. ‘Look at him now.’

Illidge uncomfortably laughed. ‘Not that I’ve seen many pirate kings,’
he said.

‘But of course,’ Lady Edward cried out, ‘I’d forgotten; he is a pirate
king. In real life. Aren’t you, Webley?’

Everard Webley laughed.’Oh, certainly, certainly.’

‘Because, you see,’ Lady Edward explained, turning confidentially to
Illidge, ‘this is Mr. Everard Webley. The head of the British Freemen.
You know those men in the green uniform? Like the male chorus at a
musical comedy.’

Illidge smiled maliciously and nodded. So this, he was thinking, was
Everard Webley. The founder and the head of the Brotherhood of British
Freemen—the B.B.F.’s, the ‘B—y, b—ing, f—s,’ as their enemies called
them. Inevitably; for, as the extremely well-informed correspondent of
the Figaro once remarked in an article devoted to the Freemen, ‘les
initiales B.B.F. ont, pour le public anglais, une signification plutot
pejorative.’ Webley had not thought of that, when he gave his Freemen
their name. It pleased Illidge to reflect that he must be made to think
of it very often now.

‘If you’ve finished being funny,’ said Everard, ‘I’ll take my leave.’

Tinpot Mussolini, Illidge was thinking. Looks his part, too. (He had a
special personal hatred of anyone who was tall and handsome, or who
looked in any way distinguished. He himself was small and had the
appearance of a very intelligent street Arab, grown up.) Great lout!’

‘But you’re not offended by anything I said, are you?’ Lady Edward asked
with a great show of anxiety and contrition.

Illidge remembered a cartoon in the Daily Herald. ‘The British Freemen,’
Webley had had the insolence to say, ‘exist to keep the world safe for
intelligence.’ The cartoon showed Webley and half a dozen of his
uniformed bandits kicking and bludgeoning a workman to death. Behind
them a top-hatted company-director looked on approvingly. Across his
monstrous belly sprawled the word: INTELLIGENCE.

‘Not offended, Webley?’ Lady Edward repeated.

‘Not in the least. I’m only rather busy. You see,’ he explained in his
silkiest voice, ‘ I have things to do. I work, if you know what that
means.’

Illidge wished that the hit had been scored by someone else. The dirty
ruffian! He himself was a communist. Webley left them. Lady Edward
watched him ploughing his way through the crowd. ‘Like a steam engine,
she said. ‘What energy! But so touchy. These politicians—worse than
actresses. Such vanity! And dear Webley hasn’t got much sense of humour.
He wants to be treated as though he were his own colossal statue,
erected by an admiring and grateful nation.’ (The r’s roared like
lions.) ‘Posthumously, if you see what I mean. As a great historical
character. I can never remember, when I see him, that he’s really
Alexander the Great. I always make the mistake of thinking it’s just
Webley.’

Illidge laughed. He found himself positively liking Lady Edward. She had
the right feelings about things. She seemed even to be on the right
side, politically.

‘Not but what his Freemen aren’t a very good thing,’ Lady Edward went
on. Illidge’s sympathy began to wane as suddenly as it had shot
up.’don’t you think so, Mr. Babbage?’

He made a little grimace. ‘Well…’ he began.

‘By the way,’ said Lady Edward, cutting short what would have been an
admirably sarcastic comment of Webley’s Freemen, ‘you must really be
careful coming down those stairs. They’re terribly slippery.’

Illidge blushed. ‘Not at all,’ he muttered and blushed still more
deeply—a beetroot to the roots of his carrot-coloured hair—as he
realized the imbecility of what he had said. His sympathy declined still
further.

‘Well, rather slippery all the same,’ Lady Edward politely insisted,
with an emphatic rolling in the throat. ‘What were you working at with
Edward this evening? ‘ she went on. ‘It always interests me so much.’

Illidge smiled. ‘Well, if you really want to know,’ he said, ‘we were
working at the regeneration of lost parts in newts.’ Among the newts he
felt more at ease; a little of his liking for Lady Edward returned.

‘Newts? Those things that swim?’ Illidge nodded. ‘But how do they lose
their parts? ‘

‘Well, in the laboratory,’ he explained, ‘they lose them because we cut
them off.’

‘And they grow again?’

‘They grow again.’

‘Dear me,’ said Lady Edward. ‘I never knew that. How fascinating these
things are. Do tell me some more.’

She wasn’t so bad after all. He began to explain. Warming to his
subject, he warmed also to Lady Edward. He had just reached the crucial,
the important and significant point in the proceedings—the conversion of
the transplanted tail-bud into a leg—when Lady Edward, whose eyes had
been wandering, laid her hand on his arm.

‘Come with me,’ she said, ‘and I’ll introduce you to General Knoyle.
Such an amusing old man—if only unintentionally sometimes.’

Illidge’s exposition froze suddenly in his throat. He realized that she
had not taken the slightest interest in what he had been saying, had not
even troubled to pay the least attention. Detesting her, he followed in
resentful silence.

General Knoyle was talking with another military-looking gentleman. His
voice was martial and asthmatic. ‘“My dear fellow,” I said to him’ (they
heard him as they approached), ‘“my dear fellow, don’t enter the horse
now. It would be a crime,” I said. “It would be sheer madness. Scratch
him,” I said, “scratch him.” And he scratched him.’

Lady Edward made her presence known. The two military gentlemen were
overwhelmingly polite; they had enjoyed their evening immensely.

‘I chose the Bach specially for you, General Knoyle,’ said Lady Edward
with something of the charming confusion of a young girl confessing an
amorous foible.

‘Well—er—really, that was very kind of you.’ General Knoyle’s confusion
was genuine; he did not know what to do with the musical present she had
made him.

‘I hesitated,’ Lady Edward went on in the same significantly intimate
tone, ‘between Handel’s Water Music and the B minor Suite with
Pongileoni. Then I remembered you and decided on the Bach.’ Her eyes
took in the signs of embarrassment on the General’s ruddy face.

‘That was very kind of you,’ he protested. ‘Not that I can pretend to
understand much about music. But I know what I like, I know what I
like.’ The phrase seemed to give him confidence. He cleared his throat
and started again. ‘What I always say is…’

‘And now,’ Lady Edward concluded triumphantly, ‘I want to introduce Mr.
Babbage, who helps Edward with his work and who is a real expert on
newts. Mr. Babbage, this is General Knoyle and this is Colonel
Pilchard.’ She gave a last smile and was gone.

‘Well, I’m damned!’ exclaimed the General, and the Colonel said she was
a holy terror.

‘One of the holiest,’ Illidge feelingly agreed.

The two military gentlemen looked at him for a moment and decided that
from one so obviously beyond the pale the comment was an impertinence.
Good Catholics may have their little jokes about the saints and the
habits of the clergy; but they are outraged by the same little jokes on
the lips of infidels. The General made no verbal comment and the Colonel
contented himself with looking his disapproval. But the way in which
they turned to one another and continued their interrupted discussion of
race-horses, as though they were alone, was so intentionally offensive,
that Illidge wanted to kick them.

 

__ __

 

‘Lucy, my child!’

‘Uncle John!’ Lucy Tantamount turned round and smiled at her adopted
uncle. She was of middle height and slim, like her mother, with short
dark hair, oiled to complete blackness and brushed back from her
forehead. Naturally pale, she wore no rouge. Only her thin lips were
painted and there was a little blue round the eyes. A black dress
emphasized the whiteness of her arms and shoulders. It was more than two
years now since Henry Tantamount had died—for Lucy had married her
second cousin. But she still mourned in her dress, at any rate by
artificial light. Black suited her so well. ‘How are you?’ she added,
thinking as she spoke the words that he was beginning to look very old.

‘Perishing,’ said John Bidlake. He took her arm familiarly, grasping it
just above the elbow with a big, blue-veined hand. ‘Give me an excuse
for going to have supper. I’m ravenously hungry.’

‘But I’m not.’

‘No matter,’ said old Bidlake. ‘My need is greater than thine, as Sir
Philip Sidney so justly remarked.’

‘But I don’t want to eat.’ She objected to being domineered, to
following instead of leading. But Uncle John was too much for her.

‘I’ll do all the eating,’ he declared. ‘Enough for two.’ And jovially
laughing, he continued to lead her along towards the dining-room.

Lucy abandoned the struggle. They edged their way through the crowd.
Greenish-yellow and freckled, the orchid in John Bidlake’s button-hole
resembled the face of a yawning serpent. His monocle glittered in his
eye.

‘Who’s that old man with Lucy?’ Polly Logan enquired as they passed.

‘That’s old Bidlake.’

‘Bidlake? The man who…who painted the pictures?’ Polly spoke
hesitatingly, in the tone of one who is conscious of a hole in her
education and is afraid of making a ridiculous mistake.’do you mean that
Bidlake?’ Her companion nodded. She felt enormously relieved. ‘Well I
never,’ she went on, raising her eyebrows and opening her eyes very
wide. ‘I always thought he was an Old Master. But he must be about a
hundred by this time, isn’t he?’

‘I should think he must be.’ Norah was also under twenty.

‘I must say,’ Polly handsomely admitted, ‘he doesn’t look it. He’s still
quite a beau, or a buck, or a Champagne Charlie, or whatever people were
in his young days.’

‘He’s had about fifteen wives,’ said Norah.

It was at this moment that Hugo Brockle found the courage to present
himself. ‘You don’t remember me. We were introduced in our
perambulators.’ How idiotic it sounded! He felt himself blushing all
over.

The third and finest ofJohn Bidlake’s ‘Bathers’ hung over the
mantelpiece in the dining-room of Tantamount House. It was a gay and
joyous picture, very light in tone, the colouring very pure and
brilliant. Eight plump and pearly bathers grouped themselves in the
water and on the banks of a stream so as to form with their moving
bodies and limbs a kind of garland (completed above by the foliage of a
tree) round the central point of the canvas. Through this wreath of
nacreous flesh (and even their faces were just smiling flesh, not a
trace of spirit to distract you from the contemplation of the lovely
forms and their relations) the eye travelled on towards a pale bright
landscape of softly swelling downland and clouds.

Plate in hand and munching caviar sandwiches, old Bidlake stood with his
companion, contemplating his own work. An emotion of mingled elation and
sadness possessed him.

‘It’s good,’ he said, ‘it’s enormously good. Look at the way it’s
composed. Perfect balance, and yet there’s no suggestion of repetition
or artificial arrangement.’ The other thoughts and feelings which the
picture had evoked in his mind he left unexpressed. They were too many
and too confused to be easily put into words. Too melancholy above all;
he did not care to dwell on them. He stretched out a finger and touched
the sideboard; it was mahogany, genuine wood. ‘Look at the figure on the
right with the arms up.’ He went on with his technical exposition in
order that he might keep down, might drive away the uninvited
thoughts.’see how it compensates for the big stooping one there on the
left. Like a long lever lifting a heavy weight.’ But the figure with the
arms up was Jenny Smith, the loveliest model he had ever had.
Incarnation of beauty, incarnation of stupidity and vulgarity. A goddess
as long as she was naked, kept her mouth shut, or had it kept shut for
her with kisses; but oh, when she opened it, when she put on her
clothes, her frightful hats! He remembered the time he had taken her to
Paris with him. He had to send her back after a week. ‘You ought to be
muzzled, Jenny,’ he told her, and Jenny cried. ‘It was a mistake going
to Paris,’ he went on. ‘Too much sun in Paris, too many artificial
lights. Next time, we’ll go to Spitzbergen. In winter. The nights are
six months long up there.’ That had made her cry still more loudly. The
girl had treasures of sensuality as well as of beauty. Afterwards she
took to drink and decayed, came round begging and drank up the charity.
And finally what was left of her died. But the real Jenny remained here
in the picture with her arms up and the pectoral muscles lifting her
little breasts. What remained of John Bidlake, the John Bidlake of five
and twenty years ago, was there in the picture too. Another John Bidlake
still existed to contemplate his own ghost. Soon even he would have
disappeared. And in any case, was he the real Bidlake, any more than the
sodden and bloated woman who died had been the real Jenny? Real Jenny
lived among the pearly bathers. And real Bidlake, their creator, existed
by implication in his creatures.

‘It’s good,’ he said again, when he had finished his exposition, and his
tons was mournful; his face as he looked at his picture was sad. ‘But
after all,’ he added, after a little pause and with a sudden explosion
of voluntary laughter,’ after all, everything I do is good; damn good
even.’ It was a bidding of defiance to the stupid critics who had seen a
falling off in his later paintings; it was a challenge to his own past,
to time and old age, to the real John Bidlake who had painted real Jenny
and kissed her into silence.

‘Of course it’s good,’ said Lucy, and wondered why the old man’s
painting had fallen off so much of late. This last exhibition—it was
deplorable. He himself, after all, had remained so young, comparatively
speaking. Though of course, she reflected, as she looked at him, he had
certainly aged a good deal during the last few months.

‘Of course,’ he repeated. ‘That’s the right spirit.’

‘Though I must confess,’ Lucy added, to change the subject, ‘I always
find your bathers rather an insult.’

‘An insult?’

‘Speaking as a woman, I mean. Do you really find us so profoundly silly
as you paint us?’

‘Yes, do you?’ another voice enquired. ‘Do you really?’ It was an
intense, emphatic voice, and the words came out in gushes, explosively,
as though they were being forced through a narrow aperture under
emotional pressure.

Lucy and John Bidlake turned and saw Mrs. Betterton, massive in dove
grey, with arms, old Bidlake reflected, like thighs, and hair that was,
in relation to the fleshy cheeks and chins, ridiculously short, curly
and auburn. Her nose, which had tilted up so charmingly in the days when
he had ridden the black horse and she the bay, was now preposterous, an
absurd irrelevance in the middleaged face. Real Bidlake had ridden with
her, just before he had painted these bathers. She had talked about art
with a naive, schoolgirlish earnestness which he had found laughable and
charming. He had cured her, he remembered, of a passion for Burne-Jones,
but never, alas, of her prejudice in favour of virtue. It was with all
the old earnestness and a certain significant sentimentality as of one
who remembers old times and would like to exchange reminiscences as well
as general ideas, that she now addressed him. Bidlake had to pretend
that he was pleased to see her after all these years. It was
extraordinary, he reflected as he took her hand, how completely he had
succeeded in avoiding her; he could not remember having spoken to her
more than three or four times in all the quarter of a century which had
turned Mary Betterton into a memento mori.

‘Dear Mrs. Betterton!’ he exclaimed. ‘This is delightful.’ But he
disguised his repugnance very badly. And when she addressed him by his
Christian name— ‘Now, John,’ she said, ‘you must give us an answer to
our question,’ and she laid her hand on Lucy’s arm, so as to associate
her in the demand—old Bidlake was positively indignant. Familiarity from
a memento mori—it was intolerable. He’d give her a lesson. The question,
it happened, was well chosen for his purposes; it fairly invited the
retort discourteous. Mary Betterton had intellectual pretensions, was
tremendously keen on the soul. Remembering this, old Bidlake asserted
that he had never known a woman who had anything worth having beyond a
pair of legs and a figure. Some of them, he added, significantly, lacked
even those indispensables. True, many of them had interesting faces; but
that meant nothing. Bloodhounds, he pointed out, have the air of learned
judges, oxen when they chew the cud seem to meditate the problems of
metaphysics, the mantis looks as though it were praying; but these
appearances are entirely deceptive. It was the same with women. He had
preferred to paint his bathers unmasked as well as naked, to give them
faces that were merely extensions of their charming bodies and not
deceptive symbols of a non-existent spirituality. It seemed to him more
realistic, truer to the fundamental facts. He felt his good humour
returning as he talked, and, as it came back, his dislike for Mary
Betterton seemed to wane. When one is in high spirits, memento mori’s
cease to remind.

‘John, you’re incorrigible,’ said Mrs. Betterton, indulgently. She
turned to Lucy, smiling. ‘But he doesn’t mean a word he says.’

‘I should have thought, on the contrary, that he meant it all,’ objected
Lucy. ‘I’ve noticed that men who like women very much are the ones who
express the greatest contempt for them.’

Old Bidlake laughed.

‘Because they’re the ones who know women most intimately.’

‘Or perhaps because they resent our power over them.’

‘But I assure you,’ Mrs. Betterton insisted, ‘he doesn’t mean it. I knew
him before you were born, my dear.’

The gaiety went out of John Bidlake’s face. The memento mori grinned for
him again behind Mary Betterton’s flabby mask.

‘Perhaps he was different then,’ said Lucy. ‘He’s been infected by the
cynicism of the younger generation, I suppose. We’re dangerous company,
Uncle John. You ought to be careful.’

She had started one of Mrs. Betterton’s favourite hares. That lady
dashed off in serious pursuit. ‘It’s the upbringing,’ she explained.
‘Children are brought up so stupidly nowadays. No wonder they’re
cynical.’ She proceeded eloquently. Children were given too much, too
early. They were satiated with amusements, inured to all the pleasures
from the cradle. ‘I never saw the inside of a theatre till I was
eighteen’ she declared, with pride.

‘My poor dear lady!’

‘I began going when I was six,’ said Lucy.

‘And dances,’ Mrs. Betterton continued. ‘The hunt ball—what an
excitement! Because it only happened once a year.’ She quoted
Shakespeare.

 

‘Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,

Since seldom coming, in the long year set,

Like stones of worth they thinly placed….

 

‘They’re a row of pearls nowadays.’

‘And false ones at that,’ said Lucy.

Mrs. Betterton was triumphant. ‘False ones-you see? But for us they were
genuine, because they were rare. We didn’t “blunt the fine point of
seldom pleasure” by daily wear. Nowadays young people are bored and
world-weary before they come of age. A pleasure too often repeated
produces numbness; it’s no more felt as a pleasure.’

‘And what’s your remedy? ‘ enquired John Bidlake. ‘If a member of the
congregation may be permitted to ask questions,’ he added ironically.

‘Naughty!’ cried Mrs. Betterton with an appalling playfulness. Then,
becoming serious, ‘The remedy,’ she went on, ‘is fewer diversions.’

‘But I don’t want them fewer,’ objected John Bidlake. ‘In that case,’
said Lucy, ‘they must be strongerprogressively.’

‘Progressively?’ Mrs. Betterton repeated. ‘But where would that sort of
progress end?’

‘In bull fighting?’ suggested John Bidlake. ‘Or gladiatorial shows? Or
public executions, perhaps? Or the amusements of the Marquis de Sade?
Where?’

Lucy shrugged her shoulders. ‘Who knows?’

 

__

 

Hugo Brockle and Polly were already quarrelling.

‘I think it’s detestable,’ Polly was saying—and her face was flushed
with anger, ‘to make war on the poor.’

‘But the Freemen don’t make war on the poor.’

‘They do.’

‘They don’t,’ said Hugo. ‘Read Webley’s speeches.’

‘I only read about his actions.’

‘But they’re in accordance with his words.’

‘They are not.’

‘They are. All he’s opposed to is dictatorship of a class.’

‘Of the poor class.’

‘Of any class,’ Hugo earnestly insisted. ‘That’s his whole point. The
classes must be equally strong. A strong working class clamouring for
high wages keeps the professional middle class active.’

‘Like fleas on a dog,’ suggested Polly and laughed with a return towards
good humour. When a ludicrous thought occurred to her she could never
prevent herself from giving utterance to it, even when she was supposed
to be serious, or, as in this case, in a rage.

‘They’ve jolly well got to be inventive and progressive,’ Hugo
continued, struggling with the difficulties of lucid exposition.
‘Otherwise they wouldn’t be able to pay the workers what they demand and
make a profit for themselves. And at the same time a strong and
intelligent middle class is good for the workers, because they get good
leadership and good organization. Which means better wages and peace and
happiness.’

‘Amen,’ said Polly.

‘So the dictatorship of one class is nonsense,’ continued Hugo. ‘Webley
wants to keep all the classes and strengthen them. He wants them to live
in a condition of tension, so that the state is balanced by each pulling
as hard as it can its own way. Scientists say that the different organs
of the body are like that. They live in a state—’ he hesitated, he
blushed—’of hostile symbiosis.’

‘Golly!’

‘I’m sorry,’ Hugo apologized.

‘All the same,’ said Polly, ‘he doesn’t want to allow men to strike.’

‘Because strikes are stupid.’

‘He’s against democracy.’

‘Because it allows such awful people to get power. He wants the best to
rule.’

‘Himself, for example,’ said Polly sarcastically.

‘Well, why not? If you knew what a wonderful chap he was.’ Hugo became
enthusiastic. He had been acting as one of Webley’s aides-de-camp for
the last three months. ‘I never met anyone like him,’ he said.

Polly listened to his outpourings with a smile. She felt old and
superior. At school she herself had felt and talked like that about the
domestic economy mistress. All the same, she liked him for being so
loyal.


CHAPTER V

A jungle of innumerable trees and dangling creepers—it was in this form
that parties always presented themselves to Walter Bidlake’s
imagination. A jungle of noise; and he was lost in the jungle, he was
trying to clear a path for himself through its tangled luxuriance. The
people were the roots of the trees and their voices were the stems and
waving branches and festooned lianas—yes, and the parrots and the
chattering monkeys as well.

The trees reached up to the ceiling and from the ceiling they were bent
back again, like mangroves, towards the floor. But in this particular
room, Walter reflected, in this queer combination of a Roman courtyard
and the Palm House at Kew, the growths of sound shooting up,
uninterrupted, through the height of three floors, would have gathered
enough momentum to break clean through the flimsy glass roof that
separated them from the outer night. He pictured them going up and up,
like the magic beanstalk of the Giant Killer, into the sky. Up and up,
loaded with orchids and bright cockatoos, up through the perennial mist
of London, into the clear moonlight beyond the smoke. He fancied them
waving up there in the moonlight, the last thin aerial twigs of noise.
That loud laugh, for example, that exploding guffaw from the fat man on
the left-it would mount and mount, diminishing as it rose, till it no
more than delicately tinkled up there under the moon. And all these
voices (what were they saying? ‘… made an excellent speech…’; ‘… no idea
how comfortable those rubber reducing belts are till you’ve tried
them…’; ‘… such a bore…’; ‘… eloped with the chauffeur…’), all these
voices—how exquisite and tiny they’d be up there! But meanwhile down
here, in the jungle… Oh, loud, stupid, vulgar, fatuous.

Looking over the heads of the people who surrounded him, he saw Frank
Illidge, alone, leaning against a pillar. His attitude, his smile were
Byronic, at once world-weary and contemptuous; he glanced about him with
a languid amusement, as though he were watching the drolleries of a
group of monkeys. Unfortunately, Walter reflected, as he made his way
through the crowd towards him, poor Illidge hadn’t the right physique
for being Byronically superior. Satirical romantics should be long,
slow-moving, graceful and handsome. Illidge was small, alert and jerky.
And what a comic face! Like a street Arab’s, with its upturned nose and
wide slit of a mouth; a very intelligent, sharp-witted street Arab’s
face, but not exactly one to be languidly contemptuous with. Besides,
who can be superior with freckles? Illidge’s complexion was sandy with
them. Protectively coloured, the sandy-brown eyes, the sandyorange
eyebrows and lashes disappeared, at a little distance, into the skin, as
a lion dissolves into the desert. From across a room his face seemed
featureless and unregarding, like the face of a statue carved out of a
block of sandstone. Poor Illidge! The Byronic part made him look rather
ridiculous.

‘Hullo,’ said Walter, as he got within speaking distance. The two young
men shook hands. ‘How’s science?’ What a silly question! thought Walter
as he pronounced the words.

Illidge shrugged his shoulders. ‘Less fashionable than the arts, to
judge by this party.’ He looked round him. ‘I’ve seen half the writing
and painting section of Who’s Who this evening. The place fairly stinks
of art.’

‘Isn’t that rather a comfort for science?’ said Walter. ‘The arts don’t
enjoy being fashionable.’

‘Oh, don’t they! Why are you here, then?’

‘Why indeed?’ Walter parried the question with a laugh. He looked round,
wondering where Lucy could have gone. He had not caught sight of her
since the music stopped.

‘You’ve come to do your tricks and have your head patted,’ said Illidge,
trying to get a little of his own back; the memory of that slip on the
stairs, of Lady Edward’s lack of interest in newts, of the military
gentlemen’s insolence, still rankled. ‘Just look at that girl there with
the frizzy dark hair, in cloth of silver. The one like a little white
negress. What about her, for example? It’d be pleasant to have one’s
head patted by that sort of thing—eh?’

‘Well, would it?’

Illidge laughed. ‘You take the high philosophical line, do you? But, my
dear chap, admit it’s all humbug I take it myself, so I ought to know.
To tell you the honest truth, I envy you art-mongers your success. It
makes me really furious when I see some silly, halfwitted little
writer…’

‘Like me, for example.’

‘No, you’re a cut above most of them,’ conceded Illidge. ‘But when I see
some wretched little scribbler with a tenth of my intelligence, making
money and being cooed over, while I’m disregarded, I do get furious
sometimes.’

‘You ought to regard it as a compliment. If they coo over us, it’s
because they can understand, more or less, what we’re after. They can’t
understand you; you’re above them. Their neglect is a compliment to your
mind.’

‘Perhaps; but it’s a damned insult to my body.’ Illidge was painfully
conscious of his appearance. He knew that he was ugly and looked
undistinguished. And knowing, he liked to remind himself of the
unpleasant fact, like a man with an aching tooth, who is for ever
fingering the source of his pain, just to make sure it is still painful.
‘If I looked like that enormous lout, Webley, they wouldn’t neglect me,
even if my mind were like Newton’s. The fact is,’ he said, giving the
aching tooth a good tug this time, ‘ I look like an anarchist. You’re
lucky, you know. You look like a gentleman, or at least like an artist.
You’ve no idea what a nuisance it is to look like an intellectual of the
lower classes.’ The tooth was responding excruciatingly; he pulled at it
the harder. ‘It’s not merely that the women neglect you—these women, at
any rate. That’s bad enough. But the police refuse to neglect you; they
take a horrid inquisitive interest. Would you believe it, I’ve been
twice arrested, simply because I look like the sort of man who makes
infernal machines.’

‘It’s a good story,’ said Walter sceptically.

‘But true, I swear. Once it was in this country. Near Chesterfield. They
were having a coal strike. I happened to be looking on at a fight
between strikers and blacklegs. The police didn’t like my face and
grabbed me. It took me hours to get out of their clutches. The other
time was in Italy. Somebody had just been trying to blow up Mussolini, I
believe. Anyhow, a gang of black-shirted bravoes made me get out of the
train at Genoa and searched me from top to toe. Intolerable! Simply
because of my subversive face.’

‘Which corresponds, after all, to your ideas.’

‘Yes, but a face isn’t evidence, a face isn’t a crime. Well yes,’ he
added parenthetically,’ perhaps some faces are crimes. Do you know
General Knoyle? ‘ Walter nodded. ‘His is a capital offence. Nothing
short of hanging would do for a man like that. God! how I’d like to kill
them all!’ Had he not slipped on the stairs and been snubbed by a stupid
man-butcher?’How I loathe the rich! Loathe them! Don’t you think they’re
horrible?’

‘More horrible than the poor?’ The recollection of Wetherington’s
sickroom made him almost at once feel rather ashamed of the question.

‘Yes, yes. There’s something peculiarly base and ignoble and diseased
about the rich. Money breeds a kind of gangrened insensitiveness. It’s
inevitable. Jesus understood. That bit about the camel and the needle’s
eye is a mere statement of fact. And remember that other bit about
loving your neighbours. You’ll be thinking I’m a Christian at this
rate,’ he added with parenthetic apology. ‘But honour where honour is
due. The man had sense; he saw what was what. Neighbourliness is the
touchstone that shows up the rich. The rich haven’t got any neighbours.’

‘But, damn it, they’re not anchorites.’

‘But they have no neighbours in the sense that the poor have neighbours.
When my mother had to go out, Mrs. Cradock from next door on the right
kept an eye on us children. And my mother did the same for Mrs. Cradock
when it was her turn to go out. And when somebody had broken a leg, or
lost his job, people helped with money and food. And how well I
remember, as a little boy, being sent running round the village after
the nurse, because young Mrs. Foster from next door on the left had
suddenly been taken with birth pains before she expected! When you live
on less than four pounds a week, you’ve damned well got to behave like a
Christian and love your neighbour. To begin with, you can’t get away
from him; he’s practically in your back-yard. There can be no refined
and philosophical ignoring of his existence. You must either hate or
love; and on the whole you’d better make a shift to love, because you
may need his help in emergencies and he may need yours—so urgently, very
often, that there can be no question of refusing to give it. And since
you must give, since, if you’re a human being, you can’t help giving,
it’s better to make an effort to like the person you’ve anyhow got to
give to.’

Walter nodded. ‘Obviously.’

‘But you rich,’ the other went on, ‘you have no real neighbours. You
never perform a neighbourly action or expect your neighbours to do you a
kindness in return. It’s unnecessary. You can pay people to look after
you. You can hire servants to simulate kindness for three pounds a month
and board. Mrs. Cradock from next door doesn’t have to keep an eye on
your babies when you go out. You have nurses and governesses doing it
for money. No, you’re generally not even aware of your neighbours. You
live at a distance from them. Each of you is boxed up in his own secret
house. There may be tragedies going on behind the shutters; but the
people next door don’t know anything about it.’

‘Thank God!’ ejaculated Walter.

‘Thank him by all means. Privacy’s a great luxury. Very pleasant, I
agree. But you pay for luxuries. People aren’t moved by misfortunes they
don’t know about. Ignorance is insensitive bliss. In a poor street
misfortune can’t be hidden. Life’s too public. People have their
neighbourly feeling kept in constant training. But the rich never have a
chance of being neighbourly to their equals. The best they can do is to
feel mawkish about the sufferings of their inferiors, which they can
never begin to understand, and to be patronizingly kind. Horrible! And
that’s when they’re doing their best. When they’re at their worst,
they’re like this.’ He indicated the crowded room. ‘They’re Lady Edward
—the lowest hell! They’re that daughter of hers….’ He made a grimace, he
shrugged his shoulders.

Walter listened with a strained and agonized attention.

‘Damned, destroyed, irrevocably corrupted,’ Illidge went on like a
denouncing prophet. He had only once spoken to Lucy Tantamount,
casually, for a moment. She had seemed hardly to notice that he was
there.

It was true, Walter was thinking. She was all that people enviously or
disapprovingly called her, and yet the most exquisite and marvellous of
beings. Knowing all, he could listen to anything that might be said
about her. And the more atrocious the words the more desperately he
loved her. Credo quia absurdum. Amo quia turpe, quia indignum….

‘What a putrefaction!’ Illidge continued grandiloquently. ‘The
consummate flower of this charming civilization of ours—that’s what she
is. A refined and perfumed imitation of a savage or an animal. The
logical conclusion, so far as most people are concerned, of having money
and leisure.’

Walter listened, his eyes shut, thinking of Lucy. ‘A perfumed imitation
of a savage or an animal.’ The words were true and an excruciation; but
he loved her all the more because of the torment and because of the
odious truth.

‘Well,’ said Illidge in a changed voice, ‘I must go and see if the Old
Man wants to go on working to-night. We don’t generally knock off before
halfpast one or two. It’s rather pleasant living upside down like this.
Sleeping till lunch-time, starting work after tea. Very pleasant,
really.’ He held out his hand.’So long.’

‘We must dine together one evening,’ said Walter without much
conviction. Illidge nodded.

‘Let’s fix it up one of these days,’ he said and was gone.

Walter edged his way through the crowd, searching.

 

__ __

 

Everard Webley had got Lord Edward into a corner and was trying to
persuade him to support the British Freemen.

‘But I’m not interested in politics,’ the Old Man huskily protested.
‘I’m not interested in politics….’ Obstinately, mulishly, he repeated
the phrase, whatever Webley might say.

Webley was eloquent. Men of good will, men with a stake in the country
ought to combine to resist the forces of destruction. It was not only
property that was menaced, not only the material interests of a class;
it was the English tradition, it was personal initiative, it was
intelligence, it was all natural distinction of any kind. The Freemen
were banded to resist the dictatorship of the stupid; they were armed to
protect individuality from the mass man, the mob; they were fighting for
the recognition of natural superiority in every sphere. The enemies were
many and busy.

But forewarned was forearmed; when you saw the bandits approaching, you
formed up in battle order and drew your swords. (Webley had a weakness
for swords; he wore one when the Freemen paraded, his speeches were full
of them, his house bristled with panoplies.) Organization, discipline,
force were necessary. The battle could no longer be fought
constitutionally. Parliamentary methods were quite adequate when the two
parties agreed about fundamentals and disagreed only about trifling
details. But where fundamental principles were at stake, you couldn’t
allow politics to go on being treated as a Parliamentary game. You had
to resort to direct action or the threat of it.

‘I was five years in Parliament,’ said Webley. ‘Long enough to convince
myself that there’s nothing to be done in these days by Parliamentarism.
You might as well try to talk a fire out. England can only be saved by
direct action. When it’s saved we can begin to think about Parliament
again. (Something very unlike the present ridiculous collection of
mob-elected rich men it’ll have to be.) Meanwhile, there’s nothing for
it but to prepare for fighting. And preparing for fighting, we may
conquer peacefully. It’s the only hope. Believe me, Lord Edward, it’s
the only hope.’

Harassed, like a bear in a pit set upon by dogs, Lord Edward turned
uneasily this way and that, pivoting his bent body from the loins. ‘But
I’m not interested in pol…’ He was too agitated to be able to finish the
word.

‘But even if you’re not interested in politics,’ Webley persuasively
continued, ‘you must be interested in your fortune, your position, the
future of your family. Remember, all those things will go down in the
general destruction.’

‘Yes, but… No….’ Lord Edward was growing desperate

‘I… I’m not interested in money.’

Once, years before, the head of the firm of solicitors to whom he left
the entire management of his affairs, had called, in spite of Lord
Edward’s express injunction that he was never to be troubled with
matters of business, to consult his client about a matter of
investments. There were some eighty thousand pounds to be disposed of.
Lord Edward was dragged from the fundamental equations of the statics of
living systems. When he learned the frivolous cause of the interruption,
the ordinarily mild Old Man became unrecognizably angry. Mr. Figgis,
whose voice was loud and whose manner confident, had been used, in
previous interviews, to having things all his own way. Lord Edward’s
fury astonished and appalled him. It was as though, in his rage, the Old
Man had suddenly thrown back atavistically to the feudal past, had
remembered that he was a Tantamount, talking to a hired servant. He had
given orders; they had been disobeyed and his privacy unjustifiably
disturbed. It was insufferable. If this sort of thing should ever happen
again, he would transfer his affairs to another solicitor. And with that
he wished Mr. Figgis a very good afternoon.

‘I’m not interested in money,’ he now repeated.

Illidge, who had approached and was hovering in the neighbourhood,
waiting for an opportunity to address the Old Man, overheard the remark
and exploded with inward laughter. ‘These rich! ‘ he thought. ‘These
bloody rich!’ They were all the same.

‘But if not for your own sake,’ Webley insisted, attacking from another
quarter, ‘for the sake of civilization, of progress.’

Lord Edward started at the word. It touched a trigger, it released a
flood of energy. ‘Progress! he echoed, and the tone of misery and
embarrassment was exchanged for one of confidence. ‘Progress! You
politicians are always talking about it. As though it were going to
last. Indefinitely. More motors, more babies, more food, more
advertising, more money, more everything, for ever. You ought to take a
few lessons in my subject. Physical biology. Progress, indeed! What do
you propose to do about phosphorus, for example? ‘ His question was a
personal accusation.

‘But all this is entirely beside the point,’ said Webley impatiently.

‘On the contrary,’ retorted Lord Edward, ‘ it’s the only point.’ His
voice had become loud and severe. He spoke with a much more than
ordinary degree of coherence. Phosphorus had made a new man of him; he
felt very strongly about phosphorus and, feeling strongly, he was
strong. The worried bear had become the worrier. ‘With your intensive
agriculture,’ he went on, ‘you’re simply draining the soil of
phosphorus. More than half of one per cent. a year. Going clean out of
circulation. And then the way you throw away hundreds of thousands of
tons of phosphorus pentoxide in your sewage! Pouring it into the sea.
And you call that progress. Your modern sewage systems!’ His tone was
witheringly scornful. ‘You ought to be putting it back where it came
from. On the land.’ Lord Edward shook an admonitory finger and frowned.
‘On the land, I tell you.’

‘But all this has nothing to do with me,’ protested Webley.

‘Then it ought to,’ Lord Edward answered sternly. ‘That’s the trouble
with you politicians. You don’t even think of the important things.
Talking about progress and votes and Bolshevism and every year allowing
a million tons of phosphorus pentoxide to run away into the sea. It’s
idiotic, it’s criminal, it’s… it’s fiddling while Rome is burning.’ He
saw Webley opening his mouth to speak and made haste to anticipate what
he imagined was going to be his objection. ‘No doubt,’ he said, ‘you
think you can make good the loss with phosphate rocks. But what’ll you
do when the deposits are exhausted? ‘ He poked Everard in the shirt
front. ‘What then? Only two hundred years and they’ll be finished. You
think we’re being progressive because we’re living on our capital
Phosphates, coal, petroleum, nitre—squander them all. That’s your
policy. And meanwhile you go round trying to make our flesh creep with
talk about revolutions.’

‘But damn it all,’ said Webley, half angry, half amused, ‘your
phosphorus can wait. This other danger’s imminent. Do you want a
political and social revolution?’

‘Will it reduce the population and check production?’ asked Lord Edward.

‘Of course.’

‘Then certainly I want a revolution.’ The Old Man thought in terms of
geology and was not afraid of logical conclusions. ‘Certainly.’ Illidge
could hardly contain his laughter.

‘Well, if that’s your view…’ began Webley; but Lord Edward interrupted
him.

‘The only result of your progress,’ he said, ‘ will be that in a few
generations there ‘II be a real revolutiona natural, cosmic revolution.
You’re upsetting the equilibrium. And in the end, nature will restore
it. And the process will be very uncomfortable for you. Your decline
will be as quick as your rise. Quicker, because you’ll be bankrupt,
you’ll have squandered your capital. It takes a rich man a little time
to realize all his resources. But when they’ve all been realized, it
takes him almost no time to starve.’

Webley shrugged his shoulders. ‘Dotty old lunatic!’ he said to himself,
and aloud, ‘Parallel straight lines never meet, Lord Edward. So I’ll bid
you goodnight.’ He took his leave.

A minute later the Old Man and his assistant were making their way up
the triumphal staircase to their world apart.

‘What a relief!’ said Lord Edward, as he opened the door of his
laboratory. Voluptuously, he sniffed the faint smell of the absolute
alcohol in which the specimens were pickled. ‘These parties! One’s
thankful to get back to science. Still, the music was really…’ His
admiration was inarticulate.

Illidge shrugged his shoulders. ‘Parties, music, science—alternative
entertainments for the leisured. You pays your money and you takes your
choice. The essential is to have the money to pay.’ He laughed
disagreeably.

Illidge resented the virtues of the rich much more than their vices.
Gluttony, sloth, sensuality and all the less comely products of leisure
and an independent income could be forgiven, precisely because they were
discreditable. But disinterestedness, spirituality, incorruptibility,
refinement of feeling and exquisiteness of taste—these were commonly
regarded as qualities to be admired; that was why he so specially
disliked them. For these virtues, according to Illidge, were as fatally
the product of wealth as were chronic guzzling and breakfast at eleven.

‘These bourgeois,’ he complained, ‘they go about handing one another
bouquets for being so disinterested—that is to say, for having enough to
live on without being compelled to work or be preoccupied about money.
Then there’s another bouquet for being able to afford to refuse a tip
And another for having enough money to buy the apparatus of cultured
refinement. And yet another for having the time to spare for art and
reading and elaborate longdrawn love-making. Why can’t they be frank and
say outright what they’re all the time implying-that the root of all
their virtue is a five per cent. gilt-edged security?’

The amused affection which he felt for Lord Edward was tempered by a
chronic annoyance at the thought that all the Old Man’s intellectual and
moral virtues, all his endearing eccentricities and absurdities were
only made possible by the really scandalous state of his bank balance.
And this latent disapproval became acute whenever he heard Lord Edward
being praised, admired or even laughed at by others. Laughter, liking
and admiration were permitted to him, because he understood and could
forgive. Other people did not even realize that there was anything to
forgive. Illidge was always quick to inform them.

‘If the Old Man wasn’t the descendant of monastery-robbers,’ he would
say to the praisers or admirers, ‘he’d be in the workhouse or the loony
asylum.’

And yet he was genuinely fond of the Old Man, he genuinely admired his
talents and his character. The world, however, might be excused for not
realizing the fact. ‘Unpleasant’ was the ordinary comment on Lord
Edward’s assistant.

But being unpleasant to and about the rich, besides a pleasure, was
also, in Illidge’s eyes, a sacred duty. He owed it to his class, to
society at large, to the future, to the cause of justice. Even the Old
Man himself was not spared. He had only to breathe a word in favour of
the soul (for Lord Edward had what his assistant could only regard as a
shameful and adulterous passion for idealistic metaphysics); Illidge
would at once leap out at him with a sneer about capitalist philosophy
and bourgeois religion. An expression of distaste for hardheaded
business men, of indifference to material interests, of sympathy for the
poor, would bring an immediate reference, more or less veiled, but
always sarcastic, to the Tantamount millions. There were days (and owing
to the slip on the stairs and that snub from the General, this day was
one of them) when even a reference to pure science elicited its ironic
comment. Illidge was an enthusiastic biologist; but as a class-conscious
citizen he had to admit that pure science, like good taste and boredom,
perversity and platonic love, is a product of wealth and leisure. He was
not afraid of being logical and deriding even his own idol.

‘Money to pay,’ he repeated. ‘That’s the essential.

The Old Man looked rather guiltily at his assistant.

These implied reproofs made him feel uncomfortable. He tried to change
the subject. ‘What about our tadpoles? ‘ he asked

‘The asymmetrical ones.’ They had a brood of tadpoles hatched from eggs
that had been kept abnormally warm on one side and abnormally cold on
the other. He moved towards the glass tank in which they were kept.
Illidge followed. ‘Asymmetrical tadpoles!’ he repeated.

‘Asymmetrical tadpoles! What a refinement! Almost as good as playing
Bach on the flute or having a palate for wine.’ He thought of his
brother Tom, who had weak lungs and worked a broaching machine in a
motor factory at Manchester. He remembered washing days and the pink
crinkled skin of his mother’s watersodden hands. ‘Asymmetrical
tadpoles!’ he said once more and laughed.

 

__ __

 

‘Strange,’ said Mrs. Betterton, ‘strange that a great artist should be
such a cynic.’ In Burlap’s company she preferred to believe that John
Bidlake had meant what he said. Burlap on cynicism was uplifting and
Mrs. Betterton liked to be uplifted. Uplifting too on greatness, not to
mention art. ‘For you must admit,’ she added, ‘he is a great artist.’

Burlap nodded slowly. He did not look directly at Mrs. Betterton, but
kept his eyes averted and downcast as though he were addressing some
little personage invisible to everyone but himself, standing to one side
of her—his private daemon, perhaps; an emanation from himself, a little
doppelganger. He was a man of middle height with a stoop and a rather
slouching gait. His hair was dark, thick and curly, with a natural
tonsure as big as a medal showing pink on the crown of his head. His
grey eyes were very deeply set, his nose and chin pronounced but well
shaped. his mouth full-lipped and rather wide. A mixture, according to
old Bidlake, who was a caricaturist in words as well as with the pencil,
of a movie villain and St. Anthony of Padua by a painter of the baroque,
of a cardsharping Lothario and a rapturous devotee.

‘Yes, a great artist,’ he agreed, ‘but not one of the greatest.’ He
spoke slowly, ruminatively, as though he were talking to himself. All
his conversation was a dialogue with himself or that little doppelgdnger
which stood invisibly to one side of the people he was supposed to be
talking to; Burlap was unceasingly and exclusively selfconscious. ‘Not
one of the greatest,’ he repeated slowly. As it happened, he had just
been writing an article about the subject-matter of art for next week’s
number of the Literary World. ‘Precisely because of that cynicism.’
Should he quote himself? he wondered.

‘How true that is!’ Mrs. Betterton’s applause exploded perhaps a little
prematurely; her enthusiasm was always on the boil. She clasped her
hands together. ‘How true!’ She looked at Burlap’s averted face and
thought it so spiritual, so beautiful in its way.

‘How can a cynic be a great artist?’ Burlap went on, having decided that
he’d spout his own article at her and take the risk of her recognizing
it in print next Thursday. And even if she did recognize it, that
wouldn’t efface the personal impression he’d made by spouting it.
‘Though why you want to make an impression,’ a mocking devil had put in,
‘unless it’s because she’s rich and useful, goodness knows!’ The devil
was pitchforked back to where he came from. ‘One has responsibilities,’
an angel hastily explained. ‘The lamp mustn’t be hidden under a bushel.
One must let it shine, especially on people of good will.’ Mrs.
Betterton was on the side of the angels; her loyalty should be
confirmed. ‘A great artist,’ he went on aloud, ‘is a man who synthesizes
all experience. The cynic sets out by denying half the facts—the fact of
the soul, the fact of ideals, the fact of God. And yet we’re aware of
spiritual facts just as directly and indubitably as we’re aware of
physical facts.’

‘Of course, of course!’ exclaimed Mrs. Bidlake

‘It’s absurd to deny either class of facts.’ ‘Absurd to deny me,’ said
the demon, poking out his head into Burlap’s consciousness.

‘Absurd!’

‘The cynic confines himself to only half the world of possible
experience. Less than half. For there are more spiritual than bodily
experiences.’

‘Infinitely more!’

‘He may handle his limited subject-matter very well. Bidlake, I grant
you, does. Extraordinarily well. He has all the sheer ability of the
most consummate artists. Or had, at any rate.’

‘Had,’ Mrs. Betterton sighed. ‘When I first knew him.’ The implication
was that it was her influence that had made him paint so well.

‘But he’s always applied his powers to something small. What he
synthesizes in his art was limited, comparatively unimportant.’

‘That’s what I always told him,’ said Mrs. Betterton, reinterpreting
those youthful arguments about Pre-Raphaelitism in a new and, for her
own reputation, favourable light. ‘Consider Burne-Jones, I used to say.’
The memory of John Bidlake’s huge and Rabelaisian laughter reverberated
in her ears

‘Not that Burne-Jones was a particularly good painter,’ she hastened to
add. (‘He painted,’ John Bidlake had said—and how shocked she had been,
how deeply offended!—’as though he had never seen a pair of buttocks in
the whole of his life.’) ‘But his subjects were noble. If you had his
dreams, I used to tell John Bidlake, if you had his ideals, you’d be a
really great artist.’

Burlap nodded, smiling his agreement. Yes, she’s On the side of the
angels, he was thinking; she needs encouraging. One has a
responsibility. The demon winked. There was something in his smile, Mrs.
Betterton reflected, that reminded one of a Leonardo or a
Sodoma—something mysterious, subtle, inward.

‘Though, mind you,’ he said regurgitating his article slowly, phrase by
phrase, ‘the subject doesn’t make the work of art. Whittier and
Longfellow were fairly stuffed with Great Thoughts. But what they wrote
was very small poetry.’

‘How true!’

‘The only generalization one can risk is that the greatest works of art
have had great subjects; and that works with small subjects, however
accomplished, are never so good as…’

‘There’s Walter,’ said Mrs. Betterton, interrupting him. ‘Wandering like
an unlaid ghost. Walter!’

At the sound of his name, Walter turned. The Betterton—good Lord! And
Burlap! He assumed a smile. But Mrs. Be and his colleague on the
Literary World were among the last people he wanted at this moment to
see.

‘We were just discussing greatness in art,’ Mrs. Betterton explained.
‘Mr. Burlap was saying such profound things.’

She began to reproduce the profundities for Walter’s benefit.

He meanwhile was wondering why Burlap’s manner towards him had been so
cold, so distant, shut, even hostile. That was the trouble with Burlap.
You never knew where you stood with him. Either he loved you, or he
hated. Life with him was a series of scenes—scenes of hostility or, even
more trying in Walter’s estimation, scenes of affection. One way or the
other, the emotion was always flowing. There were hardly any intervals
of comfortably slack water. The tide was always running. Why was it
running now towards hostility?

Mrs. Betterton went on with her exposition of the profundities. To
Walter they sounded curiously like certain paragraphs in that article of
Burlap’s, the proof of which he had only that morning been correcting
for the printers. Reproduced—explosion after enthusiastic explosion—from
Burlap’s spoken reproduction, the article did sound rather ridiculous. A
light dawned. Could that be the reason? He looked at Burlap. His face
was stony.

‘I’m afraid I must go,’ said Burlap abruptly, when Mrs. Betterton
paused.

‘But no,’ she protested. ‘But why?’

He made an effort and smiled his Sodoma smile. ‘The world is too much
with us,’ he quoted mysteriously. He liked saying mysterious things,
dropping them surprisingly into the middle of the conversation.

‘But you’re not enough with us,’ flattered Mrs. Betterton.

‘It’s the crowd,’ he explained. ‘After a time, I get into a panic. I
feel they’re crushing my soul to death. I should begin to scream if I
stayed.’ He took his leave.

‘Such a wonderful man!’ Mrs. Betterton exclaimed before he was well out
of earshot. ‘It must be wonderful for you to work with him.’

‘He’s a very good editor,’ said Walter.

‘But I was thinking of his personality. How shall I say? The spiritual
quality of the man.’

Walter nodded and said, ‘Yes,’ rather vaguely. The spiritual quality of
Burlap was just the thing he wasn’t very enthusiastic about.

‘In an age like ours,’ Mrs. Betterton continued, ‘he’s an oasis in the
desert of stupid frivolity and cynicism.’

‘Some of his ideas are first rate,’ Walter cautiously agreed.

He wondered how soon he could decently make his escape.

 

__ __

 

‘There’s Walter,’ said Lady Edward.

‘Walter who?’ asked Bidlake. Borne by the social currents, they had
drifted together again.

‘Your Walter.’

‘Oh, mine.’ He was not much interested, but he followed the direction of
her glance. ‘What a weed!’ he said. He disliked his children for growing
up; growing, they pushed him backwards, year after year, backwards
towards the gulf and the darkness. There was Walter; it was only
yesterday he was born. And yet the fellow must be five-and-twenty, if he
was a day.

‘Poor Walter; he doesn’t look at all well.’

‘Looks as though he had worms,’ said Bidlake ferociously.

‘How’s that deplorable affair of his going?’ she asked.

Bidlake shrugged his shoulders. ‘As usual, I suppose.’

‘I never met the woman.’

‘I did. She’s awful.’

‘What, vulgar? ‘

‘No, no. I wish she were,’ protested Bidlake. ‘She’s refined, terribly
refined. And she speaks like this.’ He spoke into a drawling falsetto
that was meant to be an imitation of Marjorie’s voice. ‘Like a sweet
little innocent girlie. And so serious, such a highbrow. He interrupted
the imitation with his own deep laugh,’Do you know what she said to me
once? I may mention that she always talks to me about Art. Art with a
capital A. She said’: (his voice went up again to the babyish falsetto)
‘“I think there’s a place for Fra Angelico and Rubens.”’ He laughed
again, homerically. ‘What an imbecile! And she has a nose that’s at
least three inches too long.’

 

__ __

 

Marjorie had opened the box in which she kept her private papers. All
Walter’s letters. She untied the ribbon and looked them over one by one.
‘Dear Mrs. Carling, I enclose under separate cover that volume of
Keats’s Letters I mentioned to-day. Please do not trouble to return it.
I have another copy, which I shall re-read for the pleasure of
accompanying you, even at a distance, through the same spiritual
adventure.’

That was the first of them. She read it through and recaptured in memory
something of the pleased surprise which that passage about the spiritual
adventure had originally evoked in her. In conversation he had always
seemed to shrink from the direct and personal approach, he was painfully
shy. She hadn’t expected him to write like that. Later, when he had
written to her often, she became accustomed to his peculiarities. She
took it for granted that he should be bolder with the pen than face to
face. All his love—all of it, at any rate, that was articulate and all
of it that, in the days of his courtship, was in the least ardent—was in
his letters. The arrangement suited Marorie perfectly. She would have
liked to go on indefinitely making cultured and verbally burning love by
post. She liked the idea of love; what she did not like was lovers,
except at a distance and in imagination. A correspondence course of
passion was, for her, the perfect and ideal relationship with a man.
Better still were personal relationships with women; for women had all
the good qualities of men at a distance, with the added advantage of
being actually there. They could be in the room with you and yet demand
no more than a man at the other end of a system of post-offices. With
his face-to-face shyness and his postal freedom and ardour, Walter had
seemed in Marjorie’s eyes to combine the best points of both sexes. And
then he was so deeply, so flatteringly interested in everything she did
and thought and felt. Poor Marjorie was not much used to having people
interested in her.

‘Sphinx,’ she read in the third of his letters. (He had called her that
because of her enigmatic silences. Carling, for the same reason, had
called her Turnip or Dumb-Bell.) ‘Shinx, why do you hide yourself inside
such a shell of silence? One would think you were ashamed of your
goodness and sweetness and intelligence. But they pop their heads out
all the same and in spite of you.’

The tears came into her eyes. He had been so kind to her, so tender and
gentle. And now…

‘Love,’ she read dimly, through the tears, in the next letter, ‘love can
transform physical into spiritual desire; it has the magic power to turn
the body into pure soul….’

Yes, he had had those desires too. Even he. All men had, she supposed.
Rather dreadful. She shuddered, remembering Carling, remembering even
Walter with something of the same horror. Yes, even Walter, though he
had been so gentle and considerate. Walter had understood what she felt.
That made it all the more extraordinary that he should be behaving as he
was behaving now. It was as though he had suddenly become somebody else,
become a kind of wild animal, with the animal’s cruelty as well as the
animal’s lusts.

‘How can he be so cruel? ‘ she wondered.

‘How can he, deliberately? Walter?’ Her Walter, the real Walter, was so
gentle and understanding and considerate, so wonderfully unselfish and
good. It was for that goodness and gentleness that she had loved him, in
spite of his being a man and having ‘those’ desires; her devotion was to
that tender, unselfish, considerate Walter, whom she had got to know and
appreciate after they had begun to live together. She had loved even the
weak and unadmirable manifestations of his considerateness; had loved
him even when he let himself be overcharged by cabmen and porters, when
he gave handfuls of silver to tramps with obviously untrue stories about
jobs at the other end of the country and no money to pay the fare. He
was too sensitively quick to see the other person’s point of view. In
his anxiety to be just to others he was often prepared to be unjust to
himself. He was always ready to sacrifice his own rights rather than run
any risk of infringing the rights of others. It was a considerateness,
Marjorie realized, that had become a weakness, that was on the point of
turning into a vice; a considerateness, moreover, that was due to his
timidity, his squeamish and fastidious shrinking from every conflict,
even every disagreeable contact. All the same, she loved him for it,
loved him even when it led him to treat her with something less than
justice. For having come to regard her as a being on the hither side of
the boundary between himself and the rest of the world, he had sometimes
in his excessive considerateness for the rights of others, sacrificed
not only his own rights, but also hers. How often, for example, she had
told him that he was being underpaid for his work on the Literary World!
She thought of the latest of their conversations on what was to him the
most odious of topics.

‘Burlap’s sweating you, Walter,’ she had said.

‘The paper’s very hard up.’ He always had excuses for the shortcomings
of other people towards himself.

‘But why should you let yourself be swindled?’

‘I’m not being swindled.’ There was a note of exasperation in his voice,
the exasperation of a man who knows he is in the wrong. ‘And even if I
were, I prefer being swindled to haggling for my pound of flesh. After
all, it’s my business.’

‘And mine!’ She held up the account book on which she had been busy when
the conversation began. ‘If you knew the price of vegetables!’

He had flushed up and left the room without answering. The conversation,
the case were typical of many others. Walter had never been deliberately
unkind to her, only by mistake, out of excessive consideration for other
people and while he was being unkind to himself. She had never resented
these injustices. They proved how closely he associated her with
himself. But now, now there was nothing accidental about his unkindness.
The gentle considerate Walter had disappeared and somebody else—somebody
ruthless and full of hate—was deliberately making her suffer.

 

__ __

 

Lady Edward laughed. ‘One wonders what he saw in her, if she’s so
deplorable as you make out.’

‘What does one ever see in anyone?’ John Bidlake spoke in a melancholy
tone. Quite suddenly he had begun to feel rather ill. An oppression in
the stomach, a feeling of sickness, a tendency to hiccough. It often
happened now. Just after eating. Bicarbonate didn’t seem to do much
good. ‘In these matters,’ he added, ‘we’re all equally insane.’

‘Thanks!’ said Lady Edward, laughing.

Making an essay to be gallant, ‘Present company excepted,’ he said with
a smile and a little bow. He stifled another hiccough. How miserable he
was feeling! ‘ Do you mind if I sit down? ‘ he asked. ‘All this standing
about…’ He dropped heavily into a chair.

Lady Edward looked at him with a certain solicitude, but said nothing.
She knew how much he hated all references to age, or illness, or
physical weakness.

‘It must have been that caviar,’ he was thinking. ‘That beastly caviar.’
He violently hated caviar. Every sturgeon in the Black Sea was his
personal enemy.

‘Poor Walter!’ said Lady Edward, taking up the conversation where it had
been dropped. ‘And he has such a talent.’

John Bidlake snorted contemptuously. Lady Edward perceived that she had
said the wrong thing—by mistake, genuinely by mistake, this time. She
changed the subject.

‘And Elinor?’ she asked. ‘When’s your Elinor coming home? Elinor and
Quarles?’

‘Leaving Bombay to-morrow,’ John Bidlake answered telegraphically. He
was too busy thinking of the caviar and his visceral sensations to be
more responsive.


CHAPTER VI

The Indians drank deir liberalism at your fountains,’ said Mr. Sita Ram,
quoting from one of his own speeches in the Legislative Assembly. He
pointed an accusing finger at Philip Quarles. The drops of sweat pursued
one another down his brown and pouchy cheeks; he seemed to be weeping
for Mother India. One drop had been hanging, an iridescent jewel in the
lamplight, at the end of his nose. It flashed and trembled while he
spoke, as if responsive to patriotic sentiments. There came a moment
when the sentiments were too much for it. At the word ‘fountain,’ it
gave a last violent shudder and fell among the broken morsels of fish on
Mr. Sita Ram’s plate.

‘Burke and Bacon,’ Mr. Sita Ram went on sonorously, ‘Milton and
Macaulay…’

‘Oh, look!’ Elinor Quarles’s voice was shrill with alarm. She got up so
suddenly that her chair fell over backwards. Mr. Sita Ram turned towards
her.

‘What’s de matter?’ he asked in a tone of annoyance. It is vexatious to
be interrupted in the middle of a peroration.

Elinor pointed. A very large grey toad was laboriously hopping across
the veranda. In the silence its movements were audible—a soft thudding,
as though a damp sponge were being repeatedly dropped.

‘De toad can do no harm,’ said Mr. Sita Ram, who was accustomed to the
tropical fauna.

Elinor looked beseechingly at her husband. The glance that he returned
was one of disapproval.

‘Really, my darling,’ he protested. He himself had a strong dislike for
squashy animals. But he knew how to conceal his disgust, stoically. It
was the same with the food. There had been (the right, the fully
expressive word now occurred to him) a certain toad-like quality about
the fish. But he had managed, none the less, to eat it. Elinor had left
hers, after the first mouthful, untouched.

‘Perhaps you wouldn’t mind driving it away,’ she whispered. Her face
expressed her inward agony. ‘You know how much I detest them.’

Her husband laughed and, apologizing to Mr. Sita Ram, got up, very tall
and slim, and limped across the veranda. With the toe of his clumsy
surgical boot he manoeuvred the animal to the edge of the platform. It
flopped down heavily into the garden below. Looking out, he caught a
glimpse of the sea shining between the palm stems. The moon was up and
the tufted foliage stood out black against the sky. Not a leaf stirred.
It was enormously hot and seemed to be growing hotter as the night
advanced. Heat under the sun was not so bad; one expected it. But this
stifling darkness…Philip mopped his face and went back to his seat at
the table.

‘You were saying, Mr. Sita Ram?’

But Mr. Sita Ram’s first fine careless rapture had evaporated. ‘I was
re-reading some of de works of Morley to-day,’ he announced

‘Golly! ‘ said Philip Quarles, who liked on occasion, very deliberately,
to bring out a piece of schoolboy slang. It made such an effect in the
middle of a serious conversation.

But Mr. Sita Ram could hardly be expected to catch the full significance
of that ‘ Golly.’ ‘What a tinker!’ he pursued. ‘What a great tinker! And
de style is so chaste.’

‘I suppose it is.’

‘Dere are some good phrases,’ Mr. Sita Ram went on ‘I wrote dem down.’
He searched his pockets, but failed to discover his notebook. ‘Never
mind,’ he said. ‘But dey were good phrases. Sometimes one reads a whole
book widout finding a single phrase one can remember or quote. What’s de
good of such a book, I ask you?’

‘What indeed?’

Four or five untidy servants came out of the house and changed the
plates. A dish of dubious rissoles made its appearance. Elinor glanced
despairingly at her husband, then turned to Mr. Sita Ram to assure him
that she never ate meat. Himself stoically eating, Philip approved her
wisdom. They drank sweet champagne that was nearly as warm as tea. The
rissoles were succeeded by sweetmeats—large, pale balls (much fingered,
one felt sure, long and lovingly rolled between the palms) of some
equivocal substance, at once slimy and gritty, and tasting hauntingly
through their sweetness of mutton fat.

Under the influence of the champagne, Mr. Sita Ram recovered his
eloquence. His latest oration re-uttered itself.

‘Dere is one law for de English,’ he said, ‘and anoder for de Indians,
one for de oppressors and anoder for de oppressed. De word justice has
eider disappeared from your vocab’lary, or else it has changed its
meaning.’

‘I’m inclined to think that it has changed its meaning,’ said Philip.

Mr. Sita Ram paid no attention. He was filled with a sacred indignation,
the more violent for being so hopelessly impotent. ‘Consider de case,’
he went on (and his voice trembled out of his control), ‘of de
unfortunate station-master of Bhowanipore.’

But Philip refused to consider it. He was thinking of the way in which
the word justice changes its meaning. Justice for India had meant one
thing before he visited the country. It meant something very different
now, when he was on the point of leaving it.

The station-master of Bhowanipore, it appeared, had had a spotless
record and nine children.

‘But why don’t you teach them birth control, Mr. Sita Ram? ‘ Elinor had
asked. These descriptions of enormous families always made her wince.
She remembered what she had suffered when little Phil was born. And
after all, she had had chloroform and two nurses and Sir Claude Aglet.
Whereas the wife of the station-master of Bhowanipore… She had heard
accounts of Indian midwives. She shuddered. ‘Isn’t it the only hope for
India?’

Mr. Sita Ram, however, thought that the only hope was universal suffrage
and self-government. He went on with the station-master’s history. The
man had passed all his examinations with credit; his qualifications were
the highest possible. And yet he had been passed over for promotion no
less than four times. Four times, and always in favour of Europeans or
Eurasians. Mr. Sita Ram’s blood boiled when he thought of the five
thousand years of Indian civilization, Indian spirituality, Indian moral
superiority, cynically trampled, in the person of the station-master of
Bhowanipore, under English feet…

‘Is dat justice, I ask? ‘ He banged the table.

Who knows? Philip wondered. Perhaps it is.

Realizing that he was expected to make some response, Philip shook his
head and said, ‘No.’

Elinor was still thinking of the nine children. To obtain a quick
delivery, the midwives, she had heard, stamp on their patients. And,
instead of ergot, they use a paste made of cow-dung and powdered glass

‘Do you call dat justice? ‘ Mr. Sita Ram repeated. Realizing that he was
expected to make some response, Philip shook his head and said, ‘No.’

‘You ought to write about it,’ said Mr. Sita Ram, ‘you ought to show de
scandal up.’

Philip excused himself; he was only a writer of novels, not a
politician, not a journalist.’do you know old Daulat Singh?’ he added
with apparent irrelevance. ‘The one who lives at Ajmere?’

‘I have met de man,’ said Mr. Sita Ram, in a tone that made it quite
clear that he didn’t like Daulat Singh, or perhaps (more probably,
thought Philip) hadn’t been liked or approved by him.

‘A fine man, I thought,’ said Philip. For men like Daulat Singh justice
would have to mean something very different from what it meant for Mr.
Sita Ram or the station-master of Bhowanipore. He remembered the noble
old face, the bright eyes, the restrained passion of his words. If only
he could have refrained from chewing pan….

The time came for them to go. At last. They said goodbye with an almost
excessive cordiality, climbed into the waiting car and were driven away.
The ground beneath the palm trees of Joohoo was littered with a mintage
of shining silver, splashed with puddles of mercury. They rolled through
a continuous flickering of light and dark—the cinema film of twenty
years ago—until, emerging from under the palm trees, they found
themselves in the full glare of the enormous moon.

‘Three-formed Hecate,’ he thought, blinking at the round brilliance.
‘But what about Sita Ram and Daulat Singh and the station-master, what
about old appalling India, what about justice and liberty, what about
progress and the future? The fact is, I don’t care. Not a pin. It’s
disgraceful. But I don’t. And the forms of Hecate aren’t three. They’re
a thousand, they’re millions. The tides. The Nemorensian goddess, the
Tifatinian. Varying directly as the product of the masses and inversely
as the square of the distances. A florin at arm’s length, but as big as
the Russian Empire. Bigger than India. What a comfort it will be to be
back in Europe again! And to think there was a time when I read books
about yoga and did breathing exercises and tried to persuade myself that
I didn’t really exist! What a fool! It was the result of talking with
that idiot Burlap. But luckily people don’t leave much trace on me. They
make an impression easily, like a ship in water. But the water closes up
again. I wonder what this Italian ship will be like to-morrow? The Lloyd
Triestino boats are always supposed to be good. “Luckily,” I said; but
oughtn’t one to be ashamed of one’s indifference? That parable of the
sower. The seed that fell in shallow ground. And yet, obviously, it’s no
use pretending to be what one isn’t. One sees the results of that in
Burlap. What a comedian! But he takes in a lot of people. Including
himself, I suppose. I don’t believe there’s such a thing as a conscious
hypocrite, except for special occasions. You can’t keep it up all the
time. All the same, it would be good to know what it’s like to believe
in something to the point of being prepared to kill people or get
yourself killed. It would be an experience….’

Elinor had lifted her face towards the same bright disc. Moon, full
moon…. And instantly she had changed her position in space and time. She
dropped her eyes and turned towards her husband; she took his hand and
leaned tenderly against him.

‘Do you remember those evenings?’ she asked. ‘In the garden, at
Gattenden. Do you remember, Phil?’

Elinor’s words came to his ears from a great distance and from a world
in which, for the moment, he felt no interest. He roused himself with
reluctance. ‘Which evenings? ‘ he asked, speaking across gulfs, and in
the rather flat and colourless voice of one who answers an importunate
telephone.

At the sound of that telephone voice Elinor quickly drew away from him.
To press yourself against someone who turns out simply not to be there
is not only disappointing; it is also rather humiliating. Which
evenings, indeed!

‘Why don’t you love me any more?’ she asked despairingly. As if she
could have been talking about any other evenings than those of that
wonderful summer they had spent, just after their marriage, at her
mother’s house. ‘You don’t even take any interest in me now—less than
you would in a piece of furniture, much less than in a book.’

‘But, Elinor, what are you talking about?’ Philip put more astonishment
into his voice than he really felt. After the first moment, when he had
had time to come to the surface, so to speak, from the depths of his
reverie, he had understood what she meant, he had connected this Indian
moon with that which had shone, eight years ago, on the Hertfordshire
garden. He might have said so, of course. It would have made things
easier. But he was annoyed at having been interrupted, he didn’t like to
be reproached, and the temptation to score a debater’s point against his
wife was strong. ‘I ask a simple question,’ he went on, ‘merely wanting
to know what you mean. And you retort by complaining that I don’t love
you. I fail to see the logical connection.’

‘But you know quite well what I was talking about,’ said Elinor. ‘And
besides, it is true—you don’t love me any more.’

‘I do, as it happens,’ said Philip and, still skirmishing (albeit,
vainly as he knew) in the realm of dialectic, went on like a little
Socrates with his cross-examination. ‘But what I really want to know is
how we ever got to this point from the place where we started. We began
with evenings and now…’

But Elinor was more interested in love than in logic. ‘Oh, I know you
don’t want to say you don’t love me,’ she interrupted. ‘Not in so many
words. You don’t want to hurt my feelings. But it would really hurt them
less if you did so straight out, instead of just avoiding the whole
question, as you do now. Because this avoiding is really just as much of
an admission as a bald statement. And it hurts more because it lasts
longer, because there’s suspense and uncertainty and repetition of pain.
So long as the words haven’t been definitely spoken, there’s always just
a chance that they mayn’t have been tacitly implied. Always a chance,
even when one knows that they have been implied. There’s still room for
hope. And where there’s hope there’s disappointment. It isn’t really
kinder to evade the question, Phil; it’s crueller.’

‘But I don’t evade the question,’ he retorted. ‘Why should I, seeing
that I do love you?’

‘Yes, but how? How do you love me? Not in the way you used to, at the
beginning. Or perhaps you’ve forgotten. You didn’t even remember the
time when we were first married.’

‘But, my dear child,’ Philip protested,’do be accurate. You just said
“those evenings” and expected me to guess which.’

‘Of course I expected,’ said Elinor. ‘You ought to have known. You would
have known, if you took any interest. That’s what I complain of. You
care so little now that the time when you did care means nothing to you.
Do you think I can forget those evenings?’

She remembered the garden with its invisible and perfumed flowers, the
huge black Wellingtonia on the lawn, the rising moon, and the two stone
griffins at either end of the low terrace wall, where they had sat
together. She remembered what he had said and his kisses, the touch of
his hands. She remembered everything—remembered with the minute
precision of one who loves to explore and reconstruct the past, of one
who is for ever turning over and affectionately verifying each precious
detail of recollected happiness.

‘It’s all simply faded out of your mind,’ she added, mournfully
reproachful. For her, those evenings were still more real, more actual
than much of her contemporary living.

‘But of course I remember,’ said Philip impatiently. ‘Only one can’t
readjust one’s mind instantaneously. At the moment, when you spoke, I
happened to be thinking of something else; that was all.’

Elinor sighed. ‘I wish I had something else to think about,’ she said.
‘That’s the trouble; I haven’t. Why should I love you so much? Why? It
isn’t fair. You’re protected by an intellect and a talent. You have your
work to retire into, your ideas to shield you. But I have nothing—no
defence against my feelings, no alternative to you. And it’s I who need
the defence and the alternative. For I’m the one who really cares.
You’ve got nothing to be protected from. You don’t care. No, it isn’t
fair, it isn’t fair.’

And after all, she was thinking, it had always been like this. He hadn’t
ever really loved her, even at the beginning. Not profoundly and
entirely, not with abandonment. For even at the beginning he had evaded
her demands, he had refused to give himself completely to her. On her
side she had offered everything, everything. And he had taken, but
without return. His soul, the intimacies of his being, he had always
withheld. Always, even from the first, even when he had loved her most.
She had been happy then—but only because she had not known better than
to be happy, because she had not realized, in her inexperience, that
love could be different and better. She took a perverse pleasure in the
retrospective disparagement of her felicity, in laying waste her
memories. The moon, the dark and perfumed garden, the huge black tree
and its velvet shadow on the lawn…. She denied them, she rejected the
happiness which they symbolized in her memory.

Philip Quarles, meanwhile, said nothing. There was nothing, really, to
say. He put his arm round her and drew her towards him; he kissed her
forehead and her fluttering eyelids; they were wet with tears.

The sordid suburbs of Bombay slid past them—factories and little huts
and huge tenements, ghastly and bone-white under the moon. Brown,
thin-legged pedestrians appeared for a moment in the glare of the
headlights, like truths apprehended intuitively and with immediate
certainty, only to disappear again almost instantly into the void of
outer darkness. Here and there, by the roadside, the light of a fire
mysteriously hinted at dark limbs and faces. The inhabitants of a world
of thought starrily remote from theirs peered at them, as the car
flashed past, from creaking bullock carts.

‘My darling,’ he kept repeating, ‘my darling…’

Elinor permitted herself to be comforted. ‘You love me a little?’

‘So much.’

She actually laughed, rather sobbingly, it is true; but still, it was a
laugh. ‘You do your best to be nice to me.’ And after all, she thought,
those days at Gattenden had really been blissful. They were hers, she
had had them; they couldn’t be denied. ‘You make such efforts. It’s
sweet of you.’

‘It’s silly to talk like that,’ he protested. ‘You know I love you.’

‘Yes, I know you do.’ She smiled and stroked his cheek. ‘When you have
time and then by wireless across the Atlantic.’

‘No, that isn’t true.’ But secretly he knew that it was. All his life
long he had walked in a solitude, in a private void, into which nobody,
not his mother, not his friends, not his lovers had ever been permitted
to enter. Even when he held her thus, pressed close to him, it was by
wireless, as she had said, and across an Atlantic that he communicated
with her.

‘It isn’t true,’ she echoed, tenderly mocking. ‘But, my poor old Phil,
you couldn’t even take in a child. You don’t know how to lie
convincingly. You’re too honest. That’s one of the reasons why I love
you. If you knew how transparent you were!’

Philip was silent. These discussions of personal relations always made
him uncomfortable. They threatened his solitude—that solitude which,
with a part of his mind, he deplored (for he felt himself cut off from
much he would have liked to experience), but in which alone,
nevertheless, his spirit could live in comfort, in which alone he felt
himself free. At ordinary times he took this inward solitude for
granted, as one accepts the atmosphere in which one lives. But when it
was menaced, he became only too painfully aware of its importance to
him; he fought for it, as a choking man fights for air. But it was a
fight without violence, a negative battle of retirement and defence. He
entrenched himself now in silence, in that calm, remote, frigid silence,
which he was sure that Elinor would not attempt, knowing the
hopelessness of the venture, to break through. He was right; Elinor
glanced at him for an instant, and then, turning away, looked out at the
moonlit landscape. Their parallel silences flowed on through time,
unmeeting.

They were driven on through the Indian darkness. Almost cool against
their faces, the moving air smelt now of tropical flowers, now of
sewage, or curry, or burning cow-dung.

‘And yet,’ said Elinor suddenly, unable any longer to contain her
resentful thoughts, ‘you couldn’t do without me. Where would you be, if
I left you, if I went to somebody who was prepared to give me something
in return for what I give? Where would you be?’

The question dropped into the silence. Philip made no answer. But where
would he be? He too wondered. For in the ordinary daily world of human
contacts he was curiously like a foreigner, uneasily not at home among
his fellows, finding it difficult or impossible to enter into
communication with any but those who could speak his native intellectual
language of ideas. Emotionally, he was a foreigner. Elinor was his
interpreter, his dragoman. Like her father, Elinor Bidlake had been born
with a gift of intuitive understanding and social ease. She was quickly
at home with anybody. She knew, instinctively, as well as old John
himself, just what to say to every type of person—to every type except,
perhaps, her husband’s. It is difficult to know what to say to someone
who does not say anything in return, who answers the personal word with
the impersonal, the particular and feeling word with an intellectual
generalization. Still, being in love with him, she persisted in her
efforts to lure him into direct contact; and though the process was
rather discouraging—like singing to deaf-mutes or declaiming poetry to
an empty hall—she went on giving him her intimacies of thought and
feeling. There were occasions, when, making a great effort, he did his
best, in exchange, to admit her into his own personal privacies. But
whether it was that the habit of secrecy had made it impossible for him
to give utterance to his inward feelings, or whether the very capacity
to feel had actually been atrophied by consistent silence and
repression, Elinor found these rare intimacies disappointing. The holy
of holies into which he so painfully ushered her was almost as naked and
empty as that which astonished the Roman invaders, when they violated
the temple ofJerusalem. Still, she was grateful to Philip for his good
intentions in at least wanting to admit her to his emotional intimacy,
even though there mightn’t be much of an emotional life to be intimate
with. A kind of Pyrrhonian indifference, tempered by a consistent
gentleness and kindness, as well as by the more violent intermittences
of physical passion—this was the state of being which nature and second
nature had made normal for him. Elinor’s reason told her that this was
so; but her feelings would not accept in practice what she was sure of
in theory. What was living and sensitive and irrational in her was hurt
by his indifference, as though it were a personal coldness directed only
against herself. And yet, whatever she might feel, Elinor knew all the
time that his indifference wasn’t personal, that he was like that with
everybody, that he loved her as much as it was possible for him to love,
that his love for her hadn’t diminished, because it had never really
been greater—more passionate once perhaps, but never more emotionally
rich in intimacies and self-giving, even at its most passionate, than it
was now. But all the same her feelings were outraged; he oughtn’t to be
like this. He oughtn’t to be; but there, he was. After an outburst, she
would settle down and try to love him as reasonably as she could, making
the best of his kindness, his rather detached and separate passion, his
occasional and laborious essays at emotional intimacy, and finally his
intelligence—that quick, comprehensive, ubiquitous intelligence that
could understand everything, including the emotions it could not feel
and the instincts it took care not to be moved by.

Once, when he had been telling her about Koehler’s book on the apes,
‘You’re like a monkey on the superman side of humanity,’ she said.
‘Almost human, like those poor chimpanzees. The only difference is that
they’re trying to think up with their feelings and instincts, and you’re
trying to feel down with your intellect. Almost human. Trembling on the
verge, my poor Phil.’

He understood everything so perfectly. That was why it was such fun
being his dragoman and interpreting other people for him. (It was less
amusing when one had to interpret oneself.) All that the intelligence
could seize upon he seized. She reported her intercourse with the
natives of the realm of emotion and he understood at once, he
generalized her experience for her, he related it with other
experiences, classified it, found analogies and parallels. From single
and individual it became in his hands part of a system. She was
astonished to find that she and her friends had been, all unconsciously,
substantiating a theory, or exemplifying some interesting
generalization. Her functions as dragoman were not confined to mere
scouting and reporting. She acted also directly as personal interpreter
between Philip and any third party he might wish to get into touch with,
creating the atmosphere in which alone the exchange of personalities is
possible, preserving the conversation from intellectual desiccation.
Left to himself Philip would never have been able to establish personal
contact or preserve it when once established. But when Elinor was there
to make and keep the contact for him, he could understand, he could
sympathize, with his intelligence, in a way which Elinor assured him was
all but human. In his subsequent generalizations from the experience she
had made possible for him he became once more undisguisedly the overman.

Yes, it was fun to serve as dragoman to such an exceptionally
intelligent tourist in the realm of feeling. But it was more than fun;
it was also, in Elinor’s eyes, a duty. There was his writing to
consider.

‘Ah, if you were a little less of an overman, Phil,’ she used to say,
‘what good novels you’d write!’

Rather ruefully he agreed with her. He was intelligent enough to know
his own defects. Elinor did her best to supply them—gave him first-hand
information about the habits of the natives, acted as go-between when he
wanted to come into personal contact with one of them. Not only for her
own sake, but for the sake of the novelist he might be, she wished he
could break his habit of impersonality and learn to live with the
intuitions and feelings and instincts as well as with the intellect.
Heroically, she had even encouraged him in his velleities of passion for
other women. It might do him good to have a few affairs. So anxious was
she to do him good as a novelist, that on more than one occasion, seeing
him look admiringly at some young woman or other, she had gone out of
her way to establish for him the personal contact which he would never
have been able to establish for himself. It was risky, of course. He
might really fall in love; he might forget to be intellectual and become
a reformed character, but for some other woman’s benefit. Elinor took
the risk, partly because she thought that his writing ought to come
before everything else, even her own happiness, and partly because she
was secretly convinced that there was in reality no risk at all, that he
would never lose his head so wholly as to want to run off with another
woman. The cure by affairs, if it worked at all, would be gentle in its
action; and if it did work, she was sure she would know how to profit by
its good effects on him. Anyhow, it hadn’t worked so far. Philip’s
infidelities amounted to very little and had had no appreciable effect
on him. He remained depressingly, even maddeningly the same—intelligent
to the point of being almost human, remotely kind, separately passionate
and sensual, impersonally sweet. Maddening. Why did she go on loving
him? She wondered. One might almost as well go on loving a bookcase. One
day she would really leave him. There was such a thing as being too
unselfish and devoted. One should think of one’s own happiness
sometimes. To be loved for a change, instead of having to do all the
loving oneself; to receive instead of perpetually giving…. Yes, one day
she really would leave him. She had herself to think about. Besides, it
would be a punishment for Phil. A punishment—for she was sure that, if
she left him, he would be genuinely unhappy, in his way, as much as it
lay in him to be unhappy. And perhaps the unhappiness might achieve the
miracle she had been longing and working for all these years; perhaps it
would sensitize him, personalize him. Perhaps it might be the making of
him as a writer. Perhaps it was even her duty to make him unhappy, the
most sacred of her duties….

The sight of a dog running across the road just in front of the car
aroused her from her reverie. How suddenly, how startlingly it had
dashed into the narrow universe of the headlamps! It existed for a
fraction of a second, desperately running, and was gone again into the
darkness on the other side of the luminous world. Another dog was
suddenly in its place, pursuing.

‘Oh!’ cried Elinor. ‘It ‘1I be…’ The headlights swerved and swung
straight again, there was a padded jolt, as though one of the wheels had
passed over a stone; but the stone yelped. ‘…run over,’ she concluded.

‘It has been run over.’

The Indian chauffeur looked round at them, grinning. They could see the
flash of his teeth. ‘Dog!’ he said. He was proud of his English.

‘Poor beast!’ Elinor shuddered.

‘It was his fault,’ said Philip. ‘He wasn’t looking. That’s what comes
of running after the females of one’s species.’

There was a silence. It was Philip who broke it.

‘Morality’d be very queer,’ he reflected aloud, ‘if we loved seasonally,
not all the year round. Moral and immoral would change from one month to
another. Primitive societies are apt to be more seasonal than cultivated
ones. Even in Sicily there are twice as many births in January as in
August. Which proves conclusively that in the spring the young man’s
fancy… But nowhere only in the spring. There’s nothing human quite
analogous to heat in mares or she-dogs. Except,’ he added, ‘except
perhaps in the moral sphere. A bad reputation in a woman allures like
the signs of heat in a bitch. Ill-fame announces accessibility. Absence
of heat is the animal’s equivalent of the chaste woman’s habits and
principles….’

Elinor listened with interest and at the same time a kind of horror.
Even the squashing of a wretched animal was enough to set that quick
untiring intelligence to work. A poor starved pariah dog had its back
broken under the wheels and the incident evoked from Philip a selection
from the vital statistics of Sicily, a speculation about the relativity
of morals, a brilliant psychological generalization. It was amusing, it
was unexpected, it was wonderfully interesting; but oh! she almost
wanted to scream.


CHAPTER VII

Mrs. Betterton had been shaken off, his father and Lady Edward distantly
waved to and avoided; Walter was free to continue his search. And at
last he found what he was looking for. Lucy Tantamount had just emerged
from the dining-room and was standing under the arcades, glancing in
indecision this way and that. Against the mourning of her dress the skin
was luminously white. A bunch of gardenias was pinned to her bodice. She
raised a hand to touch her smooth black hair, and the emerald of her
ring shot a green signal to him across the room. Critically, with a kind
of cold intellectual hatred, Walter looked at her and wondered why he
loved. Why? There was no reason, no justification. All the reasons were
against his loving her.

Suddenly she moved, she walked out of sight. Walter followed. Passing
the entrance to the dining-room, he noticed Burlap, no longer the
anchorite, drinking champagne and being talked to by the Comtesse
d’Exergillod. Gosh! thought Walter, remembering his own experiences with
Molly d’Exergillod. ‘But Burlap probably adores her. He would…He…’ But
there she was again, talking—damnation!—with General Knoyle. Walter hung
about at a little distance, waiting impatiently for an opportunity to
address her.

‘Caught at last,’ said the General patting her hand. ‘Been looking for
you the whole evening.’

Half satyr, half uncle, he had an old man’s weakness for Lucy. ‘Charming
little girl!’ he would assure all those who wanted to hear. ‘Charming
little figure! Such eyes!’ For the most part he preferred them rather
younger. ‘Nothing like youth!’ he was fond of saying. His lifelong
prejudice against America and Americans had been transformed into
enthusiastic admiration ever since, at the age of sixty-five, he had
visited California and seen the flappers of Hollywood and the bathing
beauties on the Pacific beaches. Lucy was nearly thirty; but the General
had known her for years; he continued to regard her as hardly more than
the young girl of his first memories. For him, she was still about
seventeen. He patted her hand again. ‘We’ll have a good talk,’ he said.

‘That will be fun,’ said Lucy with sarcastic politeness.

From his post of observation Walter looked on. The General had been
handsome once. Corseted, his tall figure still preserved its military
bearing. The gallant and the guardsman, he smiled; he fingered his white
moustache. The next moment he was the playful, protective and
confidential old uncle. Faintly smiling, Lucy looked at him out of her
pale grey eyes with a detached and unmerciful amusement. Walter studied
her. She was not even particularly good looking. So why, why? He wanted
reasons, he wanted justification. Why? The question persistently
reverberated. There was no answer. He had just fallen in love with
her—that was all; insanely, the first time he set eyes on her.

Turning her head, Lucy caught sight of him. She beckoned and called his
name. He pretended to be surprised and delightfully astonished.

‘I hope you’ve not forgotten our appointment,’ he said.

‘Do I ever forget? Except occasionally on purpose,’ she qualified with a
little laugh. She turned to the General. ‘Walter and I are going to see
your stepson this evening,’ she announced in the tone and with the smile
which one employs when one talks to people about those who are dear to
them. But between Spandrell and his stepfather the quarrel, she knew
very well, was mortal. Lucy had inherited all her mother’s fondness for
the deliberate social blunder and with it a touch of her father’s
detached scientific curiosity. She enjoyed experimenting, not with frogs
and guinea-pigs, but with human beings. You did unexpected things to
people, you put them in curious situations and waited to see what would
happen. It was the method of Darwin and Pasteur.

What happened in this case was that General Knoyle’s face became
extremely red. ‘I haven’t seen him for some time,’ he said stiffly.

‘Good, she said to herself. ‘He’s reacting.’

‘But he’s such good company,’ she said aloud.

The General grew redder and frowned. What he hadn’t done for that boy!
And how ungratefully the boy had responded, how abominably he had
behaved! Getting himself kicked out of every job the General had wangled
him into. A waster, an idler; drinking and drabbing; making his mother
miserable, sponging on her, disgracing the family name. Anid the
insolence of the fellow, the things he had ventured to say the last time
they had met and, as usual, had a scene together! The Genleral was never
likely to forget being called ‘an impotent old fumbler.’

‘And so intelligent,’ Lucy was saying. With an inward smile she
remembered Spandrell’s summary of his stepfather’s career.
‘Superannuated from Harrow,’ it began, ‘passed out from Sandhurst at the
bottom of the list, he had a most distinguished career in the Army,
rising durng the War to a high post in the Military Intelligence
Department.’ The way he rolled out this anticipated obituary was really
magnificent. He was thne Times made audible. And then his remarks on
Military Intelligence in general! ‘If you look up “Intelligence” in the
new volumes of the Encyclopedia Britannica,’ he had said, ‘you’ll find
it classified under the following three heads: Intelligence, Human;
Intelligence, Animal; Intelligence, Military. My stepfather’s a perfect
specimen of Intelligence, Military.’

‘So intelligent,’ Lucy repeated

‘Some people think so, I know,’ said General Knoyle very stiffly. ‘But
personally…’ He cleared his throat with violence. That was his personal
opinion.

A moment later, still rigid, still angrily dignified, he took his leave.
He felt that Lucy had offended him. Even her youth and her bare
shoulders did not compensate him for those laudatory references to
Maurice Spandrell. Insolent, bad-blooded young cub! His existence was
the General’s standing grievance against his wife. A woman had no right
to have a son like that, no right. Poor Mrs. Knoyle had often atoned to
her second husband for the offences of her son. She was there, she could
be punished, she was too weak to resist. The exasperated General visited
the sins of the child on his parent.

Lucy glanced after the retreating figure, then turned to Walter. ‘I
can’t risk that sort of thing happening again,’ she said. ‘It would be
bad enough even if he didn’t smell so unpleasant. Shall we go away?’

Walter desired nothing better. ‘But what about your mother and the
social duties?’ he asked.

She shrugged her shoulders. ‘After all, mother can look after her own
bear garden.’

‘Bear garden’s the word,’ said Walter, feeling suddenly hopeful ‘Let’s
sneak away to some place where it’s quiet.’

‘My poor Walter! Her eyes were derisive. ‘I never knew anybody with such
a mania for quietness as you. But I don’t want to be quiet.’

His hope evaporated, leaving a feeble little bitterness, an ineffective
anger. ‘Why not stay here then?’ he asked with an attempt at sarcasm.
‘Isn’t it noisy enough?’

‘Ah, but noisy with the wrong sort of noise,’ she explained. ‘There’s
nothing I hate more than the noise of cultured, respectable, eminent
people, like these creatures.’ She waved her hand comprehensively. The
words evoked, for Walter, the memory of hideous evenings passed with
Lucy in the company of the disreputable and uncultured—tipsy at that.
Lady Edward’s guests were bad enough. But the others were surely worse.
How could she tolerate them?

Lucy seemed to divine his thoughts. Smiling, she laid a hand
reassuringly on his arm. ‘Cheer up!’ she said. ‘I’m not taking you into
low company this time. There’s Spandrell…’

‘Spandrell,’ he repeated and made a grimace.

‘And if Spandrell isn’t classy enough for you, we shall probably find
Mark Rampion and his wife, if we don’t arrive too late.’

At the name of the painter and writer, Walter nodded approvingly.

‘No, I don’t mind listening to Rampion’s noise,’ he said. And then,
making an effort to overcome the timidity which always silenced him when
the moment came to give words to his feelings, ‘but I’d much rather,’ he
added, jocularly, so as to temper the boldness of his words, ‘I’d much
rather listen to your noise, in private.’

Lucy smiled, but said nothing. He flinched away in a kind of terror from
her eyes. They looked at him calmly, coldly, as though they had seen
everything before and were not much interested—only faintly amused, very
faintly and coolly amused.

‘All right,’ he said, ‘let’s go.’ His tone was resigned and wretched.

‘We must do a creep,’ she said. ‘Furtive’s the word. No good being
caught and headed back.’

But they did not escape entirely unobserved. They were approaching the
door, when there was a rustle and a sound of hurrying steps behind them.
A voice called Lucy’s name. They turned round and saw Mrs. Knoyle, the
General’s wife. She laid a hand on Lucy’s arm.

‘I’ve just heard that you’re going to see Maurice this evening,’ she
said, but did not explain that the General had told her so only because
he wanted to relieve his feelings by saying something disagreeable to
somebody who couldn’t resent the rudeness. ‘Give him a message from me,
will you?’ She leaned forward appealingly. ‘Will you?’ There was
something pathetically young and helpless about her manner, something
very young and soft even about her middleaged looks. To Lucy, who might
have been her daughter, she appealed as though to someone older and
stronger than herself. ‘Please.’

‘But of course,’ said Lucy.

Mrs. Knoyle smiled gratefully. ‘Tell him I ‘1 come to see him to-morrow
afternoon,’ she said.

‘Tomorrow afternoon.’

‘Between four and halfpast. And don’t mention it to anyone else,’ she
added after a moment of embarrassed hesitation.

‘Of course I won’t.’

‘I’m so grateful to you,’ said Mrs. Knoyle, and with a sudden shy
impulsiveness she leaned forward and kissed her. ‘Good night, my dear.’
She slipped away into the crowd.

‘One would think,’ said Lucy, as they crossed the vestibule, ‘that it
was an appointment with her lover she was making, not her son.’

Two footmen let them out, obsequiously automatic. Closing the door, one
winked to the other significantly. For an instant, the machines revealed
themselves disquietingly as human beings.

Walter gave the address of Sbisa’s restaurant to the taxi driver and
stepped into the enclosed darkness of the cab. Lucy had already settled
into her corner.

Meanwhile, in the dining-room, Molly d’Exergillod was still talking. She
prided herself on her conversation. Conversation was in the family. Her
mother had been one of the celebrated Miss Geoghegans of Dublin. Her
father was that Mr. Justice Brabant, so well known for his table talk
and his witticisms from the bench. Moreover she had married into
conversation. D’Exergillod had been a disciple of Robert de Montesquiou
and had won the distinction of being mentioned in Sodome et Gomorrhe by
Marcel Proust. Molly would have had to be a talker by marriage, if she
had not already been one by birth. Nature and environment had conspired
to make her a professional athlete of the tongue. Like all conscientious
professionals, she was not content to be merely talented. She was
industrious, she worked hard to develop her native powers. Malicious
friends said that she could be heard practising her paradoxes in bed,
before she got up in the morning. She herself admitted that she kept
diaries in which she recorded, as well as the complicated history of her
own feelings and sensations, every trope and anecdote and witticism that
caught her fancy. Did she refresh her memory with a glance at these
chronicles each time she dressed to go out to dinner? The same friends
who had heard her practising in bed had also found her, like an examinee
the night before his ordeal, laboriously mugging up Jean Cocteau’s
epigrams about art and Mr. Birrell’s after-dinner stories and W. B.
Yeats’s anecdotes about George Moore and what Charlie Chaplin had said
to and of her last time she was in Hollywood. Like all professional
talkers Molly was very economical with her wit and wisdom. There are not
enough bons mots in existence to provide any industrious
conversationalist with a new stock for every social occasion. Though
extensive, Molly’s repertory was, like that of other more celebrated
talkers, limited. A good housewife, she knew how to hash up the
conversational remains of last night’s dinner to furnish out this
morning’s lunch. Monday’s funeral baked meats did service for Tuesday’s
wedding.

To Denis Burlap she was at this moment serving up the talk that had
already been listened to with such appreciation by Lady Benger’s lunch
party, by the week-enders at Gobley, by Tommy Fitton, who was one of her
young men, and Vladimir Pavloff, who was another, by the American
Ambassador and Baron Benito Cohen. The talk turned on Molly’s favourite
topic.

‘Do you know what Jean said about me?’ she was saying (Jean was her
husband). ‘Do you?’ she repeated insistently, for she had a curious
habit of demanding answers to merely rhetorical questions. She leaned
towards Burlap, offering dark eyes, teeth, a decollete.

Burlap duly replied that he didn’t know.

‘He said that I wasn’t quite human. More like an elemental than a woman.
A sort of fairy. Do you think it’s a compliment or an insult?’

‘That depends on one’s tastes,’ said Burlap, making his face look arch
and subtle as though he had said something rather daring, witty and at
the same time profound.

‘But I don’t feel that it’s even true,’ Molly went on. I don’t strike
myself as at all elemental or fairy-like. I’ve always considered myself
a perfectly simple, straightforward child of nature. A sort of peasant,
really.’ At this point in Molly’s performance all her other auditors had
burst into laughing protestation. Baron Benito Cohen had vehemently
declared that she was ‘ one of Nature’th Roman Empreththeth.’

Burlap’s reaction was unexpectedly different from that of the others. He
wagged his head, he smiled with a far-away, whimsical sort of
expression. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I think that’s true. A child of nature,
malgre tout. You wear disguises, but the simple genuine person shows
through.’

Molly was delighted by what she felt was the highest compliment Burlap
could pay her. She had been equally delighted by the others’ denials of
her peasanthood. Denial had been their highest compliment. The
flattering intention, the interest in her personality were the things
that mattered. About the actual opinions of her admirers she cared
little.

Burlap, meanwhile, was developing Rousseau’s antithesis between the Man
and the Citizen. She cut him short and brought the conversation back to
the original theme.

‘Human beings and fairies—I think it’s a very good classification, don’t
you?’ She leaned forward with offered face and bosom, intimately. ‘Don’t
you?’ she repeated the rhetorical question.

‘Perhaps.’ Burlap was annoyed at having been interrupted.

‘The ordinary human—yes, let’s admit it—all too ‘human being on the one
hand. And the elemental on the other. The one so attached and involved
and sentimental—I’m terribly sentimental, I may say.’ (‘About ath the
ntimental ath the Thirenth in the Odyththey,’ had been Baron Benito’s
classical comment.) ‘The other, the elemental, quite free and apart from
things, like a cat; coming and going—and going just as lightheartedly as
it came; charming, but never charmed; making other people feel, but
never really feeling itself. Oh, I envy them their free airiness.’

‘You might as well envy a balloon,’ said Burlap, gravely. He was always
on the side of the heart.

‘But they have such fun.’

‘They haven’t got enough feelings to have fun with. That’s what I should
have thought.’

‘Enough to have fun,’ she qualified; ‘but perhaps not enough to be
happy. Certainly not enough to be unhappy. That’s where they’re so
enviable. Particularly if they’re intelligent. Take Philip Quarles, for
example. There’s a fairy if ever there was one.’ She launched into her
regular description of Philip. ‘Zoologist of fiction,’, ‘learnedly
elfish,’ ‘a scientific Puck’ were a few of her phrases. But the best of
them had slipped her memory. Desperately she hunted it, but it eluded
her. Her Theophrastian portrait had to go out into the world robbed this
time of its most brilliantly effective passage, and a little marred as a
whole by Molly’s consciousness of the loss and her desperate efforts, as
she poured forth, to make it good. ‘Whereas his wife,’ she concluded,
rather painfully aware that Burlap had not smiled as frequently as he
should have done, ‘is quite the opposite of a fairy. Neither elfish, nor
learned, nor particularly intelligent.’ Molly smiled rather
patronizingly. ‘A man like Philip must find her a little inadequate
sometimes, to say the least.’ The smile persisted, a smile now of
selfsatisfaction. Philip had had a faible for her, still had. He wrote
such amusing letters, almost as amusing as her own. (‘Quand je veux
briller dans le monde,’ Molly was fond of quoting her husband’s
compliments, ‘je cite des phrases de tes lettres.’) Poor Elinor! ‘A
little bit of a bore sometimes,’ Molly went on. ‘But mind you, a most
charming creature. I’ve known her since we were children together.
Charming, but not exactly a Hypatia.’ Too much of a fool even to realize
that Philip was bound to be attracted by a woman of his own mental
stature, a woman he could talk to on equal terms. Too much of a fool to
notice, when she had brought them together, how thrilled he had been.
Too much of a fool to be jealous. Molly had felt the absence of jealousy
as a bit of an insult. Not that she ever gave real cause for jealousy.
She didn’t sleep with husbands; she only talked to them. Still, they did
do a lot of talking; there was no doubt of that. And wives had been
jealous. Elinor’s ingenuous confidingness had piqued her into being more
than ordinarily gracious to Philip. But he had started to go round the
world before much conversation had taken place. The talk, she
‘anticipated, would be agreeably renewed on his return. Poor Elinor, she
thought pityingly. Her feelings might have been a little less Christian,
if she had realized that poor Elinor had noticed the admiring look in
Philip’s eye even before Molly had noticed it herself, and, noticing,
had conscientiously proceeded to act the part of dragoman and
go-between. Not that she had much hope or fear that Molly would achieve
the transforming miracle. One does not fall very desperately in love
with a loud speaker, however pretty, however firmly plump (for Philip’s
tastes were rather old-fashioned), however attractively callipygous. Her
only hope was that the passions aroused by the plumpness and prettiness
would be so very inadequately satisfied by the talking (for talk was
all, according to report, that Molly ever conceded) that poor Philip
would be reduced to a state of rage and misery most conducive to good
writing.

‘But of course,’ Molly went on, ‘intelligence ought never to marry
intelligence. That’s why Jean is always threatening to divorce me. He
says I’m too stimulating. “Tu ne m’ennuies pas assez,” he says; and that
what he needs is une femme sedative. And I believe he’s really right.
Philip Quarles has been wise. Imagine an intelligent fairy of a man like
Philip married to an equally fairyish intelligent woman—Lucy Tantamount,
for example. It would be a disaster, don’t you think? ‘

‘Lucy’d be rather a disaster for any man, wouldn’t she, fairy or no
fairy? ‘

‘No, I must say, I like Lucy.’ Molly turned to her inner store-house of
Theophrastian phrases

‘I like the way she floats through life instead of trudging. I like the
way she flits from flower to flower—which is perhaps a rather too
botanical and poetical description of Bentley and Jim Conklin and poor
Reggie Tantamount and Maurice Spandrell and Tom Trivet and Poniatovsky
and that young Frenchman who writes plays, what is his name? and the
various others one has forgotten or never heard about.’ Burlap smiled;
they all smiled at this passage. ‘Anyhow, she flits. Doing a good deal
of damage to the flowers, I must admit.’ Burlap smiled again. ‘But
getting nothing but fun out of it herself. I must say, I rather envy
her. I wish I were a fairy and could float.’

‘She has much more reason to envy you,’ said Burlap, looking deep,
subtle and Christian once more, and wagging his head.

‘Envy me for being unhappy? ‘

‘Who’s unhappy? ‘ asked Lady Edward breaking in on them at this moment.
‘Good evening, Mr. Burlap,’ she went on without waiting for an answer.
Burlap told her how much he had enjoyed the music.

‘We were just talking about Lucy,’ said Molly d’Exergillod, interrupting
him. ‘Agreeing that she was like a fairy. So light and detached.’

‘Fairy!’ repeated Lady Edward, emphatically rolling the ‘r’ far back in
her throat.’she’s like a leprechaun. You’ve no idea, Mr. Burlap, how
hard it is to bring up a leprechaun.’ Lady Edward shook her head.’she
used really to frighten me sometimes.’

‘Did she?’ said Molly. ‘But I should have thought you were a bit of a
fairy yourself, Lady Edward.’

‘A bit,’ Lady Edward admitted. ‘But never to the point of being a
leprechaun.’

 

__ __

 

‘Well?’ said Lucy, as Walter sat down beside her in the cab. She seemed
to be uttering a kind of challenge. ‘Well?’

The cab started. He lifted her hand and kissed it. It was his answer to
her challenge. ‘I love you. That’s all.’

‘Do you, Walter?’ She turned towards him and, taking his face between
her two hands, looked at him intently in the half-darkness

‘Do you? ‘ she repeated; and as she spoke, she shook her head slowly and
smiled. Then, leaning forward, she kissed him on the mouth. Walter put
his arms round her; but she disengaged herself from the embrace. ‘No,
no,’ she protested and dropped back into her corner. ‘No.’

He obeyed her and drew away. There was a silence. Her perfume was of
gardenias; sweet and tropical, the perfumed symbol of her being
enveloped him. ‘I ought to have insisted,’ he was thinking. ‘Brutally.
Kissed her again and again. Compelled her to love me. Why didn’t I?
Why?’ He didn’t know. Nor why she had kissed him, unless it was just
provocatively, to make him desire her more violently, to make him more
hopelessly her slave. Nor why, knowing this, he still loved her. Why,
why? he kept repeating to himself. And echoing his thoughts out loud her
voice suddenly spoke.

‘Why do you love me?’ she asked from her corner.

He opened his eyes. They were passing a street lamp. Through the window
of the moving cab the light of it fell on her face. It stood out for a
moment palely against the darkness, then dropped back into
invisibility—a pale mask that had seen everything before and whose
expression was one of amused detachment and a hard, rather weary
languor. ‘I was just wondering,’ Walter answered. ‘And wishing I
didn’t.’

‘I might say the same, you know. You’re not particularly amusing when
you’re like this.’

How tiresome, she reflected, these men who imagined that nobody had ever
been in love before! All the same, she liked him. He was attractive. No,
‘attractive’ wasn’t the word. Attractive, as a possible lover, was just
what he wasn’t. ‘Appealing’ was more like it. An appealing lover? It
wasn’t exactly her style. But she liked him. There was something very
nice about him. Besides, he was clever, he could be a pleasant
companion. And tiresome as it was, his love-sickness did at least make
him very faithful. That, for Lucy, was important. She was afraid of
loneliness and needed her cavalier servants in constant attendance.
Walter attended with a dog-like fidelity. But why did he look so like a
whipped dog sometimes? So abject. What a fool! She felt suddenly annoyed
by his abjection.

‘Well, Walter,’ she said mockingly, laying her hand on his, ‘why don’t
you talk to me?’

He did not reply.

‘Or is mum the word?’ Her fingers brushed electrically along the back of
his hand and closed round his wrist. ‘Where’s your pulse?’ she asked
after a moment. ‘I can’t feel it anywhere. ‘She groped over the soft
skin for the throbbing of the artery. He felt the touch of her finger
tips, light and thrilling and rather cold against his wrist. ‘I don’t
believe you’ve got a pulse,’ she said. ‘I believe your blood stagnates.
‘The tone of her voice was contemptuous. What a fool! she was thinking.
What an abject fool! ‘Just stagnates,’ she repeated and suddenly, with
sudden malice, she drove her sharp file-pointed nails into his flesh.
Walter cried out in surprise and pain. ‘You deserved it,’ she said and
laughed in his face.

He seized her by the shoulders and began to kiss her, savagely. Anger
had quickened his desire; his kisses were a vengeance. Lucy shut her
eyes and abandoned herself unresistingly, limply. Little premonitions of
pleasure shot with a kind of panic flutter, like fluttering moths,
through her skin. And suddenly sharp fingers seemed to pluck, pizzicato,
at the fiddle-strings of her nerves; Walter could feel her whole body
starting involuntarily within his arms, starting as though it had been
suddenly hurt. Kissing her, he found himself wondering if she had
expected him to react in this way to her provocation, if she had hoped
he would. He took her slender neck in his two hands. His thumbs were on
her wind-pipe. He pressed gently. ‘One day,’ he said between his
clenched teeth, ‘ I shall strangle you.

‘Lucy only laughed. He bent forward and kissed her laughing mouth. The
touch of his lips against her own sent a thin, sharp sensation that was
almost pain running unbearably through her. The panic moth-wings
fluttered over her body. She hadn’t expected such fierce and savage
ardours from Walter. She was agreeably surprised.

The taxi turned into Soho Square, slowed down, came to a halt. They had
arrived. Walter let fall his hands and drew away from her.

She opened her eyes and looked at him. ‘Well?’ she asked challengingly,
for the second time that evening. There was a moment’s silence.

‘Lucy,’ he said, ‘let’s go somewhere else. Not here; not this horrible
place. Somewhere where we can be alone. ‘His voice trembled, his eyes
were imploring. The fierceness had gone out of his desire; it had become
abject again, dog-like. ‘Let’s tell the man to drive on,’ he begged.

She smiled and shook her head. Why did he implore, like that? Why was he
so abject? The fool, the whipped dog!

‘Please, please!’ he begged. But he should have commanded. He should
simply have ordered the man to drive on, and taken her in his arms
again.

‘Impossible,’ said Lucy and stepped out of the cab. If he behaved like a
whipped dog, he could be treated like one.

Walter followed her, abject and miserable.

Sbisa himself received them on the threshold. He bowed, he waved his fat
white hands, and his expanding smile raised a succession of waves in the
flesh of his enormous cheeks. When Lucy arrived, the consumption of
champagne tended to rise. She was an honoured guest.

‘Mr. Spandrell here!’ she asked. ‘And Mr. and Mrs. Rampion?’

‘Oo yez, oo yez,’ old Sbisa repeated with Neapolitan, almost oriental
emphasis. The implication was that they were not only there, but that if
it had been in his power, he would have provided two of each of them for
her benefit. ‘And you? Quaite well, quaite well, I hope? Sooch lobster
we have to-night, sooch lobster…’ Still talking, he ushered them into
the restaurant.


CHAPTER VIII

‘What I complain of,’ said Mark Rampion, ‘is the horrible unwholesome
tameness of our world.’

Mary Rampion laughed whole-heartedly from the depths of her lungs. It
was a laugh one could not hear without wishing to laugh oneself. ‘You
wouldn’t say that,’ she said, ‘if you’d been your wife instead of you.
Tame? I could tell you something about tameness.’

There was certainly nothing very tame about Mark Rampion’s appearance.
His profile was steep, with a hooked fierce nose like a cutting
instrument and a pointed chin. The eyes were blue and piercing, and the
very fine hair, a little on the reddish side of golden, fluttered up at
every movement, every breath of wind, like wisps of blown flame.

‘Well, you’re not exactly a sheep either,’ said Rampion. ‘But two people
aren’t the world. I was talking about the world, not us. It’s tame, I
say. Like one of those horrible big gelded cats.’

‘Did you find the War so tame?’ asked Spandrell, speaking from the
half-darkness outside the little world of pink-tinged lamplight in which
their table stood. He sat leaning backwards, his chair tilted on its
hind legs against the wall.

‘Even the War,’ said Rampion. ‘It was a domesticated outrage. People
didn’t go and fight because their blood was up. They went because they
were told to; they went because they were good citizens. ” Man is a
fighting animal,” as your stepfather is so fond of saying in his
speeches. But what I complain of is that he’s a domestic animal.’

‘And getting more domestic every day,’ said Mary Rampion, who shared her
husband’s opinions-or perhaps it would be truer to say, shared most of
his feelings and, consciously or unconsciously, borrowed his opinions
when she wanted to express them. ‘It’s factories, it’s Christianity,
it’s science, it’s respectability, it’s our education,’ she explained.
‘They weigh on the modern soul. They suck the life out of it. They…’

‘Oh, for God’s sake shut up!’ said Rampion.

‘But isn’t that what you say?’

‘What I say is what _I_ say. It becomes quite different when you say
it.’

The expression of irritation which had appeared on Mary Rampion’s face
cleared away. She laughed.

Ah, well,’ she said good-humouredly, ‘ratiocination was never my
strongest point. But you might be a little more polite about it in
public.’

‘I don’t suffer fools gladly.’

‘You’ll suffer one very painfully, if you’re not careful,’ she menaced
laughingly.

‘If you’d like to throw a plate at him,’ said Spandrell, pushing one
over to her as he spoke,’ don’t mind me.’

Mary thanked him. ‘It would do him good,’ she said. ‘He gets so
bumptious.’

‘And it would do you no harm,’ retorted Rampion, ‘if I gave you a black
eye in return.’

‘You just try. I’ll take you on with one hand tied behind my back.’

They all burst out laughing.

‘I put my money on Mary,’ said Spandrell, tilting back his chair.
Smiling with a pleasure which he would have found it hard to explain, he
looked from one to the other—from the thin, fierce, indomitable little
man to the big golden woman. Each separately was good; but together, as
a couple, they were better still. Without realizing it, he had quite
suddenly begun to feel happy.

‘We’ll have it out one of these days,’ said Rampion and laid his hand
for a moment on hers. It was a delicate hand, sensitive and expressive.
An aristocrat’s hand if ever there was one, thought Spandrell. And hers,
so blunt and strong and honest, was a peasant’s. And yet by birth it was
Rampion who was the peasant and she the aristocrat. Which only showed
what nonsense the genealogists talked.

‘Ten rounds,’ Rampion went on. ‘No gloves.’ He turned to Spandrell.

‘You ought to get married, you know,’ he said.

Spandrell’s happiness suddenly collapsed. It was as though he had come
with a jolt to his senses. He felt almost angry with himself. What
business had _he_ to go and sentimentalize over a happy couple?’

I can’t box,’ he answered; and Rampion detected a bitterness in his
jocularity, an inward hardening.

‘No, seriously,’ he said, trying to make out the expression on the
other’s face. But Spandrell’s head was in the shadow, and the light of
the interposed lamp on the table between them dazzled him.

‘Yes, seriously,’ echoed Mary. ‘You ought. You’d be a changed man.’

Spandrell uttered a brief and snorting laugh, and letting his chair fall
back on to its four legs, leaned forward across the table. Pushing aside
his coffee cup and his half-emptied liqueur glass, he planted his elbows
on the table and his chin in his hands. His face came into the light of
the rosy lamp. Like a gargoyle, Mary thought, a gargoyle in a pink
boudoir. There was one on Notre Dame in just that attitude, leaning
forward with his demon’s face between his claws. Only the gargoyle was a
comic devil, so extravagantly diabolical that you couldn’t take his
devilishness very seriously. Spandrell was a real person, not a
caricature; that was why his face was so much more sinister and
tragical. It was a gaunt face. Cheekbone and jaw showed in hard outline
through the tight skin. The grey eyes were deeply set. In the cadaverous
mask only the mouth was fleshy—a wide mouth, with lips that stood out
from the skin like two thick weals.

‘When he smiles,’ Lucy Tantamount had once said of him, ‘it’s like an
appendicitis operation with ironical corners.’ The red scar was sensual,
but firm at the same time and determined, as was the round chin below.
There were lines round the eyes and at the corners of his lips. The
thick brown hair had begun to retreat from the forehead.

‘He might be fifty, to look at him,’ Mary Rampion was thinking. ‘And
yet, what is his age?’ She made calculations and decided that he
couldn’t be more than thirty-two or thirty-three. Just the right age for
settling down.

‘A changed man,’ she repeated.

‘But I don’t particularly want to be changed.’

Mark Rampion nodded. ‘Yes, that’s the trouble with you, Spandrell. You
like stewing in your disgusting suppurating juice. You don’t want to be
made healthy. You enjoy your unwholesomeness. You’re rather proud of it,
even.’

‘Marriage would be the cure,’ persisted Mary, indefatigably enthusiastic
in the cause of the sacrament to which she herself owed all her life and
happiness.

‘Unless, of course, it merely destroyed the wife,’ said Rampion. ‘He
might infect her with his own gangrene.’

Spandrell threw back his head and laughed profoundly, butt, as was his
custom, almost inaudibly, a muted explosion. ‘Admirable!’ he said.
‘Admirable! The first really good argument in favour of matrimony I ever
heard. Almost thou persuadest me, Rampion. I’ve never actually carried
it as far as marriage.’

‘Carried what?’ asked Rampion, frowning a little. He disliked the
other’s rather melodramatically cynical way of talking. So damned
pleased with his naughtinesses! Like a stupid child, really.

‘The process of infection. I’d always stopped this side of the registry
office. But I’ll cross the threshold next time.’ He drank some more
brandy. ‘I’m like Socrates,’ he went on. ‘I’m divinely appointed to
corrupt the youth, the female youth more particularly. I have a mission
to educate them in the way they shouldn’t go.’ He threw back his head to
emit that voiceless laugh of his. Rampion looked at him distastefully.
So theatrical. It was as though the man were overacting in order to
convince himself he was there at all.

‘But if you only knew what marriage could mean,’ Mary earnestly put in.
‘If you only knew…’

‘But, my dear woman, of course he knows,’ Rampion interrupted with
impatience.

‘We’ve been married more than fifteen years now,’ she went on, the
missionary spirit strong within her. ‘And I assure you…’

‘I wouldn’t waste my breath, if I were you.’

Mary glanced enquiringly at her husband. Wherever human relationships
were concerned, she had an absolute trust in Rampion’s judgment. Through
those labyrinths he threaded his way with a sure tact which she could
only envy, not imitate. ‘He can smell people’s souls,’ she used to say
of him. She herself had but an indifferent nose for souls. Wisely then,
she allowed herself to be guided by him. She glanced at him. Rampion was
staring into his coffee cup. His forehead was puckered into a frown; he
had evidently spoken in earnest. ‘Oh, very well,’ she said and lit
another cigarette.

Spandrell looked from one to the other almost triumphantly. ‘I have a
regular technique with the young ones,’ he went on in the same too
cynical manner. Mary shut her eyes and thought of the time when she and
Rampion had been young.


CHAPTER IX

‘What a blotch!’ said the young Mary, as they topped the crest of the
hill and looked down into the valley. Stanton-in-Teesdale lay below
them, black with its slate roofs and its sooty chimneys and its smoke.
The moors rose up and rolled away beyond it, bare as far as the eye
could reach. The sun shone, the clouds trailed enormous shadows. ‘Our
poor view! It oughtn’t to be allowed. It really oughtn’t.’

‘Every prospect pleases and only man is vile,’ quoted her brother
George.

The other young man was more practically minded. ‘If one could plant a
battery here,’ he suggested, ‘and drop a few hundred rounds onto the
place…’

‘It would be a good thing,’ said Mary emphatically. ‘A really good
thing.’

Her approval filled the military young man with happiness. He was
desperately in love. ‘Heavy, howitzers,’ he added, trying to improve on
his suggestion. But George interrupted him.

‘Who the devil is that?’ he asked.

The others looked round in the direction he was pointing. A stranger was
walking up the hill towards them.

‘No idea,’ said Mary, looking at him.

The stranger approached. He was a young man in the early twenties,
hook-nosed, with blue eyes and silky pale hair that blew about in the
wind—for he wore no hat. He had on a Norfolk jacket, ill cut and of
cheap material, and a pair of baggy grey flannel trousers. His tie was
red; he walked without a stick.

‘Looks as if he wanted to talk to us,’ said George.

And indeed, the young man was coming straight towards them. He walked
rapidly and with an air of determination, as though he were on some very
important business.

‘What an extraordinary face!’ thought Mary, as he approached. ‘But how
ill he looks! So thin, so pale.’ But his eyes forbade her to feel pity.
They were bright with power.

He came to a halt in front of them drawing up his thin body very
rigidly, as though he were on parade. There was defiance in the
attitude, an earnest defiance in the expression of his face. He looked
at them fixedly with his bright eyes, turning from one to the other.

‘Good afternoon,’ he said. It was costing him an enormous effort to
speak. But speak he must, just because of that insolent unawareness in
their blank rich faces.

Mary answered for the others. ‘Good afternoon.’

‘I’m trespassing here,’ said the stranger. ‘Do you mind?’ The
seriousness of his defiance deepened. He looked at them sombrely. The
young men were examining him from the other side of the bars, from a
long way off, from the vantage ground of another class. They had noticed
his clothes. There was hostility and contempt in their eyes. There was
also a kind of fear. ‘I’m a trespasser,’ he repeated. His voice was
rather shrill, but musical. His accent was of the country.

‘One of the local cads,’ George had been thinking.

‘A trespasser.’ It would have been much easier, much pleasanter to sneak
out unobserved. That was why he had to affront them.

There was a silence. The military man turned away. He dissociated
himself from the whole unpleasant business. It had nothing to do with
him, after all. The park belonged to Mary’s father. He was only a guest.
‘I’ve gotta motta: Always merry and bright,’ he hummed to himself, as he
looked out over the black town in the valley.

It was George who broke the silence.’Do we mind?’ he said, repeating the
stranger’s words. His face had gone very red.

‘How absurd he looks!’ thought Mary, as she glanced at him. ‘Like a bull
calf. A blushing bull calf.’

‘Do we mind?’ Damned insolent little bounder! George was working up a
righteous indignation. ‘I should just think we do mind. And I’ll trouble
you to…’

Mary broke out into laughter. ‘We don’t mind at all,’ she said. ‘Not in
the least.’

Her brother’s face became even redder. ‘What do you mean, Mary?’ he
asked furiously. (‘Always merry and bright,’ hummed the military man,
more starrily detached than ever.) ‘The place is private.’

‘But we don’t mind a bit,’ she said, not looking at her brother, but at
the stranger. ‘Not a bit, when people come and are frank about it, like
you.’ She smiled at him; but the young man’s face remained as proudly
serious as ever. Looking into those serious bright eyes, she too
suddenly became serious. It was no joke, she saw all at once, no joke.
Grave issues were involved, important issues. But why grave and in what
way important she did not know. She was only obscurely and profoundly
aware that it was no joke. ‘Goodbye,’ she said in an altered voice, and
held out her hand.

The stranger hesitated for a second, then took it. ‘Goodbye,’ he said.
‘I’ll get out of the park as quick as I can.’ And turning round, he
walked rapidly away.

‘What the devil!’ George began, turning angrily on his sister.

‘Oh, hold your tongue!’ she answered impatiently.

‘Shaking hands with the fellow,’ he went on protesting.

‘A bit of a pleb, wasn’t he?’ put in the military friend.

She looked from one to the other without speaking and walked away. What
louts they were! The two young men followed.

‘I wish to God Mary would learn how to behave herself properly,’ said
George, still fuming.

The military young man made deprecating noises. He was in love with her;
but he had to admit that she _was_ rather embarrassingly unconventional
sometimes. It was her only defect.

‘Shaking that bounder’s hand!’ George went on grumbling.

That was their first meeting. Mary then was twenty-two and Mark Rampion
a year younger. He had finished his second year at Sheffield University
and was back at Stanton for the summer vacation. His mother lived in one
of a row of cottages near the station. She had a little pension—her
husband had been a postman—and made a few extra shillings by sewing.
Mark was a scholarship boy. His younger and less talented brothers were
already at work.

‘A very remarkable young man,’ the Rector insisted more than once in the
course of his sketch of Mark Rampion’s career, some few days later.

The occasion was a church bazaar and charitable garden party at the
Rectory. Some of the Sunday School children had acted a little play in
the open air The dramatist was Mark Rampion.

‘Quite unassisted,’ the Rector assured the assembled gentry.’ And what’s
more, the lad can draw. They’re a little eccentric perhaps, his
pictures, a little…ah..’ he hesitated.

‘Weird,’ suggested his daughter, with an upper middle-class smile, proud
of her incomprehension.

‘But full of talent,’ the Rector continued. ‘The boy’s a real cygnet of
Tees,’ he added with a selfconscious, almost guilty laugh. He had a
weakness for literary allusions. The gentry smiled perfunctorily.

The prodigy was introduced. Mary recognized the trespasser.

‘I’ve met you before,’ she said.

‘Poaching your view.’

‘You’re welcome to it.’ The words made him smile, a little ironically it
seemed to her. She blushed, fearful lest she had said something that
might have sounded rather patronizing. ‘But I suppose you’d go on
poaching whether you were welcome or not,’ she added with a nervous
little laugh.

He said nothing, but nodded, still smiling.

Mary’s father stepped in with congratulations. His praises went
trampling over the delicate little play like a herd of elephants. Mary
writhed. It was all wrong, hopelessly wrong. She could feel that. But
the trouble, as she realized, was that she couldn’t have said anything
better herself. The ironic smile still lingered about his lips. ‘What
fools he must think us all!’ she said to herself.

And now it was her mother’s turn. ‘Jolly good’ was replaced by ‘too
charming.’ Which was just as bad, just as hopelessly beside the point.

When Mrs. Felpham asked him to tea, Rampion wanted to refuse the
invitation—but to refuse it without being boorish or offensive. After
all, she meant well enough, poor woman. She was only rather ludicrous.
The village Maecenas, in petticoats, patronizing art to the extent of
two cups of tea and a slice of plum cake. The role was a comic one.
While he was hesitating, Mary joined in the invitation.

‘Do come,’ she insisted. And her eyes, her smile expressed a kind of
rueful amusement and an apology. She saw the absurdity of the situation.
‘But I can’t do anything about it,’ she seemed to say. ‘Nothing at all.
Except apologize.’

‘I should like to come very much,’ he said, turning back to Mrs.
Felpham.

The appointed day came. His tie as red as ever, Rampion presented
himself. The men were out fishing; he was received by Mary and her
mother. Mrs. Felpham tried to rise to the occasion. The village
Shakespeare, it was obvious, must be interested in the drama.

‘Don’t you love Barrie’s plays?’ she asked. ‘I’m so fond of them.’ She
talked on; Rampion made no comment. It was only later, when Mrs. Felpham
had given him up as a bad job and had commissioned Mary to show him
round the garden, that he opened his lips.

‘I’m afraid your mother thought me very rude,’ he said, as they walked
along the smooth flagged paths between the roses

‘Of course not,’ Mary protested with an excessive heartiness.

Rampion laughed. ‘Thank you,’ he said. ‘But of course she did. Because I
_was_ rude. I was rude in order that I shouldn’t be ruder. Better say
nothing than say what I thought about Barrie.’

‘Don’t you like his plays?’

‘Do I like them? I?’ He stopped and looked at her. The blood rushed up
into her cheeks; what had she said? ‘You can ask that here.’ He waved
his hand at the flowers, the little pool with the fountain, the high
terrace, with the stonecrops and the aubretias growing from between the
stones, the grey, severe Georgian house beyond. ‘But come down with me
into Stanton and ask me there. We’re sitting on the hard reality down
there, not with an air cushion between us and the facts. You must have
an assured five pounds a week at least, before you can begin to enjoy
Barrie. If you’re sitting on the bare facts, he’s an insult.’

There was a silence. They walked up and down among the roses—those roses
which Mary was feeling that she ought to disclaim, to apologize for. But
a disclaimer, an apology would be an offence. A big retriever puppy came
frisking clumsily along the path towards them. She called its name; the
beast stood up on its hind legs and pawed at her.

‘I think I like animals better than people,’ she said, as she protected
herself from its ponderous playfulness.

‘Well, at least they’re genuine, they don’t live on air cushions like
the sort of people you have to do with,’ said Rampion, bringing out the
obscure relevance of her remark to what had been said before. Mary was
amazed and delighted by the way he understood.

‘I’d like to know more of your sort of people,’ she said; ‘genuine
people, people without air cushions.’

‘Well, don’t imagine I’m going to do the Cook’s guide for you,’ he
answered ironically. ‘We’re not a Zoo, you know; we’re not natives in
quaint costume, or anything of that sort. If you want to go slumming,
apply to the Rector.’

She flushed very red. ‘You know I wasn’t meaning that,’ she protested.

‘Are you sure?’ he asked her. ‘When one’s rich, it’s difficult not to
mean that. A person like you simply can’t imagine what it is not to be
rich. Like a fish. How can a fish imagine what life out of the water is
like?’

‘But can’t one discover, if one tries?’

‘There’s a great gulf,’ he answered.

‘It can be crossed.’

‘Yes, I suppose it can be crossed.’ But his tone was dubious.

They walked and talked among the roses for a few minutes longer; then
Rampion looked at his watch and said he must be going.

‘But you’ll come again?’

‘Would there be much point in my coming again?’ he asked. ‘It’s rather
like interplanetary visiting, isn’t it?

‘I hadn’t felt it like that,’ she answered, and added, after a little
pause, ‘I suppose you find us all very stupid, don’t you?’ She looked at
him. He had raised his eyebrows, he was about to protest. She wouldn’t
allow him to be merely polite. ‘Because, you know, we _are_ stupid.
Terribly stupid.’ She laughed, rather ruefully. With people of her own
kind stupidity was rather a virtue than a defect. To be too intelligent
was to risk not being a gentleman. Intelligence wasn’t altogether safe.
Rampion had made her wonder whether there weren’t better things than
gentlemanly safety. In his presence she didn’t feel at all proud of
being stupid.

Rampion smiled at her. He liked her frankness. There was something
genuine about her. She hadn’t been spoilt—not yet, at any rate.

‘I believe you’re an _agent provocateur_,’ he bantered, ‘trying to tempt
me to say rude and subversive things about my betters. But as a matter
of fact, my opinions aren’t a bit rude. You people aren’t stupider than
anyone else. Not naturally stupider. You’re victims of your way of
living. It’s put a shell round you and blinkers over your eyes. By
nature a tortoise may be no stupider than a bird. But you must admit
that its way of living doesn’t exactly encourage intelligence.’

They met again several times in the course of that summer. Most often
they walked together over the moors. ‘Like a force of nature,’ he
thought as he watched her with bent head tunnelling her way through the
damp wind. A great physical force. Such energy, such strength and
health—it was magnificent. Rampion himself had been a delicate child,
constantly ailing. He admired the physical qualities he did not himself
possess. Mary was a sort of berserker Diana of the moors. He told her,
as much one day. She liked the compliment.

‘_Wass fur ein Atavismus_! That was what my old German governess always
used to say about me. She was right, I think. I _am_ a bit of an
Atavismus.’

Rampion laughed. ‘It sounds ridiculous in German. But it isn’t at all
absurd in itself. An atavismus—that’s what we all ought to be.
Atavismuses with all modern conveniences. Intelligent primitives. Big
game with a soul.’

It was a wet cold summer. On the morning of the day fixed for their next
meeting, Mary received a letter from him. ‘Dear Miss Felpham,’ she read,
and this first sight of his handwriting gave her a strange pleasure.
‘I’ve idiotically gone and caught a chill. Will you be more forgiving
than I am—for I can’t tell you how inexpressibly disgusted and angry I
am with myself—and excuse me for putting you off till to-day week?’

He looked pale and thin, when she next saw him, and was still troubled
by a cough. When she enquired about his health, he cut her short almost
with anger. ‘I’m quite all right,’ he said sharply, and changed the
subject.

‘I’ve been re-reading Blake,’ he said. And he began to speak about the
_Marriage of Heaven and Hell_.

‘Blake was civilized,’ he insisted, ‘_civilized_. Civilization is
harmony and completeness. Reason, feeling, instinct, the life of the
body—Blake managed to include and harmonize everything. Barbarism is
being lopsided. You can be a barbarian of the intellect as well as of
the body. A barbarian of the soul and the feelings as well as of
sensuality. Christianity made us barbarians of the soul, and now science
is making us barbarians of the intellect. Blake was the last civilized
man.’

He spoke of the Greeks and those naked sunburnt Etruscans in the
sepulchral wall paintings. ‘You’ve seen the originals?’ he said. ‘My
word, I envy you.’

Mary felt terribly ashamed. She had seen the painted tombs at Tarquinia;
but how little she remembered of them! They had just been curious old
works of art like all those other innumerable old works of art she had
dutifully seen in company with her mother on their Italian journey the
year before. They had really been wasted on her. Whereas if he could
have afforded to go to Italy…

‘_They_ were civilized,’ he was saying, ‘they knew how to live
harmoniously and completely, with their whole being.’ He spoke with a
kind of passion, as though he were angry—with the world, with himself,
perhaps. ‘We’re all barbarians,’ he began; but was interrupted by a
violent fit of coughing. Mary waited for the paroxysm to subside. She
felt anxious and at the same time embarrassed and ashamed, as one feels
when one has come upon a man off his guard and displaying a weakness
which at ordinary times he is at pains to conceal. She wondered whether
she ought to say something sympathetic about the cough, or pretend that
she hadn’t noticed it. He solved her problem by referring to it himself.

‘Talk of barbarism,’ he said, when the fit was over. He spoke in a tone
of disgust, his smile was wry and angry. ‘Have you ever heard anything
more barbarous than that cough? A cough like that wouldn’t be allowed in
a civilized society.’

Mary proffered solicitude and advice. He laughed impatiently.

‘My mother’s very words,’ he said. ‘Word for word. You women are all the
same. Clucking like hens after their chickens.’

‘But think how miserable you’d be if we didn’t cluck!’

A few days later—with some misgivings—he took her to see his mother. The
misgivings were groundless; Mary and Mrs. Rampion seemed to find no
difficulties in making spiritual contact. Mrs. Rampion was a woman of
about fifty, still handsome and with an expression on her face of calm
dignity and resignation. Her speech was slow and quiet. Only once did
Mary see her manner change and that was when, Mark being out of the room
preparing the tea, she began to talk about her son.

‘What do you think of him?’ she asked, leaning forward towards her guest
with a sudden brightening of the eyes.

‘What do I think?’ Mary laughed. ‘I’m not impertinent enough to set up
as a judge of my betters. But he’s obviously somebody, somebody that
matters.’

Mrs. Rampion nodded, smiling with pleasure. ‘He’s somebody,’ she
repeated. ‘That’s what I’ve always said.’ Her face became grave. ‘If
only he were stronger! If I could only have afforded to bring him up
better. He was always delicate. He ought to have been brought up more
carefully than I could do. No, not more carefully. I was as careful as I
could be. More comfortably, more healthily. But there, I couldn’t afford
it.’ She shook her head.’ ‘There you are.’ She gave a little sigh and,
leaning back in her chair, sat there in silence, with folded arms,
looking at the floor.

Mary made no comment; she did not know what to say. Once more she felt
ashamed, miserable and ashamed.

‘What did you think of my mother? ‘ Rampion asked later, when he was
escorting her home.

‘I liked her,’ Mary answered.’very much indeed. Even though she did make
me feel so small and petty and bad. Which is another way of saying that
I admired her, and liked her because of my admiration.’

Rampion nodded. ‘She _is_ admirable,’ he said. ‘She’s courageous and
strong and enduring. But she’s too resigned.’

‘But I thought that was one of the wonderful things about her.’

‘She has no right to be resigned,’ he answered, frowning. ‘No right.
When you’ve had a life like hers, you oughtn’t to be resigned. You ought
to be rebellious. It’s this damned religion. Did I tell you she was
religious?’

‘No; but I guessed it, when I saw her,’ Mary answered.

‘She’s a barbarian of the soul,’ he went on. ‘All soul and future. No
present, no past, no body, no intellect. Only the soul and the future
and in the meantime resignation. Could anything be more barbarous? She
ought to rebel.’

‘I should leave her as she is,’ said Mary. ‘She’ll be happier. And you
can rebel enough for two.’

Rampion laughed. ‘I’ll rebel enough for millions,’ he said.

At the end of the summer Rampion returned to Sheffield, and a little
later the Felphams moved southwards to their London house. It was Mary
who wrote the first letter. She had expected to hear from him; but he
did not write. Not that there was any good reason why he should. But
somehow she had expected that he would write; she was disappointed when
he did not. The weeks passed. In the end she wrote to ask him the name
of a book about which he had spoken in one of their conversations. The
pretext was flimsy; but it served. He answered; she thanked him; the
correspondence became an established fact.

At Christmas Rampion came up to London; he had had some things accepted
by the newspapers and was unprecedentedly rich—he had ten pounds to do
what he liked with. He did not let Mary know of his proximity till the
day before his departure.

‘But why didn’t you tell me before?’ she asked reproachfully, when she
heard how many days he had already been in London.

‘I didn’t want to inflict myself on you,’ he answered.

‘But you knew I should have been delighted.’

‘You have your own friends.’ _Rich_ friends, the ironical smile implied.

‘But aren’t you one of my friends?’ she asked, ignoring the implication.

‘Thank you for saying so.’

‘Thank you for being so,’ she answered without affectation or coquetry.

He was moved by the frankness of her avowal, the genuineness and
simplicity of her sentiment. He knew, of course, that she liked and
admired him; but to know and to be told are different things.

‘I’m sorry, then, I didn’t write to you before,’ he said, and then
regretted his words. For they were hypocritical. The real reason why he
had kept away from her was not a fear of being badly received; it was
pride. He could not afford to take her out; he did not want to accept
anything.

They spent the afternoon together and were unreasonably,
disproportionately happy.

‘If only you’d told me before,’ she repeated when it was time for her to
go. ‘I wouldn’t have made this tiresome engagement for the evening.’

‘You’ll enjoy it,’ he assured her with a return of that ironical tone in
which all his references to her life as a member of the monied class
were made. The expression of happiness faded from his face. He felt
suddenly rather resentful at having been so happy in her company It was
stupid to feel like that. What, was the point of being happy on opposite
sides of a gulf? ‘You’ll enjoy it,’ he repeated, more bitterly. ‘Good
food and wine, distinguished people, witty conversation, the theatre
afterwards. Isn’t it the ideal evening?’ His tone was savagely
contemptuous.

She looked at him with sad, pained eyes, wondering why he should
suddenly have started thus to lay waste retrospectively to their
afternoon. ‘I don’t know why you talk like that,’ she said. ‘Do you know
yourself?’

The question reverberated in his mind long after they had parted. ‘Do
you know yourself?’ Of course he knew. But he also knew that there was a
gulf.

They met again at Stanton in Easter week. In the interval they had
exchanged many letters, and Mary had received a proposal of marriage
from the military friend who had wanted to obliterate Stanton with
howitzers. To the surprise and somewhat to the distress of her
relations, she refused him.

‘He’s such a nice boy,’ her mother had insisted.

‘I know. But one simply can’t take him seriously, can one? ‘

‘Why not?’

‘And then,’ Mary continued, ‘he doesn’t really exist. He isn’t
completely there. Just a lump; nothing more. One can t marry someone who
isn’t there.’ She thought of Rampion’s violently living face; it seemed
to burn, it seemed to be sharp and glowing. ‘One can’t marry a ghost,
even when it’s tangible and lumpy—particularly when it’s lumpy.’ She
burst out laughing.

‘I don’t know what you’re talking about,’ said Mrs. Felpham with
dignity.

‘But _I_ do,’ Mary answered. ‘_I_ do. And after all, that’s what chiefly
matters in the circumstances.’

Walking with Rampion on the moors, she told him of the laying of this
too, too solid military phantom. He made no comment. There was a long
silence. Mary felt disappointed and at the same time ashamed of her
disappointment. ‘I believe,’ she said to herself, ‘I believe I was
trying to get him to propose to me.’

The days passed; Rampion was silent and gloomy. When she asked him the
reason, he talked unhappily about his future prospects. At the end of
the summer, he would have finished his university course; it would be
time to think of a career. The only career that seemed to be immediately
open—for he could not afford to wait—was teaching.

‘Teaching,’ he repeated with emphatic horror, ‘teaching! Does it
surprise you that I should feel depressed?’ But his misery had other
causes besides the prospect of having to teach. ‘Would she laugh at me,
if I asked her? ‘ he was wondering. He didn’t think she would. But if
she wasn’t going to refuse, was it fair on his part to ask? Was it fair
to let her in for the kind of life she would have to lead with him? Or
perhaps she had money of her own; and in that case his own honour would
be involved.

‘Do you see me as a pedagogue?’ he asked aloud. The pedagogue was his
scapegoat.

‘But why should you be a pedagogue, when you can write and draw? You can
live on your wits.’

‘But can I? At least pedagogy’s safe.’

‘What do you want to be safe for?’ she asked, almost contemptuously.

Rampion laughed. ‘You wouldn’t ask if you’d had to live on a weekly
wage, subject to a week’s notice. Nothing like money for promoting
courage and selfconfidence.’

‘Well then, to that extent money’s a good thing. Courage and
selfconfidence are virtues.’

They walked on for a long time in silence. ‘Well, well,’ said Rampion at
last, looking up at her, ‘you’ve brought it on yourself.’ He made an
attempt at laughter. ‘Courage and selfconfidence are virtues; you said
so yourself. I’m only trying to live up to your moral standards. Courage
and selfconfidence! I’m going to tell you that I love you.’ There was
another long silence. He waited; his heart was beating as though with
fear.

‘Well?’ he questioned at last. Mary turned towards him and, taking his
hand, lifted it to her lips.

Before and after their marriage Rampion had many occasions of admiring
those wealth-fostered virtues. It was she who made him give up all
thought of teaching and trust exclusively to his wits for a career. She
had confidence for both.

‘I’m not going to marry a schoolmaster,’ she insisted. And she didn’t;
she married a dramatist who had never had a play performed, except at
the Stanton-in-Teesdale church bazaar, a painter who had never sold a
picture.

‘We shall starve,’ he prophesied. The spectre of hunger haunted him; he
had seen it too often to be able to ignore its existence.

‘Nonsense,’ said Mary, strong in the knowledge that people didn’t
starve. Nobody that she knew had ever been hungry. ‘Nonsense.’ She had
her way in the end.

What made Rampion the more reluctant to take the unsafe course was the
fact that it could only be taken at Mary’s expense.

‘I can’t live on you,’ he said. ‘I can’t take your money.’

‘But you’re not taking my money,’ she insisted, ‘you’re simply an
investment. I’m putting up capital in the hope of getting a good return.
You shall live on me for a year or two, so that I may live on you for
the rest of my life. It’s business; it’s positively sharp practice.

He had to laugh.

‘And in any case,’ she continued, ‘you won’t live very long on me. Eight
hundred pounds won’t last for ever.’

He agreed at last to borrow her eight hundred pounds at the current rate
of interest. He did it reluctantly, feeling that he was somehow
betraying his own people. To start life with eight hundred pounds—it was
too easy, it was a shirking of difficulties, a taking of unfair
advantages. If it had not been for that sense of responsibility which he
felt towards his own talents, he would have refused the money and either
desperately risked the career of literature without a penny, or gone the
safe and pedagogical way. When at last he consented to take the money,
he made it a condition that she should never accept anything from her
relations. Mary agreed.

‘Not that they’ll be very anxious to give me anything,’ she added with a
laugh.

She was right. Her father’s horror at the misalliance was as profound as
she had expected. Mary was in no danger, so far as he was concerned, of
becoming rich.

They were married in August and immediately went abroad. They took the
train as far as Dijon and from there began to walk south-east, towards
Italy. Rampion had never been out of England before. The strangeness of
France was symbolical to him of the new life he had just begun, the new
liberty he had acquired. And Mary herself was no less symbolically novel
than the country through which they travelled. She had not only
selfconfidence, but a recklessness which was altogether strange and
extraordinary in his eyes. Little incidents impressed him. There was
that occasion, for example, when she left her spare pair of shoes behind
in the farm where they had spent the night. It was only late in the
afternoon that she discovered her loss. Rampion suggested that they
should walk back and reclaim them. She would not hear of it.

‘They’re gone,’ she said. ‘It’s no use bothering. Let the boots bury
their boots.’ He got quite angry with her. ‘Remember you’re not rich any
more,’ he insisted. ‘You can’t afford to throw away a good pair of
shoes. We shan’t be able to buy a new pair till we get home.’ They had
taken a small sum with them for their journey and had vowed that in no
circumstances would they spend more. ‘Not till we get home,’ he
repeated.

‘I know, I know,’ she answered impatiently. ‘I shall learn to walk
barefoot.’

And she did.

‘I was born to be a tramp,’ she declared one evening when they were
lying on hay in a barn. ‘I can’t tell you how I enjoy not being
respectable. It’s the Atavismus coming out. You bother too much, Mark.
Consider the lilies of the field.’

‘And yet,’ Rampion meditated, ‘Jesus was a poor man. Tomorrow’s bread
and boots must have mattered a great deal in his family. How was it that
he could talk about the future like a millionaire?’

‘Because he was one of nature’s dukes,’ she answered. ‘That’s why. He
was born with the title; he felt he had a divine right, like a king.
Millionaires who make their money are always thinking about money;
they’re terribly preoccupied about to-morrow. Jesus had the real ducal
feeling that he could never be let down. None of your titled financiers
or soap boilers. A genuine aristocrat. And besides, he was an artist, he
was a genius. He had more important things to think about than bread and
boots and to-morrow.’ She was silent for a little and then added, as an
afterthought: ‘And what’s more, he wasn’t respectable. He didn’t care
about appearances. They have their reward. But I don’t mind if we do
look like scarecrows.’

‘You’ve paid yourself a nice lot of compliments, said Rampion. But he
meditated her words and her spontaneous, natural, untroubled way of
living. He envied her her Atavismus.

It was not merely tramping that Mary liked. She got almost as much
enjoyment out of the more prosaic settled life they led, when they
returned to England. ‘Marie-Antoinette at the Trianon,’ was what Rampion
called her, when he saw her cooking the dinner; she did it with such
childlike enthusiasm.

‘Think carefully,’ he had warned her before they married

‘You’re going to be poor. _Really_ poor; not poor on a thousand a year
like your impecunious friends. There’ll be no servants. You’ll have to
cook and mend and do housework. You won’t find it pleasant.’

Mary only laughed. ‘_You’ll_ be the one who won’t find it pleasant,’ she
answered, ‘at any rate until I’ve learnt to cook.’

She had never so much as fried an egg when she married him.

Strangely enough that childlike, Marie-Antoinette-ish enthusiasm for
doing things—for cooking on a real range, using a real carpet sweeper, a
real sewing machine—survived the first novel and exciting months. She
went on enjoying herself.

‘I could never go back to being a perfect lady,’ she used to say. ‘It
would bore me to death. Goodness knows, housework and managing and
looking after the children can be boring and exasperating enough. But
being quite out of touch with all the ordinary facts of existence,
living in a different planet from the world of daily, physical
reality—that’s much worse.’

Rampion was of the same opinion. He refused to make art and thought
excuses for living a life of abstraction. In the intervals of painting
and writing he helped Mary with the housework.

‘You don’t expect flowers to grow in nice clean vacuums.’ That was his
argument. ‘They need mould and clay and dung. So does art.’

For Rampion, there was also a kind of moral compulsion to live the life
of the poor. Even when he was making quite a reasonable income, they
kept only one maid and continued to do a great part of the housework
themselves. It was a case, with him, of _noblesse obligeor_ rather
_roture oblige_. To live like the rich, in a comfortable abstraction
from material cares would be, he felt, a kind of betrayal of his class,
his own people. If he sat still and paid servants to work for him, he
would somehow be insulting his mother’s memory, he would be posthumously
telling her that he was too good to lead the life she had led.

There were occasions when he hated this moral compulsion, because he
felt that it was compelling him to do foolish and ridiculous things; and
hating, he would try to rebel against it. How absurdly shocked he had
been, for example, by Mary’s habit of lying in bed of a morning. When
she felt lazy, she didn’t get up; and there was an end of it. The first
time it happened, Rampion was really distressed.

‘But you can’t stay in bed all the morning,’ he protested.

‘Why not?’

‘Why not? But because you _can’t_.’

‘But I _can_,’ said Mary calmly. ‘And I _do_.’

It shocked him. Unreasonably, as he perceived when he tried to analyse
his feelings. But all the same, he was shocked. He was shocked because
he had always got up early himself, because all his people had had to
get up early. It shocked him that one should lie in bed while other
people were up and working. To get up late was somehow to add insult to
injury. And yet, obviously, getting up early oneself, unnecessarily, did
nothing to help those who had to get up early. Getting up, when one
wasn’t compelled to get up, was just a tribute of respect, like taking
off one’s hat in a church. And at the same time it was an act of
propitiation, a sacrificial appeasement of the conscience

‘One oughtn’t to feel like that,’ he reflected. ‘Imagine a Greek feeling
like that!’

It was unimaginable. And yet the fact remained that, however much he
might disapprove of the feeling, he did in fact feel like that.

‘Mary’s healthier than I am,’ he thought; and he remembered those lines
of Walt Whitman about the animals. ‘They do not sweat and whine about
their condition. They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their
sins.’ Mary was like that and it was good. To be a perfect animal _and_
a perfect human—that was the ideal. All the same, he was shocked when
she didn’t get up in the morning. He tried not to be; but he was
shocked. Rebelling, he would sometimes lie in bed himself till noon, on
principle. It was a duty not to be a barbarian of the conscience. But it
was a very long time before he could genuinely enjoy his laziness.

Slug-abed habits were not the only things in Mary that distressed him.
During those first months of their marriage he was often, secretly and
against his own principles, shocked by her. Mary soon learnt to
recognize the signs of his unexpressed disapproval and made a point,
when she saw that she had shocked him, of shocking him yet more
profoundly. The operation, she thought, did him nothing but good.

‘You’re such an absurd old puritan,’ she told him.

The taunt annoyed him, because he knew it was well founded. By birth, to
some extent, and yet more by training, he _was_ half a puritan. His
father had died when he was only a child and he had been brought up
exclusively by a virtuous and religious mother who had done her best to
abolish, to make him deny the existence of all the instinctive and
physical components of his being. Growing up, he had revolted against
her teaching, but with the mind only, not in practice. The conception of
life against which he had rebelled was a part of him; he was at war
against himself. Theoretically, he approved of Mary’s easy aristocratic
tolerance of behaviour which his mother had taught him was horribly
sinful; he admired her unaffected enjoyment of food and wine and kisses,
of dancing and singing, fairs and theatres and every kind of
jollification. And yet, whenever, in those early days, she began to talk
in her calm matter-of-fact way of what he had only heard of,
portentously, as fornication and adultery, he felt a shock, not in his
reason (for that, after a moment’s reflection, approved), but in some
deeper layer of his being. And the same part of him obscurely suffered
from her great and whole-heartedly expressed capacity for pleasure and
amusement, from her easy laughter, her excellent appetite, her
unaffected sensuality. It took him a long time to unlearn the puritanism
of his childhood. There were moments when his love for his mother turned
almost to hatred.

‘She had no right to bring me up like that,’ he said. ‘Like a Japanese
gardener deliberately stunting a tree. No right.’

And yet he was glad that he had not been born a noble savage, like Mary.
He was glad that circumstances had compelled him laboriously to learn
his noble savagery. Later, when they had been married several years and
had achieved an intimacy impossible in those first months of novelties,
shocks and surprises, he was able to talk to her about these matters.

‘Living comes to you too easily,’ he tried to explain. ‘You live by
instinct. You know what to do quite naturally, like an insect when it
comes out of the pupa. It’s too simple, too simple.’ He shook his head.
‘You haven’t earned your knowledge; you’ve never realized the
alternatives.’

‘In other words,’ said Mary, ‘I’m a fool.’

‘No, a woman.’

‘Which is your polite way of saying the same thing. But I’d like to
know,’ she went on with an irrelevance that was only apparent, ‘where
you’d be without me. I’d like to know what you’d be doing if you’d never
met me.’ She moved from stage to stage of an emotionally coherent
argument.

‘I’d be where I am and be doing exactly what I’m doing now.’ He didn’t
mean it, of course; for he knew, better than anyone, how much he owed to
her, how much he had learnt from her example and precept. But it amused
him to annoy her.

‘You know that’s not true,’ Mary was indignant.

‘It _is_ true.’

‘It’s a lie. And to prove it,’ she added, ‘I’ve a very good mind to go
away with the children and leave you for a few months to stew in your
own juice. I’d like to see how you get on without me.’

‘I should get on perfectly well,’ he assured her with exasperating
calmness.

Mary flushed; she was beginning to be genuinely annoyed.’very well
then,’ she answered, ‘ I’ll really go. This time I really will.’ She had
made the threat before; they quarrelled a good deal, for both were
quick-tempered.

‘Do,’ said Rampion. ‘But remember that two can play at that going-away
game. When you go away from me, I go away from you.’

‘We’ll see how you get on without me,’ she continued menacingly.

‘And you?’ he asked.

‘What about me?’

‘Do you imagine you can get on any better without me than I can get on
without you?’

They looked at one another for a little time in silence and then,
simultaneously, burst out laughing.


CHAPTER X

A regular technique,’ Spandrell repeated. ‘One chooses them unhappy, or
dissatisfied, or wanting to go on the stage, or trying to write for the
magazines and being rejected and consequently thinking they’re _dmes
incomprises_.’ He was boastfully generalizing from the case of poor
little Harriet Watkins. If he had just baldly recounted his affair with
Harriet, it wouldn’t have sounded such a very grand exploit. Harriet was
such a pathetic, helpless little creature; anybody could have done her
down. But generalized like this, as though her case was only one of
hundreds, told in a language of the cookery book (‘one chooses them
unhappy’—it was one of Mrs. Beeton’s recipes), the history sounded, he
thought, most cynically impressive. ‘And one starts by being very, very
kind, and so wise, and perfectly pure, an elder brother, in fact. And
they think one’s really wonderful, because, of course, they’ve never met
anybody who wasn’t just a city man, with city ideas and city ambitions.
Simply wonderful, because one knows all about art and has met all the
celebrities and doesn’t think exclusively about money and in terms of
the morning paper. And they’re a little in awe of one too,’ he added
remembering little Harriet’s expression of scared admiration; ‘one’s so
unrespectable and yet so high-class, so at ease and at home among the
great works and the great men, so wicked but so extraordinarily good, so
learned, so well travelled, so brilliantly cosmopolitan and West-End
(have you ever heard a suburban talking of the West-End?), like that
gentleman with the order of the Golden Fleece in the advertisements for
De Reszke cigarettes. Yes, they’re in awe of one; but at the same time
they adore. One’s so understanding, one knows so much about life in
general and their souls in particular, and one isn’t a bit flirtatious
or saucy like ordinary men, not a bit. They feel they could trust one
absolutely; and so they can, for the first weeks. One has to get them
used to the trap; quite tame and trusting, trained not to shy at an
occasional brotherly pat on the back or an occasional chaste uncle-ish
kiss on the forehead. And meanwhile one coaxes out their little
confidences, one makes them talk about love, one talks about it oneself
in a man-to-man sort of way, as though they were one’s own age and as
sadly disillusioned and bitterly knowing as oneself—which they find
terribly shocking (though of course they don’t say so), but oh, so
thrilling, so enormously flattering. They simply love you for that. Well
then, finally, when the moment seems ripe and they’re thoroughly
domesticated and no more frightened, one stages the denouement. Tea in
one’s rooms—one’s got them thoroughly used to coming with absolute
impunity to one’s rooms—and they’re going to go out to dinner with one,
so that there’s no hurry. The twilight deepens, one talks
disillusionedly and yet feelingly about the amorous mysteries, one
produces cocktailsvery strong—and goes on talking so that they
ingurgitate them absentmindedly without reflection. And sitting on the
floor at their feet, one begins very gently stroking their ankles in an
entirely platonic way, still talking about amorous philosophy, as though
one were quite unconscious of what one’s hand were doing. If that’s not
resented and the cocktails have done their work, the rest shouldn’t be
difficult. So at least I’ve always found.’ Spandrell helped himself to
more brandy and drank. ‘But it’s then, when they’ve become one’s
mistress that the fun really begins. It’s then one deploys all one’s
Socratic talents. One develops their little temperaments, one
domesticates them—still so wisely and sweetly and patiently—to every
outrage of sensuality. It can be done, you know; the more easily, the
more innocent they are. They can be brought in perfect ingenuousness to
the most astonishing pitch of depravity.’

‘I’ve no doubt they can,’ said Mary indignantly. ‘But what’s the point
of doing it?’

‘It’s an amusement,’ said Spandrell with theatrical cynicism. ‘It passes
the time and relieves the tedium.’

‘And above all,’ Mark Rampion went on, without looking up from his
coffee cup, ‘ above all it’s a vengeance. It’s a way of getting one’s
own back on women, it’s a way of punishing them for being women and so
attractive, it’s a way of expressing one’s hatred of them and of what
they represent, it’s a way of i expressing one’s hatred of oneself. The
trouble with I you, Spandrell,’ he went on, suddenly and accusingly
raising his bright pale eyes to the other’s face, ‘is that you really
hate yourself. You hate the very source of your life, its ultimate
basis—for there’s no denying it,’sex _is_ fundamental. And you hate it,
_hate_ it.’

‘Me?’ It was a novel accusation. Spandrell was accustomed to hearing
himself blamed for his excessive love of women and the sensual
pleasures.

‘Not only you. All these people.’ With a jerk of his head he indicated
the other diners. ‘And all the respectable ones too. Practically
everyone. It’s the disease of modern man. I call it Jesus’s disease on
the analogy of Bright’s disease. Or rather Jesus’s and Newton’s disease;
for the scientists are as much responsible as the Christians. So are the
big business men, for that matter. It’s Jesus’s and Newton’s and Henry
Ford’s disease. Between them, the three have pretty well killed us.
Ripped the life out of our bodies and stuffed us with hatred.’

Rampion was full of his subject. He had been busy all day on a drawing
that symbolically illustrated it. Jesus, in the loin-cloth of the
execution morning, and an overalled surgeon were represented, scalpel in
hand, one on either side of an operating table, on which, foreshortened,
the soles of his feet presented to the spectator, lay crucified a
half-dissected man. From the horrible wound in his belly escaped a coil
of entrails which, falling to the earth, mingled with those of the
gashed and bleeding woman lying in the foreground, to be transformed by
an allegorical metamorphosis into a whole people of living snakes. In
the background receded a landscape of hills, dotted with black
collieries and chimneys. On one side of the picture, behind the figure
of Jesus, two angels—the spiritual product of the vivisectors’
mutilations—were trying to rise on their outspread wings. Vainly, for
their feet were entangled in the coils of the serpents. For all their
efforts, they could not leave the earth.

‘Jesus and the scientists are vivisecting us,’ he went on, thinking of
his picture. ‘Hacking our bodies to bits.’

‘But after all, why not?’ objected Spandrell. ‘Perhaps they’re meant to
be vivisected. The fact of shame is significant. We feel spontaneously
ashamed of the body and its activities. That’s a sign of the body’s
absolute and natural inferiority.’

‘Absolute and natural rubbish!’ said Rampion indignantly.’shame isn’t
spontaneous, to begin with. It’s artificial, it’s acquired. You can make
people ashamed of anything. Agonizingly ashamed of wearing brown boots
with a black coat, or speaking with the wrong sort of accent, or having
a drop at the end of their noses. Of absolutely anything, including the
body and its functions. But that particular shame’s just as artificial
as any other. The Christians invented it, just as the tailors in Savile
Row invented the shame of wearing brown boots with a black coat. There
was precious little of it before Christian times. Look at the Greeks,
the Etruscans.’

The antique names transported Mary back to the moors above Stanton. He
was just the same. Stronger now, that was all. How ill he had looked
that day! She had felt ashamed of being healthy and rich. Had she loved
him then as much as she loved him now?

Spandrell had lifted a long and bony hand. ‘I know, I know. Noble and
nude and antique. But I believe they’re entirely a modem invention,
those Swedishdrill pagans of ours. We trot them out whenever we want to
bait the Christians. But did they ever exist? I have my doubts.’

‘But look at their art,’ put in Mary, thinking of the paintings at
Tarquinia. She had seen them a second time with Mark—really seen them on
that occasion.

‘Yes, and look at ours,’ retorted Spandrell. ‘When the Royal Academy
sculpture room is dug up three thousand years hence, they’ll say that
twentieth-century Londoners wore fig-leaves, suckled their babies in
public and embraced one another in the parks, stark naked.’

‘I only wish they did,’ said Rampion.

‘But they don’t. And then—leaving this question of shame on one side for
the momen—what about asceticism as the preliminary condition of the
mystical experience?’

Rampion brought his hands together with a clap and, leaning back in his
chair, turned up his eyes. ‘Oh, my sacred aunt!’ he said. ‘So it’s come
to that, has it? Mystical experience and asceticism. The fornicator’s
hatred of life in a new form.’

‘But seriously…’ the other began.

‘No, seriously, have you read Anatole France’s _Thais_?’

Spandrell shook his head.

‘Read it,’ said Rampion. ‘Read it. It’s elementary, of course. A boy’s
book. But one mustn’t grow up without having read all the boys’ books.
Read it and then come and talk to me again about asceticism and mystical
experiences.’

‘I‘1I read it,’ said Spandrell. ‘Meanwhile, all I wanted to say is that
there are certain states of consciousness known to ascetics that are
unknown to people who aren’t ascetics.’

‘No doubt. And if you treat your body in the way nature meant you to, as
an equal, you attain to states of consciousness unknown to the
vivisecting ascetics.’

‘But the states of the vivisectors are better than the states of the
indulgers.’

‘In other words, lunatics are better than sane men. Which I deny. The
sane, harmonious, Greek man gets as much as he can of both sets of
states. He’s not such a fool as to want to kill part of himself. He
strikes a balance. It isn’t easy of course; it’s even damnably
difficult. The forces to be reconciled are intrinsically hostile. The
conscious soul resents the activities of the unconscious, physical,
instinctive part of the total being The life of the one is the other’s
death and vice versa. But the sane man at least tries to strike a
balance. The Christians, who weren’t sane, told people that they’d got
to throw half of themselves in the waste-paper basket. And now the
scientists and business men come and tell us that we must throw away
half of what the Christians left us. But I don’t want to be
three-quarters dead. I prefer to be alive, entirely alive. It’s time
there was a revolt in favour of life and wholeness.’

‘But from your point of view,’ said Spandrell, ‘I should have thought
this epoch needed no reforming. It’s the golden age of guzzling, sport
and promiscuous love-making.’

‘But if you knew what a puritan Mark really was!’ Mary Rampion laughed.
‘What a regular old puritan!’

‘Not a puritan,’ said her husband. ‘Merely sane. You’re like everyone
else,’ he went on, addressing himself to Spandrell. ‘You seem to imagine
that the cold, modern, civilized lasciviousness is the same as the
healthy—what shall I call it?—phallism (that gives the religious quality
of the old way of life; you’ve read the _Acharnians_?) phallism, then,
of the ancients.’

Spandrell groaned and shook his head.’spare us the Swedish exercisers.’

‘But it _isn’t_ the same,’ the other went on. ‘It’s just Christianity
turned inside out. The ascetic contempt for the body expressed in a
different way. Contempt and hatred. That was what I was saying just now.
You hate yourselves, you hate life. Your only alternatives are
promiscuity or asceticism. Two forms of death. Why, the Christians
themselves understood phallism a great deal better than this godless
generation. What’s that phrase in the marriage service? ” With my body I
thee worship.” Worshipping with the body—that’s the genuine phallism.
And if you imagine it has anything to do with the unimpassioned
civilized promiscuity of our advanced young people, you’re very much
mistaken indeed.’

‘Oh, I’m quite ready to admit the deathliness of our civilized
entertainments,’ Spandrell answered. ‘There’s a certain smell,’ he went
on speaking in snatches between sucks at the half-smoked cigar he was
trying to relight, ‘of cheap scent…and stale unwashedness…I often
think…the atmosphere of hell…must be composed of it.’ He threw the match
away.’ But the other alternative—there’s surely no death about that. No
death in Jesus or St. Francis, for example.’

‘In spots,’ said Rampion. ‘They were dead in spots. Very much alive in
others, I quite agree. But they simply left half of existence out of
account. No, no, they won’t do. It’s time people stopped talking about
them. I’m tired of Jesus and Francis, terribly tired of them.’

‘Well then, the poets,’ said Spandrell. ‘You can’t say that Shelley’s a
corpse.’

‘Shelley?’ exclaimed Rampion. ‘Don’t talk to me of Shelley.’ He shook
his head emphatically. ‘No, no. There’s something very dreadful about
Shelley. Not human, not a man. A mixture between a fairy and a white
slug.’

‘Come, come,’ Spandrell protested.

‘Oh, exquisite and all that. But what a bloodless kind of slime inside!
No blood, no real bones and bowels. Only pulp and a white juice. And oh,
that dreadful lie in the soul! The way he was always pretending for the
benefit of himself and everybody else that the world wasn’t really the
world, but either heaven or hell. And that going to bed with women
wasn’t really going to bed with them, but just two angels holding hands.
Ugh! Think of his treatment of women—shocking, really shocking. The
women loved it of course—for a little. It made them feel so
spiritual—that is, until it made them feel like committing suicide. _So_
spiritual. And all the time he was just a young schoolboy with a sensual
itch like anybody else’s, but persuading himself and other people that
he was Dante and Beatrice rolled into one, only much more so. Dreadful,
dreadful! The only excuse is that, I suppose, he couldn’t help it. He
wasn’t born a man; he was only a kind of fairy slug with the sexual
appetites of a schoolboy. And then, think of that awful incapacity to
call a spade a spade. He always had to pretend it was an angel’s harp or
a platonic imagination. Do you remember the _Ode to the Skylark_?” Hail
to thee, blithe spirit! Bird thou never wert!”’ Rampion recited with a
ludicrous parody of an elocutionist’s ‘expression.’ ‘Just pretending,
just lying to himself, as usual. The lark couldn’t be allowed to be a
mere bird, with blood and feathers and a nest and an appetite for
caterpillars. Oh no! That wasn’t nearly poetical enough, that was much
too coarse. It had to be a disembodied spirit. Bloodless, boneless. A
kind of ethereal flying slug. It was only to be expected. Shelley was a
kind of flying slug himself; and, after all, nobody can really write
about anything except himself. If you’re a slug, you must write about
slugs, even though your subject is supposed to be a skylark. But I wish
to God,’ Ramplon added, with a sudden burst of comically extravagant
fury, ‘I wish to God the bird had had as much sense as those sparrows in
the book of Tobit and dropped a good large mess in his eye. It would
have served him damned well right for saying it wasn’t a bird. Blithe
spirit, indeed! Blithe spirit!’


CHAPTER XI

In Lucy’s neighbourhood life always tended to become exceedingly public.
The more the merrier was her principle; or if ‘merrier’ were too strong
a word, at least the noisier, the more tumultuously distracting. Within
five minutes of her arrival, the corner in which Spandrell and the
Rampions had been sitting all evening in the privacy of quiet
conversation was invaded and in a twinkling overrun by a loud and
alcoholic party from the inner room. Cuthbert Arkwright was the noisiest
and the most drunken—on principle and for the love of art as well as for
that of alcohol. He had an idea that by bawling and behaving
offensively, he was defending art against the Philistines. Tipsy, he
felt himself arrayed on the side of the angels, of Baudelaire, of Edgar
Allan Poe, of De Quincey, against the dull unspiritual mob. And if he
boasted of his fornications, it was because respectable people had
thought Blake a madman, because Bowdler had edited Shakespeare, and the
author of _Madame Bovary_ had been prosecuted, because when one asked
for the Earl of Rochester’s _Sodom_ at the Bodleian, the librarians
wouldn’t give it unless one had a certificate that one was engaged on
_bona fide_ literary research. He made his living, and in the process
convinced himself that he was serving the arts, by printing limited and
expensive editions of the more scabrous specimens of the native and
foreign literatures. Blond, beef-red, with green and bulging eyes, his
large face shining, he approached vociferating greetings. Willie Weaver
jauntily followed, a little man perpetually smiling, spectacles astride
his long nose, bubbling with good humour and an inexhaustible verbiage.
Behind him, his twin in height and also spectacled, but grey, dim,
shrunken and silent, came Peter Slipe.

‘They look like the advertisement of a patent medicine,’ said Spandrell
as they approached. Slipe’s the patient before, Weaver’s the same after
one bottle, and Cuthbert Arkwright illustrates the appalling results of
taking the complete cure.’

Lucy was still laughing at the joke when Cuthbert took her hand. ‘Lucy!
‘ he shouted. ‘My angel! But why in heaven’s name do you always write in
pencil? I simply cannot read what you write. It’s a mere chance that I’m
here to-night.’

So she’d written to tell him to meet her here, thought Walter. That
vulgar, stupid lout.

Willie Weaver was shaking hands with Mary Rampion and Mark. ‘I had no
idea I was to meet the great,’ he said. ‘Not to mention the fair.’ He
bowed towards Mary, who broke into loud and masculine laughter. Willie
Weaver was rather pleased than offended. ‘Positively the Mermaid
Tavern!’ he went on.

‘Still busy with the bric-a-brac?’ asked Spandrell, leaning across the
table to address Peter Slipe, who had taken the seat next to Walter’s.
Peter was an Assyriologist employed at the British Museum.

‘But why in pencil, why in pencil?’ Cuthbert was roaring.

‘I get my fingers so dirty when I use a pen.’

‘I’ll kiss the ink away,’ protested Cuthbert, and bending over the hand
he was still holding, he began to kiss the thin fingers.

Lucy laughed. ‘I think I’d rather buy a stylo,’ she said.

Walter looked on in misery. Was it possible? A gross and odious clown
like that?’

Ungrateful!’ said Cuthbert. ‘But I simply must talk to Rampion.’

And turning away, he gave Rampion a clap on the shoulder and
simultaneously waved his other hand at Mary.

‘What an agape!’ Willie Weaver simmered on, like a tea kettle. The spout
was now turned towards Lucy, ‘what a symposium! What a—’ he hesitated
for a moment in search of the right, the truly staggering phrase—’what
Athenian enlargements! What a more than Platonic orgy!’

‘What _is_ an Athenian enlargement?’ asked Lucy. Willie sat down and
began to explain. ‘Enlargements, I mean, by contrast with our bourgeois
and Pecksniffian smuggeries…’

‘Why don’t you give me something of yours to print?’ Cuthbert was
persuasively enquiring.

Rampion looked at him with distaste. ‘Do you think I’m ambitious of
having my books sold in the rubber shops?’

‘They’d be in good company,’ said Spandrell. ‘_The Works of Aristotle_…’
Cuthbert roared in protest.

‘Compare an eminent Victorian with an eminent Periclean,’ said Willie
Weaver. He smiled, he was happy and eloquent.

On Peter Slipe the burgundy had acted as a depressant, not a stimulant.
The wine had only enhanced his native dimness and melancholy.

‘What about Beatrice?’ he said to Walter, ‘Beatrice Gilray?’ he
hiccoughed and tried to pretend that he had coughed. ‘I suppose you see
her often, now that she works on the _Literary World_.’

Walter saw her three times a week and always found her well.

‘Give her my love, when you see her next,’ said Slipe.

‘The stertorous borborygms of the dyspeptic Carlyle!’ declaimed Willie
Weaver, and beamed through his spectacles. The _mot_, he flattered
himself, could hardly have been more exquisitely _juste_. He gave the
little cough which was his invariable comment on the best of his
phrases. ‘I would laugh, I would applaud,’ the little cough might be
interpreted; ‘but modesty forbids.’

‘Stertorous what?’ asked Lucy. ‘Do remember that I’ve never been
educated.’

‘Warbling your native woodnotes wild!’ said Willie. ‘May I help myself
to some of that noble brandy? The blushful Hippocrene.’

‘She treated me badly, extremely badly.’ Peter Slipe was plaintive. ‘But
I don’t want her to think that I bear her any grudge.’

Willie Weaver smacked his lips over the brandy. ‘Solid joys and liquid
pleasures none but Zion’s children know,’ he misquoted and repeated his
little cough of selfsatisfaction.

‘The trouble with Cuthbert,’ Spandrell was saying, ‘is that he’s never
quite learnt to distinguish art from pornography.’

‘Of course,’ continued Peter Slipe, ‘she had a perfect right to do what
she liked with her own house. But to turn me out at such short notice.’

At another time Walter would have been delighted to listen to poor
little Slipe’s version of that curious story. But with Lucy on his other
hand, he found it difficult to take much interest.

‘But I sometimes wonder if the Victorians didn’t have more fun than we
did,’ she was saying. ‘The more prohibitions, the greater the fun. If
you want to see people drinking with real enjoyment, you must go to
America. Victorian England was dry in every department. For example,
there was a nineteenth amendment about love. They must have made it as
enthusiastically as the Americans drink whiskey. I don’t know that I
really believe in Athenian enlargements—that is, if we’re one of them.’

‘You prefer Pecksniff to Alcibiades,’ Willie Weaver concluded.

Lucy shrugged her shoulders. ‘I’ve had no experience of Pecksniff.’

‘I don’t know,’ Peter Slipe was saying, ‘whether you’ve ever been pecked
by a goose.’

‘Been what?’ asked Walter, recalling his attention. ‘Been pecked by a
goose.’

‘Never, that I can remember.’

‘It’s a hard, dry sensation.’ ‘Slipe jabbed the air with a
tobacco-stained forefinger. ‘Beatrice is like that. She pecks; she
enjoys pecking. But she can be very kind at the same time. She insists
on being kind in _her_ way, and she pecks if you don’t like it.
Pecking’s part of the kindness; so I always found. I never objected. But
why should she have turned me out of the house as though I were a
criminal? And rooms are so difficult to find now. I had to stay in a
boarding house for three weeks. The food…’ He shuddered.

Walter could not help smiling.

‘She must have been in a great hurry to instal Burlap in your place.’

‘But why in such a hurry as all that?’

‘When it’s a case of off with the old love and on with the new…’

‘But what has love to do with it?’ asked Slipe. ‘In Beatrice’s case.’

‘A great deal,’ Willie Weaver broke in. ‘Everything. These superannuated
virgins—always the most passionate.’

‘But she’s never had a love affair in her life.’

‘Hence the violence,’ concluded Willie triumphantly. ‘Beatrice has a
nigger sitting on the safety valve. And my wife assures me that her
underclothes are positively Phrynean. That’s most sinister.’

‘Perhaps she likes being well dressed,’ suggested Lucy.

Willie Weaver shook his head. The hypothesis was too simple.

‘That woman’s unconscious as a black hole.’ Willie hesitated a moment.
‘Full of batrachian grapplings in the dark,’ he concluded and modestly
coughed to commemorate his achievement.

 

__

 

Beatrice Gilray was mending a pink silk camisole. She was thirtyfive,
but seemed younger, or rather seemed ageless. Her skin was clear and
fresh. From shallow and unwrinkled orbits the eyes looked out, shining.
In a sharp, determined way her face was not unhandsome, but with
something intrinsically rather comic about the shape and tilt of the
nose, something slightly absurd about the bright beadiness of the eyes,
the pouting mouth and round defiant chin. But one laughed with as well
as at her; for the set of her lips was humorous and the expression of
her round astonished eyes was mocking and mischievously inquisitive.

She stitched away. The clock ticked. The moving instant which, according
to Sir Isaac Newton, separates the infinite past from the infinite
future advanced inexorably through the dimension of time. Or, if
Aristotle was right, a little more of the possible was every instant
made real; the present stood still and drew into itself the future, as a
man might suck for ever at an unending piece of macaroni. Every now and
then Beatrice actualized a potential yawn. In a basket by the fireplace
a black she-cat lay on her side purring and suckling four blind and
parti-coloured kittens. The walls of the room were primrose yellow. On
the top shelf of the bookcase the dust was thickening on the text-books
of Assyriology which she had bought when Peter Slipe was the tenant of
her upper floor. A volume of Pascal’s _Thoughts_, with pencil
annotations by Burlap, lay open on the table. The clock continued to
tick.

Suddenly the front door banged. Beatrice put down her pink silk camisole
and sprang to her feet.

‘Don’t forget that you must drink your hot milk, Denis,’ she said,
looking out into the hall. Her voice was clear, sharp and commanding.

Burlap hung up his coat and came to the door. ‘You oughtn’t to have sat
up for me,’ he said, with tender reproachfulness, giving her one of his
grave and subtle Sodoma smiles.

‘I had some work I simply had to get finished,’ Beatrice lied.

‘Well, it was most awfully sweet of you.’ These pretty colloquialisms,
with which Burlap liked to pepper his conversation, had for sensitive
ears a most curious ring. ‘He talks slang,’ Mark Rampion once said, ‘as
though he were a foreigner with a perfect command of English—but a
foreigner’s command. I don’t know if you’ve ever heard an Indian calling
anyone a “jolly good sport.” Burlap’s slang reminds me of that.’

For Beatrice, however, that ‘awfully sweet’ sounded entirely natural and
un-alien. She flushed with a younggirlishly timid pleasure. But, ‘Come
in and shut the door,’ she rapped out commandingly. Over that soft young
timidity the outer shell was horny; there was a part of her being that
pecked and was efficient. ‘Sit down there,’ she ordered; and while she
was briskly busy over the milk-jug, the saucepan, the gas-ring, she
asked him if he had enjoyed the party.

Burlap shook his head. ‘_Fascinatio nugacitatis_,’ he said. ‘_Fascinatio
nugacitatis_.’ He had been ruminating the fascination of nugacity all
the way from Piccadilly Circus.

Beatrice did not understand Latin; but she could see from his face that
the words connoted disapproval. ‘Parties are rather a waste of time,
aren’t they?’ she said.

Burlap nodded. ‘A waste of time,’ he echoed in his slow ruminant’s
voice, keeping his blank preoccupied eyes fixed on the invisible daemon
standing a little to Beatrice’s left. ‘One’s forty, one has lived more
than half one’s life, the world is marvellous and mysterious. And yet
one spends four hours chattering about nothing at Tantamount House. Why
should triviality be so fascinating? Or is there something else besides
the triviality that draws one? Is it some vague fantastic hope that one
may meet the messianic person one’s always been looking for, or hear the
revealing word?’ Burlap wagged his head as he spoke with a curious loose
motion, as though the muscles of his neck were going limp. Beatrice was
so familiar with the motion that she saw nothing strange in it any more.
Waiting for the milk to boil, she listened admiringly, she watched him
with a serious church-going face. A man whose excursions into the
drawing-rooms of the rich were episodes in a lifelong spiritual quest
might justifiably be regarded as the equivalent of Sunday morning
church.

‘All the same,’ Burlap added, glancing up at her with a sudden
mischievous, gutter-snipish grin, most startlingly unlike the Sodoma
smile of a moment before, ‘the champagne and the caviar were really
marvellous.’ It was the demon that had suddenly interrupted the angel at
his philosophic ruminations. Burlap had allowed him to speak out loud.
Why not? It amused him to be baffling. He looked at Beatrice.

Beatrice was duly baffled. ‘I’m sure they were,’ she said, readjusting
her church-going face to make it harmonize with the grin. She laughed
rather nervously and turned away to pour out the milk into a cup.
‘Here’s your milk,’ she rapped out, taking refuge from her bafflement in
officious command. ‘Mind you drink it while it’s hot.’

There was a long silence. Burlap sipped slowly at his steaming milk and,
seated on a pouf in front of the empty fireplace, Beatrice waited,
rather breathlessly, she hardly knew for what.

‘You look like little Miss Muffett sitting on her tuffet,’ said Burlap
at last.

Beatrice smiled. ‘Luckily there’s no big spider.’

‘Thanks for the compliment, if it is one.’

‘Yes it is,’ said Beatrice. That was the really delightful thing about
Denis, she reflected; he was so trustworthy. Other men were liable to
pounce on you and try to paw you about and kiss you. Dreadful that was,
quite dreadful. Beatrice had never really got over the shock she
received as a young girl, when her Aunt Maggie’s brother-in-law, whom
she had always looked up to as an uncle, had started pawing her about in
a hansom. The incident so scared and disgusted her that when Tom Field,
whom she really did like, asked her to marry him, she refused, just
because he was a man, like that horrible Uncle Ben, and because she was
so terrified of being made love to, she had such a panic fear of being
touched. She was over thirty now and had never allowed anyone to touch
her. The soft quivering little girl underneath the business-like shell
of her had often fallen in love. But the terror of being pawed about, of
being even touched, had always been stronger than the love. At the first
sign of danger, she had desperately pecked, she had hardened her shell,
she had fled. Arrived in safety, the terrified little girl had drawn a
long breath. Thank Heaven! But a little sigh of disappointment was
always included in the big sigh of relief. She wished she hadn’t been
frightened, she wished that the happy relationship that had existed
before the pawing could have gone on for ever, indefinitely. Sometimes
she was angry with herself; more often she thought there was something
fundamentally wrong with love, something fundamentally dreadful about
men. That was the wonderful thing about Denis Burlap; he was so
reassuringly not a pouncer or a pawer. Beatrice could adore him without
a qualm.

‘Susan used to sit on poufs, like little Miss Muffett,’ Burlap resumed
after a pause. His voice was melancholy. He had spent the last minutes
in ruminating the theme of his dead wife. It was nearly two years now
since Susan had been carried off in the influenza epidemic. Nearly two
years; but the pain, he assured himself, had not diminished, the sense
of loss had remained as overwhelming as ever. Susan, Susan, Susan—he had
repeated the name to himself over and over again. He would never see her
any more, even if he lived for a million years. A million years, a
million years. Gulfs opened all round the words. ‘Or on the floor,’ he
went on, reconstructing her image as vividly as he could. ‘I think she
liked sitting on the floor best. Like a child.’ A child, a child, he
repeated to himself. So young.

Beatrice sat in silence, looking into the empty grate. To have looked at
Burlap, she felt, would have been indiscreet, indecent almost. Poor
fellow! When she turned towards him at last, she saw that there were
tears on his cheeks. The sight filled her with a sudden passion of
maternal pity. ‘Like a child,’ he had said. But he was like a child
himself. Like a poor unhappy child. Leaning forward she drew her fingers
caressingly along the back of his limply hanging hand.

 

__

 

‘Batrachian grapplings!’ Lucy repeated and laughed. ‘That was a stroke
of genius, Willie.’

‘All my strokes are strokes of genius,’ said Willie modestly. He acted
himself; he was Willie Weaver in the celebrated role of Willie Weaver.
He exploited artistically that love of eloquence, that passion for the
rotund and reverberating phrase with which, more than three centuries
too late, he had been born. In Shakespeare’s youth he would have been a
literary celebrity. Among his contemporaries, Willie’s euphuisms only
raised a laugh. But he enjoyed applause, even when it was derisive.
Moreover, the laughter was never malicious; for Willie Weaver was so
good-natured and obliging that everybody liked him. It was to a
hilariously approving audience that he played his part; and, feeling the
approval through the hilarity, he played it for all it was worth. ‘All
my strokes are strokes of genius.’ The remark was admirably in
character. And perhaps true? Willie jested, but with a secret belief.
‘And mark my words,’ he added, ‘one of these days the batrachians will
erump, they’ll break out.’

‘But why batrachians?’ asked Slipe. ‘Anything less like a batrachian
than Beatrice…’

‘And why should they break out?’ put in Spandrell.

‘Frogs don’t peck.’ But Slipe’s thin voice was drowned by Mary
Rampion’s.

‘Because things do break out,’ she cried. ‘They do.’

‘Moral,’ Cuthbert concluded:’don’t shut anything up. I never do.’

‘But perhaps the fun consists in breaking out,’ Lucy speculated.

‘Perverse and paradoxical prohibitionist!’

‘But obviously,’ Rampion was saying, ‘you get revolutions occurring
inside as well as outside. It’s poor against rich in the state. In the
individual, it’s the oppressed body and instincts against the intellect.
The intellect’s been exalted as the spiritual upper classes; the
spiritual lower classes rebel.’

‘Hear, hear!’ shouted Cuthbert, and banged the table.

Rampion frowned. He felt Cuthbert’s approbation as a personal insult.

‘I’m a counter-revolutionary,’ said Spandrell. ‘Put the spiritual lower
classes in their place.’

‘Except in your own case, eh?’ said Cuthbert grinning.

‘Mayn’t one theorize?’

‘People have been forcibly putting them in their place for centuries,’
said Rampion; ‘and look at the result. _You_, among other things.’ He
looked at Spandrell, who threw back his head and noiselessly laughed.
‘Look at the result,’ he repeated. ‘Inward personal revolution and
consequent outward and social revolution.’

‘Come, come,’ said Willie Weaver. ‘You talk as though the thermidorian
tumbrils were already rumbling. England still stands very much where it
did.’

‘But what do you know of England and Englishmen?’ Rampion retorted.
‘You’ve never been out of London or your class. Go to the North.’

‘God forbid!’ Willie piously interjected.

‘Go to the coal and iron country. Talk a little with the steel workers.
It isn’t revolution for a cause, It’s revolution as an end in itself.
Smashing for smashing’s sake.’

‘Rather sympathetic it sounds,’ said Lucy.

‘It’s terrifying. It simply isn’t human. Their humanity has all been
squeezed out of them by civilized living, squeezed out by the weight of
coal and iron. It won’t be a rebellion of men. It’ll be a revolution of
elementals, monsters, pre-human monsters. And you just shut your eyes
and pretend everything’s too perfect.

 

__

 

‘Think of the disproportion,’ Lord Edward was saying, as he smoked his
pipe. ‘It’s positively…’ His voice failed. ‘Take coal, for example.
Man’s using a hundred and ten times as much as he used in i8oo. But
population’s only two and a half times what it was. With other
animals…Surely quite different. Consumption’s proportionate to numbers.’

Illidge objected. ‘But if animals can get more than they actually
require to subsist, they take it, don’t they? If there’s been a battle
or a plague, the hyenas and vultures take advantage of the abundance to
overeat. Isn’t it the same with us? Forests died in great quantities
some millions of years ago. Man has unearthed their corpses, finds he
can use them and is giving himself the luxury of a real good guzzle
while the carrion lasts. When the supplies are exhausted, he’ll go back
to short rations, as the hyenas do in the intervals between wars and
epidemics.’ Illidge spoke with gusto. Talking about human beings as
though they were indistinguishable from maggots filled him with a
peculiar satisfaction. ‘A coal-field’s discovered; oil’s struck. Towns
spring up, railways are built, ships come and go. To a long-lived
observer on the moon, the swarming and crawling must look like the
pullulation of ants and flies round a dead dog. Chilean nitre, Mexican
oil, Tunisian phosphates—at every discovery another scurrying of
insects. One can imagine the comments of the lunar astronomers. “These
creatures have a remarkable and perhaps unique tropism towards
fossilized carrion.”’

 

__

 

‘Like ostriches,’ said Mary Rampion. ‘You live like ostriches.’

‘And not about revolutions only,’ said Spandrell, while Willie Weaver
was heard to put in something about ‘strouthocamelian philosophies.’
‘About all the important things that happen to be disagreeable. There
was a time when people didn’t go about pretending that death and sin
didn’t exist. “_Au ditour d’un sentier une charogne infame_,”’ he
quoted. ‘Baudelaire was the last poet of the Middle Ages as well as the
first modern. “_Et pourtant_,”’ he went on, looking with a smile to Lucy
and raising his glass.

‘“Et pourtant vous serez semblable a cette ordure,

A cette horrible infection,

Etoile de mes yeux, soleil de ma nature,

Vous, mon ange et ma passion!

 

Alors, o ma beaute, dites a la vermine

Qui vous mangera de baisers…”’

 

‘My dear Spandrell!’ Lucy held up her hand protestingly.

‘Really too necrophilous!’ said Willie Weaver.

‘Always the same hatred of life,’ Rampion was thinking. ‘Different kinds
of death—the only alternatives.’ He looked observantly into Spandrell’s
face.

 

__

 

‘And when you come to think of it,’ Illidge was saying, ‘the time it
took to form the coal measures divided by the length of a human life
isn’t so hugely different from the life of a sequoia divided by a
generation of decay bacteria.’

 

__

 

Cuthbert looked at his watch. ‘But good God!’ he shouted. ‘It’s
twentyfive to one.’ He jumped up. ‘And I promised we’d put in an
appearance at Widdicombe’s party. Peter, Willie! Quick march.’

‘But you can’t go,’ protested Lucy. ‘Not so absurdly early.’

‘The call of duty,’ Willie Weaver explained. ‘Stern Daughter of the
Voice of God.’ He uttered his little cough of self-approbation.

‘But it’s ridiculous, it’s not permissible.’ She looked from one to
another with a kind of angry anxiety. The dread of solitude was chronic
with her. And it was always possible, if one sat up another five
minutes, that something really amusing might happen. Besides, it was
insufferable that people should do things she didn’t want them to do.

‘And we too, I’m afraid,’ said Mary Rampion rising.

Thank heaven, thought Walter. He hoped that Spandrell would follow the
general example.

‘But this is impossible!’ cried Lucy. ‘Rampion, I simply cannot allow
it.’

Mark Rampion only laughed. These professional sirens! he thought. She
left him entirely cold, she repelled him. In desperation Lucy even
appealed to the woman of the party.

‘Mrs. Rampion, you _must_ stay. Five minutes more. Only five minutes,’
she coaxed.

In vain. The waiter opened the side door. Furtively they slipped out
into the darkness.

‘Why _will_ they insist on going?’ asked Lucy, plaintively.

‘Why will _we_ insist on staying?’ echoed Spandrell. Walter’s heart
sank; that meant the man didn’t intend to go. ‘Surely, that’s much more
incomprehensible.’

Utterly incomprehensible! On Walter the heat and alcohol were having
their usual effects. He was feeling ill as well as miserable. What was
the point of sitting on, hopelessly, in this poisonous air? Why not go
home at once. Marjorie would be pleased.

‘You, at least, are faithful, Walter.’ Lucy gave him a smile. He decided
to postpone his departure. There was a silence.

 

__

 

Cuthbert and his companions had taken a cab. Refusing all invitations,
the Rampions had preferred to walk.

‘Thank heaven!’ said Mary as the taxi drove away. ‘That dreadful
Arkwright!’

‘Ah, but that woman’s worse,’ said Rampion.’she gives me the creeps.
That poor silly little Bidlake boy. Like a rabbit in front of a weasel.’

‘That’s male trade unionism. I rather like her for making you men squirm
a bit. Serves you right.’

‘You might as well like cobras.’ Rampion’s zoology was wholly
symbolical.

‘But if it’s a matter of creeps, what about Spandrell? He’s like a
gargoyle, a demon.’

‘He’s like a silly schoolboy,’ said Rampion emphatically. ‘He’s never
grown up. Can’t you see that? He’s a permanent adolescent. Bothering his
head about all the things that preoccupy adolescents. Not being able to
live, because he’s too busy thinking about death and God and truth and
mysticism and all the rest of it; too busy thinking about sins and
trying to commit them and being disappointed because he’s not
succeeding. It’s deplorable. The man’s a sort of Peter Pan—much worse
even than Barrie’s disgusting little abortion, because he’s got stuck at
a sillier age. He’s Peter Pan a la Dostoevsky-cum-de
Musset-cum-the-Nineties-cum-Bunyan-cum-Byron and the Marquis de Sade.
Really deplorable. The more so as he’s potentially a very decent human
being.’

Mary laughed. ‘I suppose I shall have to take your word for it.’

 

__

 

‘By the way,’ said Lucy, turning to Spandrell. ‘I had a message from
your mother.’ She gave it. Spandrell nodded, but made no comment.

‘And the General?’ he enquired as soon as she had finished speaking. He
wanted no more said about his mother.

‘Oh, the General!’ Lucy made a grimace. ‘I had at least half an hour of
Military Intelligence this evening. Really, he oughtn’t to be allowed.
What about a Society for the Prevention of Generals?’

‘I’m an honorary and original member.’

‘Or why not for the Prevention of the Old, while one was about it?’ Lucy
went on. ‘The old really aren’t possible. Except your father, Walter.
He’s perfect. Really perfect. The only possible old man.’

‘One of the few completely impossible, if you only knew.’ Among the
Bidlakes of Walter’s generation the impossibility of old John was almost
axiomatic. ‘You wouldn’t find him quite so perfect if you’d been his
wife or his daughter.’ As he uttered the words, Walter suddenly
remembered Marjorie. The blood rushed to his cheeks.

‘Oh, of course, if you will go and choose him as a husband or a father,’
said Lucy, ‘ what can you expect? He’s a possible old man just because
he’s been such an impossible husband and father. Most old people have
had the life crushed out of them by their responsibilities. Your father
never allowed himself to be squashed. He’s had wives and children and
all the rest. But he’s always lived as though he were a boy on the
spree. Not very pleasant for the wives and children, I grant. But how
delightful for the rest of us!’

‘I suppose so,’ said Walter. He had always thought of himself as so
utterly unlike his father. But he was acting just as his father had
acted.

‘Think of him unfilially.’

‘I’ll try.’ How should he think of himself?’

Do, and you’ll see that I’m right. One of the few possible old men.
Compare him with the others.’ She shook her head. ‘It’s no good; you
can’t have any dealings with them.’

Spandrell laughed. ‘You speak of the old as though they were Kaffirs or
Eskimos.’

‘Well, isn’t that just about what they are? Hearts of gold, and all
that. And wonderfully intelligent—in their way, and all things
considered. But they don’t happen to belong to our civilization. They’re
aliens. I shall always remember the time I went to tea with some Arab
ladies in Tunis. So kind they were, so hospitable. But they _would_ make
me eat such uneatable cakes, and they talked French so badly, and there
was nothing whatever to say to them, and they were so horrified by my
short skirts and my lack of children. Old people always remind me of an
Arab tea party. Do you suppose we shall be an Arab tea party when we’re
old?’

‘Yes, and probably a death’s head into the bargain,’ said Spandrell.
‘It’s a question of thickening arteries.’

‘But what makes the old such an Arab tea party is their ideas. I simply
cannot believe that thick arteries will ever make me believe in God and
morals and all the rest of it. I came out of the chrysalis during the
War, when the bottom had been knocked out of everything. I don’t see how
our grandchildren could possibly knock it out any more thoroughly than
it was knocked then. So where would the misunderstanding come in?’

‘They might have put the bottom in again,’ suggested Spandrell.

She was silent for a moment. ‘I never thought of that.’

‘Or else you might have put it in yourself. Putting the bottom in again
is one of the traditional occupations of the aged.’

 

__

 

The clock struck one and, like the cuckoo released by the bell, Simmons
popped into the library, carrying a tray. Simmons was middleaged and had
that statesman-like dignity of demeanour which the necessity of holding
the tongue and keeping the temper, of never speaking one’s real mind and
preserving appearances tends always to produce in diplomats, royal
personages, high government officials and butlers. Noiselessly, he laid
the table for two, and, announcing that his lordship’s supper was
served, retired. The day had been Wednesday; two grilled mutton chops
were revealed when Lord Edward lifted the silver cover. Mondays,
Wednesdays and Fridays were chop days. On Tuesdays and Thursdays there
was steak with chips. On Saturdays, as a treat, Simmons prepared a mixed
grill. On Sundays he went out; Lord Edward had to be content with cold
ham and tongue, and a salad.

‘Curious,’ said Lord Edward, as he handed Illidge his chop, ‘curious
that the sheep population doesn’t rise. Not at the same rate as the
human population.

One would have expected…seeing that the symbiosis is such a close…’ He
chewed in silence.

‘Mutton must be going out of fashion,’ said Illidge. ‘Like God,’ he
added provocatively, ‘ and the immortal soul.’ Lord Edward was not to be
baited. ‘Not to mention the Victorian novelists,’ Illidge went on. He
had slipped on the stairs; and the only literature Lord Edward ever read
was Dickens and Thackeray. But the Old Man calmly masticated. ‘And
innocent young girls.’ Lord Edward took a scientific interest in the
sexual activities of axolotls and chickens, guinea-pigs and frogs; but
any reference to the corresponding activities of humans made him
painfully uncomfortable. ‘And purity,’ Illidge continued, looking
sharply into the Old Man’s face,’ and virginities, and…’ He was
interrupted and Lord Edward saved from further persecution by the
ringing of the telephone bell.

‘I’ll deal with it,’ said Illidge jumping up from his place.

He put the receiver to his ear. ‘Hullo!’

‘Edward, is that you?’ said a deep voice, not unlike Lord Edward’s own.
‘This is me. Edward, I’ve just this moment discovered a most
extraordinary mathematical proof of the existence of God, or rather of…’

‘But this isn’t Lord Edward,’ shouted Illidge. ‘Wait. I’ll ask him to
come.’ He turned back to the Old Man. ‘It’s Lord Gattenden,’ he said.
‘He’s just discovered a new proof of the existence of God.’ He did not
smile, his tone was grave. Gravity in the circumstances was the wildest
derision. The statement made fun of itself. Laughing comment made it
less, not more, ridiculous. Marvellous old imbecile! Illidge felt
himself revenged for all the evening’s humiliations. ‘A mathematical
proof,’ he added, more seriously than ever.

‘Oh dear!’ exclaimed Lord Edward, as though something deplorable had
happened. Telephoning always made him nervous. He hurried to the
instrument. ‘Charles, is that…’

‘Ah, Edward,’ cried the disembodied voice of the head of the family from
forty miles away at Gattenden. ‘Such a really remarkable discovery. I
wanted your opinion on it. About God. You know the formula, _m_ over
nought equals infinity, _m_ being any positive number? Well, why not
reduce the equation to a simpler form by multiplying both sides by
nought? In which case you have _m_ equals infinity times nought. That is
to say that a positive number is the product of zero and infinity.
Doesn’t that demonstrate the creation of the universe by an infinite
power out of nothing? Doesn’t it?’ The diaphragm of the telephone
receiver was infected by Lord Gattenden’s excitement, forty miles away.
It talked with breathless speed; its questions were earnest and
insistent. ‘Doesn’t it, Edward?’ All his life the fifth marquess had
been looking for the absolute. It was the only sort of hunting possible
to a cripple. For fifty years he had trundled in his wheeled chair at
the heels of the elusive quarry. Could it be that he had now caught it,
so easily, and in such an unlikely place as an elementary school-book on
the theory of limits? It was something that justified excitement.
‘What’s your opinion, Edward?’

‘Well,’ began Lord Edward, and at the other end of the electrified wire,
forty miles away, his brother knew, from the tone in which that single
word was spoken, that it was no good. The Absolute’s tail was still
unsalted.

 

__

 

‘Talking about elders,’ said Lucy,’did I ever tell either of you that
really marvellous story about my father?’

‘Which story? ‘

‘The one about the conservatories.’ The mere thought of the story made
her smile.

‘No, I never remember hearing about the conservatories,’ said Spandrell,
and Walter also shook his head.

‘It was during the War,’ Lucy began. ‘I was getting on for eighteen, I
suppose. Just launched. And by the way, somebody did almost literally
break a bottle of champagne over me. Parties were rather feverish in
those days, if you remember.’

Spandrell nodded and, though as a matter of fact he had been at school
during the War, Walter also nodded, knowingly.

‘One day,’ Lucy continued, ‘I got a message: Would I go upstairs and see
his Lordship? It was unprecedented. I was rather alarmed. You know how
the old imagine one lives. And how upset they are when they discover
they’ve been wrong. The usual Arab tea party.’ She laughed and, for
Walter, her laughter laid waste to all the years before he had known
her. To elaborate the history of their young and innocent loves had been
one of his standing consolations. She had laughed; and now not even
fancy could take pleasure in that comforting romance.

Spandrell nodded. ‘So you went upstairs, feeling as though you were
climbing a scaffold…’

‘And found my father in his library, pretending to read. My arrival
really terrified him. Poor man! I never saw anyone so horribly
embarrassed and distressed You can imagine how his terrors increased
mine. Such strong feelings must surely have an adequate cause What could
it be? Meanwhile, he suffered agonies. If his sense of duty hadn’t been
so strong, I believe he would have told me to go away again at once. You
should have seen his face!’ The comic memories were too much for her.
She laughed.

His elbow on the table, his head in his hand, Walter stared into his
wine-glass. The bright little bubbles came rushing to the surface one by
one, purposively, as though determined at all costs to be free and
happy. He did not dare to raise his eyes. The sight of Lucy’s
laughter-distorted face, he was afraid, might make him do something
stupid—cry aloud, or burst into tears.

‘Poor man!’ repeated Lucy, and the words came out on a puff of explosive
mirth. ‘He could hardly speak for terror.’ Suddenly changing her tone,
she mimicked Lord Edward’s deep blurred voice bidding her sit down,
telling her (stammeringly and with painful hesitations) that he had
something to talk to her about. The mimicry was admirable. Lord Edward’s
embarrassed phantom was sitting at their table.

‘Admirable!’ Spandrell applauded. And even Walter had to laugh; but the
depths of his unhappiness remained undisturbed.

‘It must have taken him a good five minutes,’ Lucy went on, ‘to screw
himself up to the talking point. I was in an agony, as you can imagine.
But guess what it was he wanted to say.

‘What?’

‘Guess.’ And all at once Lucy began to laugh again, uncontrollably. She
covered her face with her hands, her whole body shook, as though she
were passionately weeping. ‘It’s too good,’ she gasped, dropping her
hands and leaning back in her chair. Her face still worked with
laughter; there were tears on her cheeks. ‘Too good.’ She opened the
little beaded bag that lay on the table in front of her and taking out a
handkerchief, began to wipe her eyes. A gust of perfume came out with
the handkerchief, reinforcing those faint memories of gardenias that
surrounded her, that moved with her wherever she went like a second
ghostly personality. Walter looked up; the strong gardenia perfume was
in his nostrils; he was breathing what was for him the very essence of
her being, the symbol of her power, of his own insane desires. He looked
at her with a kind of terror.

‘He told me,’ Lucy went on, still laughing spasmodically, still dabbing
at her eyes,’ he told me that he had heard that I sometimes allowed
young men to kiss me at dances, in conservatories. Conservatories!’ she
repeated. ‘What a wonderful touch! So marvellously in period. The
‘eighties. The old Prince of Wales. Zola’s novels. Conservatories! Poor
dear man! He said he hoped I wouldn’t let it happen again. My mother’d
be so dreadfully distressed if she knew. Oh dear, oh dear!’ She drew a
deep breath. The laughter finally died down.

Walter looked at her and breathed her perfume, breathed his own desires
and the terrible power of her attraction. And it seemed to him that he
was seeing her for the first time. Now for the first time—with the
half-emptied glass in front of her, the bottle, the dirty ash-tray; now,
as she leaned back in her chair, exhausted with laughter, and wiping the
tears of laughter from her eyes.

‘Conservatories,’ Spandrell was repeating. ‘Conservatories. Yes, that’s
very good. That’s very good indeed.’

‘Marvellous,’ said Lucy. ‘The old are really marvellous. But hardly
possible, you must admit. Except, of course, Walter’s father.’

 

__

 

John Bidlake climbed slowly up the stairs. He was very tired. ‘These
awful parties,’ he was thinking. He turned on the light in his bedroom.
Over the mantelpiece one of Degas’s realistically unlovely women sat in
her round tin bath trying to scrub her back. On the opposite wall a
little girl by Renoir played the piano between a landscape of his own
and one of Walter Sickert’s visions of Dieppe. Above the bed hung two
caricatures of himself by Max Beerbohm and another by Rouveyre. There
was a decanter of brandy on the table, with a siphon and glass. Two
letters were propped conspicuously against the edge of the tray. He
opened them. The first contained press cuttings about his latest show.
The _Daily Mail_ called him ‘the veteran of British Art ‘ and assured
its readers that’ his hand has lost nothing of its cunning.’ He crumpled
up the cutting and threw it angrily into the fireplace. The next was
from one of the superior weeklies. The tone was almost contemptuous. He
was judged by his own earlier performance and condemned. ‘It is
difficult to believe that works so cheap and flashy—ineffectively
flashy, at that—as those collected in the present exhibition should have
been produced by the painter of the Tate Gallery ‘Haymakers’ and the
still more magnificent ‘Bathers,’ now at Tantamount House. In these
empty and trivial pictures we look in vain for those qualities of
harmonious balance, of rhythmic calligraphy, of three-dimensional
plasticity which…’ What a rigmarole! What tripe! He threw the whole
bunch of cuttings after the first. But his contempt for the critics
could not completely neutralize the effects of their criticism. ‘Veteran
of British art’—it was the equivalent of ‘poor old Bidlake.’ And when
they complimented him on his hand having lost none of its cunning, they
were patronizingly assuring him that he still painted wonderfully well
for an old dotard in his second childhood. The only difference between
the hostile and the favourable critic was that one said brutally in so
many words what the other implied in his patronizing compliment. He
almost wished that he had never painted those Bathers.

He opened the other envelope. It contained a letter from his daughter
Elinor. It was dated from Lahore:

‘The bazaars are the genuine article—maggoty. What with the pullulations
and the smells, it is like burrowing through a cheese. From the artist’s
point of view, the distressing thing about all this oriental business is
that it’s exactly like that painting of Eastern scenes they did in
France in the middle of last century. You know the stuff, smooth and
shiny, like those pictures that used to be printed on tea canisters.
When you’re here, you see that the style is necessary. The brown skin
makes the faces uniform and the sweat puts a polish on the skin. One
would have to paint with a surface at least as slick as an Ingres.’

He read on with pleasure. The girl always had something amusing to say
in her letters. She saw things with the right sort of eye. But suddenly
he frowned.

‘Yesterday, who should come to see us but John Bidlake Junior. We had
imagined him in Waziristan; but he was down here on leave. I hadn’t seen
him since I was a little girl. You can imagine my surprise when an
enormous military gentleman with a grey moustache stalked in and called
me by my Christian name. He had never seen Phil, of course. We killed
such fatted calves as this hotel can offer in honour of the prodigal
brother.’

John Bidlake leaned back in his chair and closed his eyes. The enormous
military man with the grey moustache was his son. Young John was fifty.
Fifty. There had been a time when fifty seemed a Methusalem age. ‘If
Manet hadn’t died prematurely…’ He remembered the words of his old
teacher at the art school in Paris. ‘But did Manet die so young?’ The
old man had shaken his head. (Old? John Bidlake reflected. He had seemed
very old then. But probably he wasn’t more than sixty.) ‘Manet was only
fifty-one,’ the teacher had answered. He had found it difficult to
restrain his laughter. And now his own son was the age of Manet when
Manet died. An enormous military gentleman with a grey moustache. And
his brother was dead and buried at the other side of the world, in
California. Cancer of the intestine. Elinor had met his son at Santa
Barbara—a young man with a rich young wife, evading the Prohibition laws
to the tune of a bottle of gin a day between them.

John Bidlake thought of his first wife, the mother of the military
gentleman and the Californian who had died of cancer of the intestine.
He was only twenty-two when he married for the first time. Rose was not
yet twenty. They loved one another frantically, with a tigerish passion.
They quarrelled too, quarrelled rather enjoyably at first, when the
quarrels could be made up in effusions of sensuality as violent as the
furies they assuaged. But the charm began to wear off when the children
arrived, two of them within twentyfive months. There was not enough
money to keep the brats at a distance, to hire professionals to do the
tiresome and dirty work. John Bidlake’s paternity was no sinecure. His
studio became a nursery. Very soon, the results of passion—the yelling
and the wetted diapers, the broken sleep, the smells—disgusted him of
passion. Moreover, the object of his passion was no longer the same.
After the babies were born, Rose began to put on fat. Her face became
heavy; her body swelled and sagged. The quarrels, now, were not so
easily made up. At the same time, they were more frequent; paternity got
on John Bidlake’s nerves. His art provided him with a pretext for going
to Paris. He went for a fortnight and stayed away four months. The
quarrels began again on his return. Rose now frankly disgusted him. His
models offered him facile consolations; he had a more serious love
affair with a married woman who had come to him to have her portrait
painted. Life at home was a dreariness tempered by scenes. After a
particularly violent scene Rose packed up and went to live with her
parents. She took the children with her; John Bidlake was only too
delighted to be rid of them. The elder of the squalling diaper-wetters
was now an enormous military gentleman with a grey moustache. And the
other was dead of cancer of the intestine. He had not seen either of
them since they were boys of five-and-twenty. The sons had stuck to
their mother. She too was dead, had been in the grave these fifteen
years.

Once bitten, twice shy. After his divorce John Bidlake had promised
himself that he would never marry again. But when one falls desperately
in love with a virtuous young woman of good family, what can one do? He
had married, and those two brief years with Isabel had been the most
extraordinary, the most beautiful, the happiest of all his life. And
then she had died in childbirth, pointlessly. He did his best never to
think of her. The recollection was too painful. Between her remembered
image and the moment of remembering, the abysses of time and separation
were vaster than any other gulf between the present and the past. And by
comparison with the past which he had shared with Isabel every present
seemed dim; and her death was a horrible reminder of the future. He
never spoke of her, and all that might remind him of her—her letters,
her books, the furniture of her room—he destroyed or sold. He wished to
ignore all but here and now, to be as though he had only just entered
the world and were destined to be eternal. But his memory survived, even
though he never deliberately made use of it; and though the things which
had been Isabel’s were destroyed, he could not guard against chance
reminders. Chance had found many gaps in his defences this evening. The
widest breach was opened by this letter of Elinor’s. Sunk in his
armchair, John Bidlake sat for a long time, unmoving.

 

__

 

Polly Logan sat in front of the looking-glass. As she drew the comb
through her hair there was a fine small crackling of electric sparks.

‘Little sparks, like a tiny battle, tiny, tiny ghosts shooting. Tiny
battle, tiny ghost of a battle-rattle.’

Polly pronounced the words in a sonorous monotone, as though she were
reciting to an audience. She lingered lovingly over them, rolling the
r’s, hissing on the s’s, humming like a bee on the m’s, drawing out the
long vowels and making them round and pure. ‘Ghost rattle of ghost
rifles, in-fin-itesimal ghost cannonade.’ Lovely words! It gave her a
peculiar satisfaction to be able to roll them out, to listen with an
appreciative, a positively gluttonous ear, to the rumble of the
syllables as they were absorbed into the silence. Polly had always liked
talking to herself. It was a childish habit which she would not give up.
‘But if it amuses me,’ she protested, when people laughed at her for it,
‘why shouldn’t I? It does nobody any harm.’

She refused to let herself be laughed out of the habit.

‘Electric, electric,’ she went on, dropping her voice, and speaking in a
dramatic whisper. ‘Electrical musketry, metrical biscuitry. Ow! ‘ The
comb had caught in a tangle. She leaned forward to see more clearly in
the glass what she was doing. The reflected face approached. ‘Ma chere,’
exclaimed Polly in another tone, ‘tu as l’air fatigue. Tu es vieille.
You ought to be ashamed of yourself. At your age. Tz, tz!’ She clicked
her tongue disapprovingly against her teeth and shook her head. ‘This
won’t do, this won’t do. Still, you looked all right to-night. “My dear,
how sweet you look in white!”’ She imitated Mrs. Betterton’s emphatic
voice. ‘Same to you and many of them. Do you think I shall look like an
elephant when I’m sixty? Still, I suppose one ought to be grateful even
for an elephant’s compliments. “Count your blessings, count them one by
one,”’ she chanted softly, ‘“And it will surprise you what the Lord has
done.” Oh, heavens, heavens!’ She put down her comb, she violently
shuddered and covered her face with her hands. ‘Heavens!’ She felt the
blood rushing up into her cheeks. ‘The _gaffe_! The enormous and ghastly
floater!’ She had thought suddenly of Lady Edward. Of course she had
overheard. ‘How could I have risked saying that about her being a
Canadian?’ Polly moaned, overwhelmed with retrospective shame and
embarrassment. ‘That’s what comes of wanting to say something clever at
any cost. And then think of wasting attempted cleverness on Norah!
_Norah_! Oh Lord, oh Lord!’ She jumped up and pulling her dressing-gown
round her as she went, hurried down the corridor to her mother’s room.
Mrs. Logan was already in bed and had turned out the light. Polly opened
the door and stepped into darkness.

‘Mother,’ she called, ‘mother!’ Her tone was urgent and agonized.

‘What is it?’ Mrs. Logan answered anxiously out of the dark. She sat up
and fumbled for the, electric switch by the bed. ‘What is it?’ The light
went on with a click. ‘What is it, my darling?’

Polly threw herself down on the bed and hid her face against her
mother’s knees. ‘Oh, mother, if you knew what a _terrible_ floater I
made with Lady Edward! If you _knew_! I forgot to tell you.’

Mrs. Logan was almost angry that her anxiety had been for nothing. When
one has put forth all one’s strength to raise what seems an enormous
weight, it is annoying to find that the dumb-bell is made of cardboard
and could have been lifted between two fingers. ‘Was it necessary to
come and wake me up out of my first sleep to tell me?’ she asked
crossly.

Polly looked up at her mother ‘I’m sorry, mother,’ she said repentantly.
‘But if you knew what an _awful_ floater it was!’

Mrs. Logan could not help laughing.

‘I couldn’t have gone to sleep if I hadn’t told you,’ Polly went on.

‘And I mayn’t go to sleep until you have.’ Mrs. Logan tried to be severe
and sarcastic. But her eyes, her smile betrayed her.

Polly took her mother’s hand and kissed it. ‘I knew you wouldn’t mind,’
she said.

‘I do mind. Very much.’

‘It’s no good trying to bluff _me_,’ said Polly. ‘But now I _must_ tell
you about the floater.’

Mrs. Logan heaved the parody of a sigh of resignation and, pretending to
be overwhelmed with sleepiness, closed her eyes. Polly talked. It was
after halfpast two before she went back to her room. They had discussed,
not only the floater and Lady Edward, but the whole party, and everyone
who was there. Or rather Polly had discussed and Mrs. Logan had
listened, had laughed and laughingly protested when her daughter’s
comments became too exuberantly highspirited.

‘But Polly, Polly,’ she had said, ‘you really mustn’t say that people
look like elephants.’

‘But Mrs. Betterton _does_ look like an elephant,’ Polly had replied.
‘It’s the truth.’ And in her dramatic stage whisper she had added,
rising from fancy to still more preposterous fancy: ‘Even her nose is
like a trunk.’

‘But she’s got a short nose.’

Polly’s whisper had become more gruesome. ‘An amputated trunk. They bit
it off when she was a baby. Like puppies’ tails.’


CHAPTER XII

For valued clients, Sbisa never closed his restaurant. They could sit
there, in spite of the law, and consume intoxicating poisons as far into
the small hours as they liked. An extra waiter came on at midnight to
attend to the valued clients who wished to break the law. Old Sbisa saw
to it that their value, to him, was very high. Alcohol was cheaper at
the Ritz than at Sbisa’s.

It was about halfpast one—’only halfpast one,’ Lucy complained—when she
and Walter and Spandrell left the restaurant.

‘Still young,’ was Spandrell’s comment on the night. ‘Young and rather
insipid. Nights are like human beings—never interesting till they’re
grown up. Round about midnight they reach puberty. At a little after one
they come of age. Their prime is from two to halfpast. An hour later
they’re growing rather desperate, like those man-eating women and waning
middleaged men who hop around twice as violently as they ever did in the
hope of persuading themselves that they’re not old. After four they’re
in full decay. And their death is horrible. Really horrible at sunrise,
when the bottles are empty and people look like corpses and desire’s
exhausted itself into disgust. I have rather a weakness for the
death-bed scenes, I must confess,’ Spandrell added.

‘I’m sure you have,’ said Lucy.

‘And it’s only in the light of ends that you can judge beginnings and
middles. The night has just come of age. It remains to be seen how it
will die. Till then, we can’t judge it.’

Walter knew how it would die for him—in the midst of Marjorie’s tears
and his own complicated misery and exasperation, in an explosion of
self-hatred and hatred for the woman to whom he had been cruel. He knew,
but would not admit his knowledge; nor that it was already halfpast one
and that Marjorie would be awake and anxiously wondering why he hadn’t
returned.

At five to one Walter had looked at his watch and declared that he must
go. What was the good of staying? Spandrell was immovable. There was no
prospect of his having a moment alone with Lucy. He lacked even that
justification for making Marjorie suffer. He was torturing her, not that
he might be happy, but that he might feel bored, ill, exasperated,
impatiently wretched.

‘I must really go,’ he had said, standing up.

But Lucy had protested, cajoled, commanded. In the end he sat down
again. That had been more than half an hour ago and now they were out in
Soho Square, and the evening, according to Lucy and Spandrell, had
hardly begun.

‘I think it’s time,’ Spandrell had said to Lucy, ‘that you saw what a
revolutionary communist looked like.’

Lucy demanded nothing better.

‘I belong to a sort of club,’ Spandrell explained. He offered to take
them in with him.

‘There’ll still be a few enemies of society on view, I expect,’ he went
on, as they stepped out into the refreshing darkness. ‘Good fellows
mostly. But absurdly childish. Some of them seem genuinely to believe
that a revolution would make people happier. It’s charming, it’s
positively touching.’ He uttered his noiseless laugh. ‘But I’m an
aesthete in these matters. Dynamite for dynamite’s sake.’

‘But what’s the point of dynamite, if you don’t believe in Utopia?’
asked Lucy.

‘The point? But haven’t you eyes?’

Lucy looked round her. ‘I see nothing particularly frightful.’

‘They have eyes and see not.’ He halted, took her arm with one hand and
with the other pointed round the square. ‘The deserted pickle factory,
transformed into a dance hall; the lying-in hospital; Sbisa’s; the
publishers of _Who’s Who_. And once,’ he added, ‘the Duke of Monmouth’s
palace. You can imagine the ghosts:

‘Whether inspired by some diviner lust,

His father got him with a keener gust…’

And so forth. You know the portrait of him after the execution, lying on
a bed, with the sheet up to his chin, so that you can’t see the place
where the neck was cut through? By Kneller. Or was it Lely? Monmouth and
pickles, lying-in and _Who’s Who_, and dancing and Sbisa’s
champagne—think of them a little, think of them.’

‘I’m thinking of them,’ said Lucy. ‘Hard.’

‘And do you still ask what the point of dynamite is?’ They walked on. At
the door of a little house in St. Giles’s Spandrell called a halt. ‘Wait
a moment,’ he said, beckoning the others back into the darkness. He
rang. The door opened at once. There was a brief parleying in the
shadows; then Spandrell turned and called to his companions. They
followed him into a dark hall, up a flight of stairs and into a
brightly-lighted room on the first floor. Two men were standing near the
fire place, a turbaned Indian and a little man with red hair. At the
sound of footsteps they turned round. The red-haired man was Illidge.

‘Spandrell? Bidlake?’ he raised his invisibly sandy eyebrows in
astonishment. And what’s that woman doing here? he wondered.

Lucy came forward with outstretched hand. ‘We’re old acquaintances,’ she
said with a smile of friendly recognition. Illidge, who was preparing to
make his face look coldly hostile, found himself smiling back at her.

 

__

 

A taxi turned into the street, suddenly and startlingly breaking the
silence. Marjorie sat up in bed, listening. The hum of the engine grew
louder and louder. It was Walter’s taxi; this time she felt sure of it,
she knew. Nearer it came and nearer. At the bottom of the little hill on
the right of the house, the driver changed down to a lower gear; the
engine hummed more shrilly, like an angry wasp. Nearer and nearer. She
was possessed by an anxiety that was of the body as well as of the mind.
She felt breathless, her heart beat strongly and irregularly—beat, beat,
beat and then it seemed to fail; the expected beat did not make itself
felt; it was as though a trap-door had been opened beneath her into the
void; she knew the terror of emptiness, of falling, falling—and the next
retarded beat was the impact of her body against solid earth. Nearer,
nearer. She almost dreaded, though she had so unhappily longed for, his
return. She dreaded the emotions she would feel at the sight of him; the
tears she would shed, the reproaches she would find herself uttering, in
spite of herself. And what would he say and do, what would be his
thoughts? She was afraid of imagining. Nearer; the sound was just below
her windows; it retreated, it diminished. And she had been so certain
that it was Walter’s taxi. She lay down again. If only she could have
slept. But that physical anxiety of her body would not allow her. The
blood thumped in her ears. Her skin was hot and dry. Her eyes ached. She
lay quite still, on her back, her arms crossed on her breast, like a
dead woman laid out for burial. Sleep, sleep, she whispered to herself;
she imagined herself relaxed, smoothed out, asleep. But suddenly, a
malicious hand seemed to pluck at her taut nerves. A violent tic
contracted the muscles of her limbs; she started as though with terror.
And the physical reaction of fear evoked an emotion of terror in her
mind, quickening and intensifying the anxiety of unhappiness which, all
the time, had underlain her conscious efforts to achieve tranquillity.
‘Sleep, sleep, relax’—it was useless to go on trying to be calm, to
forget, to sleep. She allowed her misery to come to the surface of her
mind. ‘Why should he want to make me so unhappy?’ She turned her head.
The luminous hands of the clock on the little table beside her bed
marked a quarter to three. A quarter to three—and he knew she could
never go to sleep before he came in. ‘He knows I’m ill,’ she said
aloud.’doesn’t he care?’

A new thought suddenly occurred to her. ‘Perhaps he wants me to die.’ To
die, not to be, not to see his face any more, to leave him with that
other woman. The tears came into her eyes. Perhaps he was deliberately
trying to kill her. It was not in spite of her being ill that he treated
her like this; it was because she suffered so much, it was precisely
because she was ill. He was cruel with a purpose. He hoped, he intended
that she should die; die and leave him in peace with that other woman.
She pressed her face against the pillow and sobbed. Never see him again,
never any more. Darkness, loneliness, death, for ever. For ever and
ever. And on top of everything, it was all so unfair. Was it her fault
that she couldn’t afford to dress well?

‘If I could afford to buy the clothes she buys.’ Chanel, Lanvin,—the
pages of _Vogue_ floated before her eyes—Molyneux, Groult….At one of
those cheap-smart shops where cocottes buy their clothes, off
Shaftesbury Avenue, there was a model for sixteen guineas. ‘He likes her
because she’s attractive. But if I had the money…’ It wasn’t fair. He
was making her pay for not being well off. She had to suffer because he
didn’t earn enough to buy her good clothes.

And then there was the baby. He was making her pay for that. His child.
He was bored with her, because she was always tired and ill; he didn’t
like her any more. That was the greatest injustice of all.

A cell had multiplied itself and become a worm, the worm had become a
fish, the fish was turning into the foetus of a mammal. Marjorie felt
sick and tired. Fifteen years hence a boy would be confirmed. Enormous
in his robes, like a full-rigged ship, the Bishop would say: ‘Do ye here
in the presence of God, and of this congregation, renew the solemn
promise and vow that was made in your name at your Baptism?’ And the
ex-fish would answer with passionate conviction: ‘I do.’

For the thousandth time she wished she were not pregnant. Walter might
not succeed in killing her now. But perhaps it would happen in any case,
when the child was born. The doctor had said it would be difficult for
her to have a baby. The pelvis was narrow. Death reappeared before her,
a great pit at her feet.

A sound made her start violently. The outside door of the flat was being
furtively opened. The hinges squeaked. There were muffled footsteps.
Another squeak, the hardly perceptible click of the spring latch being
carefully let back into place, then more footsteps. Another click and
simultaneously the light showed yellow under the door that separated her
room from his. Did he mean to go to bed without coming to bid her
goodnight? She lay quite still, quiveringly awake, her eyes wide open,
listening to the noises that came from the other room and to the quick
terrified beating of her own heart.

Walter sat on the bed unlacing his shoes. He was wondering why he had
not come home three hours before, why he had ever gone out at all. He
hated a crowd; alcohol disagreed with him and the twice-breathed air,
the smell, the smoke of restaurants acted on him like a depressing
poison. He had suffered to no purpose; except for those painful
exasperating moments in the taxi, he had not been alone with Lucy the
whole evening. The hours he had spent with her had been hours of boredom
and impatience—endlessly long, minute after minute of torture. And the
torture of desire and jealousy had been reinforced by the torture of
selfconscious guilt. Every minute they lingered at Sbisa’s, every minute
among the revolutionaries, was a minute that retarded the consummation
of his desire and that, increasing Marjorie’s unhappiness, increased at
the same time his own remorse and shame. It was after three when finally
they left the club. Would she dismiss Spandrell and let him drive her
home? He looked at her; his eyes were eloquent. He willed, he commanded.

‘There’ll be sandwiches and drinks at my house,’ said Lucy, when they
were in the street.

‘That’s very welcome news,’ said Spandrell.

‘Come along, Walter darling.’ She took his hand, she pressed it
affectionately.

Walter shook his head. ‘I must go home.’ If misery could kill, he would
have died there in the street.

‘But you can’t desert us now,’ she protested. ‘Now that you’ve got thus
far, you really must see it through. Come along.’ She tugged at his
hand.

‘No, no.’ But what she said was true. He could hardly make Marjorie any
more wretched than he had certainly done already. If she weren’t there,
he thought, if she were to die—a miscarriage, bloodpoisoning…

Spandrell looked at his watch. ‘Halfpast three. The death rattle has
almost started.’ Walter listened in horror; was the man reading his
thoughts? ‘_Munie des conforts de notre sainte religion_. Your place is
at the bedside, Walter. You can’t go and leave the night to die like a
dog in a ditch.’

Like a dog in a ditch. The words were terrible, they condemned him. ‘I
_must_ go.’ He was firm, three hours too late. He walked away. In Oxford
Street he found a taxi. Hoping, he knew vainly, to come home unobserved,
he paid off the cab at Chalk Farm station and walked the last furlong to
the door of the house in which he and Marjorie occupied the two upper
floors. He had crept upstairs, he had opened the door with the
precautions of a murderer. No sound from Marjorie’s room. He undressed,
he washed as though he were performing a dangerous operation. He turned
out the light and got into bed. The darkness was utterly silent. He was
safe.

‘Walter!’

It was with the feelings of a condemned criminal when the warders come
to wake him on the morning of his execution that he answered, putting an
imitation of astonishment into his voice: ‘Are you awake, Marjorie?’ He
got up and walked, as though from the condemned cell to the scaffold,
into her room.

‘Do you want to make me die, Walter?’

Like a dog in a ditch, alone. He made as if to take her in his arms.
Marjorie pushed him away. Her misery had momentarily turned to anger,
her love to a kind of hatred and resentment. ‘Don’t be a hypocrite on
top of everything else,’ she said. ‘Why can’t you tell me frankly that
you hate me, that you’d like to get rid of me, that you’d be glad if I
died? Why can’t you be honest and tell me?’

‘But why should I tell you what isn’t true?’ he protested.

‘Are you going to tell me that you love me, then?’ she asked
sarcastically.

He almost believed it while he said so; and besides it was true, in a
way.

‘But I do, I do. This other thing’s a kind of madness. I don’t want to.
I can’t help it. If you knew how wretched I felt, what an unspeakable
brute.’ All that he had ever suffered from thwarted desire, from remorse
and shame and self-hatred seemed to be crystallized by his words into a
single agony. He suffered and he pitied his own sufferings. ‘If you
knew, Marjorie.’ And suddenly something in his body seemed to break. An
invisible hand took him by the throat, his eyes were blinded with tears
and a power within him that was not himself shook his whole frame and
wrenched from him, against his will, a muffled and hardly human cry.

At the sound of this dreadful sobbing in the darkness beside her,
Marjorie’s anger suddenly fell. She only knew that he was unhappy, that
she loved him. She even felt remorse for her anger, for the bitter words
she had spoken.

‘Walter. My darling.’ She stretched out her hands, she drew him down
towards her. He lay there like a child in the consolation of her
embrace.

 

__

 

‘Do you enjoy tormenting him?’ Spandrell enquired, as they walked
towards the Charing Cross Road.

‘Tormenting whom? ‘ said Lucy. ‘Walter? But I don’t.’

‘But you don’t let him sleep with you?’ said Spandrell. Lucy shook her
head. ‘And then you say you don’t torment him! Poor wretch!’

‘But why should I have him, if I don’t want to?’

‘Why indeed? Meanwhile, however, keeping him dangling’s mere torture.’

‘But I like him,’ said Lucy. ‘He’s such good company. Too young, of
course; but really rather perfect. And I assure you, I don’t torment
him. He torments himself.’

Spandrell delayed his laughter long enough to whistle for the taxi he
had seen at the end of the street. The cab wheeled round and came to a
halt in front of them. He was still silently laughing when they climbed
in. ‘Still, he only gets what’s due to him,’ Spandrell went on from his
dark corner. ‘He’s the real type of murderee.’

‘Murderee?’

‘It takes two to make a murder. There are born victims, born to have
their throats cut, as the cutthroats are born to be hanged. You can see
it in their faces. There’s a victim type as well as a criminal type.
Walter’s the obvious victim; he fairly invites maltreatment.’

‘Poor Walter!’

‘And it’s one’s duty,’ Spandrell went on, ‘to see that he gets it.’

‘Why not to see that he doesn’t get it, poor lamb?’

‘One should always be on the side of destiny. Walter’s manifestly born
to catch it. It’s one’s duty to give his fate a helping hand. Which I’m
glad to see you’re already doing.’

‘But I tell you, I’m not. Have you a light?’ Spandrell struck a match.
The cigarette between her thin lips, she leaned forward to drink the
flame. He had seen her leaning like this, with the same swift, graceful
and ravenous movement, leaning towards him to drink his kisses. And the
face that approached him now was focussed and intent on the flame, as he
had seen it focussed and intent upon the inner illumination of
approaching pleasure. There are many thoughts and feelings, but only a
few gestures; and the mask has only half a dozen grimaces to express a
thousand meanings. She drew back; Spandrell threw the match out of the
window. The red cigarette end brightened and faded in the darkness.

‘Do you remember that curious time of ours in Paris?’ he asked, still
thinking of her intent and eager face. Once, three years before, he had
been her lover for perhaps a month.

Lucy nodded. ‘I remember it as rather perfect, while it lasted. But you
were horribly fickle.’

‘In other words I didn’t make as much of an outcry as you hoped I would,
when you went off with Tom Trivet.’

‘That’s a lie!’ Lucy was indignant. ‘You’d begun to fade away long
before I even dreamt of Tom.’

‘Well, have it your own way. As a matter of fact you weren’t enough of a
murderee for my taste.’ There was nothing of the victim about Lucy; not
much even, he had often reflected, of the ordinary woman. She could
pursue her pleasure as a man pursues his, remorselessly,
single-mindedly, without allowing her thoughts and feelings to be in the
least involved. Spandrell didn’t like to be used and exploited for
someone else’s entertainment. He wanted to be the user. But with Lucy
there was no possibility of slave-holding. ‘I’m like you,’ he added. ‘I
need victims.’

‘The implication being that I’m one of the criminals?’

‘I thought we’d agreed to that long ago, my dear Lucy.’

‘I’ve never agreed to anything in my life,’ she protested,’ and never
will. Not for more than half an hour at a time, at any rate.’

‘It was in Paris, do you remember? At the _Chaumiere_. There was a young
man painting his lips at the next table.’

‘Wearing a platinum and diamond bracelet.’ She nodded, smiling. ‘And you
called me an angel, or something.’

‘A bad angel,’ he qualified, ‘a born bad angel.’

‘For an intelligent man, Maurice, you talk a lot of drivel. Do you
genuinely believe that some things are right and some wrong?’

Spandrell took her hand and kissed it. ‘Dear Lucy,’ he said, ‘you’re
magnificent. And you must never bury your talents. Well done, thou good
and faithful succubus!’ He kissed her hand again. ‘Go on doing your duty
as you’ve already done it. That’s all heaven asks of you.’

‘I merely try to amuse myself.’ The cab drew up in front of her little
house in Bruton Street. ‘God knows,’ she added as she stepped out,
‘without much success. Here, I’ve got money.’ She handed the driver a
ten-shilling note. Lucy insisted, when she was with men, on doing as
much of the paying as possible. Paying, she was independent, she could
call her own tune. ‘And nobody gives me much help,’ she went on, as she
fumbled with her latchkey. ‘You’re all so astonishingly dull.’

In the dining-room a rich still-life of bottles, fruits and sandwiches
was awaiting them. Round the polished flanks of the vacuum flask their
reflections walked fantastically in a non-Euclidean universe. Professor
Dewar had liquefied hydrogen in order that Lucy’s soup might be kept hot
for her into the small hours. Over the sideboard hung one of John
Bidlake’s paintings of the theatre. A curve of the gallery, a slope of
faces, a corner of the bright proscenium.

‘How good that is!’ said Spandrell shading his eyes to see it more
clearly.

Lucy made no comment. She was looking at herself in an old grey-glassed
mirror.

‘What shall I do when I’m old?’ she suddenly asked.

‘Why not die?’ suggested Spandrell with his mouth full of bread and
Strasbourg goose liver.

‘I think I’ll take to science, like the Old Man. Isn’t there such a
thing as human zoology? I’d get a bit tired of frogs. Talking of frogs,’
she added, ‘I rather liked that little carroty man—what’s his
name?—Illidge. How he does hate us for being rich!’

‘Don’t lump me in with the rich. If you knew…’ Spandrell shook his head.
‘Let’s hope she’ll bring some cash when she comes to-morrow,’ he was
thinking, remembering the message Lucy had brought from his mother. He
had written that the case was urgent.

‘I like people who can hate,’ Lucy went on.

‘Illidge knows how to. He’s fairly stuffed with theories and bile and
envy. He longs to blow you all up.’

‘Then why doesn’t he? Why don’t you? Isn’t that what your club’s there
for?’

Spandrell shrugged his shoulders. ‘There’s a slight difference between
theory and practice, you know. And when one’s a militant communist and a
scientific materialist and an admirer of the Russian Revolution, the
theory’s uncommonly queer. You should hear our young friend talking
about murder! Political murder is what especially interests him, of
course; but he doesn’t make much distinction between the different
branches of the profession. One kind, according to him, is as harmless
and morally indifferent as another. Our vanity makes us exaggerate the
importance of human life; the individual is nothing; Nature cares only
for the species. And so on and so forth. Queer,’ Spandrell commented
parenthetically, ‘how old-fashioned and even primitive the latest
manifestations of art and politics generally are! Young Illidge talks
like a mixture of Lord Tennyson in _In Memoriam_ and a Mexican Indian,
or a Malay trying to make up his mind to run amok. Justifying the most
primitive, savage, animal indifference to life and individuality by
means of obsolete scientific arguments. Very queer indeed.’

‘But why should the science be obsolete?’ asked Lucy

‘Seeing that he’s a scientist himself…’

‘But also a communist. Which means he’s committed to nineteenth-century
materialism. You can’t be a true communist without being a mechanist.
You’ve got to believe that the only fundamental realities are space,
time and mass, and that all the rest is nonsense, mere illusion and
mostly bourgeois illusion at that. Poor Illidge! He’s sadly worried by
Einstein and Edington. And how he hates Henri Poincare! How furious he
gets with old Mach! They’re undermining his simple faith. They’re
telling him that the laws of nature are useful conventions of strictly
human manufacture and that space and time and mass themselves, the whole
universe of Newton and his successors, are simply our own invention. The
idea’s as inexpressibly shocking and painful to him as the idea of the
non-existence of Jesus would be to a Christian. He’s a scientist, but
his principles make him fight against any scientific theory that’s less
than fifty years old. It’s exquisitely comic.’

‘I’m sure it is,’ said Lucy, yawning. ‘That is, if you happen to be
interested in theories, which I’m not.’

‘But I am,’ retorted Spandrell; ‘so I don’t apologize. But if you prefer
it, I can give you examples of his practical inconsistencies. I
discovered not long ago, quite accidentally, that Illidge has the most
touching sense of family loyalty. He keeps his mother, he pays for his
younger brother’s education, he gave his sister fifty pounds when she
married.’

‘What’s wrong in that?’

‘Wrong? But it’s disgustingly bourgeois! Theoretically he sees no
distinction between his mother and any other aged female. He knows that,
in a properly organized society, she’d be put into the lethal chamber,
because of her arthritis. In spite of which he sends her I don’t know
how much a week to enable her to drag on a useless existence. I twitted
him about it the other day. He blushed and was terribly upset, as though
he’d been caught cheating at cards. So, to restore his prestige, he had
to change the subject and begin talking about political murder and its
advantages with the most wonderfully calm, detached, scientific
ferocity. I only laughed at him. “One of these days,” I threatened,
“I’ll take you at your word and invite you to a man-shooting party.” And
what’s more, I will.’

‘Unless you just go on chattering, like everybody else.’

‘Unless,’ Spandrell agreed, ‘ I just go on chattering.’

‘Let me know if you ever stop chattering and do something. It might be
lively.’

‘Deathly, if anything.’

‘But the deathly sort of liveliness is the most lively, really.’ Lucy
frowned. ‘I’m so sick of the ordinary conventional kinds of liveliness.
Youth at the prow and pleasure at the helm. You know. It’s silly, it’s
monotonous. Energy seems to have so few ways of manifesting itself
nowadays. It was different in the past, I believe.’

‘There was violence as well as love-making. Is that what you mean?’

‘That’s it.’ She nodded. ‘The liveliness wasn’t so exclusively…so
exclusively bitchy, to put it bluntly.’

‘They broke the sixth commandment too. There are too many policemen
nowadays.’

‘Many too many. They don’t allow you to stir an eyelid. One ought to
have had all the experiences.’

‘But if none of them are either right or wrong—which is what you seem to
feel—what’s the point?’

‘The point? But they might be amusing, they might be exciting.’

‘They could never be very exciting if you didn’t feel they were wrong.’
Time and habit had taken the wrongness out of almost all the acts he had
once thought sinful. He performed them as unenthusiastically as he would
have performed the act of catching the morning train to the city. ‘Some
people,’ he went on meditatively, trying to formulate the vague
obscurities of his own feelings,’some people can only realize goodness
by offending against it.’ But when the old offences have ceased to be
felt as offences, what then? The argument pursued itself internally. The
only solution seemed to be to commit new and progressively more serious
offences, to have all the experiences, as Lucy would say in her jargon.
‘One way of knowing God,’ he concluded slowly, ‘is to deny Him.’

‘My good Maurice!’ Lucy protested.

‘I ‘1 stop.’ He laughed. ‘But really, if it’s a case of “my good
Maurice”’ (he imitated her tone), ‘if you’re equally unaware of goodness
and offence against goodness, what is the point of having the sort of
experiences the police interfere with?’

Lucy shrugged her shoulders. ‘Curiosity. One’s bored.’

‘Alas, one is.’ He laughed again. ‘All the same, I do think the cobbler
should stick to his last.’

‘But what _is_ my last?’

Spandrell grinned. ‘Modesty,’ he began, ‘forbids…’


CHAPTER XIII

Walter travelled down to Fleet Street feeling not exactly happy, but at
least calm—calm with the knowledge that everything was now settled. Yes,
everything had been settled; everything—for in the course of last
night’s emotional upheaval, everything had come to the surface. To begin
with, he was never going to see Lucy again; that was definitely decided
and promised, for his own good as well as for Marjorie’s. Next he was
going to spend all his evenings with Marorie. And finally he was going
to ask Burlap for more money. Everything was settled. The very weather
seemed to know it. It was a day of white insistent mist, so
intrinsically calm that all the noises of London seemed an irrelevance.
The traffic roared and hurried, but somehow without touching the
essential stillness and silence of the day. Everything was settled; the
world was starting afresh—not very exultantly, perhaps, not at all
brilliantly, but with resignation, with a determined calm that nothing
could disturb.

Remembering the incident of the previous evening, Walter had expected to
be coldly received at the office. But on the contrary, Burlap was in one
of his most genial moods. He too remembered last night and was anxious
that Walter should forget it. He called Walter ‘old man’ and squeezed
his arm affectionately, looking up at him from his chair with those eyes
that expressed nothing, but were just holes into the darkness inside his
skull. His mouth, meanwhile, charmingly and subtly smiled. Walter
returned the ‘old man’ and the smile, but with a painful consciousness
of insincerity. Burlap always had that effect on him; in his presence,
Walter never felt quite honest or genuine. It was a most uncomfortable
sensation. With Burlap he was always, in some obscure fashion, a liar
and a comedian. And at the same time all that he said, even when he was
speaking his innermost convictions, became a sort of falsehood.

‘I liked your article on Rimbaud,’ Burlap declared, still pressing
Walter’s arm, still smiling up at him from his tilted swivel chair.

‘I’m glad,’ said Walter, feeling uncomfortably that the remark wasn’t
really addressed to him, but to some part of Burlap’s own mind which had
whispered, ‘You ought to say something nice about his article,’ and was
having its demands duly satisfied by another part of Burlap’s mind.

‘What a man!’ exclaimed Burlap. ‘That was someone who believed in Life,
if you like!’

Ever since Burlap had taken over the editorship, the leaders of the
_Literary World_ had almost weekly proclaimed the necessity of believing
in Life. Burlap’s belief in Life was one of the things Walter found most
disturbing. What did the words mean? Even now he hadn’t the faintest
idea. Burlap had never explained. You had to understand intuitively; if
you didn’t, you were as good as damned. Walter supposed that he was
among the damned. He was never likely to forget his first interview with
his future chief. ‘I hear you’re in want of an assistant editor,’ he had
shyly begun. Burlap nodded. ‘Yes, I am.’ And after an enormous and
horrible silence, he suddenly looked up with his blank eyes and asked:
‘Do you believe in Life?’ Walter blushed to the roots of his hair and
said, Yes. It was the only possible answer. There was another desert of
speechlessness and then Burlap looked up again. ‘Are you a virgin?’ he
enquired. Walter blushed yet more violently, hesitated and at last shook
his head. It was only later that he discovered, from one of Burlap’s own
articles, that the man had been modelling his behaviour on that of
Tolstoy—’ going straight to the great simple fundamental things,’ as
Burlap himself described the old Salvationist’s soulful impertinences.

‘Yes, Rimbaud certainly believed in Life,’ Walter acquiesced feebly,
feeling while he spoke the words as he felt when he had to write a
formal letter of condolence. Talking about believing in Life was as bad
as talking about grieving with you in your great bereavement.

‘He believed in it so much,’ Burlap went on, dropping his eyes (to
Walter’s great relief) and nodding as he ruminatively pronounced the
words,’so profoundly that he was prepared to give it up. That’s how I
interpret his abandonment of literature—as a deliberate sacrifice.’ (He
uses the big words too easily, thought Walter.) ‘He that would save his
life must lose it.’ (Oh, oh!) ‘To be the finest poet of your generation
and, knowing it, to give up poetry—that’s losing your life to save it.
That’s really believing in life. His faith was so strong, that he was
prepared to lose his life, in the certainty of gaining a new and better
one.’ (Much too easily! Walter was filled with embarrassment.) ‘A life
of mystical contemplation and intuition. Ah, if only one knew what he
did and thought in Africa, if only one knew!’

‘He smuggled guns for the Emperor Menelik,’ Walter had the courage to
reply. ‘And to judge from his letters, he seems to have thought chiefly
about making enough money to settle down. He carried forty thousand
francs in his belt. A stone and a half of gold round his loins.’ Talking
of gold, he was thinking, I really ought to speak to him about my screw.

But at the mention of Menelik’s rifles and the forty thousand francs,
Burlap smiled with an expression of Christian forgiveness. ‘But do you
_really_ imagine,’ he asked, ‘that gun-running and money were what
occupied his mind in the desert? The author of _Les Illuminations_?’

Walter blushed, as though he had been guilty of some nasty solecism.
‘Those are the only facts we know,’ he said self-excusingly.

‘But there is an insight that sees deeper than the mere facts.’ ‘Deeper
insight’ was Burlap’s pet name for his own opinion. ‘He was realizing
the new life, he was gaining the Kingdom of Heaven.’

‘It’s a hypothesis,’ said Walter, wishing uncomfortably that Burlap had
never read the New Testament.

‘For me,’ retorted Burlap, ‘it’s a certainty. An absolute certainty.’ He
spoke very emphatically, he wagged his head with violence. ‘A complete
and absolute certainty,’ he repeated, hypnotizing himself by the
reiteration of the phrase into a fictitious passion of conviction.
‘Complete and absolute.’ He was silent; but within, he continued to lash
himself into mystical fury. He thought of Rimbaud until he himself was
Rimbaud. And then suddenly his devil popped out its grinning face and
whispered, ‘A stone and a half of gold round his loins.’ Burlap
exorcised the creature by changing the subject. ‘Have you seen the new
books for review?’ he said, pointing to a double pile of volumes on the
corner of the table. ‘Yards of contemporary literature.’ He became
humorously exasperated. ‘Why can’t authors stop? It’s a disease. It’s a
bloody flux, like what the poor lady suffered from in the Bible, if you
remember.’

What Walter chiefly remembered was the fact that the joke was Philip
Quarles’s.

Burlap got up and began to look through the books. ‘Pity the poor
reviewer!’ he said with a sigh.

The poor reviewer—wasn’t that the cue for his little speech about
salary? Walter nerved himself, focussed his will. ‘I was wondering,’ he
began.

But Burlap had almost simultaneously begun on his own account. ‘I’ll get
Beatrice to come in,’ he said and pressed the bell-push three times.
‘Sorry. What were you saying?’

‘Nothing.’ The demand would have to be postponed. It couldn’t be made in
public, particularly when the public was Beatrice. Damn Beatrice! he
thought unjustly. What business had she to do subediting and Shorter
Notices for nothing? Just because she had a private income and adored
Burlap.

Walter had once complained to her, jokingly, of his miserable six pounds
a week.

‘But the _World’s_ worth making sacrifices for,’ she rapped out. ‘After
all, one has a responsibility towards people; one _ought_ to do
something for them.’ Echoed in her clear rapping voice, Burlap’s
Christian sentiments sounded, Walter thought, particularly odd. ‘The
_World_ does do something; one ought to help.’

The obvious retort was that his own private income was very small and
that he wasn’t in love with Burlap. He didn’t make it, however, but
suffered himself to be pecked. Damn her, all the same!

Beatrice entered, a neat, plumply well-made little figure, very erect
and business-like. ‘Morning, Walter,’ she said, and every word she
uttered was like a sharp little rap with an ivory mallet over the
knuckles. She examined him with her bright, rather protuberant brown
eyes. ‘You look tired,’ she went on. ‘Worn out, as though you’d been on
the tiles last night.’ Peck after peck. ‘Were you?’

Walter blushed. ‘I slept badly,’ he mumbled and engrossed himself in a
book.

They sorted out the volumes for the various reviewers. A little heap for
the scientific expert, another for the accredited metaphysician, a whole
mass for the fiction specialist. The largest pile was of Tripe. Tripe
wasn’t reviewed, or only got a Shorter Notice.

‘Here’s a book about Polynesia for you, Walter,’ said Burlap generously.
‘And a new anthology of French verse. No, on second thoughts, I think
_I’ll_ do that.’ On second thoughts he generally did keep the most
interesting books for himself.

‘_The Life of St. Francis re-toldfor the Children by Bella Jukes_.
Theology or tripe?’ asked Beatrice.

‘Tripe,’ said Walter looking over her shoulder.

‘But I’d rather like an excuse to do a little article on St. Francis,’
said Burlap. In the intervals of editing, he was engaged on a
full-length study of the Saint. ‘St. Francis and the Modern Psyche,’ it
was to be called. He took the little book from Beatrice and let the
pages flick past under his thumb. ‘Tripe-ish,’ he admitted. ‘But what an
extraordinary man! Extraordinary!’ He began to hypnotize himself, to
lash himself up into the Franciscan mood.

‘Extraordinary!’ Beatrice rapped out, her eyes fixed on Burlap.

Walter looked at her curiously. Her ideas and her pecking goose-billed
manner seemed to belong to two different people, between whom the only
perceptible link was Purlap. Was there any inward, organic connection?

‘What a devastating integrity!’ Burlap went on, selfintoxicated. He
shook his head and, sighing, sobered himself sufficiently to proceed
with the morning’s business.

When the opportunity came for Walter to talk (with what diffidence, what
a squeamish reluctance!) about his salary, Burlap was wonderfully
sympathetic.

‘I know, old man,’ he said, laying his hand on the other’s shoulder with
a gesture that disturbingly reminded Walter of the time when, as a
schoolboy, he had played Antonio in _The Merchant of Venice_ and the
detestable Porter Major, disguised as Bassanio, had been coached to
register friendship. ‘I know what being hard up is.’ His little laugh
gave it to be understood that he was a Franciscan specialist in poverty,
but was too modest to insist upon the fact. ‘I know, old man.’ And he
really almost believed that he wasn’t half owner and salaried editor of
the _World_, that he hadn’t a penny invested, that he had been living on
two pounds a week for years. ‘I wish we could afford to pay you three
times as much as we do. You’re worth it, old man.’ He gave Walter’s
shoulder a little pat.

Walter made a vague mumbling sound of deprecation. That little pat, he
was thinking, was the signal for him to begin:

‘I am a tainted wether of the flock,

Meetest for slaughter.’

‘I wish for your sake,’ Burlap continued, ‘for mine too,’ he added,
putting himself with a rueful little laugh in the same financial boat as
Walter, ‘that the paper did make more money. If you wrote worse, it
might.’ The compliment was graceful. Burlap emphasized it with another
friendly pat and a smile. But the eyes expressed nothing. Meeting them
for an instant, Walter had the strange impression that they were not
looking at him at all, that they were not looking at anything. ‘The
paper’s too good. It’s largely your fault. One cannot serve God and
mammon.’

‘Of course not,’ Walter agreed; but he felt again that the big words had
come too easily.

‘I wish one could.’ Burlap spoke like a jocular St. Francis pretending
to make fun of his own principles.

Walter joined mirthlessly in the laughter. He was wishing that he had
never mentioned the word ‘salary.’

‘I’ll go and talk to Mr. Chivers,’ said Burlap. Mr. Chivers was the
business manager. Burlap made use of him, as the Roman statesman made
use of oracles and augurs, to promote his own policy. His unpopular
decisions could always be attributed to Mr. Chivers; and when he made a
popular one, it was invariably made in the teeth of the business
manager’s soulless tyranny. Mr. Chivers was a most convenient fiction.
‘I’ll go this morning.’

‘Don’t bother,’ said Walter.

‘If it’s humanly possible to scrape up anything more for you…’

‘No, please.’ Walter was positively begging not to be given more. ‘I
know thd difficulties. Don’t think I want…’

‘But we’re sweating you, Walter, positively sweating you.’ The more
Walter protested, the more generous Burlap became.’don’t think I’m not
aware of it. I’ve been worrying about it for a long time.’

His magnanimity was infectious. Walter was determined not to take any
more money, quite determined, even though he was sure the paper could
afford to give it. ‘Really, Burlap,’ he almost begged, ‘I’d much rather
you left things as they are.’ And then suddenly he thought of Marjorie.
How unfairly he was treating her! Sacrificing her comfort to his.
Because he found haggling distasteful, because he hated fighting on the
one hand and accepting favours on the other, poor Marjorie would have to
go without new clothes and a second maid.

But Burlap waved his objections aside. He insisted on being generous.
‘I’ll go and talk to Chivers at once. I think I can persuade him to let
you have another twentyfive a year.’

Twentyfive. That was ten shillings a week. Nothing. Marjorie had said
that he ought to stand out for at least another hundred. ‘Thank you,’ he
said and despised himself for saying it.

‘It’s ridiculously little, I’m afraid. Quite ridiculously.’

That’s what I ought to have said, thought Walter.

‘One feels quite ashamed of offering it. But what can one do?’ ‘One’
could obviously do nothing, for the good reason that ‘one’ was
impersonal and didn’t exist.

Walter mumbled something about being grateful. He felt humiliated and
blamed Marjorie for it.

When Walter worked at the office, which was only three days a week, he
sat with Beatrice. Burlap, in editorial isolation, sat alone. It was the
day of Shorter Notices. Between them, on the table, stood the stacks of
Tripe. They helped themselves. It was a Literary Feast—a feast of offal.
Bad novels and worthless verses, imbecile systems of philosophy and
platitudinous moralizings, insignificant biographies and boring books of
travel, pietism so nauseating and children’s books so vulgar and so
silly that to read them was to feel ashamed for the whole human race—the
pile was high, and every week it grew higher. The ant-like industry of
Beatrice, Walter’s quick discernment and facility were utterly
inadequate to stem the rising flood. They settled down to their work
‘like vultures,’ said Walter, ‘in the Towers of Silence.’ What he wrote
this morning was peculiarly pungent.

On paper Walter was all he failed to be in life. His reviews were
epigrammatically ruthless. Poor earnest spinsters, when they read what
he had written of their heartfelt poems about God and Passion and the
Beauties of Nature, were cut to the quick by his brutal contempt. The
big-game shooters who had so much enjoyed their African trip would
wonder how the account of anything so interesting could be called
tedious. The young novelists who had modelled their styles and their
epical conceptions on those of the best authors, who had daringly
uncovered the secrets of their most intimate and sexual life, were hurt,
were amazed, were indignant to learn that their writing was stilted,
their construction non-existent, their psychology unreal, their drama
stagey and melodramatic. A bad book is as much of a labour to write as a
good one; it comes as sincerely from the author’s soul. But the bad
author’s soul being, artistically at any rate, of inferior quality, its
sincerities will be, if not always intrinsically uninteresting, at any
rate uninterestingly expressed, and the labour expended on the
expression will be wasted. Nature is monstrously unjust. There is no
substitute for talent. Industry and all the virtues are of no avail.
Immersed in his Tripe, Walter ferociously commented on lack of talent.
Conscious of their industry, sincerity and good artistic intentions, the
authors of the Tripe felt themselves outrageously and unfairly treated.

Beatrice’s methods of criticism were simple; she tried in every case to
say what she imagined Burlap would say. In practice what happened was
that she praised all books in which Life and its problems were taken, as
she thought, seriously, and condemned all those in which they were not.
She would have ranked Bailey’s _Festus_ higher than _Candide_, unless of
course Burlap or some other authoritative person had previously told her
that it was her duty to prefer _Candide_. As she was never permitted to
criticize anything but Tripe, her lack of all critical insight was of
little importance.

They worked, they went out to lunch, they returned and set to work
again. Eleven new books had arrived in the interval.

‘I feel,’ said Walter, ‘as the Bombay vultures must feel when there’s
been an epidemic among the Parsees.’ Bombay and the Parsees reminded him
of his sister Elinor. She and Philip would be sailing to-day. He was
glad they were coming home. They were almost the only people he could
talk to intimately about his affairs. He would be able to discuss his
problems with them. It would be a comfort, an alleviation of his
responsibility. And then suddenly he remembered that everything was
settled, that there were no more problems. No more. And then the
telephone bell rang. He lifted the receiver, he hallooed into the
mouthpiece

‘Is that you, Walter darling?’ The voice was Lucy’s.

His heart sank; he knew what was going to happen.

‘I’ve just woken up,’ she explained. ‘I’m all alone.’

She wanted him to come to tea. He refused. After tea, then.

‘I can’t,’ he persisted.

‘Nonsense! Of course you can.’

‘Impossible.’

‘But why? ‘

‘Work.’

‘But not after six. I insist.’

After all, he thought, perhaps it would be better to see her and explain
what he had decided.

‘I’ll never forgive you if you don’t come.’

‘All right,’ he said, ‘I’ll make an effort. I’ll come if I possibly
can.’

‘What a flirt you are!’ Beatrice mocked, as he hung up the receiver.
‘Saying no for the fun of being persuaded!’

And when, at a few minutes after five, he left the office on the pretext
that he must get to the London Library before closing time, she sent
ironical good wishes after him. ‘_Bon amusement!_’ were her last words.

 

__

 

In the editorial room. Burlap was dictating letters to his secretary.
‘Yours etcetera,’ he concluded and picked up another batch of papers.
‘Dear Miss Saville,’ he began, after glancing at them for a moment.
‘No,’ he corrected himself.’dear Miss Romola Saville. Thank you for your
note and for the enclosed manuscripts.’ He paused and, leaning back in
his chair, closed his eyes in brief reflection. ‘It is not my custom,’
he went on at last in a soft remote voice, ‘it is not my custom to write
personal letters to unknown contributors.’ He reopened his eyes, to meet
the dark bright glance of his secretary from across the table. The
expression in Miss Cobbett’s eyes was sarcastic; the faintest little
smile almost imperceptibly twitched the corners of her mouth. Burlap was
annoyed; but he concealed his feelings and continued to stare straight
in front of him as though Miss Cobbett were not there at all and he were
looking absentmindedly at a piece of furniture. Miss Cobbett looked back
at her notebook.

‘How contemptible!’ she said to herself. ‘How unspeakably vulgar!’

Miss Cobbett was a small woman, black-haired, darkly downy at the
corners of her upper lip, with brown eyes disproportionately large for
her thin, rather sickly little face. Sombre and passionate eyes in which
there was, almost permanently, an expression of reproach that could
flash up into sudden anger or, as at this moment, derision. She had a
right to look reproachfully on the world. Fate had treated her badly.
Very badly indeed. Born and brought up in the midst of a reasonable
prosperity, her father’s death had left her, from one day to another,
desperately poor. She got engaged to Harry Markham. Life promised to
begin again. Then came the War. Harry joined up and was killed. His
death condemned her to shorthand and typing for the rest of her natural
existence. Harry was the only man who had ever loved her, who had been
prepared to take the risk of loving her. Other men found her too
disquietingly violent and impassioned and serious. She took things
terribly seriously. Young men felt uncomfortable and silly in her
company. They revenged themselves by laughing at her for having no’sense
of humour,’ for being a pedant and, as time went on, for being an old
maid who was longing for a man. They said she looked like a witch. She
had often been in love, passionately, with a hopeless violence. The men
had either not noticed; or, if they noticed, had fled precipitately, or
had mocked, or, what was almost worse, had been patronizingly kind as
though to a poor misguided creature who might be a nuisance but who
ought, none the less, to be treated with charity. Ethel Cobbett had
every right to look reproachful.

She had met Burlap because, as a girl, in the prosperous days, she had
been at school with Susan Paley, who had afterwards become Burlap’s
wife. When Susan died and Burlap exploited the grief he felt, or at any
rate loudly said he felt, in a more than usually painful series of these
always painfully personal articles which were the secret of his success
as a journalist (for the great public has a chronic and cannibalistic
appetite for personalities), Ethel wrote him a letter of condolence,
accompanying it with a long account of Susan as a girl. A moved and
moving answer came back by return of post. ‘Thank you, thank you for
your memories of what I have always felt to be the _realest_ Susan, the
little girl who survived so beautifully and purely in the woman, to the
very end; the lovely child that in spite of chronology she always was,
underneath and parallel with the physical Susan living in time. In her
heart of hearts, I am sure, she never quite believed in her
chronological adult self; she could never quite get it out of her head
that she was a little girl playing at being grown up.’ And so it went
on—pages of a rather hysterical lyricism about the dead child-woman. He
incorporated a good deal of the substance of the letter in his next
week’s article. ‘Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven’ was its title. A day
or two later he travelled down to Birmingham to have a personal
interview with this woman who had known the realest Susan when she was
chronologically as well as spiritually a child. The impression each made
upon the other was favourable. For Ethel, living bitterly and
reproachfully between her dismal lodgings and the hateful insurance
office where she was a clerk, the arrival first of his letter and now of
Burlap himself had been great and wonderful events. A real writer, a man
with a mind and a soul. In the state into which he had then worked
himself Burlap would have liked any woman who could talk to him about
Susan’s childhood and into whose warm maternal compassion, a child
himself, he could luxuriously sink as into a feather bed. Ethel Cobbett
was not only sympathetic and a friend of Susan’s; she had intelligence,
was earnestly cultured and an admirer. The first impressions were good.

Burlap wept and was abject. He agonized himself with the thought that he
could never, never ask Susan’s forgiveness for all the unkindness he had
ever done her, for all the cruel words he had spoken. He confessed in an
agony of contrition that he had once been unfaithful to her. He
recounted their quarrels. And now she was dead; he would never be able
to ask her pardon. Never, never. Ethel was moved. Nobody, she reflected,
would care like that when she was dead. But being cared for when one is
dead is less satisfactory than being cared for when one is alive. These
agonies which Burlap, by a process of intense concentration on the idea
of his loss and grief, had succeeded in churning up within himself were
in no way proportionate or even related to his feelings for the living
Susan. For every Jesuit novice Loyola prescribed a course of solitary
meditation on the passion of Christ; a few days of this exercise,
accompanied by fasting, were generally enough to produce in the novice’s
mind a vivid, mystical and personal realization of the Saviour’s real
existence and sufferings. Burlap employed the same process; but instead
of thinking about Jesus, or even about Susan, he thought of himself, his
own agonies, his own loneliness, his own remorses. And duly, at the end
of some few days of incessant spiritual masturbation, he had been
rewarded by a mystical realization of his own unique and incomparable
piteousness. He saw himself in an apocalyptic vision as a man of
sorrows. (The language of the New Testament was constantly on Burlap’s
lips and under his pen. ‘To each of us,’ he wrote, ‘is given a Calvary
proportionate to his or her powers of endurance and capabilities of
self-perfection.’ He spoke familiarly of agonies in the garden and
cups.) The vision rent his heart; he was overwhelmed with self-pity. But
with the sorrows of this Christ-like Burlap poor Susan had really very
little to do. His love for the living Susan had been as much
self-induced and self-intensified as his grief at her death. He had
loved, not Susan, but the mental image of Susan and the idea of love,
fixedly concentrated on, in the best Jesuitical manner, until they
became hallucinatingly real. His ardours for this phantom, and the love
of love, the passion for passion which he had managed to squeeze out of
his inner consciousness, conquered Susan, who imagined that they had
some connection with herself. What pleased her most about his feelings
was their ‘pure’ unmasculine quality. His ardours were those of a child
for its mother (a rather incestuous child, it is true; but how tactfully
and delicately the little (Edipus!); his love was at once babyish and
maternal; his passion was a kind of passive snuggling. Frail, squeamish,
less than fully alive and therefore less than adult, permanently
under-aged, she adored him as a superior and almost holy lover. Burlap
in return adored his private phantom, adored his beautifully Christian
conception of matrimony, adored his own adorable husbandliness. His
periodical articles in praise of marriage were lyrical. He was, however,
frequently unfaithful; but he had such a pure, childlike and platonic
way of going to bed with women, that neither they nor he ever considered
that the process really counted as going to bed. His life with Susan was
a succession of scenes in every variety of emotional key. He would chew
and chew on some grievance until he had poisoned himself into a passion
of anger or jealousy. Or else he would pore over his own shortcomings
and grow abjectly repentant, or roll at her feet in an ecstasy of
incestuous adoration for the imaginary mother-baby of a wife with whom
he had chosen to identify the corporeal Susan. And then sometimes, very
disquietingly for poor Susan, he would suddenly interrupt his emotions
with an oddly cynical little laugh and would become for a while somebody
entirely different, somebody like the Jolly Miller in the song. ‘I care
for nobody, no, not I, and nobody cares for me.’ ‘One’s devil’ was how
he described those moods, when he had worked himself back again into
emotional spirituality; and he would quote the Ancient Mariner’s words
about the wicked whisper that had turned his heart as dry as dust.
‘One’s devil’—or was it, perhaps the genuine, fundamental Burlap, grown
tired of trying to be somebody else and of churning up emotions he did
not spontaneously feel, taking a brief holiday?

Susan died; but the prolonged and passionate grief which he felt on that
occasion could have been worked up, if Burlap had chosen to imagine her
dead and himself desolate and lonely, almost equally well during her
lifetime. Ethel was touched by the intensity of his feelings, or rather
by the loudness and insistence of their expression. Burlap seemed to be
quite broken down, physically and spiritually, by his grief. Her heart
bled for him. Encouraged by her sympathy, he plunged into an orgy of
regrets, whose vanity made them exasperatingly poignant, of repentances,
excruciating for being too late, of unnecessary confessions and
self-abasements. Feelings are not separate entities that can be
stimulated in isolation from the rest of the mind. When a man is
emotionally exalted in one direction, he is liable to become emotionally
exalted in others. Burlap’s grief made him noble and generous; his
self-pity made it easy to feel Christian about other people. ‘You’re
unhappy, too,’ he said to Ethel. ‘I can see it.’ She admitted it; told
him how much she hated her work, hated the place, hated the people; told
him her wretched history. Burlap churned up his sympathy. ‘But what do
my little miseries matter in comparison with yours,’ she protested,
remembering the violence of his outcry. Burlap talked about the
freemasonry of suffering and then, dazzled by the vision of his own
generous self, proceeded to offer Miss Cobbett a secretarial job on the
staff of the _Literary World_. Infinitely preferable as London and the
_Liteary World_ seemed to the Insurance office and Birmingham, Ethel
hesitated. The insurance job was dull, but it was safe, permanent,
pensioned. In another and yet more explosive burst of generous feeling
Burlap guaranteed her all the permanence she wanted. He felt warm with
goodness.

Miss Cobbett allowed herself to be persuaded. She came. If Burlap had
hoped to slide by gradual stages and almost imperceptibly into Ethel’s
bed, he was disappointed. A broken-hearted child in need of consolation,
he would have liked to lure his consoler, ever so spiritually and
platonically, into a gentle and delicious incest. But to Ethel Cobbett
the idea was unthinkable; it never entered her head. She was a woman of
principles, as passionate and violent in her moral loyalties as in her
love. She had taken Burlap’s grief seriously and literally. When they
had agreed, with tears, to found a kind of private, cult for poor Susan,
to raise and keep perpetually illumined and adorned an inward altar to
her memory, Ethel had imagined that they were meaning what they were
saying. She meant it in any case. It never occurred to her that Burlap
did not. His subsequent behaviour had astonished and shocked her. Was
this the man, she asked herself as she watched him living his life of
disguised and platonic and slimily spiritual promiscuities, was this the
man who had vowed to keep the candles for ever burning in front of poor
little Susan’s altar? She looked, she spoke her disapproval. Burlap
cursed himself for his foolishness in having lured her away from the
insurance office, his double-dyed idiocy in promising her permanence of
tenure. If only she’d go of her own accord! He tried to make her life a
misery for her by treating her with a cold, superior impersonality, as
though she were just a machine for taking down letters and copying
articles. But Ethel Cobbett grimly stuck to her job, had stuck to it for
eighteen months now and showed no signs of giving notice. It was
intolerable; it couldn’t go on. But how should he put an end to it? Of
course, he wasn’t _legally_ bound to keep her for ever. He had never put
down anything in black and white. If the worst came to the worst…

Stonily ignoring the look in Ethel Cobbett’s eyes, the almost
imperceptible smile of irony, Burlap went on with his dictation. One
doesn’t deign to notice machines; one uses them. But still, this sort of
thing simply could not go on.

‘It is not my custom to write personal letters to unknown contributors,’
he repeated in a firm, determined tone. ‘But I cannot refrain from
telling you—no, no—from thanking you for the great pleasure your poems
have given me. The lyrical freshness of your work, its passionate
sincerity, its untamed and almost savage brilliance have come as a
surprise and a refreshment to me. An editor must read through such
quantities of bad literature, that he is almost pathetically grateful to
those who—no; say: to the rare and precious spirits who offer him gold
instead of the customary dross. Thank you for the gift of…’ he looked
again at the papers, ‘of “Love in the Greenwood” and “Passion Flowers.”
Thank you for their bright and turbulent verbal surface. Thank you also
for the sensitiveness…no, the quivering sensibility, the experience of
suffering, the ardent spirituality which a deeper insight detects
beneath that surface. I am having both poems set up at once and hope to
print them early next month.

‘Meanwhile, if you ever happen to be passing in the neighbourhood of
Fleet Street, I should esteem it a great honour to hear from you
personally some account of your poetical projects. The literary
aspirant, even of talent, is often balked by material difficulties which
the professional man of letters knows how to circumvent. I have always
regarded it as one of my greatest privileges and duties as a critic and
editor to make smooth the way for literary talent. This must be my
excuse for writing to you at such length. Believe me, yours very truly.’

He looked again at the typewritten poems and read a line or two. ‘Real
talent,’ he said to himself several times, ‘real talent.’ But ‘one’s
devil’ was thinking that the girl was remarkably outspoken, must have a
temperament, seemed to know a thing or two. He dropped the papers into
the basket on his right hand and picked up another letter from the
basket on his left.

‘To the Reverend James Hitchcock,’ he dictated. ‘The Vicarage,
Tuttleford, Wilts. Dear Sir, I regret very much that I am unable to use
your long and very interesting article on the relation between
agglutinative languages and agglutinative chimera-forms in symbolic art.
Exigencies of space…

 

__

 

Pink in her dressing-gown like the tulips in the vases, Lucy lay propped
on her elbow, reading. The couch was grey, the walls were hung with grey
silk, the carpet was rose-coloured. In its gilded cage even the parrot
was pink and grey. The door opened.

‘Walter, darling! At last!’ She threw down her book.

‘Already. If you knew all the things I ought to be doing instead of
being here.’ (‘Do you promise?’ Marjorie had asked. And he had answered,
‘ I promise.’ But this last visit of explanation didn’t count.)

The divan was wide. Lucy moved her feet towards the wall, making place
for him to sit down. One of her red Turkish slippers fell.

‘That tiresome manicure woman,’ she said, raising the bare foot a few
inches so that it came into her line of sight. ‘she will put that
horrible red stuff on my toe nails. They look like wounds.’

Walter did not speak. His heart was violently beating. Like the warmth
of a body transposed into another sensuous key, the scent of her
gardenias enveloped him. There are hot perfumes and cold, stifling and
fresh. Lucy’s gardenias seemed to fill his throat and lungs with a
tropical and sultry sweetness. On the grey silk of the couch, her foot
was flower-like and pale, like the pale fleshy buds of lotus flowers.
The feet of Indian goddesses walking among their lotuses are themselves
flowers. Time flowed in silence, but not to waste, as at ordinary
moments. It was as though it flowed, pumped beat after beat by Walter’s
anxious heart, into some enclosed reservoir of experience to mount and
mount behind the dam until at last, suddenly…Walter suddenly reached out
and took her bare foot in his hand. Under the pressure of those silently
accumulated seconds, the dam had broken. It was a long foot, long and
narrow. His fingers closed round it. He bent down and kissed the instep.

‘But, my dear Walter!’ She laughed. ‘You’re becoming quite oriental.’

Walter said nothing, but kneeling on the ground beside the couch, he
leaned over her. The face that bent to kiss her was set in a kind of
desperate madness. The hands that touched her trembled. She shook her
head, she shielded her face with her hand.

‘No, no.’

‘But why not?’

‘It wouldn’t do,’ she said.

‘Why not?’

‘It would complicate things too much for you, to begin with.’

‘No, it wouldn’t,’ said Walter. There were no complications. Marjorie
had ceased to exist.

‘Besides,’ Lucy went on, ‘you seem to forget me. I don’t want to.’

But his lips were soft, his hands touched lightly. The moth-winged
premonitions of pleasure came flutteringly to life under his kisses and
caresses. She shut her eyes. His caresses were like a drug, at once
intoxicant and opiate. She had only to relax her will; the drug would
possess her utterly. She would cease to be herself. She would become
nothing but a skin of fluttering pleasure enclosing a void, a warm
abysmal darkness.

‘Lucy!’ Her eyelids fluttered and shuddered under his lips. His hand was
on her breast. ‘My sweetheart.’ She lay quite still, her eyes still
closed.

A sudden and piercing shriek made both of them start, broad awake, out
of their timelessness. It was as though a murder had been committed
within a few feet of them, but on someone who found the process of being
slaughtered rather a joke, as well as painful.

Lucy burst out laughing. ‘It’s Polly.’

Both turned towards the cage. His head cocked a little on one side, the
bird was examining them out of one black and circular eye. And while
they looked, a shutter of parchment skin passed like a temporary
cataract across the bright expressionless regard and was withdrawn. The
jocular martyr’s dying shriek was once again repeated.

‘You’ll have to cover his cage with the cloth,’ said Lucy.

Walter turned back towards her and angrily began to kiss her. The parrot
yelled again. Lucy’s laughter redoubled.

‘It’s no good,’ she gasped. ‘He won’t stop till you cover him.’

The bird confirmed what she had said with another scream of mirthful
agony. Feeling furious, outraged and a fool, Walter got up from his
knees and crossed the room. At his approach the bird began to dance
excitedly on its perch; its crest rose, the feathers of its head and
neck stood apart from one another like the scales of a ripened fir-cone.
‘Good-morning,’ it said in a guttural ventriloquial voice,
‘good-morning, Auntie, good-morning, Auntie, good-morning, Auntie….’
Walter unfolded the pink brocade that lay on the table near the cage and
extinguished the creature. A last ‘Good-morning, Auntie’ came out from
under the cloth. Then there was silence.

‘He likes his little joke,’ said Lucy, as the parrot disappeared. She
had lighted a cigarette.

Walter strode back across the room and without saying anything took the
cigarette from between her fingers and threw it into the fireplace. Lucy
raised her eyebrows, but he gave her no time to speak. Kneeling down
again beside her, he began to kiss her, angrily.

‘Walter,’ she protested. ‘No! What’s come over you?’ She tried to
disengage herself, but he was surprisingly strong. ‘You’re like a wild
beast.’ His desire was dumb and savage. ‘Walter! I insist.’ Struck by an
absurd idea, she suddenly laughed. ‘If you knew how like the movies you
were! A great huge grinning close-up.’

But ridicule was as unavailing as protest. And did she really desire it
to be anything but unavailing? Why shouldn’t she abandon herself? It was
only rather humiliating to be carried away, to be compelled instead of
to choose. Her pride, her will resisted him, resisted her own desire.
But after all, why not? The drug was potent and delicious. Why not? She
shut her eyes. But as she was hesitating, circumstances suddenly decided
for her. There was a knock at the door. Lucy opened her eyes again. ‘I’m
going to say come in,’ she whispered.

He scrambled to his feet and, as he did so, heard the knock repeated.

‘Come in!’

The door opened. ‘Mr. Illidge to see you, madam,’ said the maid.

Walter was standing by the window, as though profoundly interested in
the delivery van drawn up in front of the opposite house.

‘Show him up,’ said Lucy.

He turned round as the door closed behind the maid. His face was very
pale, his lips were trembling.

‘I quite forgot,’ she explained ‘I asked him last night; this morning
rather.’

He averted his face and without saying a word crossed the room, opened
the door and was gone.

‘Walter!’ she called after him, ‘Walter!’ But he did not return.

On the stairs he met Illidge ascending behind the maid.

Walter responded to his greetings with a vague salute and hurried past.
He could not trust himself to speak.

‘Our friend Bidlake seemed to be in a great hurry,’ said Illidge, when
the preliminary greetings were over. He felt exultantly certain that he
had driven the other fellow away.

She observed the triumph on his face. Like a little ginger cock, she was
thinking. ‘He’d forgotten something,’ she vaguely explained.

‘Not himself, I hope,’ he questioned waggishly. And when she laughed,
more at the fatuous masculinity of his expression than at his joke, he
swelled with selfconfidence and satisfaction. This social business was
as easy as playing skittles. Feeling entirely at his ease, he stretched
his legs, he looked round the room. Its richly sober elegance impressed
him at once as the right thing. He sniffed the perfumed air
appreciatively.

‘What’s under that mysterious red cloth there?’ he asked, pointing at
the mobled cage.

‘That’s a cockatoo,’ Lucy answered. ‘A cock-adoodle-doo,’ she emended,
breaking out into a sudden disquieting and inexplicable laughter.

There are confessable agonies, sufferings of which one can positively be
proud. Of bereavement, of parting, of the sense of sin and the fear of
death the poets have eloquently spoken. They command the world’s
sympathy. But there are also discreditable anguishes, no less
excruciating than the others, but of which the sufferer dare not, cannot
speak. The anguish of thwarted desire, for example. That was the anguish
which Walter carried with him into the street. It was pain, anger,
disappointment, shame, misery all in one. He felt as though his soul
were dying in torture. And yet the cause was unavowable, low, even
ludicrous. Suppose a friend were now to meet him and to ask why he
looked so unhappy.

‘I was making love to a woman when I was interrupted, first by the
screaming of a cockatoo, then by the arrival of a visitor.’

The comment would be enormous and derisive laughter. His confession
would have been a smokingroom joke. And yet he could not be suffering
more if he had lost his mother.

He wandered for an hour through the streets, in Regent’s Park. The light
gradually faded out of the white and misty afternoon; he became calmer.
It was a lesson, he thought, a punishment; he had broken his promise.
For his own good as well as for Marjorie’s, never again. He looked at
his watch and seeing that it was after seven, turned homewards. He
arrived at the house tired and determinedly repentant. Marjorie was
sewing; the lamplight was bright on her thin fatigued face. She too was
wearing a dressing-gown. It was mauve and hideous; he had always thought
her taste bad. The flat was pervaded with a smell of cooking. He hated
kitchen smells, but that was yet another reason why he should be
faithful. It was a question of honour and duty. It was not because he
preferred gardenia to cabbage that he had a right to make Marjorie
suffer.

‘You’re late,’ she said.

‘There was a lot to do,’ Walter explained. ‘And I walked home.’ That at
least was true. ‘How are you feeling?’ He laid his hand on her shoulder
and bent down. Dropping her sewing, Marjorie threw her hands round his
neck. What a happiness, she was thinking, to have him again! Hers once
more. What a comfort! But even as she pressed herself against him, she
realized that she was once more betrayed. She broke away from him.

‘Walter, how could you?’

The blood rushed to his face; but he tried to keep up the pretence. ‘How
could I what? ‘ he asked.

‘You’ve been to see that woman again.’

‘But what _are_ you talking about?’ He knew it was useless; but he went
on pretending all the same.

‘It’s no use lying.’ She got up so suddenly that her work basket
overturned and scattered its contents on the floor. Unheeding, she
walked across the room. ‘Go away!’ she cried, when he tried to follow
her. Walter shrugged his shoulders and obeyed. ‘How could you?’ she went
on. ‘Coming home reeking of her perfume.’ So it was the gardenias. What
a fool he was not to have foreseen….’After all you said last night. How
could you?’

‘But if you’d let me explain,’ he protested in the tone of a victim—an
exasperated victim.

‘Explain why you lied,’ she said bitterly. ‘Explain why you broke your
promise.’

Her contemptuous anger evoked an answering anger in Walter. ‘Merely
explain,’ he said with hard and dangerous politeness. What a bore she
was with her scenes and jealousies! What an intolerable, infuriating
_bore_!

‘Merely go on lying,’ she mocked.

Again he shrugged his shoulders. ‘If you like to put it like that,’ he
said politely.

‘Just a despicable liar—that’s what you are.’ And turning away from him,
she covered her face with her hands and began to cry.

Walter was not touched. The sight of her heaving shoulders just
exasperated and bored him. He looked at her with a cold and weary anger.

‘Go away,’ she cried through her tears, ‘go away.’ She did not want him
to be there, triumphing over her, while she cried. ‘Go away.’

‘Do you really want me to go?’ he asked with the same cool, aggravating
politeness.

‘Yes, go, go.’

‘Very well,’ he said and opening the door, he went.

At Camden Town he took a cab and was at Bruton Street just in time to
find Lucy on the point of going out to dinner.

‘You’re coming out with me,’ he announced very calmly.

‘Alas!’

‘Yes, you are.’

She looked at him curiously and he looked back at her, with steady eyes,
smiling, with a queer look of amused triumph and invincible obstinate
power, which she had never seen on his face before. ‘All right,’ she
said at last and, ringing for the maid, ‘Telephone to Lady Sturlett,
will you,’ she ordered, ‘and say I’m sorry, but I’ve got a very bad
headache and can’t come to-night.’ The maid retired. ‘Well, are you
grateful now?’

‘I’m beginning to be,’ he answered.

‘Beginning?’ She assumed indignation. ‘I like your damned impertinence.’

‘I know you do,’ said Walter, laughing. And she did. That night Lucy
became his mistress.

 

__

 

It was between three and four in the afternoon. Spandrell had only just
got out of bed. He was still unshaved; over his pyjamas he wore a
dressing-gown of rough brown cloth, like a monk’s cassock. (The monastic
note was studied; he liked to remind himself of the ascetics. He liked,
rather childishly, to play the part of the anchorite of diabolism.) He
had filled the kettle and was waiting for it to boil on the gas ring. It
seemed to be taking an unconscionably long time about it. His mouth was
dry and haunted by a taste like the fumes of heated brass. The brandy
was having its usual effects.

‘Like as the hart desireth the water brooks,’ he said to himself,’so
longeth my soul…With a morningafter thirst. If only Grace could be
bottled like Perrier water.’

He walked to the window. Outside a radius of fifty yards everything in
the universe had been abolished by the white mist. But how insistently
that lamp-post thrust itself up in front of the next house on the right,
how significantly! The world had been destroyed and only the lamp-post,
like Noah, preserved from the universal cataclysm. And he had never even
noticed there was a lamp-post there; it simply hadn’t existed until this
moment. And now it was the only thing that existed. Spandrell looked at
it with a fixed and breathless attention. This lamp-post alone in the
mist—hadn’t he seen something like it before? This queer sensation of
being with the sole survivor of the Deluge was somehow familiar. Staring
at the lamp-post, he tried to remember. Or rather he breathlessly didn’t
try; he held back his will and his conscious thoughts, as a policeman
might hold back the crowd round a woman who had fainted in the street;
he held back his consciousness to give the stunned memory a place to
stretch itself, to breathe, to come to life. Staring at the lamp-post,
Spandrell waited, agonized and patient, like a man who feels he is just
going to sneeze, tremulously awaiting the anticipated paroxysm; waited
for the long-dead memory to revive. And suddenly it sprang up, broad
awake, out of its catalepsy and, with a sense of enormous relief,
Spandrell saw himself walking up the steep hard-trodden snow of the road
leading from Cortina towards the pass of Falzarego. A cold white cloud
had descended on to the valley. There were no more mountains. The
fantastic coral pinnacles of the Dolomites had been abolished. There
were no more heights and depths. The world was only fifty paces wide,
white snow on the ground, white cloud around and above. And every now
and then, against the whiteness appeared some dark shape of house or
telegraph pole, of tree or man or sledge, portentous in its isolation
and uniqueness, each one a solitary survivor from the general wreck. It
was uncanny, but how thrillingly new and how beautiful in a strange way!
The walk was an adventure; he felt excited and a kind of anxiety
intensified his happiness till he could hardly bear it.

‘But look at that little chalet on the left,’ he cried to his mother.
‘That wasn’t here when I came up last. I swear it wasn’t here.’

He knew the road perfectly, he had been up and down it a hundred times
and never seen that little chalet. And now it loomed up almost
appallingly, the only dark and definite thing in a vague world of
whiteness.

‘Yes, I’ve never noticed it, either,’ said his mother. ‘Which only
shows,’ she added with that note of tenderness which always came into
her voice when she mentioned her dead husband, ‘ how right your father
was. Mistrust all evidence, he used to say, even your own.’

He took her hand and they walked on together in silence, pulling their
sledges after them.

Spandrell turned away from the window. The kettle was boiling. He filled
the tea-pot, poured himself out a cup and drank. Symbolically enough,
his thirst remained unassuaged. He went on sipping, meditatively,
remembering and analysing those quite incredible felicities of his
boyhood. Winters among the Dolomites. Springs in Tuscany or Provence or
Bavaria, summers by the Mediterranean or in Savoy. After his father’s
death and before he went to school, they lived almost continuously
abroad—it was cheaper. And almost all his holidays from school were
spent out of England. From seven to fifteen, he had moved from one
European beauty spot to another, appreciating their beauty, what was
more—genuinely, a precocious Childe Harold. England seemed a little tame
afterwards. He thought of another day in winter. Not misty, this time,
but brilliant; the sun hot in a cloudless sky; the coral precipices of
the Dolomites shining pink and orange and white above the woods and the
snow slopes. They were sliding down on skis through the bare larchwoods.
Streaked with tree-shadows, the snow was like an immense white and blue
tiger-skin beneath their feet. The sunlight was orange among the
leafless twigs, sea-green in the hanging beards of moss. The powdery
snow sizzled under their skis, the air was at once warm and eager. And
when he emerged from the woods the great rolling slopes lay before him
like the contours of a wonderful body, and the virgin snow was a smooth
skin, delicately grained in the low afternoon sunlight, and twinkling
with diamonds and spangles. He had gone ahead. At the outskirts of the
wood he halted to wait for his mother. Looking back he watched her
coming through the trees. A strong tall figure, still young and agile,
the young face puckered into a smile. Down she came towards him, and she
was the most beautiful and at the same time the most homely and
comforting and familiar of beings. ‘Well!’ she said, laughing, as she
drew up beside him

‘Well!’ He looked at her and then at the snow and the tree-shadows and
the great bare rocks and the blue sky, then back again at his mother.
And all at once he was filled with an intense, inexplicable happiness.

‘I shall never be so happy as this again,’ he said to himself, when they
set off once more. ‘Never again, even though I live to be a hundred.’ He
was only fifteen at the time, but that was how he felt and thought.

And his words had been prophetic. That was the last of his happinesses.
Afterwards…No, no. He preferred not to think of afterwards. Not at the
moment. He poured himself out another cup of tea.

A bell rang startlingly. He went to the door of the flat and opened it.
It was his mother.

‘You?’ Then he suddenly remembered that Lucy had said something.

‘Didn’t you get my message?’ Mrs. Knoyle asked anxiously.

‘Yes. But I’d clean forgotten.’

‘But I thought you needed…’ she began. She was afraid she might have
intruded; his face was so unwelcoming.

The corners of his mouth ironically twitched. ‘I do need,’ he said. He
was chronically penniless.

They passed into the other room. The windows, Mrs. Knoyle observed at a
glance, were foggy with grime. On shelf and mantel the dust lay thick.
Sooty cobwebs dangled from the ceiling. She had tried to get Maurice’s
permission to send a woman to clean up two or three times a week. But,
‘None of your slumming,’ he had said. ‘I prefer to wallow. Filth’s my
natural element. Besides, I haven’t a distinguished military position to
keep up.’ He laughed, noiselessly, showing his big strong teeth. That
was for her. She never dared to repeat her offer. But the room really
did need cleaning.

‘Would you like some tea? ‘ he asked. ‘It’s ready. I’m just having
breakfast,’ he added, purposely drawing attention to the irregularity of
his way of life.

She refused, without venturing any comment on the unusual breakfast
hour. Spandrell was rather disappointed that he had not succeeded in
drawing her. There was a long silence.

From time to time Mrs. Knoyle glanced almost surreptitiously at her son.
He was staring fixedly into the empty fireplace. He looked old, she
thought, and rather ill and dreadfully uncared for. She tried to
recognize the child, the big schoolboy he had been in those far-off
times when they were happy, just the two of them together. She
remembered how distressed he used to be when she didn’t wear what he
thought were the right clothes, when she wasn’t smart or failed to look
her best. He was as jealously proud of her as she was of him. But the
responsibility of his upbringing weighed on her heavily. The future had
always frightened her; she had always been afraid of taking decisions;
she had no trust in her own powers. Besides, after her husband’s death,
there wasn’t much money; and she had no head for affairs, no talent for
management. How to afford to send him to the university, how to get him
started in life? The questions tormented her. She lay awake at night,
wondering what she 6ught to do. Life terrified her. She had a child’s
capacity for happiness, but also a child’s fears, a child’s
inefficiency. When existence was a holiday, none could be more
rapturously happy; but when there was business to be done, plans to be
made, decisions taken, she was simply lost and terrified. And to make
matters worse, after Maurice went to school she was very lonely. He was
with her only in the holidays. For nine months out of the twelve she was
alone, with nobody to love but her old dachshund. And at last even he
failed her-fell ill, poor old beast, and had to be put out of his
misery. It was shortly after poor old Fritz’s death that she first met
Major Knoyle, as he then was.

‘You say you brought that money?’ Spandrell asked, breaking the long
silence.

Mrs. Knoyle flushed. ‘Yes, it’s here,’ she said and opened her bag. The
moment to speak had come. It was her duty to admonish, and the wad of
bank notes gave her the right, the power. But the duty was odious and
she had no wish to use her power. She raised her eyes and looked at him
imploringly. ‘Maurice,’ she begged, ‘why can’t you be reasonable? It’s
such a madness, such a folly.’

Spandrell raised his eyebrows. ‘What’s a madness?’ he asked, pretending
not to know what she was talking about.

Embarrassed at being thus compelled to specify her vague reproaches,
Mrs. Knoyle blushed. ‘You know what I mean,’ she said. ‘This way of
living. It’s bad and stupid. And such a waste, such a suicide. Besides,
you’re not happy; I can see that.’

‘Mayn’t I even be unhappy, if I want to?’ he asked ironically.

‘But do you want to make me unhappy too? ‘ she asked. ‘Because if you
do, you succeed, Maurice; you succeed. You make me terribly unhappy.’
The tears came into her eyes. She felt in her bag for a handkerchief.

Spandrell got up from his chair and began to walk up and down the room.
‘You didn’t think much of my happiness in the past,’ he said.

His mother did not answer, but went on noiselessly crying.

‘When you married that man,’ he went on, ‘did you think of my
happiness?’

‘You know I thought it would be for the best,’ she answered brokenly.
She had explained it so often; she couldn’t begin again. ‘You know it,’
she repeated.

‘I only know what I felt and said at the time,’ he answered. ‘You didn’t
listen to me, and now you tell me you wanted to make me happy.’

‘But you were so unreasonable,’ she protested. ‘If you had given me any
reasons…’

‘Reasons,’ he repeated slowly. ‘Did you honestly expect a boy of fifteen
to tell his mother the reasons why he didn’t want her to share her bed
with a stranger?’

He was thinking of that book which had circulated surreptitiously among
the boys of his house at school. Disgusted and ashamed, but irresistibly
fascinated, he had read it at night, by the light of an electric torch,
under the bedclothes. _A Girls’ School in Paris_ it was called,
innocuously enough; but the contents were pure pornography. The sexual
exploits of the military were pindarically exalted. A little later his
mother wrote to him that she was going to marry Major Knoyle. ‘It’s no
good, mother, he said aloud. ‘Hadn’t we better talk about something
else?’

Mrs. Knoyle drew her breath sharply and with determination, gave her
eyes a final wipe and put away the handkerchief. ‘I’m sorry,’ she said.
‘It was stupid of me. Perhaps I’d better go.’

Secretly she hoped that he would protest, would beg her to stay. But he
said nothing.

‘Here’s the money,’ she added.

He took the folded bank-notes and stuffed them into the pocket of his
dressing-gown. ‘I’m sorry I had to ask you for it,’ he said. ‘I was in a
hole. I’ll try not to get into it again.’

He looked at her for a moment, smiling, and suddenly, through the worn
mask, she seemed to see him as he was in boyhood. Tenderness like a soft
warmth expanded within her, soft but irresistible. It would not be
contained. She laid her hands on his shoulders.

‘Goodbye, my darling boy,’ she said, and Spandrell recognized in her
voice that note which used to come into it when she talked to him of his
dead father. She leaned forward to kiss him. Averting his face, he
passively suffered her lips to touch his cheek.


CHAPTER XIV

Miss Fulkes rotated the terrestrial globe until the crimson triangle of
India was opposite their eyes. ‘That’s Bombay,’ she said, pointing with
her pencil. ‘That’s where Daddy and Mummy took the ship. Bombay is a big
town in India,’ she went on instructively. ‘All this is India.’

‘Why is India red?’ asked little Phil.

‘I told you before. Try to remember.’

‘Because it’s English?’ Phil remembered, of course; but the explanation
had seemed inadequate. He had hoped for a better one this time.

‘There, you see, you can remember if you try,’ said Miss Fulkes, scoring
a small triumph.’

‘But why should English things be red?’

‘Because red is England’s colour. Look, here’s little England.’ She spun
the globe. ‘Red too.’

‘We live in England, don’t we?’ Phil looked out of the window. The lawn
with its Wellingtonia, the clotpolled elms looked back at him.

‘Yes, we live just about here,’ and Miss Fulkes poked the red island in
the stomach.

‘But it’s green, where we live,’ said Phil. ‘Not red.’

Miss Fulkes tried to explain, as she had done so many times before, just
precisely what a map was.

In the garden Mrs. Bidlake walked among her flowers, weeding and
meditating. Her walking-stick had a little pronged spud at the end of
it; she could weed without bending. The weeds in the flower-beds were
young and fragile; they yielded without a struggle to the spud. But the
dandelions and plantains on the lawn were more formidable enemies. The
dandelions’ roots were like long tapering white serpents. The plantains,
when she tried to pull them up, desperately clawed the earth.

It was the season of tulips. Duc van Thol and Keizers Kroon, Proserpine
and Thomas Moore stood at attention in all the beds, glossy in the
light. Atoms in the sun vibrated and their trembling filled all space.
Eyes felt the pulses as light; the tulip atoms absorbed or reverberated
the accorded movements, creating colours for whose sake the burgesses of
seventeenth-century Haarlem were prepared to part with hoarded guilders.
Red tulips and yellow, white and parti-coloured, smooth or feathery—Mrs.
Bidlake looked at them, happily. They were like those gay and brilliant
young men, she reflected, in Pinturicchio’s frescoes at Siena. She
halted so as to be able to shut her eyes and think more thoroughly of
Pinturicchio. Mrs. Bidlake could only think really well when she had her
eyes shut. Her face tilted a little upwards towards the sky, her heavy,
wax-white eyelids closed against the light, she stood remembering,
confusedly thinking. Pinturicchio, Siena, the solemn huge cathedral—the
Tuscan Middle Ages marched past her in a rich and confused pageant….She
had been brought up on Ruskin. Watts had painted her portrait as a
child. Rebelling against the Pre-Raphaelites, she had thrilled with an
admiration that was quickened, at first, by a sense of sacrilege, over
the Impressionists. It was because she loved art that she had married
John Bidlake. Liking his pictures, she had imagined, when the painter of
‘The Haymakers’ had paid his court to her, that she adored the man. He
was twenty years her senior; his reputation as a husband was bad; her
family objected strenuously. She did not care. John Bidlake was embodied
Art. His was a sacred function and through his function he appealed to
all her vague, but ardent, idealism.

John Bidlake’s reasons for desiring to marry yet again were unromantic.
Travelling in Provence he had caught typhoid. (‘That’s what comes of
drinking water,’ he used to say afterwards. ‘If only I’d stuck to
Burgundy and cognac!’) After a month in hospital at Avignon he returned
to England, a thin and tottering convalescent. Three weeks later
influenza, followed by pneumonia, brought him again to death’s door. He
recovered slowly. The doctor congratulated him on having recovered at
all.’do you call this recovering? ‘ grumbled John Bidlake. ‘I feel as
though about three-quarters of me were dead and buried.’ Accustomed to
being well, he was terrified of illness. He saw himself living
miserably, a lonely invalid. Marriage would be an alleviation. He
decided to marry. The girl must be good-looking—that went without
saying. But serious, not flighty; devoted, a stay-at-home.

In Janet Paston he found all that he had been looking for. She had a
face like a saint’s; she was serious almost to excess; her adoration for
himself was flattering.

They were married, and ifJohn Bidlake had remained the invalid he had
imagined himself doomed to be, the marriage might have been a success.
Her devotion would have made up for her incompetence as a nurse; his
helplessness would have rendered her indispensable to his happiness. But
health returned. Six months after his marriage John Bidlake was entirely
his old self. The old self began to behave in the old way. Mrs. Bidlake
took refuge from unhappiness in an endless imaginative meditation, which
even her two children were hardly able to interrupt.

It had lasted now for a quarter of a century. A tall imposing lady of
fifty all in white, with a white veil hanging from her hat, she stood
among the tulips, her eyes shut, thinking of Pinturicchio and the Middle
Ages, and time flowing and flowing, and God immobile on the eternal
bank.

A shrill barking precipitated her out of her high eternity. She opened
her eyes, reluctantly, and looked round. The small and silky parody of
an extreme-oriental monster, her little Pekingese was barking at the
kitchen cat. Frisking this way and that round the circumference of a
circle whose radius was proportionate to his terror of the arched and
spitting tabby, he yapped hysterically. His tail waved like a plume in
the wind, his eyes goggled out of his black face.

‘T’ang!’ Mrs. Bidlake called. ‘T’ang!’ All her Pekingese for the last
thirty years had had dynastic names. T’ang the First had flourished
before her children were born. It was with T’ang the Second that she and
Walter had visited the dying Wetherington. The kitchen cat was now
spitting at T’ang the Third. In the intervals, little Mings and Sungs
had lived, grown decrepit and, in the lethal chamber, gone the way of
all pets. ‘T’ang, come here.’ Even in this emergency Mrs. Bidlake was
careful to pronounce the apostrophe. Or rather she was not careful to
pronounce it; she pronounced it by cultured instinct, because, being
what nature and education had made her, she simply could not pronounce
the word without the apostrophe even when the fur was threatening to
fly.

The little dog obeyed at last. The cat ceased to spit, its fur lay down
on its back, it walked away majestically. Mrs. Bidlake went on with her
weeding and her vague, unending meditation among the flowers. God,
Pinturicchio, dandelions, eternity, the sky, the clouds, the early
Venetians, dandelions….

Upstairs in the schoolroom lessons were over. At least they were over as
far as little Phil was concerned; for he was doing what he liked best in
the world, drawing. Miss Fulkes, it is true, called the process ‘Art’
and ‘Imagination Training,’ and allotted half an hour to it every
morning, from twelve to halfpast. But for little Phil it was just fun.
He sat bent over his paper, the tip of his tongue between his teeth, his
face intent and serious, drawing, drawing with a kind of inspired
violence. Wielding a pencil that seemed disproportionately large, his
little brown hand indefatigably laboured. At once rigid and wavering,
the lines of the childish composition traced themselves out on the
paper.

Miss Fulkes sat by the window, looking out at the sunny garden, but not
consciously seeing it. What she saw was behind the eyes, in a fanciful
universe. She saw herself—herself in that lovely Lanvin frock that had
been illustrated last month in _Vogue_, with pearls, dancing at Ciro’s,
which looked (for she had never been at Ciro’s) curiously like the
Hammersmith Palais de Danse, where she had been. ‘How lovely she looks!’
all the people were saying. She walked swayingly, like that actress she
had seen at the London Pavilion—what was her name? She held out her
white hand; it was young Lord Wonersh who kissed it, Lord Wonersh, who
looked like Shelley and lived like Byron and owned half Oxford Street
and had come to the house last February with old Mr. Bidlake and had
perhaps spoken to her twice. And then, all at once, she saw herself
riding in the Park. And a couple of seconds later she was on a yacht in
the Mediterranean. And then in a motor car. Lord Wonersh had just taken
his seat beside her, when the noise of T’ang’s shrill barking
startlingly roused her to consciousness of the lawn, the gay tulips, the
Wellingtonia and, on the other side, the schoolroom. Miss Fulkes felt
guilty, she had been neglecting her charge.

‘Well, Phil,’ she asked, turning round briskly to her pupil, ‘what are
you drawing?’

‘Mr. Stokes and Albert pulling the mow-lawner,’ Phil answered, without
looking up from his paper.

‘Lawn-mower,’ Miss Fulkes corrected.

‘Lawn-mower,’ Phil dutifully repeated.

‘You never get your compound words right,’ Miss Fulkes continued.
‘Mow-lawner, hopgrasser, crack-nutter—it’s a sort of mental defect, like
mirror-writing, I suppose.’ Miss Fulkes had taken a course in
educational psychology. ‘You must’really try to correct it, Phil,’ she
added, earnestly. After so long and flagrant a dereliction of duty (at
Ciro’s, on horseback, in the limousine with Lord Wonersh) Miss Fulkes
felt it incumbent upon her to be particularly solicitous, scientifically
so: she was a very conscientious young woman. ‘Will you try?’ she
insisted.

‘Yes, Miss Fulkes,’ the child answered. He had no idea what she wanted
him to try to do. But it would keep her quiet if he said yes. He was
busy on a particularly difficult bit of his drawing.

Miss Fulkes sighed and looked out of the window again. This time she
consciously perceived what her eyes saw. Mrs. Bidlake wandered among the
tulips, dressed flowingly in white, with a white veil hanging from her
hat, a sort of Pre-Raphaelitic ghost. Every now and then she paused and
looked at the sky. Old Mr. Stokes the gardener, passed carrying a rake;
the tips of his white beard fluttered gently in the breeze. The village
clock struck the half-hour. The garden, the trees, the fields, the
wooded hills in the distance were always the same. Miss Fulkes felt all
at once so hopelessly sad that she could have cried.

‘Do mow-lawners, I mean lawn-mowers, have wheels?’ asked little Phil,
looking up with a frown of effort and perplexity wrinkling his forehead.
‘I can’t remember.’

‘Yes. Or let me think…’ Miss Fulkes also frowned; ‘no. They have
rollers.’

‘Rollers! ‘ cried Phil. ‘That’s it.’ He attacked his drawing again with
fury.

Always the same. There seemed to be no escape, no prospect of freedom.
‘If I had a thousand pounds,’ thought Miss Eulkes, ‘a thousand pounds. A
thousand pounds.’ The words were magical. ‘A thousand pounds.’

‘There!’ cried Phil. ‘Come and look.’ He held up his paper. Miss Fulkes
got up and crossed to the table. ‘What a lovely drawing!’ she said.

‘That’s all the little bits of grass flying up,’ said Phil, pointing to
a cloud of dots and dashes in the middle of his picture. He was
particularly proud of the grass.

‘I see,’ said Miss Fulkes.

‘And look how hard Albert is pulling!’ It was true; Albert was pulling
like mad. And old Mr. Stokes, recognizable by the four parallel pencil
strokes issuing from his chin, pushed as energetically at the other end
of the machine.

For a child of his age, little Phil had an observant eye, and a strange
talent for rendering on paper what he had seen—not realistically, of
course, but in terms of expressive symbols. Albert and Mr. Stokes were,
for all their scratchy uncertainty of outline, violently alive.

‘Albert’s left leg is rather funny, isn’t it?’ said Miss Fulkes. ‘Rather
long and thin and…’ She checked herself, remembering what old Mr.
Bidlake had said. ‘On no account is the child to be taught how to draw,
in the art-school sense of the word. On no account. I don’t want him to
be ruined.’

Phil snatched the paper from her. ‘No, it isn’t,’ he said angrily. His
pride was hurt, he hated criticism, refused ever to be in the wrong.

‘Perhaps it isn’t really,’ Miss Fulkes made haste to be soothing.
‘Perhaps I made a mistake.’ Phil smiled again. ‘Though why a child,’
Miss Fulkes was thinking,’shouldn’t be told when he’s drawn a leg that’s
impossibly long and thin and waggly, I really don’t understand.’ Still,
old Mr. Bidlake ought to know. A man in his position, with his
reputation, a great painter—she had often heard him called a great
painter, read it in newspaper articles, even in books. Miss Fulkes had a
profound respect for the Great. Shakespeare, Milton, Michelangelo…Yes,
Mr. Bidlake, the Great John Bidlake, ought to know best. She had been
wrong in mentioning that left leg.

‘It’s after halfpast twelve,’ she went on in a brisk efficient voice.
‘Time for you to lie down.’ Little Phil always lay down for half an hour
before lunch.

‘No!’ Phil tossed his head, scowled ferociously and made a furious
gesture with his clenched fists.

‘Yes,’ said Miss Fulkes calmly. ‘And don’t make those silly faces.’ She
knew, by experience, that the child was not really angry; he was just
making a demonstration, in order to assert himself and in the vague
hope, perhaps, that he might frighten his adversary into yielding—as
Chinese soldiers are said to put on devils’ masks and to utter fearful
yells when they approach the enemy, in the hope of inspiring terror.

‘Why should I?’ Phil’s tone was already much calmer.

‘Because you must.’

The child got up obediently. When the mask and the yelling fail to take
effect, the Chinese soldier, being a man of sense and not at all anxious
to get hurt, surrenders.

‘I’ll come and draw the curtains for you,’ said Miss Fulkes.

Together, they walked down the passage to Phil’s bedroom. The child took
off his shoes and lay down. Miss Fulkes drew the folds of orange
cretonne across the windows.

‘Not too dark,’ said Phil, watching her movements through the richly
coloured twilight.

‘You rest better when it’s dark.’

‘But I’m frightened,’ protested Phil.

‘You’re not frightened in the least. Besides, it isn’t really dark at
all.’ Miss Fulkes moved towards the door.

‘Miss Fulkes!’ She paid no attention. ‘Miss Fulkes!’

On the threshold Miss Fulkes turned round. ‘If you go on shouting,’ she
said severely, ‘I shall be very angry. Do you understand?’ She turned
and went out, shutting the door behind her.

‘Miss Fulkes!’ he continued to call, but in a whisper, under his breath.
‘Miss Fulkes! Miss Fulkes!’ She mustn’t hear him, of course; for then
she would really be cross. At the same time he wasn’t going to obey
tamely and without a protest. Whispering her name he rebelled, he
asserted his personality, but in complete safety.

Sitting in her own room, Miss Fulkes was reading—to improve her mind.
The book was _The Wealth of Nations_. Adam Smith, she knew, was Great.
His book was one of those that one ought to have read. The best that has
been thought or said. Her family was poor, but cultured. We needs must
love the highest when we see it. But when the highest takes the form of
a chapter beginning, ‘As it is the power of exchanging that gives
occasion to the division of labour, so the extent of this division must
always be limited by the extent of that power, or in other words, by the
extent of the market,’ then, really, it is difficult to love it as
ardently as one ought to do. ‘When the market is very small, no person
can have any encouragement to dedicate himself entirely to one
employment, for want of the opportunity to exchange all that surplus
part of the produce of his own labour, which is over and above his own
consumption, for such parts of the produce of other men’s labour as he
has occasion for.’

Miss Fulkes read the sentence through; but before she had come to the
end of it, she had forgotten what the beginning was about. She began
again;…’for want of the opportunity to exchange all that surplus…(I
could take the sleeves out of my brown dress, she was thinking; because
it’s only under the arms that it’s begun to go, and wear it for the
skirt only with a jumper over it)…over and above his own consumption for
such parts…(an orange jumper perhaps).’ She tried a third time, reading
the words out aloud. ‘When the market is very small…’ A vision of the
cattle market at Oxford floated before her inward eye; it was quite a
large market. ‘No person can have any encouragement to dedicate
himself…’ What was it all about? Miss Fulkes suddenly rebelled against
her own conscientiousness. She hated the highest when she saw it.
Getting up, she put _The Wealth of Nations_ back on the shelf. It was a
row of very high books—’my treasures,’ she called them. Wordsworth,
Longfellow, and Tennyson bound in squashy leather and looking, with
their rounded corners and Gothic titles, like so many Bibles. _Sartor
Resartus_, also Emerson’s _Essays_. Marcus Aurelius in one of those limp
leathery artistic little editions that one gives, at Christmas, and in
sheer despair, to those to whom one can think of nothing more suitable
to give. Macaulay’s _History_. Thomas a Kempis, Mrs. Browning. Miss
Fulkes did not select any of them. She put her hand behind the best that
has beenr thought or said and withdrew from its secret place a copy of
_The Mystery of the Castlemaine Emeralds_. A ribbon marked her place.
She opened and began to read. ‘Lady Kitty turned on the lights and
walked in. A cry of horror broke from her lips, a sudden faintness
almost overcame her. In the middle of the room lay the body of a man in
faultless evening dress. The face was almost unrecognizably mangled;
there was a red gash in the white shirt front. The rich Turkey carpet
was darkly soaked with blood…’ Miss Fulkes read on, avidly. The thunder
of the gong brought her back with a start from the world of emeralds and
murder. She sprang up. ‘I ought to have kept an eye on the time,’ she
thought, feeling guilty. ‘We shall be late.’ Pushing _The Mystery of the
Castlemaine Emeralds_ back into its place behind the best that has been
thought or said, she hurried along to the night nursery. Little Phil had
to be washed and brushed.

 

__

 

There was no breeze except the wind of the ship’s own speed; and that
was like a blast from the engine-room. Stretched in their chairs Philip
and Elinor watched the gradual diminution against the sty of a jagged
island of bare red rock. From the deck above came the sound of people
playing shuffle-board. Walking on principle or for an appetite their
fellow passengers passed and re-passed with the predictable regularity
of comets.

‘The way people take exercise,’ said Elinor in a tone positively of
resentment; it made her hot to look at them. ‘Even in the Red Sea.’

‘It explains the British Empire,’ he said.

There was a silence. Burnt brown, burnt scarlet, the young men on leave
passed laughing, four to a girl. Sun-dried and curry-pickled veterans of
the East strolled by with acrimonious words; about the Reforms and the
cost of Indian living, upon their lips. Two female missionaries padded
past in a rarely broken silence. The French globe-trotters reacted to
the oppressively imperial atmosphere by talking very loud. The Indian
students slapped one another on the back like stage subalterns in the
days of ‘Charley’s Aunt’; and the slang they talked would have seemed
old-fashioned in a preparatory school.

Time flowed. The island vanished; the air was if possible hotter.

‘I’m worried about Walter,’ said Elinor, who had been ruminating the
contents of that last batch of letters she had received just before
leaving Bombay.

‘He’s a fool,’ Philip answered. ‘After committing one stupidity with
that Carling female, he ought to have had the sense not to start again
with Lucy.’

‘Of course he ought,’ said Elinor irritably. ‘But the point is that he
hasn’t had the sense. It’s a question of thinking of a remedy.’

‘Well, it’s no good thinking about it five thousand miles away.’

‘I’m afraid he may suddenly rush off and leave poor Marorie in the
lurch. With a baby on the way, too. She’s a dreary woman. But he mustn’t
be allowed to treat her like that.’

‘No,’ Philip agreed. There was a pause. The sparse procession of
exercise lovers marched past. ‘I’ve been thinking,’ he went on
reflectively, ‘that it would make an excellent subject.’

‘What?’

‘This business of Walter’s.’

‘You don’t propose to exploit poor Walter as copy?’ Elinor was
indignant. ‘No really, I won’t have it. Botanizing on his grave—or at
any rate his heart.’

‘But of course not!’ Philip protested.

‘_Mais je vous assure_,’ one of the Frenchwomen was shouting so loud
that he had to abandon the attempt to continue, ‘ _aux Galeries
Lafayette les camisoles en flanelle pour enfant ne coutent que_…’

‘_Camisoles enflanelle_,’ repeated Philip. ‘Phew!’

‘But seriously, Phil…’

‘But, my dear, I never intended to use more than the situation. The
young man who tries to make his life rhyme with his idealizing books and
imagines he’s having a great spiritual love, only to discover that he’s
got hold of a bore whom he really doesn’t like at all.’

‘Poor Marjorie! But why can’t she keep her face better powdered? And
those artistic beads and earrings she always wears…’

‘And who then goes down like a ninepin,’ Philip continued, ‘at the mere
sight of a Siren. It’s the situation that appealed to me. Not the
individuals. After all, there are plenty of other nice young men besides
Walter. And Marjorie isn’t the only bore. Nor Lucy the only man-eater.’

‘Well, if it’s only the situation,’ Elinor grudgingly allowed.

‘And besides,’ he went on, ‘it isn’t written and probably never will be.
So there’s nothing to get upset about, I assure you.’

‘All right. I won’t say anything more till I see the book.’

There was another pause.

‘.. such a wonderful time at Gulmerg last summer,’ the young lady was
saying to her four attentive cavaliers. ‘There was golf, and dancing
every evening, and…’

‘And in any case,’ Philip began again in a meditative tone, ‘ the
situation would only be a kind of…’

‘_Mais je lui ai dit, les hommes sont comme ca. Une jeune fille bien
elevee doit…’

‘…a kind of excuse,’ bawled Philip. ‘It’s like trying to talk in the
parrot-house at the Zoo,’ he added with parenthetic irritation. ‘A kind
of excuse, as I was saying, for a new way of looking at things that I
want to experiment with.’

‘I wish you’d begin by looking at me in a new way,’ said Elinor with a
little laugh. ‘A more human way.’

‘But seriously, Elinor…’

‘Seriously,’ she mocked. ‘Being human isn’t serious. Only being clever.’

‘Oh, well,’ he shrugged his shoulders, ‘if you don’t want to listen,
I’ll shut up.’

‘No, no, Phil. Please.’ She laid her hand on his. ‘Please.’

‘I don’t want to bore you.’ He was huffy and dignified.

‘I’m sorry, Phil. But you do look so comic when you’re more in sorrow
than in anger. Do you remember those camels at Bikaner—what an
extraordinarily superior expression? But do go on!’

‘This year,’ one female missionary was saying to the other, as they
passed by, ‘ the Bishop of Kuala Lumpur ordained six Chinese deacons and
two Malays. And the Bishop of British North Borneo…’ The quiet voices
faded into inaudibility.

Philip forgot his dignity and burst out laughing. ‘Perhaps he ordained
some Orang-utans.’

‘But do you remember the wife of the Bishop of Thursday Island?’ asked
Elinor. ‘The woman we met on that awful Australian ship with the
cockroaches.’

‘The one who would eat pickles at breakfast?’

‘Pickled onions at that,’ she qualified with a shudder. ‘But what about
your new way of looking at things? We seem to have wandered rather a
long way from that.’

‘Well, as a matter of fact,’ said Philip, ‘we haven’t. All these
_camisoles en flanelle_ and pickled onions and bishops of cannibal
islands are really quite to the point. Because the essence of the new
way of looking is multiplicity. Multiplicity of eyes and multiplicity of
aspects seen. For instance, one person interprets events in terms of
bishops; another in terms of the price of flannel camisoles; another,
like that young lady from Gulmerg,’ he nodded after the retreating
group, ‘ thinks of it in terms of good times. And then there’s the
biologist, the chemist, the physicist, the historian. Each sees,
professionally, a different aspect of the event, a different layer of
reality. What I want to do is to look with all those eyes at once. With
religious eyes, scientific eyes, economic eyes, _homme moyen sensuel_
eyes…’

‘Loving eyes too.’

He smiled at her and stroked her hand. ‘The result…’ he hesitated.

‘Yes, what would the result be?’ she asked.

‘Queer,’ he answered. ‘A very queer picture indeed.’

‘Rather too queer, I should have thought.’

‘But it can’t be too queer,’ said Philip. ‘However queer the picture is,
it can never be half so odd as the original reality. We take it all for
granted; but the moment you start thinking, it becomes queer. And the
more you think, the queerer it grows. That’s what I want to get in this
book—the astonishingness of the most obvious things. Really any plot or
situation would do. Because everything’s implicit in anything. The whole
book could be written about a walk from Piccadilly Circus to Charing
Cross. Or you and I sitting here on an enormous ship in the Red Sea.
Really, nothing could be queerer than that. When you reflect on the
evolutionary processes, the human patience and genius, the social
organisation, that have made it possible for us to be here, with stokers
having heat apoplexy for our benefit and steam turbines doing five
thousand revolutions a minute, and the sea being blue, and the rays of
light not flowing round obstacles, so that there’s a shadow, and the sun
all the time providing us with energy to live and think—when you think
of all this and a million other things, you must see that nothing could
well be queerer and that no picture can be queer enough to do justice to
the facts.’

‘All the same,’ said Elinor, after a long silence, ‘I wish one day you’d
write a simple straightforward story about a young man and a young woman
who fall in love and get married and have difficulties, but get over
them, and finally settle down.’

‘Or why not a detective novel?’ He laughed. But if, he reflected, he
didn’t write that kind of story, perhaps it was because he couldn’t. In
art there are simplicities more difficult than the most serried
complications. He could manage the complications as well as anyone. But
when it came to the simplicities, he lacked the talent—that talent which
is of the heart, no less than of the head, of the feelings, the
sympathies, the intuitions, no less than of the analytical
understanding. The heart, the heart, he said to himself. ‘Perceive ye
not, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened?’ No heart, no
understanding.

‘…a terrible flirt!’ cried one of the four cavaliers, as the party
rounded the corner into hearing.

‘I am not!’ the young lady indignantly retorted.

‘You are!’ they all shouted together. It was courtship in chorus and by
teasing.

‘It’s a lie!’ But, one could hear, the ticklish impeachment really
delighted her.

Like dogs, he thought. But the heart, the heart The heart was Burlap’s
speciality. ‘You’ll never write a good book,’ he had said oracularly,
‘unless you write from the heart.’ It was true; Philip knew it. But was
Burlap the man to say so, Burlap whose books were so heartfelt that they
looked as though they had come from the stomach, after an emetic? If he
went in for the grand simplicities, the results would be no less
repulsive. Better to cultivate his own particular garden for all it was
worth. Better to remain rigidly and loyally oneself. Oneself? But this
question of identity was precisely one of Philip’s chronic problems. It
was so easy for him to be almost anybody, theoretically and with his
intelligence. He had such a power of assimilation, that he was often in
danger of being unable to distinguish the assimilator from the
assimilated, of not knowing among the multiplicity of his roles who was
the actor. The amoeba, when it finds a prey, flows round it,
incorporates it and oozes on. There was something amoeboid about Philip
Quarles’s mind. It was like a sea of spiritual protoplasm, capable of
flowing in all directions, of engulfing every object in its path, of
trickling into every crevice, of filling every mould and, having
engulfed, having filled, of flowing on towards other obstacles, other
receptacles, leaving the first empty and dry. At different times in his
life and even at the same moment he had filled the most various moulds.
He had been a cynic and also a mystic, a humanitarian and also a
contemptuous misanthrope; he had tried to live the life of detached and
stoical reason and another time he had aspired to the unreasonableness
of natural and uncivilized existence. The choice of moulds depended at
any given moment on the books he was reading, the people he was
associating with. Burlap, for example, had redirected the flow of his
mind into those mystical channels which it had not filled since he
discovered Boehme in his undergraduate days. Then he had seen through
Burlap and flowed out again, ready however at any I time to let himself
trickle back once more, whenever the circumstances seemed to require it.
He was trickling back at this moment, the mould was heart-shaped. Where
was the self to which he could be loyal?

The female missionaries passed in silence. Looking over Elinor’s
shoulder he saw that she was reading the _Arabian Nights_ in Mardrus’s
translation. Burtt’s _Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science_ lay on
his knees; he picked it up and began looking for his place. Or wasn’t
there a self at all? he was wondering. No, no, that was untenable, that
contradicted immediate experience. He looked over the top of his book at
the enormous blue glare of the sea. The essential character of the self
consisted precisely in that liquid and undeformable ubiquity; in that
capacity to espouse all contours and yet remain unfixed in any form, to
take, and with an equal facility efface, impressions. To such moulds as
his spirit might from time to time occupy, to such hard and burning
obstacles as it might flow round, submerge, and, itself cold, penetrate
to the fiery heart of, no permanent loyalty was owing. The moulds were
emptied as easily as they had been filled, the obstacles were passed by.
But the essential liquidness that flowed where it would, the cool
indifferent flux of intellectual curiosity—that persisted and to that
his loyalty was due. If there was any single way of life he could
lastingly believe in, it was that mixture of pyrrhonism and stoicism
which had struck him, an enquiring schoolboy among the philosophers, as
the height of human wisdom and into whose mould of sceptical
indifference he had poured his unimpassioned adolescence. Against the
pyrrhonian suspense of judgment and the stoical imperturbability he had
often rebelled. But had the rebellion ever been really serious? Pascal
had made him a Catholic—but only so long as the volume of _Pensees_ was
open before him. There were moments when, in the company of Carlyle or
Whitman or bouncing Browning, he had believed in strenuousness for
strenuousness’ sake. And then there was Mark Rampion. After a few hours
in Mark Rampion’s company he really believed in noble savagery; he felt
convinced that the proudly conscious intellect ought to humble itself a
little and admit the claims of the heart, aye and the bowels, the loins,
the bones and skin and muscles, to a fair share of life. The heart
again! Burlap had been right, even though he was a charlatan, a sort of
swindling thimble-rigger of the emotions. The heart! But always,
whatever he might do, he knew quite well in the secret depths of his
being that he wasn’t a Catholic, or a strenuous liver, or a mystic, or a
noble savage. And though he sometimes nostalgically wished he were one
or other of these beings, or all of them at once, he was always secretly
glad to be none of them and at liberty, even though his liberty was in a
strange paradoxical way a handicap and a confinement to his spirit.

‘That simple story of yours,’ he said aloud; ‘it wouldn’t do.’

Elinor looked up from the _Arabian Nights_. ‘Which simple story?’

‘That one you wanted me to write.’

‘Oh, _that_!’ She laughed. ‘You’ve been brooding over it a long time.’

‘It wouldn’t give me my opportunity,’ he explained.

‘It would have to be solid and deep. Whereas I’m wide; wide and liquid.
It wouldn’t be in my line.’

‘I could have told you that the first day I met you,’ said Elinor, and
returned to Scheherazade.

‘All the same,’ Philip was thinking, ‘Mark Rampion’s right. In practice,
too; which makes it so much more impressive. In his art and his living,
as well as in his theories. Not like Burlap.’ He thought with disgust of
Burlap’s emetic leaders in the _World_. Like a spiritual channel
crossing. And such a nasty, slimy sort of life. But Rampion was the
proof of his own theories. ‘If I could capture something of his secret!’
Philip sighed to himself. ‘I’ll go and see him the moment I get home.’


CHAPTER XV

During the weeks which followed their final scene, Walter and Marjorie
lived in relations of a peculiar and unpleasant falsity. They were very
considerate to one Another, very courteous, and whenever they were left
together alone they made a great deal of polite unintimate conversation.
The name of Lucy Tantamount was never mentioned and no reference
whatsoever was made to Walter’s almost nightly absences. There was a
tacit agreement to pretend that nothing had happened and that all was
for the best in the best of all possible worlds.

In the first outburst of anger Marjorie had actually begun to pack her
clothes. She would leave at once, that very night, before he came back.
She would show him that there was a limit to the outrages and insults
she would put up with. Coming home reeking of that woman’s scent! It was
disgusting. He seemed to imagine that she was so abjectly devoted to him
and materially so dependent on him, that he could go on insulting her
without any fear of provoking her to open revolt. She had made a mistake
not to put her foot down before. She oughtn’t to have allowed herself to
be touched by his misery the previous night. But better late than never.
This time it was final. She had her self-respect to consider. She pulled
out her trunks from the box-room and began to pack.

But where was she going? What was she going to do? What should she live
on? The questions asked themselves more and more insistently with every
minute. The only relation she had was a married sister, who was poor and
had a disapproving husband. Mrs. Cole had quarrelled with her. There
were no other friends who could or would support her. She had been
trained to no profession, she had no particular gifts. Besides, she was
going to have a baby; she would never find a job. And after all and in
spite of everything she was very fond of Walter, she loved him, she
didn’t know how she would be able to do without him. And he had loved
her, did still love her a little, she was sure. And perhaps this madness
would die down of its own accord; or perhaps she would be able to bring
him round again gradually. And in any case it was better not to act
precipitately. In the end she unpacked her clothes again and dragged the
trunks back to the box room. Next day she started to play her comedy of
pretence and deliberately feigned ignorance.

On his side Walter was only too happy to play the part assigned to him
in the comedy. To say nothing, to act as though nothing particular had
happened, suited him perfectly. The evaporation of his anger, the
slaking of his desire had reduced him from momentary strength and
ruthlessness to his normal condition of gentle, conscience-stricken
timidity. Upon the fibres of the spirit bodily fatigue has a softening
effect. He came back from Lucy feeling guiltily that he had done
Marjorie a great wrong and looking forward with dread to the outcry she
was sure to raise. But she was asleep when he crept to his room. Or at
any rate she pretended to be, she didn’t call him. And next day it was
only the more than ordinarily courteous and formal manner of her
greeting that so much as hinted at any untowardness. Enormously
relieved, Walter requited portentous silence with silence and politely
trivial courtesy with a courtesy that, in his case, was more than merely
formal, that came from the heart, that was a genuine attempt (so uneasy
was his conscience) to be of service, to make solicitous and
affectionate amends for past offences, to beg forgiveness in advance for
the offences he had no intention of not committing in the future.

That there had been no outcry, no reproaches, only a polite ignoring
silence, was a great relief. But as the days passed, Walter began to
find the falsity of their relationship more and more distressing. The
comedy got on his nerves, the silence was accusatory. He became more and
more polite, solicitous, affectionate; but though he genuinely did like
her, though he genuinely desired to make her happy, his nightly visits
to Lucy made even his genuine affection for Marjorie seem a lie and his
real solicitude had the air of an hypocrisy, even to himself, so long as
he persisted in doing, in the intervals of his kindness, precisely those
things which he knew must make her unhappy. ‘But if only,’ he said to
himself, with impotent complaining anger, ‘if only she’d be content with
what I can give her and stop distressing herself about what I can’t.”
(For it was obvious, in spite of the comedy of silence and courtesy,
that she was distressing herself. Her thin, haggard face was alone
sufficient to belie the studied indifference of her manner.) ‘What I can
give her is so much. What I can’t give is so unimportant. At any rate
for her,’ he added; for he had no intention of cancelling his
unimportant engagement with Lucy that evening.

 

‘Enjoy’d no sooner but despised straight;

Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,

Past reason hated.’

 

Literature, as usual, had been misleading. So far from making him hate
and despise, having and enjoying had only made him long for more having
and enjoying. True, he was still rather ashamed of his longing. He
wanted it to be justified by something higher—by love. (‘After all,’ he
argued, ‘there’s nothing impossible or unnatural in being in love with
two women at the same time. Genuinely in love.’) He accompanied his
ardours with all the delicate and charming tenderness of his rather weak
and still adolescent nature. He treated Lucy, not as the hard, ruthless
amusementhunter he had so clearly recognized her as being before he
became her lover, but as an ideally gracious and sensitive being, to be
adored as well as desired, a sort of combined child, mother and
mistress, whom one should maternally protect and be maternally protected
by, as well as virilely and yes! faunishly make love to. Sensuality and
sentiment, desire and tenderness are as often friends as they are
enemies. There are some people who no sooner enjoy, but they despise
what they have enjoyed. But there are others in whom the enjoyment is
associated with kindliness and affection. Walter’s desire to justify his
longings by love was only, on final analysis, the articulately moral
expression of his natural tendency to associate the act of sexual
enjoyment with a feeling of tenderness, at once chivalrously protective
and childishly self-abased. In him sensuality produced tenderness; and
conversely, where there was no sensuality, tenderness remained
undeveloped. His relations with Marjorie were too sexless and platonic
to be fully tender. JIt was as a hard, angrily cynical sensualist that
Walter had conquered Lucy. But put into action, his sensuality
sentimentalized him. The Walter who had held Lucy naked in his arms was
different from the Walter who had only desired to do so; and this new
Walter required, in sheer self-preservation, to believe that Lucy felt
no less tenderly under the influence of his caresses than he did
himself. Tenderness can only live in an atmosphere of tenderness. To
have gone on believing, as the old Walter had believed, that she was
hard, selfish, incapable of warm feeling would have killed the soft
tenderness of the new Walter. It was essential for him to believe her
tender. He did his best to deceive himself. Every movement of languor
and abandonment was eagerly interpreted by him as a symptom of inner
softening, of trustfulness and surrender. Every loving word—and Lucy was
fashionably free with her’darlings’ and ‘angels’ and ‘beloveds,’ her
rapturous or complimentary phrases—was treasured as a word come straight
from the depths of the heart. To these marks of an imaginary softness
and warmth of feeling he responded with a grateful redoubling of his own
tenderness; and this redoubled tenderness was doubly anxious to find an
answering tenderness in Lucy. Love produced a desire to be loved. Desire
to be loved begot a strained precarious belief that he was loved. The
belief that he was loved strengthened his love. And so,
self-intensified, the circular process began again.

Lucy was touched by his adoring tenderness, touched and surprised. She
had had him because she was bored, because his lips were soft and his
hands knew how to caress and because, at the last moment, she had been
amused and delighted by his sudden conversion from abjectness to
conquering impertinence. What a queer evening it had been! Walter
sitting opposite to her at dinner with that hard look on his face, as
though he were terribly angry and wanted to grind his teeth; but being
very amusing, telling the most malicious stories about everybody,
producing the most fantastic and grotesque pieces of historical
information, the most astonishing quotations from old books. When dinner
was over, ‘We’ll go back to your house,’ he said. But Lucy wanted to go
and see Nellie Wallace’s turn at the Victoria Palace and then drop in at
the Embassy for some food and a little dancing, and then perhaps drive
round to Cuthbert Arkwright’s on the chance that…Not that she had any
real and active desire to go to the music hall, or dance, or listen to
Cuthbert’s conversation. She only wanted to assert her will against
Walter’s. She only wanted to dominate, to be the leader and make him do
what she wanted, not what he wanted. But Walter was not to be shaken. He
said nothing, merely smiled. And when the taxi came to the restaurant
door, he gave the address in Bruton Street.

‘But this is a rape,’ she protested.

Walter laughed. ‘Not yet,’ he answered. ‘But it’s going to be.’

And in the grey and rose-coloured sittingroom it almost was. Lucy
provoked and submitted to all the violences of sensuality. But what she
had not expected to provoke was the adoring and passionate tenderness
which succeeded those first violences. The hard look of anger faded from
his face and it was as though a protection had been stripped from him
and he were left bare, in the quivering, vulnerable nakedness of adoring
love. His caresses were like the soothing of pain or terror, like the
appeasements of anger, like delicate propitiations. His words were
sometimes like whispered and fragmentary prayers to a god, sometimes
words of whispered comfort to a sick child. Lucy was surprised, touched,
almost put to shame by this passion of tenderness.

‘No, I’m not like that, not like that,’ she protested in answer to his
whispered adorations. She could not accept such love on false pretences.
But his soft lips, brushing her skin, his lightly drawn finger tips were
soothing and caressing her into tenderness, were magically transforming
her into the gentle, loving, warmhearted object of his adoration, were
electrically charging her with all those qualities his whispers had
attributed to her and the possession of which she had denied.

She drew his head on to her breast, she ran her fingers through his
hair. ‘Darling Walter,’ she whispered,’darling Walter.’ There was a long
silence, a warm still happiness. And then suddenly, just because this
silent happiness was so deep and perfect and therefore, in her eyes,
intrinsically rather absurd and even rather dangerous in its flawless
impersonality, rather menacing to her conscious will, ‘Have you gone to
sleep, Walter?’ she asked and tweaked his ear.

In the days that followed Walter desperately did his best to credit her
with the emotions he himself experienced. But Lucy did not make it easy
for him. She did not want to feel that deep tenderness which is a
surrender of the will, a breaking down of personal separateness. She
wanted to be herself, Lucy Tantamount, in full command of the situation,
enjoying herself consciously to the last limit, ruthlessly having her
fun; free, not only financially and legally, but emotionally
too—emotionally free to have him or not to have him. To drop him as she
had taken him, at any moment, whenever she liked. She had no wish to
surrender herself. And that tenderness of his—why, it was touching, no
doubt, and flattering and rather charming in itself, but a little absurd
and, in its anxious demand for a response from her side, really rather
tiresome. She would let herself go a little way towards surrender, would
suffer herself to be charged by his caresses with some of his
tenderness; only to suddenly draw herself back from him into a teasing,
provocative detachment. And Walter would be woken from his dream of love
into a reality of what Lucy called ‘fun,’ into the cold daylight of
sharply conscious, laughingly deliberate sensuality. She left him
unjustified, his guiltiness unpalliated.

‘Do you love me? ‘ he asked her one night. He knew she didn’t. But
perversely he wanted to have his knowledge confirmed, made explicit.

‘I think you’re a darling,’ said Lucy. She smiled up at him. But
Walter’s eyes remained unansweringly sombre and despairing.

‘But do you _love_ me?’ he insisted. Propped on his elbow, he hung over
her almost menacingly. Lucy was lying on her back, her hands clasped
under her head, her flat breasts lifted by the pull of the stretched
muscles. He looked down at her; under his fingers was the curved elastic
warmth of the body he had so completely and utterly possessed. But the
owner of the body smiled up at him through half-closed eyelids, remote
and unattained. ‘Do you love me?’

‘You’re enchanting.’ Something like mockery shone between the dark
lashes.

‘But that isn’t an answer to my question. Do you love me?’

Lucy shrugged up her shoulders and made a little grimace

‘Love?’ she repeated. ‘It’s rather a big word, isn’t it?’ Disengaging
one of her hands from under her head she raised it to give a little tug
to the lock of brown hair that had fallen across Walter’s forehead.
‘Your hair’s too long,’ she said.

‘Then why did you have me?’ Walter insisted.

‘If you knew how absurd you looked with your solemn face and your hair
in your eyes!’ She laughed. ‘Like a constipated sheep dog.’

Walter brushed back the drooping lock. ‘I want to be answered,’ he went
on obstinately. ‘Why did you have me?’

‘Why? Because it amused me. Because I wanted to. Isn’t that fairly
obvious?’

‘Without loving?’

‘Why must you always bring in love?’ she asked impatiently.

‘Why?’ he repeated. ‘But how can you leave it out?’

‘But if I can have what I want without it, why should I put it in? And
besides, one doesn’t put it in. It happens to one. How rarely! Or
perhaps it never happens; I don’t know. Anyhow, what’s one to do in the
intervals?’ She took him again by the forelock and pulled his face down
towards her own. ‘In the intervals, Walter darling, there’s you.’

His mouth was within an inch or two of hers. He stiffened his neck and
would not let himself be pulled down any further. ‘Not to mention all
the others,’ he said.

Lucy tugged harder at his hair. ‘Idiot!’ she said, frowning. ‘Instead of
being grateful for what you’ve got.’

‘But what have I got?’ Her body curved away, silky and warm, under his
hand; but he was looking into her mocking eyes

‘What _have_ I got?’ Her body curved away, silky and warm, under his
hand; but he was looking into her mocking eyes. ‘What _have_ I got?’

Lucy still frowned. ‘Why don’t you kiss me?’ she demanded, as though she
were delivering an ultimatum. Walter did not answer, did not stir. ‘Oh,
very well.’ She pushed him away. ‘Two can play at that game.’

Repelled, Walter anxiously bent down to kiss her. Her voice had been
hard with menace; he was terrified of losing her. ‘I’m a fool,’ he said.

‘You are.’ Lucy averted her face.

‘I’m sorry.’

But she would not make peace. ‘No, no,’ she said, and when, with a hand
under her cheek, he tried to turn her face back towards his kisses, she
made a quick fierce movement and bit him in the ball of the thumb. Full
of hatred and desire, he took her by force.

‘Still bothering about love?’ she asked at last, breaking the silence of
that languid convalescence which succeeds the fever of accomplished
desires.

Reluctantly, almost with pain, Walter roused himself to answer. Her
question in that deep silence was like the spurt of a match in the
darkness of the night. The night is limitless, enormous, pricked with
stars. The match is struck and all the stars are instantly abolished;
there are no more distances and profundities. The universe is reduced to
a little luminous cave scooped out of the solid blackness, crowded with
brightly lit faces, with hands and bodies and the near familiar objects
of common life. In that deep night of silence Walter had been happy.
Convalescent after the fever, he held her in his arms, hating no more,
but filled with a drowsy tenderness. His spirit seemed to float in the
warm serenity between being and annihilation. She stirred within his
arms, she spoke, and that marvellous unearthly serenity wavered and
broke like a smooth reflecting surface of water suddenly disturbed.

‘I wasn’t bothering about anything.’ He opened his eyes to find her
looking at him, amused and curious. Walter frowned. ‘Why do you stare at
me? ‘ he asked.

‘I didn’t know it was prohibited.’

‘Have you been looking at me like that all this time?’ The idea was
strangely unpleasant to him.

‘For hours,’ Lucy answered. ‘But admiringly, I assure you. I thought you
looked really charming. Quite a sleeping beauty.’ She was smiling,
mockingly; but she spoke the truth. Aesthetically, with a connoisseur’s
appreciation, she had really been admiring him as he lay there, pale,
with closed eyes and as though dead, at her side.

Walter was not mollified by the flattery. ‘I don’t like you to exult
over me,’ he said, still frowning.

‘Exult?’

‘As though you’d killed me.’

‘What an incorrigible romantic!’ She laughed. But it was true, all the
same. He _had_ looked dead; and death, in these circumstances, had
something slightly ridiculous and humiliating about it. Herself alive,
wakefully and consciously alive, she had studied his beautiful deadness.
Admiringly, but with amused detachment, she had looked at this pale
exquisite creature which she had used for her delight and which was now
dead. ‘What a fool!’ she had thought. And ‘why do people make themselves
miserable, instead of taking the fun that comes to them? ‘ She had
expressed her thoughts in the mocking question which recalled Walter
from his eternity. Bothering about love—what a fool!

‘All the same,’ insisted Walter, ‘you were exulting.’

‘Romantic, romantic!’ she jeered. ‘You think in such an absurdly
unmodern way about everything. Killing and exulting over corpses and
love and all the rest of it. It’s absurd. You might as well walk about
in a stock and a swallow-tail coat. Try to be a little more up to date.’

‘I prefer to be human.’

‘Living modernly’s living quickly,’ she went on. ‘You can’t cart a
waggon-load of ideals and romanticisms about with you these days. When
you travel by aeroplane, you must leave your heavy baggage behind. The
good old-fashioned soul was all right when people lived slowly. But it’s
too ponderous nowadays. There’s no room for it in the aeroplane.’

‘Not even for a heart?’ asked Walter. ‘I don’t so much care about the
soul.’ He had cared a great deal about the soul once. But now that his
life no more consisted in reading the philosophers, he was somehow less
interested in it. ‘But the heart,’ he added, the heart…’

Lucy shook her head. ‘Perhaps it’s a pity,’ she admitted. ‘But you can’t
get something for nothing. If you like speed, if you want to cover the
ground, you can’t have luggage. The thing is to know what you want and
to be ready to pay for it. I know exactly what I want; so I sacrifice
the luggage. If you choose to travel in a furniture van, you may. But
don’t expect me to come along with you, my sweet Walter. And don’t
expect me to take your grand piano in my two-seater monoplane.’

There was a long silence. Walter shut his eyes. He wished he were dead.
The touch of Lucy’s hand on his face made him start. He felt her taking
his lower lip between her thumb and forefinger. She pinched it gently.
‘You have the most delicious mouth,’ she said.


CHAPTER XVI

The Rampions lived in Chelsea. Their house consisted of one large studio
with three or four little rooms tacked on to it. A very nice little
place, in its rather ramshackle way, Burlap reflected, as he rang the
bell that Saturday afternoon. And Rampion had bought it for nothing,
literally for nothing, just before the War. No post-War rents for him. A
sheer gift of a hundred and fifty a year. Lucky devil, thought Burlap,
forgetting for the moment that he himself was living rent-free at
Beatrice’s, and only remembering that he had just spent twentyfour and
ninepence on a luncheon for himself and Molly d’Exergillod.

Mary Rampion opened the door. ‘Mark’s expecting you in the studio,’ she
said when salutations had been exchanged. Though why on earth, she was
inwardly wondering, why on earth he goes on being friendly with this
creature passes all comprehension. She herself detested Burlap. ‘He’s a
sort of vulture,’ she had said to her husband after the journalist’s
previous visit. ‘No, not a vulture, because vultures only eat carrion.
He’s a parasite that feeds on living hosts, and always the choicest he
can find He has a nose for the choicest; I’ll grant him that. A
spiritual leech, that’s what he is. Why do you let him suck your blood?’

‘Why shouldn’t he suck?’ retorted Mark. ‘He doesn’t do me any harm, and
he amuses me.’

‘I believe he tickles your vanity,’ said Mary. ‘It’s flattering to have
parasites. It’s a compliment to the quality of your blood.’

‘And besides,’ Rampion went on, he has something in him.’

‘Of course he has something in him,’ Mary answered. ‘He has your blood
in him, among other things. And the blood of all the other people he
feeds on.’

‘Now, don’t exaggerate, don’t be romantic.’ Rampion objected to all
hyperboles that weren’t his own.

‘Well, all I can say is that I don’t like parasites.’ Mary spoke with
finality. ‘And next time he comes I shall try sprinkling a little
Keating’s powder on him, just to see what happens. So there.’

However, the next time had arrived, and here she was opening the door
for him and telling him to find his own way to the studio, as if he were
a welcome guest. Even in atavistic Mary the force of polite habit was
stronger than her desire to sprinkle Keating’s.

Burlap’s thoughts, as he found his own way to the studio, were still of
financial matters. The memory of what he had paid for lunch continued to
rankle.

‘Not only does Rampion pay no rent,’ he was thinking; ‘he has hardly any
expenses. Living as they do with only one servant, doing most of the
housework themselves, having no car, they really must spend ridiculously
little. True, they have two children to educate.’ But Burlap managed by
a kind of mental conjuring trick, at which he was extremely adept, to
make the two children disappear out of his field of consciousness. ‘And
yet Rampion must make quite a lot. He sells his pictures and drawings
very decently. And he has a regular market for anything he chooses to
write. What does he do with all his money? ‘ Burlap wondered rather
resentfully, as he knocked at the studio door. ‘Does he hoard it up? Or
what?’

‘Come in,’ called Rampion’s voice from the other side of the door.

Burlap adjusted his face to a smile and opened.

‘Ah, it’s you,’ said Rampion. ‘Can’t shake hands at the moment, I’m
afraid.’ He was cleaning his brushes. ‘How are you?’

Burlap shook his head and said that he needed a holiday but couldn’t
afford to take it. He walked round the studio looking reverentially at
the paintings. St. Francis would hardly have approved of most of them.
But what life, what energy, what imagination! Life, after all, was
the’important thing. ‘I believe in life.’ That was the first article of
one’s creed.

‘What’s the title of this?’ he asked, coming to a halt in front of the
canvas on the easel.

Wiping his hands as he came, Rampion crossed the room and stood beside
him. ‘That?’ he said. ‘Well, “_Love_,” I suppose, is what _you_‘d call
it.’ He laughed; he had worked well that afternoon and was in the best
of humours. ‘But less refined and soulful people might prefer something
less printable.’ Grinning, he suggested a few of the less printable
alternatives. Burlap’s smile was rather sickly. ‘I don’t know if you can
think of any others,’ Rampion concluded maliciously. When Burlap was in
the neighbourhood it amused him, and at the same time he felt it
positively a duty, to be shocking.

It was a smallish painting, in oils. Low down in the left-hand corner of
the canvas, set in a kind of recess between a foreground of dark rocks
and tree trunks and a background of precipitous crags, and arched over
by a mass of foliage, two figures, a man and a woman, lay embraced. Two
naked bodies, the woman’s white, the man’s a red brown. These two bodies
were the source of the whole illumination of the picture. The rocks and
tree trunks in the foreground were silhouetted against the light that
issued from them. The precipice behind them was golden with the same
light. It touched the lower surface of the leaves above, throwing
shadows up into a thickening darkness of greenery. It streamed out of
the recess in which they lay, diagonally into and across the picture,
illuminating and, one felt, creating by its radiance an astounding flora
of gigantic roses and zinnias and tulips, with horses and leopards and
little antelopes coming and going between the huge flowers, and beyond,
a green landscape deepening, plane after plane, into blue, with a
glimpse of the sea between the hills and over it the shapes of huge,
heroic clouds in the blue sky.

‘It’s fine,’ said Burlap slowly, wagging his head over the picture.

‘But I can see you hate it.’ Mark Rampion grinned with a kind of
triumph.

‘But why do you say that?’ the other protested with a martyred and
gentle sadness.

‘Because it happens to be true. The thing’s not gentle-Jesusish enough
for you. Love, _physical_ love, as the source of light and life and
beauty—Oh, no, no, no! That’s much too coarse and carnal; it’s quite
deplorably straightforward.’

‘But do you take me for Mrs. Grundy?’

‘Not Mrs. Grundy, no.’ Rampion’s high spirits bubbled over in mockery.
‘Say St. Francis. By the way, how’s your Life of him progressing? I hope
you’ve got a good juicy description of his licking the lepers.’ Burlap
made a gesture of protest. Rampion grinned. ‘As a matter of fact even
St. Francis is a little too grown up for you. Children don’t lick
lepers. Only sexually perverted adolescents do that. St. Hugh of
Lincoln, that’s who you are, Burlap. He was a child, you know, a pure
sweet chee-yild. Such a dear snuggly-wuggly, lovey-dovey little chap. So
wide-eyed and reverent towards the women, as though they were all
madonnas. Coming to be petted and have his pains kissed away and be told
about poor Jesus—even to have a swig of milk if there happened to be any
going.’

‘Really! ‘ Burlap protested.

‘Yes, really,’ Rampion mimicked. He liked baiting the fellow, making him
look like a forgiving Christian martyr. Serve him right for coming in
that beloveddisciple attitude and being so disgustingly reverential and
admiring.

‘Toddling wide-eyed little St. Hugh. Toddling up to the women so
reverently, as though they were all madonnas. But putting his dear
little hand under their skirts all the same. Coming to pray, but staying
to share madonnina’s bed.’ Rampion knew a good deal about Burlap’s
amorous affairs and had guessed more. ‘Dear little St. Hugh! How
prettily he toddles to the bedroom, and what a darling babyish way he
has of snuggling down between the sheets! This sort of thing is much too
gross and unspiritual for our little Hughie.’ He threw back his head and
laughed.

‘Go on, go on,’ said Burlap. ‘Don’t mind me.’ And at the sight of his
martyred, spiritual smile, Rampion laughed yet louder.

‘Oh dear, oh dear!’ he gasped. ‘Next time you come, I’ll have a copy of
Ary Scheffer’s “St. Monica and St. Augustine” for you. That ought to
make you really happy. Would you like to see some of my drawings?’ he
asked in another tone. Burlap nodded. ‘They’re grotesques mostly.
Caricatures. Rather ribald, I warn you. But if you _will_ come to look
at my work, you must expect what you get.’

He opened a portfolio that was lying on the table.

‘Why do you imagine I don’t like your work?’ asked Burlap. ‘After all,
you’re a believer in life and so am I. We have our differences; but on
most matters our point of view’s the same.’

Rampion looked up at him. ‘Oh, I’m sure it is, I know it is,’ he said,
and grinned.

‘Well, if you know it’s the same,’ said Burlap, whose averted eyes had
not seen the grin on the other’s face, ‘why do you imagine I’ll
disapprove of your drawings?’

‘Why indeed? ‘ the other mocked.

‘Seeing that the point of view’s the same…’

‘It’s obvious that the people looking at the view from the same point
must be identical.’ Rampion grinned again. ‘Q. E. D.’ He turned away
again to take out one of the drawings. ‘This is what I call “Fossils of
the Past and Fossils of the Future.”’ He handed Burlap the drawing. It
was in ink touched with coloured washes, extraordinarily brilliant and
lively. Curving in a magnificently sweeping S, a grotesque procession of
monsters marched diagonally down and across the paper. Dinosaurs,
pterodactyls, titanotheriums, diplodocuses, ichthyosauruses walked, swam
or flew at the tail of the procession; the van was composed of human
monsters, huge-headed creatures, without limbs or bodies, creeping
slug-like on vaguely slimy extensions of chin and neck. The faces were
mostly those of eminent contemporaries. Among the crowd Burlap
recognized J. J. Thomson and Lord Edward Tantamount, Bernard Shaw,
attended by eunuchs and spinsters, and Sir Oliver Lodge, attended by a
sheeted and turnipheaded ghost and a walking cathode tube, Sir, Alfred
Mond and the head of John D. Rockefeller carried on a charger by a
Baptist clergyman, Dr. Frank Crane and Mrs. Eddy wearing haloes, and
many others.

‘The lizards died of having too much body and too little head,’ said
Rampion in explanation.’so at least the scientists are never tired of
telling us. Physical size is a handicap after a certain point. But what
about mental size? These fools seem to forget that they’re just as
top-heavy and clumsy and disproportioned as any diplodocus. Sacrificing
physical life and affective life to mental life. What do they imagine’s
going to happen?’

Burlap nodded his agreement. ‘That’s what I’ve always asked. Man can’t
live without a heart.’

‘Not to mention bowels and skin and bones and flesh,’ said Rampion.
‘They’re just marching towards extinction. And a damned good thing too.
Only the trouble is that they’re marching the rest of the world along
with them. Blast their eyes! I must say, I resent being condemned to
extinction because these imbeciles of scientists and moralists and
spiritualists and technicians and literary and political uplifters and
all the rest of them haven’t the sense to see that man must live as a
man, not as a monster of conscious braininess and soulfulness. Grr! I’d
like to kill the lot of them.’ He put the drawing back into the
portfolio and extracted another. ‘Here are two Outlines of History, the
one on the left according to H. G. Wells, the one on the right according
to me….’

Burlap looked, smiled, laughed outright. ‘Excellent!’ he said. The
drawing on the left was composed on the lines of a simple crescendo. A
very small monkey was succeeded by a very slightly larger
pithecanthropus, which was succeeded in its turn by a slightly larger
Neanderthal man. Paleolithic man, neolithic man, bronze-age Egyptian and
Babylonian man, iron-age Greek and Roman man—the figures slowly
increased in size. By the time Galileo and Newton had appeared on the
scene, humanity had grown to quite respectable dimensions. The crescendo
continued’ uninterrupted through Watt and Stephenson, Faraday and
Darwin, Bessemer and Edison, Rockefeller and Wanamaker, to come to a
contemporary consummation in the figures of Mr. H. G. Wells himself and
Sir Alfred Mond. Nor was the future neglected. Through the radiant mist
of prophecy the forms of Wells and Mond, growing larger and larger at
every repetition, wound away in a triumphant spiral clean off the paper,
towards Utopian infinity The drawing on the right had a less optimistic
composition of peaks and declines. The small monkey very soon blossomed
into a good-sized bronze-age man, who gave place to a very large Greek
and a scarcely smaller Etruscan. The Romans grew smaller again. The
monks of the Thebaid were hardly distinguishable from the primeval
little monkeys. There followed a number of good-sized Florentines,
English, French. They were succeeded by revolting monsters labelled
Calvin and Knox, Baxter and Wesley. The stature of the representative
men declined. The Victorians had begun to be dwarfish and misshapen.
Their twentieth-century successors were abortions. Through the mists of
the future one could see a diminishing company of little gargoyles and
foetuses with heads too large for their squelchy bodies, the tails of
apes and the faces of our most eminent contemporaries, all biting and
scratching and disembowelling one another with that methodical and
systematic energy which belongs only to the very highly civilized.

‘I’d like to have one or two of these for the _World_,’ said Burlap,
when they had looked through the contents of the portfolio. ‘We don’t
generally reproduce drawings. We’re frankly missionaries, not an art for
art concern. But these things of yours are parables as well as pictures.
I must say,’ he added, ‘I envy you your power of saying things so
immediately and economically. It would take me hundreds and thousands of
words to say the same things less vividly in an essay.’

Rampion nodded. ‘That’s why I’ve almost given up writing for the moment.
Writing’s not much good for saying what I find I want to say now. And
what a comfort to escape from words! Words, words, words, they shut one
off from the universe. Three-quarters of the time one’s never in contact
with things, only with the beastly words that stand for them. And often
not even with those—only with some poet’s damned metaphorical rigmarole
about a thing. “Nor what soft incense hangs upon the bough,” for
example. Or “every fall soothing the raven wing of darkness till it
smiled.” Or even” then will I visit with a roving kiss the vale of
lilies and the bower of bliss.”’ He looked at Burlap with a grin. ‘Even
the bower of bliss is turned into a metaphorical abstraction. Vale of
lilies, indeed! Oh, these words! I’m thankful to have escaped from them.
It’s like getting out of a prison—oh, a very elegant fantastic sort of
prison, full of frescoes and tapestries and what not. But one prefers
the genuine country outside. Painting, I find, puts you in real touch
with it. I can say what I want to say.’

‘Well, all I can do,’ said Burlap, ‘is to provide an audience to listen
to what you’ve got to say.’

‘Poor devils!’ laughed Rampion. ‘But I think they _ought_ to listen. One
has a responsibility. That’s why I’d like to publish some of your
drawings in the _World_. I feel it’s really a duty.’

‘Oh, if it’s a question of the categorical imperative,’ Rampion laughed
again, ‘why then of course you must. Take what you like. The more
shocking the drawings you publish, the better I shall be pleased.’

Burlap shook his head. ‘We must begin mildly,’ he said. He didn’t
believe in Life to the point of taking any risks with the circulation.

‘Mildly, mildly,’ the other mockingly repeated. ‘You’re all the same,
all you newspaper men. No jolts. Safety first. Painless literature. No
prejudices extracted or ideas hammered in except under ail anaesthetic.
Readers kept permanently in a state of twilight sleep. You’re hopeless,
all of you.’

‘Hopeless,’ repeated Burlap penitently, ‘I know. But, alas, one simply
must compromise a little with the world, the flesh and the devil.’

‘I don’t mind your doing that,’ Rampion answered. ‘What I resent is the
disgusting way you compromise with heaven, respectability and Jehovah.
Still, I suppose in the circumstances you can’t help it. Take what you
want.’

Burlap made his selection. ‘I’ll take these,’ he said at last, holding
up three of the least polemical and scandalous of the drawings. ‘Is that
all right?’

Rampion glanced at them. ‘If you’d waited another week,’ he grumbled,
‘I’d have had that copy of Ary Scheffer ready for you.’

‘I’m afraid,’ said Burlap with that wistfully spiritual expression which
always came over his face when he began to speak about money, ‘I’m
afraid I shan’t be able to pay much for them.’

‘Ah, well. I’m used to it,’ Rampion shrugged his shoulders. Burlap was
glad he took it like that. And after all, he reflected, it was true.
Rampion wasn’t used to being paid much. And with his way of living he
did not need much. No car, no servants…

‘One wishes one could,’ he said aloud, drifting away into impersonality.
‘But the paper…’ He shook his head. ‘Trying to persuade people to love
the highest when they see it doesn’t pay. One might manage four guineas
a drawing.’

Rampion laughed. ‘Not exactly princely. But take them. Take them for
nothing if you like.’

‘No, no,’ protested Burlap. ‘I wouldn’t do that. The _World_ doesn’t
live on charity. It pays for what it uses—not much, alas, but something,
it pays something. I make a point of that,’ he went on, wagging his
head, ‘even if I have to pay out of my own pocket. It’s a question of
principle. Absolutely of principle,’ he insisted, contemplating with a
thrill of justifiable satisfaction the upright and selfsacrificing Denis
Burlap who paid contributors out of his own pocket and in whose
existence he was beginning, as he talked, almost genuinely to believe.
He talked on, and with every word the outlines of this beautifully poor
but honest Burlap became clearer before his inward eyes; and at the same
time the _World_ crept closer and closer to the brink of insolvency,
while the bill for lunch grew momently larger and larger, and his income
correspondingly decreased. Rampion eyed him curiously. What the devil is
he lashing himself up into a fury about this time? he wondered. A
possible explanation suddenly occurred to him. When Burlap next paused
for breath, he nodded sympathetically.

‘What you need is a capitalist,’ he said. ‘If I had a few hundreds or
thousands to spare, I’d put them into the _World_. But alas, I haven’t.
Not sixpence,’ he concluded, almost triumphantly, and the sympathetic
expression turned suddenly into a grin.

 

__

 

That evening Burlap addressed himself to the question of Franciscan
poverty. ‘Barefooted through the Umbrian hills she goes, the Lady
Poverty.’ It was thus that he began his chapter. His prose, in moments
of exaltation, was apt to turn into blank verse…. ‘Her feet are set on
the white dusty roads that seem, to one who gazes from the walls of the
little cities, taut stretched white ribbons in the plain below…’

There followed references to the gnarled olive trees, the vineyards, the
terraced fields,’ the great white oxen with their curving horns,’ the
little asses patiently carrying their burdens up the stony paths, the
blue mountains, the hill towns in the distance, each like a little New
Jerusalem in a picture book, the classical waters of Clitumnus and the
yet more classical waters of Trasimene. ‘That was a land,’ continued
Burlap, ‘and that a time when poverty was a practical, workable ideal.
The land supplied all the needs of those who lived on it; there was
little functional specialization; every peasant was, to a great extent,
his own manufacturer as well as his own butcher, baker, green-grocer and
vintner. It was a society in which money was still comparatively
unimportant. The majority lived in an almost moneyless condition. They
dealt directly in things—household stuff of their own making and the
kindly fruits of the earth—and so had no need of the precious metals
which buy things. St. Francis’s ideal of poverty was practicable then,
because it held up for admiration a way of life not so enormously unlike
the actual way of his humbler contemporaries. He was inviting the
leisured and the functionally specialized members of society—those who
were living mainly in terms of money—to live as their inferiors were
living, in terms of things. How different is the state of things
to-day!’ Burlap relapsed once more into blank verse, moved this time by
indignation, not by lyrical tenderness. ‘We are all specialists, living
in terms only of money, not of real things, inhabiting remote
abstractions, not the actual world of growth and making.’ He rumbled on
a little about ‘the great machines that having been man’s slaves are now
his masters,’ about standardization, about industrial and commercial
life and its withering effect on the human soul (for which last he
borrowed a few of Rampion’s favourite phrases). Money, he concluded, was
the root of the whole evil: the fatal necessity under which man now
labours of living in terms of money, not of real things. ‘To modern eyes
St. Francis’s ideal appears fantastic, utterly insane. The Lady Poverty
has been degraded by modern circumstances into the semblance of a
sackaproned, leaky-booted charwoman…No one in his senses would dream of
following her. To idealize so repulsive a Dulcinea one would have to be
madder than Don Quixote himself. Within our modern society the
Franciscanideal is unworkable. We have made poverty detestable. But this
does not mean that we can just neglect St. Francis as a dreamer of mad
dreams. No, on the contrary, the insanity is ours, not his. He is the
doctor in the asylum. To the lunatics the doctor seems the only madman.
When we recover our senses, we shall see that the doctor has been all
the time the only healthy man. As things are at present the Franciscan
ideal is unworkable. The moral of that is that things must be altered,
radically. Our aim must be to create a new society in which Lady Poverty
shall be, not a draggled charwoman, but a lovely form of light and
graciousness and beauty. Oh Poverty, Poverty, beautiful Lady Poverty!…’

Beatrice came in to say that supper was on the table.

‘Two eggs,’ she commanded, rapping out her solicitude. ‘Two, I insist.
They were made especially for you.’

‘You treat me like the prodigal son,’ said Burlap. ‘Or the fatted calf
while it was being fattened.’ He wagged his head, he smiled a Sodoma
smile and helped himself to the second egg.

‘I want to ask your advice about some gramophone shares I’ve got,’ said
Beatrice. ‘They’ve been rising so violently.’

‘Gramophones!’ said Burlap. ‘Ah…’ He advised.


CHAPTER XVII

It had been raining for days. To Spandrell it seemed as though the fungi
and the mildew were sprouting even in his soul. He lay in bed, or sat in
his dismal room, or leaned against the counter in a public house,
feeling the slimy growth within him, watching it with his inward eyes.

‘But if only you’d do something,’ his mother had so often implored.
‘Anything.’

And all his friends had said the same thing, had gone on saying it for
years.

But he was damned if he’d do anything. Work, the gospel of work, the
sanctity of work, _laborare est orare_—all that tripe and nonsense.
‘Work!’ he once broke out contemptuously against the reasonable
expostulations of Philip Quarles, ‘work’s no more respectable than
alcohol, and it serves exactly the same purpose: it just distracts the
mind, makes a man forget himself. Work’s simply a drug, that’s all. It’s
humiliating that men shouldn’t be able to live without drugs, soberly;
it’s humiliating that they shouldn’t have the courage to see the world
and themselves as they really are. They must intoxicate themselves with
work. It’s stupid. The gospel of work’s just a gospel of stupidity and
funk. Work may be prayer; but it’s also hiding one’s head in the sand,
it’s also making such a din and a dust that a man can’t hear himself
speak or see his own hand before his face. It’s hiding yourself from
yourself. No wonder the Samuel Smileses and the big business men are
such enthusiasts for work. Work gives them the comforting illusion of
existing, even of being important. If they stopped working, they’d
realize that they simply weren’t there at all, most of them. Just holes
in the air, that’s all. Holes with perhaps a rather nasty smell in them.
Most Smilesian souls must smell rather nasty, I should think. No wonder
they daren’t stop working. They might find out what they really are, or
rather _aren’t_. It’s a risk they haven’t the courage to take.’

‘And what has your courage permitted _you_ to find out about yourself? ‘
asked Philip Quarles.

Spandrell grinned rather melodramatically. ‘It needed some courage,’ he
said, ‘to go on looking at what I discovered. If I hadn’t been such a
brave man, I’d have taken to work or morphia long ago.’

Spandrell dramatized himself a little, made his conduct appear rather
more rational and romantic than it really was. If he did nothing, it was
out of habitual laziness as well as on perverse and topsy-turvy moral
principle. The sloth, indeed, had preceded the principle and was its
root. Spandrell would never have discovered that work was a pernicious
opiate, if he had not had an invincible sloth to find a reason and a
justification for. But that it did require some courage on his part to
do nothing was true; for he was idle in spite of the ravages of a
chronic boredom that could become, at moments like the present, almost
unbearably acute. But the habit of idleness was so deeply ingrained that
to break it would have demanded more courage than to bear the agonies of
boredom to which it gave rise. Pride had reinforced his native
laziness—the pride of an able man who is not quite able enough, of an
admirer of great achievements who realizes that he lacks the talent to
do original work and who will not humiliate himself by what he knows
will be an unsuccessful attempt to create, or by stooping, however
successfully, to some easier task.

‘It’s all very well you talking about work,’ he had said to Philip. ‘But
you can do something, _I_ can’t. What do you want me to do? Bank
clerking? Commercial travelling?’

‘There are other professions,’ said Philip. ‘And since you’ve got some
money, there’s all scholarship, all natural history…

‘Oh, you want me to be an ant collector, do you? Or a writer of theses
on the use of soap among the Angevins. A dear old Uncle Toby with a
hobby to ride. But I tell you, I don’t want to be an Uncle Toby. If I’m
no real good, I prefer to be just frankly no good. I don’t want to
disguise myself as a man of learning. I don’t want to be the
representative of a hobby. I want to be what nature made me—no good.’

Ever since his mother’s second marriage Spandrell had always perversely
made the worst of things, chosen the worst course, deliberately
encouraged his own worst tendencies. It was with debauchery that he
distracted his endless leisures. He was taking his revenge on her, on
himself also for having been so foolishly happy and good. He was spiting
her, spiting himself, spiting God. He hoped there was a hell for him to
go to and regretted his inability to believe in its existence. Still,
hell or no hell, it was satisfactory, it was even exciting in those
early days to know that one was doing something bad and wrong. But there
is in debauchery something so intrinsically dull, something so
absolutely and hopelessly dismal, that it is only the rarest beings,
gifted with much less than the usual amount of intelligence and much
more than the usual intensity of appetite, who can go on actively
enjoying a regular course of vice or continue actively to believe in its
wickedness. Most habitual debauchees are debauchees not because they
enjoy debauchery, but because they are uncomfortable when deprived of
it. Habit converts luxurious enjoyments into dull and daily necessities.
The man who has formed a habit of women or gin, of opium-smoking or
flagellation, finds it as difficult to live without his vice as to live
without bread and water, even though the actual practice of the vice may
have become in itself as unexciting as eating a crust or drinking a
glass from the kitchen tap. Habit is as fatal to a sense of wrongdoing
as to active enjoyment. After a few years the converted or sceptical
Jew, the Westernized Hindu, can eat their pork and beef with an
equanimity which to their still believing brothers seems brutally
cynical. It is the same with the habitual debauchee. Actions which at
first seemed thrilling in their intrinsic wickedness become after a
certain number of repetitions morally neutral. A little disgusting,
perhaps; for the practice of most vices is followed by depressing
physiological reactions; but no longer wicked, because so ordinary. It
is difficult for a routine to seem wicked.

Robbed gradually by habit both of his active enjoyment and of his active
sense of wrongdoing (which had always been a part of his pleasure),
Spandrell had turned with a kind of desperation to the refinements of
vice. But the refinements of vice do not produce corresponding
refinements of feeling. The contrary is in fact true; the more refined
in its far-fetched extravagance, the more uncommon and abnormal the
vice, the more dully and hopelessly unemotional does the practice of it
become. Imagination may exert itself in devising the most improbable
variations on the normal sexual theme; but the emotional product of all
the varieties of orgy is always the same—a dull sense of humiliation and
abasement. There are many people, it is true, (and they are generally
the most intellectually civilized, refined and sophisticated), who have
a hankering after lowness and eagerly pursue their own abasement in the
midst of multiple orgies, masochistic prostitutions, casual and almost
bestial couplings with strangers, sexual association with gross and
uneducated individuals of a lower class. Excessive intellectual and
aesthetic refinement is liable to be bought rather dearly at the expense
of some strange emotional degeneration, and the perfectly civilized
Chinaman with his love of art and his love of cruelty is suffering from
another form of the same disease which gives the perfectly civilized
modern aesthete his taste for guardsmen and apaches, for humiliating
promiscuities and violences. ‘High brows, low loins,’ was how Rampion
had once summed up in Spandrell’s hearing. ‘The higher the one, the
lower the other.’ Spandrell, for his part, did not enjoy humiliation.
The emotional results of all the possible refinements of vice seemed to
him dully uniform. Divorced from all significant emotion, whether
approving or remorseful, the mere sensations of physical excitement and
pleasure were insipid. The corruption of youth was the only form of
debauchery that now gave him any active emotion. Inspired, as Rampion
had divined, by that curious vengeful hatred of sex, which had resulted
from the shock of his mother’s second marriage supervening, in an uneasy
moment of adolescence, on the normal upper middle-class training in
refinement and gentlemanly repression, he could still feel a peculiar
satisfaction in inflicting what he regarded as the humiliation of
sensual pleasure on the innocent sisters of those too much loved and
therefore detested women who had been for him the personification of the
detested instinct. Mediaevally hating, he took his revenge, not (like
the ascetics and puritans) by mortifying the hated flesh of women, but
by teaching it an indulgence which he himself regarded as evil, by
luring and caressing it on to more and more complete and triumphant
rebellion against the conscious soul. And the final stage of his revenge
consisted in the gradual insinuation into the mind of his victim of the
fundamental wrongness and baseness of the raptures he himself had taught
her to feel. Poor little Harriet was the only innocent on whom, so far,
he had been able to carry out the whole of his programme. With her
predecessors he had never gone so far and she had had no successors.
Seduced in the manner he had described to the Rampions, Harriet had
adored him and imagined herself adored. And she was almost right; for
Spandrell did genuinely care for her, even while he was deliberately
making her his victim. The violation of his own feelings as well as of
hers gave an added spice of perversity to the proceedings. Patiently,
with the tact and gentleness and understanding of the most delicate,
most exquisitely sympathetic lover, he allayed her virgin fears and
gradually melted the coldness of her youth, thawed down the barriers
raised by her education—only, however, to impose on her inexperience the
ingenuous acceptance of the most fantastic lubricities. To see her
accepting these as ordinary marks of affection was already, for the
reversed ascetic in Spandrell, an admirable revenge on her for being a
woman. But it was not enough; he began to simulate scruples, to shrink
with an air of distress from her ardours or, if he accepted them, to
accept them passively as though he were being outraged and violated.
Harriet became suddenly anxious and distressed, felt ashamed, as a
sensitive person always feels whose ardours meet with no response; and
suddenly, at the same time, she found herself a little grotesque, like
an actor who has been performing with a group of companions and who,
deserted, suddenly realises he is alone on the stage—grotesque and even
a little disgusting. Didn’t he love her any more? But so much, he
answered. Then why? Precisely because of the depth of his love; and he
began to talk about the soul. The body was like a wild beast that
devoured the soul, annihilated the consciousness, abolished the real you
and me. And as though by accident, somebody, that very evening, had sent
him a mysterious parcel, which when he opened, as he now did, turned out
to contain a portfolio full of pornographic French etchings, in which
poor Harriet saw with a growing sense of horror and disgust all the
actions she had so innocently and warmheartedly accepted as love,
represented in cold and lucid outlines and made to look so hideous, so
low, so bottomlessly vulgar that but to glance was to hate and despise
the whole human race. For some days Spandrell skilfully rubbed the
horror in; and then, when she was thoroughly penetrated with the sense
of guilt and creeping with self-disgust, cynically and violently renewed
his now obscene love-making. In the end she had left him, hating him,
hating herself. That was three months ago. Spandrell had made no attempt
to have her back or to renew the experiment on another victim. It wasn’t
worth the effort; nothing was worth the effort. He contented himself
with talking about the excitements of diabolism, while in practice he
remained sunk apathetically in the dismal routine of brandy and hired
love. The talk momentarily excited him; but when it was over he fell
back again yet deeper into boredom and despondency. There were times
when he felt as though he were becoming inwardly paralysed, with a
gradual numbing of the very soul. It was a paralysis which it was within
his power, by making an effort of the will, to cure. But he could not,
even would not, make the effort.

‘But if you’re bored by it, if you hate it,’ Philip Quarles had
interrogated, focussing on Spandrell his bright intelligent curiosity,
‘why the devil do you go on with the life?’ It was nearly a year since
the question had been asked; the paralysis had not then crept so deep
into Spandrell’s soul. But even in those days Philip had found his case
very puzzling. And since the man was prepared to talk about himself
without demanding any personalities in return, since he didn’t seem to
mind being an object of scientific curiosity and was boastful rather
than reticent about his weaknesses, Philip had taken the opportunity of
cross-examining him. ‘I can’t see why,’ he insisted.

Spandrell shrugged his shoulders. ‘Because I’m committed to it. Because
in some way it’s my destiny. Because that’s what life finally is—hateful
and boring; that’s what human beings are, when they’re left to
themselves—hateful and boring again. Because, once one’s damned, one
ought to damn oneself doubly. Because…yes, because I really like hating
and being bored.’

He liked it. The rain fell and fell; the mushrooms sprouted in his very
heart and he deliberately cultivated them. He could have gone to see his
friends; but he preferred to be bored and alone. The concert season was
in full swing, there was opera at Covent Garden, all the theatres were
open; but Spandrell only read the advertisements—the _Eroica_ at the
Queen’s Hall, Schnabel playing Op. 106 at the Wigmore, _Don Giovanni_ at
Covent Garden, Little Tich at the Alhambra, _Othello_ at the Old Vic,
Charlie Chaplin at Marble Arch—read them very carefully and stayed at
home. There was a pile of music on the piano, his shelves were full of
books, all the London Library was at his disposal; Spandrell read
nothing but magazines and the illustrated weeklies and the morning and
evening papers. The rain went sliding incessantly down the dirty glass
of the windows; Spandrell turned the enormous crackling pages of the
_Times_. ‘The Duke of York,’ he read, having eaten his way, like a dung
beetle’s maggot in its native element, through Births, Deaths and the
Agony Column, through Servants and Real Estate, through Legal Reports,
through Imperial and Foreign News, through Parliament, through the
morning’s history, through the five leading articles, through Letters to
the Editor, as far as Court and Personal and the little clerical essay
on _The Bible in Bad Weather_,’ the Duke of York will be presented with
the Honorary Freedom of the Gold and Silver Wire Drawers Company on
Monday next. His Royal Highness will take luncheon with the Master and
Wardens of the Company after the presentation.’ Pascal and Blake were
within reach, on the bookshelf. But ‘Lady Augusta Crippen has left
England on the _Berengaria_. She will travel across America to visit her
brother-in-law and sister, the Governor-General of South Melanesia and
Lady Ethelberta Todhunter.’ Spandrell laughed, and the laughter was a
liberation, was a source of energy. He got up; he put on his mackintosh
and went out. ‘The Governor-General of South Melanesia and Lady
Ethelberta Todhunter.’ Still smiling, he turned into the public-house
round the comer. It was early; there was only one other drinker in the
bar.

‘But why should two people stay together and be unhappy?’ the barmaid
was saying. ‘Why? When they can get a divorce and be happy?’

‘Because marriage is a sacrament,’ replied the stranger.

‘Sacrament yourself!’ the barmaid retorted contemptuously. Catching
sight of Spandrell, she nodded and smiled. He was a regular customer.

‘Double brandy,’ he ordered, and leaning against the bar examined the
stranger. He had a face like a choirboy’s—but a choirboy suddenly
overwhelmed by middle age; chubby, prettily doll-like, but withered. The
mouth was horribly small, a little slit in a rosebud. The cherub’s
cheeks had begun to sag and were grey, like the chin, with a day’s
beard.

‘Because,’ the stranger went on—and Spandrell noticed that he was never
still, but must always be smiling, frowning, lifting eyebrows, cocking
his head on one side or another, writhing his body in a perpetual
ecstasy of selfconsciousness, ‘because a man shall cleave unto his wife
and they shall be one flesh. One flesh,’ he repeated and accompanied the
wdrds by a more than ordinary writhe of the body and a titter. He caught
Spandrell’s eye, blushed, and to keep himself in countenance, hastily
emptied his glass.

‘What do _you_ think, Mr. Spandrell?’ asked the barmaid as she turned to
reach for the brandy bottle.

‘Of what? Of being one flesh?’ The barmaid nodded. ‘H’m. As a matter of
fact, I was just envying the Governor-General of South Melanesia and
Lady Ethelberta Todhunter for being so unequivocally two fleshes. If you
were called the Governor-General of South Melanesia,’ he went on,
addressing himself to the withered choirboy,’ and your wife was Lady
Ethelberta Todhunter, do you imagine you’d be one flesh? ‘ The stranger
wriggled like a worm on a hook. ‘Obviously not. It would be shocking if
you were.’

The stranger ordered another whiskey. ‘But joking apart,’ he said, ‘the
sacrament of marriage…’

‘But why should two people be unhappy? ‘ persisted the barmaid. ‘When it
isn’t necessary?’

‘Why _shouldn’t_ they be unhappy?’ Spandrell enquired. ‘Perhaps it’s
what they’re here for. How do you know that the earth isn’t some other
planet’s hell?’

A positivist, the barmaid laughed. ‘What rot!’

‘But the Anglicans don’t regard it as a sacrament,’ Spandrell continued.

The choirboy writhed indignantly. ‘Do you take me for an Anglican?’

The working day was over; the bar began to fill up with men in quest of
spiritual relaxation. Beer flowed, spirits were measured out in little
noggins, preciously. In stout, in bitter, in whiskey they bought the
equivalents of foreign travel and mystical ecstasy, of poetry and a
week-end with Cleopatra, of big-game hunting and music. The choirboy
ordered another drink.

‘What an age we live in!’ he said, shaking his head. ‘Barbarous. Such
abysmal ignorance of the most rudimentary religious truths.’

‘Not to mention hygienic truths,’ said Spandrell. ‘These damp clothes!
And not a window.’ He pulled out his handkerchief and held it to his
nose.

The choirboy shuddered and held up his hands. ‘But what a handkerchief!’
he exclaimed, ‘what a horror!’

Spandrell held it out for inspection. ‘It seems to me a very nice
handkerchief,’ he said. It was a silk bandana, red with bold patterns in
black and pink. ‘Extremely expensive, I may add.’

‘But the colour, my dear sir. The colour!’

‘I like it.’

‘But not at this. season of the year. Not between Easter and Whitsun.
Impossible! The liturgical colour is white.’ He pulled out his own
handkerchief. It was snowy. ‘And my socks.’ He lifted a foot.

‘I wondered why you looked as though you were going to play tennis.’

‘White, white,’ said the choirboy. ‘It’s prescribed. Between Easter and
Pentecost the chasuble must be predominantly white. Not to mention the
fact that to-day’s the feast of St. Natalia the Virgin. And white’s the
colour for all virgins who aren’t also martyrs.’

‘I should have thought they were all martyrs,’ said Spandrell. ‘That is,
if they’ve been virgins long enough.’

The swing-door opened and shut, opened and shut. Outside was loneliness
and the damp twilight; within, the happiness of being many, of being
close and in contact. The choirboy began to talk of little St. Hugh of
Lincoln and St. Piran of Perranzabuloe, the patron saint of Cornish
tin-miners. He drank another whiskey and confided to Spandrell that he
was writing the lives of the English saints, in verse.

‘Another wet Derby,’ prophesied a group of pessimists at the bar, and
were happy because they could prophesy in company and with fine weather
in their bellies and beery sunshine in their souls. The wet clothes
steamed more suffocatingly than ever,—a steam of felicity; the sound of
talk and laughter was deafening. Into Spandrell’s face the withered
choirboy breathed alcohol and poetry.

‘To and fro, to and fro,

Piran of Perranzabuloe,’

he intoned. Four whiskeys had almost cured him of writhing and
grimacing. He had lost his selfconsciousness. The onlooker who was
conscious of the self had gone to sleep. A few more whiskeys and there
would be no more self to be conscious of.

‘Walked weightless,’

he continued,

‘Walked weightless on the heaving seas

Among the Cassiterides.’

‘That was Piran’s chief miracle,’ he explained; ‘walking from Land’s End
to the Scilly Islands.’

‘Pretty nearly the world’s record, I should think,’ said Spandrell.

The other shook his head. ‘There was an Irish saint who walked to Wales.
But I can’t remember his name. Miss!’ he called. ‘Here! Another whiskey,
please.’

‘I must say,’ said Spandrell, ‘you seem to make the best of both worlds.
Six whiskeys…

‘Only five,’ the choirboy protested. ‘This is only the fifth.’

‘Five whiskeys, then, and the liturgical colours. Not to mention St.
Piran of Perranzabuloe. Do you really believe in that walk to the
Scillies?’

‘Absolutely.’

‘And here’s for young Sacramento,’ said the barmaid, pushing his glass
across the counter.

The choirboy shook his head as he paid. ‘Blasphemies all round,’ he
said. ‘Every word another wound in the Sacred Heart.’ He drank. ‘Another
bleeding, agonizing wound.’

‘What fun you have with your Sacred Heart!’

‘Fun?’ said the choirboy indignantly.

‘Staggering from the bar to the altar rails. And from the confessional
to the bawdy house. It’s the ideal life. Never a dull moment. I envy
you.’

‘Mock on, mock on!’ He spoke like a dying martyr. ‘And if you knew what
a tragedy my life has been, you wouldn’t say you envied me.’

The swing-door opened and shut, opened and shut. God-thirsty from the
spiritual deserts of the workshop and the office, men came, as to a
temple. Bottled and barrelled by Clyde and Liffey, by Thames, Douro and
Trent, the mysterious divinity revealed itself to them.

For the Brahmins who pressed and drank the soma, its name was Indra; for
the hemp-eating yogis, Siva. The gods of Mexico inhabited the peyotl.
The Persian Sufis discovered Allah in the wine of Shiraz, the shamans of
the Samoyedes ate toadstools and were filled with the spirit of Num.

‘Another whiskey, Miss,’ said the choirboy, and turning back to
Spandrell almost wept over his misfortunes. He had loved, he had
married—sacramentally; he insisted on that. He had been happy. They had
both been happy.

Spandrell raised his eyebrows.’did she like the smell of whiskey?’

The other shook his head sadly. ‘I had my faults,’ he admitted. ‘I was
weak. This accursed drink! Accursed!’ And in a sudden enthusiasm for
temperance he poured his whiskey on the floor. ‘There!’ he said
triumphantly.

‘Very noble!’ said Spandrell. He beckoned to the barmaid

‘Another whiskey for this gentleman.’

The choirboy protested, but without much warmth. He sighed. ‘It was
always my besetting sin,’ he said. ‘But I was always sorry afterwards.
Genuinely repentant.’

‘I’m sure you were. Never a dull moment.’

‘If she’d stood by me, I might have cured myself.’

‘A pure woman’s help, what?’ said Spandrell.

‘Exactly,’ the other nodded. ‘That’s exactly it. But she left me. Ran
off. Or rather, not ran. She was lured. She wouldn’t have done it on her
own. It was that horrible little snake in the grass. That little…’ He
ran through the sergeant-major’s brief vocabulary. ‘I’d wring his neck
if he were here,’ the choirboy went on. The Lord of Battles had been in
his fifth whiskey. ‘Dirty little swine!’ He banged the counter. ‘You
know the man who painted those pictures in the Tate; Bidlake? Well, it
was that chap’s son. Walter Bidlake.’

Spandrell raised his eyebrows, but made no comment. The choirboy talked
on.

At Sbisa’s, Walter was dining with Lucy Tantamount.

‘Why don’t you come to Paris too? ‘ Lucy was saying.

Walter shook his head. ‘I’ve got to work.’

‘I find it’s really impossible to stay in one place more than a couple
of months at a time. One gets so stale and wilted, so unutterably bored.
The moment I step into the aeroplane at Croydon I feel as though I had
been born again—like the Salvation Army.’

‘And how long does the new life last?’

Lucy shrugged her shoulders. ‘As long as the old one. But fortunately
there’s an almost unlimited supply of aeroplanes. I’m all for Progress.’

The swing-doors of the temple of the unknown god closed behind them.
Spandrell and his companion stepped out into the cold and rainy
darkness.

‘Oof!’ said the choirboy, shivering, and turned up the collar of his
raincoat. ‘It’s like jumping into a swimming-bath.’

‘It’s like reading Haeckel after Fenelon. You Christians live in such a
jolly little public-house of a universe.’

They walked a few yards down the street.

‘Look here,’ said Spandrell,’do you think you can get home on foot?
Because you don’t look as though you could.’

Leaning against a lamp-post the choirboy shook his head.

‘We’ll wait for a cab.’

They waited. The rain fell. Spandrell looked at the other man with a
cold distaste. The creature had amused him, while they had been in the
pub, had served as a distraction. Now, suddenly, he was merely
repulsive.

‘Aren’t you afraid of going to hell?’ he asked. ‘They’ll make you drink
burning whiskey there. A perpetual Christmas pudding in your belly. If
you could see yourself! The revolting spectacle…’

The choirboy’s sixth whiskey had been full of contrition. ‘I know, I
know,’ he groaned. ‘I’m disgusting. I’m contemptible. But if you knew
how I’d struggled and striven and…’

‘There’s a cab.’ Spandrell gave a shout.

‘How I’d prayed,’ the choirboy continued.

‘Where do you live?’

‘Forty-one Ossian Gardens. I’ve wrestled…’

The cab drew up in front of them. Spandrell opened the door.

‘Get in, you sot,’ he said, and gave the other a push. ‘Forty-one Ossian
Gardens,’ he said to the driver. The choirboy, meanwhile, had crawled
into his seat. Spandrell followed. ‘Disgusting slug!’

‘Go on, go on. I deserve it. You have every right to despise me.’

‘I know,’ said Spandrell. ‘But if you think I’m going to do you the
pleasure of telling you so any more, you’re much mistaken.’ He leaned
back in his corner and shut his eyes. All his appalling weariness and
disgust had suddenly returned. ‘God,’ he said to himself. ‘God, God,
God.’ And like a grotesque derisive echo of his thoughts, the choirboy
prayed aloud. ‘God have mercy upon me,’ the maudlin voice repeated.
Spandrell burst out laughing.

Leaving the drunkard on his front door step, Spandrell went back to the
cab. He remembered suddenly that he had not dined.’sbisa’s Restaurant,’
he told the driver. ‘God, God,’ he repeated in the darkness. But the
night was a vacuum.

‘There’s Spandrell,’ cried Lucy, interrupting her companion in the
middle of a sentence. She raised her arm and waved.

‘Lucy!’ Spandrell took her hand and kissed it. He sat down at their
table. ‘It’ll interest you to hear, Walter, that I’ve just been doing a
good Samaritan to your victim.’

‘My victim?’

‘Your cuckold. Carling; isn’t that his name?’ Walter blushed in an
agony. ‘He wears his horns without any difference. Quite traditionally.’
He looked at Walter and was glad to see the signs of distress on his
face. ‘I found him drowning his sorrows,’ he went on maliciously. ‘In
whiskey. The grand romantic remedy.’ It was a relief to be able to take
some revenge for his miseries.


CHAPTER XVIII

At Port Said they went ashore. The flank of the ship was an iron
precipice. At its foot the launch heaved on a dirty and slowly wallowing
sea; between its gunwale and the end of the ship’s ladder a little chasm
alternately shrank and expanded. For a sound pair of legs the leap would
have been nothing. But Philip hesitated. To jump with his game leg
foremost might mean to collapse under the impact of arrival; and if he
trusted to the game leg to propel him, he had a good chance of falling
ignominiously short. He was delivered from his predicament by the
military gentleman who had preceded him in the leap.

‘Here, take my hand,’ he called, noticing Philip’s hesitation and its
cause.

‘Thanks so much,’ said Philip when he waa safely in the launch.

‘Awkward, this sort of thing,’ said the other. ‘Particularly if one’s
short of a leg, what?’

‘Very.’

‘Damaged in the War?’

Philip shook his head. ‘Accident when I was a boy,’ he explained
telegraphically, and the blood mounted to his cheeks. ‘There’s my wife,’
he mumbled, glad of an excuse to get away. Elinor jumped, steadied
herself against him; they picked their way to seats at the other end of
the launch.

‘Why didn’t you let me go first and help you over?’ she asked.

‘I was all right,’ he answered curtly and in a tone that decided her to
say no snore. She wondered what was the matter. Something to do with his
lameness? Why was he so queer about it?

Philip himself would have found it hard to explain what there was in the
military gentleman’s question to distress him. After all there was
nothing in the least discreditable in having been run over by a cart.
And to have been rejected as totally unfit for military service was not
in the least unpatriotic. And yet, quite unreasonably, the question had
disturbed him, as all such questions, as any too overt reference to his
lameness, unless deliberately prepared for by himself, invariably did.

Discussing him with Elinor, ‘Philip was the last person,’ his mother had
once said, ‘the very last person such an accident ought to have happened
to. He was born far away, if you know what I mean. It was always too
easy for him to dispense with people. He was too fond of shutting
himself up inside his own private silence. But he might have learned to
come out more, if that horrible accident hadn’t happened. It raised an
artificial barrier between him and the rest of the world. It meant no
games, to begin with; and no games meant fewer contacts with other boys,
more solitude, more leisure for books. And then (poor Phil!) it meant
fresh causes for shyness. A sense of inferiority. Children can be so
horribly ruthless; they used to laugh at him sometimes at school. And
later, when girls began to matter, how I wish he’d been able to go to
dances and tennis parties! But he couldn’t waltz or play. And of course
he didn’t want to go as an onlooker and an outsider. His poor smashed
leg began by keeping him at a physical distance from girls of his own
age. And it kept him at a psychological distance, too. For I believe he
was always afraid (secretly, of course, and without admitting it) that
they might laugh at him, as some of the boys did; and he didn’t want to
run the risk of being rejected in favour of someone who wasn’t
handicapped as he was. Not that he’d ever have taken very much interest
in girls,’ Mrs. Quarles had added.

And Elinor had laughed. ‘I shouldn’t imagine so.’

‘But he wouldn’t have got into such a habit of deliberately avoiding
them. He wouldn’t have so systematically retired from all personal
contacts—and not with girls only; with men, too. Intellectual
contacts—those are the only ones he admits.’

‘It’s as though he only felt safe among ideas,’ Elinor had said.

‘Because he can hold his own there; because he can be certain of
superiority. He’s got into the habit of feeling afraid and suspicious
outside that intellectual world. He needn’t have. And I’ve always tried
to reassure him and tempt him out; but he won’t let himself be tempted,
he creeps back into his shell.’ And after a silence, ‘it’s had only one
good result,’ she had added, ‘the accident, I mean. It saved him from
going to the War, from being killed, probably. Like his brother.’

The launch began to move towards the shore. From being an impending wall
of black iron, the liner, as they receded, became a great ship, seen in
its entirety. Fixed motionless between the sea and the blue glare of the
sky, it looked like the advertisement of tropical cruises in the window
of a Cockspur Street shipping office.

‘It was an impertinence to ask,’ Philip was thinking. ‘What business was
it of his whether I’d been damaged in the War? How they go on gloating
over their War, those professional soldiers! Well, I can be thankful I
kept out of the bloody business. Poor Geoffrey!’ He thought of his dead
brother.

‘And yet,’ Mrs. Quarles had concluded after a pause, ‘in a certain sense
I wish he had gone to the War. Oh, not for fire-eating patriotic
reasons. But because, if one could have guaranteed that he wouldn’t have
been killed or mangled, it would have been so good for him—violently
good, perhaps; painfully good; but still good. It might have smashed his
shell for him and set him free from his own prison. Emotionally free;
for his intellect’s free enough already. Too free, perhaps, for my
old-fashioned taste.’ And she had smiled rather sadly. ‘Free to come and
go in the human world, instead of being boxed up in that indifference of
his.’

‘But isn’t the indifference natural to him?’ Elinor had objected.

‘Partly. But in part it’s a habit. If he could break the habit, he’d be
so much happier. And I think he knows it, but can’t break it himself. If
it could be broken for him… But the War was the last chance. And
circumstances didn’t allow it to be taken.’

‘Thank heaven!’

‘Well, perhaps you’re right.’

The launch had arrived; they stepped ashore. The heat was terrific, the
pavements glared, the air was full of dust. With much display of teeth,
much flashing of black and liquid eyes, much choreographic
gesticulation, an olive-coloured gentleman in a tarboosh tried to sell
them carpets. Elinor was for driving him away. But,’don’t waste energy,’
said Philip. ‘Too hot. Passive resistance, and pretend not to
understand.’

They walked on like martyrs across an arena; and like a hungry lion, the
gentleman in the tarboosh frisked round them. If not carpets, then
artificial pearls. No pearls? Then genuine Havana cigars at
three-halfpence each. Or a celluloid comb. Or imitation amber. Or almost
genuine gold bangles. Philip continued to shake his head.

‘Nice corals. Nice scarabs—real old.’ That winning smile was beginning
to look like a snarl.

Elinor had seen the drapery shop she was looking for; they crossed the
street and entered.

‘Saved!’ she said. ‘He daren’t follow. I had such a horrible fear that
he might suddenly begin to bite. Poor wretch, though. I think we ought
to buy something.’ She turned and addressed herself to the assistant
behind the counter.

‘Meanwhile,’ said Philip, foreseeing that Elinor’s shopping would be
interminably tedious, ‘I’ll go and get a few cigarettes.’

He stepped out into the glare. The man in the tarboosh was waiting. He
pounced, he caught Philip by the sleeve. Desperately, he played his last
trump.

‘Nice postcards,’ he whispered confidentially and produced an envelope
from his breast-pocket. ‘Hot stuff. Only ten shillings.’

Philip stared uncomprehending. ‘No English,’ he said and limped away
along the street. The man in the tarboosh hurried at his side.

‘Tres curieuses,’ he said. ‘Tres amusantes. Moeurs arabes. Pour passer
le temps a bord. Soixante francs seulement.’ He saw no answering light
of comprehension. ‘Molto artistiche,’ he suggested in Italian. ‘Proprio
curiose. Cinquanta franchi.’ He peered in desperation into Philip’s
face; it was a blank. ‘Huebsch,’ he went on,’sehr geschlechtlich. Zehn
mark.’ Not a muscle moved. ‘Muy hermosas, muy agraciadas, mucho
indecorosas.’ He tried again. ‘Skon bref kort. Liderlig fotografi bild.
Nakna jungfrun. Verklig smutsig.’ Philip was evidently no Scandinavian.
Was he a Slav? ‘Sprosny obraz,’ the man wheedled. It was no good.
Perhaps Portuguese would do it. ‘Photographia deshonesta,’ he began.

Philip burst out laughing. ‘Here,’ he said, and gave him half a crown.
‘You deserve it.’

‘Did you discover what you wanted?’ asked Elinor when he returned.

He nodded. ‘And I also discovered the only possible basis for the League
of Nations. The one common interest. Our toothy friend offered me
indecent postcards in seventeen languages. He’s wasting himself at Port
Said. He ought to be at Geneva.’

 

__

 

‘Two ladies to see you, sir,’ said the office boy.

‘Two?’ Burlap raised his dark eyebrows. ‘Two?’ The office boy insisted.
‘Well, show them up.’ The boy retired. Burlap was annoyed. He was
expecting Romola Saville, the Romola Saville who had written,

‘Already old in passion, I have known

All the world’s lovers since the world began;

Have held in Leda’s arms the immortal Swan;

And felt fair Paris take me as his own.’

And she was coming with a duenna. It wasn’t like her. _Two_ ladies…

The two doors of his sanctum opened simultaneously. Ethel Cobbett
appeared at one holding a bunch of galley proofs. By the other entered
the two ladies. Standing on the threshold Ethel looked at them. One of
them was tall and remarkably thin. Almost equally tall, the other was
portly. Neither of them was any longer young. The thin lady seemed a
withered and virgin forty three or four. The portly one was perhaps a
little older, but had preserved a full-blown and widowed freshness. The
thin one was sallow, with sharp bony features, nondescript brown hair
and grey eyes, and was dressed rather fashionably, not in the style of
Paris, but in the more youthful and jaunty mode of Hollywood, in pale
grey and pink. The other lady was very blonde, with blue eyes, and long
dangling earrings and lapis lazuli beads to match. Her style of dressing
was more matronly and European than the other’s, and numbers of not very
precious ornaments were suspended here and there all over her person and
tinkled a little as she walked.

The two ladies advanced across the room. Burlap pretended to be so
deeply immersed in composition that he had not heard the opening of the
door. It was only when the ladies had come to within a few feet of his
table that he looked up from the paper on which he had been furiously
scribbling—with what a start of amazement, what an expression of
apologetic embarrassment! He sprang to his feet.

‘I’m so sorry. Forgive…I hadn’t noticed. One gets so deeply absorbed.’
The n’s and m’s had turned to d’s and b’s. He had a cold.’so idvolved id
ode’s work.’

He came round the table to meet them, smiling his subtlest and most
spiritual Sodoma smile. But, ‘Oh God!’ he was inwardly exclaiming. ‘What
appalling females!’

‘And which,’ he went on aloud, smiling from one to the other,’ which,
may I venture to ask, is Miss Saville?’

‘Neither of us,’ said the portly lady in a rather deep voice, but
playfully and with a smile.

‘Or both, if you like,’ said the other. Her voice was high and metallic
and she spoke sharply, in little spurts, and with an extraordinary and
vertiginous rapidity. ‘Both _and_ neither.’

And the two ladies burst into simultaneous laughter. Burlap looked and
listened with a sinking heart. What had he let himself in for? They were
formidable. He blew his nose; he coughed. They were making his cold
worse.

‘The fact is,’ said the portly lady, cocking her head rather archly on
one side and affecting the slightest lisp, ‘the fact ith…’

But the thin one interrupted her. ‘The fact is,’ she said pouring out
her words so fast that it was extraordinary that she should have been
able to articulate them at all, ‘that we’re a partnership, a
combination, almost a conspiracy.’ She uttered her sharp shrill laugh.

‘Yeth, a conthpirathy,’ said the portly one lisping from sheer
playfulness.

‘We’re the two parts of Romola Saville’s dual personality.’

‘I being the Dr. Jekyll,’ put in the portly one, and both laughed yet
once more.

‘A conspiracy,’ thought Burlap with a growing sense of horror. ‘I should
think it was!’

‘Dr. Jekyll, _alias_ Ruth Goffer. May I introduce you to Mrs. Goffer?’

‘While I do the same for Mr. Hyde, alias Miss Hignett?’

‘While together we introduce ourselves as the Romola Saville whose poor
poems you said such very kind things about.’

Burlap shook hands with the two ladies and said something about his
pleasure at beefing the authors of work he had so much adbired. ‘But how
shall I ever get rid of them?’ he wondered. So much energy, such an
exuberance of force and will! Getting rid of them would be no joke. He
shuddered inwardly. ‘They’re like steam engines,’ he decided. And they’d
pester him to go on printing their beastly verses. Their obscene
verses—for that’s what they were, in the light of these women’s age and
energy and personal appearance—just obscene. ‘The bitches!’ he said to
himself, feeling resentfully that they’d got something out of him on
false pretences, that they’d taken advantage of his innocence and
swindled him. It was at this moment that he caught sight of Miss
Cobbett. She held up her bundle of proofs enquiringly. He shook his
head. ‘Later,’ he said to her, with a dignified and editorial
expression. Miss Cobbett turned away, but not before he had remarked the
look of derisive triumph on her face. Damn the woman! It was
intolerable.

‘We were so thrilled and delighted by your kind letter,’ said the
stouter of the ladies.

Burlap smiled Franciscanly. ‘One’s glad to be able to do something for
literature.’

‘So _few_ take any interest.’

‘Yes, so few,’ echoed Miss Hignett. And speaking with the rapidity of
one who tries to say ‘ Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled pepper ‘ in
the shortest possible time and with the fewest possible mistakes, she
poured out their history and their grievances. It appeared that they had
been living together at Wimbledon and conspiring to be Romola Saville
for upwards of six years now, and that only on nine occasions in all
that time had any of their works been printed. But they hadn’t lost
courage. Their day, they knew, would come. They had gone on writing.
They had written a great deal. Perhaps Mr. Burlap would be interested to
see the plays they had written? And Miss Hignett opened a despatch case
and laid four thick wads of typescript on the table. Historical plays
they were, in blank verse. And the titles were ‘Fredegond,’ ‘The Bastard
of Normandy,’ ‘Semiramis’ and ‘Gilles de Retz.’

They went at last, taking with them Burlap’s promise to read their
plays, to print a sonnet sequence, to come to lunch at Wimbledon. Burlap
sighed; then recomposing his face to stoniness and superiority, rang for
Miss Cobbett.

‘You’ve got the proofs?’ he asked distantly and without looking at her.

She handed them to him. ‘I’ve telephoned to say they must hurry up with
the rest.’

‘Good.’

There was a silence. It was Miss Cobbett who broke it, and though he did
not deign to look up at her, Burlap could tell from the tone of her
voice that she was smiling.

‘Your Romola Saville,’ she said; ‘that was a bit of a shock, wasn’t it?’

Miss Cobbett’s loyalty to Susan’s memory was the intenser for being
forced and deliberate. She had been in love with Burlap herself. Her
loyalty to Susan and to that platonic spirituality which was Burlap’s
amorous speciality (she believed, at first, that he meant what he so
constantly and beautifully said) was exercised by a continual struggle
against love, and grew strong in the process. Burlap, who was
experienced in these matters, had soon realized, from the quality of her
response to his first platonic advances, that there was, in the vulgar
language which even his devil hardly ever used,’ nothing doing.’
Persisting, he would only damage his own high spiritual reputation. In
spite of the fact that the gitl was in love with him, or even in a
certain sense because of it (for, loving, she realized how dangerously
easy it would be to betray the cause of Susan and pure spirit and,
realizing the danger, braced herself against it), she would never, he
saw, permit his passage, however gradual, from spirituality to a
carnality however refined. And since he himself was not in love with
her, since she had aroused in him only the vague adolescent itch of
desire which almost any personable woman could satisfy, it cost him
little to be wise and retire. Retirement, he calculated, would enhance
her admiration for his spirituality, would quicken her love. It is
always useful, as Burlap had found in the past, to have employees who
are in love with one. They work much harder and ask much less than those
who are not in love. For a little everything went according to plan.
Miss Cobbett did the work of three secretaries and an office boy, and at
the same time worshipped. But there were incidents. Burlap was too much
interested in female contributors. Some women he had actually been to
bed with came and confided in Miss Cobbett. Her faith was shaken. Her
righteous indignation at what she regarded as Burlap’s treachery to
Susan and his ideals, his deliberate hypocrisy, was inflamed by personal
feelings. He had betrayed her too. She was angry and resentful. Anger
and resentment intensified her ideal loyalty. It was only in terms of
loyalty to Susan and the spirit that she could express her jealousy.

The last straw was Beatrice Gilray. The cup of Miss Cobbett’s bitterness
overflowed when Beatrice was installed at the office—in the editorial
department, what was more, actually doing some of the writing for the
paper. Miss Cobbett comforted herself a little by the thought that the
writing was only Shorter Notices, which Were quite unimportant. But
still, she was bitterly resentful. She was much better educated than
that fool of a Beatrice, much more intelligent too. It was just because
Beatrice had money that she was allowed to write. Beatrice had put a
thousand pounds into the paper. She worked for nothing—and worked, what
was more, like mad; just as Miss Cobbett herself had worked, at the
beginning. Now, Miss Cobbett did as little as she could. She stood on
her rights, never arrived a minute early, never stayed a minute past her
allotted time. She did no more than she was paid to do. Burlap was
annoyed, resentful, distressed; he would either have to do more work
himself or employ another secretary. And then, providentially, Beatrice
turned up. She took over all the subediting which Miss Cobbett now had
no time to do. To compensate her for the subediting and the thousand
pounds he allowed her to do a little writing. She didn’t know how to
write, of course; but that didn’t matter. Nobody ever read the Shorter
Notices.

When Burlap went to live in Beatrice Gilray’s house, Miss Cobbett’s cup
overflowed again. In the first moment of anger she was rash enough to
give Beatrice a solemn warning against her tenant. But her disinterested
solicitude for Beatrice’s reputation and virginity was too manifestly
and uncontrollably tinged with spite against Burlap. The only effect of
her admonition was to exasperate Beatrice into sharp retort.

‘She’s really insufferable,’ Beatrice complained to Burlap afterwards,
without, however, detailing all the reasons she had for finding the
woman insufferable.

Burlap looked Christ-like. ‘She’s difficult,’ he admitted. ‘But one’s
sorry for her. She’s had a hard life.’

‘I don’t see that a hard life excuses anybody from behaving properly,’
she rapped out.

‘But one has to make allowances,’ said Burlap, wagging his head.

‘If I were you,’ said Beatrice, ‘I wouldn’t have her in the place; I’d
send her away.’

‘No, I couldn’t do that,’ Burlap answered, speaking slowly and
ruminatively, as though the whole discussion were taking place inside
himself. ‘Not in the circumstances.’ He smiled a Sodoma smile, subtle,
spiritual and sweet; once more he wagged his dark, romantic head. ‘The
circumstances are rather peculiar.’ He went on vaguely, never quite
definitely explaining what the rather peculiar circumstances were, and
with a kind of diffidence, as though he were reluctant to sing his own
praises. Beatrice was left to gather that he had taken and was keeping
Miss Cobbett out of charity. She was filled with a mixed feeling of
admiration and pity—admiration for his goodness and pity for his
helplessness in an ungrateful world.

‘All the same,’ she said, and she looked fierce, her words were like
sharp little mallet taps, ‘I don’t see why you should let yourself be
bullied. _I_ wouldn’t let myself be treated like that.’

From that time forward she took every opportunity of snubbing Miss
Cobbett and being rude. Miss Cobbett snapped, snubbed and was sarcastic
in return. In the offices of the _Literary World_ the war was open.
Remotely, but not quite impartially, like a god with a prejudice in
favour of virtue—virtue being represented in the present case by
Beatrice—Burlap hovered mediatingly above the battle.

The episode of Romola Saville gave Miss Cobbett an opportunity for being
malicious.

‘Did you see those two terrifying poetesses?’ she enquired of Beatrice,
with a deceptive air of friendliness, the next morning.

Beatrice glanced at her sharply. What was the woman up to? ‘Which
poetesses?’ she asked suspiciously.

‘Those two formidable middleaged ladies the editor asked to come and see
him under the impression that they were one young one.’ She laughed.
‘Romola Saville. That’s how the poems were signed. It sounded so
romantic. And the poems were quite romantic too. But the two
authoresses! Oh, my goodness. When I saw the editor in their clutches I
really felt quite sorry for him. But after all, he did bring it on
himself. If he will write to his lady contributors…

That evening Beatrice renewed her complaints about Miss Cobbett. The
woman was not only tiresome and impertinent; one could put up with that
if she did her job properly; she was lazy. Running a paper was a
business like any other. One couldn’t afford to do business on a basis
of sentimentality. Vaguely, diffidently, Burlap talked again about the
peculiar circumstances of the case. Beatrice retorted. There was an
argument.

‘There’s such a thing as being too kind,’ Beatrice sharply concluded.

‘Is there?’ said Burlap; and his smile was so beautifully and wistfully
Franciscan, that Beatrice felt herself inwardly melting into tenderness.

‘Yes, there is,’ she rapped out, feeling more hard and hostile towards
Miss Cobbett as she felt more softly and maternally protective towards
Burlap. Her tenderness was lined, so to speak, with indignation. When
she didn’t want to show her softness, she turned her feelings inside out
and was angry. ‘Poor Denis,’ she thought, underneath her indignation

‘He really needs somebody to look after him. He’s too good.’ She spoke
aloud

‘And you’ve got a shocking cough,’ she said reproachfully with an
irrelevance that was only apparent. Being too good, having nobody to
look after one and having a cough—the ideas were logically connected.
‘What you need,’ she went on in the same sharp commanding tones, ‘is a
good rubbing with camphorated oil and a wad of Thermogene.’ She spoke
the words almost menacingly, as though she were threatening him with a
good beating and a month on bread and water. Her solicitude expressed
itself that way; but how tremulously soft it was underneath the surface!

Burlap was only too happy to let her carry out her tender threat. At
halfpast ten he was lying in bed with an extra hot-water bottle. He had
drunk a glass of hot milk and honey and was now sucking a soothing
lozenge. It was a pity, he was thinking, that she wasn’t younger. Still,
she was really amazingly youthful for her age. Her face, her figure—more
like twentyfive than thirtyfive. He wondered how she’d behave when
finally she’d been coaxed past her terrors. There was something very
strange about these childish terrors in a grown woman. Half of her was
arrested at the age at which Uncle Ben had made his premature
experiment. Burlap’s devil grinned at the recollection of her account of
the incident.

There was a tap at the door and Beatrice entered carrying the
camphorated oil and the Thermogene.

‘Here’s the executioner,’ said Burlap laughing. ‘Let me die like a man.’
He undid his pyjama jacket. His chest was white and well-covered; the
contour of the ribs only faintly showed through the flesh. Between the
paps a streak of dark curly hair followed the line of the breastbone.’do
your worst,’ he bantered on. ‘I’m ready.’ His smile was playfully
tender.

Beatrice uncorked the bottle and poured a little of the aromatic oil
into the palm of her right hand. ‘Take the bottle,’ she commanded,’ and
put it down.’ He did as he was told. ‘Now,’ she said, when he was
stretched out again unmoving; and she began to rub.

Her hand slid back and forth over his chest, back and forth, vigorously,
efficiently. And when the right was tired, she began again with the
left, back and forth, back and forth.

‘You’re like a little steam engine,’ said Burlap with his playfully
tender smile.

‘I feel like one,’ she answered. But it wasn’t true. She felt like
almost anything but a steam engine, She had had to overcome a kind of
horror before she could touch that white, full-fleshed chest of his. Not
that it was ugly or repulsive. On the contrary, it was rather beautiful
in its smooth whiteness and fleshy strength. Fine, like the torso of a
statue. Yes, a statue. Only the statue had dark little curls along the
breastbone and a little brown mole that fluttered up and down with the
pulsing skin over the heart. The statue lived; that was the disquieting
thing. The white naked breast was beautiful; but it was almost
repulsively alive. To touch it…She shuddered inwardly with a little
spasm of horror, and was angry with herself for having felt so stupidly.
Quickly she had stretched out her hand and begun to rub. Her palm slid
easily over the lubricated skin. The warmth of his body was against her
hand. Through the skin she could feel the hardness of the bones. There
was a bristle of roughness against her fingers as they touched the hairs
along the breastbone, and the little paps were firm and elastic. She
shuddered again, but there was something agreeable in the feeling of
horror and the overcoming of it; there was a strange pleasure in the
creeping of alarm and repulsion that travelled through her body. She
went on rubbing, a steam engine only in the vigour and regularity of her
movements, but, within, how quiveringly and self-dividedly alive!

Burlap lay with his eyes shut, faintly smiling with the pleasure of
abandonment and self-surrender. He was feeling, luxuriously, like a
child, helpless; he was in her hands, like a child who is its mother’s
property and plaything, no longer his own master. Her hands were cold on
his chest; his flesh was passive and abandoned, like so much clay, under
those strong cold hands.

‘Tired?’ he asked, when she paused to change hands for the third time.
He opened his eyes to look at her.

She shook her head. ‘I’m as much bother as a sick child.’

‘No bother at all.’

But Burlap insisted on being sorry for her and apologetic for himself.
‘Poor Beatrice!’ he said. ‘All you have to do for me! I’m quite
ashamed.’

Beatrice only smiled. Her first shudderings of unreasonable repulsion
had passed off. She felt extraordinarily happy.

‘There!’ she said at last. ‘Now for the Thermogene.’ She opened the
cardboard box and unfolded the orange wool. ‘The problem is how to stick
it on to your chest. I’d thought of keeping it in place with a bandage.
Two or three turns right round the body. What do you think?’

‘I don’t think anything,’ said Burlap who was still enjoying the luxury
of infantility. ‘I’m utterly in your hands.’

‘Well, then, sit up,’ she commanded. He sat up. ‘Hold the wool on to
your chest while I pass the bandage round.’ To bring the bandage round
his body she had to lean very close to him, almost embracing him; her
hands met for a moment behind his back, as she unwound the bandage.
Burlap dropped his head forward and his forehead rested against her
breast. The forehead of a tired child on the soft breast of its mother.

‘Hold the end a moment while I get a safety-pin.’

Burlap lifted his forehead and drew back. Rather flushed, but still very
business-like and efficient, Beatrice was detaching one from a little
card of assorted safety pins.

‘Now comes the really difficult moment,’ she said, laughing. ‘You won’t
mind if I run the pin into your flesh.’

‘No, I won’t mind,’ said Burlap and it was true; he wouldn’t have
minded. He’d have been rather pleased, if she had hurt him. But she
didn’t. The bandage was pinned into position with quite professional
neatness.

‘There!’

‘What do you want me to do now?’ asked Burlap, greedy to obey.

‘Lie down.’

He lay down. She did up the buttons of his pyjama jacket. ‘Now you must
go to sleep as quickly as you can.’ She pulled the bedclothes up to his
chin and tucked them in. Then she laughed. ‘You look like a little boy.’

‘Aren’t you going to kiss me goodnight?’

The colour came into Beatrice’s cheeks. She bent down and kissed him on
the forehead. ‘Goodnight,’ she said. And suddenly she wanted to take him
in her arms, to press his head against her breast and stroke his hair.
But she only laid her hand for a moment against his cheek, then hurried
out of the room.


CHAPTER XIX

Little Phil was lying on his bed. The room was in an orange twilight. A
thin needle of sunshine came probing in between the drawn curtains. Phil
was more than usually restless.

‘What’s the time?’ he shouted at last, though he had shouted before and
been told to keep quiet.

‘Not time for you to get up,’ Miss Fulkes called back from across the
passage. Her voice came muffled, for she was half-way into her blue
frock, her head involved in silken darkness, her arms struggling blindly
to find the entrance to their respective sleeves. Phil’s parents were
arriving to-day; they would be at Gattenden for lunch. Miss Fulkes’s
blue best was imperatively called for.

‘But what’s the _time_?’ the child shouted back angrily. ‘On your watch,
I mean.’

Miss Fulkes’s head came through into the light. ‘Twenty to one,’ she
called back. ‘You must be quiet.’

‘Why isn’t it one?’

‘Because it isn’t. Now I shan’t answer you any more. And if you shout
again I shall tell your mother how naughty you’ve been.’

‘Naughty!’ Phil retorted, putting a tearful fury into his voice—but so
softly, that Miss Fulkes hardly heard him. ‘I hate you!’ He didn’t of
course. But he had made his protest; honour was saved.

Miss Fulkes went on with her toilet. She felt agitated, afraid,
painfully excited. What would they think of Phil— _her_ Phil, the Phil
she had made? ‘I hope he’ll be good,’ she thought. ‘I hope he’ll be
good.’ He could be an angel, so enchanting when he chose. And when he
wasn’t an angel, there was always a reason; but one had to know him, one
had to understand him in order to see the reason. Probably they wouldn’t
be able to see the reason. They had been away so long; they might have
forgotten what he was like. And in any case they couldn’t know what he
was like now, what he had grown into during these last months. She alone
knew _that_ Phil. Knew him and loved him—so much, so much. She alone.
And one day she would have to leave him. She had no rights over him, no
claim to him; she only loved him. They could take him away from her
whenever they wanted. The image of herself in the glass wavered and was
lost in a rainbow fog and suddenly the tears overflowed on to her
cheeks.

The train was punctual, the car in attendance. Philip and Elinor climbed
in.

‘Isn’t it wonderful to be here?’ Elinor took her husband’s hand. Her
eyes shone. ‘But, good Lord,’ she added, in a tone of horror and without
waiting for his answer,’ they’ re building a lot of new houses on the
hill there. How dare they?’

Philip looked. ‘Rather garden city, isn’t it?’ he said. ‘It’s a pity the
English love the country so much,’ he added. ‘They’re killing it with
kindness.’

‘But how lovely it still is, all the same. Aren’t you tremendously
excited?’

‘Excited?’ he questioned, cautiously. ‘Well…

‘Aren’t you even pleased that you’re going to see your son again?’

‘Of course.’

‘Of course!’ Elinor repeated the words derisively. ‘And in _that_ tone
of voice. I never thought there was any “of course” about it; but now
the time has come, I’ve never been so excited in my life.’

There was a silence; the car drove on windingly, down the lanes. The
road mounted; they climbed through beechwoods to a wooded plateau. At
the end of a long green vista the most colossal monument of Tantamount
grandeur, the palace of the Marquess of Gattenden, basked far off in the
sun. The flag flew; his lordship was in residence. ‘We must go and call
on the old madman one day,’ said Philip. The fallow deer browsed in the
park.

‘Why does one ever travel?’ said Elinor, as she looked at them.

Miss Fulkes and little Phil were waiting on the steps. ‘I believe I hear
the car,’ said Miss Fulkes. Her rather lumpy face was very pale; her
heart was beating with more than ordinary force. ‘No,’ she added, after
a moment of intent listening. What she had heard was only the sound of
her own anxiety.

Little Phil moved about uncomfortably, conscious only of a violent
desire to ‘go somewhere.’ Anticipation had lodged a hedgehog in his
entrails.

‘Aren’t you _happy_?’ asked Miss Fulkes, with assumed enthusiasm,
selfsacrificingly determined that the child should show himself wild
with joy to see his parents again. ‘Aren’t you _tremendously_ excited?’
But they could take him away from her if they wanted to, take him away
and never let her see him again.

‘Yes,’ little Phil replied rather vaguely. He was preoccupied
exclusively with the approach of visceral events.

Miss Fulkes was disappointed by the flatness of his tone. She looked at
him enquiringly. ‘Phil?’ She had noticed his uneasy Charleston. The
child nodded. She took his hand and hurried him into the house.

A minute later Philip and Elinor drove up to a deserted porch. Elinor
couldn’t help feeling disappointed. She had so clearly visualized the
scene—Phil on the steps frantically waving—she had so plainly, in
anticipation, heard his shouting. And the steps were a blank.

‘Nobody to meet us,’ she said, and her tone was mournful.

‘You could hardly expect them to hang about, waiting,’ Philip replied.
He hated anything in the nature of a fuss. For him, the perfect
homecoming would have been in a cloak of invisibility. This was a good
second best.

They got out of the car. The front door was open. They entered. In the
silent, empty hall three and a half centuries of life had gone to sleep.
The sunlight stared through flat-arched windows. The panelling had been
painted pale green in the eighteenth century. All ancient oak and
high-lights, the staircase climbed up, out of sight, towards the higher
floors. A smell of potpourri faintly haunted the air; it was as though
one apprehended the serene old silence through another sense.

Elinor looked round her, she took a deep breath, she drew her
finger-tips along the polished walnut wood of a table, with the knuckle
of a bent forefinger she rapped the round Venetian bowl that stood on
it; the glassy bell-note lingered sweetly on the perfumed silence.

‘Like the Sleeping Beauty,’ she said. But even as she spoke the words,
the spell was broken. Suddenly, as though the ringing glass had called
the house back to life, there was sound and movement. Somewhere upstairs
a door opened, through the sanitary noise of rushing water came the
sound of Phil’s piercing young voice; small feet thudded along the
carpet of the corridor, clattered like little hoofs on the naked oak of
the stairs. At the same moment a door on the ground floor flew open and
the enormous form of Dobbs, the parlourmaid, hastened into the hall.

‘Why, Miss Elinor, I never heard you…’

Little Phil rounded the last turn of the staircase. At the sight of his
parents he gave a shout, he quickened his pace; he almost slid from step
to step.

‘Not so fast, not so fast!’ his mother called anxiously and ran towards
him.

‘Not so fast!’ echoed Miss Fulkes hurrying down the stairs behind. And
suddenly, from the morningroom, which had a door leading out into the
garden, Mrs. Bidlake appeared, white and silent and with floating veils,
like an imposing phantom. In a little basket she carried a bunch of cut
tulips; her gardening scissors dangled at the end of a yellow ribbon.
T’ang the Third followed her, barking. There was a confusion of
embracing and handshaking. Mrs. Bidlake’s greetings had the majesty of
ritual, the solemn grace of an ancient and sacred dance. Miss Fulkes
writhed with shyness and excitement, stood first on one leg and then on
the other, went into the attitudes of fashion-plates and mannequins and
from time to time piercingly laughed. When she shook hands with Philip,
she writhed so violently that she almost lost her balance.

‘Poor creature!’ Elinor had time to think between the answering and
asking of questions. ‘How urgently she needs marrying! Much worse than
when we left.’

‘But how he’s grown!’ she said aloud. ‘And how he’s ‘changed!’ She held
the child at arm’s length with the gesture of a connoisseur who stands
back to examine a picture. ‘He used to be the image of Phil. But now…’
She shook her head. Now the broad face had lengthened, the short
straight nose (the comical ‘cat’s nose’ which in Philip’s face she had
always laughed at and so much loved) had grown finer and faintly
aquiline, the hair had darkened. ‘Now he’s exactly like Walter. Don’t
you think so?’ Mrs. Bidlake remotely nodded. ‘Except when he laughs,’
she added. ‘His laugh’s pure Phil.’

‘What have you brought me?’ asked little Phil almost anxiously. When
people went away and came back again, they always brought him something.
‘Where’s my present?’

‘What a question!’ Miss Fulkes protested, blushing with vicarious shame,
and writhing.

But Elinor and Philip only laughed.

‘He’s Walter when he’s serious,’ said Elinor.

‘Or you.’ Philip looked from one to the other.

‘The first minute your father and mother arrive!’ Miss Fulkes continued
her reproaches.

‘Naughty!’ the child retorted and threw back his head with a little
movement of anger and pride.

Elinor, who had been looking at him, almost laughed aloud. That sudden
lifting of the chin—why it was the parody of old Mr. Quarles’s gesture
of superiority. For a moment the child was her father-in-law, her absurd
deplorable father-in-law, caricatured and in miniature. It was comic,
but at the same time it was somehow no joke. She wanted to laugh, but
she was oppressed by a sudden realization of the mysteries and
complexities of life, the terrible inscrutabilities of the future. Here
was her child—but he was also Philip, he was also herself, he was also
Walter, her father, her mother; and now, with that upward tilting of the
chin, he had suddenly revealed himself as the deplorable Mr. Quarles.
And he might be hundreds of other people too. Might be? He certainly
was. He was aunts and cousins she hardly ever saw; grandfathers and
great-uncles she had only known as a child and utterly forgotten;
ancestors who had died long ago, back to the beginning of things. A
whole population of strangers inhabited and shaped that little body,
lived in that mind and controlled its wishes, dictated its thoughts and
would go on dictating and controlling. Phil, little Phil—the name was an
abstraction, a title arbitrarily given, like ‘France’ or ‘England,’ to a
collection, never long the same, of many individuals, who were born,
lived and died within him, as the inhabitants of a country appear and
disappear, but keep alive in their passage the identity of the nation to
which they belong. She looked at the child with a kind of terror. What a
responsibility!

‘I call that cupboard love,’ Miss Fulkes was still going on. ‘And you
mustn’t say “naughty” to me like that.’

Elinor gave a little sigh, shook herself out of her reverie and, picking
up the child in her arms, pressed him against her. ‘Never mind,’ she
said, half to the reproving Miss Fulkes, half to her own apprehensive
self. ‘Never mind.’ She kissed him.

Philip was looking at his watch. ‘Perhaps we ought to go and wash and
brush up a bit before lunch,’ he said. He had the sentiment of
punctuality.

‘But first,’ said Elinor, to whom it seemed that meals were made for
man, not man for meals,’ first we simply _must_ run into the kitchen and
say how-do-you-do to Mrs. Inman. It would be unforgivable if we didn’t.
Come.’ Still carrying the child, she led the way through the
dining-room. The smell of roast duck grew stronger and stronger as they
advanced.

Fretted a little by his consciousness of unpunctuality, and a little
uneasy at having to risk himself, even with Elinor for dragoman, in the
kitchen among the servants, Philip reluctantly followed her.

At luncheon, little Phil celebrated the occasion by behaving
atrociously.

‘The excitement has been too much for him,’ poor Miss Fulkes kept
repeating, trying to excuse the child and indirectly to justify herself.
She would have liked to cry. ‘You’ll see when he’s got used to your
being here, Mrs. Quarles,’ she said, turning to Elinor, ‘you’ll see; he
can be such an angel. It’s the excitement.’

She had come to love the child so much that his triumphs and
humiliations, his virtues and his crimes made her exult or mourn, feel
selfsatisfaction or shame, as if they had been her own. Besides there
was her professional pride. She had been alone responsible for him all
these months, teaching him the social virtues and why the triangle of
India is painted crimson on the map; she had made him, had moulded him.
And now, when this object of tenderest love, this product of her skill
and patience, screamed at table, spat out mouthfuls of half-masticated
food and spilt the water, Miss Fulkes not only blushed with agonizing
shame, as though it were she who had screamed, had spat, had spilled,
but experienced at the same time all the humiliation of the conjurer
whose long-prepared trick fails to come off in public, the inventor of
the ideal flying machine which simply refuses to leave the ground.

After all,’ said Elinor, consolingly, ‘it’s only to be expected.’ She
felt genuinely sorry for the poor girl. She looked at the child. He was
crying—and she had expected (how unreasonably!) that it would be quite
different now, that she would find him entirely rational and grown up.
Her heart sank. She loved him, but children were terrible, terrible. And
he was still a child. ‘Now, Phil,’ she said severely, ‘you must eat. No
more nonsense.’

The child howled louder. He would have liked to behave well, but he did
not know how to stop behaving badly. He had voluntarily worked up this
mood of rebellious misery within himself; but now the emotion was his
master and stronger than his will. It was impossible for him, even
though he desired it, to return by the way he had come. Besides he had
always rather disliked roast duck; and having now, for five minutes,
thought of roast duck with concentrated disgust and horror, he loathed
it. The sight, the smell, the taste of it really and genuinely made him
sick.

Mrs. Bidlake meanwhile preserved her metaphysical calm. Her soul swam on
steadily, like a great ship through a choppy sea; or perhaps it was more
like a balloon, drifting high above the waters in the serene and
windless world of fancy. She had been talking to Philip about Buddhism
(Mrs. Bidlake had a special weakness for Buddhism). At the first
screams, she had not even turned round to see what was the matter.,
contenting herself with raising her voice so as to make it audible above
the tumult. The yelling was renewed, was continued. Mrs. Bidlake was
silent and shut her eyes. A cross-legged Buddha, serene and golden,
appeared against the red background oi her closed lids; she saw the
yellow-robed priests around him, each in the attitude of the god and
plunged in ecstasic meditation.

‘Maya,’ she said with a sigh, as though to herself, ‘maya—the eternal
illusion.’ She opened her eyes again. ‘It is rather tough,’ she added,
addressing herself to Elinor and Miss Fulkes who were desperately trying
to make the child eat.

Little Phil seized the excuse which she had thus gratuitously given him.
‘It’s tough,’ he shouted tearfully, pushing away the fork on which Miss
Fulkes, her hand trembling with the excess of painful emotions, was
offering him a shred of roast duck and half a new potato.

Mrs. Bidlake shut her eyes again for a moment; then turned to Philip and
went on discussing the EightFold Way.

 

__

 

That evening Philip wrote at some length in the notebook, in which he
recorded, pell mell, thoughts and events, conversations, things heard
and seen. ‘The kitchen in the old house,’ was how he headed the page.
‘You can render it easily enough. The Tudor casements reflected in the
bottoms of the copper pots. The huge black range with its polished steel
trimmings and the fire peeping out through the half-opened porthole in
the top. The mignonette in the window boxes. The cat, an enormous ginger
eunuch, dozing in its basket by the dresser. The kitchen table so worn
with time and constant scrubbing that the graining stands out above the
softer wood—as though an engraver had prepared a wood-block of some
gigantic finger-print. The beams in the low ceiling. The brown beechwood
chairs. The raw pastry in process of rolling. The smell of cookery. The
leaning column of yellow sunlight full of motes. And finally old Mrs.
Inman, the cook, small, frail, indomitable, the authoress of how many
thousand meals! Work that up a little, and you’d have your picture. But
I want something more. A sketch of the kitchen in time as well as space,
a hint of its significance in the general human cosmos. I write one
sentence.’summer after summer, from the time when Shakespeare was a boy
till now, ten generations of cooks have employed infrared radiations to
break up the protein molecules of spitted ducklings; (“thou wast not
born for death, immortal bird,” etc.).’ One sentence, and I am already
involved in history, art and all the sciences. The whole story of the
universe is implicit in any part of it. The meditative eye can look
through any single object and see, as through a window, the entire
cosmos. Make the smell of roast duck in an old kitchen diaphanous and
you will have a glimpse of everything, from the spiral nebulae to
Mozart’s music and the stigmata of St. Francis of Assisi. The artistic
problem is to produce diaphanousness in spots, selecting the spots so as
to reveal only the most humanly significant of distant vistas behind the
near familiar object. But in all cases, the things seen at the end of
the vista must be strange enough to make the familiar seem fantastically
mysterious. Question; can this be achieved without pedantry, and without
spinning out the work interminably? It needs a great deal of thinking
about.

Meanwhile, how charming the kitchen is! How sympathetic its inhabitants.
Mrs. Inman has been in the house as long as Elinor. A miracle of aged
beauty. And how serene, how aristocratically commanding! When one has
been monarch of all one surveys for thirty years, one looks the royal
part, even when all one surveys is only the kitchen. And then there is
Dobbs, the parlourmaid. Dobbs has only been in the house since a little
before the War. An invention of Rabelais. Six feet high and
proportionately thick. And the enormous body houses Gargantua’s spirit.
What broad humours, what a relish for life, what anecdotes, what facile
and enormous laughter! Dobbs’s laughter is almost terrifying. And on a
shelf of the pantry dresser I noticed, when we went to pay our respects,
a green bottle, half full of pills—but pills like good-sized marbles,
such as one blows down the throats of horses from a rubber hose. What
Homeric indigestions they imply!

The kitchen is good; but so is the drawing-room. We came in from our
afternoon walk to find the vicar and his wife talking Art over the
tea-cups. Yes, Art. For it was their first call since their visit to the
Academy.

It is an annual affair. Every year on the day following Ascension Day
they take the 8.52 to town and pay the tribute that even Religion owes
to Art—Established Religion and Established Art. They scour every corner
of Burlington House annotating the catalogue as they go round,
humorously, wherever humour is admissible—for Mr. Truby (who looks
rather like Noah in a child’s ark) is one of those facetious churchmen
who crack jokes in order to show that, in spite of the black coat and
the reversed collar, they are ‘human,’ ‘good chaps,’ _etc._

Plumply pretty Mrs. Truby is less uproariously waggish than her husband,
but is none the less what upper middle-class readers of _Punch_ would
call a ‘thoroughly cheery soul,’ up to any amount of innocent fun and
full of quaint remarks. I looked on and listened, fascinated, while
Elinor drew them out about the parish and the Academy, feeling like
Fabre among the coleoptera. Every now and then some word of the
conversation would cross the spiritual abysses separating Elinor’s
mother from her surroundings, would penetrate her reverie and set up a
curious reaction. Oracularly, disconcertingly, with a seriousness that
was almost appalling in the midst of the Truby waggeries, she would
speak out of another world. And outside, meanwhile, the garden is green
and flowery. Old Stokes the gardener has a beard and looks like Father
Time. The sky is pale blue. There is a noise of birds. The place is
good. How good, one must have circumnavigated the globe to discover. Why
not stay? Take root? But roots are chains. I have a terror of losing my
freedom. Free, without ties, unpossessed by any possessions, free to do
as one will, to go at a moment’s notice wherever the fancy may
suggest—it is good. But so is this place. Might it not be better? To
gain freedom one sacrifices something—the house, Mrs. Inman, Dobbs,
facetious Truby from the parsonage, the tulips in the garden, and all
that these things and people signify. One sacrifices something-for a
greater gain in knowledge, in understanding, in intensified living? I
sometimes wonder?

 

__

 

Lord Edward and his brother were taking the air in Gattenden Park. Lord
Edward took it walking. The fifth Marquess took it in a bath chair drawn
by a large grey donkey. He was a cripple. ‘Which luckily doesn’t prevent
the mind from running,’ he was fond of saying. It had been running,
mazily, hither and thither all his life. Meanwhile, the grey ass only
walked, very slowly. Before the two brothers and behind stretched
Gattenden Broad Walk. A mile in front of them at the end of the straight
vista stood a model of Trajan’s column in Portland stone with a bronze
statue of the first Marquess, on the top and an inscription in large
letters round the pedestal setting forth his claims to fame. He had
been, among other things, Viceroy of Ireland and the Father of
Scientific Agriculture. At the other end of the Broad Walk, a mile
behind the brothers, rose the fantastic towers and pinnacles of
Gattenden Castle, built for the second Marquess by James Wyatt in the
most extravagant style of Strawberry Hill Gothic, and looking more
mediaeval than anything that the real chronological Middle Ages had ever
dreamt of. The Marquess lived permanently at Gattenden. Not that he
particularly liked the house or the surrounding scenery. He was hardly
aware of them. When he wasn’t reading, he was thinking about what he had
read; the world of appearances, as he liked, platonically, to call
visible and tangible reality, did not interest him. This lack of
interest was his revenge on the universe for having made him a cripple.
He inhabited Gattenden, because it was only at Gattenden that he could
safely go for drives in his bath chair. Pall Mall is no place for grey
donkeys and paralytic old gentlemen who read and meditate as they drive.
He had made over Tantamount House to his brother and continued to drive
his ass through the beechwoods of Gattenden Park.

The ass had halted to browse at the wayside. The fifth Marquess and his
brother were having an argument about God. Time passed. They were still
talking about God when, half an hour later, Philip and Elinor, who had
been taking their afternoon walk in the Park, emerged from the beechwood
and unexpectedly came upon the Marquess’s bath chair.

‘Poor old creatures!’ was Philip’s comment when they were once more out
of earshot. ‘What else have they got to talk about? Too old to want to
talk about love—too old and much too good. Too rich to talk about money.
Too highbrow to talk about people and too hermit-like to know any people
to talk about. Too shy to talk about themselves, too blankly
inexperienced to talk about life or even literature. What is there left
for the poor old wretches to talk about? Nothing—only God.’

‘And at the present rate of progress,’ said Elinor, ‘you’ll be exactly
like them ten years from now.’


CHAPTER XX

Of Philip Quarles’s father old John Bidlake used to say that he was like
one of those baroque Italian churches with sham facades. High,
impressive, bristling with classical orders, broken pedimenta and
statuary, the faCade seems to belong to a great cathedral. But look more
closely and you discover that it is only a screen. Behind the enormous
and elaborate front there crouches a wretched little temple of brick and
rubble and scabby plaster. And warming to his simile, John Bidlake would
describe the unshaven priest gabbling the office, the snotty little
acolyte in his unwashed surplice, the congregation of goitrous peasant
women and their brats, the cretin begging at the door, the tin crowns on
the images, the dirt on the floor, the stale smell of generations of
pious humanity.

‘Why is it,’ he concluded, forgetting that he was making an
uncomplimentary comment on his own successes, ‘that women always needs
must love the lowest when they see it—or rather him? Curious.
Particularly in this case. One would have given Rachel Quarles too much
sense to be taken in by such a vacuum.’

Other people had thought so too, had also wondered why. Rachel Quarles
seemed so incomparably too good for her husband. But one does not marry
a set of virtues and talents; one marries an individual human being. The
Sidney Quarles who had proposed to Rachel was a young man whom anyone
might have fallen in love with and even believed in—anyone; and Rachel
was only eighteen and particularly inexperienced. He too was young
(youth is in itself a virtue), young and good-looking. Broad-shouldered
and proportionately tall, portly now to the verge of stoutness, Sidney
Quarles was still an imposing figure. At twenty-three the big body had
been athletic, the greyish hair which now surrounded a pink and polished
tonsure had then been golden-brown and had covered the whole of his
scalp with a waving luxuriance. The large, highcoloured, fleshy face had
been fresher, firmer, less moon-like. The forehead, even before baldness
had set in, had seemed intellectual in its smooth height. Nor did Sidney
Quarles’s conversation belie the circumstantial evidence offered by his
brow. He talked well, albeit perhaps with a little too much arrogance
and selfsatisfaction for every taste. Moreover, he had at that time a
reputation; he had just come down from the university in something that
was almost a blaze of academic and debating-society glory. On the virgin
expanses of his future sanguine friends painted the brightest visions.
At the time when Rachel first knew him, these prophecies had a
positively reasonable air. And in any case, reasonably or unreasonably
she loved him. They were married when she was only nineteen.

From his father Sidney had inherited a handsome fortune The business
(old Mr. Quarles was in sugar) was a going concern. The estate in Essex
paid its way. The town house was in Portman Square, the country house at
Chamford was commodious and Georgian. Sidney’s ambitions were political.
After an apprenticeship in local government, he would go into
Parliament. Hard work, speeches at once sound and brilliant would mark
him out as the coming man. He would be offered an assistant
under-secretaryship, there would be rapid promotions. He might expect
(so at least it had seemed five-and-thirty years ago) to realize the
most extravagant ambitions.

But Sidney, as old Bidlake had said, was only a faĂ§ade, an impressive
appearance, a voice, a superficial cleverness and nothing more. Behind
the handsome front lived the genuine Sidney, feeble, lacking all
tenacity of purpose in important matters, though obstinate where trifles
were concerned, easily fired with enthusiasm and still more easily
bored. Even the cleverness turned out to be no more than the kind of
cleverness which enables brilliant schoolboys to write Ovidian Latin
verses or humorous parodies of Herodotus. Brought to the test, this
sixth-form ability proved to be as impotent in the purely intellectual
as in the practical sphere. For when, by a course of neglect tempered by
feverish speculation and mismanagement, he had half ruined his father’s
business (Rachel made him sell out completely before it was too late),
when his political prospects had been completely ruined by years of
alternating indolence and undisciplined activity, he decided that his
real vocation was to be a publicist. In the first flush of this new
conviction, he actually contrived to finish a book about the principles
of government. Shallow and vague, commonplace with an ordinariness made
emphatic by the pretensions of an ornate style that coruscated with
verbal epigrams, the book met with a deserved neglect, which Sidney
Quarles attributed to the machinations of political enemies. He trusted
to posterity for his due.

Ever since the publication of that first book, Mr. Quarles had been
writing, or at least had been supposed to be writing, another, much
larger and more important, about democracy. The largeness and the
importance justified an almost indefinite delay in its completion. He
had already been at work on it for more than seven years and as yet, he
would say to anyone who asked him about the progress of the book
(shaking his head as he spoke with the expression of a man who bears an
almost intolerable burden), as yet he had not even finished collecting
the materials.

‘It’s a labour of Hercules,’ he would say with an air at once martyred
and fatuously arrogant. He had a way when he spoke to you of tilting his
face upwards and shooting his words into the air, as though he were a
howitzer, looking at you meanwhile, if he condescended to look at you at
all, along his nose and from under half-shut eyelids. His voice was
resonant and full of those baaings with which the very Oxonian are
accustomed to enrich the English language. ‘Really’ in Sidney’s mouth
was always ‘ryahly,’ ‘mere’ was ‘myah.’ It was as though a flock of
sheep had broken loose in his vocabulary. ‘A labour of Hercules.’ The
words were accompanied by a sigh. ‘Ryahly fyahful.’

If the questioner were sufficiently sympathetic, he would take him into
his study and show him (or preferably her) the enormous apparatus of
card indices and steel filing-cabinets which he had accumulated round
his very professional-looking roll-top desk. As time passed and the book
showed no signs of getting itself written, Mr. Quarles had collected
more and more of these impressive objects. They were the visible proofs
of his labour, they symbolized the terrific difficulty of his task. He
possessed no less than three typewriters. The portable Corona
accompanied him wherever he went, in case he should at any time feel
inspired when on his travels. Occasionally, when he felt the need of
being particularly impressive, he took the Hammond, a rather larger
machine, on which the letters were carried, not on separate arms, but on
a detachable band of metal clipped to a revolving drum, so that it was
possible to change the type at will and write in Greek or Arabic,
mathematical symbols or Russian, according to the needs of the moment;
Mr. Quarles had a large collection of these alternative types which, of
course, he never used, but of which he felt very proud, as though each
of them represented a separate talent or accomplishment of his own.
Finally there was the third and latest of the typewriters, a very large
and very expensive office instrument, which was not only a typewriter,
but also a calculating machine. So useful, Mr. Quarles would explain,
for compiling statistics for his great book and for doing the accounts
of the estate. And he would point with special pride to the little
electric motor attached to the machine; ydu made a connection with the
wall plug and the motor did everything for you—everything, that is to
say, except actually compose your book. You had only to touch the keys,
so (and Mr. Quarles would give a demonstration); the electricity
provided the force to bring the type into contact with the paper. All
muscular effort was eliminated. You could go on typing for eighteen
hours at a stretch-and Mr. Quarles gave it to be understood that it was
a common thing for him to spend eighteen hours at his desk (like Balzac,
or Sir Isaac Newton)—you could go on, indeed, almost indefinitely
without experiencing the slightest fatigue, at any rate in the fingers.
An American invention. Very ingenious.

Mr. Quarles had bought his calculating typewriter at the moment when,
for all practical purposes, he had ceased to have anything to do with
the management of the estate. For Rachel had left him the estate. Not
that he ran it any better than the business which she had persuaded him,
only just in time, to abandon. But the absence of profit did not matter,
the loss, when there actually was a loss, was inconsiderable. The
estate, Rachel Quarles had hoped, would keep her husband healthily
occupied. For that it was worth paying something. But the price that had
to be paid in these post-War years of depression was very high; and as
Sidney occupied himself less and less with the routine of management,
the price rose alarmingly, while the object for which it was being
paid—healthy occupation for Sidney—was not achieved. Occasionally, it is
true, Sidney would get an idea into his head and suddenly plunge into an
orgy of what he called ‘estate improvements.’ On one occasion after
reading a book about American efficiency, he bought a large outfit of
costly machinery, only to discover that the estate was not large enough
to justify the expenditure; he could not give his machines enough to do.
Later, he built a jam factory; it had never paid. Their lack of success
made him rapidly lose interest in his ‘improvements.’ Hard work and
constant attention might conceivably have made them profitable in time;
meanwhile, however, owing to Sidney’s neglect, the improvement had
resulted in a dead loss. Decidedly, the price was too high, and it was
being paid for nothing. Mrs. Quarles decided that it was time to get the
estate out of Sidney’s hands. With her usual tact—for after more than
thirty years of marriage she knew her husband only too well—she
persuaded him that he would have more time for his great work if he left
the tiresome business of estate management to others. She and the
bailiff were good enough for that. There was no sense in wasting talents
that might be better, more suitably employed, on such mechanical labour.
Sidney was easily persuaded. The estate bored him; it had hurt his
vanity by being so malevolently unsuccessful in spite of his
improvements. At the same time, he realized that to give up all
connection with it would be an acknowledgment of failure and a
tribute—yet another—to his wife’s inherent superiority. He agreed to
devote less time to the details of management, but promised, or
threatened, in a god-like way, that he would continue to keep an eye on
it, would supervise it distantly, but none the less effectively, in the
intervals of his literary labours. It was now that, to justify himself,
to magnify his importance, he bought the calculating typewriter. It
symbolized the enormous complexity of the literary work to which he was
now mainly to devote himself; and it proved at the same time that he had
not completely abandoned all interest in practical affairs. For the
calculating machine was to deal not only with statistics (in what way
Mr. Quarles was wise enough never precisely to specify), but also with
the accounts under which, it was implied, poor Rachel and the bailiff
would infallibly succumb without his higher aid.

Sidney did not, of course, acknowledge his wife’s superiority. But the
obscure realization and resentment of it, the desire to prove that, in
spite of everything, he was really just as good as she, or indeed much
better, conditioned his whole life. It was this resentment, this desire
to assert his domestic superiority that had made him cling so long to
his unsuccessful political career. Left to himself, he would probably
have abandoned political life at the first discovery of its difficulties
and tediousness; his indolence was stronger than his ambition. But a
reluctance to admit failure and the personal inferiority which failure
would have implied, kept him (for ever desperately sanguine of his
prospects) from resigning his parliamentary seat. With the exasperating
spectacle of Rachel’s quiet efficiency perpetually before his eyes, he
could not admit himself defeated. What Rachel did, she did well; people
loved and admired her. It was to rival and outdo her, in the eyes of the
world and in his own, that he clung to politics, that he plunged into
the erratic activities which had distinguished his parliamentary career.
Disdaining to be the mere slave of his party and desirous of personal
distinction, he had championed with enthusiasm, only to desert again
with disgust, a succession of Causes. The abolition of capital
punishment, antivivisection, prison reform, the amelioration of labour
conditions in West Africa had called forth, each in its turn, his
fieriest eloquence and a brief outburst of energy. He had visions of
himself as a conquering reformer bringing victory by his mere presence
to whatever cause he chose to take up. But the walls of Jericho never
collapsed at the sound of his trumpet, and he was not the man to
undertake laborious sieges. Hangings, operations on dogs and frogs,
solitary convicts and maltreated negroes—one after another, all lost
their charm for him. And Rachel continued to be efficient, continued to
be loved and admired.

Meanwhile, her direct encouragement had always supplemented that
indirect stimulus to ambition which she had provided, all
unintentionally, by the mere fact of being herself and Sidney’s wife. At
first she genuinely believed in him; she encouraged her hero. A few
years sufficed to change faith in his ultimate success into a pious
hope. When the hope was gone she encouraged him for diplomatic
reasons—because failure in politics cost less than failure in the City.
For Sidney’s mismanagement of the business was threatening to be
ruinous. She dared not tell him so, dared not advise him to sell out; to
have done so would have been to provoke him to cling more tenaciously
than ever to the business. By throwing doubts on his capacity she would
only have spurred him on to new and more dangerous speculations. To
hostile criticism Sidney reacted with a violent and obstinate
contrariness. Made wise by experience Rachel Quarles averted the danger
by redoubling her encouragement of his political ambitions. She
magnified the importance of his parliamentary activities. What good,
what noble work he was doing! And what a pity that the care of the
business should take up so much of the time and energies that might be
better employed! Sidney responded at once and with a secret and
unrealized gratitude. The routine of business bored him; he was becoming
alarmed by his speculative failures. He welcomed the excuse for
divesting himself of his responsibilities, which Rachel had so
diplomatically offered. He sold out before it was too late and
reinvested the money in securities which might be trusted to look after
themselves. His income was in this way reduced by about a third; but in
any case it was now secure—that was what Rachel chiefly cared about.
Sidney went about hinting at the great financial sacrifices he had made
in order that he might devote all his time to the poor convicts. (Later
it was the poor negroes; but the sacrifices remained the same.)

When finally, tired of being a political nonentity and outraged by what
he regarded as the injustice of his party chiefs, Sidney resigned his
seat, Mrs. Quarles made no objection. There was no business now for her
husband to ruin, and the estate in those times of agricultural
prosperity that immediately followed the Armistice was still profitable.
Sidney explained that he was too good for practical politics; they
degraded a man of worth, their dirt came off. He had decided (for his
consciousness of Rachel’s superiority would not let him rest) to devote
himself to something more important than ‘myah’ politics, something
worthier of his powers. To be the philosopher of politics was better
than to be a politician He actually finished and published a first
instalment of his political philosophy. The prolonged effort of writing
blunted his enthusiasm for philosophical authorship; the poor success of
the book disgusted him completely. But Rachel was still efficient and
beloved. In self-defence he announced his intention of producing the
largest and most comprehensive work on democracy that had ever been
written. Rachel might be very active on committees, do good works, be
loved by the villagers, have friends and correspondents galore; but,
after all, what was that compared with writing the largest book on
democracy? The only trouble was that the book did not get written. When
Rachel showed herself too efficient, when people liked her too much, Mr.
Quarles bought another cardindex, or a new and more ingenious kind of
loose-leaf notebook, or a fountain-pen with a particularly large ink
capacity—a fountain-pen, he explained, that could write six thousand
words without requiring to be refilled. The retort was perhaps
inadequate. But it seemed to Sidney Quarles good enough.

Philip and Elinor spent a couple of days with Mrs. Bidlake at Gattenden.
Then it was the turn of Philip’s parents. They arrived at Chamford to
find that Mr. Quarles had just bought a dictaphone. Sidney did not allow
his son to remain for long in ignorance of his triumph. The dictaphone
was his greatest achievement since the calculating typewriter.

‘I’ve just made an acquisition,’ he said in his rich voice, shooting the
words up over Philip’s head. ‘Something that will interest you, as a
writer.’ He led the way to his study.

Philip followed him. He had expected to be overwhelmed with questions
about the East and the tropics. Instead of which his father had only
perfunctorily enquired if the voyage had been good, and had gone on,
almost before Philip could answer, to speak about his own affairs. For
the first moment Philip had been surprised and even a little nettled.
But the moon, he reflected, seems larger than Sirius, because it is
nearer. The voyage, _his_ voyage, was to him a moon, to his father the
smallest of little stars.

‘Here,’ said Mr. Quarles and raised the cover. The dictaphone was
revealed. ‘Wonderful invention!’ He spoke with profound
selfsatisfaction. It was the sudden rising, in all its refulgence, of
_his_ moon. He explained the workings of the machine. Then, tilting up
his face, ‘It’s so useful,’ he said, ‘when an idyah occurs to you. You
put it into wahds at once. Talk to yourself; the machine remembahs. I
have it brought up to my bedroom every night. Such valuable idyahs come
to one when one’s in bed, don’t you find? Without a dictaphone they
would get lost.’

‘And what do you do when you’ve got to the end of one of these
phonograph records?’ Philip enquired.

‘Send it to my secretarah to be typed.’

Philip raised his eyebrows. ‘You’ve got a secretary now?’

Mr. Quarles nodded importantly. ‘Only a half-time one, so far,’ he said,
addressing the cornice of the opposite wall. ‘You’ve no idyah what a lot
I have to do. What with the book, and the estate, and letters, and
accounts and…and…things,’ he concluded rather lamely. He sighed, he
shook the martyr’s head. ‘You’re lucky, my dyah boy,’ he went on. ‘You
have no distractions. You can give your whole time to writing. I wish I
could give all mine. But I have the estate and all the rest. Trivial—but
the business must be done.’ He sighed again. ‘I envy you your freedom.’

Philip laughed. ‘I almost envy myself sometimes. But the dictaphone will
be a great help.’

‘Oh, it will,’ said Mr. Quarles

‘Undoubtedlah.’

‘How’s the book going?’

‘Slowly,’ his father replied, ‘but surely. I think I have most of my
materials now.’

‘Well, that’s something.’

‘You novelists,’ said Mr. Quarles patronizingly, ‘you’re fortunate. You
can just sit down and write. No preliminarah labour necessarah. Nothing
like this.’ He pointed to the filing cabinets and the cardindex boxes.
They were the proofs of his superiority, as well as of the enormous
difficulties against which he had to struggle. Philip’s books might be
successful. But after all, what was a novel? An hour’s entertainment,
that was all; to be picked up and thrown aside again, carelessly.
Whereas the largest book on democracy…And anyone could write a novel. It
was just a question of living and then proceeding to record the fact. To
compose the largest book on democracy one had to take notes, collect
materials from innumerable sources, buy filing cabinets and typewriters,
portable, polyglottic, calculating; one needed a cardindex and
loose-leaf notebooks and a fountain-pen that could write six thousand
words without having to be refilled; one required a dictaphone and a
half-time secretary who would shortly have to become a whole-time one.
‘Nothing like this,’ he insisted.

‘Oh, no,’ said Philip, who had been wandering round the room examining
the literary apparatus. ‘Nothing like this.’ He picked up some newspaper
clippings that were lying under a paper weight on the lid of the
unopened Corona. ‘Puzzles?’ he asked, holding up the irregularly
chequered diagrams. ‘I didn’t know you’d become a crossword fiend.’

Mr. Quarles took the clippings from his son and put them away in a
drawer. He was annoyed that Philip should have seen them. The crosswords
spoiled the effect of the dictaphone. ‘Childish things,’ he said with a
little laugh. ‘But they’re a distraction when the mind is tired. I like
to amuse myself with them occasionalah.’ In reality Mr. Quarles spent
almost the whole of his mornings on crosswords. They exactly suited his
type of intelligence. He was one of the most expert puzzle-solvers of
his epoch.

In the drawing-room, meanwhile, Mrs. Quarles was talking with her
daughter-in-law. She was a small and active woman, grey-haired but
preserving unblurred and hardly distorted the pure outlines of regular
and well-moulded features. The expression of the face was at once
vivacious and sensitive. It was a delicate energy, a strong but
quiveringly responsive life, that shone in incessant variations of
brilliance and shade of colour from her expressive grey-blue eyes. Her
lips responded hardly less closely and constantly to her thoughts and
feelings than did her eyes, and were grave or firm, smiled or were
melancholy through an almost infinitesimally chromatic scale of
emotional expression.

‘And little Phil?’ she said, enquiring after her grandchild.

‘Radiant.’

‘Darling little man!’ The warmth of Mrs. Quarles’s affection enriched
her voice and was visible as a light in her eyes. ‘You must have felt
miserable, leaving him for such a long time.’

Elinor gave an almost imperceptible shrug of the shoulders. ‘Well, I
knew that Miss Fulkes and mother between them would look after him much
better than I could do.’ She laughed and shook her head. ‘I don’t
believe nature ever meant me to have children. Either I’m impatient with
them, or else I spoil them. Little Phil’s a pet, of course; but I know
that a family would have driven me crazy.’

Mrs. Quarles’s expression changed. ‘But wasn’t it wonderful to see him
again after all those months? ‘ The tone of the question was almost
anxious. She hoped that Elinor would answer it with the enthusiastic
affirmative which would have been natural in the circumstances to
herself. But at the same time she was haunted by a fear lest the strange
girl might answer (with the frankness which was so admirable a quality
in her, but which was also so disquieting, in its revelation of
unfamiliar and to Rachel incomprehensible states of soul) that she
hadn’t been in the least pleased to see her child again. Elinor’s first
words came to her as a relief.

‘Yes, it was wonderful,’ she said, but robbed the phrase of its full
effect by adding. ‘I didn’t imagine I _could_ be so glad to see him
again. But it was really a wild excitement.’

There was a silence. ‘A queer girl,’ Mrs. Quarles was thinking; and her
face reflected something of that bewilderment which she always felt in
Elinor’s presence. She did her best to love her daughter-in-law; and up
to a point she succeeded. Elinor had many excellent qualities. But
something seemed to be lacking in her, something without which no human
being could be entirely sympathetic to Rachel Quarles. It was as though
she had been born without certain natural instincts. Not to have
expected to feel happy when she saw her baby again—that was strange
enough. But what Rachel found almost stranger was Elinor’s calm and
casual admission of the fact. She herself would have blushed to make
such an admission, even if it had been the truth. It would have seemed
to her something shameful—a kind of blasphemy, a denial of what was
holy. To Rachel the reverence for holy things came naturally. It was
Elinor’s lack of this reverence, her inability even to realize that holy
things _were_ holy, which made it impossible for Mrs. Quarles to love
her daughter-in-law as much as she would have liked.

On her side Elinor admired, respected and genuinely liked her husband’s
mother. For her, the chronic difficulty was to establish effectual
contact with a person whose ruling ideas and motives seemed to her so
oddly incomprehensible and even so absurd. Mrs. Quarles was
unobtrusively but ardently religious and lived to the best of her
ability in accordance with her beliefs. Elinor admired, but felt that it
was all rather absurd and superfluous. Her education had been orthodox.
But she never remembered a time, even in her childhood, when she
seriously believed what people told her about the other world and its
inhabitants. The other world bored her; she was interested only in this.
Confirmation had evoked in her no more enthusiasm than a visit to the
theatre, indeed considerably less. Her adolescence had passed without
the trace of a religious crisis.

‘It all seems to me just nonsense,’ she would say when the matter was
discussed in her presence. And there was no affectation in her words,
they were not uttered provocatively. She simply stated a fact of her
personal history. Religion and, along with religion, all transcendental
morality, all metaphysical speculation seemed to her nonsensical in
precisely the same way as the smell of Gorgonzola seemed to her
disgusting. There was no getting behind the immediate experience. Often,
on occasions like this, she wished there were. She would have liked to
cross the abyss which separated her from Mrs. Quarles. As it was, she
felt a certain uneasiness when she was with her mother-in-law; she
hesitated in her presence to express her feelings or to say what she
thought. For she had found, only too often, that the frank utterance of
what seemed to her perfectly natural sentiments and reasonable opinions,
was apt to distress her mother-in-law, to strike her as strange and
shocking. It had happened again now, as she could see from the
expression which showed itself for an instant on Mrs. Quarles’s mobile
and sensitive face. What had it been this time? Conscious of no offence,
Elinor could only wonder. In future, she decided, she would volunteer
nothing of her own; she would just agree with what was said.

As it happened, however, the next topic of conversation to be broached
was one in which Elinor was too deeply interested to be able to keep her
new-made resolution. Moreover it was one on which, as she knew by
experience, she could speak freely without risk of unintentional
offence. For where Philip was concerned, Elinor’s feelings and opinions
seemed to Mrs. Quarles entirely appropriate.

‘And big Philip?’ she now asked.

‘You see how well he looks,’ Elinor answered for his health, though she
knew that the question had not concerned his bodily wellbeing. It was
with a certain dread that she looked forward to the conversation that
impended. At the same time, however, she was glad to have an opportunity
of discussing that which so constantly and distressingly occupied her
thoughts.

‘Yes, yes, I can see that,’ said Mrs. Quarles. ‘But what I really meant
was: how is he in himself? How is he with you?’

There was a silence. Elinor frowned slightly and looked at the floor.
‘Remote,’ she said at last.

Mrs. Quarles sighed. ‘He was always that,’ she said. ‘Always remote.’

He too, it seemed to her, was lacking in something—in the desire and the
capacity to give himself, to go out and meet his fellows, even those who
loved him, even those he loved. Geoffrey had been so different. At the
memory of her dead son Mrs. Quarles felt her whole being invaded by a
poignant sadness. If anyone had suggested that she had loved him more
than she loved Philip, she would have protested. Her own feelings, she
felt sure, had been initially the same. But Geoffrey had permitted
himself to be loved more fully, more intimately than his brother. If
only Philip had allowed her to love him more! But there had always been
barriers between them, barriers of his erecting. Geoffrey had come out
to meet her, had given that he might receive. But Philip had always been
reluctant and parsimonious. He had always shut doors when she
approached, always locked up his mind lest she should catch a glimpse of
his secrets. She had never known what he really felt and thought. ‘Even
as a little boy,’ she said aloud.

‘And now he has his work,’ said Elinor after a pause. ‘Which makes it
worse. It’s like a castle on the top of a mountain, his work. He shuts
himself up in it and he’s impregnable.’

Mrs. Quarles smiled sadly. ‘Impregnable.’ It was the right word. Even as
a little boy he had been impregnable. ‘Perhaps in the end he’ll
surrender of his own accord.’

‘To me?’ said Elinor. ‘Or to someone else? It wouldn’t be much
satisfaction if it was to somebody else, would it? Though when I’m
feeling unselfish,’ she added, ‘I wish he’d surrender to
anyone—_anyone_, for his own good.’

Elinor’s words set Mrs. Quarles thinking of her husband—not resentfully,
though he had done wrong, though he had hurt her, but pityingly, rather,
and solicitously. For she could never feel that it was entirely his
fault. It was his misfortune.

Elinor sighed. ‘I can’t really expect to receive his surrender,’ she
said. ‘When one has become a habit, one can’t very well suddenly turn
into an overwhelming revelation.’

Mrs. Quarles shook her head. In recent years Sidney’s overwhelming
revelations had come from such unexpectedly humble sources. The little
kitchenmaid, the gamekeeper’s daughter. How could he, she wondered for
the thousandth time, how _could_ he? It was incomprehensible.

‘If at least,’ she said almost in a whisper, ‘you had God as a
companion.’ God had always been her comfort, God and the doing of God’s
will. She could never understand how people could get through life
without Him. ‘If only you could find God.’

Elinor’s smile was sarcastic. Remarks of this sort annoyed her by being
so ridiculously beside the point. ‘It might be simpler,’ she began, but
checked herself after the first words. She had meant to say that it
might be simpler perhaps to find a man. But she remembered her
resolution and was silent.

‘What were you saying?’

Elinor shook her head. ‘Nothing.’

 

__

 

Fortunately for Mr. Quarles the British Museum had no Essex branch. It
was only in London that he could make researches and collect the
documents necessary for his book. The house in Portman Square was let
(Mr. Quarles blamed the income tax, but his own speculations in sugar
were mainly responsible); and it was in a modest little flat in
Bloomsbury (‘convenientlah nyah the Museum’) that he now camped whenever
the claims of scholarship brought him to town.

During the last few weeks the claims had been more than usually
peremptory. His visits to London had been frequent and prolonged. After
the second of these visits Mrs. Quarles had wondered, sadly, whether
Sidney had found another woman. And when, on his return from a third
journey and, a few days later, on the eve of a fourth, he began to groan
ostentatiously over the vast complexity of the history of democracy
among the Ancient Indians, Rachel felt convinced that the woman had been
found. She knew Sidney well enough to be certain that, if he had really
been reading about the Ancient Indians, he would never have troubled to
talk about them over the dinner-table—not at such length, in any case,
nor so insistently. Sidney talked for the same reason as the hunted
sepia squirts ink, to conceal his movements. Behind the inkcloud of the
Ancient Indians he hoped to go jaunting up to town unobserved. Poor
Sidney! He thought himself so Machiavellian. But his ink was
transparent, his cunning like a child’s.

‘Couldn’t you get the books sent down from the London Library?’ Mrs.
Quarles rather pointedly asked.

Sidney shook his head. ‘They’re the sort of books,’ he said importantly,
‘that are only in the Museum.’

Rachel sighed and could only hope that the woman could be trusted to
look after herself well enough to keep out of serious trouble and not so
well as to want to make mischief.

‘I think I shall run up to town with you to-morrow,’ he announced on the
morning before Philip and Elinor took their leave.

‘Again?’ asked Mrs. Quarles.

‘There’s a point about those wretched Indians,’ he explained, ‘that I
ryahly must clear up. I think I may find it in Pramathanatha Banerea’s
book…Or it may be dealt with by Radakhumud Mookerji.’ He rolled out the
names impressively, professionally. ‘It’s about local government in
Maurya times. So democratic, you know, in spite of the central
despotism. For example…’

Through the inkcloud Mrs. Quarles caught glimpses of a female figure.

Breakfast over, Sidney retired to his study and addressed himself to the
morning’s crossword. A kind of onion, six letters Anticipations of the
morrow distracted him; he could not fix his attention. Her breasts, he
was thinking, her smooth white back…What about ‘chive’? No good; only
five letters. Walking over to the bookshelf he took out his Bible; its
thin pages rustled under his fingers. ‘Thy navel is like a round goblet
that wanteth not liquor, thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about
with lilies. Thy two breasts are like young roes that are twins.’
Solomon spoke for him, with what rich thunders! ‘The joints of thy
thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.’ He
read the words out loud. Gladys had a perfect figure. ‘Like a round
goblet that wanteth not liquor.’ These orientals knew what passion was.
Miscalling libidinousness ‘passion,’ Mr. Quarles regarded himself as a
very passionate man. ‘Thy belly is like an heap of wheat.’ Passion is
respectable, is actually respected by the law in some countries. For the
poets it is even sacred. He agreed with the poets. But ‘like young roes’
was an odd, inadequate simile. Gladys was plump without being fat,
firmly resilient. Roes, on the contrary…As a man of great passions,
Sidney could regard himself as positively a noble and heroic figure. ‘A
garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed. Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits;
camphire with spikenard; spikenard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon,
with all trees of frankincense; myrrh…’ But, of course, the word was
‘garlic’! Six letters. A kind of onion. ‘Myrrh and aloes, with all the
chief spices.’

Their train next morning was nearly twenty minutes late. ‘Scandalous,’
Mr. Quarles kept repeating, as he looked at his watch, ‘disgraceful.’

‘You’re in a great hurry to be at your Indians,’ said Philip, smiling
from his corner.

His father frowned and talked about something else. At Liverpool Street
they parted, Sidney in one taxi, Philip and Elinor in a second. Sidney
reached his flat only just in time. He was still engaged in washing the
grime of the journey from his large, flesh-padded hands, when the bell
rang. He made haste to rinse and dry himself, then, adjusting his face,
he stepped into the hall and opened. It was Gladys. He received her with
a kind of condescending regality, his chin tilted, his chest thrown
back, his waistcoat projecting, but smiling down at her (Gladys called
herself ‘petite’) and graciously twinkling through half-shut eyelids. It
was an impudent, vulgar, snubby little face that smiled back at him. But
it was not her face that had brought Mr. Quarles to London, it was not
the individual Gladys Helmsley; it was the merely generic aspect of the
woman, her ‘figah,’ as Sidney would have euphemistically put it.

‘You’re very punctual, my dyah,’ he said, holding out his hand.

Gladys was rather taken aback by the coolness of his greeting. After
what had happened last time, she had expected something tenderer.

‘Am I!’ she said, for lack of anything better to say; and since human
beings have only a limited number of noises and grimaces with which to
express the multiplicity of their emotions, she laughed as though she
had been amused by something, when in fact she was only surprised and
disquieted. It was on the tip of her tongue to ask him,
provocative-petulantly, why he didn’t kiss her, whether he was tired of
her—_already_. But she decided to wait.

‘Almost too punctual,’ Sidney went on. ‘My train was scandalouslah late.
Scandalouslah!’ He radiated indignation.

‘Fancy! ‘ said Gladys. The refinement that hung around her speech, like
a too genteel disguise, dropped away from time to time, leaving
individual words and phrases nakedly cockney.

‘Ryahly disgraceful!’ said Sidney. ‘Trains have no business to be late.
I shall write to the Traffic Superintendent at Liverpool Street. I’m not
sure,’ he added, still more importantly, ‘that I shan’t write to the
_Times_ as well.’

Gladys was impressed. Mr. Quarles had intended that she should be. Apart
from all merely sensual satsfactions, the greatest charm of his sexual
holidays resided in the fact that they were shared with impressible
companions. Sidney liked them, not only young, but of a lower class, and
poor. To feel himself unequivocally superior and genuinely admired was
for Sidney a luxury almost as great as an embracement. His escapades
were holidays not only from chastity, but also from that sense of
inferiority which, at home, in parliament, at the office, had always
inveterately haunted him. In relation to young women of the lower
classes he was a great man, as well as a ‘passionate’ one.

Gladys, on her side, was impressed by his thunderings. But she was also
amused. Impressed, because she belonged to the world of poor and patient
wage-slaves, who accept the unpleasantnesses of social life as so many
natural phenomena, uncontrollable by human agency and recalcitrant to
human desires. But Sidney was one of the Olympian rich; the rich refuse
to accept unpleasantness; they write letters to the _Times_ about it,
they pull wires, use influence, lodge formal complaints with an always
friendly and obsequious police. To Gladys it was wonderful—wonderful,
but also very funny. There was such a lot of loud haw-haw and lahdy-da
about the whole performance. It was so like the parody of itself on the
music-hall stage. She admired, she realized very accurately the economic
and social causes of Sidney’s behaviour (it was that realization which
had made her so promptly his mistress). But she also laughed. She lacked
reverence.

Mr. Quarles opened the sittingroom door to let her pass.

‘Ta,’ said Gladys and walked in.

He followed. On the nape of her neck, her dark cropped hair ended in a
little triangle that pointed downwards along the spine. She was wearing
a thin green dress. Through the fine stuff he could see, just below her
shoulders, the line where the underclothes gave place to bare skin. A
belt of black shiny leather was fastened in a slant very low on her
hips. At every stride it rose and fell on her left hip with a rhythmical
regularity. Her stockings were the colour of sunburnt flesh. Brought up
in an epoch when ladies apparently rolled along on. wheels, Mr. Quarles
was peculiarly susceptible to calves, found modem fashions a treat and
could never quite get over the belief that the young women who adopted
them had deliberately made themselves indecent for his benefit and
because they wanted him to become their lover. His eyes followed the
curves of the lustrous sunburn. But what fascinated him most to-day was
the black leather belt flicking up and down over the left haunch, with
the regularity of a piece of machinery, every time she moved her leg. In
that rise and fall the whole unindividualized species, the entire sex
semaphored their appeal.

Gladys halted and turned towards him with a smile, expectantly
coquettish. But Mr. Quarles made no responding gesture.

‘I’ve got the Corona hyah,’ he said. ‘Perhaps we had better begin at
once.’

For the second time Gladys was surprised, thought of making a comment,
and again said nothing, but sat down in silence before the typewriter.

Mr. Quarles put on his tortoiseshell-rimmed pince-nez and opened his
despatch case. He had found a mistress, but he did not see why that
should entail the loss of a typist, for whose services, after all, he
paid.

‘Perhaps,’ he said, looking up at her over the top of his pince-nez,
‘we’d better begin with those letters to the Traffic Superintendent and
the Times.’ Gladys adjusted the paper, typed the date. Mr. Quarles
cleared his throat and dictated. There were some good phrases, he
flattered himself, in the letters. ‘Inexcusable slackness entailing the
waste of time otherwise valuable than that of drowsy railway
bureaucrats’—that, for example, was excellent. And so (for the benefit
of the _Times_) was ‘the pampered social parasites of a protected
industry.’

‘That’ll teach the dogs,’ he said with satisfaction, as he read the
letters through. ‘That’ll make them squirm.’ He looked to Gladys for
applause, and was not entirely satisfied with the smile on that
impertinent face. ‘Pity old Lord Hagworm’s not alive,’ he added, calling
up strong allies

‘I’d have written to him. He was a director of the company.’ But the
last of the Hagworms had died in 1912. And Gladys continued to be more
amused than admiring.

Mr. Quarles dictated a dozen more letters, the answers to a
correspondence which he had allowed to accumulate for several days
before coming to London, so that the total might seem more important and
also that he might get his full money’s worth out of Gladys’s
secretaryship

‘Thank goodness,’ he said, when the last of the letters was answered.
‘You’ve no idyah,’ he went on (and the great thinker had come to
reinforce the landed gentleman), ‘you’ve no idyah how exasperating these
trivial little things can be, when you’ve got something more syahrious
and important to think about.’

‘I suppose they must be,’ said Gladys, thinking how funny he was.

‘Take down,’ commanded Mr. Quarles, to whom a _pensee_ had suddenly
occurred. He leaned back in his chair and, closing his eyes, pursued the
elusive phrase.

Gladys waited, her fingers poised above the keyboard. She looked at the
watch on her wrist. Ten past twelve. It would be lunch-time soon. A new
watch—that would be the first thing she’d make him give her. The one she
had was such a cheap, nasty-looking watch; and it kept such bad time.

‘Note for the volume of Reflections,’ said Mr. Quarles, without opening
his eyes. The keys briefly rattled. ‘The ivory pinnacles of thought’—he
repeated the words inwardly. They made a satisfying reverberation along
the corridors of his mind. The phrase was caught. He sat up briskly and
opened his eyes—to become aware that the lisle-thread top of one of
Gladys’s sunburnt stockings was visible, from where he was sitting, to a
considerable distance above the knee.

‘All my life,’ he dictated, his eyes fixed on the lisle thread, ‘I have
suffered from the irrelevant—no, say “importunate”—interruptions of the
wahld’s trivialitah, full stop. Some thinkers comma I know comma are
able to ignore these interruptions comma to give them a fleeting but
sufficient attention and return with a serene mind to higher things full
stop.’

There was silence. Above the lisle thread, Mr. Quarles was thinking, was
the skin,—soft, curving tightly over the firm curved flesh. To caress
and, caressing, to feel the finger-tips silkily caressed; to squeeze a
handful of elastic flesh. Even to bite. Like a round goblet, like a heap
of wheat.

Suddenly conscious of the direction of his glances, Gladys pulled down
her skirt.

‘Where was I?’ asked Mr. Quarles.

‘Higher things with a serene mind,’ Gladys g answered, reading from the
page in front of her.

‘H’m.’ He rubbed his nose. ‘For me comma alas comma this serenitah has
always been impossible semi-colon; my nahvous sensibilitah is too great
full stop. Dragged down from the ivorah pinnacles of thought’ (he rolled
out the phrase with relish) ‘into the common dust comma, I am
exasperated comma, I lose my peace of mind and am unable to climb again
into my tower.’

He rose and began to walk restlessly about the room.

‘That’s always been my trouble,’ he said. ‘Too much sensibilitah. A
syahrious thinker ought to have no temperament, no nerves. He has no
business to be passionate.’

The skin, he was thinking, the firm elastic flesh. He halted behind her
chair. The little triangle of cropped hair pointed down along her spine.
He put his hands on her shoulders and bent over her.

Gladys looked up, smiling impertinently, with triumph. ‘Well?’ she
asked.

Mr. Quarles bent lower and kissed her neck. She giggled.

‘How you tickle!’

His hands explored her, sliding along her arms, pressing her body—the
body of the species, of the entire sex. The individual Gladys continued
to giggle.

‘Naughty!’ she said, and made a pretence of pushing his hands away.
‘Naughty!’


CHAPTER XXI

‘A month ago,’ said Elinor, as their taxi drove out of Liverpool Street
Station, ‘we were in Udaipur.’

‘It certainly seems improbable,’ said Philip, agreeing with the
implications of her remark.

‘These ten months of travel have been like an hour in a cinema. There’s
the Bank. I begin to doubt whether I’ve ever been away.’ She sighed.
‘It’s rather a dreadful feeling.’

‘Is it?’ said Philip. ‘I suppose I’m used to it. I never do feel that
anything has really happened before this morning.’ He craned his neck
out of the window. ‘Why people should bother about the Taj Mahal when
there’s St. Paul’s to look at, I can’t imagine. What a marvel!’

‘That wonderful black and white of the stone.’

‘As though it were an engraving. Doubly a work of art. Not merely
architecture, but an etching of architecture.’ He leaned back. ‘I often
doubt whether I ever had a childhood,’ he went on, returning to the
previous conversation.

‘That’s because you never think of it. Lots of my childhood is more real
to me than Ludgate Hill here. But then I constantly think of it.’

‘That’s true,’ said Philip. ‘I don’t often try to remember. Hardly ever,
in fact. I always seem to have too much to do and think about.’

‘You have no natural piety,’ said Elinor. ‘I wish you had.’

They drove along the Strand. The two little churches protested against
Australia House, in vain. In the courtyard of King’s College a group of
young men and women sat in the sun waiting for the Professor of Pastoral
Theology. At the pit door of the Gaiety there was already a queue; the
placards advertised the four hundredth performance of’ The Girl from
Biarritz.’ Next door to the Savoy, Philip noticed, you could still buy a
pair of boots for twelve-and-six. In Trafalgar Square the fountains were
playing, Sir Edwin Landseer’s lions mildly glared, the lover of Lady
Hamilton stood perched among the clouds, like St. Simeon the Stylite.
And behind the grim colonnade of the National Gallery Uccello’s horsemen
timelessly fought and Rubens raped his Sabines, Venus looked into her
mirror and in the midst of Piero’s choiring angels Jesus was born into a
magically lovely world.

The cab turned down Whitehall.

‘I like to think of all the bureaucrats.’

‘I don’t,’ said Elinor.

‘Scribbling away,’ he went on,’scribbling from morning till night in
order that we may live in freedom and comfort. Scribble, scribble—the
result is the British Empire. What a comfort,’ he added, ‘to live in a
world where one can delegate everything tiresome, from governing to
making sausages, to somebody else.’

At the Gate of the Horse Guards the mounted sentries looked as though
they were stuffed. Near the Cenotaph a middleaged lady was standing with
raised eyes, murmuring a prayer over the Kodak with which she proposed
to take a snapshot of the souls of the nine hundred thousand dead. A
Sikh with a black beard and a pale mauve turban emerged from Grindley’s
as they passed. The time, according to Big Ben, was twenty-seven minutes
past eleven. In the library of the House of Lords was there a dozing
marquess? A charabanc disgorged Americans at the door of Westminster
Abbey. Looking back through the little porthole in the hood they were
able to see that the hospital was still urgently in need of funds.

John Bidlake’s house was in Grosvenor Road, overlooking the river.

‘Pimlico,’ said Philip meditatively, as they approached the house. He
laughed. ‘Do you remember that absurd song your father used always to
quote?’

‘“To Pimlico Then let us go,”’ Elinor chanted.

‘“One verse omitted here.” You mustn’t forget that.’ They both laughed,
remembering John Bidlake’s comments.

‘“One verse omitted here.” It’s omitted in all the anthologies. I’ve
never been able to discover what happened when they’d got to Pimlico.
It’s kept me wondering for years, feverishly. Nothing like Bowdlerism
for heating the imagination.’

‘Pimlico,’ Philip repeated. Old Bidlake, he was thinking, had made of
Pimlico a sort of Rabelaisian Olympus. He liked the phrase. But
‘Gargantuan’ would be better for public use than ‘Rabelaisian.’ For
those who had never read him, Rabelais connoted nothing but smut.
Gargantuan Olympus, then. They had at least heard rumours that Gargantua
was large.

But the John Bidlake they found sitting by the stove in his studio was
not at all Olympian, seemed less instead of more than life size. He
suffered himself to be kissed by his daughter, limply shook hands with
Philip.

‘Good to see you again,’ he said. But there was no resonance in his
voice; the undertone ofjovial thunders and jovial laughters was absent.
He spoke without gusto. His eyes were without lustre, and bloodshot. He
looked thin and grey.

‘How are you, father?’ Elinor was surprised and distressed. She had
never seen her father like this before.

‘Not well,’ he answered, shaking his head, ‘not well. Something wrong
with my insides.’ The old lion suddenly and recognizably roared. ‘Making
us go through life with a barrow-full of tripes! I’ve always resented
God’s practical jokes.’ The roar became plaintive. ‘I don’t know what’s
happening to mine now. Something very unpleasant.’ It degenerated almost
into a whine. ‘I feel wretched.’ Lengthily, the old man described his
symptoms.

‘Have you seen a doctor?’ Elinor asked, when he had finished.

He shook his head. ‘Don’t believe in them. They never do one any good.’
The truth was that he had a superstitious terror of doctors. Birds of
evil omen—he hated to see them in the house.

‘But you really ought.’ She tried to persuade him.

‘All right,’ he at last consented grumblingly.

‘Let the quacks come.’ But secretly he was rather relieved. He had been
wanting to see the doctor for some time now; but his superstition had
been stronger hitherto than his desire. The ill-omened medicine man was
now to come, but not on his invitation; on Elinor’s. The responsibility
was not his; not on him, therefore, would fall the bad luck. Old
Bidlake’s private religion was obscurely complicated.

They began to talk of other things. Now that he knew he could consult a
doctor in safety, John Bidlake felt better and more cheerful.

I’m worried about him,’ said Elinor, as they drove away.

Philip nodded. ‘Being seventy-three’s no joke. He’s begun to look his
age.’

What a head! he was thinking. He wished he could paint. Literature
couldn’t render it. One could describe it, of course, down to the last
wrinkle. But where would one be then? Nowhere. Descriptions are slow. A
face is instantaneously perceived. A word, a single phrase â€”that was
what one needed. ‘The glory that was Greece, grown old.’ That, for
example, would give you something of the man. Only of course it wouldn’t
do. Quotations have something facetiously pedantic about them. ‘A statue
in parchment’ would be better. ‘The parchment statue of what had once
been Achilles was sitting, crumpled, near the stove.’ That was getting
nearer the mark. No longwinded description. But for anyone who had ever
seen a cast of the Discobolos, handled a vellum-bound book, heard of
Achilles, John Bidlake was in that sentence visible. And for those who
had never seen a Greek statue or read about Achilles in a book with a
crinkly sheep-skin cover? Well, presumably they could go to the devil.

‘All the same,’ he thought, ‘it’s too literary. Too much culture.’

Elinor broke the silence. ‘I wonder how I shall find Everard, now that
he’s become such a great man.’ With her mind’s eye she saw the keen
face, the huge but agile body. Swiftness and violence. And he was in
love with her. Did she like the man? Or did she detest him?

‘I wonder if he’s started pinching people’s ears, like Napoleon?’ Philip
laughed. ‘Anyhow, it’s only a matter of time.’

‘All the same,’ said Elinor, ‘I like him.’ Philip’s mockery had answered
her question for her.

‘So do I. But mayn’t I laugh at what I like?’

‘You certainly laugh at me. Is that because you like me?’

He took her hand and kissed it. ‘I adore you, and I never laugh at you.
I take you perfectly seriously.’

Elinor looked at him, unsmiling. ‘You make me desperate sometimes. What
would you do, if I went off with another man? Would you care two pins?’

‘I should be perfectly wretched.’

‘Would you?’ She looked at him. Philip was smiling; he was a thousand
miles away. ‘I’ve a good mind to make the experiment,’ she added,
frowning. ‘But _would_ you be wretched? I’d like to be certain before I
began.’

‘And who’d be your fellow experimenter?’

‘Ah, that’s the trouble. Most other men are so impossible.’

‘What a compliment!’

‘But you’re impossible too, Phil. The most impossible of them all,
really. And the worst of it is I love you, in spite of it. And you know
it. Yes, and exploit it too.’ The cab drew up at the curb. She reached
for her umbrella. ‘But you be careful,’ she went on, as she rose to her
feet. ‘I’m not indefinitely exploitable. I won’t go on giving something
for nothing for ever. One of these days I shall start looking for
somebody else.’ She stepped out on to the pavement.

‘Why not try Everard,’ he chaffed, looking out at her through the window
of the cab.

‘Perhaps I shall,’ she answered. ‘I know Everard would ask nothing
better.’

Philip laughed and blew her a kiss. ‘Tell the man to drive to the Club,’
he said.

Everard kept her waiting nearly ten minutes. When she had finished
re-powdering her face, Elinor wandered inquisitively about the room. The
flowers were abominably arranged. And that cabinet full of old swords
and daggers and inlaid pistols was hideous, like a thing in a museum; a
monstrosity, but at the same time rather touchingly absurd. Everard had
such a schoolboyish ambition to ride about on a horse and chop people’s
heads off; the cabinet gave him away. So did that glass-topped table
with the tray-full of coins and medals under the crystal lid. How
proudly he had shown her his treasures! There was the Macedonian
tetradrachm, with the head of Alexander the Great in the guise of
Hercules; the sestertius of 44 B.C. with the formidable profile of
Caesar, and next to it Edward iI.’s rose noble stamped with the ship
that symbolized the beginning of England’s power at sea. And there, on
Pisanello’s medal, was Sigismondo Malatesta, most beautiful of ruffians;
and there was Queen Elizabeth in her ruff and Napoleon with laurels in
his hair, and the Duke of Wellington. She smiled at them affectionately;
they were old friends. The satisfactory thing about Everard, she
reflected, was that you always knew where you were with him. He was
always so definitely himself; he lived up to character. She opened the
piano and played a couple of chords; out of tune, as usual. On the
little table near the fireplace was a volume of Everard’s latest
Speeches and Addresses. She picked it up, she turned over the pages.
‘The policy of the British Freemen,’ she read, ‘may be summarized as
Socialism without Political Democracy, combined with Nationalism without
insularity.’ That sounded excellent. But if he had written ‘ political
democracy without socialism combined with insularity without
nationalism’she would probably have admired just as sincerely. These
abstractions! she shook her head and sighed. ‘I must be a fool,’ she
thought. But really they meant nothing to her. They were quite empty.
Words, nothing more. She turned a page. ‘The party system works well
enough in cases where the parties are merely two groups of rival
oligarchs, belonging to the same class and having fundamentally the same
interests and ideals, competing with one another for power. But when
parties become identified with classes and develop strict party
principles, the system becomes an insanity. Because I sit on one side of
the house and you sit on the other, I am compelled to believe in
individualism to the exclusion of all state interference, you are
compelled to believe in state interference to the exclusion of all
individualism; I am compelled to believe in nationalism, even in
economic nationalism (which is an imbecility), and you are compelled to
believe in internationalism, even political internationalism (which is
no less of an imbecility); I am compelled to believe in the dictatorship
of the rich (to the exclusion of the intelligent), you are compelled to
believe in the dictatorship of the poor (also to the exclusion of the
intelligent). All this for the simple and politically irrelevant reason
that I am on the Right and you are on the Left. In our parliaments the
claims of topography are stronger than those of sense. Such are the
blessings of the modern party system. It is the aim of the British
Freemen to abolish that system, along with the corrupt and inefficient
parliamentarism which is its corollary.’ That sounded all right, she
thought; but she wondered, nevertheless, why people should bother about
this sort of thing. Instead of just living. But apparently, if one were
a man, one found just living dull. She reopened the book in the middle.
‘Every English liberty has been paid for by a new slavery. The
destruction of feudalism strengthened the Crown. At the Reformation, we
disposed of Papal infallibility, but we saddled ourselves with the
divine right of kings. Cromwell smashed the divine right of kings, but
imposed the tyranny of the landowners and the middle classes. The
tyranny of the landowners and the middle classes is rapidly being
destroyed, in order that we may have the dictatorship of the
proletariat. A new infallibility, not of the Pope, but of the majority,
has been propounded—an infallibility which we are compelled by law to
believe in. The British Freemen are pledged to a new reformation and a
new political revolution. We shall dispose of the dictatorship of the
proletariat as our fathers disposed of the divine right of kings. We
shall deny majority infallibility as they denied papal infallibility.
The British Freemen stand for…’ Elinor had some difficulty in turning
the page. Stand for what? she wondered. For the dictatorship of Everard
and the infallibility of Webley? She blew at the recalcitrant pages;
they fluttered apart. ‘…for justice and liberty. Their policy is that
the best men shall rule, whatever their origin. Careers, in a word, must
be fully open to talents. That is justice. They demand that every
problem shall be dealt with on its own merits, intelligently, without
reference to traditional party prejudices or the worthless opinion of
stupid majorities. That is liberty. Those who imagine that liberty is
synonymous with universal suffrage…’ A door banged; a loud voice
resounded in the hall. There was a rush of feet on the stairs; the house
shook. The door of the drawing-room burst open, as though a bomb had
exploded on the outside. Everard Webley came in on a burst of loud
apology and welcome.

‘How can I excuse myself?’ he cried, as he took her hands. ‘But if you
knew what a whirl I live in! How marvellous it is to see you again! Not
changed at all. As lovely as ever.’ He looked intently into her face.
The same serene pale eyes, the same full and melancholy lips. ‘And
looking so wonderfully well!’

She smiled back at him. His eyes were a very dark brown; from a little
distance they seemed all pupil. Fine eyes, but rather disquieting, she
found, in their intent, bright, watchful fixity. She looked into them a
moment, then turned away. ‘You too,’ she said, ‘just the same. But then
I don’t know why we should be different.’ She glanced back into his face
and found him still intently looking at her. ‘Ten months and travelling
in the tropics don’t turn one into somebody else.’

Everard laughed. ‘Thank heaven for that!’ he said. ‘Let’s come down to
lunch.’

‘And Philip?’ he asked, when the fish had been served

‘Is he also the same as ever?’

‘A little more so, if possible.’

Everard nodded. ‘A little more so. Quite. One would expect it. Seeing
blackamoors walking about without trousers must have made him still more
sceptical about the eternal verities than he was.’

Elinor smiled, but at the same time was a little offended by his
mockery. ‘And what’s been the effect on you of seeing so many Englishmen
walking about in pea-green uniforms?’ she retorted.

Everard laughed.’strengthened my belief in the eternal verities, of
course.’

‘Of which you’re one?’

He nodded. ‘Of which, naturally, I’m one.’ They looked at one another,
smiling. It was Elinor again who first averted her eyes.

‘Thanks for telling me.’ She kept up the note of irony. ‘I mightn’t have
guessed by myself.’ There was a little silence.

‘Don’t imagine,’ he said at last in a tone that was no more bantering,
but serious, ‘that you can make me lose my temper by telling me that
I’ve got a swelled head.’ He spoke softly; but you were conscious of
huge reserves of power. ‘Other people might succeed perhaps. But then
one doesn’t like to be bothered by the lower animals. One squashes them.
But with fellow humans one discusses things rationally.’

‘I’m most relieved to hear it,’ laughed Elinor.

‘You think I’ve got a swelled head,’ he went on. ‘And I suppose it’s
true in a way. But the trouble is, I know it’s justified—experimentally.
Modesty’s harmful if it’s false. Milton said that “nothing profits more
than self-esteem founded on just and right.” I know that mine is founded
on just and right. I know, I’m absolutely convinced that I can do what I
want to do. What’s the good of denying the knowledge? I’m going to be
master, I’m going to impose my will. I have the determination and the
courage. Very soon I shall have the organized strength. And then I shall
take control. I know it; why should I pretend that I don’t?’ He leaned
back in his chair and there was a long silence.

‘It’s absurd,’ Elinor was thinking, ‘it’s ridiculous to talk like that.’
It was the protest of her critical intellect against her feelings. For
her feelings had been strangely moved. His words, the tone of his
voice—so soft, yet with such vibrating latencies of power and passion
divinable beneath its softness—had carried her away. When he had said,
‘I’m going to be master,’ it was as though she had taken a gulp of
mulled wine—such a warmth had suddenly tingled through her whole body.
‘It’s ridiculous,’ she inwardly repeated, trying to avenge herself on
him for his easy conquest, trying to punish the traitors within her own
soul who had so easily surrendered. But what had been done could not
wholly be undone. The words might be ridiculous; but the fact remained
that, while he was uttering them, she had thrilled with sudden
admiration, with excitement, with a strange desire to exult and laugh
aloud.

The servant changed the plates. They talked of indifferent matters—of
her travels, of doings in London while she had been away, of common
friends. The coffee was brought, they lit their cigarettes; there was a
silence. How would it be broken? Elinor wondered apprehensively. Or
rather did not wonder; for she knew and it was this prophetic knowledge
that made her apprehensive. Perhaps she could forestall him by breaking
the silence herself. Perhaps, if she rattled on, she could keep the
conversation insignificant till it was time for her to go. But there
seemed suddenly to be nothing to say. She felt as though paralysed by
the approach of the inevitable event. She could only sit and wait. And
at last the inevitable duly happened.

‘Do you remember,’ he said slowly, without looking up, ‘what I told you
before you went away?’

‘I thought we’d agreed not to talk about it again.’

He threw back his head with a little laugh. ‘Well, you thought wrong.’
He looked at her and saw in her eyes an expression of distress and
anxiety, an appeal for mercy. But Everard was merciless. He planted his
elbows on the table and leaned towards her. She dropped her eyes.

‘You said I hadn’t changed to look at,’ he said in his soft voice with
its latencies of violence. ‘Well, my mind hasn’t changed either. It’s
still the same, Elinor, still the same as it was when you went away. I
love you just as much, Elinor. No, I love you more.’ Her hand lay limp
on the table in front of her. He stretched out one of his and took it.
‘Elinor,’ he whispered.

She shook her head, without looking at him.

Softly and passionately he talked on. ‘You don’t know what love can be,’
he said. ‘You don’t know what I can give you. Love that’s desperate and
mad, like a forlorn hope. And at the same time tender, like a mother’s
love for a sick child. Love that’s violent and gentle, violent like a
crime and as gentle as sleep.’

‘Words,’ Elinor was thinking, ‘absurd melodramatic words.’ But they
moved her, as his boasting had moved her

‘Please, Everard,’ she said aloud,’ no more.’ She didn’t want to be
moved. With an effort she held her glance steady while she looked into
his face, into those bright and searching eyes. She essayed a laugh, she
shook her head. ‘Because it’s impossible, and you know it.’

‘All I know,’ he said slowly, ‘is that you’re afraid. Afraid of coming
to life. Because you’ve been half dead all these years. You haven’t had
a chance to come fully alive. And you know I can give it you. And you’re
afraid, you’re afraid.’

‘What nonsense!’ she said. It was just ranting and melodrama.

‘And perhaps you’re right, in a way,’ he went on. ‘Being alive, really
alive, isn’t entirely a joke. It’s dangerous. But by God,’ he added, and
the latent violence in his soft voice suddenly broke out into ringing
actuality, ‘it’s exciting.’

‘If you knew what a fright you gave me!’ she said.’shouting like that!’
But it was not only a fright she had had. Her nerves and her very flesh
still crept and quivered with the obscure and violent exultations which
his voice had evoked in her. ‘It’s ridiculous,’ she assured herself. But
it was as though she had heard the voice directly with her body. The
echoes of it seemed to vibrate at her very midriff. ‘Ridiculous,’ she
repeated. And then what was this love he talked about so thrillingly?
Just an occasional brief violence in the intervals of business. He
despised women, resented them because they wasted a man’s time and
energy. She had often heard him say that he had no time for love-making.
His advances were almost an insult—the propositions one makes to a woman
of the streets.

‘Do be reasonable, Everard,’ she said.

Everard withdrew his hand from hers and, with a laugh, leaned back in
his chair. ‘Very well,’ he answered. ‘For to-day.’

‘For every day.’ She felt profoundly relieved. ‘Besides,’ she added,
quoting a phrase of his, with a little ironical smile, ‘you’re not a
member of the leisured class. You’ve got more important things to do
than make love.’

Everard looked at her for a little in silence and his face was grave
with a kind of lowering thoughtfulness. More important things to do? It
was true, of course. He was angry with himself for wanting so much to
have her. Angry with Elinor for keeping him unsatisfied.’shall we talk
about Shakespeare?’ he asked sarcastically. ‘Or the musical glasses?’

 

__

 

The fare was three-and-six. Philip gave the driver two half-crowns and
climbed the steps of the club’s pillared portico pursued by the sound of
thanks. He made a habit of overtipping. It was not out of ostentation or
because he had asked, or meant to ask, special services. (Indeed, few
men could have demanded less of their servants than did Philip, could
have been more patient to put up with bad service, and more willing to
excuse remissness.) His overtipping was the practical expression of a
kind of remorseful and apologetic contempt. ‘My poor devil!’ the
superfluous gratuity seemed to imply, ‘I’m sorry to be your superior.’
And perhaps also there was a shilling’s worth of apology for his very
considerateness as an employer. For if he was unexacting in his demands,
that was due as much to a dread and dislike of unnecessary human
contacts as to consideration and kindness. From those who served him
Philip demanded little, for the good reason that he wanted to have as
little as possible to do with them. Their presence disturbed him. He did
not like to have his privacy intruded upon by alien personalities. To be
compelled to speak with them, to have to establish a direct contact—not
of intelligences, but of wills, feelings, intuitions—with these
intruders was always disagreeable to him. He avoided it as much as he
could; and when contact was necessary, he did his best to dehumanize the
relation. Philip’s generosity was in part a compensation for his inhuman
kindness towards its recipients. It was conscience money.

The doors stood open; he entered. The hall was vast, dim, pillared and
cool. Sir Francis Chantrey’s allegorical marble group of Science and
Virtue subduing the Passions writhed with classical decorum in a niche
on the stairs. He hung up his hat and went to the smokingroom to look at
the papers and await the arrival of his guests. Spandrell was the first
to arrive.

‘Tell me,’ said Philip, as soon as the greetings were over and the
vermouth ordered, ‘tell me quickly, before he comes, what about my
absurd young brother-in-law. What’s happening with him and Lucy
Tantamount?’

Spandrell shrugged his shoulders. ‘What _does_ usually happen on these
occasions? And in any case, is this the place and time to go into
details?’ He indicated the other occupants of the smokingroom. A cabinet
minister, two judges and a bishop were within earshot.

Philip laughed. ‘But I only wanted to know how serious the affair really
was, how long it’s likely to last…’

‘Very serious as far as Walter’s concerned. As for duration—who knows?
But Lucy’s going abroad very soon.’

‘Thank heaven for small mercies! Ah, here you are!’ It was Walter. ‘And
there’s Illidge.’ He waved his hand. The newcomers refused an aperitive.
‘Let’s come and eat at once, then,’ said Philip.

The dining-room at Philip’s club was enormous. A double row of stucco
Corinthian pillars supported a gilded ceiling. From the pale
chocolate-brown walls, the portraits of distinguished members, now
deceased, glared down. Curtains of claretcoloured velvet were looped up
at either side of the six windows, a claretcoloured carpet muffled the
floor and in their claretcoloured liveries the waiters darted about
almost invisibly, like leaf-insects in a forest.

‘I always like this room,’ said Spandrell as they entered. ‘It’s like a
scene for Belshazzar’s feast.’

‘But a very Anglican Belshazzar,’ Walter qualified.

‘Gosh!’ exclaimed Illidge, who had been looking round

‘This is the sort of thing that really does make me feel pleb-ish.’

Philip laughed, rather uncomfortably. Changing the subject, he pointed
out the protectively coloured waiters. They proved the Darwinian
hypothesis. ‘Survival of the fittest,’ he said as they sat down at their
appointed table. ‘The men in other colours must have been killed off by
infuriated members.’ One of the claretcoloured survivors brought the
fish. They began to eat.

‘It’s curious,’ said Illidge, pursuing the train of thought suggested by
his first impressions of the room, ‘it’s really extraordinary that I
should be here at all. Sitting with you, at any rate, as a guest. For
there wouldn’t have been anything so very surprising about my being here
in one of these wine-coloured coats. That at least would have been in
harmony with what the parsons would call “my station in life.”’ He
uttered a brief resentful laugh. ‘But to be sitting with you—that’s
really almost incredible. And it’s all due to the fact that a Manchester
shopkeeper had a son with tendencies to scrofula. If Reggie Wright had
been normally healthy, I’d probably be cobbling shoes in Lancashire. But
luckily Reggie had tubercle bacilli in his lymph-system. The doctors
prescribed a country life. His father took a cottage in our village for
his wife and child, and Reggie went to the village school. But his
father was ambitious for Reggie. (What a disgusting little rat he was!)
‘ Illidge remarked parenthetically. ‘Wanted him to go to Manchester
Grammar School, later on. With a scholarship. Paid our schoolmaster to
give him special coaching. I was a bright boy; the master liked me.
While he was coaching Reggie, he thought he might as well coach me.
Gratis, what’s more. Wouldn’t let my mother pay a penny. Not that she
could have done so very easily, poor woman. The time came, and it was I
who got the scholarship. Reggie failed.’ Illidge laughed. ‘Miserable
scrofulous little squit! But I’m eternally grateful to him and the busy
bacilli in his glands. But for them I’d be carrying on my uncle’s
cobbling business in a Lancashire village. And that’s the sort of thing
one’s life hinges on—some absolutely absurd, million-to-one chance. An
irrelevance, and youi life’s altered.’

‘Not an irrelevance,’ objected Spandrell. ‘Your scholarship wasn’t
irrelevant; it was very much to the point, it was in harmony with you.
Otherwise you wouldn’t have won it, you wouldn’t be here. I doubt if
anything is really irrelevant. Everything that happens Jis intrinsically
like the man it happens to.’

‘That’s a bit oracular, isn’t it?’ Philip objected. ‘Perceiving events,
men distort them—put it like that—so that what happens seems to be like
themselves.’

Spandrell shrugged his shoulders. ‘There may be that sort of distortion.
But I believe that events come ready-made to fit the people they happen
to.’

‘What rot!’ said Illidge, disgustedly.

Philip dissented more politely. ‘But many people can be influenced by
the same event in entirely different and characteristic ways.’

‘I know,’ Spandrell answered. ‘But in some indescribable way the event’s
modified, qualitatively modified, so as to suit the character of each
person involved in it. It’s a great mystery and a paradox.’

‘Not to say an absurdity and impossible,’ put in Illidge.

‘Absurd, then, and impossible,’ Spandrell agreed. ‘But all the same, I
believe that’s how it happens. Why should things be logically
explainable?’

‘Yes, why indeed? ‘ Walter echoed.

‘Still,’ said Philip, ‘your providence that makes the same event
qualitatively different for different peopleisn’t that a bit thick?’

‘No thicker than our being here at all. No thicker than all this.’ With
a wave of his hand he indicated the Belshazzaresque dining-room, the
eaters, the plumcoloured waiters and the Perpetual Secretary of the
British Academy, who happened at that moment to be entering the room
with the Professor of Poetry at the University of Cambridge.

But Philip was argumentatively persistent. ‘But assuming, as the
scientists do, that the simplest hypothesis is the best—though I could
never for the life of me see what justification, beyond human
ineptitude, they had for doing so…’

‘Hear, hear.’

‘What justification?’ repeated Illidge. ‘Only the justification of
observed fact, that’s all. It happens to be found experimentally that
nature does do things in the simplest way.’

‘Or else,’ said Spandrell, ‘that human beings understand only the
simplest explanations. In practice, you couldn’t distinguish between
those alternatives.’

‘But if a thing has a simple, natural explanation, it can’t at the same
time have a complicated supernatural one.’

‘Why not?’ asked Spandrell. ‘You mayn’t be able to understand or measure
the supernatural forces behind the superficially natural ones (whatever
the difference between natural and supernatural may be). But that
doesn’t prove they’re not there. You’re simply raising your stupidity to
the rank of a general law.’

Philip took the opportunity to continue his argument. ‘But assuming, all
the same,’ he broke in before Illidge could speak again, ‘that the
simpler explanation is likely to be the truer—aren’t the facts more
simply explained by saying it’s the individual, with his history and
character, who distorts the event into his own likeness? We can see
individuals, but we can’t see providence; we have to postulate it. Isn’t
it best, if we can do without it, to omit the superfluous postulate?’

‘But _is_ it superfluous?’ said Spandrell. ‘_Can_ you cover the facts
without it? I have my doubts. What about the malleable sort of
people—and we’re all more or less malleable, we’re all more or less made
as well as born? What about the people whose characters aren’t given but
are formed, inexorably, by a series of events all of one type? A run of
luck, if you like to call it that, or a run of bad luck; a run of purity
or a run of impurity; a run of fine heroic chances or a run of ignoble
drab ones. After the run has gone on long enough (and it’s astounding
the way such runs persist), the character will be formed; and then, if
you like to explain it that way, you can say that it’s the individual
who distorts all that happens to him into his own likeness. But before
he had a definite character to distort events into the likeness of—what
then? Who decided the sort of things that should happen to him then?’

‘Who decides whether a penny shall come down heads or tails?’ asked
Illidge contemptuously.

‘But why bring in pennies?’ Spandrell retorted. ‘Why bring in pennies,
when we’re talking about human beings? Consider yourself. Do you _feel_
like a penny when things happen to you?’

‘It doesn’t matter how I feel. Feelings have nothing to do with
objective facts.’

‘But sensations have. Science is the rationalization of
sense-perceptions. Why should one class of psychological intuitions be
credited with scientific value and all others denied it? A direct
intuition of providential action is just as likely to be a bit of
information about objective facts as a direct intuition of blueness and
hardness. And when things happen to one, one doesn’t feel like a penny.
One feels that events are significant; that they’ve been arranged.
Particularly when they occur in series. Tails a hundred times in
succession, shall we say?’

‘Give us the credit of coming down heads,’ said Philip laughing. ‘We’re
the intelligentsia, remember.’ Spandrell frowned; he felt the frivolity,
as an irrelevance. The subject for him was a serious one. ‘When I think
of myself,’ he said, ‘I feel sure that everything that has happened to
me was somehow engineered in advance. As a young boy I had a foretaste
of what I might have grown up to be, but for events. Something entirely
different from this actual Me.’

‘A little angel, what?’ said Illidge.

Spandrell ignored the interruption. ‘But from the time that I was
fifteen onwards, things began happening to me which were prophetically
like what I am now.’ He was silent.

‘And so you grew a tail and hoofs instead of a halo and a pair of wings.
A sad story. Has it ever struck you,’ Illidge went on, turning towards
Walter, ‘you who are an expert on art, or at least ought to be—has it
ever struck you that the paintings of angels are entirely incorrect and
unscientific?’ Walter shook his head. ‘A seventy-kilogram man, if he
developed wings, would have to develop colossal muscles to work them.
And big flying muscles would mean a correspondingly large sternum, like
a bird’s. A ten-stone angel, if he wanted to fly as well as a duck,
would have to have a breastbone projecting at least four or five feet.
Tell your father that, next time he wants to paint a picture of the
Annunciation. All the existing Gabriels are really shockingly
improbable.’

Spandrell, meanwhile, was thinking of those raptures among the
mountains, those delicacies of feeling, those scruples and
sensitivenesses and remorses of his boyhood; and how they were all—the
repentance for a bad action no less than the piercing delight at the
spectacle of a flower or a landscape—in some way bound up with his
sentiment for his mother, somehow rooted and implied in it. He
remembered that _Girls’ School in Paris_, those erotic readings by
flashlight under the sheets. The book had been written in the age when
long black stockings and long black gloves had been the height of
pornographic fashion, when ‘kissing a man without a moustache was like
eating an egg without salt.’ The seductive and priapic major’s
moustaches had been long, curly and waxed. What shame he had felt and
what remorse! Struggled how hard, and prayed how earnestly for strength!
And the god to whom he had prayed wore the likeness of his mother. To
resist temptation was to be worthy of her. Succumbing, he betrayed her,
he denied God. He had begun to triumph. And then, one morning, out of
the blue, came the news that she was going to marry Major Knoyle. Major
Knoyle’s moustaches were also curly.

‘Augustine and the Calvinists were right,’ he said aloud, breaking in on
the discussion of Seraphim’s breastbones.

‘Still harping?’ said Illidge.

‘God means to save some people and damn others.’

‘Or rather he might do so if (a) he existed, (b) there were such a thing
as salvation, and (c)…’

‘When I think of the War,’ Spandrell went on, interrupting him, ‘what it
might have been for me and what in fact it was…’ He shrugged his
shoulders. ‘Yes, Augustine was right.’

‘Well, I must say,’ said Philip, ‘I’ve always been very grateful to
Augustine, or whoever else it may have been, for giving me a game leg.
It prevented me from being a hero; but it also preserved me from
becoming a corpse.’

Spandrell looked at him; the corers of his wide mouth ironically
twitched. ‘Your accident guaranteed you a quiet detached life. In other
words, the event was like you. Just as the War, so far as I was
concerned, was exactly like me. I’d been up at Oxford a year, when it
began,’ he went on.

‘The dear old College, what?’ said Illidge, who could never hear the
name of one of the more ancient and expensive seats of learning
mentioned without making some derisive comment.

‘Three lively terms and two still more lively vacs—discovering alcohol
and poker and the difference between women in the flesh and women in the
pubescent imagination. Such an apocalypse, the first real woman!’ he
added parenthetically. ‘And at the same time, such a revolting
disappointment! So flat, in a way, after the superheated fancy and the
pornographic book.’

‘Which is a tribute to art,’ said Philip. ‘As I’ve so often pointed
out.’ He smiled at Walter, who blushed, remembering what his
brother-in-law had said about the dangers of trying to make love after
high poetic models. ‘We’re brought up topsy-turvy,’ Philip went on. ‘Art
before life; _Romeo and Juliet_ and filthy stories before marriage or
its equivalents. Hence all young modern literature is disillusioned.
Inevitably. In the good old days poets began by losing their virginity;
and then, with a complete knowledge of the real thing and just where and
how it was unpoetical, deliberately set to work to idealize and beautify
it. We start with the poetical and proceed to the unpoetical. If boys
and girls lost their virginities as early as they did in Shakespeare’s
day, there’d be a revival of the Elizabethan love lyric.’

‘You may be right,’ said Spandrell. ‘All I know is that, when I
discovered the reality, I found it disappointing—but attractive, all the
same. Perhaps so attractive just because it was so disappointing. The
heart’s a curious sort of manure—heap; dung calls to dung, and the great
charm of vice consists in its stupidity and sordidness. It attracts
because it’s so repellent. But repellent it always remains. And I
remember when the War came, how exultantly glad I was to have a chance
of getting out of the muck and doing something decent, for a change.’

‘For King and Country!’ mocked Illidge.

‘Poor Rupert Brooke! One smiles now at that thing of his about honour
having come back into the world again. Events have made it seem a bit
comical.’

‘It was a bad joke even when it was written,’ said Illidge.

‘No, no. At the time it was exactly what I felt myself.’

‘Of course you did. Because you were what Brooke was—a spoilt and blase
member of the leisured class. You needed a new thrill, that was all. The
War and that famous “honour” of yours provided it.’

Spandrell shrugged his shoulders. ‘Explain it like that if you want. All
I say is that in August 1914 I wanted to do something noble. I’d even
have been quite pleased to get killed.’

‘“Rather death than dishonour,” what?’

‘Yes, quite literally,’ said Spandrell. ‘For I can assure you that all
the melodramas are perfectly realistic. There are certain occasions when
people do say that sort of thing. The only defect of melodrama is that
it leads you to believe that they say it all the time. They don’t,
unfortunately. But “rather death than dishonour” was exactly what I was
thinking in August 1914. If the alternative to death was the stupid kind
of life I’d been leading. I wanted to get killed.’

‘There speaks the gentleman of leisure again,’ said Illidge.

‘And then, just because I’d been brought up a good deal abroad and knew
three foreign languages, because I had a mother who was too fond of me
and a stepfather with military influence, I was transferred willynilly
into the Intelligence. God was really bent on damning me.’

‘He was very kindly trying to save your life,’ said Philip.

‘But I didn’t want it saved. Not unless I could do something decent with
it, something heroic for preference, or at least difficult and risky.
Instead of which they put me on to liaison work and then to hunting
spies. Of all the sordid and ignoble businesses…’

‘But after all the trenches weren’t so very romantic.’

‘No, but they were dangerous. Sitting in a trench, you needed courage
and endurance. A spy catcher was perfectly safe and didn’t have to
display any of the nobler virtues; while as to his opportunities for
vice… Those towns behind the lines, and Paris, and the ports-whores and
alcohol were their chief products.’

‘But after all,’ said Philip, ‘those are avoidable evils.’ Naturally
cold, he found it easy to be reasonable.

‘Not avoidable by me,’ Spandrell answered. ‘Particularly in those
circumstances. I’d wanted to do something decent, and I’d been
prevented. So it became a kind of point of honour to do the opposite of
what I’d desired. A point of honour—can you understand that?’

Philip shook his head. ‘A little too subtle for me.’

‘But just imagine yourself in the presence of a man you respect and like
and admire more than you’ve ever admired and liked anyone before.’

Philip nodded. But in point of fact, he reflected, he had never deeply
and whole-heartedly admired anyone. Theoretically, yes; but never in
practice, never to the point of wanting to make himself a disciple, a
follower. He had adopted other people’s opinions, even their modes of
life—but always with the underlying conviction that they weren’t really
his, that he could and certainly would abandon them as easily as he had
taken them up. And whenever there had seemed any risk of his being
carried away, he had deliberately resisted, had fought or fled for his
liberty.

‘You’re overcome with your feeling for him,’ Spandrell continued. ‘And
you go towards him with outstretched hands, offering your friendship and
devotion. His only response is to put his hands in his pockets and turn
away. What would you do then? ‘ Philip laughed. ‘I should have to
consult Vogue’s _Book of Etiquette_.’

‘You’d knock him down. At least that’s what I would do. It would be a
point of honour. And the more you’d admired, the more violent the knock
and the longer the subsequent dance on his carcase. That’s why the
whores and the alcohol weren’t avoidable. On the contrary, it became a
point of honour never to avoid them. That life in France was like the
life I’d been leading before the War—only much nastier and stupider, and
utterly unrelieved by any redeeming feature. And after a year of it, I
was desperately wangling to cling to my dishonour and avoid death.
Augustine was right, I tell you,; we’re damned or saved in advance. The
things that happen are a providential conspiracy.’

‘Providential balderdash!’ said Illidge; but in the silence that
followed he thought again how extraordinary it was, how almost
infinitely improbable that he should be sitting there, drinking claret,
with the Perpetual Secretary of the British Academy two tables away and
the second oldest Judge of the High Court just behind him. Twenty years
before the odds against, his being there under the gilded ceiling had
been at the rate of several hundreds or thousands of millions to one.
But there, all the same, he was. He took another draught of claret.

And Philip, meanwhile, was remembering that immense black horse,
kicking, plunging, teeth bared and cars laid back; and how it suddenly
started forward, dragging the carter along with it; and the rumble of
the wheels; and, ‘Aie!’ his own scream; and how he shrank back against
the steep bank, how he tried to climb, slipped, fell; and the appalling
rush and trampling of the giant; and ‘Aie, aie!’ the huge shape between
him and the sun, the great hoofs and suddenly an annihilating pain.

And through the same silence Walter was thinking of that afternoon when,
for the first time, he entered Lucy Tantamount’s drawing-room.
‘Everything that happens is intrinsically like the man it happens to.’

 

__

 

‘But what’s her secret?’ Marjorie asked. ‘Why should he have gone mad
about her? Because he has gone mad. Literally.’

‘Isn’t it rather an obvious secret?’ said Elinor. What she found queer
was not that Walter should have lost his head about Lucy, but that he
should ever have seen anything attractive in poor Marjorie. ‘After all,’
she continued, ‘Lucy’s very amusing and alive. And besides,’ she added,
remembering Philip’s exasperating comments on the dog they had run over
at Bombay, ‘she has a bad reputation.’

‘But is that attractive? A bad reputation?’ The tea-pot hung suspended
over the cup as she asked.

‘Of course. It means that the woman who enjoys it is accessible. No
sugar, thanks.’

‘But surely,’ said Marjorie, handing her the cup, men don’t want to
share their mistress with other lovers.’

‘Perhaps not. But the fact that a woman has had other lovers gives a man
hope. “Where others have succeeded, I can succeed.” That’s the man’s
argument. And at the same time a bad reputation makes him immediately
think of the woman in terms of love-making. It gives a twist to his
imaginations about her. When you met Lola Montes, her reputation made
you automatically think of bedrooms. You didn’t think of bedrooms when
you met Florence Nightingale. Only sickrooms. Which are rather
different,’ Elinor concluded.

There was a silence. It was horrid of her, Elinor was thinking, not to
feel more sympathetic. But there it was; she didn’t. She reminded
herself of the abominable life the poor woman had had—first with her
husband, and now with Walter. Really abominable. But those dreadful,
dangling, sham jade earrings! And the voice, the earnest manner…

Marjorie looked up. ‘But is it possible that men can be so easily taken
in? By such a cheap bait? Men like Walter. Like Walter,’ she insisted.
‘Can men like that be such…such…’

‘Pigs?’ suggested Elinor. ‘Apparently they can. It seems odd,
certainly.’ Perhaps it would be better, she reflected, if Philip were
rather more of a pig and less of a hermit crab. Pigs are human—all too
much so, perhaps; but still human. Whereas hermit crabs are doing their
best to be molluscs.

Marjorie shook her head and sighed. ‘It’s extraordinary,’ she said with
a conviction that struck Elinor as rather ludicrous. ‘What sort of an
opinion can she have of herself?’ she wondered. But Marjorie’s good
opinion was not for herself so much as for virtue. She had been brought
up to believe in the ugliness of vice and the animal part of human
nature, the beauty of virtue and the spirit. And cold by nature, she had
the cold woman’s utter incomprehension of sensuality. That Walter should
suddenly cease to be the Walter she had known and behave ‘like a pig,’
as Elinor rather crudely put it, was to her really extraordinary, quite
apart from any personal considerations of her own attractiveness.

‘And then you must remember,’ Elinor said aloud, ‘Lucy has another
advantage where men like Walter are concerned. She’s one of those women
who have the temperament of a man. Men can get pleasure out of casual
encounters. Most women can’t; they’ve got to be in love, more or less.
They’ve got to be emotionally involved. All but a few of them. Lucy’s
one of the few. She has the masculine detachment. She can separate her
appetite from the rest of her soul.’

‘What a horror!’ Marjorie shuddered.

Elinor observed the shudder and was annoyed by it into contradiction.

‘Do you think so? It seems to me sometimes rather an enviable talent.’
She laughed and Marjorie was duly shocked by her cynicism. ‘For a boy
with Walter’s shyness and timidity,’ she went on, ‘there’s something
very exciting about that kind of bold temperament. It’s the opposite of
his. Reckless, without scruple, wilful, unconscientious. I can so well
understand its going to his head.’ She thought of Everard Webley. ‘Force
is always attractive,’ she added. ‘Particularly if one lacks it oneself,
as Walter does. Lucy’s obviously a force. You may not like that kind of
force.’ She herself didn’t much like Webley’s energetic ambition. ‘But
you can’t help admiring the force in itself. It’s like Niagara. Fine,
even though you mayn’t want to be standing underneath. May I take
another piece of bread and butter?’ She helped herself. Out of
politeness Marjorie also took another slice. ‘Delicious brown bread,’
Elinor commented and wondered how Walter could have lived with anyone
who crooked the little finger of the hand that held the tea-cup and who
took such horribly small bites from a slice of bread and then chewed
only with the front teeth, like a guinea-pig—as though the process of
eating were an indelicate and rather disgusting affair.

‘But what do you think I ought to do?’ Marjorie brought herself finally
to ask.

Elinor shrugged her shoulders. ‘What can you do, but hope he’ll get what
he wants and soon be sick of it.’

It was obvious; but Marjorie thought her rather unfeeling, hard and
cruel to have said it.

 

__

 

In London the Quarleses sketchily inhabited what had once been the last
of a row of stables in a Belgravian mews. You passed under an archway. A
cliff of cream-coloured stucco rose sheer on your left—windowless, for
the Belgravians had declined to be aware of the squalid domesticity of
their dependants. On the right stretched the low line of stables with
the single storey of living rooms above, tenanted now by enormous
Daimlers and the families of their chauffeurs. The mews ended in a wall,
over the top of which you could see the waving planetrees of Belgravian
gardens. The Quarleses doorstep lay in the shadow of this wall. Set
between the gardens and the sparsely inhabited mews, the little house
was very quiet. The coming and going of limousines and the occasional
yelling of a child were the only disturbances.

‘But fortunately,’ Philip had remarked, ‘the rich can afford to buy
silent cars. And there’s something about internal combustion engines
that makes for birth control. Who ever heard of a chauffeur with eight
children?’ Coach-house and horse-boxes had been knocked together in the
reconstruction of the stable, into a single spacious living-room. Two
screens hinted at a division. Behind the screen on the right, as you
entered, was the drawing-room end of the apartment—chairs and a sofa
grouped around the fireplace. The screen on the left concealed the
dining-table and the entrance to a tiny kitchen. A little staircase
slanted up across one of the walls, leading to the bedrooms. Yellow
cretonnes mimicked the sunshine that never shone through the
northward-looking windows. There were many books. Old Bidlake’s portrait
of Elinor as a young girl hung over the mantelpiece.

Philip was lying on the sofa, book in hand. ‘Very remarkable,’ he read,
‘is Mr. Tate Regan’s account of pigmy parasitic males in three species
of Cerativid Anglerfishes. In the Arctic _Ceratias holbolli_ a female
about eight inches in length carried on her ventral surface two males of
about two-and-a-half inches. The snout and chin region of the dwarf
malewas permanently attached to a papilla of the female’s skin, and the
bloodvessels of the two were confluent. The male is without teeth; the
mouth is useless; the alimentary canal is degenerate. In _photocarynus
spiniceps_ the female, about two-and-a-half inches in length bore a male
under half an inch long on the top of her head in front of her right
eye. In _Edriolychnus schmidti_ the dimensions were about the same as in
the last case, and the female carried the pigmy male upside down on the
inner surface of her gill-cover.’

Philip put down the book and feeling in his breast pocket pulled out his
pocket diary and his fountain-pen. ‘Female Anglerfishes,’ he wrote,
‘carry dwarf parasitic males attached to their bodies. Draw the obvious
comparison, when my Walter rushes after his Lucy. What about a scene at
an aquarium? They go in with a scientific friend who shows them the
female Anglers and their husbands. The twilight, the fishes—perfect
background.’ He was just putting his diary away, when another thought
occurred to him. He reopened it. ‘Make it the aquarium at Monaco and
describe Monte Carlo and the whole Riviera in terms of deep-sea
monstrosity.’ He lit a cigarette and went on with his book.

There was a rap at the door. He got up and opened; it was Elinor.

‘What an afternoon!’ She dropped into a chair.

‘Well, what news of Marjorie?’ he asked.

‘No _news_,’ she sighed, as she took off her hat. ‘The poor creature’s
as dreary as ever. But I’m very sorry for her.’

‘What did you advise her to do?’

‘Nothing. What else could she do? And Walter?’ she asked in her turn.
‘Did you get a chance to be the heavy father?’

‘The middle-weight father, shall we say. I persuaded him to come down to
Chamford with Marjorie.’

‘Did you? That was a real triumph.’

‘Not quite such a triumph as you think. I had no enemy to fight with.
Lucy’s going to Paris next Saturday.’

‘Let’s hope she’ll stay there. Poor Walter!’

‘Yes, poor Walter. But I must tell you about Anglerfishes.’ He told her.
‘One of these days,’ he concluded,’ I shall really have to write a modem
Bestiary. Such moral lessons! But tell me, how was Everard? I quite
forgot you’d seen him.’

‘You would have forgotten,’ she answered scornfully.

‘Would I? I don’t know why.’

‘No, you wouldn’t.’

‘I’m crushed,’ said Philip with a mock humility. There was a silence.

‘Everard’s in love with me,’ said Elinor at last without looking at her
husband and in the flattest, most matter-of-fact of voices.

‘Is that news?’ asked Philip. ‘I thought he was an old admirer.’

‘But it’s serious,’ Elinor went on.’very serious.’ She waited anxiously
for his comment. It came, after a little pause.

‘That must be less amusing.’

Less amusing! Couldn’t he understand? After all, he wasn’t a fool. Or
perhaps he did understand and was only pretending not to; perhaps he was
secretly glad about Everard. Or was it just indifference that made him
blind? Nobody understands what he does not feel. Philip couldn’t
understand her because he didn’t feel as she felt. He was confident in
the belief that other people were as reasonably lukewarm as he was
himself. ‘But I like him,’ she said aloud in a last desperate attempt to
provoke him into at least a semblance of caring. If only he’d show
himself jealous, or sad, or angry, how happy she’d be, how grateful!
‘Very much,’ she went on. ‘There’s something very attractive about him.
That passionateness of his, that violence….’

Philip laughed. ‘Quite the irresistible cave-man, in fact.’

Elinor rose with a little sigh, picked up her hat and bag, and bending
over her husband’s chair, kissed him on the forehead, as though she were
saying goodbye; then turned away and still without a word went upstairs
to her bedroom.

Philip picked up his abandoned book. ‘_Bonellia viridis_,’ he read, ‘is
a green worm, not uncommon in the Mediterranean. The female has a body
about the size of a prune, bearing a string-like, terminally bifid, very
contractile proboscis, which may be two feet long. But the male is
microscopic and lives in what may be called the reproductive duct
(modified nephridium) of the female. It has no mouth and depends on what
it absorbs parasitically through its ciliated surfaces….’

Philip once more put down the book. He was wondering whether he oughtn’t
to go upstairs and say something to Elinor. He was sure she’d never
really care for Everard. But perhaps he oughtn’t to take it so much for
granted. She had seemed rather upset. Perhaps she had expected him to
say something—how much he cared for her, how wretched he’d be, how
angry, if she were to stop caring for him. But these precisely were the
almost unsayable things. In the end he decided not to go upstairs. He’d
wait and see, he’d put it off to another time. He went on reading about
_Bonellia viridis_.


CHAPTER XXII

_From Philip Quarles’s Notebook_

 

To-day, at Lucy Tantamount’s, I was the victim of a very odd association
of ideas. Lucy, as usual, was the French tricolor; blue round the eyes,
a scarlet mouth and the rest dead white against a background of shiny
metal-black hair. I made some sort of a joke. She laughed, opening her
mouth—and her tongue and gums were so much paler than the paint on her
lips that they seemed (it gave me a queer creepy shock of astonished
horror) quite bloodless and white by contrast. And then, without
transition, I was standing in front of those sacred crocodiles in the
palace gardens at Jaipur, and the Indian guide was throwing them bits of
meat, and the inside of the animals’ mouths was almost white, as though
the mouths were lined with a slightly glace cream-coloured kid. And
that’s how one’s mind naturally works. And one has intellectual
pretensions! Well, well. But what a windfall for my novel! I shall begin
the book with it. My Walterish hero makes his Lucyish siren laugh and
immediately (to his horror; but he goes on longing for her, with an
added touch of perversity, all the same and perhaps all the more) sees
those disgusting crocodiles he had been looking at in India a month
before. In this way I strike the note of strangeness and fantasticality
at once. Everything’s incredible, if you can skin off the crust of
obviousness our habits put on it. Every object and event contains within
itself an infinity of depths within depths. Nothing’s in the least like
what it seems—or rather it’s like several million other things at the
same time. All India rushes like a cinema film through his head while
she’s laughing and showing—she the beloved, longedfor, lusted-after,
beautiful one—those gruesomely bloodless crocodile’s gums and palate.

 

__

 

The musicalization of fiction. Not in the symbolist way, by
subordinating sense to sound. (_Pleuvent les bleus baisers des astres
taciturnes. Mere glossolalia_). But on a large scale, in the
construction. Meditate on Beethoven. The changes of moods, the abrupt
transitions. (Majesty alternating with a joke, for example, in the first
movement of the B flat major quartet. Comedy suddenly hinting at
prodigious and tragic solemnities in the scherzo of the C sharp minor
quartet.) More interesting still the modulations, not merely from one
key to another, but from mood to mood. A theme is stated, then
developed, pushed out of shape, imperceptibly deformed, until, though
still recognizably the same, it has become quite different. In sets of
variations the process is carried a step further. Those incredible
Diabelli variations, for example. The whole range of thought and
feeling, yet all in organic relation to a ridiculous little waltz tune.
Get this into a novel. How? The abrupt transitions are easy enough. All
you need is a sufficiency of characters and parallel, contrapuntal
plots. While Jones is murdering a wife, Smith is wheeling the
perambulator in the park. You alternate the themes. More interesting,
the modulations and variations are also more difficult. A novelist
modulates by reduplicating situations and characters. He shows several
people falling in love, or dying, or praying in different
ways—dissimilars solving the same problem. Or, _vice versa_, similar
people confronted with dissimilar problems. In this way you can modulate
through all the aspects of your theme, you can write variations in any
number of different moods. Another way: The novelist can assume the
god-like creative privilege and simply elect to consider the events of
the story in their various aspects—emotional, scientific, economic,
religious, metaphysical, _etc._ He will modulate from one to the
other—as from the aesthetic to the physico-chemical aspect of things,
from the religious to the physiological or financial. But perhaps this
is a too tyrannical imposition of the author’s will. Some people would
think so. But need the author be so retiring? I think we’re a bit too
squeamish about these personal appearances nowadays.

 

__

 

Put a novelist into the novel. He justifies aesthetic generalizations,
which may be interesting—at least to me. He also justifies experiment.
Specimens of his work may illustrate other possible or impossible ways
of telling a story. And if you have him telling parts of the same story
as you are, you can make a variation on the theme. But why draw the line
at one novelist inside your novel? Why not a second inside his? And a
third inside the novel of the second? And so on to infinity, like those
advertisements of Quaker Oats where there’s a quaker holding a box of
oats, on which is a picture of another quaker holding another box of
oats, on which etc., _etc._ Alt about the tenth remove you might have a
novelist telling your story in algebraic symbols or in terms of
variations in blood-pressure, pulse, secretion of ductless glands and
reaction times.

 

__

 

Novel of ideas. The character of each personage must be implied, as far
as possible, in the ideas of which he is the mouthpiece. In so far as
theories are rationalizations of sentiments, instincts, dispositions of
soul, this is feasible. The chief defect of the novel of ideas is that
you must write about people who have ideas to express—which excludes all
but about .01 per cent. of the human race. Hence the real, the
congenital novelists don’t write such books. But then I never pretended
to be a congenital novelist.

 

__

 

The great defect of the novel of ideas is that it’s a made-up affair.
Necessarily; for people who can reel off neatly formulated notions
aren’t quite real; they’re slightly monstrous. Living with monsters
becomes rather tiresome in the long run.

 

__

 

The instinct of acquisitiveness has more perverts, I believe, than the
instinct of sex. At any rate, people seem to me odder about money than
about even their amours. Such amazing meannesses as one’s always coming
across, particularly among the rich! Such fantastic extravagances too.
Both qualities, often, in the same person. And then the hoarders, the
grubbers, the people who are entirely and almost unceasingly preoccupied
with money. Nobody’s unceasingly preoccupied with sex in the same way—I
suppose because there’s a physiological satisfaction possible in sexual
matters, while there’s none where money’s concerned. When the body’s
satiated, the mind stops thinking about food or women. But the hunger
for money and possessions is an almost purely mental thing. There’s no
physical satisfaction possible. That would account for the excesses and
perversities of acquisitiveness. Our bodies almost compel the sexual
instinct to behave in a normal fashion. Perversions must be violent
before they overrule the normal physiological tendencies. But where
acquisitiveness is concerned, there’s no regulating body, no lump of too
too solid flesh to be pushed out of the grooves of physiological habit.
The slightest tendency to perversion is at once made manifest. But
perhaps the word ‘perversion’ is meaningless in this context. For
perversion implies the existence of a norm from which it departs. What
is the norm of acquisitiveness? One guesses vaguely at some golden mean;
but is it in fact the true statistical norm? I should imagine myself
rather ‘under-acquisitivized’; less interested in money and possessions
in general than the average. Illidge would say it’s entirely due to
having been brought up in an atmosphere of easy money. It may be partly
true. But not entirely, I think. Consider the many people born rich who
are preoccupied with nothing but money making. No, my
under-acquisitiveness is hereditary as well as acquired. In any case I
find myself uninterested in possessions and rather unsympathetic with,
and without understanding of, those who are. No predominantly
acquisitive character has appeared in any of my stories. It is a defect;
for acquisitives are obviously very common in real life. But I doubt if
I could make such a character interesting—not being interested myself in
the acquisitive passion. Balzac could; circumstances and heredity had
made him passionately interested in money. But when one finds a thing
boring, one’s apt to be boring about it.


CHAPTER XXIII

The writing table was under the window. Dimmed by the smoky air of
Sheffield, a shaft of yellow, viscous-looking sunlight lit up a corner
of the table and a patch of red and flowered carpet. Everard Webley was
writing a letter. His pen rushed over the paper. Whatever he did was
done with rapidity and decision.

‘Dearest Elinor,’ he wrote. ‘_De profundis clamavi_, from the depths of
this repulsive hotel bedroom and the even lower depths of this political
tour of the North, I call to you.’ (He wrote his I’s as though they were
pillars—a strong straight shaft and two little transverse strokes at top
and bottom for capital and base. The crosses on his t’s were firm and
uncompromising.) ‘But I don’t suppose you listen. I’ve always felt such
sympathy for the savages who give their gods a good beating when they
don’t answer prayers or respond to sacrifices. England expects that
every god this day will do his duty. And if he doesn’t—well, so much the
worse for him; he’ll get a taste of the cat-o’-nine-tails. The modern
worship of a remote Ineffable, whose acts one doesn’t criticize, seems
to me very unsatisfactory. What’s the good of making a contract with
somebody who can break it at will and against whom one has no redress?
Women have gone the same way as the gods. They mayn’t be questioned.
You’re not allowed to compel them to do their duty by their worshippers
or fulfil their part in the natural contract between the sexes. I write,
I implore. But, like the newfangled god of modern philosophies and broad
theologies, you don’t listen. And one’s not allowed to take reprisals;
it’s bad form to beat the defaulting god. It isn’t done. All the same, I
warn you: one of these days I’ll try the good old methods. I’ll do a
slight Rape of the Sabines and then where will your ineffable remote
superiority be? How I hate you really for compelling me to love you so
much! It’s such a damnable injustice—getting so much passion and longing
out of me and giving nothing in return. And you not here to receive the
punishment you deserve! I have to take a vicarious revenge on the
ruffians who disturb my meetings. I had a terrific battle last night.
Howls, booing, organized singing of the International. But I fought them
down. Literally at one moment. I had to give one of the ringleaders a
black eye. Poor devil! He was only paying for your misdeeds. He was your
scapegoat. For it was really you I was fighting. If it hadn’t been for
you I wouldn’t have been half so savage. I probably wouldn’t have won.
So indirectly I owe you my victory. For which I’m duly grateful. But
another time there won’t be any Communists to vent my rage on. The next
fight will be against the real enemy—against you. So be careful, my
dear. I’ll try to stop short of black eyes; but in the heat of the
moment one never knows. But seriously, Elinor, seriously. Why are you so
cold and aloof and dead? Why do you shut yourself off from me? I think
of you so incessantly, so insistently. The thought of you is always
there. It lies hidden, a latency, in the most unlikely things and
places, ready at the command of some chance association to jump out at
me from its ambush. Haunting, like a guilty conscience. If I…’

There was a knock at the door. It was Hugo Brockle who came in. Everard
looked at his watch, then at Hugo. The expression on his face was
menacing. ‘Why are you so late?’ he asked in a terrifyingly quiet voice.

Hugo blushed. ‘I hadn’t realized the time.’ It was only too true. He had
been lunching with the Upwiches, twenty miles away across the moors.
Polly Logan was staying with them. After lunch old Upwich and the others
had gone to play a round of golf on the private links in the park.
Polly, providentially, didn’t play. He had taken her for a walk through
the woods along the river. How should he have realized the time? ‘I’m
sorry,’ he added.

‘I should hope you were,’ said Everard and the latent violence broke out
from under his quietness. ‘I tell you to be back at five and it’s now a
quarter past six. When you’re with me on British Freeman business you’re
under military discipline. My orders are to be obeyed, do you
understand? Do you understand?’ he insisted.

Sheepishly Hugo nodded. ‘Yes.’

‘And now go away and see that all the arrangements for this evening’s
meeting have been properly made. And mind, this sort of thing mustn’t
happen again. You won’t get off so lightly next time.’

Hugo shut the door after him. All the anger instantly vanished from
Everard’s face. He believed in frightening his subordinates from time to
time. Anger, he always found, was an excellent weapon, so long as you
didn’t let yourself be mastered by it. He never did. Poor Hugo! he
smiled to himself and went on with his letter. Ten minutes later Hugo
came in to say that dinner was ready. The meeting was at eight; they had
to eat very early.

 

__

 

‘But it’s so silly, all this political squabbling,’ said Rampion, his
voice shrill with exasperation,’so utterly silly. Bolsheviks and
Fascists, Radicals and Conservatives, Communists and British
Freemen—what the devil are they all fighting about? I’ll tell you.
They’re fighting to decide whether we shall go to hell by communist
express train or capitalist racing motor car, by individualist ‘bus or
collectivist tram running on the rails of state control. The
destination’s the same in every case. They’re all of them bound for
hell, all headed for the same psychological impasse and the social
collapse that results from psychological collapse. The only point of
difference between them is: How shall we get there? It’s simply
impossible for a man of sense to be interested in such disputes. For the
man of sense the important thing is hell, not the means of transport to
be employed in getting there. The question for the man of sense is: Do
we or do we not want to go to hell? And his answer is: No, we don’t. And
if that’s his answer, then he won’t have anything to do with any of the
politicans. Because they all want to land us in hell. All, without
exception. Lenin _and_ Mussolini, MacDonald _and_ Baldwin. All equally
anxious to take us to hell and only squabbling about the means of taking
us.’

‘Some of them may take us a little more slowly than others,’ suggested
Philip.

Rampion shrugged his shoulders. ‘But so very little more slowly that it
wouldn’t make any appreciable difference. They all believe in
industrialism in one form or another, they all believe in
Americanization. Think of the Bolshevist ideal. America but much more
so. America with government departments taking the place of trusts and
state officials instead of rich men. And then the ideal of the rest of
Europe. The same thing, only with the rich men preserved. Machinery and
government officials there. Machinery and Alfred Mond or Henry Ford
here. The machinery to take us to hell; the rich or the officials to
drive it. You think one set may drive more cautiously than the other?
Perhaps you’re right. But I can’t see that there’s anything to choose
between them. They’re all equally in a hurry. In the name of science,
progress and human happiness! Amen and step on the gas.’

Philip nodded. ‘They do step on it all right,’ he said. ‘They get a move
on. Progress. But as you say, it’s probably in the direction of the
bottomless pit.’

‘And the only thing the reformers can find to talk about is the shape,
colour and steering arrangements of the vehicle. Can’t the imbeciles see
that it’s the direction that matters, that we’re entirely on the wrong
road and ought to go back—preferably on foot, without the stinking
machine?’

‘You may be right,’ said Philip. ‘But the trouble is that, given our
existing world, you can’t go back, you can’t scrap the machine. That is,
you can’t do it unless you’re prepared to kill off about half the human
race. Industrialism made possible the doubling of the world’s population
in a hundred years. If you want to get rid of industrialism, you’ve got
to get back to where you started. That’s to say, you’ve got to slaughter
half the existing number of men and women. Which might, _sub specie
aeternitatis_ or merely _historiac_, be an excellent thing. But hardly a
matter of practical politics.’

‘Not at the moment,’ Rampion agreed. ‘But the next war and the next
revolution will make it only too practical.’

‘Possibly. But one shouldn’t count on wars and revolutions. Because, if
you count on them happening, they certainly will happen.’

‘They’ll happen,’ said Rampion, ‘whether you count on them or not.
Industrial progress means over-production, means the need for getting
new markets, means international rivalry, means war. And mechanical
progress means more specialization and standardization of work, means
more ready-made and unindividual amusements, means diminution of
initiative and creativeness, means more intellectualism and the
progressive atrophy of all the vital and fundamental things in human
nature, means increased boredom and restlessness, means finally a kind
of individual madness that can only result in social revolution. Count
on them or not, wars and revolutions are inevitable, if things are
allowed to go on as they are at present.’

‘So the problem will solve itself,’ said Philip.

‘Only by destroying itself. When humanity’s destroyed, obviously
there’ll be no more problem. But it seems a poor sort of solution. I
believe there may be another, even within the framework of the present
system. A temporary one while the system’s being modified in the
direction of a permanent solution. The root of the evil’s in the
individual psychology; so it’s there, in the individual psychology, that
you’d have to begin. The first step would be to make people live
dualistically, in two compartments. In one compartment as industrialized
workers, in the other as human beings. As idiots and machines for eight
hours out of every twentyfour and real human beings for the rest.’

‘Don’t they do that already?’

‘Of course they don’t. They live as idiots and machines all the time, at
work and in their leisure. Like idiots and machines, but imagining they
‘reliving like civilized humans, even like gods. The first thing to do
is to make them admit that they are idiots and machines during working
hours. “Our civilization being what it is,” this is what you’ll have to
say to them,” you’ve got to spend eight hours out of every twentyfour as
a mixture between an imbecile and a sewing machine. It’s very
disagreeable, I know. It’s humiliating and disgusting. But there you
are. You’ve got to do it; otherwise the whole fabric of our world will
fall to bits and we’ll all starve. Do the job, then, idiotically and
mechanically; and spend your leisure hours in being a real complete man
or woman, as the case may be. Don’t mix the two lives together; keep the
bulkheads watertight between them. The genuine human life in your
leisure hours is the real thing. The other’s just a dirty job that’s got
to be done. And never forget that it is dirty and, except in so far as
it keeps you fed and society intact, utterly unimportant, utterly
irrelevant to the real human life. Don’t be deceived by the canting
rogues who talk of the sanctity of labour and the Christian Service that
business men do their fellows. It’s all lies. Your work’s just a nasty,
dirty job, made unfortunately necessary by the folly of your ancestors.
They piled up a mountain of garbage and you’ve got to go on digging it
away, for fear it might stink you to death, dig for dear life, while
cursing the memory of the maniacs who made all the dirty work for you to
do. But don’t try to cheer yourself up by pretending the nasty
mechanical job is a noble one. It isn’t; and the only result of saying
and believing that it is, will be to lower your humanity to the level of
the dirty work. If you believe in business as Service and the sanctity
of labour, you’ll merely turn yourself into a mechanical idiot for
twentyfour hours out of the twentyfour. Admit it’s dirty, hold your nose
and do it for eight hours and then concentrate on being a real human
being in your leisure. A real complete human being. Not a newspaper
reader, not a jazzer, not a radio fan. The industrialists who 1purvey
standardized ready-made amusements to the masses are doing their best to
make you as much of a mechanical imbecile in your leisure as in your
hours of work. But don’t let them. Make the effort of being human.”
That’s what you’ve got to say to people; that’s the lesson you’ve got to
teach the young. You’ve got to persuade everybody that all this grand
industrial civilization is just a bad smell and that the real,
significant life can only be lived apart from it. It’ll be a very long
time before decent living and industrial smell can be reconciled.
Perhaps, indeed, they’re irreconcilable. It remains to be seen. In the
meantime, at any rate, we must shovel the garbage and bear the smell
stoically, and in the intervals try to lead the real human life.’

‘It’s a good programme,’ said Philip. ‘But I don’t see you winning many
votes on it at the next election.’

‘That’s the trouble.’ Rampion frowned. ‘One would have them all against
one. For the only thing they’re all agreed on—Tories, Liberals,
Socialists, Bolsheviks—is the intrinsic excellence of the industrial
stink and the necessity of standardizing and specializing every trace of
genuine manhood or womanhood out of the human race. And we’re expected
to take an interest in politics. Well, well.’ He shook his head. ‘Let’s
think about something pleasanter. Look, I want to show you this
picture.’ He crossed the studio and pulled out one from a stack of
canvases leaning against the wall. ‘There,’ he said when he had set it
up on an easel. Seated on the crest of a grassy bank, where she formed
the apex of the pyramidal composition, a naked woman was suckling a
child. Below and in front of her to the left crouched a man, his bare
back turned to the spectator, and in the corresponding position on the
right stood a little boy. The crouching man was playing with a couple of
tiny leopard cubs that occupied the centre of the picture, a little
below the seated mother’s feet; the little boy looked on. Close behind
the woman and filling almost the whole of the upper part of the picture,
stood a cow, its head slightly averted, ruminating. The woman’s head and
shoulders stood out pale against its dun flank.

‘It’s a picture I like particularly,’ said Rampion after a little
silence. ‘The flesh is good. Don’t you think. Has a bloom to it, a
living quality. By God, how marvellously your father-in-law could paint
flesh in the open air! Amazing! Nobody’s done it better. Not even
Renoir. I wish I had his gifts. But this is all right, you know,’ he
went on, turning back to the picture. ‘Quite good, really. And there are
other qualities. I feel I’ve managed to get the living relationship of
the figures to each other and the rest of the world. The cow, for
example. It’s turned away, it’s unaware of the human scene. But somehow
you feel it’s happily in touch with the humans in some milky,
cud-chewing, bovine way. And the humans are in touch with it. And also
in touch with the leopards, but in a quite different way-a way
corresponding to the quick leopardy way the cubs are in touch with them.
Yes, I like it.’

‘So do I,’ said Philip. ‘It’s something to put over against the
industrial stink.’ He laughed. ‘You ought to paint a companion picture
of life in the civilized world. The woman in a mackintosh, leaning
against a giant Bovril bottle and feeding her baby with Glaxo. The bank
covered with asphalt. The man dressed in a five-guinea suit for fifty
shillings, squatting down to play with a wireless set. And the little
boy, pimpled and with rickets, looking interestedly on.’

‘And the whole thing painted in the cubist manner,’ said Rampion; ‘so as
to make quite sure that there should be no life in it whatever. Nothing
like modern art for sterilizing the life out of things. Carbolic acid
isn’t in it.’


CHAPTER XXIV

Local government among the Indians under the Maurya emperors continued,
week after week, to necessitate Mr. Quarles’s attendance at the British
Museum for at least two full days in every seven.

‘I had no idyah,’ he explained, ‘that there was so much available
matyahrial.’

Gladys, meanwhile, was discovering that she had made a mistake. The good
time which she had looked forward to enjoying under Mr. Quarles’s
protection was no better than the good time she might have enjoyed with
‘boys’ hardly richer than herself. Mr. Quarles, it seemed, was not
prepared to pay for the luxury of feeling superior. He wanted to be a
great man, but for very little money. His excuse for the cheap
restaurant and the cheap seats at the theatre was always the necessity
of secrecy. It would never do for him to be seen by an acquaintance in
Gladys’s company; and since his acquaintances belonged to the world
which is carried, replete, from the Berkeley to the stalls of the
Gaiety, Mr. Quarles and Gladys ate at a Corer House and looked at the
play remotely from the Upper Circle. Such was the official explanation
of the very unprincely quality of Sidney’s treats. The real explanation
was not the need for secrecy, but Sidney’s native reluctance to part
with hard cash. For though large sums meant little to him, small ones
meant a great deal. When it was a matter of’ improving the estate,’ he
would lightheartedly sign away hundreds, even thousands of pounds. But
when it was a question of parting with two or three half-crowns to give
his mistress a better seat at the play or a more palatable meal, a bunch
of flowers or a box of chocolates, he became at once the most economical
of men. His avarice was at the root of a certain curious puritanism,
which tinged his opinions about almost all pleasures and amusements
other than the strictly sexual. Dining with a seduced work-girl in the
cheap obscurity of a Soho eating-hell, he would (with all the passion of
a Milton reproving the sons of Belial, all the earnestness of a
Wordsworth advocating low living and high thinking) denounce the hoggish
guzzlers at the Carlton, the gluttons at the Ritz, who in the midst of
London’s serried miseries would carelessly spend a farm labourer’s
monthly wage on a _tete-a-tete_ dinner. Thus his inexpensive preferences
in the matter of restaurants and theatre seats were made to assume a
high moral as well as a merely diplomatic character. Seduced by an
ageing libertine, Mr. Quarles’s mistresses were surprised to find
themselves dining with a Hebrew prophet, and taking their amusements
with a disciple of Cato or of Calvin.

‘One would think you were a blessed saint to hear you talk,’ said Gladys
sarcastically, when he had paused for breath in the midst of one of his
Corner House denunciations of the extravagant and greedy. ‘You!’ Her
laughter was mockingly savage.

Mr. Quarles was disconcerted. He was used to being listened to
respectfully, as an Olympian. Gladys’s tone was ribald and rebellious;
he didn’t like it; it even alarmed him.

He raised his chin with dignity and fired a dropping shot of rebuke upon
her head. ‘It isn’t a question of myah personalities,’ he pronounced.
‘It’s a question of general principles.’

‘I can’t see any difference,’ retorted Gladys, abolishing at one stroke
all the solemn pretensions of all the philosophers and moralists, all
the religious leaders and reformers and Utopia-makers from the beginning
of human time.

What exasperated Gladys most was the fact that even in the world of the
Maison Lyons and cheap seats, Mr. Quarles did not abandon his Olympian
pretensions and his Olympian manners. His indignation, when one evening
there was a crowd on the stairs leading to the Upper Circle was loud and
righteous. ‘A ryahl scandal!’ he called it.

‘One would think you’d taken the royal box,’ said Gladys sarcastically.

And when, at a tea-shop, he complained that the one-and-fourpenny slice
of salmon tasted as though it had come from British Columbia rather than
from Scotland, she advised him to write to the _Times_ about it. The
discovery tickled her fancy and, after that, she was always ironically
telling him to write to the _Times_. Did he complain, a noble and
disillusioned philosopher, of the shallowness of politicians and the
sordid triviality of political life, Gladys bade him write to the
_Times_. He was eloquent about iniquitous Mrs. Grundy and English
illiberality; let him write to the _Times_. It was a ryahl scandal that
neither Sir Edward Grey nor Lloyd George should have been able to speak
French; the _Times_ again was indicated. Mr. Quarles was hurt and
outraged. Nothing like this had ever happened before. In the company of
his other mistresses the consciousness of his superiority had been a
serene happiness. They had worshipped and admired; he had felt himself a
god. And during the first days Gladys too had seemed a worshipper. But
coming to pray, she had stayed to mock. His spiritual happiness was
ruined. If it had not been for the bodily solace which the species in
her provided, Mr. Quarles would have quickly exhausted the subject of
local self-government under the Mauryas and stayed at home. But there
was in Gladys a more than usually large admixture of undifferentiated
species. It was too much for Mr. Quarles. The derisive individual in her
pained and repelled him; but the attraction of what was generic, of the
whole feminine species, the entire sex, was stronger than that
individual repulsion. In spite of her mockery, Mr. Quarles returned. The
claims of the Indians became increasingly peremptory.

Realizing her power, Gladys began to withhold what he desired. Perhaps
he could be blackmailed into the generosity which it was not in his
nature to display spontaneously. Returning from a very inexpensive
evening at Lyons’ and the pictures, she pushed him angrily away when, in
the taxi, he attempted the usual endearments.

‘Can’t you leave me in peace?’ she snapped. And a moment later, ‘Tell
the driver to go to my place first and drop me.’

‘But, my dyah child! Mr. Quarles protested. Hadn’t she promised to come
back with him?

‘I’ve changed my mind. Tell the driver.’

The thought that, after three days of fervid anticipation, he would have
to pass the evening in solitude was agonizing. ‘But, Gladys, my
darling…’

‘Tell the driver.’

‘But it’s ryahly too cruel; you’re _too_ unkind.’

‘Better write to the _Times_ about it,’ was all her answer. ‘I’ll tell
the driver myself.’

After a night of insomnia and suffering Mr. Quarles went out as soon as
the shops were open and bought a fourteen-guinea wrist watch.

 

__

 

The advertisement was for a dentifrice. But as the picture represented
two fox-trotting young people showing their teeth at one another in an
amorous and pearly smile and as the word began with a D, little Phil
unhesitatingly read ‘dancing.’

His father laughed. ‘You old humbug!’ he said. ‘I thought you said you
could read.’

‘But they _are_ dancing,’ the child protested.

‘Yes, but that isn’t what the word says. Try again.’ He pointed.

Little Phil glanced again at the impossible word and took a long look at
the picture. But the fox-trotting couple gave him no help. ‘Dynamo,’ he
said at last in desperation. It was the only other word beginning with a
D that he could think of at the moment.

‘Or why not dinosaurus, while you’re about it?’ mocked his father. ‘Or
dolicocephalous? Or dicotyledon?’ Little Phil was deeply offended; he
could not bear to be laughed at. ‘Try again. Try to _read_ it this time.
Don’t guess.’

Little Phil turned his head away. ‘It bores me,’ he said. His vanity
made him reluctant to attempt what he could not achieve successfully.
Miss Fulkes, who believed in teaching by rational persuasion and with
the reasoned consent of the taught (she was still very young), had
lectured him on his own psychology, in the hope that, once he had
realized his defects, he would mend them. ‘You’ve got the wrong sort of
pride,’ she had told him. ‘You’re not ashamed of being a dunce and not
knowing things. But you _are_ ashamed of making mistakes. You’d rather
not do a thing at all than do it badly. That’s quite wrong.’ Little Phil
would nod his head and say ‘Yes, Miss Fulkes’ in the most rational and
understanding way imaginable. But he continued to prefer doing things
not at all to doing them with difficulty and badly. ‘It bores me,’ he
repeated. ‘But would you like me to make you a drawing?’ he suggested,
turning back to his father with a captivating smile. He was always ready
to draw; he drew well.

‘No thanks. I’d like you to read,’ said Philip.

‘But it bores me.’

‘Never mind. You must try.’

‘But I don’t want to try.’

‘But _I_ want you to. Try.’

Little Phil burst into tears. Tears, he knew, were an irresistible
weapon. And, sure enough, they proved their value yet once more.

Elinor looked up from where she was sitting, dissociated, book in hand,
at the other end of the room. ‘Don’t make him cry,’ she called. ‘It’s so
bad for him.’

Philip shrugged his shoulders. ‘If you imagine that’s the way to educate
a child…’ he said with a bitterness that the occasion did not justify, a
bitterness gradually accumulated during the past weeks of silence and
distant hostility, of self-questioning and ineffective self-reproach,
and finding now an almost irrelevant expression.

‘I don’t imagine anything,’ said Elinor in a cold hard voice. ‘I only
know that I don’t want him to cry.’ Little Phil redoubled his noise. She
called him to her and took him on to her knee.

‘But seeing that he has the misfortune to be an only child, one really
ought to make the effort not to spoil him.’

Elinor pressed her cheek against the boy’s hair.’seeing that he is an
only child,’ she said, ‘ I don’t see why he shouldn’t be treated as
one.’

‘You’re hopeless,’ said Philip. ‘It’s high time we settled down, so that
the boy can have a chance of being brought up rationally.’

‘And who’s going to do the rational upbringing?’ asked Elinor. ‘You?’
She laughed sarcastically. ‘At the end of a week you’d be so bored that
you’d either commit suicide or take the first aeroplane to Paris and not
come back for six months.’

‘Naughty father!’ put in the child.

Philip was offended, the more so as he was secretly aware that what she
said was true. The ideal of a rustic domesticity, filled with small
duties and casual human contacts, was one that, for him, precariously
verged on absurdity. And though the idea of supervising little Phil’s
upbringing was interesting, he knew that the practice would be
intolerably tedious. He remembered his own father’s spasmodic essays at
education. He’d be just the same. Which was precisely why Elinor had no
business to say so.

‘I’m not quite so childishly frivolous as you seem to imagine,’ he said
with dignity and bottled anger.

‘On the contrary,’ she answered, ‘you’re too adultly serious. You
couldn’t manage a child because you’re not enough of a child yourself.
You’re like one of those dreadfully grown-up creatures in Shaw’s
_Methuselah_.’

‘Naughty father!’ repeated little Phil exasperatingly, like a parrot
with only one phrase.

Philip’s first impulse was to seize the child out of his mother’s arms,
smack him for his impertinence, drive him from the room and then turn on
Elinor and violently ‘have things out’ with her. But a habit of
gentlemanly self-control and a dread of scenes made him keep his temper.
Instead of healthily breaking out he made an effort of will and more
than ever tightly shut himself in. Preserving his dignity and his
unexpressed grievance, he got up and walked through the French window
into the garden. Elinor watched his departure. Her impulse was to run
after him, take him by the hand and make peace. But she too checked
herself. Philip limped away out of sight. The child continued to
whimper. Elinor gave him a little shake.

‘Stop, Phil,’ she said almost angrily. ‘That’s enough now. Stop at
once.’

 

__

 

The two doctors were examining what to an untrained eye might have
seemed the photograph of a typhoon in the Gulf of Siam, of an explosion
of black smoke in the midst of clouds, or merely of an ink stain.

‘Particularly clear,’ said the young radiographer. ‘Look.’ He pointed at
the smoke cloud. ‘There’s a most obvious new growth there, at the
pylorus.’ He glanced with a certain enquiring deference at his
distinguished colleague.

Sir Herbert nodded. ‘Obvious,’ he repeated. He had an oracular manner;
what he said, you felt, was always and necessarily true.

‘It couldn’t very well be large. Not with the symptoms so far recorded.
There’s been no vomiting yet.’

‘No vomiting?’ exclaimed the radiographer with an almost excessive
display of interest and astonishment. ‘That would explain the
smallness.’

‘The obstruction’s only slight.’

‘It would certainly be worth opening up the abdomen for exploration
purposes.’

Sir Herbert made a little pouting grimace and dubiously shook his head.
‘One has to think of the patient’s age.’

‘Quite,’ the radiographer made haste to agree.

‘He’s older than he seems.’

‘Yes, yes. He certainly doesn’t look his age.’

‘Well, I must be going,’ said Sir Herbert.

The young radiographer darted to the door, handed him his hat and
gloves, personally escorted him to the attendant Daimler. Returning to
his desk he glanced again at the black-blotched, grey-cloudy photograph.

‘A really remarkably successful exposure,’ he said to himself with
satisfaction and, turning the picture over, he wrote a few words in
pencil on the back.

‘J. Bidlake, Esq. Stomach after barium meal. New growth at pylorus,
small but v. clear. Photographed….’ He looked up at his calendar for the
date, recorded it and put the photograph away in his file for future
reference.

 

__

 

The old manservant announced the visitor and retired, closing the door
of the studio behind him.

‘Well, John,’ said Lady Edward, advancing across the room. ‘How are you?
I heard you’d been seedy. Nothing serious, I hope.’

John Bidlake did not even get up to receive her. From the depth of the
armchair in which he had spent the day meditating in terror the themes
of disease and death, he held out a hand.

‘But, my poor John!’ exclaimed Lady Edward sitting down beside him. ‘You
look very low and wretched. What is it?’

John Bidlake shook his head. ‘God knows,’ he said. He had guessed, of
course, from Sir Herbert’s vaguely professional words about ‘slight
obstructions in the neighbourhood of the pylorus,’ he _knew_ what was
the matter. Hadn’t his son Maurice died of the same thing five years
ago, in California? He knew; but he would not speak his knowledge.
Uttered, the worst was more frightful, more irrevocable. Besides, one
should never formulate one’s knowledge of coming evil; for then fate
would have, so to speak, a model on which to shape events. There was
always a kind of impossible chance that, if one didn’t put one’s
foreboding of evil into words, the evil wouldn’t happen. The mysteries
of John Bidlake’s personal religion were quite as obscure and
paradoxical as any of those in the ‘theolatrous’ orthodoxies which he
liked to deride.

‘But haven’t you seen a doctor?’ Lady Edward’s tone was accusatory; she
knew her friend’s strange prejudice against doctors.

‘Of course I have,’ he answered irritably, knowing that she knew. ‘Do
you take me for a fool? But they’re all charlatans. I went to one with a
knighthood. But do you suppose he knew anything more than the others? He
just told me in quack jargon what I’d told him in plain words; that I’d
got something wrong with my innards. Stupid rogue!’ His hatred of Sir
Herbert and all doctors had momentarily revived him.

‘But he must have told you something,’ Lady Edward insisted.

The words brought him back to the thought of that’slight obstruction in
the neighbourhood of the pylorus,’ of disease and pain and the creeping
approach of death. He relapsed into his old misery and terror. ‘Nothing
of significance,’ he muttered, averting his face.

‘Then perhaps it’s nothing really serious,’ Lady Edward comfortingly
suggested.

‘No, no!’ To the old man her lighthearted hopefulness seemed an outrage.
He would not put himself into the power of fate by formulating the
horrible truth. But at the same time he wanted to be treated as though
the truth had been formulated. Treated with a grave commiseration. ‘It’s
bad. It’s very bad,’ he insisted.

He was thinking of death; death in the form of a new life growing and
growing in his belly, like an embryo in a womb. The one thing fresh and
active in his old body, the one thing exuberantly and increasingly alive
was death.

All round, on the walls of the studio, hung fragmentary records of John
Bidlake’s life. Two little landscapes painted in the Pincian Gardens in
the days when Rome had only just ceased to be the Pope’s—a view of
belfries and cupolas seen through a gap in the ilex trees, a pair of
statues silhouetted against the sky. Next to them a satyr’s face, snubby
and bearded—the portrait of Verlaine. A London street scene, full of
hansoms and top hats and lifted skirts. Three sketches of the plump,
bright-coloured Mary Betterton of thirty years ago. And Jenny, loveliest
of models, lying naked on a long chair, with a window behind her, white
clouds beyond, a bowl of roses on the window-sill and a great blue
Persian cat stretched like a couchant lion, on Jenny’s white belly,
dozing, its paws between her round and shallow breasts.

Lady Edward brightly changed the subject. ‘Lucy’s just flown off to
Paris again,’ she began.


CHAPTER XXV

QUAI VOLTAIRE.

 

The air was rough, I forgot the _Quies_ for my ears and was in a Hell of
Noise for 2 1/2 hours. Feeling very tired and consequently, sweet
Walter, rather sentimental and _sola sola_. Why aren’t you here to
console me for the unbearable sadness of this lovely evening outside my
window? The Louvre, the river, the green glass sky, the sunlight and
those velvet shadows—they make me feel like bursting into tears. And not
the scenery only. My arms in the sleeves of my dressing-gown, my hand
writing, even my bare toes, now that I’ve dropped my slippers—terible,
terrible. And as for my face in the glass, and my shoulders, and the
orange roses and the Chinese goldfish to match, and the Dufy curtains
and all the rest—yes, _all_, because everything’s equally beautiful and
extraordinary, even the things that are dull and ugly—they’re too much
to be borne. Too much. I can’t stand it and what’s more, I won’t.
Interval of 5 minutes. That’s why I’ve telephoned to Rene Tallemant to
come and have a cocktail and take me out somewhere amusing, malgre my
headache. I simply won’t let myself be bullied by the universe. Do you
know Rene? Rather a divine little man. But I wish it were you, all the
same. Must go and put on a few clothes. A toi. LUCY.

QUAI VOLTAIRE.

Your letter was tiresome. Such yammering. And it isn’t flattering to be
called a poison in the blood. It’s the equivalent of being called a
stomach-ache. If you can’t write more sensibly, don’t write at all.
Quant a moi, je m’amuse. Pas follement. But sufficiently, sufficiently.
Theatres; mostly bad; but I like them; I’m still childish enough to feel
involved in the imbecile plots. And buying clothes; such ravishments! I
simply adored myself in Lanvin’s looking-glasses. Looking at pictures,
on the other hand, is an overrated sport. Not dancing, though. There’d
be some point, if life were always like dancing with a professional. But
it ain’t. And if it were, I dare say one would long to walk. In the
evenings a little pub-crawling in Mont Parnasse through hordes of
Americans, Poles, Esthonians, Rumanians, Finns, Letts, Lapps, Wends,
etcetera, and all of them (God help us!) artists. Shall we found a
league for the suppression of art? Paris makes me long to. Also I wish
one met a few more heterosexuals for a change. I don’t really like ni
les tapettes ni les gousses. And since Proust and Gide made them
fashionable one sees nothing else in this tiresome town. All my English
respectability breaks out! Yours, L.

QUAI VOLTAIRE.

This time your letter was much better. (My only poem, and an accident at
that. Rather good, all the same.) If only everybody would realize that
being miserable or jolly about love is chiefly a matter of fashion.
Being poetically miserable is an old fashion, and besides, the rhymes
don’t justify it in English. Cuoredolore-amore; you can’t escape it in
Italian. Nor in German; herz must feel schmerz and liebe is inevitably
full of triebe. But in English, no. There’s no pain connected with
English loves; only gloves and turtle doves. And the only things that,
by the laws of poetry, can go straight to Englishmen’s hearts are tarts
and amorous arts. And I assure you, a man’s much better occupied when
he’s thinking about those subjects than when he’s telling himself how
wretched he is, how jealous, how cruelly wronged and all the nonsensical
rest of it. I wish that idiot Rene would understand this. But
unfortunately cceur rhymes with douleur, and he’s French. He’s becoming
almost as much of a bore as you were, my poor Walter. But I hope you’re
now a reformed character. I like you. L.

QUAI VOLTAIRE.

Suffering from a cold and intense boredom, only momentarily relieved by
your letter. Paris is really terribly dreary. I have a good mind to fly
away somewhere else, only I don’t know where. Eileen came to see me
to-day. She wants to leave Tim, because he will insist on her lying
naked in bed while he sets fire to newspapers over her and lets the hot
ashes fall on her body. Poor Tim! It seems unkind to deprive him of his
simple pleasures. But Eileen’s so nervous of being grilled. She was
furious with me for laughing and not being more sympathetic. I took it
all as a joke. Which it is. A very mild one, however. For really, like
the Queen, we are not amused. How I hate you for not being here to
entertain me! One can forgive anything except absence. Unpardonably
absent Walter, goodbye. I have an envie for you to-night, for your hands
and your mouth. And you? Do you remember? L.

QUAI VOLTARAIRE.

So Philip Quarles is going to settle in the country and be a mixture of
Mrs. Gaskell and Knud Hamsun. Well, well…. But it’s good that somebody
should have illusions. At any rate he can’t be more bored in his village
than I am here. What straits one’s reduced to! Last night I went with
Tim and Eileen, who seems to be reconciled to the firework displays, to
one of those places where you pay a hundred francs for the privilege of
looking on at orgies (in masks—the one amusing feature) and if you want
to, participating in them. Dim religious lights, little cubicles,
divans, a great deal of what the French call _amour_ promiscuously going
on. Odd and grotesque, but terribly dreary and all so very _medical_. A
sort of cross between very stupid clowns and an operating theatre. Tim
and Eileen wanted me to stay. I told them I’d rather pay-a visit to the
Morgue, and left them there. I hope they amused themselves. But what a
_bore_, what a hopeless unmitigated _bore_! I always thought
Heliogabalus was such a very sophisticated young person. But now I’ve
seen what amused him, I realize that he must have had a mind like a
baby’s, really infantile. I have the misfortune to be rather grown up
about some things. I’ve a notion of going to Madrid next week. It’ll be
terrifically hot, of course. gut I love the heat. I blossom in ovens.
(Rather a significant intimation of my particular immortality, perhaps?)
Why don’t you come with me? Seriously, I mean. You could surely get
away. Murder Burlap and come and be a tripper _a la_ Maurice Barre’s.
_Du sang, de la volupte et de la mort_. I feel rather bloodthirsty at
the moment. Spain would suit me. Meanwhile, I’ll make enquiries about
the bull-fighting season. The ring makes you sick; even my
bloodthirstiness won’t run to disembowelled cab-horses. But the
spectators are marvellous. Twenty thousand simultaneous sadistic
_frissons_. Really remarkable. You simply must come. my sweet Walter.
Say yes. I insist. LUCY.

QUAI VOLTAIRE.

It was too sweet of you, Walter darling, to do the impossible to come to
Spain. I wish, for once, you hadn’t taken my momentary _envie_ quite so
seriously. Madrid’s off-for the present, at any rate. If it should come
on again, I’ll let you know at once. Meanwhile. Paris. Hastily. L.


CHAPTER XXVI

_From Philip Quarles’s Notebook_

 

Found Rampion gloomy and exasperated, I don’t know what about, and
consequently pessimistic—lyrically and violently so. ‘I give the present
dispensation ten years,’ he said, after cataloguing the horrors of the
modern world. ‘After that the most appalling and sanguinary bust up
that’s ever been.’ And he prophesied class wars, wars between the
continents, the final catastrophic crumbling of our already dreadfully
unsteady society. ‘Not a pleasant look-out for our children,’ I said.
‘We’ve at least had our thirty years or so. They’ll only grow up to see
the Last Judgment.’ ‘We oughtn’t to have brought them into the world,’
he answered. I mentioned those Melanesians that Rivers wrote about, who
simply refused to breed any more after the white people had robbed them
of their religion and their traditional civilization. ‘The same thing’s
been happening in the West,’ I said, ‘but more slowly. No sudden race
suicide, but gradual diminution of births. Gradual, because with us the
poison of modem civilization has infected men so slowly. The thing has
been going on for a long time; but we’re only just beginning to realize
that we’re being poisoned. That’s why we’ve only just begun to stop
begetting children. The Melanesians had their souls suddenly murdered,
so they couldn’t help realizing what was being done to them. That’s why
they decided, almost from one day to another, that they wouldn’t bother
to keep the race alive any longer.’ ‘The poison isn’t slow any more. It
works faster and faster.’ ‘Like arsenic—the effects are cumulative.
After a certain moment you begin to gallop towards death.’ ‘Breeding
would have slowed down much more completely if people had realized.
Well, well; our brats will have to look out for themselves now they’re
here.’ ‘And meanwhile,’ I said, ‘one’s got to go on behaving as if our
world were going on for ever—teaching them good manners and Latin
grammar and all the rest. What do you do about yours?’ ‘If I could have
my way, I wouldn’t teach them anything. Just turn them loose in the
country, on a farm, and tell them to amuse themselves. And if they
couldn’t amuse themselves, I’d give them rat poison.’ ‘Rather Utopian as
an educational programme, isn’t it?’ ‘I know. They’ve got to be scholars
and gentlemen, damn them! Twenty years ago, I’d have objected to the
gentility. I’d have brought them up as peasants. But the working classes
are just as bad as the others nowadays. Just rather bad imitations of
the bourgeoisie, a little worse than the original in some ways. So it’s
as gentlemen my boys are being brought up after all. _And_ scholars.
What an imbecility!’ He complained to me that both his children have a
passion for machinery—motor cars, trains, aeroplanes, radios. ‘It’s an
infection, like smallpox. The love of death’s in the air. They breathe
it and get infected. I try to persuade them to like something else. But
they won’t have it. Machinery’s the only thing for them. They’re
infected with the love of death. It’s as though the young were
absolutely determined to bring the world to an end—mechanize it first
into madness, then into sheer murder. Well, let them if they want to,
the stupid little devils! But it’s humiliating, it’s horribly
humiliating that human beings should have made such a devilish mess of
things. Life could have been so beautiful, if they’d cared to make it
so. Yes, and it _was_ beautiful once, I believe. Now it’sjust an
insanity; it’s just death violently galvanized, twitching about and
making a hellish hullabaloo to persuade itself that it isn’t really
death, but the most exuberant sort of life. Think of New York, for
example; think of Berlin! God! Well, let them go to hell if they want
to. I don’t care.’ But the trouble is that he does care.

 

__

 

Since reading Alverdes and Wheeler I have quite decided that my novelist
must be an amateur zoologist. Or, better still, a professional zoologist
who is writing a novel in his spare time. His approach will be strictly
biological. He will be constantly passing from the termitary to the
drawing-room and the factory, and back again. He will illustrate human
vices by those of the ants, which neglect their young for the sake of
the intoxicating liquor exuded by the parasites that invade their nests.
His hero and heroine will spend their honeymoon by a lake, where the
grebes and ducks illustrate all the aspects of courtship and matrimony.
Observing the habitual and almost sacred ‘pecking order’ which prevails
among the hens in his poultry yard—hen A pecking hen B, but not being
pecked by it, hen B pecking hen C and so forth—the politician will
meditate on the Catholic hierarchy and Fascism. The mass of intricately
copulating snakes will remind the libertine of his orgies. (I can
visualize quite a good scene with a kind of Spandrell drawing the moral,
to an innocent and idealistic young woman, of a serpents’ petting
party.) Nationalism and the middle classes’ religious love of property
will be illustrated by the male warbler’s passionate and ferocious
defence of his chosen territory. And so on. Something queer and quite
amusing could be made out of this.

 

__

 

One of the hardest things to remember is that a man’s merit in one
sphere is no guarantee of his merit in another. Newton’s mathematics
don’t prove his theology. Faraday was right about electricity, but not
about Sandemanism. Plato wrote marvellously well, and that’s why people
still go on believing in his pernicious philosophy. Tolstoy was an
excellent novelist; but that’s no reason for regarding his ideas about
morality as anything but detestable, or for feeling anything but
contempt for his aesthetics, his sociology and his religion. In the case
of scientists and philosophers this ineptitude outside their own line of
business isn’t surprising. Indeed, it’s almost inevitable. For it’s
obvious that excessive development of the purely mental functions leads
to atrophy of all the rest. Hence the notorious infantility of
professors and the ludicrous simplicity of the solutions they offer for
the problems of life. The same is true of the specialists in
spirituality. The profound silliness of saintly people; their
childishness. But in an artist there’s less specialization, less
one-sided development; consequently the artist ought to be sounder right
through than the lopsided man of science; he oughtn’t to have the blind
spots and the imbecilities of the philosophers and saints. That’s why a
man like Tolstoy is so specially unforgivable. Instinctively you trust
him more than you would trust an intellectual or a spiritual specialist.
And there he goes perverting all his deepest instincts and being just as
idiotic and pernicious as St. Francis of Assisi, or as Kant the moralist
(oh, those categorical imperatives! and then the fact that the only
thing the old gentleman felt at all deeply about was crystallized
fruit!), or Newton the theologian. It puts one on one’s guard, even
against those one thinks are probably in the right. Such as Rampion, for
example. An extraordinary artist. But right in his views about the
world? Alas, it doesn’t follow from the excellence of his painting and
writing. But two things give me confidence in his opinions about the
problems of living. The first is that he himself lives in a more
satisfactory way than anyone I know. He lives more satisfactorily,
because he lives more realistically than other people. Rampion, it seems
to me, takes into account all the facts (whereas other people hide from
them, or try to pretend that the ones they find unpleasant don’t or
shouldn’t exist), and then proceeds to make his way of living fit the
facts, and doesn’t try to compel the facts to fit in with a preconceived
idea of the right way of living (like these imbecile Christians and
intellectuals and moralists and efficient business men). The second
thing which gives me confidence in his judgment is that so many of his
opinions agree with mine, which, apart from all questions of vanity, is
a good sign, because we start from such distant points, from opposite
poles in fact. Opinions on which two opponents agree (for that’s what
essentially, and to start with, we are: opponents) have a fair chance of
being right. The chief difference between us, alas, is that his opinions
are lived and mine, in the main, only thought. Like him, I mistrust
intellectualism, but intellectually I disbelieve in the adequacy of any
scientific or philosophical theory, any abstract moral principle, but on
scientific, philosophical and abstract-moral grounds. The problem for me
is to transform a detached intellectual scepticism into a way of
harmonious all-round living.

The course of every intellectual, if he pursues his journey long and
unflinchingly enough, ends in the obvious, from which the
nonintellectuals have never stirred. The theme was developed by Burlap
in one of those squelchy emetic articles of his. And there’s a good deal
of truth in it, in spite of Burlap. (Here we are, back again among the
personalities. The thoroughly contemptible man may have valuable
opinions, just as the in some ways admirable man can have detestable
opinions. And I suppose, parenthetically, that I belong to the first
class—though not so completely, I hope, as Burlap and in a different
way.) Many intellectuals, of course, don’t get far enough to reach the
obvious again. They remain stuck in a pathetic belief in rationalism and
the absolute supremacy of mental values and the entirely conscious will.
You’ve got to go further than the nineteenth-century fellows, for
example; as far at least as Protagoras and Pyrrho, before you get back
to the obvious in which the nonintellectuals have always remained. And
one must hasten to make it clear that these nonintellectuals aren’t the
modern canaille who read the picture papers and listenin and jazz and
are preoccupied with making money and having the awful modem ‘good
time.’ No, no; one isn’t paying a compliment to the hardheaded business
man or the low-brow. For, in spite of their stupidity and tastelessness
and vulgarity and infantility (or rather because of all these defects),
they aren’t the nonintellectuals I’m talking about. They take the main
intellectualist axiom for granted—that there’s an intrinsic superiority
in mental, conscious, voluntary life over physical, intuitive,
instinctive, emotional life. The whole of modern civilization is based
on the idea that the specialized function which gives a man his place in
society is more important than the whole man, or rather _is_ the whole
man, all the rest being irrelevant or even (since the physical,
intuitive, instinctive and emotional part of man doesn’t contribute
appreciably to making money or getting on in an industrialized world)
positively harmful and detestable. The low-brow of our modern
industrialized society has all the defects of the intellectual and none
of his redeeming qualities. The nonintellectuals I’m thinking of are
very different beings. One might still find a few of them in Italy
(though Fascism has probably turned them all into bad imitations of
Americans and Prussians by this time); a few perhaps in Spain, in
Greece, in Provence. Not elsewhere in modern Europe. There were probably
quite a lot of them three thousand years ago. But the combined efforts
of Plato and Artistotle, Jesus, Newton and big business have turned
their descendants into the modern bourgeoisie and proletariat. The
obvious that the intellectual gets back to, if he goes far enough, isn’t
of course the same as the obvious of the nonintellectuals. For their
obvious is life itself and his recovered obvious is only the idea of
that life. Not many can put flesh and blood on the idea and turn it into
reality. The intellectuals who, like Rampion, don’t have to return to
the obvious, but have always believed in it and lived it, while at the
same time leading the life of the spirit, are rarer still.

Being with Rampion rather depresses me; for he makes me see what a great
gulf separates the knowledge of the obvious from the actual living of
it. And oh, the difficulties of crossing that gulf! I perceive now that
the real charm of the intellectual life—the life devoted to erudition,
to scientific research, to philosophy, to aesthetics, to criticism—is
its easiness. It’s the substitution of simple intellectual schemata for
the complexities of reality; of still and formal death for the
bewildering movements of life. It’s incomparably easier to know a lot,
say, about the history of art and to have profound ideas about
metaphysics and sociology, than to know personally and intuitively a lot
about one’s fellows and to have satisfactory relations with one’s
friends and lovers, one’s wife and children. Living’s much more
difficult than Sanskrit or chemistry or economics. The intellectual life
is child’s play; which is why intellectuals tend to become children—and
then imbeciles and finally, as the political and industrial history of
the last few centuries clearly demonstrates, homicidal lunatics and wild
beasts. The repressed functions don’t die; they deteriorate, they
fester, they revert to primitiveness. But meanwhile it’s much easier to
be an intellectual child or lunatic or beast than a harmonious adult
man. That’s why (among other reasons) there’s such a demand for higher
education. The rush to books and universities is like the rush to the
public-house. People want to drown their realization of the difficulties
of living properly in this grotesque contemporary world, they want to
forget their own deplorable inefficiency as artists in life. Some drown
their sorrows in alcohol, but still more drown them in books and
artistic dilettantism; some try to forget themselves in fornication,
dancing, movies, listening-in, others in lectures and scientific
hobbies. The books and lectures are better sorrow-drowners than drink
and fornication; they leave no headache, none of that despairing _post
coitum triste_ feeling. Till quite recently, I must confess, I took
learning and philosophy and science—all the activities that are
magniloquently lumped under the title of ‘The Search for Truth’—very
seriously. I regarded the Search for Truth as the highest of human tasks
and the Searchers as the noblest of men. But in the last year or so I
have begun to see that this famous Search for Truth is just an
amusement, a distraction like any other, a rather refined and elaborate
substitute for genuine living; and that Truth-Searchers become just as
silly, infantile and corrupt in their way as the boozers, the pure
aesthetes, the business men, the Good-Timers in theirs. I also perceived
that the pursuit of Truth is just a polite name for the intellectual’s
favourite pastime of substituting simple and therefore false
abstractions for the living complexities of reality. But seeking Truth
is much easier than learning the art of integral living (in which, of
course, Truth-Seeking will take its due and proportionate place along
with the other amusements, like skittles and mountain-climbing). Which
explains, though it doesn’t justify, my continued and excessive
indulgence in the vices of informative reading and abstract
generalization. Shall I ever have the strength of mind to break myself
of these indolent habits of intellectualism and devote my energies to
the more serious and difficult task of living integrally? And even if I
did try to break these habits, shouldn’t I find that heredity was at the
bottom of them and that I was congenitally incapable of living wholly
and harmoniously?


CHAPTER XXVII

John Bidlake and his third wife had never definitely or officially
parted company. They simply didn’t see one another very often, that was
all. The arrangement suited John very well. He hated everything in the
nature of a fuss, and he was the enemy of every definite and irrevocable
contract. Any arrangement that bound him down, that imposed
responsibilities and kept him in mind of duties, was intolerable to him.
‘God knows what I should have done,’ he used to say,’ if I’d had to go
to an office every day, or get work done by a certain date. I think I
should have run amok after a few months of it.’ Of marriage he had
always consistently disapproved. Unfortunately, however, he could not
have all the women he wanted without marriage. He had had to enter into
no less than three of what he called, in Ciceronian language, ‘those
inopportune and obscene compacts.’ The idea of divorce or an official
separation was hardly less disagreeable to him than that of marriage; it
was too definite, it committed you. Why not leave things to settle
themselves, instead of trying to give an arbitrary shape to them? The
ideal was to live, emotionally and socially speaking, from hand to
mouth—without plans, without a status, in good company of one’s own
daily choosing, not the choosing of others or of some dead self.
‘Sleeping around’—that was how he had heard a young American girl
describe the amorous side of the ideal life, as lived in Hollywood. Its
other aspects might be lumped under the head of ‘waking around.’ The
unideal life, the life which John Bidlake had always refused to lead,
was that which consisted of waking and sleeping not ‘around,’ but
definitely here or there, day after day, according to a fixed
foreseeable schedule that only death, or at the least the act of God or
the king’s enemies, could alter.

With his third wife John Bidlake’s relations were, and had been for
years, most satisfyingly indefinite. They did not live together, but
they were not separated. They rarely communicated, but they had never
quarrelled. John had been sleeping and waking ‘around’ for upwards of
twenty years, and yet they met, whenever they _did_ meet, on friendly
terms; and if ever he desired to refresh his memories of the landscape
of the northern Chilterns, his arrival at Gattenden was accepted without
comment, as though it were the most natural thing in the world. The
arrangement entirely suited John Bidlake; and, to do him justice, he was
grateful to his wife for making it possible. He refrained, however, from
expressing his gratitude; for to have done so would have been to comment
on the arrangement; and a comment would have brought a touch of
destructive definition into a situation whose fragile excellence
consisted precisely in its virgin and beautifully unsullied vagueness.
Few women, as her husband gratefully recognized, would have been willing
or even able to preserve the indefiniteness of the situation so
chronically inviolate as Janet Bidlake. Another wife would have demanded
explanations, would have wanted to know where she stood, would have
offered the irrevocable choice of peace or war, life in common or
separation. But Mrs. Bidlake had permitted her husband to fade out of
their married life without a quarrel, with hardly a word. And his brief
spasmodic re-entries were accepted by her with as little comment. She
had been from childhood more at home in the fictitious world of her
invention than in the real. As a little girl she had had an imaginary
sister who lived in the signal-box by the level crossing. Between the
ages of ten and thirteen, her inability to distinguish between the
testimony of her senses and that of her fancy had often resulted in her
being punished for lying. Pictures and books gave a new turn to her
imagining, which became less personal and more classically artistic,
literary and speculative. From sixteen onwards she was an inhabitant of
the country of art and letters and was little more than a reluctant
stranger in mere England. It was because she had imagined John Bidlake a
spiritual compatriot that she had fallen in love with him—artistically,
poetically in love—and consented to become his wife. Her parents, who
considered him only as a fellow-subject of the Queen and attached more
importance, in the circumstances, to his career as a husband than as an
artist, did their best to dissuade her. But Janet was of age and had the
obstinacy of those who can simply retire from the plane on which the
argument is taking place, leaving the opponent to waste his energy on a
mere untenanted body. She ended by doing what she wanted. When she
discovered, as she discovered only too soon, that there was very little
connection between the admirable artist she had loved and the husband
she had married, Janet Bidlake was restrained by a very natural pride
from complaining. She had no wish to give her relations the pleasure of
saying, ‘I told you so.’ John slept and woke ‘around,’ faded more and
more completely out of conjugality. She held her peace and herself
retired for consolation into those regions of artistic and literary
fancy, where she was native and felt most at home. A private income,
supplemented by the irregular and fluctuating contributions which John
Bidlake made whenever he remembered or felt he could afford to support a
wife and family, allowed her to make a habit of this foreign travel of
the imagination. Elinor was born a year after their marriage. Four years
later an ulcerated stomach brought John Bidlake home, a temporarily
reformed character, to be nursed. Walter was the result of his still
domestic convalescence. The ulcers healed, John Bidlake faded away
again. Nurses and governesses looked after the children. Mrs. Bidlake
superintended their upbringing dimly and as though from a distance. From
time to time she swooped across the border dividing her private country
from the world of common fact; and her interferences with the quotidian
order of things had always a certain disconcerting and almost
supernatural quality. Incalculable things were liable to happen whenever
she descended, a being from another plane’ and judging events by other
standards than those of the common world, into the midst of the
children’s educational routine. Once, for example, she dismissed a
governess because she had heard her playing Dan Leno’s song about the
Wasp and the Hard-boiled Egg on the schoolroom piano. She was a good
girl, taught well and supported a paralytic father. But great artistic
principles were at stake. Elinor’s musical taste might be irretrievably
ruined (incidentally Elinor resembled her father in detesting music);
and the fact that she was very fond of Miss Dempster made the danger of
contamination even greater. Mrs. Bidlake was firm. ‘The Wasp and the
Hard-boiled Egg’ could not be permitted. Miss Dempster was sent away.
When he heard the news, her old father had another stroke and was picked
up blind in one eye and unable to speak. But Mrs. Bidlake’s returns from
imaginative travel were generally less serious in their results. When
she interfered with the practical business of her children’s upbringing,
it was usually only to insist that they should read classical authors
usually considered incomprehensible or unsuitable for the very young.
Children, it was her theory, should be brought up only with the very
best in the way of philosophy and the arts. Elinor had had _Hamlet_ read
to her when she was three, her picture-books were reproductions of
Giotto and Rubens. She had been taught French out of _Candide_, had been
given _Tristram_ Shandy and Bishop Berkeley’s _Theory of Vision_ when
she was seven, Spinoza’s _Ethics_, Goya’s etchings and, as a German
text-book, _Also sprach Zarathustra_ when she was nine. The result of
this premature introduction to the best philosophy was to produce in
Elinor that slightly amused contempt for the grand abstractions and
highfaluting idealisms, which had come to be so characteristic of her.
Brought up at the same time on the unexpurgated classics, she had
acquired in childhood a complete theoretical knowledge of all those
matters which it is thought least suitable for the young to know. This
knowledge had reinforced rather than tempered the coldness and practical
incuriosity about all amorous matters which were natural to her; and she
had grown up in a state of well-informed and superficially cynical
innocence, like one of those Shakespearean heroines, whose scientific
and Rabelaisian speech accompanies actions of the most delicately
virtuous refinement. Mrs. Bidlake was a little distressed by Elinor’s
irreverent attitude towards her cherished fancies; but, wise in her way,
she did not comment, did not try to reform, only ignored and retired, as
she had ignored her husband’s shortcomings, had retired from the
realization of them into the happier realms of art and imagination.
There can be no cancellation of accomplished facts; but for practical
purposes a conspiracy of silence is almost as effective as cancellation.
Unmentioned, what is can become as though it were not. When John Bidlake
arrived at Gattenden, a sick man made sicker by dejection, terror and an
all-absorbing self-pity, Mrs. Bidlake passed over in silence the fact,
upon which she might so easily have commented: that he only came to her
when he needed a nurse. His room was made ready, he settled in. It was
as though he had never been away. In the privacy of the kitchen the
housemaids grumbled a little at the extra work, while Mrs. Inman sighed
and Dobbs was massively and Anglicanly indignant over old Mr. Bidlake’s
treatment of his wife. At the same time all felt a kind of gloating pity
for the old man. His disease and its symptoms were talked of in lowered
voices, religiously. Aloud, the servants might grumble and disapprove.
But secretly they were all rather pleased. John Bidlake’s arrival broke
the daily monotony, and the fact that he was going to die made them all
feel somehow more important. To the domesticities of Gattenden his
approaching death gave a new significance. That future event was the sun
round which the souls of the household now meaningfully and almost
stealthily revolved. They might grumble and disapprove, but they looked
after him solicitously. In an obscure way they were grateful to him.
Dying, he was quickening their life.


CHAPTER XXVIII

With Molly d’Exergillod everything had to be articulate, formulated,
expressed. The whole of experience was, for her, only the raw material
out of which an active mind could manufacture words. Ironstone was of no
use to man until he learnt to smelt it and hammer out the pure metal
into tools and swords. For Molly, the raw facts of living, the
sensations, the feelings, the thoughts and recollections, were as
uninteresting in themselves as so many lumps of rock. They were of value
only when they had been transformed by conversational art and industry
into elegant words and well-shaped phrases. She loved a sunset because
she could say of it: ‘It’s like a mixture of Bengal lights, Mendelssohn,
soot and strawberries and cream’; or of spring flowers: ‘They make you
feel as you feel when you’re convalescent after influenza. Don’t you
think so?’ And leaning intimately she would press the rhetorical
question. ‘Don’t you think so?’ What she liked about a view of distant
mountains in a thunderstorm was that it was so like El Greco’s
landscapes of Toledo. As for love, why, the whole charm of love, in
Molly’s eyes, was its almost infinite capacity for being turned into
phrases. You could talk about it for ever. She was talking about it now
to Philip Quarles-had been talking about it for the last hour; analysing
herself, recounting her experiences, questioning him about his past and
his feelings. Reluctantly and with difficulty (for he hated talking
about himself and did it very badly) he answered her.

‘Don’t you think,’ she was saying, ‘that the most exciting thing about
being in love is the discoveries it enables you to make about yourself?’

Philip duly thought so.

‘I’d no idea how motherly I really was, before I married Jean. I’m so
preoccupied now when he gets his feet wet.’

‘I’d be very worried if you got your feet wet,’ said Philip essaying a
gallantry. Too stupid! he thought. He was not very good at gallantries.
He wished he wasn’t so much attracted by Molly’s rather creamy and
florid beauty. He wouldn’t be here making a fool of himself if she were
ugly.

‘Too sweet of you,’ said Molly. ‘Tell me,’ she added, leaning towards
him with offered face and bosom, ‘why do you like me.’

‘Isn’t it fairly obvious why?’ he answered.

Molly smiled. ‘Do you know why Jean says I’m the only woman he could
ever fall in love with?’

‘No,’ said Philip, thinking that she was really superb in her Junonian
way.

‘Because,’ Molly went on, ‘according to him, I’m the only woman who
isn’t what Baudelaire calls _le contraire du dandy_. You remember that
fragment in _Mon Coeur Mis a Nu_? “La femme a faim et elle veut manger;
soif, et elle veut boire. La femme est _naturelle_, c’est-a-dire
abominable. Aussi est-elle…”’

Philip interrupted her. ‘You’ve left out a sentence,’ he said, laughing.
‘Soif, et elle veut boire. And then: Elle est en rut, et elle veut
etre…They don’t print the word in Crepet’s edition; but I’ll supply it
if you like.’

‘No, thanks,’ said Molly, rather put out by the interruption. It had
spoilt the easy unfolding of a welltried conversational gambit. She
wasn’t accustomed to people being so well up in French literature as
Philip. ‘The word’s irrelevant.’

‘Is it?’ Philip raised his eyebrows. ‘I wonder.’

‘Aussi est-elle toujours vulgaire,’ Molly went on, hurrying back to the
point at which she had been interrupted, ‘c’est-a-dire le contraire du
dandy. Jean says I’m the only female dandy. What do you think?’

‘I’m afraid he’s right.’

‘Why “afraid”?’

‘I don’t know that I like dandies much. Particularly female ones.’ A
woman who uses the shapeliness of her breasts to compel you to admire
her mind—a good character, he reflected, for his novel. But trying in
private life, very trying indeed. ‘I prefer them natural,’ he added.

‘But what’s the point of being natural unless you have enough art to do
it well and enough consciousness to know how natural you’re being?’
Molly was pleased with her question. A little polishing and it would be
epigrammatically perfect. ‘There’s no point in being in love with a
person unless you know exactly what you feel and can express it.’

‘I can see a great deal of point,’ said Philip. ‘One doesn’t have to be
a botanist or a still-life painter to enjoy flowers. And equally, my
dear Molly, one doesn’t have to be Sigmund Freud or Shakespeare to enjoy
you.’ And sliding suddenly nearer to her along the sofa, he took her in
his arms and kissed her.

‘But what _are_ you thinking about?’ she cried in pained astonishment.

‘I’m not thinking about anything,’ he answered rather angrily from the
other end of the arm with which she had pushed him away from her. ‘Not
thinking; only wanting.’ He felt humiliated, made a fool of. ‘But I’d
forgotten you were a nun.’

‘I’m nothing of the kind,’ she protested. ‘I’m merely civilized. All
this pouncing and clawing—it’s really too savage.’ She readjusted a
water-waved lock of hair, and began to talk about platonic relationships
as aids to spiritual growth. The more platonic the relations between an
amorous man and woman, the more intense in them the life of the
conscious mind.

‘What the body loses, the soul gains. Wasn’t it Paul Bourget who pointed
that out in his _Psychologie Contemporaine_? A bad novelist,’ she added,
finding it necessary to apologize for quoting from so very old-fashioned
and disreputed an author; ‘but good as an essayist, I always find.
Wasn’t it Paul Bourget?’ she repeated.

‘I should think it must have been Paul Bourget,’ said Philip wearily.

‘The energy which wanted to expend itself in physical passion is
diverted and turns the mills of the soul.’ (‘Turn the mills of the soul’
was perhaps a shade too romantic, Victorian, Meredithian, she felt as
she pronounced the words.)’ The body’s dammed and canalized,’ she
emended, ‘and made to drive the spiritual dynamos. The thwarted
unconscious finds vent in making consciousness more intense.’

‘But does one want one’s consciousness intensified?’ asked Philip,
looking angrily at the rather luscious figure at the other end of the
sofa. ‘I’m getting a bit tired of consciousness, to tell you the truth.’
He admired her body, but the only contact she would permit was with her
much less interesting and beautiful mind. He wanted kisses, but all he
got was analytical anecdotes and philosophic epigrams. ‘Thoroughly
tired,’ he repeated. It was no wonder.

Molly only laughed. ‘Don’t start pretending you’re a paleolithic
cave-man,’ she said. ‘It doesn’t suit you. Tired of consciousness,
indeed! _You_! Why, if you’re tired of consciousness, you must be tired
of yourself.’

‘Which is exactly what I am,’ said Philip. ‘You’ve made me tired of
myself. Sick to death.’ Still irritated, he rose to take his leave.

‘Is that an insult?’ she asked, looking up at him. ‘Why have I made you
tired of yourself?’

Philip shook his head. ‘I can’t explain. I’ve given up explaining.’ He
held out his hand. Still looking enquiringly into his face, Molly took
it. ‘If you weren’t one of the vestal virgins of civilization,’ he went
on, ‘you’d understand without any explaining. Or rather, there wouldn’t
be any explaining to do. Because you wouldn’t have made me feel tired of
myself. And let me add, Molly, that if you were really and consistently
civilized, you’d take steps to make yourself less desirable.
Desirability’s barbarous. It’s as savage as pouncing and clawing. You
ought to look like George Eliot. Goodbye.’ And giving her hand a final
shake, he limped out of the room. In the street he gradually recovered
his temper. He even began to smile to himself. For it was a joke. The
spectacle of a biter being bitten is always funny, even when the bitten
biter happens to be oneself. Conscious and civilized, he had been
defeated by someone even more civilized than himself. The justice was
poetic. But what a warning! Parodies and caricatures are the most
penetrating of criticisms. In Molly he perceived a kind of Max Beerbohm
version of himself. The spectacle was alarming. Having smiled, he became
pensive.

‘I must be pretty awful,’ he thought.

Sitting on a chair in the Park, he considered his shortcomings. He had
considered them before, often. But he had never done anything about
them. He knew in advance that he wouldn’t do anything about them this
time. Poor Elinor! That rigmarole of Molly’s about platonic relations
and Paul Bourget gave him a notion of what she had to put up with. He
decided to tell her of his adventure with Molly—comically, for it was
always easier to talk unseriously—and then go on to talk about
themselves. Yes, that was what he’d do. He ought to have spoken before.
Elinor had been so strangely and unnaturally silent of late, so far
away. He had been anxious, had wanted to speak, had felt he ought to
have spoken. But about what? The ridiculous episode with Molly provided
him with an opening gambit.

‘I saw Molly d’Exergillod this afternoon,’ he began, when he saw Elinor.
But the tone of her ‘Did you?’ was so coldly uninterested, that he went
no further. There was a silence. Elinor went on with her reading. He
glanced at her surreptitiously over the top of his book. Her pale face
wore an expression of calm remoteness. He felt a renewal of that uneasy
anxiety which had come upon him so often during the last few weeks.

‘Why don’t you ever talk now?’ he screwed up the courage to ask her that
evening after dinner.

Elinor looked up at him from her book. ‘Don’t I ever talk?’ she said,
ironically smiling. ‘Well, I suppose there’s nothing of any particular
interest to say.’

Philip recognized one of the answers he was in the habit of making to
her reproaches, and was abashed into silence. And yet it was unfair of
her to retort it upon him. For in his case it was true: there really
wasn’t anything of interest to say. By dint of being secretive about
them, he had almost abolished his intimate feelings. Very little seemed
to go on in the unintellectual part of his mind—very little, at any
rate, that wasn’t either trivial or rather discreditable. Whereas Elinor
always had a mass of things to say. Things that said themselves, that
came out of their own accord from the depths of her being. Philip would
have liked to explain this to her; but somehow it was difficult, he
couldn’t.

‘All the same,’ he brought himself to say, after a pause, ‘you used to
talk much more. It’s only in these last days…’

‘I suppose I’m rather tired of talking, that’s all.’

‘But why should you be tired?’

‘Mayn’t one be tired sometimes?’ She uttered a rather resentful little
laugh. ‘You seem to be permanently tired.’

Philip looked at her with a kind of anxiety. His eyes seemed to implore.
But she wouldn’t allow herself to be touched. She had allowed herself to
be touched too often. He had exploited her love, systematically
underpaid her and, whenever she threatened rebellion, had turned
suddenly rather pathetic and helpless, appealing to her better feelings.
This time she was going to be hard. He might look as imploring and
anxious as he liked, but she wouldn’t take any notice. It only served
him right. All the same she felt rather guilty. And yet it was his own
fault. Why couldn’t he love her actively, articulately, outright? When
she gave him her love, he took it for granted, he accepted it passively
as his right. And when she stopped giving it, he looked dumbly anxious
and imploring. But as for saying anything, as for doing anything…

The seconds passed. Elinor waited, pretending to read. If only he’d
speak or move! She longed for an excuse to love him again. As for
Everard—why, Everard simply didn’t count. To the deep instinctive core
of her being he really didn’t matter and if Philip would only take the
trouble to love her a little, he wouldn’t matter any more even to the
conscious part of her that was trying to love him—to love him on
principle, so to speak, to love him deliberately, of set purpose. But
the seconds passed in silence. And at last, with a little sigh (for he
too would have liked to say something, to do something; only it was
impossible, because the something said or done would have to be
personal), Philip picked up his book and, in the interests of the
zoological novelist in his novel, went on reading about the possessive
instinct in birds. Reading again. He wasn’t going to say anything after
all. Oh, very well; if he wanted her to become Everard’s mistress, then
he’d have only himself to blame. She tried to shrug her shoulders and
feel truculently. But the threat, she inwardly felt, was directed
against herself rather than against Philip. It was she, not he, who was
being condemned. Condemned to be Everard’s mistress.

Taking a lover had seemed to Elinor, thoeretically and in advance, a
matter of no great difficulty. Morally wrong she did not think it. All
the fuss that Christians and the heroines of novels managed to make
about it! It was incomprehensible. ‘If people want to go to bed with one
another,’ she would say, ‘why can’t they do it quite simply and
straightforwardly, without tormenting themselves and everyone else
within range?’ Nor had she any fear of the social consequences of taking
a lover. The people who, if they knew, would object, were precisely the
people she herself had always objected to. By refusing to meet her, they
would be doing her a favour. As for Phil, he would have deserved it. He
had had it in his power to prevent any such thing happening. Why
couldn’t he have come nearer, given a little more of himself? She had
begged for love; but what he had given her was a remote impersonal
benevolence. Mere warmth, that was all she wanted; mere humanity. It was
not much to ask. And she had warned him so often of what would happen if
he didn’t give it.

Didn’t he understand? Or was it that he simply didn’t care? Perhaps it
wouldn’t hurt him at all; the punishment wouldn’t punish. That would be
humiliating. But after all, she would go on to remind herself, whenever
she had arrived (yet once more) at this point in her inward argument,
after all it wasn’t only or mainly to punish Philip, it wasn’t primarily
to teach him humanity by pain and jealousy, that she was going to take a
lover. It was in the interest of her own happiness. (She would try to
forget how very wretched the pursuit of her own happiness made her.) Her
own independent happiness. She had grown accustomed to think and act too
exclusively in relation to Philip. Even when she planned to take a
lover, it was still of him that she thought. Which was absurd, absurd.

But these self-reminders of her right, her intention to be independently
happy, had to be constantly repeated. Her natural and habitual mode of
thinking even about a possible lover was still in terms of her
husband—of his conversion, or his punishment. It was only by an effort,
deliberately, that she could remember to forget him.

But anyhow, for whatever reasons she might do it, to take a lover had
seemed, in advance, a matter of no great psychological difficulty.
Particularly if the lover were to be Everard Webley. For she liked
Everard, very much; she admired him; she felt herself strangely moved
and thrilled by the power that seemed to radiate out of him. And yet,
when it came to the point of physical contact with the man, what
extraordinary difficulties at once arose! She liked to be with him, she
liked his letters, she could imagine, when he did not touch her, that
she was in love with him. But when, at their second meeting after her
return, Everard took her in his arms and kissed her, she was seized with
a kind of horror, she felt herself turning colk and stony in his
embrace. It was the same horror, Ehe same coldness as she had felt,
nearly a year before, when he had first tried to kiss her. The same, in
spite of the fact she had prepared herself in the interval to feel
differently, had accustomed her conscious mind to the idea of taking him
as a lover. That horror, that wincing coldness were the spontaneous
reactions of the instinctive and habitual part of her being. It was only
her mind that had decided to accept. Her feelings, her body, all the
habits of her instinctive self were in rebellion. What her intellect
found harmless, her stiffened and shrinking body passionately
disapproved. The spirit was a libertine, but the flesh and its
affections were chaste.

‘Please, Everard,’ she begged, ‘please.’

He let her go. ‘Why do you hate me?’

‘But I don’t, Everard.’

‘I only give you the creeps, that’s all!’ he said with a savage
derision. Hurt, he took a pleasure in opening his own wound. ‘I merely
disgust you.’

‘But how can you say such a thing?’ She felt wretched and ashamed of her
shrinking; but the sense of repulsion still persisted.

‘Because it happens to be true.’

‘No, it isn’t.’ At the words Everard stretched out his hands again. She
shook her head. ‘But you mustn’t touch me,’ she begged. ‘Not now. It
would spoil everything. I can’t explain why. I don’t know why. But not
now. Not yet,’ she added, implicitly promising but meanwhile avoiding.

The implication of a promise revived his importunity. Elinor was half
sorry that she had pronounced the words, half glad that she had, to this
extent, committed herself. She was relieved to have escaped from the
immediate menace of his bodily contact, and at the same time angry with
herself for having shrunk from him. Her body and her instincts had
rebelled against her will. Her implied promise was the will’s reprisal
against the traitors within her. It made the amends which, she felt, she
owed to Everard. ‘Not yet.’ But when? When? Any time, her will replied,
any time you like. It was easy to promise, but oh, how hard to fulfil!
Elinor sighed. If only Philip would let her love him! But he did not
speak, he did not act, he just went on reading. Silently he condemned
her to unfaithfulness.


CHAPTER XXIX

The scene was Hyde Park; the day, a Saturday in June.

Dressed in green and wearing a sword, Everard Webley was addressing a
thousand British Freemen from the back of his white horse, Bucephalus.
With a military precision which would have done credit to the Guards,
the Freemen had formed up on the Embankment at Blackfriars, had marched
with music and symbolic standards to Charing Cross, up Northumberland
Avenue, through Trafalgar Square and Cambridge Circus to the Tottenham
Court Road and thence along the whole length of Oxford Street to the
Marble Arch. At the entrance to the Park they had met an AntiVivisection
procession and there had been some slight confusion—a mingling of ranks,
a musical discord, as the bands collided, of ‘The British Grenadiers’
and ‘My Faith looks up to Thee, Thou Lamb of Calvary,’ an entangling of
banners, ‘Protect our Doggies’ with ‘Britons never shall be slaves,’
‘Socialism is Tyranny’ with ‘Doctors or Devils?’ But the admirable
discipline of the Freemen had prevented the confusion from becoming
serious, and after a short delay the thousand had entered the Park,
marched past their leader and finally formed themselves into three sides
of a hollow square, with Everard and his staff at the centre of the
fourth side. The trumpets had sounded a fanfare and the thousand had
sung the four verses of Everard’s rather Kiplingesque ‘Song of the
Freemen.’ When the singing was done Everard began his speech.

‘British Freemen!’ he said, ‘comrades!’ and at the sound of that strong
effortless voice there was a silence even among the spectators who had
idly collected to watch the proceedings. Carrying a power not
intrinsically theirs, a power that belonged to the speaker, not to what
he spoke, his words fell one by one, thrillingly audible, into the
attentive hush they had created. He began by praising the Freemen’s
discipline. ‘Discipline,’ he said, ‘voluntarily accepted discipline is
the first condition of freedom, the first virtue of Freemen. Free and
disciplined Spartans held the Persian hordes at bay. Free and
disciplined Macedonians conquered half the world. It is for us free and
disciplined Englishmen to deliver our country from the slaves who have
enslaved it. Three hundred fought at Thermopylae against tens of
thousands. The odds we face are not so desperate. Your battalion is only
one of more than sixty, a single thousand among the sixty thousand
Freemen of England. The numbers daily increase. Twenty, fifty, sometimes
a hundred recruits join us every day. The army grows, the green army of
Freemen.

‘The British Freemen are uniformed in green. Theirs is the livery of
Robin Hood and Little John, the livery of outlaws. For outlaws they are
in this stupid democratic world. Outlaws proud of their outlawry. The
law of the democratic world is quantity. We outlaws believe in quality.
For the democratic politicians, the voice of the greatest number is the
voice of God; their law is the law that pleases the mob. Outside the
pale of mob-made law, we desire the rule of the best, not the most
numerous. Stupider than their liberal grandfathers, the democrats of
to-day would discourage individual enterprise and, by nationalizing
industry and land, invest the state with tyrannical powers such as it
has never possessed, except perhaps in India in the time of the Moguls.
We outlaws are freemen. We believe in the value of individual liberty.
We would encourage individual enterprise; for we believe that,
co-ordinated and controlled in the interests of society as a whole,
individual enterprise produces the best economic and moral results. The
law of the democratic world is human standardization, is the reduction
of all humanity to the lowest common measure. Its religion is the
worship of the average man. We outlaws believe in diversity, in
aristocracy, in the natural hierarchy. We would remove every removable
handicap and give every man his chance, in order that the best may rise
to the position for which nature has qualified them. In a word, we
believe in justice. And we revere, not the ordinary, but the
extraordinary man. I could go on almost indefinitely with this list of
the points on which we British Freemen are in radical disagreement with
the democratic governors of what once was free and merry England. But I
have said enough to show that there can be no peace between them and us.
Their white is our black, their political good is our evil, their
earthly paradise is our hell. Voluntary outlaws, we repudiate their
rule, we wear the green livery of the forest. And we bide our time, we
bide our time. For our time is coming and we do not propose to remain
outlaws for ever. The time is coming when the laws will be of our making
and the forest will be the place for those who now hold power. Two years
ago our band was insignificant. To-day it is an army. An army of
outlaws. Yet a little while, my comrades, and it will be the army of
those who make the laws, not of those who break them. Yes, of those who
break them. For, before we can become the makers of good laws, we must
be the breakers of bad laws. We must have the courage of our outlawry.
British Freemen, fellow outlaws, when the time comes, will you have that
courage?’

From the green-coated ranks rose an enormous shout.

‘When I give the word, will you follow.’

‘We will, we will,’ the green thousand repeated.

‘Even if laws must be broken?’

There was another burst of affirmative cheering. When it died down and
as Everard Webley was opening his mouth to continue, a voice
shouted,’down with Webley! Down with the rich man’s militia! Down with
the Bloody B…’ But before the voice could enunciate the whole hated
parody of their name, half a dozen of the nearest British Freemen had
thrown themselves upon its owner.

Everard Webley rose in his stirrups. ‘Keep your ranks,’ he called
peremptorily. ‘How dare you leave the ranks?’

There was a scurrying of officers to the scene of confusion, an angry
shouting of orders. The over-zealous Freemen slunk back to their places.
Holding a bloody handkerchief to his nose and escorted by two policemen,
their enemy marched away. He had lost his hat. The dishevelled hair
blazed red in the sunlight. It was Illidge.

Everard Webley turned to the officer commanding the company whose men
had broken their ranks. ‘Insubordination,’ he began; and his voice was
cold and hard, not loud, but dangerously penetrating, ‘insubordination
is the worst…’

Illidge removed his handkerchief from his nose and shouted in a shrill
falsetto, ‘Oh, you naughty boys!’

There was a guffaw from the spectators. Everard ignored the interruption
and having concluded his rebuke, went on with his speech. Commanding and
yet persuasive, passionate, but controlled and musical, his voice
thrilled out; and in a moment the shattered silence was reconstructed
round his words, the dissipated attention was once more focussed and
concentrated. There had been a rebellion; he had made another conquest.

 

__ __

 

Spandrell waited without impatience. Illidge’s tardiness gave him the
opportunity to drink an extra cocktail or two. He was at his third and
feeling already much better and more cheerful, when the restaurant door
swung open and in walked Illidge, very militant and defiant, with an air
of truculently parading his blackened eye.

‘Drunk and disorderly?’ questioned Spandrell at the sight of the bruise.
‘Or did you meet an outraged husband? Or have words with a lady?’

Illidge sat down and recounted his adventure, boastfully and with
embellishments. He had been, according to his own account, a mixture of
Horatius defending the bridge and St. Stephen under the shower of
stones.

‘The ruffians!’ said Spandrell sympathetically. But his eyes shone with
malicious laughter. The misfortunes of his friends were an unfailing
source of amusement to him, and this of Illidge’s was a particularly
entertaining disaster.

‘But at least I spoilt the best effect in Webley’s disgusting oration,’
Illidge went on in the same selfcongratulating tone.

‘It might have been slightly more satisfactory if you’d spoilt his face
for him.’

Illidge was stung by the note of mockery in Spandrell’s words. ‘Spoiling
his face wouldn’t be enough,’ he said with ferocity, scowling as he
spoke. ‘The man ought to be exterminated. He’s a public danger, he and
his gang of bravoes.’ He broke into profanity.

Spandrell only laughed. ‘It’s easy to yammer,’ he said. ‘Why not do
something for a change? A little direct action in Webley’s own style.’

The other shrugged his shoulders apologetically. ‘We’re not well enough
organized.’

‘I shouldn’t have thought it needed much organization to knock a man on
the head. No, the real trouble is that you’re not courageous enough.’

Illidge blushed. ‘That’s a lie!’

‘Not well enough organized!’ Spandrell went on contemptuously ‘At least
you’re modern in your excuses. The great god organization. Even art and
love will soon be bowing down like everything else. Why are your verses
so bad? Because the poetry industry isn’t well enough organized. And the
impotent lover will excuse himself in the same way and assure the
indignant lady that, next time, she’ll find his organization perfect.
No, no, my dear Illidge, it won’t do, you know; it won’t do.’

‘You’re being very funny, no doubt,’ said Illidge, still pink with
anger. ‘But you’re talking rot. You can’t compare poetry and politics. A
political party’s a lot of men who’ve got to be disciplined and held
together. A poet’s one man.’

‘But so’s a murderer, isn’t he?’ Spandrell’s tone, his smile were still
sarcastic. Illidge felt the blood running up again into his face like
the warmth of a suddenly flaring inward fire. He hated Spandrell for his
power of humiliating him, for making him feel small, a fool and ashamed.
He had come in feeling important and heroic, flushed with satisfaction.
And now, with a few slow sneering words, Spandrell had turned his
selfsatisfaction to an angry shame. There was a silence; they ate their
soup without speaking. When his plate was empty, ‘One man,’ said
Spandrell meditatively, leaning back in his chair. ‘With all one man’s
responsibility. A thousand men have no.) responsibility. That’s why
organization’s such a wonderful comfort. A member of a political party
feels himself as safe as the member of a church. The party may order
civil war, rape, massacre; he does what he’s told cheerfully, because
the responsibility isn’t his. It’s the leader’s. And the leader is the
rare man, like Webley. The man with courage.’

‘Or cowardice, in his case,’ said Illidge. ‘Webley’s the bourgeois
rabbit terrified into ferocity.’

‘Is he?’ asked Spandrell raising his eyebrows derisively. ‘Well, you may
be right. But anyhow, he’s rather different from the ordinary rabbit.
The ordinary rabbit isn’t scared into ferocity. He’s scared into abject
inactivity or abject activity in obedience to somebody else’s orders.
Never into activity on his own account, for which he has to take the
responsibility. When it’s a question of murder, for example, you don’t
find the ordinary rabbits exactly eager, do you? They wait to be
organized. The responsibility’s too great for the little individual.
He’s scared.’

‘Well, obviously nobody wants to be hanged.’

‘He’d be scared even if there wasn’t any hanging.’

‘You’re not going to trot out the categorical imperative again, are
you.?’ It was Illidge’s turn to be sarcastic.

‘It trots itself out. Even in your case. When it came to the point,
you’d never dare do anything about Webley, unless you had an
organization to relieve you of all responsibility. You simply wouldn’t
dare,’ he repeated, with a kind of mocking challenge. He looked at
Illidge intently between half-closed eyelids, and through the whole of
Illidge’s rather rhetorical speech about the scotching of snakes, the
shooting of tigers, the squashing of bugs, he studied his victim’s
flushed and angry face. How comic the man was when he tried to be
heroic! Illidge stormed on, uncomfortably conscious that his phrases
were too big and sounded hollow. But emphasis and still more emphasis,
as the smile grew more contemptuous, seemed to be the only possible
retort to Spandrell’s maddeningly quiet derision—more and still more,
however false the rhetoric might sound. Like a man who stops shouting
because he is afraid his voice may break, he was suddenly silent.
Spandrell slowly nodded.

‘All right,’ he said mysteriously. ‘All right.’

 

__ __

 

‘It’s absurd,’ Elinor kept assuring herself. ‘It’s childish. Childish
and absurd.’

It was an irrelevance. Everard was no different because he had sat on a
white horse, because he had commanded and been acclaimed by a cheering
crowd. He was no better because she had seen him at the head of one of
his battalions. It was absurd, it was childish to have been so moved.
But moved she had been; the fact remained. What an excitement when he
had appeared, riding, at the head of his men! A quickening of the heart
and a swelling. And what an anxiety in the seconds of silence before he
began to speak! A real terror. He might stammer and hesitate; he might
say something stupid or vulgar; he might be longwinded and a bore; he
might be a mountebank. And then, when the voice spoke, unstrained, but
vibrant and penetrating, when the speech began to unroll itself in words
that were passionate and stirring, but never theatrical, in phrases
rich, but brief and incisive—then what an exultation, what pride! But
when that man made his interruption, she had felt, together with a
passion of indignation against the interrupter, a renewal of her
anxiety, her terror lest he might fail, might be publicly humiliated and
put to shame. But he had sat unmoved, he had uttered his stern rebuke,
he had made a pregnant and breathless silence and then, at last,
continued his speech, as though nothing had happened. Elinor’s anxiety
had given place to an extraordinary happiness. The speech came to an
end; there was a burst of cheering and Elinor had felt enormously proud
and elated and at the same time embarrassed, as though the cheering had
been in part directed towards herself; and she had laughed aloud, she
did not know why, and the blood had rushed up into her cheeks and she
had turned away in confusion, not daring to look at him; and then, for
no reason, she had begun to cry.

Absurd and childish, she now assured herself. But there, the absurd and
childish thing had happened; there was no undoing it.

 

__ __

 

_From Philip Quarles’s Notebook_

 

In the _Sunday Pictorial_, a snapshot of Everard Webley with his mouth
open—a black hole in the middle of a straining face—bawling. ‘Mr. E. W.,
the founder and chief of the B. B. F., addressed a battalion of British
Freemen in Hyde Park on Saturday.’ And that was all that remained of the
event, that gargoylish symbol of demagogy. A mouth opened to bray. What
a horror!

And yet the event was genuinely impressive. And E.’s bawling sounded
quite nobly, at the time. And he looked monumental on his white horse.
Selecting a separate instant out of what had been a continuity, the
camera turned him into a cautionary scarecrow. Unfair? Or was the
camera’s vision the true one and mine the false? For after all, the
impressive continuity must have been made up of such appalling instants
as the camera recorded. Can the whole be something quite different from
its parts? In the physical world, yes. Taken as a whole a body and brain
are radically different from their component electrons. But what about
the moral world? Can a collection of low values make up a single high
value? Everard’s photo poses a genuine problem. Millions of monstrous
instants making up a splendid half-hour.

Not that I was without my doubts of the splendidness at the time. E.
talked a lot about Thermopylae and the Spartans. But my resistance was
even more heroic. Leonidas had three hundred companions. I defended my
spiritual Thermopylae single-handed against E. and his Freemen. They
impressed me; but I resisted. The drill, to begin with, was superb. I
watched, enchanted. As usual. How does one explain the fascination of
the military spectacle? Explain it away, by preference. I wondered all
the time I was watching.

A squad is merely ten men and emotionally neutral. The heart only begins
to beat at the sight of a company. The evolutions of a battalion are
intoxicating. And a brigade is already an army with banners—which is the
equivalent, as we know from the Song of Songs, of being in love. The
thrill is proportional to the numbers. Given the fact that one is only
two yards high, two feet wide and solitary, a cathedral is necessarily
more impressive than a cottage and a mile of marching men is grander
than a dozen loafers at a street corner. But that’s not all. A
regiment’s more impressive than a crowd. The army with banners is
equivalent to love only when it’s perfectly drilled. Stones in the form
of a building are finer than stones in a heap. Drill and uniforms impose
an architecture on the crowd. An army’s beautiful. But that’s not all;
it panders to lower instincts than the aesthetic. The spectacle of human
beings reduced to automatism satisfies the lust for power. Looking at
mechanized slaves, one fancies oneself a master. So I thought, as I
admired the evolutions of Everard’s Freemen. And by taking the
admiration to bits, I preserved myself from being overwhelmed by it.
Divide and rule. I did the same with the music and afterwards with
Everard’s speech.

What a great stage manager was lost in Everard! Nothing could have been
more impressive than (breaking the studiously prolonged silence) that
fanfare of trumpets and then, solemnly, the massive harmonies of a
thousand voices singing ‘The Song of the Freemen.’ The trumpets were
prodigious—like the overture to the Last Judgment. (Why should upper
partials be so soul-shaking?) And when the trumpet overture was done,
the thousand voices burst out with that almost supernatural sound which
choral singing always has. Enormous, like the voice of Jehovah.
Reinhardt himself couldn’t have done the trick more effectually. IV felt
as though there were a hole where my diaphragm should be; a kind of
anxious tingling ran over my skin, the tears were very nearly at the
surface of my eyes. I did the Leonidas turn again and reflected how bad
the music was, what ridiculous rant the words.

The Last Trump, the voice of God—and then it was Everard’s turn to
speak. And one wasn’t let down. How well he did it! His voice took you
in the solar plexus, like those upper partials on the trumpets. Moving
and convincing, even though you knew that what he said was vague and
more or less meaningless. I analysed the tricks. They were the usual
ones. The most effective was the employment of inspiring words with two
or more meanings. ‘Liberty,’ for example. The liberty in the title and
programme of the British Freemen is the liberty to buy and sell and own
property with a minimum of government interference. (A pretty large
minimum, parenthetically; but let that pass.) Everard bawls out the word
in his solar-plexus-punching voice: ‘we are fighting for _liberty_; we
are going to _free_ the country,’ etcetera. The hearer immediately
visualizes himself sitting in shirt-sleeves with a bottle and a
complaisant wench and no laws, no code of good manners, no wife, no
policeman, no parson to forbid. Liberty! Naturally it arouses his
enthusiasm. It’s only when the British Freemen come to power that he’ll
realize that the word was really used in an entirely different sense.
Divide and conquer. I conquered. _P. S._—Or rather one part of me
conquered. I’ve got into the habit of associating myself with that part
and applauding when it triumphs. But, after all, is it the best part? In
these particular circumstances, perhaps yes. It’s probably better to be
dispassionately analytical than to be overwhelmed by Everard’s
stage-managing and eloquence into becoming a British Freeman. But in
other circumstances? Rampion’s probably right. But having made a habit
of dividing and conquering in the name of the intellect, it’s hard to
stop. And perhaps it isn’t entirely a matter of second nature; perhaps
first nature comes in too. It’s easy to believe one ought to change
one’s mode of living. The difficulty is to act on the belief. This
settlement in the country, for example; this being rustic and paternal
and a good neighbour; this living vegetably and intuitively—is it really
going to be possible? I imagine it; but in fact, in fact…? Meanwhile, it
might be rather interesting to concoct a character on these lines. A man
who has always taken pains to encourage his own intellectualist
tendencies at the expense of all the others. He avoids personal
relationships as much as he can, he observes without participating,
doesn’t like to give himself away, is always a spectator rather than an
actor. Again, he has always been careful not to distinguish one day, one
place from another; not to review the past and anticipate the future at
the New Year, not to celebrate Christmas or birthdays, not to revisit
the scenes of his childhood, not to make pilgrimages to the birthplaces
of great men, battlefields, ruins and the like. By this suppression of
emotional relationships and natural piety he seems to himself to be
achieving freedom—freedom from sentimentality, from the irrational, from
passion, from impulse and emotionalism. But in reality, as he gradually
discovers, he has only narrowed and desiccated his life; and what’s
more, has cramped his intellect by the very process he thought would
emancipate it. His reason’s free, but only to deal with a small fraction
of experience. He realizes his psychological defects, and desires, in
theory, to change. But it’s difficult to break lifelong habits; and
perhaps the habits are only the expression of an inborn indifference and
coldness, which it might be almost impossible to overcome. And for _him_
at any rate, the merely intellectual life is easier; it’s the line of
least resistance, because it’s the line that avoids other human beings.
Among them his wife. For he’d have a wife and there would be the
elements of drama in the relations between the woman, living mainly with
her emotions and intuitions, and the man whose existence is mainly on
the abstracted intellectual plane. He loves her in his way and she loves
him in hers. Which means that he’s contented and she’s dissatisfied; for
love in his way entails the minimum of those warm, confiding human
relationships which constitute the essence of love in her way. She
complains; he would like to give more, but finds it hard to change
himself. She even threatens to leave him for a more human lover; but she
is too much in love with him to put the threat into effect.

 

__ __

 

That Sunday afternoon Elinor and Everard Webley drove down into the
country.

‘Forty-three miles in an hour and seven minutes,’ said Everard looking
at his watch as he stepped out of the car. ‘Not bad considering that
includes getting out of London and being held up by that filthy
charabanc in Guildford. Not at all bad.’

‘And what’s more,’ said Elinor, ‘we’re still alive. If you knew the
number of times I just shut my eyes and only expected to open them again
on the Day of Judgment….’

He laughed, rather glad that she should have been so frightened by the
furiousness of his driving. Her terrors gave him a pleasing sense of
power and superiority. He took her arm protectively and they walked away
down the green path into the wood. Everard drew a deep breath.

‘This is better than making political speeches,’ he said, pressing her
arm.

‘Still,’ said Elinor, ‘it must be rather wonderful to sit on a horse and
make a thousand people do whatever you want.’

Everard laughed. ‘Unfortunately there’s a bit more in politics than
that.’ He glanced at her. ‘You enjoyed the meeting?’

‘I was thrilled.’ She saw him again on his white horse, heard his strong
vibrating voice, remembered her exultation and those sudden tears.
Magnificent, she said to herself, magnificent! But there was no
recapturing the exultation. His hand was on her arm, his huge presence
loomed almost threateningly over her. ‘Is he going to kiss me?’ she
nervously wondered. She tried to drive out the questioning dread and
fill its place with yesterday’s exultation. Magnificent! But the dread
would not be exorcised. ‘I thought your speech was splendid,’ she said
aloud and wondered parenthetically as she spoke what it had been about
She remembered the sound and timbre of the words, but not their
significance. Hopeless! ‘Oh, what lovely honeysuckle!’

Everard reached up, enormous, and picked a couple of blossoms. ‘Such
beauty, such loveliness!’ He quoted Keats, fumbled in his memory for a
line in the _Midsummer Night’s Dream_. He wondered lyrically why one
lived in towns, why one wasted one’s time in the pursuit of money and
power, when there was all this beauty waiting to be known and loved.

Elinor listened rather uncomfortably. He seemed to turn it on, this love
of beauty, like an electric light—turn out the love of power, turn out
efficiency and political preoccupations and turn on the love of beauty.
But why shouldn’t he, after all? There was nothing wrong in liking
beautiful things. Nothing, except that in some obscure indescribable way
Everard’s love of beauty wasn’t quite right. Too deliberate was it? Too
occasional? Too much for holidays only? Too conventional, too heavy, too
humourlessly reverent? She preferred him as a lover of power. As a
power-lover he was somehow of better quality than as a beauty-lover. A
poor beauty-lover, perhaps, because he was such a good power-lover. By
compensation. Everything has to be paid for.

They walked on. In an open glade between the trees the foxgloves were
coming into flower.

‘Like torches burning upwards from the bottom,’ said Everard poetically.

Elinor halted in front of one tall plant whose first flower-bells were
on a level with her eyes. The red flesh of the petals was cool and
resilient between her fingers. She peeped into the open bell-mouth.

‘Think of the discomfort of having freckles in one’s throat,’ she said.
‘Not to mention little beetles.’

They moved away in silence through the trees. It was Everard who first
spoke.

‘Will you ever love me?’ he asked suddenly.

‘You know how fond I am of you, Everard.’ Her heart sank; the moment had
come, he would want to kiss her. But he made no gesture, only laughed,
rather mournfully.

‘Very fond of me,’ he repeated. ‘Ah, if only you could be a little less
reasonable, a little more insane If only you knew what loving was!’

‘Isn’t it a good thing somebody should be sane? ‘ said Elinor. ‘Sane
beforehand, I mean. For everybody can be sane afterwards. Much too sane,
when the fit’s over and the lovers begin to wonder whether, after all,
the world _was_ well lost. Think, Everard, think first. Do you want to
lose the world?’

‘I shouldn’t lose it,’ Everard answered, and his voice had that strange
thrilling vibration which she seemed to hear, not with her ears, but
with her body, in the very midriff. ‘They couldn’t take it away from me.
Times have changed since Parnell’s day. Besides I’m not Parnell. Let
them try to take it away!’ He laughed. ‘Love and the world—I’m going to
have both, Elinor. Both.’ He smiled down at her, the power-lover
triumphant.

‘You’re asking too much,’ she answered laughing, ‘you’re greedy.’ The
exultation tingled again through her, was like the breath-taking warmth
of hot wine.

He bent down and kissed her. Elinor did not shrink.

Another car had pulled up at the roadside, another couple strolled along
the green path into the wood. Through the glaring pink and white of her
cosmetics the woman’s face was old; the weary flesh had sagged out of
its once charming shape.

‘Oh, isn’t it lovely!’ she kept exclaiming as she walked along, carrying
her heavy body rather unsteadily on very high-heeled shoes over the
uneven ground. ‘Isn’t it lovely!’

Spandrell—for it was he—did not answer.

‘Pick me some of that honeysuckle there!’ she begged.

He pulled down a flowered spray with the crook of his stick. Through the
reek of chemical perfumery and not very clean underlinen the scent of
the flowers came cool and delicious to his nostrils.

‘Don’t they smell simply divine!’ she exclaimed, rapturously sniffing.
‘Too divine!’

The corners of Spandrell’s mouth twitched into a smile. It amused him to
hear the cast-off locutions of duchesses in the mouth of this ageing
prostitute. He looked at her. Poor Connie! She _was_ a skeleton at the
feast—more gruesomely deathly for being covered with so much loose and
sagging flesh. Really gruesome. There was no other word. Here, in the
sun, she was like a piece of stage scenery seen by daylight and from
close at hand. That was why he had gone to the expense of hiring the
Daimler and taking her out—just because the poor superannuated punk was
so gruesome. He nodded. ‘Quite nice,’ he said. ‘But I prefer your
scent.’

They walked on. A little uncertain already of the distinction between a
second and a minor third, a cuckoo was calling. In the slanting
corridors of sunlight tunnelled through the green and purple of the
forest shadows the little flies jerkily danced and zigzagged. There was
no wind, the leaves hung down heavy with greenness. The trees were as
though gorged with sap and sunshine.

‘Lovely, lovely,’ was Connie’s refrain. The place, the day reminded her,
she said, of her childhood in the country. She sighed.

‘And you wish you’d been a good girl,’ said Spandrell sarcastically.
‘“The roses round the door make me love mother more.” I know, I know.’
He was silent for a moment. ‘What I hate about trees in the summer,’ he
went on, ‘is their beastly fat complacency. Bulging—that’s what they
are; like bloated great profiteers. Bulging with insolence, passive
insolence.’

‘Oh, the foxgloves!’ cried Connie, who hadn’t even been listening. She
ran towards them, grotesquely unsteady on her high heels. Spandrell
followed her.

‘Pleasingly phallic,’ he said, fingering one of the spikes of unopened
buds. And he went on to develop the conceit, profusely.

‘Oh, be quiet, be quiet,’ cried Connie. ‘How can you say such things?’
She was outraged, wounded. ‘How can you—here?’

‘In God’s country,’ he mocked. ‘How can I?’ And raising his stick he
suddenly began to lay about him right and left, slash, slash, breaking
one of the tall proud plants at every stroke. The ground was strewn with
murdered flowers.

‘Stop, stop!’ She caught at his arm. Silently laughing, Spandrell
wrenched himself away from her and went on beating down the plants.
‘Stop! Please! Oh, don’t, don’t.’ She made another dash at him. Still
laughing, still laying about him with his stick, Spandrell dodged away
from her.

‘Down with them,’ he shouted, ‘down with them.’ Flower after flower fell
under his strokes. ‘There!’ he said at last, breathless with laughter
and running and slashing. ‘There!’ Connie was in tears.

‘How could you?’ she said ‘How could you do it?’

He laughed again, silently, throwing back his head. ‘Serve them right,’
he said. ‘Do you think I’m going to sit still and let myself be
insulted? The insolence of the brutes! Ah, there’s another!’ He stepped
across the glade to where one last tall foxglove stood as though hiding
among the hazel saplings. One stroke was enough. The broken plant fell
almost noiselessly.

‘Damn their insolence! It serves them right. Let’s come back to the
car.’


CHAPTER XXX

Rachel Quarles had no sympathy with those sentiA mental philanthropists
who blur the distinction between right and wrong, between wrong-doers
and the righteous. Criminals, in her eyes, and not the society in which
they lived, were responsible for their crimes. Sinners committed their
own sins; their environment did not do it for them. There were excuses,
of course, palliations, extenuating circumstances. But good was always
good, bad remained bad. There were circumstances in which the choice of
good was very difficult; but it was always the individual who made the
choice and who, having made, must answer for it. Mrs. Quarles, in a
word, was a Christian and not a humanitarian. As a Christian she thought
that Marjorie had done wrong to leave her husband—even such a husband as
Carling—for another man. She disapproved the act, but did not presume to
judge the person, the more so since, in spite of what she had done,
Marjorie’s heart and head were still, from Mrs. Quarles’s Christian
point of view, ‘in the right place.’ Rachel found it easier to like a
person who had acted wrongly, while continuing to think rightly, than
one who, like her daughter-in-law, Elinor, thought wrongly, while
acting, so far as she knew, in a manner entirely blameless. There were
circumstances, too, in which wrong action seemed to her almost less
reprehensible than wrong thought. It was not that she had any sympathy
for hypocrisy. The person who thought and spoke well while consistently
and consciously acting ill was detestable to her. Such people, however,
are rare. Most of those who do wrong, in spite of their sound beliefs,
do so in a moment of weakness and afterwards regret their wrongdoing.
But the person who thinks wrongly does not admit the wrongness of bad
actions. He sees no reason why he should not commit them or why, having
committed them, he should repent and mend his ways. And even if he in
fact behaves virtuously, he may be the means, by his wrong thinking, of
leading others into wrong action.

‘An admirable woman,’ had been John Bidlake’s verdict; ‘but rather too
fond of fig-leaves—especially over the mouth.’

Herself, Rachel Quarles was only conscious of being a Christian. She
could never imagine how people contrived to live without being
Christians. But a great many, she sadly had to admit, did so contrive.
Almost all the young people of her acquaintance. ‘It’s as though one’s
children talked a different languages’ she had once complained to an old
friend.

In Marjorie Carling she discovered someone who spoke and understood her
own spiritual idiom.

‘You’ll find her, I’m afraid, a bit of a bore,’ Philip had warned her,
when he announced his intention of lending his little house at Chamford
to Walter and Marjorie. ‘But be nice to her, all the same. She deserves
it, poor woman. She’s had a very thin time of it.’ And he detailed a
story that made his mother sigh to listen to.

‘I shouldn’t have expected Walter Bidlake to be like that,’ she said.

‘But in these matters one doesn’t expect anything of anybody. Things
happen to them, that’s all. They don’t do them.’

Mrs. Quarles did not answer. She was thinking of the time when she had
first discovered one of Sidney’s infidelities. The astonishment, the
pain, the humiliation…. ‘But still,’ she said aloud, ‘one wouldn’t have
thought he’d knowingly have made somebody unhappy.’

‘Still less that he’d knowingly have made himself unhappy. And yet I
think he’s really made himself quite as wretched as Marjorie. Perhaps
that’s his chief justification.’

His mother sighed. ‘It all seems so extraordinarily unnecessary.’

Mrs. Quarles called on Marjorie almost as soon as she had settled in.

‘Come and see me often,’ she said, as she took her leave. ‘Because I
like you,’ she added, with a sudden smile, for which poor Marjorie was
quite pathetically grateful. It wasn’t often that people liked her. That
she had fallen so deeply in love with Walter was due, above everything,
to his having been one of the few people who had ever shown any interest
in her. ‘And I hope you like me,’ Mrs. Quarles added.

Marjorie could only blush and stammer. But she already adored.

Rachel Quarles had spoken in all sincerity. She did like Marjorie—liked
her, even, for the very defects which made other people find her such a
bore; for her stupidity—it was so good and well-meaning; for her lack of
humour—it was the mark of such earnestness. Even those intellectual
pretensions, those deep or informative remarks dropped portentously out
of a meditative silence, did not displease her. Mrs. Quarles recognized
in them the rather absurd symptoms of a genuine love of the good, the
true and the beautiful, of a genuine desire for self-improvement.

At their third meeting Marjorie confided all her story. Mrs. Quarles’s
comments were sensible and Christian. ‘There’s no miraculous cure for
these things,’ she said; ‘no patent medicine for unhappiness. Only the
old dull virtues, patience, resignation and the rest; and the old
consolation, the old source of strength—old, but not dull. There’s
nothing less dull than God. But most young people won’t believe me when
I tell them so, even though they’re bored to death with jazz bands and
dancing.’

Marjorie’s first adoration was confirmed and increased—increased so
much, indeed, that Mrs. Quarles felt quite ashamed, as though she had
extorted something on false pretences, as though she had fraudulently
acted a part.

‘You’re such a wonderful help and comfort,’ Marjorie declared.

‘No, I’m not,’ she answered almost angrily. ‘The truth is that you were
lonely and unhappy and I was conveniently there at the right moment.’

Marjorie protested; but the older woman would not permit herself to be
praised or thanked.

They talked a good deal about religion. Carling had given Marjorie a
horror for all that was picturesque or formal in Christianity. Piran of
Peranzabuloe, vestments, ceremonials—everything remotely connected with
a saint, a rite, a tradition was hateful to her. But she preserved a
vague inchoate faith in what she regarded as the essentials; she had
retained from girlhood a certain habit of Christian feeling and thought.
Under the influence of Rachel Quarles the faith became more definite,
the habitual emotions were reinforced.

‘I feel so enormously much happier since I’ve been here, with you,’ she
announced hardly more than a week after her arrival.

‘It’s because you’re not trying to be happy or wondering why you should
have been made unhappy, because you’ve stopped thinking in terms of
happiness or unhappiness. That’s the enormous stupidity of the young
people of this generation,’ Mrs. Quarles went on; ‘they never think of
life except in terms of happiness. How shall I have a good time? That’s
the question they ask. Or they complain. Why am I not having a better
time? But this is a world where good times, in their sense of the word,
perhaps in any sense, simply cannot be had continuously, and by
everybody. And even when they get their good times, it’s inevitably a
disappointment—for imagination is always brighter than reality. And
after it’s been had for a little, it becomes a bore. Everybody strains
after happiness, and the result is that nobody’s happy. It’s because
they’re on the wrong road. The question they ought to be asking
themselves isn’t: Why aren’t we happy, and how shall we have a good
time? It’s: How can we please God, and why aren’t we better? If people
asked themselves those questions and answered them to the best of their
ability in practice, they’d achieve happiness without ever thinking
about it. For it’s not by pursuing happiness that you find it; it’s by
pursuing salvation. And when people were wise, instead of merely clever,
they thought of life in terms of salvation and damnation, not of good
times and bad times. If you’re feeling happy now, Marjorie, that’s
because you’ve stopped wishing you were happy and started trying to be
better. Happiness is like coke—something you get as a by-product in the
process of making something else.’

 

__ __

 

At Gattenden, meanwhile, the days passed gloomily.

‘Why don’t you do a little painting?’ Mrs. Bidlake suggested to her
husband on the morning that followed his arrival.

Old John shook his head.

‘You’d enjoy it so much once you started,’ coaxed Elinor.

But her father would not allow himself to be persuaded. He didn’twant to
paint, precisely because painting would have been so enjoyable. His very
dread of pain, sickness and death made him perversely refuse to let his
mind be distracted from their abhorred contemplation. It was as though
some part of him obscurely desired to accept defeat and misery, were
anxious to make abjection yet more abject. His courage, his Gargantuan
power, his careless high spirits had been the fruits of a deliberate and
lifelong ignorance. But now that to ignore was no longer possible, now
that the enemy was installed in his very vitals, the virtue had gone out
of him. He was afraid and could not conceal his terrors. He no longer
even desired to conceal them. He somehow wanted to be abject. And abject
he was. Mrs. Bidlake and Elinor did their best to rouse him from the
apathetic misery in which he spent the greater part of his days at
Gattenden. But he would not be roused except to complain and
occasionally fly into a querulous rage.

‘Deplorable,’ wrote Philip in his notebook, ‘to see an Olympian reduced
by a little tumour in his stomach to a state of subhumanness. But
perhaps,’ he added a few days later as an afterthought, ‘he was always
subhuman, even when he seemed most Olympian; perhaps being Olympian was
just a symptom of subhumanity.’

It was only with little Phil that John Bidlake would occasionally rouse
himself from his abjection. Playing with the child, he would sometimes
forget for a little to be wretched.

‘Draw something for me,’ he would say.

And with his tongue between his teeth little Phil would draw a train, or
a ship, or the stags in Gattenden Park fighting, or the old marquess in
his donkey-drawn chair.

‘Now you draw me something, grandfather,’ he would say, when he was
tired.

And the old man would take the pencil and make half a dozen marvellous
little sketches of T’ang, the Pekingese dog, or Tompy, the kitchen cat.
Or sometimes, in a fit of naughtiness, he would scribble a caricature of
poor Miss Fulkes writhing. And sometimes, forgetting all about the
child, he would draw for his own amusement—a group of bathers, two men
wrestling, a dancer.

‘But why have they got no clothes on?’ the child would ask.

‘Because they’re nicer without.’

‘I don’t think so.’ And losing interest in drawings that had so little
in the way of a story to tell him, he would ask for the pencil back
again.

But it was not always that John Bidlake responded so happily to his
grandson. Sometimes, when he was feeling particularly wretched, he felt
the child’s mere presence as an outrage, a kind of taunting. He would
fly into a rage, would shout at the boy for making a noise and
disturbing him.

‘Can’t I ever be left in peace?’ he would shout, and then would go on to
complain with curses of the general inefficiency of everybody. The house
was full of women, all supposed to be looking after that damned brat.
But there he always was, rampaging round, kicking up hell’s own din,
getting in the way. It was intolerable. Particularly when one wasn’t
well. Absolutely intolerable. People were without any consideration.
Flushed and writhing, poor Miss Fulkes would lead her howling charge
back to the nursery.

The most trying scenes were at meal-times. For it was at meals (now
reduced, so far as he was concerned, to broth and milk and Benger’s
food) that John Bidlake was most disagreeably reminded of the state of
his health. ‘Disgusting slops!’ he grumbled. But if he ate anything
solid, the results were deplorable. Meal-times were the stormiest and
most savage moments of John Bidlake’s day. He vented his anger on the
child. Always a reluctant eater, little Phil was peculiarly difficult
about his food all that spring and early summer. There were tears at
almost every meal.

‘It’s because he isn’t really very well,’ Miss Fulkes explained
apologetically. And it was true. The boy looked sallow and peaked, slept
uneasily, was nervous and quickly tired, suffered from headaches, had
ceased to put on weight. Dr. Crowther had ordered malt and codliver oil
and a tonic. ‘Not well,’ insisted Miss Fulkes.

But John Bidlake would not hear of it. ‘He’s simply naughty, that’s all.
He just won’t eat.’ And turning to the boy, ‘Swallow, child, swallow!’
he shouted. ‘Have you forgotten how to swallow?’ The spectacle of little
Phil chewing and chewing interminably on a mouthful of something he did
not like exasperated him. ‘Swallow, boy! Don’t go on ruminating like
that. You’re not a cow. Swallow!’ And, very red in the face, with tears
welling up into his eyes, little Phil would make a terrible effort to
swallow the abhorred cud of five minutes’ queasy mastication. The
muscles of his throat would heave and ripple, an expression of
invincible disgust would distort his small face, there would be an
ominous sound of retching. ‘But it’s simply revolting!’ stormed the old
man. ‘Swallow!’ His shouting was an almost infallible recipe for making
the child sick.

 

__ __

 

Burdens fell, darkness gave place to light, Marjorie apocalyptically
understood all the symbols of religious literature. For she herself had
struggled in the Slough of Despond and had emerged; she too had climbed
laboriously and without hope and had suddenly been consoled by a sight
of the promised land.

‘All these phrases used to sound so conventional and meaninglessly
pious,’ she said to Mrs. Quarles. ‘But now I see they’re just
descriptions of facts.’

Mrs. Quarles nodded. ‘Bad descriptions, because the facts are
indescribable. But if you’ve had personal experience of them, you can
see what the symbols are driving at.’

‘Do you know the Black Country?’ said Marjorie. ‘I feel as though I’d
come out of one of those mining towns on to the moors. Out into the
great open spaces,’ she added in her earnest, rather drawlingly childish
voice. (The voice, Mrs. Quarles couldn’t help thinking, and repented
immediately of the thought—for after all the poor girl couldn’t help her
voice—made the great open spaces seem curiously stuffy.) ‘And when I
look back, the black town seems so small and insignificant compared with
the space and the enormous sky. As though one were looking at it through
the wrong end of a pair of field-glasses.’

Mrs. Quarles frowned slightly. ‘Not so insignificant as all that,’ she
said. ‘For after all, there are people living in the town, however black
it may be. And the wrong end of the field-glasses is the wrong end. One
isn’t meant to look at things so that they appear small and
insignificant. That’s one of the dangers of getting out under the sky;
one’s too apt to think of the towns and the people in them as small and
remote and unimportant. But they aren’t, Marjorie. And it’s the business
of the lucky ones who have got out into the open to help the others to
come too.’ She frowned again, at herself this time; she hated anything
like preaching. But Marjorie mustn’t imagine herself superior, promoted
out of the world. ‘How’s Walter?’ she asked with an irrelevance that was
no irrelevance. ‘How are you getting on together now?’

‘The same as ever,’ said Marjorie. The admission, a few weeks ago, would
have made her utterly wretched. But now even Walter had begun to seem
small and rather remote. She loved him still, of course; but somehow
through the wrong end of the field-glasses. Through the right end she
saw only God and Jesus; they loomed overwhelmingly large.

Mrs. Quarles looked at her, and an expression of sadness passed quickly
over her sensitive face. ‘Poor Walter!’ she said.

‘Yes, I’m sorry for him too,’ said Marjorie. There was silence.

Old Dr. Fisher had told her to come and report progress every few weeks,
and Marjorie took advantage of that Wednesday’s cheap excursion tickets
to run up to town, do some necessary shopping and tell the doctor how
well she felt.

‘You look it too,’ said Dr. Fisher, peering at her first through his
spectacles, then over the top of them. ‘Extraordinarily much better than
when you were here last. It often happens in the fourth month,’ he went
on to explain. Dr. Fisher liked to make his patients take an intelligent
interest in their own physiology. ‘Health improves. So do spirits. It’s
the body settling down to the new state of affairs. The changes in the
circulation no doubt have something to do with it. The foetal heart
begins to beat about this time. I’ve known cases of neurasthenic women
who wanted to have one baby after another, as quick as ever it could be
managed. Pregnancy was the only thing that could cure them of their
melancholy and obsessions. How little as yet we understand about the
relations between body and mind!’

Marjorie smiled and said nothing. Dr. Fisher was an angel, one of the
best and kindest men in the whole world. But there were things he
understood even less of than the relations between body and mind. What
did he understand about God, for example? What did he understand about
the soul and its mystical communion with spiritual powers? Poor Dr.
Fisher! All that he could talk about was the fourth month of pregnancy
and the foetal heart. She smiled inwardly, feeling a kind of pity for
the old man.

Burlap that morning was affectionate. ‘Old man,’ he said, laying a hand
on Walter’s shoulder,’shouldn’t we go out and eat a chop together
somewhere?’ He gave Walter’s shoulder a little squeeze and smiled down
at him with the wistful enigmatic tenderness of one of Sodoma’s saints.

‘Alas,’ said Walter, trying to simulate an answering affection,’ I’m
lunching with a man at the other end of London.’ It was a lie; but he
couldn’t face the prospect of an hour with Burlap in a Fleet Street
chophouse. Besides, he wanted to see if there was a letter from Lucy
waiting for him at the club. He looked at his watch. ‘Lord!’ he added,
not wishing to prolong the conversation with Burlap, ‘I must be off.’

Outside it was raining. The umbrellas were like black mushrooms that had
suddenly sprouted from the mud. Gloomy, gloomy. In Madrid the sunshine
would be ferocious. ‘But I love the heat,’ she had said. ‘I blossom in
ovens.’ He had imagined Spanish nights, dark and hot, and her body pale
in the starlight, a ghost, but tangible and warm; and love as patient
and relentless as hatred, and possessions like slow murder. His
imaginations had justified every conceivable lie and outrage. It
mattered not what might be done or left undone, provided the
imaginations were realized. He had prepared the ground, he had invented
a series of elaborate lies, one set for Burlap, another for Marjorie; he
had made enquiries about the price of tickets, he had arranged for an
overdraft at the bank. And then came Lucy’s letter with the news that
she had changed her mind. She was going to stay in Paris. Why? There was
only one possible reason. His jealousy, his disappointment; his
humiliation had overflowed into six pages of reproach and fury.

‘Any letters?’ he asked offhandedly of the porter as he entered the
club. His tone was meant to imply that he expected nothing more
interesting than a publisher’s circular or a philanthropic offer to lend
five thousand pounds without security. The porter handed him the
familiar yellow envelope. He tore it open and unfolded three sheets of
pencilled scribble. ‘Quai Voltaire. Monday.’ He pored over the writing.
It was almost as difficult to read as an ancient manuscript. ‘Why do you
always write to me in pencil?’ He remembered Cuthbert Arkwright’s
question and her answer. ‘I’ll kiss the ink away,’ he had replied. The
lout! Walter entered the dining-room and ordered his lunch. Between the
mouthfuls he deciphered Lucy’s letter. ‘Quai Voltaire. Insufferable,
your letter. Once and for all, I refuse to be cursed at or whined at; I
simply won’t be reproached, or condemned. I do what I like and I don’t
admit anybody’s right to call my doings into question. Last week I
thought it would be amusing to go to Madrid with you; this week I don’t.
If my changing my mind has put you to any inconvenience, I’m sorry. But
I’m not in the least apologetic for having changed my mind, and if you
think your howlings and jealousies make me feel sorry for you, you’re
much mistaken. They’re intolerable, they’re inexcusable. Do you really
want to know why I’m not leaving Paris? Very well. “I suppose you’ve
found some man you like more than me.” Marvellous, my dear Holmes! And
guess where I found him? In the street. Strolling along the Boulevard
Saint-Germain, looking at the bookshops. I noticed I was being followed
from window to window by a young man. I liked his looks. Very black,
with an olive skin, rather Roman, no taller than I. At the fourth window
he began to talk to me in extraordinary French, with accents on all the
mute E’s. “Ma Lei e italiano.” He was; huge delight. “Parla italiano?”
And he began pouring out his admiration in the choicest Tuscan. I looked
at him. After all, why not? Someone one has never seen before and knows
nothing about—it’s an exciting idea. Absolute strangers at one moment
and as intimate at the next as two human beings can be. Besides, he was
a beautiful creature. ” Vorrei e non vorrei,” I said. But he’d never
heard of Mozart—only Puccini, so I cut the cackle. ” All right.” We
hailed a taxi and drove to a little hotel near the Jardin des Plantes.
Rooms by the hour. A bed, a chair, a cupboard, a washstand with a tin
basin and jug, a towel-horse, a bidet. Sordid, but that was part of the
fun. “Dunque,” I said. I hadn’t let him touch me in the cab. He came at
me as though he were going to kill me, with clenched teeth. I shut my
eyes, like a Christian martyr in front of a lion. Martyrdom’s exciting.
Letting oneself be hurt, humiliated, used like a doormat—queer. I like
it. Besides, the doormat uses the user. It’s complicated. He’d just come
back from a seaside holiday by the Mediterranean and his body was all
brown and polished by the sun. Beautifully savage he looked, a Red
Indian. And as savage as his looks. The marks are still there where he
bit me on the neck. I shall have to wear a scarf for days. Where did I
see that statue of Marsyas being skinned? His face was like that. I dug
my nails into his arm so that the blood came. Afterwards I asked him
what he was called. His name’s Francesco Allegri and he’s an
aeronautical engineer, and comes from Siena, where his father’s a
professor of medicine at the university. How curiously irrelevant that a
brown savage should design aircraft engines and have a father who’s a
professor! I’m going to see him again to-morrow. So now you know,
Walter, why I’ve changed my mind about going to Madrid. Don’t ever send
me another letter like the last. L.’

 

__ __

 

Marjorie caught the three-twelve back to Chamford. The rain had stopped
when she arrived. The hills on the other side of the valley were touched
with sunlight and seemed to shine with their own radiance against the
smoke and indigo of the clouds. Drops still hung from the twigs and
every cup of leaves and petals was full. The wetted earth gave out a
cool delicious fragrance; there was a noise of birds. As she passed
under the overhanging branches of the great oak tree half-way up the
hill, a puff of wind shook down a cold and sudden shower on her face.
Marjorie laughed with pleasure.

She found the cottage untenanted. The maid was out and wouldn’t be back
till a little before bedtime. The silence in the empty rooms had a
quality of crystalline and musical transparency; the solitude seemed
friendly and kind. When she moved about the house, she walked on tiptoe,
as though she were afraid of waking a sleeping child.

Marjorie made herself a cup of tea, sipped, ate a biscuit, lighted a
cigarette. The flavour of the food and drink, the aroma of the tobacco
seemed peculiarly delicious and somehow novel. It was as if she had
discovered them for the first time.

She turned the armchair so that it faced the window and sat there
looking out, over the valley towards the bright hills with their
background of storm. She remembered a day like this when they were
living in their cottage in Berkshire. Sunshine the brighter for being so
precarious in the midst of darkness; a shining and transfigured earth.
Walter and she had sat together at the open window. He had loved her
then. And yet she was happier now, much happier. She regretted nothing
of what had happened in the interval. The suffering had been necessary.
It was the cloud that enhanced the shining of her present felicity. A
dark cloud, but how remote now, how curiously irrelevant! And that other
happy brightness before the coming of the cloud—that too was tiny and
far away, like an image in a curved mirror. Poor Walter! she thought,
and remotely she was sorry for him. Pursuing happiness, he had made
himself miserable. Happiness is a by-product, Mrs. Quarles had said. It
was true. ‘Happiness, happiness.’ Marjorie repeated the word to herself.
Against the black vapours the hills were like emerald and green gold.
Happiness and beauty and goodness. ‘The peace of God,’ she whispered, ‘
the peace of God that passeth all understanding. Peace, peace, peace…’
She felt as though she were melting into that green and golden
tranquillity, sinking and being absorbed into it, dissolving out of
separateness into union. Stillness flowed into stillness, the silence
without became one with the silence within her. The shaken and turbid
liquor of existence grew gradually calm, and all that had made it
opaque—all the noise and uproar of the world, all the personal anxieties
and desires and feelings—began to settle like a sediment, fell slowly,
slowly and noiselessly, out of sight. The turbid liquor became clearer
and clearer, more and more translucent. Behind that gradually vanishing
mist was reality, was God. It was a slow, progressive revelation.
‘Peace, peace,’ she whispered to herself; and the last faint ripples
died away from the surface of life, the opacities churned up by the
agitation of living dropped away through the utter calm. ‘Peace, peace.’
She had no desires, no more preoccupations. The liquor which had been
turbid was now quite clear, clearer than crystal, more diaphanous than
air; the mist had vanished and the unveiled reality was a wonderful
emptiness, was nothing. Nothing—the only perfection, the only absolute.
Infinite and eternal nothing. The gradual revelation was now complete.

Marjorie was roused by the click of the front-door latch and the sound
of footsteps in the passage. Reluctantly and with a kind of pain she
rose from the depths of divine vacancy; her soul swam up again to the
surface of consciousness. The sunlight on the hills had deepened its
colour, the clouds had lifted and the sky was a pale greenish blue, like
water. It was almost evening. Her limbs felt stiff. She must have been
sitting there for hours.

‘Walter?’ she called questioningly to the source of the noises in the
passage.

The voice in which he answered was dead and flat. ‘Why is he so
unhappy?’ she wondered at the sound of it, but wondered from a great
distance and with a kind of far-away resentment. She resented his
disturbing and interrupting presence, his very existence. He entered the
room and she saw that his face was pale, his eyes darkly ringed.

‘What’s the matter?’ she asked, almost against her will. The nearer she
came to Walter, the further she moved from the marvellous nothingness of
God. ‘You don’t look at all well.’

‘It’s nothing,’ he answered. ‘Rather tired, that’s all.’ Coming down in
the train he had read and re-read Lucy’s letter, till he almost knew it
by heart. His imagination had supplemented the words. He knew that
sordid little room in the _hotel meuble_; he had seen the Italian’s
brown body and her whiteness, and the man’s clenched teeth and his face
like the face of a tortured Marsyas, and Lucy’s own face with that
expression he knew, that look of grave and attentive suffering, as
though the agonizing pleasure were a profound and difficult truth only
to be grasped by intense concentration.

Ah well, Marjorie was thinking; he had said it was nothing; that was all
right; she needn’t worry any further. ‘Poor Walter!’ she said aloud and
smiled at him with a pitying tenderness. He wasn’t going to make any
demands on her attention or her feelings; she resented him no longer.
‘Poor Walter!’

Walter looked at her for a moment, then turned away. He didn’t want
pity. Not that sort of superior angel’s pity, at any rate, and not from
Marjorie. He had accepted pity from her once. The memory of the occasion
made his whole flesh creep with shame. Never again. He walked away.

Marjorie heard his feet on the stairs and the banging of a door.

‘All the same,’ she thought, reluctantly solicitous, ‘there is something
wrong. Something has made him specially miserable. Perhaps I ought to go
up and see what he’s doing.’

But she didn’t go. She sat where she was, quite still, deliberately
forgetting him. The little sediment that Walter’s coming had stirred up
in her quickly settled again. Through the vacant lifelessness of trance
her spirit sank slowly down once more into God, into the perfected
absolute, into limitless and everlasting nothing. Time passed; the late
afternoon turned into summer twilight; the twilight thickened slowly
into darkness.

Daisy, the maid, came back at ten.

‘Sittin’ in the dark, mum?’ she asked, looking into the sittingroom. She
turned on the light. Marjorie winced. The glare brought back to her
dazzled eyes all the close immediate details of the material world. God
had vanished like a pricked bubble. Daisy caught sight of the unlaid
table. ‘What, ‘aven’t you ‘ad no supper?’ she exclaimed in horror.

‘Why, no,’ said Marjorie. ‘I quite forgot about supper.’

‘Not Mr. Bidlake neither?’ Daisy went on reproachfully. ‘Why, pore man,
‘e must be perished.’

She hurried away towards the kitchen in search of cold beef and pickles.

Upstairs in his room Walter was lying on the bed, his face buried in the
pillows.


CHAPTER XXXI

A crossword problem had brought Mr. Quarles to the seventeenth volume of
the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_. Idle curiosity detained him. The Lord
Chamberlain, he learned, carries a white staff and wears a golden or
jewelled key. The word lottery has no very definite signification; but
Nero gave such prizes as a house or a slave, while Heliogabalus
introduced an element of absurdity—one ticket for a golden vase, another
for six flies. Pinckney B. S. Pinchback was the acting Republican
governor of Louisiana in 1873. To define the lyre, it is necessary
clearly to separate it from the allied harp and guitar. In one of the
northern ravines of Madeira some masses of a coarsely crystalline
Essexite are exposed to view. But there is also a negative side to
magic. And terrestrial magnetism has a long history. He had just started
to read about Sir John Blundell Maple, Bart. (1845-1903), whose father,
John Maple (d. 1900) had a small furniture shop in the Tottenham Court
Road, when the parlourmaid appeared at the door and announced that there
was a young lady to see him.

‘A young ladah?’ he repeated with some surprise, taking off his
pince-nez.

‘Yes, it’s me,’ said a familiar voice and Gladys pushed past the maid
and advanced into the middle of the room.

At the sight of her, Mr. Quarles felt a sudden spasm of apprehension. He
got up. ‘You can go,’ he said with dignity to the maid. She went. ‘My
dyah child!’ He took Gladys’s hand; she disengaged it. ‘But what a
surprise!’

‘Ow, a pleasant surprise!’ she answered sarcastically. Emotion always
resuscitated the cockney in her. She sat down, planting herself with
force and determination in the chair. ‘Here I am,’ that determined
down-sitting seemed to imply, ‘and here I stay’—perhaps even, ‘here I
bloody well stay.’

‘Pleasant indeed,’ said Mr. Quarles mellifluously, for the sake of
saying something. This was terrible, he was thinking. What could she
want? And how should he get her out of the house again? But if
necessary, he could say he’d sent for her to do some specially urgent
typing for him. ‘But very unexpected,’ he added.

‘Very.’ She shut her mouth firmly and looked at him—with eyes that Mr.
Quarles didn’t at all like the expression of—as if in expectation. Of
what?

‘I’m delighted to see you, of course,’ he went on.

‘Ow, are you?’ She laughed dangerously.

Mr. Quarles looked at her and was afraid. He really hated the girl. He
began to wonder why he had ever desired her. ‘Very glad,’ he repeated,
with dignified emphasis. The great thing was to remain dignified, firmly
superior. ‘But…’

‘_But_,’ she echoed.

‘Well, ryahlly, I think it was rather rash to come here.’

‘He thinks it rather rash,’ said Gladys, as though passing on the
information to an invisible third party.

‘Not to say unnecessarah.’

‘Well, I’m the judge of _that_.’

‘After all, you know quite well that if you’d wanted to see me, you’d
only got to write and I’d have come at once. So why run the risk of
coming hyah?’ He waited. But Gladys did not answer, only looked at him
with those hard green eyes of hers and that close-lipped smile that
seemed to shut in enigmatically heaven only knew what dangerous thoughts
and feelings. ‘I’m ryahlly annoyed with you.’ The manner of Mr.
Quarles’s rebuke was dignified and impressive, but kind—always kind.
‘Yes, ryahily annoyed.’

Gladys threw back her head and uttered a shrill, short, hyena-like
laugh.

Mr. Quarles was disconcerted. But he preserved his dignity. ‘You may
laugh,’ he said. ‘But I speak syahriously. You had no right to come. You
knew quite well how important it is that nothing should be suspected.
Especially hyah—hyah, in my own house. You knew it.’

‘Yes, I knew it,’ Gladys repeated, nodding her head truculently. ‘And
that’s exactly why I came.’ She was silent for a moment. But the
pressure of her feelings made silence no longer bearable. ‘Because I
knew you were frightened,’ she went on, ‘frightened that people might
find out what you were reelly like. You dirty old swine!’ And suddenly
losing all control of her fury, she sprang to her feet and advanced on
Mr. Quarles so menacingly, that he recoiled a step. But her attack was
only verbal. ‘Giving yourself such airs, as though you was the Prince of
Wales. And then taking a girl to dinner at the Corner House. And blaming
everybody else, worse than a parson, when you’re no better than a dirty
old pig yourself. Yes, a dirty old pig, that’s what you are. Saying you
loved me, indeed! I know what that sort of love is. Why, a girl isn’t
safe with you in a taxi. No, she isn’t. You filthy old beast! And then…’

‘Ryahlly, ryahily!’ Mr. Quarles had sufficiently recovered from his
first shock of horrified surprise to be able to protest. This was
terrible, unheard of. He felt himself being devastated, laid waste to,
ravaged.

‘“Ryahlly, ryably,”’ she mimicked derisively. ‘And then not even taking
a girl to a decent seat at the theatre. But w hen it was a question of
your having a bit of fun in your way—oh, lord! Nasty fat old swine! And
carrying on all the time like Rudolph Valentino, with your chatter about
all the women that had been in love with you. With _you_! You just look
at yourself in the glass. Like a red egg, that’s what you are.’

‘Too unseemlah!’

‘Talking about love with a face like that!’ she went on, more shrilly
than ever. ‘An old swine like you! And then you only give a girl a
rotten old watch and a pair of earrings, and the stones in them aren’t
even good ones, because I asked a jeweller and he said they weren’t. And
now, on top of everything I’m going to have a baby.’

‘A babah?’ repeated Mr. Quarles incredulously, but with a deeper and
more dreadful sinking of apprehension. ‘Surely not a babah.’

‘Yes, a baby!’ Gladys shouted, stamping her foot. ‘Can’t you hear what I
say, you old idiot? A baby. That’s what I’ve come here about. And I
won’t go away till…’

It was at this moment that Mrs. Quarles walked in through the French
window from the garden. She had been having a talk with Marjorie at the
cottage and had come to tell Sidney that she had asked the two young
people to dinner that evening.

‘Oh, I’m sorry,’ she said, halting on the threshold.

There was a moment’s silence. Then, addressing herself this time to Mrs.
Quarles, Gladys began again with uncontrollable fury. Five minutes later
she was no less uncontrollably sobbing and Mrs. Quarles was trying to
console her. Sidney took the opportunity to sneak out of the room. When
the gong sounded for lunch, he sent down word to say that he was feeling
very ill and would they please send up two lightly boiled eggs, some
toast and butter, and a little stewed fruit.

Meanwhile in the study Mrs. Quarles had hung solicitously over Gladys’s
chair. ‘It’s all right,’ she kept repeating, patting the girl’s
shoulder, ‘It’s all right. You mustn’t cry.’ Poor girl! she was
thinking. And what a dreadful scent! And how could Sidney? And again,
poor girl, poor girl! ‘Don’t cry. Try to be brave. It’ll be all right.’

Gladys’s sobbing gradually subsided. Mrs. Quarles’s calm voice talked on
consolingly. The girl listened. Then suddenly she jumped up. The face
that confronted Mrs. Quarles was savagely derisive through the tear
stains.

‘Ow, shut it!’ she said sarcastically, ‘shut it! What do you take me
for? A baby? Talking like that! You think you can talk me quiet, do you?
Talk me out of my rights. Talky talky; baby’s going to be good, isn’t
she? But you’re mistaken, I tell you. You’re damned well mistaken. And
you’ll know it soon enough, I can tell you.’

And with that she bounced out of the room into the garden and was gone.


CHAPTER XXXII

In the little house at the end of the mews Elinor was alone. Faint
rumblings of far-away traffic caressed the warm silence. A bowl of her
mother’s potpourri peopled the air for her with countless potential
memories of childhood. She was arranging roses in a vase; huge white
roses with petals of malleable porcelain, orange roses like whorls of
congealed and perfumed flame. The chiming clock on the mantelpiece made
a sudden and startling comment of eight notes and left the accorded
vibrations to tingle mournfully away into nothingness, like music on a
departing ship. Halfpast three. And at six she was expecting Everard.
Expecting Everard for a cocktail, she was at pains to explain to
herself, before he took her out to dinner and the play. Just an
evening’s entertainment, like any other evening’s entertainment. She
kept telling herself so, because she knew, underneath, she was
prophetically certain, that the evening wouldn’t be in the least like
other evenings, but cardinal, decisive. She would have to make up her
mind, she would have to choose. But she didn’t want to choose; that was
why she tried to make herself believe that the evening was to be merely
trivial and amusing. It was like covering a corpse with flowers.
Mountains of flowers. But the corpse was always there, in spite of the
concealing lilies. And a choice would have to be made, in spite of
dinner at Kettner’s and the theatre. Sighing, she picked up the heavy
vase in both hands and was just lifting it on to the mantelpiece, when
there was a loud knock at the door. Elinor started so violently, that
she almost dropped her burden. And the terror persisted, even when she
had recovered from the first shock of surprise. A knock at the door,
when she was alone in the lonely house, always set her heart
uncomfortably beating. The idea that there was somebody there, waiting,
listening, a stranger, an enemy perhaps (for Elinor’s fancy was pregnant
with horrible hairy faces peering round corners, with menacing hands,
with knives and clubs and pistols) or perhaps a madman, listening
intently for any sound of life within the house, waiting, waiting like a
spider for her to open—this was a nightmare to her, a terror. The knock
was repeated. Setting down the vase, she tiptoed with infinite
precautions to the window and peeped between the curtains. On days when
she was feeling particularly nervous she lacked the courage even to do
this, but sat motionless, hoping that the noise of her heart might not
be audible in the street, until the knocker at last wore out his
patience and walked away. Next day the man from Selfridge’s would heap
coals of fire upon her by apologizing for the retarded delivery. ‘Called
yesterday evening, madam, but there was nobody at home.’ And Elinor
would feel ashamed of herself and a fool. But the next time she was
alone and nervous, she would do exactly the same thing.

This afternoon she had courage; she ventured to look at the enemy—at as
much of him, that is to say, as she could see, peeping sideways through
the glass towards the door. A grey trouser-leg and an elbow were all
that entered her field of vision. There was yet another knock. Then the
trouser-leg moved back, the whole coat came into view, the black hat
and, with a turn of the head, Spandrell’s face. She ran to the door and
opened.

‘Sspandrell!’ she called, for he had already turned to go. He came back,
lifting his hat. They shook hands. ‘I’m so sorry,’ she explained. ‘I was
alone. I thought it was at least a murderer. Then I peeped through the
window and saw it was you.’

Spandrell gave vent to brief and noiseless laughter. ‘But it might still
be a murderer, even though it is me.’ And he shook his knobbed stick at
her with a playfulness which was, however, so dramatically like her
imaginings of the genuinely homicidal article, that Elinor was made to
feel quite uncomfortable.

She covered her emotion with a laugh, but decided not to ask him into
the house. Standing on the doorstep she felt safer. ‘All the same,’ she
said, ‘it would be better to be murdered by somebody one knows than by a
stranger.’

‘Would it?’ He looked at her; the corners of his wide weal-like mouth
twitched into a curious smile. ‘It needs a woman to think of those
refinements. But if you should ever feel like having your throat cut in
a thoroughly friendly fashion…’

‘My dear Spandrell!’ she protested, and felt gladder than ever that she
was still on the doorstep and not inside the house.

‘… Don’t hesitate to send for me. No matter what the inconvenience,’ he
laid his hand on his heart, ‘ I’d fly to your side. Or rather to your
neck.’ He clicked his heels and bowed. ‘But tell me,’ he went on in
another tone, ‘is Philip anywhere about? I wanted him to come and dine
to-night. At Sbisa’s. I’d ask you too. Only it’s a purely masculine
affair.’

She thanked him. ‘But I couldn’t come in any case, And Philip’s gone
down into the country to see his mother. And will only be back just in
time for Tolley’s concert at the Queen’s Hall. But I know he said he was
going round to Sbisa’s afterwards, on the chance of meeting someone.
You’ll see him then. Late.’

‘Well, better late than never. Or at least,’ he uttered another of his
soundless laughs, ‘so one piously hopes, where one’s friends are
concerned. Pious hopes! But to tell you the truth, the proverb needs
changing. Better never than early.’

‘Then why go to the trouble of asking people to dine?’

Spandrell shrugged his shoulders. ‘Force of habit,’ he said. ‘And
besides, I generally make them pay, when I ask them out.’

They were both laughing, when a loud ringing made them turn. A telegraph
boy on a red bicycle was shooting down the mews towards them.

‘Quarles?’ he asked, as he jumped off.

Elinor took the telegram and opened it. The laughter went out of her
face as she read. ‘No answer.’ The boy remounted and rode away. Elinor
stood staring at the telegram as though its words were written in an
unfamiliar language difficult to interpret. She looked at the watch on
her wrist, then back at the flimsy paper.

‘Will you do something for me?’ she said at last, turning to Spandrell.

‘But of course.’

‘My baby’s ill,’ she explained. ‘They want me to come. If I hurry ‘ (she
looked again at her watch): ‘I can just catch the four-seventeen at
Euston. But there’ll be no time for anything else. Will you ring up
Everard Webley for me and explain why I can’t dine with him this
evening?’ It was a warning, she thought; a prohibition. ‘Before six. At
his office.’

‘Before six,’ he repeated slowly. ‘At his office. Very well.’

‘I must rush,’ she said, holding out her hand.

‘But I’ll go and get you a cab, while you put on your hat.’

She thanked him. Spandrell hurried away along the mews. A prohibition,
Elinor repeated to herself, as she adjusted her hat in front of the
Venetian mirror in the living-room. The choice had been made for her. It
was at once a relief and a disappointment. But made, she went on to
reflect, at poor little Phil’s expense. She wondered what was the matter
with him. Her mother’s telegram—such a characteristic one, that she
could not help smiling now that she thought of it again—said nothing.
‘PHILIP RATHER SOUFFRANT AND THOUGH UNALARMINGLY SHOULD ADVISE PROMPT
HOMECOMING MOTHER.’ She remembered how nervous and difficult the child
had been of late, how easily fatigued. She reproached herself for not
having realized that he was working up for an illness. Now it had come.
A touch of influenza, perhaps. ‘I ought to have taken more care,’ she
kept repeating. She scribbled a note for her husband. ‘The accompanying
telegram explains my sudden departure. Join me at Gattenden to-morrow
morning.’ Where should she put it so that Philip should be sure to see
it when he came in? Leaning against the clock on the mantelpiece? But
would he necessarily want to know the time? Or on the table? No; pin it
to the screen; that was the thing! He couldn’t miss it. She ran upstairs
in search of a pin. On Philip’s dressing-table she saw a bunch of keys.
She picked them up and looked at them, frowning. ‘The idiot’s forgotten
his latchkey. How will he get in to-night?’ The noise of a taxi under
the window suggested a solution. She hurried down, pinned the note and
the telegram conspicuously to the screen that shut off the drawing-room
part of the living-room from the door and let herself out into the mews.
Spandrell was standing at the door of the cab.

‘That _is_ kind of you,’ she said. ‘But I haven’t finished exploiting
you even now.’ She held up the keys. ‘When you see Philip this evening,
give him these and tell him with my love that he’s an imbecile. He
wouldn’t have been able to get in without them.’ Spandrell took the keys
in silence. ‘And tell him why I’ve gone and that I’m expecting him
to-morrow.’ She got into the cab. ‘And don’t forget to ring up Webley.
Before six. Because he was supposed to be meeting me here at six.’

‘Here?’ he asked with an expression of sudden interest and curiosity
which Elinor found rather offensive and embarrassing. Was he imagining
something, was he daring to suppose…?

‘Yes, here,’ she nodded curtly.

‘I won’t forget,’ he assured her emphatically, and there was still
something about his expression which made her suspect a private
significance behind the obvious words.

‘Thank you,’ said Elinor, without cordiality. ‘And now I must fly.’ She
gave the word to the driver. The taxi backed up the mews, under the
archway, turned and was gone.

Spandrell walked slowly up to Hyde Park Corner. From the public call-box
in the station he telephoned to Illidge.

 

__ __

 

Everard Webley was striding about the room, dictating. Sedentary
composition he found impossible. ‘How do people write when they’re
grafted to chairs all day long, year in year out?’ He found it
incomprehensible. ‘When I’m sitting in a chair, or lying on a bed, I
become like the furniture I’ve combined myself with—mere wood and
stuffing. My mind doesn’t move unless my muscles move.’ On days when his
correspondence was large, when there were articles to dictate, speeches
to compose, Everard’s working day was an eight-hour walking tour. ‘Doing
the lion,’ was how his secretaries described his methods of dictation.
He was doing the lion now—the restless lion, a little before feeding
time—pacing from wall to wall of his big bare office.

‘Remember,’ he was saying, frowning, as he spoke, at the grey carpet;
under his secretary’s pencil the shorthand scurried across the page,
‘remember that the final authority is in all cases mine and that, so
long as I remain at the head of the B. B. F., every attempt at
insubordination will be promptly and ruthlessly suppressed. Yours
etcetera.’ He was silent and, walking back to his desk from the spot
where the conclusion of his thoughtful and leonine pacing had left him,
he turned over the scattered papers. ‘That seems to be all,’ he said and
looked at his watch. It was just after a quarter to six. ‘Have these
last letters ready for me in the morning,’ he went on. ‘I’ll sign them
then.’ He took his hat from the peg. ‘Good evening.’ And slamming the
door, he descended the stairs two at a time. Outside the house he found
his chauffeur waiting with the car. It was a powerful machine (for
Everard was a lover of furious driving) and, since he also enjoyed the
sensation of battling with the weather and the wind of his own speed,
open. A tightly-stretched waterproof sheet covered the whole of the back
part of the touring body like a deck, leaving only the two front seats
available for passengers. ‘I shan’t need you anv more this evening,’ he
said to the chauffeur, as he settled into the driver’s seat. ‘You can
go.’

He touched the self-starter, threw the car into gear and shot off with a
violent impetuosity. Several dozens of horses were bottled in the three
litres of Everard’s cylinders; he liked to make them work their hardest.
Full speed ahead and then, a yard from the impending accident, jam on
the brakes, that was his method. Driving with Everard in town was almost
too exciting. Elinor had protested the last time he took her out. ‘I
don’t so much mind dying,’ she had said. ‘But I really should object to
passing the rest of my life with two wooden legs and a broken nose.’ He
had laughed. ‘You’re quite safe with me. I don’t have accidents.’

‘You’re above such things are you?’ she had mocked. ‘Well, if you like
to put it like that’ The brakes were applied with such violence that
Elinor had had to clutch at the arms of her seat to prevent herself from
being thrown against the wind-screen. ‘Imbecile,’ he had shouted at the
bewildered old gentleman whose hen-like indecisions in the roadway had
so nearly landed him under Everard’s Dunlops. ‘If you like to put it
like that—’ and the car had shot forward again with a jerk that
flattened Elinor against the back of her seat—’ you may. I don’t have
accidents. I manufacture my own luck.’

Remembering the incident, Everard smiled to himself as he drove along
Oxford Street. A railway delivery van held up his progress. Horses
oughtn’t to be allowed in the streets. ‘Either you take me,’ he would
say to her, ‘and in the end that means you’ll have to make the thing
public—leave Philip and come to me’—(for he intended to be entirely
honest with her; there were to be no false pretences of any kind);
‘either that, or else…’ There was an opportunity to pass the delivery
van; he pressed the accelerator and darted forward with a swerve to the
right and another, past the nose of the old and patiently trotting
horse, to the left again. ‘Or else we don’t see one another again.’ It
was to be an ultimatum. Brutal. But Everard hated situations that were
neither one thing nor the other. He preferred definite knowledge,
however unpleasant, to even the most hopefully blissful of
uncertainties. And in this case the uncertainty wasn’t at all blissful.
At the entry to Oxford Circus a policeman lifted his hand. It was seven
minutes to six. She was too squeamish, he thought, looking round, too
sensitive about these new buildings. Everard found nothing displeasing
in the massively florid baroque of modern commerce. It was vigorous and
dramatic; it was large, it was expensive, it symbolized progress. ‘But
it’s so revoltingly vulgar!’ she had protested. ‘But it’s difficult,’ he
had answered, ‘not to be vulgar, when one isn’t dead. You object to
these people doing things. And I agree: doing things _is_ rather
vulgar.’ She had the typical consumer’s point of view, not the
producer’s. The policeman dropped his hand. Slowly at first, but with
gathering impetus, the pent-up flood of traffic rumbled forward. A
luxury mind—that was what she had; not a necessity mind. A mind that
thought of the world only in terms of beauty and enjoyment, not of use;
a mind preoccupied with sensations and shades of feeling, and
preoccupied with them for their own sake, not because sharp eyes and
intuition are necessary in the struggle for life. Indeed, she hardly
knew that there was a struggle. He ought to have disapproved of her; and
he would have disapproved (Everard smiled to himself as he made the
reflection) if he hadn’t been in love with her. He would have…Flop! from
the roof of a passing ‘bus a banana skin fell like a draggled star-fish
on to the bonnet in front of him. A whoop of laughter sounded through
the roaring. Lifting his eyes he saw two young girls looking down at him
over the rail, open-mouthed, like a pair of pretty little gargoyles, and
laughing, laughing as though there had never been a joke in the world
before that moment. Everard shook his fist at them and laughed too. How
much Elinor would have enjoyed that! he thought. She who so loved the
streets and their comedies. What an eye she had for the odd, the
amusing, the significant! Where he perceived only a mass of
undifferentiated humanity, she distinguished individuals. And her talent
for inventing life histories for her onceglimpsed oddities was no less
remarkable than her detecting eye. She would have known all about those
young girls—their class, the sort of homes they came from, where they
bought their clothes and how much they paid for them, whether they were
still virtuous, what books they read, and which were their favourite
cinema actors. Imagining to himself what Elinor would have said,
remembering her laughter and the look in her eyes and her tricks of
speech, he was suddenly filled with so much tenderness, such a violent
yet delicately affectionate longing to be with her, that he could hardly
bear to be separated from her for even a moment longer. He hooted at the
taxi in front of him, he tried to thrust past on the right. An
obstructing street island compelled him to fall back, but not before the
taxi-driver had had time to throw doubts on his legitimacy, his
heterosexuality and his prospects of happiness in another world. With as
much gusto and incomparably more originality, Everard swore back. He
felt himself overflowing with life, extraordinarily vigorous and strong,
inexplicably and (but for the fact that it would be at least five
minutes before he saw Elinor) perfectly happy. Yes, perfectly happy; for
he knew (with what calm conviction!) that she would say yes, that she
loved him. And his happiness became more intense, more poignant and at
the same time more serene, as he swung round past the Marble Arch into
the Park. His prophetic conviction deepened into something like
remembered certainty, as though the future were already history. The sun
was low and wherever its rosily golden light touched earth, it was as if
a premature and more luminous autumn had fired the leaves and grass.
Great shafts of powdery radiance leaned down from the west between the
trees and in the shadows the twilight was a mist of lavender, a mist of
blue and darkening indigo, plane after plane into the hazy London
distance. And the couples strolling across the grass, the children
playing were alternately eclipsed and transfigured as they passed from
shade to sunlight, were alternately insignificant and brilliantly
miraculous. It was as though a capricious god, now bored and now
enchanted by his creatures, had turned upon them at one moment an eye of
withering indifference and at the next, with his love, had bestowed upon
them some of his own divinity. The road stretched clear and polished
before him; but Everard hardly exceeded the speed limit—in spite of his
longing; in a sense because he loved her so much. For it was all so
beautiful; and where beauty was, there too, for Everard, by some private
logic, some personal necessity, was Elinor. She was with him now,
because she would have enjoyed this loveliness so much. And because she
would have wanted to prolong the pleasure, he crept along. The engine
was turning at a bare fifteen hundred revolutions a minute; the dynamo
was hardly charging. A Baby Austin passed him as though he were standing
still. Let them pass! Everard was thinking of the phrases in which he
would describe to her this marvel. Through the railings, the ‘buses in
Park Lane blazed scarlet and glittered like triumphal cars in a pageant.
Faintly, through the noise of the traffic, a clock struck six; and
before it had finished, another chimed in, melodious, sweet and with a
touch of melancholy—the very voice of the bright evening and of his
happiness. And now, for all his creeping, the marble gateways of Hyde
Park Corner were before him. Offered, in spite of the nakedness and the
more than Swedish development of his abdominal muscles, by the Ladies of
England to the Victor of Waterloo, the bronze Achilles, whose flesh had
once been Napoleon’s cannons, stood with shield raised, sword
brandished, menacing and defending himself against the pale and empty
sky. It was almost regretfully, though he longed to be at his journey’s
end, that Everard left the Park. Once more the towering ‘buses roared
before him and behind. Rounding the archipelago of islands he vowed that
to-morrow, if Elinor said Yes, he would send five pounds to St. George’s
Hospital. He knew she would. The money was as good as given already. He
turned out of Grosvenor Place; the roaring faded behind him. Belgrave
Square was an oasis of trees; the starlings chattered in a rural
silence. Everard turned once, twice and yet again. On the left, between
the houses was an archway. He passed it by a yard or two, stopped and,
pulling the wheel over, backed under it into the mews, back, back to the
very end of the blind alley. He stopped the car and got out. How
charming the yellow curtains looked! His heart was beating very fast. He
felt as he had felt when he made his first speech, halffrightened,
half-exultant. Mounting the doorstep, he knocked and waited twenty
heart-beats; the house gave forth no answering sound. He knocked again
and, remembering what Elinor had told him of her terrors, accompanied
the rap with a whistle and, as though in answer to the unspoken
challenge of her fears, a call of ‘Friend!’ And then, suddenly, he
noticed that the door was not latched, but only ajar. He pushed; it
swung open. Everard stepped over the threshold.

‘Elinor!’ he called, thinking that she must be upstairs. ‘Elinor!’

There was still no answer. Or was she playing a joke? Would she suddenly
pounce out at him from behind one of the screens. He smiled to himself
at the thought and was advancing to explore the silent room, when his
eye was caught by the papers pinned so conspicuously to a panel of the
screen on the right. He approached and had just begun to read, ‘The
accompanying telegram will explain…’ when a sound behind him made him
turn his head. A man was standing within four feet of him, his hands
raised; the club which they grasped had already begun to swing sideways
and forward from over the right shoulder. Everard threw up his arm, too
late. The blow caught him on the left temple. It was as though a light
had suddenly been turned out. He was not even conscious of falling.

 

__ __

 

Mrs. Quarles kissed her son. ‘Dear Phil,’ she said. ‘It’s good of you to
have come so quickly.’

‘You’re not looking very well, mother.’

‘A little tired, that’s all. And worried,’ she added after a moment’s
pause and with a sigh.

‘Worried?’

‘About your father. He’s not well,’ she went on, speaking slowly and as
if with reluctance. ‘He wanted very specially to see you. That was why I
wired.’

‘He isn’t dangerously ill?’

‘Not physically,’ Mrs. Quarles replied. ‘But his nerves…. It’s a kind of
breakdown. He’s very excited. Very unstable.’

‘But what’s the cause?’

Mrs. Quarles was silent. And when at last she spoke it was with an
obvious effort, as though each word had to force its way past some
inward barrier. Her sensitive face was fixed and strained. ‘Something
has happened to upset him,’ she said. ‘He’s had a great shock.’ And
slowly, word by word, the story came out.

Bent forward in his chair, his elbows on his knees, his chin in his
hands, Philip listened. After a first glance at his mother’s face, he
kept his eyes fixed on the ground. He felt that to look at her, to meet
her eyes would be the infliction of an unnecessary embarrassment.
Speaking was already a pain to her and a humiliation; let her at least
speak unseen, as though there were nobody there to witness her distress.
His averted eyes left her a kind of spiritual privacy. Word after word,
in a colourless soft voice, Mrs. Quarles talked on. Incident succeeded
sordid incident. When she began to tell the story of Gladys’s visit of
two days before, Philip could not bear to listen any longer. It was too
humiliating for her; he could not permit her to go on.

‘Yes, yes, I can imagine,’ he said, interrupting her. And jumping up, he
limped with quick nervous steps to the window.’don’t go on.’ He stood
there for a minute, looking out at the lawn and the thick yew-tree walls
and the harvest-coloured hills beyond, on the further side of the
valley. The scene was almost exasperatingly placid. Philip turned,
limped back across the room and standing for a moment behind his
mother’s chair laid a hand on her shoulder; then walked away again.

‘Don’t think about it any more,’ he said. ‘I’ll do whatever has to be
done.’ He looked forward with an enormous distaste to loud and
undignified scenes, to disputes and vulgar hagglings. ‘Perhaps I’d
better go and see father,’ he suggested.

Mrs. Quarles nodded. ‘He was very anxious to see you.’

‘Why?’

‘I don’t quite know. But he’s been insisting.’

‘Does he talk about…well, this business?’

‘No. Never mentions it. I have the impression that he forgets about it
deliberately.’

‘Then I’d better not speak about it.’

‘Not unless he begins,’ Mrs. Quarles advised. ‘Mostly he talks about
himself. About the past, about his health—pessimistically. You must try
to cheer him.’ Philip nodded. ‘And humour him,’ his mother went
on;’don’t contradict. He easily flares up. It isn’t good for him to get
excited.’

Philip listened. As though he were a dangerous animal, he was thinking;
or a naughty child. The misery of it, the anxiety, the humiliation for
his mother!

‘And don’t stay too long,’ she added.

Philip left her. The fool, he said to himself as he crossed the hall,
the damned fool! The sudden anger and contempt with which he thought of
his father were tempered by no previous affection. Neither, for that
matter, were they exacerbated by any previous hatred. Up to this time
Philip had neither loved nor disliked his father. Unreflectingly
tolerant or, at the worst, with a touch of amused resignation, he had
just accepted his existence. There was nothing in his memories of
childhood to justify more positive emotions. As a father, Mr. Quarles
had shown himself no less erratic and no less ineffectual than as a
politician or as a man of business. Brief periods of enthusiastic
interest in his children had alternated with long periods, during which
he almost ignored their existence. Philip and his brother had preferred
him during the seasons of neglect; for he had ignored them benevolently.
They liked him less when he was interested in their wellbeing. For the
interest was generally not so much in the children as in a theory of
education or hygiene. After meeting an eminent doctor, after reading the
latest book on pedagogical methods, Mr. Quarles would wake up to the
discovery that, unless something were drastically done, his sons were
likely to grow up into idiots and cripples, weak-minded and with bodies
poisoned by the wrong food and distorted by improper exercise. And then,
for a few weeks, the two boys would be stuffed with raw carrots or
overdone beef (it depended on the doctor Mr. Quarles happened to have
met); would be drilled, or taught folk-dancing and eurhythmics; would be
made to learn poetry by rote (if it happened to be the memory that was
important at the moment) or else (if it happened to be the ratiocinative
faculties) would be turned out into the garden, told to plant sticks in
the lawn and, by measuring the shadow at different hours of the day,
discover for themselves the principles of trigonometry. While the fit
lasted, life for the two boys was almost intolerable. And if Mrs.
Quarles protested, Sidney flew into a rage and told her that she was a
selfishly doting mother, to whom the true welfare of her children meant
nothing. Mrs. Quarles did not insist too strongly; for she knew that,
thwarted, Sidney would probably become more obstinate; humoured, he
would forget his enthusiasm. And in fact, after a few weeks, Sidney
would duly tire of labours which produced no quick and obvious results.
His hygiene had not made the boys perceptibly larger or stronger; they
had not grown appreciably more intelligent for his pedagogy. All that
they quite indubitably were was a daily and hourly bore. ‘Affairs of
greater moment’ would occupy more and more of his attention, until
gradually, like the Cheshire cat, he had faded altogether out of the
world of the schoolroom and the nursery into higher and more comfortable
spheres. The boys settled down again to happiness.

Arrested at the door of his father’s room by the sounds from within,
Philip listened. His face took on an expression of anxiety, even of
alarm. That voice? And his father, he had been told, was alone. Talking
to himself? Was he as bad as all that? Bracing himself, Philip opened
the door and was immediately reassured to find that what he had taken
for insanity was only dictation to the dictaphone. Propped up on
pillows, Mr. Quarles was half-sitting, half-lying in his bed. His face,
his very scalp were flushed and shining, and his pink silk pyjamas were
like an intensified continuation of the same fever. The dictaphone stood
on the table by his bed; Mr. Quarles was talking into the mouthpiece of
its flexible speaking-tube. ‘True greatness,’ he was saying sonorously,
‘is inversely proportional to myahr immediate success. _Ah, hyah_ you
are! he cried, looking round as the door opened. He stopped the
clockwork of the machine, hung up the speaking-tube and stretched out a
welcoming hand. Simple gestures. But there was something, it seemed to
Philip, extravagant about all his movements. It was as though he were on
the stage. The eyes which he turned on Philip were unnaturally bright.
‘I’m so glad you’ve come. So glad, dyah boy.’ He patted Philip’s hand;
the loud voice suddenly trembled.

Unused to such demonstrations, Philip was embarrassed. ‘Well, how are
you feeling?’ he asked with an assumption of cheeriness.

Mr. Quarles shook his head and pressed his son’s hand without speaking.
Philip was more than ever embarrassed at seeing that the tears had come
into his eyes. How could one go on hating and being angry?

‘But you’ll be all right,’ he said, trying to be reassuring. ‘It’s just
a question of resting for a bit.’ Mr. Quarles tightened the clasp of his
hand. ‘Don’t tell your mother,’ he said. ‘But I feel that the end’s
nyah.’

‘But that’s nonsense, father. You mustn’t talk like that.’

‘Nyah,’ Mr. Quarles repeated, obstinately nodding, ‘very nyah. That’s
why I’m so glad you’re hyah. I should have been unhappah to die when you
were at the other end of the wahld. But with you hyah, I feel I can
go’—his voice trembled again—’quite contentedlah.’ Once more he squeezed
Philip’s hand. He was convinced that he had always been a devoted
father, living for nothing but his children. And so he had been, every
now and then. ‘Yes, quite contentedlah.’ He pulled out his handkerchief,
blew his nose, and while he was doing so surreptitiously wiped his eyes.

‘But you’re not going to die.’

‘Yes, yes,’ Mr. Quarles insisted. ‘I can feel it.’ He genuinely did feel
it; he believed he was going to die, because there was at least a part
of his mind that desired to die. These complications of the last weeks
had been too much for him; and the future promised to be worse, if that
were possible. To fade out, painlessly—that would be the best solution
of all his problems. He wished, he believed; and, believing in his
approaching death, he pitied himself as a victim and at the same time
admired himself for the resigned nobility with which he supported his
fate.

‘But you’re not going to die,’ Philip dully insisted, not knowing what
consolation, beyond mere denial, to offer. He had no gift for dealing
extempore with the emotional situations of practical life. ‘There’s
nothing…’ He was going to say, ‘There’s nothing the matter with you’;
but checked himself, reflecting, before it was too late, that his father
might be offended.

‘Let’s say no more about it.’ Mr. Quarles spoke tartly; there was a look
of annoyance in his eye. Philip remembered what his mother had said
about humouring him. He kept silence. ‘One can’t quarrel with Destinah,’
Mr. Quarles went on in another tone. ‘Destinah,’ he repeated with a
sigh. ‘You’ve been fortunate, dyah boy; you discovered your vocation
from the farst. Fate has treated you well.’

Philip nodded. He had often thought so himself, with a certain
apprehension even. He had an obscure belief in nemesis.

‘Whereas in my case…’ Mr. Quarles did not finish the sentence, but
raised his hand and let it fall again, hopelessly, on to the coverlet.
‘I wasted yahs of my life on false scents. Yahs and yahs before I
discovered my ryahl bent. A philosopher’s wasted on practical affairs.
He’s even absard. Like what’s-his-name’s albatross. You know.’

Philip was puzzled. ‘Do you mean the one in _The Ancient Mariner_?’

‘No, no,’ said Mr. Quarles impatiently. ‘That Frenchman.’

‘Oh, of course.’ Philip had caught the reference. ‘Le Poete est
semblable au prince des nuees. Baudelaire, you mean.’

‘Baudelaire, of course.’

 

‘Exile sur le sol au milieu des huees,

Ses ailes de geant l’empechent de marcher,’

 

Philip quoted, glad to be able to divert the conversation if only for a
moment from personalities to literature.

His father was delighted. ‘Exactlah!’ he cried triumphantly. ‘It’s the
same with philosophers. Their wings prevent them from walking. For
tharty yahs I tried to be a walker—in politics, in business. I didn’t
ryahlize that my place was in the air, not on the ground. In the air!’
he repeated, raising his arm. ‘I had wings.’ He agitated his hand in a
rapid tremolo. ‘Wings, and didn’t know it.’ His voice had grown louder,
his eyes brighter, his face pinker and more shiny. His whole person
expressed such an excitement, such restlessness and exaltation, that
Philip was seriously disquieted.

‘Hadn’t you better rest a little?’ he anxiously suggested.

Mr. Quarles disregarded the interruption. ‘Wings, wings,’ he cried. ‘I
had wings and if I’d ryahlized it as a young man, what heights I might
have flown to! But I tried to walk. In the mud. For tharty yahs. Only
after tharty yahs did I discover that I was meant to be flying. And now
I must give up almost before I’ve begun.’ He sighed and, leaning back
against his pillows, he shot the words almost perpendicularly up into
the air. ‘My work unfinished. My dreams unryahlized. Fate’s been hard.’

‘But you’ll have all the time you need to finish your work.’

‘No, no,’ Mr. Quarles insisted, shaking his head. He wanted to be one of
fate’s martyrs, to be able to point to himself and say: There, but for
the malignity of providence, goes Aristotle. Destiny’s unkindness
justified everything—his failure in sugar, in politics, in farming, the
coldness with which his first book had been received, the indefinite
delay in the appearance of the second; it even justified in some not
easily explicable fashion his having put Gladys in a family way. To be a
seducer of servants, secretaries, peasant girls was part of his unhappy
destiny. And now that, to crown the edifice of his misfortune, he was
about to die (prematurely but stoically, like the noblest Roman of them
all), how trivial, how wretchedly insignificant was this matter of lost
virginities and impending babies! And how unseemly, at the philosophic
death-bed, was all the outcry! But he could only ignore it on condition
that this was. genuinely his death-bed and that destiny was universally
admitted to have been cruel. A martyred philosopher on the point of
death was justified in refusing to be bothered with Gladys and her baby.
That was why (though the reason was felt and not formulated) Mr. Quarles
repudiated, so vigorously and even with annoyance, his son’s consoling
assurances of long life; that was why he arraigned malignant providence
and magnified with even more than his ordinary self-complaisance the
talents which providence had prevented him from using.

‘No, no, dyah boy,’ he repeated. ‘I shall never finish. And that was one
of the reasons why I wanted to have a talk with you.’

Philip looked at him with a certain apprehension. What was coming next?
he wondered. There was a little silence.

‘One doesn’t want to shuffle off entirely unrecorded,’ said Mr. Quarles
in a voice made husky by a recrudescence of self-pity

‘Shyahr extinction—it’s difficult to face.’ Before his mind’s eye the
void expanded, lampless and abysmal. Death. It might be the end of his
troubles; but it was none the less appalling. ‘You understand the
feeling?’ he asked.

‘Perfectly,’ said Philip, ‘perfectly. But in your case, father…’ Mr.
Quarles who had been blowing his nose again raised a protesting hand.
‘No, no.’ He had made up his mind that he was going to die; it was
useless for anyone to attempt to dissuade him. ‘But if you understand my
feeling, that’s all that matters. I can depart in peace with the
knowledge that you won’t allow all memory of me to disappyah completely.
Dyah boy, you shall be my literary executor. There are some fragments of
my writing….’

‘The book on democracy?’ asked Philip, who saw himself being called upon
to complete the largest work on the subject yet projected. His father’s
answer took a load off his mind.

‘No, not that,’ Mr. Quarles hastily replied. ‘Only the bare matyahrials
of that book exist. And to a great extent not on paper. Only in my mind.
In fact,’ he went on, ‘I was just going to tell you that I wanted all my
notes for the big book destroyed. Without being looked at. They’re myah
jottings. Meaningless except to me.’ Mr. Quarles was not anxious that
the emptiness of his files and the prevailing blankness of the cards in
his cardindex should be posthumously discovered and commented on. ‘They
must all be destroyed, do you understand?’

Philip made no protest.

‘What I wanted to entrust to you dyah boy,’ Mr. Quarles went on, ‘was a
collection of more intimate fragments. Reflections on life, records of
pahsonal expyahriences. Things like that.’

Philip nodded. ‘I see.’

‘I’ve been jotting them down for a long time past,’ said Mr. Quarles.
‘Memories and Reflections of Fifty Yahs—that might be a good title.
There’s a lot in my notebooks. And these last days I’ve been recording
on this.’ He tapped the dictaphone. ‘When one’s ill, you know, one
thinks a lot.’ He sighed. ‘Syahriously.’

‘Of course,’ Philip agreed.

‘If you’d care to listen…’ he indicated the dictaphone.

Philip nodded. Mr. Quarles prepared the machine. ‘It’ll give you an
idyah of the kind of thing. Thoughts and memories. Hyah.’ He pushed the
machine across the table and, pushing, sent a piece of paper fluttering
to the ground. It lay there on the carpet, chequered, a puzzle. ‘This is
where you listen.’

Philip listened. After a moment of scratchy roaring, the Punch and Judy
parody of his father’s voice said, ‘The key to the problem of
sex:—passion is sacred, a manifestation of the divinitah.’ And then,
without stop or transition, but in a slightly different tone: ‘The
wahrst thing about politics is the frivolitah of politicians. Meeting
Asquith one evening at dinner, I forget now where, I took the
opportunitah of ahrging on him the necessitah of abolishing capital
punishment. One of the most syahrious questions of modern life. But he
myahrly suggested that we should go and play bridge. Unit of measure
seven letters long: Verchok. Fastidious men do not live in pigsties, nor
can they long remain in politics or business. There are nature’s Greeks
and nature’s Mrs. Grundies. I never shared the mob’s high opinion of
Lloyd George. Every man is born with a natural right to be happy; but
what ferocious repression when anybody tried to claim his right!
Brazilian stork, six letters: jabiru. True greatness is invarsely
proportional to myahr immediate success. Ah, _hyah_ you…!’ The scratchy
roar supervened.

‘Yes, I see the style of the thing,’ said Philip, looking up. ‘How does
one stop this affair? Ah, that’s it.’ He stopped it.

‘So many thoughts occur to me as I lie hyah,’ said Mr. Quarles, aimed
upwards, as though speaking against aircraft. ‘Such a wealth! I could
never record them all but for the machine. It’s wonderful. Ryahly
wonderful! ‘


CHAPTER XXXIII

Elinor had had time to telegraph from Euston. On her arrival, she found
the car waiting for her at the station. ‘How is he?’ she asked the
chauffeur. But Paxton was vague, didn’t rightly know. Privately, he
thought it was one of these ridiculous fusses about nothing, such as the
rich are always making, particularly where their children are concerned.
They drove up to Gattenden and the landscape of the Chilterns in the
ripe evening light was so serenely beautiful, that Elinor began to feel
less anxious and even half wished that she had stayed till the last
train. She would have been able in that case to see Webley. But hadn’t
she decided that she was really almost glad not to be seeing him? One
can be glad and sorry at the same time. Passing the north entrance to
the Park, she had a glimpse through the bars of Lord Gattenden’s
bath-chair standing just inside the gate. The ass had stopped and was
eating grass at the side of the road, the reins hung loose and the
marquess was too deeply absorbed in a thick red morocco quarto to be
able to think of driving. The car hurried on; but that second’s glimpse
of the old man sitting with his book behind the grey donkey, as she had
so often seen him sitting and reading; that brief revelation of life
living itself regularly, unvaryingly in the same old familiar way, was
as reassuring as the calm loveliness of beech-trees and bracken, of
greengolden foreground and violet distances.

And there at last was the Hall! The old house seemed to doze in the
westering sun like a basking animal; you could almost fancy that it
purred. And the lawn was like the most expensive green velvet; and in
the windless air the huge Wellingtonia had all the dignified gravity of
an old gentleman who sits down to meditate after an enormous meal. There
could be nothing much wrong here. She jumped out of the car and ran
straight upstairs to the nursery. Phil was lying in bed, quite still and
with closed eyes. Miss Fulkes, who was sitting beside him, turned as she
entered, rose and came to meet her. One glance at her face was enough to
convince Elinor that the blue and golden tranquillity of the landscape,
the dozing house, the marquess and his ass had been lying comforters.
‘All’s well,’ they had seemed to say. ‘Everything’s going on as usual.’
But Miss Fulkes looked pale and frightened, as though she had seen a
ghost.

‘What’s the matter?’ Elinor whispered with a sudden return of all her
anxiety, and before Miss Fulkes had time to answer, ‘Is he asleep?’ she
added. If he were asleep, she was thinking, it was a good sign; he
looked as though he were asleep.

But Miss Fulkes shook her head. The gesture was superfluous. For the
question was hardly out of Elinor’s mouth, when the child made a sudden
spasmodic movement under the sheets. His face contracted with pain. He
uttered a little whimpering moan.

‘His head hurts him so much,’ said Miss Fulkes. There was a look of
terror and misery in her eyes.

‘Go and have a rest,’ said Elinor.

Miss Fulkes hesitated, shook her head. ‘I’d like to be useful…’

Elinor insisted. ‘You’ll be more useful when you’ve rested….’ She saw
Miss Fulkes’s lips trembling, her eyes growing suddenly bright with
tears.

‘Go along,’ she said and pressed her arm consolingly.

Miss Fulkes obeyed with a sudden alacrity. She was afraid that she might
start crying before she got to her room.

Elinor sat down by the bed. She took the little hand that lay on the
turned-back sheet, she passed her fingers through the child’s pale hair
caressingly, soothingly. ‘Sleep,’ she whispered, as her fingers caressed
him, ‘sleep, sleep.’ But the child still stirred uneasily; and every now
and then his face was distorted with sudden pain; he shook his head, as
though trying to shake off the thing that was hurting him, he uttered
his little whimpering moan. And bending over him, Elinor felt as though
her heart were being crushed within her breast, as though a hand were at
her throat, choking her.

‘My darling,’ she said beseechingly, imploring him not to suffer, ‘my
darling.’

And she pressed the small hand more tightly, she let her palm rest more
heavily on his hot forehead, as if to stifle the pain or at least to
steady the shuddering little body against its attacks. And all her will
commanded the pain to cease under her fingers, to come out of him—out of
him, through her fingers, into her own body. But still he fidgeted
restlessly in his bed, turning his head from one side to the other, now
drawing up his legs, now straightening them out with a sharp spasmodic
kick under the sheets. And still the pain returned, stabbing; and the
face made its grimace of agony, the parted lips gave utterance to the
little whimpering cry, again and again. She stroked his lorehead, she
whispered tender words. And that was all she could do. The sense of her
helplessness suffocated her. At her throat and heart the invisible hands
tightened their grip.

‘How do you find him?’ asked Mrs. Bidlake, when her daughter came down.

Elinor did not answer, but turned away her face. The question had
brought the tears rushing into her eyes. Mrs. Bidlake put her arms round
her and kissed her. Elinor hid her face against her mother’s shoulder.
‘You must be strong,’ she kept saying to herself. ‘You mustn’t cry,
mustn’t break down. Be strong. To help him.’ Her mother held her more
closely. The physical contact comforted her, gave her the strength for
which she was praying. She made an effort of will and with a deep
intaken breath swallowed down the sobs in her throat. She looked up at
her mother and gratefully smiled. Her lips still trembled a little; but
the will had conquered.

‘I’m stupid,’ she said apologetically. ‘I couldn’t help it. It’s so
horrible to see him suffer. Helplessly. It’s dreadful. Even if one knows
that it’ll be all right in the end.’

Mrs. Bidlake sighed. ‘Dreadful,’ she echoed,’dreadful,’ and closed her
eyes in a meditative perplexity. There was a silence. ‘By the way,’ she
went on, opening them again to look at her daughter, ‘I think you ought
to keep an eye on Miss Fulkes. I don’t know whether her influence is
always entirely good.’

‘Miss Fulkes’s influence?’ said Elinor, opening her eyes in
astonishment. ‘But she’s the nicest, the most conscientious…’

‘Oh, not that, not that!’ said Mrs. Bidlake hastily. ‘Her artistic
influence, I mean. When I went up to see Phil the day before yesterday I
found her showing him such dreadfully vulgar pictures of a dog.’

‘Bonzo?’ suggested Elinor.

Her mother nodded. ‘Yes, Bonzo.’ She pronounced the word with a certain
distaste. ‘If he wants pictures of animals, there are such excellent
reproductions of Persian miniatures at the British Museum. It’s so easy
to spoil a child’s taste…. But Elinor! My dear!’

Suddenly and uncontrollably, Elinor had begun to laugh. To laugh and to
cry, uncontrollably. Grief alone she had been able to master. But grief
allied with Bonzo was irresistible. Something broke inside her and she
found herself sobbing with a violent, painful and hysterical laughter.

Mrs. Bidlake helplessly patted her shoulder. ‘My dear,’ she kept
repeating. ‘Elinor!’

Roused from uneasy and nightmarish dozing, John Bidlake shouted
furiously from the library. ‘Stop that cackling,’ commanded the
angry-plaintive voice. ‘For God’s sake.’

But Elinor could not stop.

‘Screaming like parrots,’ John Bidlake went on muttering to himself.

‘Some idiotic joke. When one isn’t well…’

 

__ __

 

‘Now, for God’s sake,’ said Spandrell roughly, ‘pull yourself together.’

Illidge pressed his handkerchief to his mouth; he was afraid of being
sick. ‘I think I’ll lie down for a moment,’ he whispered. But when he
tried to walk, it was as though his legs were dead under him. It might
have been a paralytic who dragged himself to the sofa.

‘What you need is a mouthful of spirits,’ said Spandrell. He crossed the
room. A bottle of brandy stood on the sideboard, and from the kitchen he
returned with glasses. He poured out two fingers of the spirit. ‘Here.
Drink this.’ Illidge took and sipped. ‘One would think we were crossing
the Channel,’ Spandrell went on with ferocious mockery, as he helped
himself to brandy. ‘Study in green and ginger—that’s how Whistler would
have described you now. Apple-green. Moss-green.’

Illidge looked at him for a moment, then turned away, unable to face the
steady glance of those contemptuous grey eyes. He had never felt such
hatred as he now felt for Spandrell.

‘Not to say frog-green, slime-green, scum-green,’ the other went on.

‘Oh shut up!’ cried Illidge in a voice that had recovered some of its
resonance and hardly wavered. Spandrell’s mockery had steadied his
nerves. Hate, like brandy, is a stimulant. He took another burning gulp.
There was a silence.

‘When you feel like it,’ said Spandrell, putting down his emptied glass,
‘you can come and help me clear up.’ He rose and walked round the
screen, out of sight.

Everard Webley’s body was lying where it had fallen, on its side, with
the arms reaching out across the floor. The chloroform-soaked
handkerchief still covered the face. Spandrell bent down and twitched it
away. The temple which had been struck was against the floor; seen from
above the face seemed unwounded.

His hands in his pockets, Spandrell stood looking down at the body.

‘Five minutes ago,’ he said to himself, formulating his thoughts in
words, that his realization of their significance might be the more
complete, ‘five minutes ago, it was alive, it had a soul. Alive,’ he
repeated and balancing himself unsteadily on one leg, with the other
foot he touched the dead cheek, he pushed forward the ear and let it
flick back again. ‘A soul.’ And for a moment he allowed some of his
weight to rest on what had been Everard Webley’s face. ‘He withdrew his
foot; the print of it remained, dust-grey, on the white skin. ‘Trampling
on a dead face,’ he said to himself. Why had he done it? ‘Trampling.’ He
raised his foot again and pressed his heel into the socket of the eye,
gently, tentatively, as though experimenting with outrage. ‘Like
grapes,’ he thought. ‘Trampling wine out of the grapes.’ It was in his
power to trample this thing into a pulp., But he had done enough.
Symbolically, he had trodden out the essential horror from his murder;
it flowed from under his trampling feet. The essential horror? But it
was more stupid and disgusting, than horrible. Pushing the toe of his
boot under the chin, he rolled the head over until the face was looking
up, open-mouthed and with half-shut eyes, at the ceiling. Above and
behind the left eye was a huge red contusion. There were trickles of
blood on the left cheek, already dry, and where the forehead had rested
on the floor, a little pool—hardly even a pool—a smear.

‘Incredibly little blood,’ said Spandrell aloud.

At the sound of his calm voice Illidge violently started.

Spandrell withdrew his supporting foot. The dead face fell back with a
little thump on to its side.

‘It’s a complete justification for Bishop Odo’s mace,’ he went on
dispassionately. That he should find himself recalling, at this of all
moments, the comical prancings of that conscientious churchman in the
Bayeux tapestry—that too was part of the essential horror. The
frivolousness of the human mind! The wandering irrelevance! Evil might
have a certain dignity. But silliness…

Illidge heard him walk into the kitchen. There was the gradually
sharpening note of water running into a pail. The tap was turned off;
there were foot-falls; the bucket was set down with a metallic clink.

‘Luckily,’ Spandrell went on, in comment on his last remark. ‘Or else I
don’t know what we should have done about the mess.’

Illidge listened with a strained and horrified attention to the sounds
that came to him from the other side of the screen. A limp and meaty
thud; was that an arm lifted and dropped? The sibilant sliding of a soft
and heavy object across the floor. Then the splash of water, the homely
noise of scrubbing. And at these sounds, so incomparably more horrible,
more profoundly significant than any words, however brutal, however
calmly cynical, that Spandrell could say, he felt a recrudesence of that
sinking, that heart-fluttering faintness of the first minutes, when the
dead man was lying there, still twitching, at his feet. He remembered,
he lived over again those moments of breathless and sick anticipation
before the horrible event. The noise of the car backing down the street;
the gritty scrape of feet on the doorstep, and then the knock, and then
a long, long silence of heart-beats and visceral creepings and
imaginative forebodings, of justifying thoughts of revolution and the
future, justifying hatred of oppression and the vileness of wealth. And
at the same time ridiculous, incongruous recollections, as he crouched
behind the screen, of those childish games of hide-and-seek on
school-treat days, among the gorse and juniper bushes of the common.
‘One, two, three…’; the seekers covered their faces and began to count
their hundred, aloud; the hiders scattered. You thrust yourself into a
prickly bush, you lay in the bracken. Then came the shout of
‘ninety-nine, a hundred, Cooee!’; and the seekers were off, were after
you. And the excitement was so painfully intense, as you crouched or
squatted in your lair, peeping, listening for a chance to make a bolt
for Home, that you felt an almost irrepressible desire to’do something,’
though something had been done, behind the junipers, only five minutes
before. Absurd memories! And because absurd, dreadful! For the hundredth
time he felt in his pocket to make sure that the bottle of chloroform
was still there and safely corked. The second knock startlingly
resounded and, with it, the whistle and that humorous call (you could
_hear_, from the tone of his voice, that he was smiling) of ‘Friend!’
Behind his screen Midge had shuddered. ‘Friend!’ And remembering now, he
shuddered again, more violently, with all the shame and horror and
humiliation which he had had no time then to feel. No time; for before
his mind could realize all the implications upon implications of that
laughing call, the door had creaked on its hinges, there was the noise
of feet on the boards, and Webley was shouting Elinor’s name. (Illidge
suddenly found himself wondering if he had been in love with her.)
‘Elinor!’ There followed a silence; Webley had seen the note. Illidge
had heard his breathing, only a foot or two away, on the other side of
the screen. And then there was the rustle of a quick movement, the
beginning of an exclamation and that sudden dry concussion, like the
noise of a slap, but duller, deader and at the same time much louder.
There followed a fraction of a second’s silence, then the noise of
falling—not a single sound, but a series of noises spread over an
appreciable period of time; the bony collapse of the knees, the scrape
of shoes sliding away across the polished floor, the muffled thud of the
body and arms, and the sharp hard rap of the head against the boards.
‘Quick!’ had come the sound of Spandrell’s voice, and he had darted out
of his hidingplace. ‘Chloroform.’ Obediently, he had soaked the
handkerchief, he had spread it over the twitching face….He shuddered
again, he took another sip of brandy.

The sound of scrubbing was succeeded by the squelch of a wetted cloth.

‘There,’ said Spandrell, appearing round the screen. He was drying his
hands on a duster. ‘And how’s the invalid?’ he added in the parody of a
bedside manner, smiling ironically.

Illidge averted his face. The hatred flared up in him, expelling for the
moment every other emotion. ‘I’m all right,’ he said curtly.

‘Just taking it easy while I do the dirty work. Is that it?’ Spandrell
threw the duster on to a chair and began to turn down his shirt cuffs.

In two hours the muscles of the heart contract and relax, contract again
and relax only eight thousand times. The earth travels less than an
eighth of a million miles along its orbit. And the prickly pear has had
time to invade only another hundred acres of Australian territory. Two
hours are as nothing. The time to listen to the Ninth Symphony and a
couple of the posthumous quartets, to fly from London to Paris, to
transfer a luncheon from the stomach to the small intestine, to read
_Macbeth_, to die of snake bite or earn one-and-eightpence as a
charwoman. No more. But to Illidge, as he sat waiting, with the dead
body lying there behind the screen, waiting for the darkness, they
seemed unending.

‘Are you an idiot? asked Spandrell, when he had suggested that they
should go away at once and leave the thing lying there. ‘Or are you
particularly anxious to die of hanging?’ The sneer, the cool ironic
amusement were maddening to Illidge. ‘It would be found to-night when
Philip came home.’

‘But Quarles hasn’t got a key,’ said Illidge.

‘Then to-morrow, as soon as he’d got hold of a locksmith. And three
hours later, when Elinor had explained what she had done with the key,
the police would be knocking at my door. And I promise you, they’d knock
at yours very soon afterwards.’ He smiled at Illidge, who averted his
eyes. ‘No,’ Spandrell went on, ‘Webley’s got to be taken away. And with
his car standing outside, it’s child’s play, if we wait till after
dark.’

‘But it won’t be dark for another two hours.’ Illidge’s voice was shrill
with anger and complaint.

‘Well, what of it?’

‘Why…’ Illidge began and checked himself; he realized that if he was
going to answer truthfully, he would have to say that he didn’t want to
stay those two hours because he was frightened. ‘All right,’ he said.
‘Let’s stay.’ Spandrell picked up the silver cigarette box, opened and
sniffed. ‘They smell very nice,’ he said. ‘Have one.’ He pushed the box
across the table. ‘And there are lots of books. And the _Times_ And the
_New Statesman_. And the latest number of _Vogue_. It’s positively a
dentist’s waiting-room. And we might even make ourselves a cup of tea.’
The time of waiting began. Heart-beat followed heart-beat. Each second
the earth travelled twenty miles and the prickly pears covered another
five rods of Australian ground. Behind the screen lay the body.
Thousands upon thousands of millions of minute and diverse individuals
had come together and the product of their mutual dependence, their
mutual hostility had been a human life. Their total colony, their living
hive had been a man. The hive was dead. But in the lingering warmth many
of the component individuals still faintly lived; soon they also would
have perished. And meanwhile, from the air, the invisible hosts of
saprophytics had already begun their unresisted invasion. They would
live among the dead cells, they would grow, and prodigiously multiply
and in their growing and procreation all the chemical building of the
body would be undone, all the intricacies and complications of its
matter would be resolved, till by the time their work was finished a few
pounds of carbon, a few quarts of water, some lime, a little phosphorus
and sulphur, a pinch of iron and silicon, a handful of mixed salts—all
scattered and recombined with the surrounding world—would be all that
remained of Everard Webley’s ambition to rule and his love for Elinor,
of his thoughts about politics and his recollections of childhood, of
his fencing and good horsemanship, of that soft strong voice and that
suddenly illuminating smile, of his admiration for Mantegna, his dislike
of whiskey, his deliberately terrifying rages, his habit of stroking his
chin, his belief in God, his incapacity to whistle a tune correctly, his
unshakeable determinations and his knowledge of Russian.

Illidge turned over the advertisement pages of _Vogue_. A young lady in
a fur coat priced at two hundred guineas was stepping into a motor car;
on the opposite page another young lady in nothing but a towel was
stepping out of a bath impregnated with Dr. Verbruggen’s Reducing Salts.
There followed a still-life of scent bottles containing _Songe Negre_
and the maker’s latest creation, _Relent d’Amour_. The names of Worth,
Lanvin, Patou sprawled across three more pages. Then there was a picture
of a young lady in a rubber reducing belt, looking at herself in the
glass. A group of young ladies admired one another’s slumber wear from
Crabb and Lushington’s lingerie department. Opposite them another young
lady reclined on a couch at Madame Adrena’s Beauty Laboratory, while the
hands of a masseuse stroked the menace of a double chin. Then followed a
still-life of rolling pins and rubber strigils for rolling and rubbing
away young ladies’ superfluous fat, and another still-life of jars and
gallipots containing skin foods to protect their faces from the ravages
of time and the weather.

‘Revolting!’ Illidge said to himself as he turned the pages. ‘Criminal!’
And he cherished his indignation, he cultivated it. To be angry was a
distraction, and at the same time a justification. Raging at plutocratic
callousness and frivolity, he could half forget and half excuse to
himself the horrible thing that had happened. Webley’s body was lying on
the other side of the screen. But there were women who paid two hundred
guineas for a fur coat. Two hundred guineas! His Uncle Joseph would have
thought himself happy if he could have made as much in eighteen months
of cobbling. And they bought scent at twentyfive shillings the
quarter-pint. He remembered the time when his little brother Tom had had
pneumonia after influenza. Ghastly! And when he was convalescent, the
doctor had said he ought to go away to the sea for a few weeks. They
hadn’t been able to afford it. Tom’s lungs had never been too strong
after that. He worked in a motor factory now (making machines for those
bitches in twohundred-guinea coats to sit in); Illidge had paid for him
to go to a technical school—paid, he reflected, beating up his anger,
that the boy might have the privilege of standing eight hours a day in
front of a milling machine. The air of Manchester wasn’t doing Tom any
good. There was no superfluous fat to be rolled off him, poor devil.
Swinish guzzling! Why couldn’t they do a little useful work instead of
squeegeeing their hams and bellies? That would take the fat off all
right. If they worked as his mother had done…. She had no fat to rub off
with rolling-pins, or sweat off under a rubber belt, or stew off in hot
baths and brine. He thought indignantly of that endless dreary labour of
housework. Day after day, year after year. Making beds, that they might
be unmade. Cooking to fill bellies eternally empty. Washing up what the
next meal was to make dirty again. Scrubbing the floor for muddy boots
to defile. Darning and patching that yet more holes might be made. It
was like the labouring of Sisyphus and the Danaids, hopeless and
interminable—or would have been interminable (except by his mother’s
death), if he hadn’t been able to send her those two pounds a week out
of his salary. She could get a girl in now to help with the hardest
work. But she still did more than enough to make rubber belts
unnecessary. What a life! And in the world of fur coats and _Songe
Negre_ they complained of boredom and fatigue, they had to retire into
nursing homes for rest cures. If they could lead _her_ life for a bit!
And perhaps they’d be made to, one of these days (he hoped so), even in
England. Illidge thought with satisfaction of those ex-officers of the
Tsar driving taxis and working in factories, those ex-countesses with
their restaurants and cabarets and hat-shops; of all the ex-rich of
Russia, all over the world, from Harbin and Shanghai to Rome and London
and Berlin, bankrupt, humiliated, reduced to the slavish estate of the
common people on whom they had once parasitically lived. That was good,
that served them right. And perhaps it might happen here too. But they
were strong here, the fat-reducers and the fur-coated; they were
numerous, they were an organized army. But the army had lost its chief.
He had got his packet. Embodied beastliness and plutocracy, he lay there
behind the screen. But his mouth had been open and the muscles of his
face, before the reeking handkerchief had covered it, had twitched
grotesquely. Illidge shuddered. He looked again for indignant
distraction and justification at the picture of the young lady in the
twohundred-guinea fur, of the young lady stepping, naked but coyly
towelled, out of her reducing bath. Strumpets and gluttons! They
belonged to the class that Webley had fought to perpetuate. The champion
of all that was vile and low. He had got what he deserved, he had…

‘Good Lord!’ exclaimed Spandrell suddenly, looking up from his book. The
sound of his voice in the silence made Illidge start with an
uncontrollable terror. ‘I’d absolutely forgotten. They get stiff, don’t
they?’ He looked at Illidge. ‘Corpses, I mean.’

Illidge nodded: He drew a deep breath and steadied himself with an
effort of will.

‘What about getting him into the car, then?’ He sprang up and walked
quickly round the screen, out of sight. Illidge heard the latch of the
house door rattling. He was seized with a sudden horrible terror:
Spandrell was going to make off, leaving him locked in with the body.

‘Where are you going?’ he shouted and darted off in panic pursuit.
‘Where are you going?’ The door was open, Spandrell was not to be seen,
and the thing lay on the floor, its face uncovered, open-mouthed and
staring secretly, significantly, as though through spyholes, between
half-closed eyelids. ‘Where are you going?’ Illidge’s voice had risen
almost to a scream.

‘What _is_ the excitement about?’ asked Spandrell as the other appeared,
pale and with desperation in his looks, on the doorstep. Standing by
Webley’s car, he was engaged in undoing the tightly stretched waterproof
which decked in all that part of the open body lying aft of the front
seats. ‘These thingumbobs are horribly hard to unfasten.’

Illidge put his hands in his pockets and pretended that it was merely an
idle curiosity that had brought him out with such precipitation.

‘What are you doing?’ he asked offhandedly.

Spandrell gave a final tug; the cover came loose along the whole length
of one side of the car. He turned it back and looked in. ‘Empty, thank
goodness,’ he said and, stretching his hand, he played imaginary
octaves, span after span, over the coach-work. ‘Say four feet wide,’ he
concluded, ‘by about the same in length. Of which half is taken up by
the seat. With two foot six of space under the cover. Plenty of room to
curl up in and be very comfortable. But if one were stiff?’ He looked
enquiringly at Illidge. ‘A man could be got in, but not a statue.’

Illidge nodded. Spandrell’s last words had made him suddenly remember
Lady Edward’s mocking commentary on Webley. ‘He wants to be treated like
his own colossal statue—posthumously, if you see what I mean.’

‘We must do something quickly,’ Spandrell went on. ‘Before the stiffness
sets in.’ He pulled back the cover and laying a hand on Illidge’s
shoulder, propelled him gently into the house. The door slammed behind
them. They stood looking down at the body.

‘We shall have to pull the knees up and the arms down,’ said Spandrell.

He bent down and moved one of the arms towards the side. It returned,
when he let go, half-way to its former position. Like a puppet,
Spandrell reflected, with elastic joints. Grotesque rather than
terrible; not tragical, but only rather tiresome and even absurd. That
was the essential horror—that it was all (even _this_) a kind of bad and
tedious jape. ‘We shall have to find some string,’ he said. ‘Something
to tie the limbs into place.’ It was like amateur plumbing, or mending
the summerhouse oneself; just rather unpleasant and ludicrous.

‘They ransacked the house. There was no string to be found. They had to
be content with three bandages, which Spandrell found among the aspirin
and iodine, the boracic powder and vegetable laxatives of the little
medicine cupboard in the bathroom.

‘Hold the arms in place while I tie,’ commanded Spandrell.

Illidge did as he was told. But the coldness of those dead wrists
against his fingers was horrible; he felt sick again, he began to
tremble.

‘There!’ said Spandrell, straightening himself up. ‘Now the legs. Thank
goodness we didn’t leave it much longer.’

‘Treated like his own statue.’ The words reverberated in Illidge’s
memory. ‘Posthumously, if you see what I mean.’ Posthumously… Spandrell
bent one of the legs till the knee almost touched the chin.

‘Hold it.’

Illidge grasped the ankle; the socks were grey and clocked with white.
Spandrell let go, and Illidge felt a sudden and startlingly powerful
thrust against his retaining hand. The dead man was trying to kick.
Black voids began to expand in front of his eyes, eating out holes in
the solid world before him. And the solid world itself swayed and swam
round the edges of those interstellar vacancies. His gorge turned, he
felt horribly giddy.

‘Look here,’ he began, turning to Spandrell, who had squatted down on
his heels and was tearing the wrapping off another bandage. Then
shutting his eyes, he relinquished his grasp.

The leg straightened itself out like a bent spring, and the foot, as it
shot forward, caught Spandrell on the shoulder and sent him, unsteadily
balanced as he was, sprawling backwards on to the floor.

He picked himself up. ‘You bloody fool!’ But the anger aroused by that
first shock of surprise died down. He uttered a little laugh. ‘We might
be at the circus,’ he said. It was not only not tragic; it was a
clownery.

By the time the body was finally trussed, Illidge knew that Tom’s weak
lungs and twohundred-guinea coats, that superfluous fat and his mother’s
lifelong slaving, that rich and poor, oppression and revolution,
justice, punishment, indignation—all, as far as he was concerned, were
utterly irrelevant to the fact of these stiffening limbs, this mouth
that gaped, these half-shut, glazed and secretly staring eyes.
Irrelevant, and beside the point.

 

__ __

 

Philip was dining alone. In front of his plate half a bottle of claret
and the water-jug propped up an open volume. He read between the
mouthfuls, as he masticated. The book was Bastian’s _On the Brain_. Not
very up to date, perhaps, but the best he could find in his father’s
library to keep him amused in the train. Halfway through the fish, he
came upon the case of the Irish gentleman who had suffered from
paraphasia, and was so much struck by it that he pushed aside his plate
and, taking out his pocket-book, made a note of it at once. The
physician had asked the patient to read aloud a paragraph from the
statutes of Trinity College, Dublin. ‘It shall be in the power of the
College to examine or not examine every Licentiate previous to his
admission to a fellowship, as they shall think fit.’ What the patient
actually read was: ‘An the bee-what in the teemother of the
trothodoodoo, to majoram or that emidrate, eni eni krastrei, mestreit to
ketra totombreidei, to ra from treido as that kekritest.’ Marvellous!
Philip said to himself as he copied down the last word. What style! what
majestic beauty! The richness and sonority of the opening phrase! ‘An
the bee-what in the teemother of the trothodoodoo.’ He repeated it to
himself. ‘I shall print it on the title-page of my next novel,’ he wrote
in his notebook. ‘The epigraph the text of the whole sermon.’
Shakespeare only talked about tales told by an idiot. But here was the
idiot actually speaking Shakespeareanly, what was more. ‘The final word
about life,’ he added in pencil.

At the Queen’s Hall Tolley began with Erik Satie’s _Borborygmes
Symphoniques_. Philip found the joke only moderately good. A section of
the audience improved it, however, by hissing and booing. Ironically
polite, Tolley bowed with more than his usual grace. When the hubbub
subsided, he addressed himself to the second item on the programme. It
was the _Coriolan_ overture. Tolley prided himself on a catholic taste
and omnicompetence. But, oh dear! thought Philip as he listened, how
abominably he conducted real music! As though he were rather ashamed of
Beethoven’s emotions and were trying to apologize for them. But
fortunately Coriolanus was practically Tolley-proof. The music was
heroically beautiful, it was tragic and immense in spite of him. The
last of the expiring throbs of sound died away, a demonstration of man’s
indomitable greatness and the necessity, the significance of suffering.

In the interval Philip limped out for a smoke in the bar. A hand plucked
at his sleeve.

‘The melomaniac discovered!’ said a familiar voice. He turned and saw
Willie Weaver twinkling all over with good-humour, kindliness and
absurdity. ‘What did you think of our modemrn Orpheus?’

‘If you’re referring to Tolley, I don’t think he can conduct Beethoven.’

‘A shade too light and fantastic for old man Ludwig’s portentosities?’
suggested Willie.

‘That’s about it,’ said Philip smiling. ‘Not up to him.’

‘Or too far up. Portentosity belongs to the prepositivistic epoch. It’s
bourgeois as Comrade Lenin would say. Tolley’s nothing if not
contemporaneous. Didn’t you like him in the Satie? Or did you,’ he went
on, in response to Philip’s contemptuous shrug, ‘did you wish he’d
committed it?’ He coughed his own appreciation of the pun.

‘He’s almost as modern as the Irish genius whose works I discovered this
evening.’ Philip took out his pocket-book and, after a word of
explanation, read aloud. ‘An the bee-what in the teemother of the
trothodoodoo…’ At the foot of the page were his own comments of an hour
before. ‘The text of the whole sermon. The final word about life.’ He
did not read them out. He happened to be thinking quite differently now.
‘The difference between portentosity and Satiecum-Tolleyism,’ he said, ‘
is the same as the difference between the statutes of Trinity College,
Dublin, and this bee-what in the teemother of the trothodoodoo.’

He was blankly contradicting himself. But, after all, why not?

 

__ __

 

Illidge wanted to go home and to bed; but Spandrell had insisted that he
should spend at least an hour or two at Tantamount House.

‘You must get yourself seen,’ he said. ‘For the sake of the alibi. I’m
going on to Sbisa’s. There’ll be a dozen people to vouch for me.’

Illidge agreed only under the threat of violence. He dreaded the ordeal
of talking with anyone—even with someone so incurious, preoccupied and
absent as Lord Edward. ‘I shan’t be able to stand it,’ he kept
repeating, almost in tears. They had had to carry the body, trussed into
the posture of a child in the womb—carry it amorously pressed in a close
and staggering embrace—out of the door, down the steps into the roadway.
A single greenish gas-lamp under the archway threw but a feeble light up
the mews; enough, however, to have betrayed them, if anyone had happened
to be passing the entrance as they carried their burden out and lifted
it into the car. They had begun by dumping the thing on its back on the
floor; but the up-drawn knees projected above the level of the
carriage-work. Spandrell had to climb into the car and push and lug the
heavy body on to its side, so that the knees rested on the edge of the
back seat. They’ shut the doors, pulled the cover over and fastened it
tautly into place. ‘Perfect,’ said Spandrell. He took his companion by
the elbow. ‘You need a little more brandy,’ he added. But in spite of
the brandy Illidge was still faint and tremulous when they drove away.
Nor was Spandrell’s bungling with the mechanism of the unfamiliar car at
all calculated to soothe his nerves. They had begun by backing violently
into the wall at the end of the mews; and before he discovered the
secret of the gears, Spandrell twice inadvertently stopped the engine.
He relieved his irritation by a few curses and laughed. But to Illidge
these little mishaps, entailing as they did a minute’s delay in escaping
from that horrible and accursed place, were catastrophes. His terror,
his anxious impatience became almost hysterical.

‘No, I can’t, I really can’t,’ he protested when Spandrell had told him
that he must spend the evening at Tantamount House.

‘All the same,’ said the other, ‘you’re damned well going to,’ and he
headed the car into the Mall. ‘I ‘1 drop you at the door.’

‘No, really!’

‘And if necessary kick you in.’

‘But I couldn’t stand being there, I couldn’t stand it.’

‘This is an extremely nice car,’ said Spandrell pointedly changing the
subject.’delightful to drive.’

‘I couldn’t stand it,’ Illidge whimperingly repeated.

‘I believe the makers guarantee a hundred miles an hour on the track.’

They turned up past St. James’s Palace into Pall Mall.

‘Here you are,’ said Spandrell, drawing up at the kerb. Obediently,
Illidge got out, crossed the pavement, climbed the steps and rang the
bell. Spandrell waited till the door had closed behind him, then drove
on into St. James’s Square. Twenty or thirty cars were parked round the
central gardens. He backed in among them, stopped the engine, got out
and walked up to Piccadilly Circus. A penny’bus-ride took him to the top
of the Charing Cross Road. The trees of Soho Square shone green in the
lamplight at the end of the narrow lane between the factory buildings.
Two minutes later he was at Sbisa’s, apologizing to Burlap and Rampion
for being so late.

 

__ __

 

‘Ah, here you are,’ said Lord Edward.’so glad you’ve come.’

Illidge mumbled vague apologies for not having come sooner. An
appointment with a man. About business. But suppose, he wondered in
terror while he spoke, suppose Lord Edward should ask what man, what
business? He wouldn’t know what to answer; he would utterly break down.
But the Old Man seemed not even to have heard his excuses.

‘Afraid I must ask you to do a little arithmetic for me,’ he said in his
deep blurred voice. Lord Edward had made himself a tolerably good
mathematician; but ‘sums’ had always been beyond his powers. He had
never been able to multiply correctly. And as for long division—it was
fifty years since he had even attempted it. ‘I’ve got the figures here.’
He tapped the notebook that lay open in front of him on the desk. ‘It’s
for the chapter on phosphorus. Human interference with the cycle. How
much P2 05 did we find out was dispersed into the sea in sewage?’ He
turned a page. ‘Four hundred thousand tons. That was it. Practically
irrecoverable. Just thrown away. Then there’s the stupid way we deal
with cadavers. Three-quarters of a kilo of phosphorus pentoxide in every
body. Restored to the earth, you may say.’ Lord Edward was ready to
admit every excuse, to anticipate, that he might rebut, every shift of
advocacy. ‘But how inadequately!’ he swept the excuses away, he blew the
special pleaders to bits. ‘Huddling bodies together in cemeteries! How
can you expect the phosphorus to get distributed? It finds its way back
to the life cycle in time, no doubt. But for _our_ purposes it’s lost.
Taken out of currency. Now, given three-quarters of a kilo of P2 05. for
every cadaver and a world population of eighteen hundred millions and an
average deathrate of twenty per thousand, what’s the total quantity
restored every year to the earth? You can do sums, my dear Illidge. I
leave it to you.’ Illidge sat in silence, shielding his face with his
hand. ‘But then one has to remember,’ the Old Man continued, ‘ that
there are a lot of people who dispose of the dead more sensibly than we
do. It’s really only among the white races that the phosphorus is taken
out of circulation. Other people don’t have necropolises and watertight
coffins and brick vaults. The only people more wasteful than we are the
Indians. Burning bodies and throwing the ashes into rivers! But the
Indians are stupid about everything. The way they burn all the cow-dung
instead of putting it back on the land. And then they’re surprised that
half the population hasn’t enough to eat. We shall have to make a
separate calculation about the Indians. I haven’t got the figures,
though. But meanwhile will you work out the grand total for the world?
And another, if you don’t mind, for the white races. I’ve got a list of
the populations here somewhere. And, of course, the deathrate will be
lower than the average for the whole world, at any rate in Western
Europe and America. Would you like to sit here? There’s room at this end
of the table.’ He cleared a space. ‘And here’s paper. And this is quite
a decent pen.’

‘Do you mind,’ said Illidge faintly, ‘if I lie down for a minute. I’m
not feeling well.’


CHAPTER XXXIV

It was nearly eleven before Philip Quarles appeared at Sbisa’s.
Spandrell saw him as he was entering and beckoned him to the table where
he was sitting with Burlap and Rampion. Philip came limping across the
room and sat down beside him.

‘I’ve got messages for you,’ said Spandrell, ‘and, what’s more
important,’ he felt in his pocket, ‘ the key of your house.’ He handed
it over, explaining how he had come into possession of it. If the man
knew what had happened in his house that evening… ‘And Elinor’s gone
down to Gattenden,’ he went on. ‘She had a telegram. The child doesn’t
seem to be well. And she expects you to-morrow.’

‘The devil she does!’ said Philip. ‘But I have at least fifteen
engagements. What’s wrong with the boy?’

‘Unspecified.’

Philip shrugged his shoulders. ‘If it had been serious, my mother-in-law
wouldn’t have telegraphed,’ he said, yielding to the temptation to say
something amusing. ‘She’s like that. She’ll. take a case of double
pneumonia with perfect calm and then get terribly excited about a
headache or a pain in the belly.’ He interrupted himself to order an
omelette and half a bottle of Moselle. Still, Philip reflected, the boy
hadn’t been very flourishing these last weeks. He rather wished he
hadn’t yielded to the temptation. And what he had said hadn’t really
been in the least amusing. Wanting to be amusing—that was his chief
literary defect. His books would be much better if he would allow them
to be much duller. He sank into a rather gloomy silence.

‘These children!’ said Spandrell. ‘If you will go in for them….’

‘still, it must be wonderful to have a child,’ said Burlap with proper
wistfulness. ‘I often wish…’

Rampion interrupted him. ‘It must be still more wonderful to _be_ one.
When one’s grown up, I mean.’ He grinned.

‘What do you do about _your_ children?’ asked Spandrell.

‘As little as I can. Unfortunately they have to go to school. I only
hope they won’t learn too much. It’d be really awful if they emerged as
little professors stuffed with knowledge, trotting out their smart
little abstract generalizations. They probably will. Just to spite me.
Children generally do spite their parents. Not on purpose, of course,
but unconsciously, because they can’t help it, because the parents have
probably gone too far in one direction and nature’s reacting, trying to
get back to the state of equilibrium. Yes, yes, I can feel it in my
bones. They’ll be professors, the little devils. They’ll be horrid
little scientists. Like your friend Illidge,’ he said, turning to
Spandrell, who started uncomfortably at the name and was annoyed that he
should have started. ‘Horrid little brains that do their best to
suppress the accompanying hearts and bowels.’

Spandrell smiled his significant, rather melodramatically-ironic smile.
‘Young Illidge hasn’t succeeded in suppressing his heart and bowels,’ he
said. ‘Not by a long chalk.’

‘Of course not. Nobody can suppress them. All that happens in the
process is that they’re transformed from living organs into offal. And
why are they transformed? In the interests of what? Of a lot of silly
knowledge and irrelevant abstractions.’

‘Which are after all quite amusing in themselves,’ said Philip, breaking
his silence to come to the rescue of the intellect. ‘Making
generalizations and pursuing knowledge are amusements. Among the most
entertaining, to my mind.’ Philip went on to develop his hedonistic
justification of the mental life. ‘So why be so hard on our little
diversions?’ he concluded. ‘You don’t denounce golf; so why should you
denounce the sports of the highbrows?’

‘That’s fairly rudimentary, isn’t it?’ said Rampion. ‘The tree shall be
known by its fruits. The fruits of golf are either non-existent,
harmless or positively beneficial. A healthy liver, for example—that’s a
very fine fruit. Whereas the fruits of intellectualism—my God!’ He made
a grimace. ‘Look at them. The whole of our industrial
civilization—that’s their fruit. The morning paper, the radio, the
cinema, all fruits. Tanks and trinitrotoluol; Rockefeller and
Mond—fruits again. They’re all the result of the systematically
organized, professional intellectualism of the last two hundred years.
And you expect me to approve of your amusements? But, I tell you, I
prefer bull-fighting. What’s the torture of a few animals and the
brutalizing of a few hundred spectators compared to the ruining and
befouling and degrading of a whole world? Which is what you highbrows
have done since you professionalized and organized your amusements.’

‘Come, come,’ said Philip. ‘The picture’s a little lurid. And anyhow,
even if it were accurate, the highbrows can’t be held responsible for
the applications other people have made of their results.’

‘They _are_ responsible. Because they brought the other people up in
their own damned intellectualist tradition. After all, the other people
are only highbrows on another plane. A business man is just a man of
science who happens to be rather stupider than the real man of science.
He’s living just as one-sidedly and intellectually, as far as his
intellect goes, as the other one, And the fruit of that is inner
psychological degeneration. For of course,’ he added parenthetically,
‘the fruits of your amusements aren’t merely the external apparatus of
modern industrial life. They’re an inward decay; they’re infantilism and
degeneracy and all sorts of madness and primitive reversion. No, no, I
have no patience with your precious amusements of the mind. You’d be
doing far less harm if you were playing golf.’

‘But truth?’ queried Burlap, who had been listening to the discussion
without speaking. ‘What about truth?

Spandrell nodded approval. ‘Isn’t that worth looking for?’

‘Certainly,’ said Rampion. ‘But not where Philip and his scientific and
scholarly friends are looking for it. After all, the only truth that can
be of any interest to us, or that we can know, is a human truth. And to
discover that, you must look for it with the whole being, not with a
specialized part of it. What the scientists are trying to get at is
nonhuman truth. Not that they can ever completely succeed; for not even
a scientist can completely cease to be human. But they can go some way
towards abstracting themselves from the human world of reality. By
torturing their brains they can get a faint notion of the universe as it
would seem if looked at through nonhuman eyes. What with their quantum
theory, wave mechanics, relativity and all the rest of it, they do
really seem to have got a little way outside humanity. Well, what the
devil’s the good of that?’

‘Apart from the fun of the thing,’ said Philip, ‘the good may be some
astonishing practical discovery, like the secret of disintegrating the
atom and the liberation of endless supplies of energy.’

‘And the consequent reduction of human beings to absolute imbecility and
absolute subservience to their machines,’ jeered Rampion. ‘I know your
paradises. But the point for the moment is truth. This nonhuman truth
that the scientists are trying to get at with their intellects—it’s
utterly irrelevant to ordinary human living. Our truth, the relevant
human truth is something you discover by living—living completely, with
the whole man. The results of your amusements, Philip, all these famous
theories about the cosmos and their practical applications—they’ve got
nothing whatever to do with the only truth that matters. And the
nonhuman truth isn’t merely irrelevant; it’s dangerous. It distracts
people’s attention from the important human truth. It makes them falsify
their experience in order that lived reality may fit in with abstract
theory. For example, it’s an established nonhuman truth—or at least it
was established in my young days—that secondary qualities have no real
existence. The man who takes that seriously denies himself, destroys the
whole fabric of his life as a human being. For human beings happen to be
so arranged that secondary qualities are, for them, the only real ones.
Deny them and you commit suicide.’

‘But in practice,’ said Philip, ‘nobody does deny them.’

‘Not completely,’ Rampion agreed. ‘Because it can’t be done. A man can’t
abolish his sensations and feelings completely without physically
killing himself. But he can disparage them after the event. And, in
fact, that’s what a great number of intelligent and welleducated people
do—disparage the human in the interests of the nonhuman. Their motive’s
different from that of the Christians; but the result’s the same. A sort
of self-destruction. Always the same,’ he went on with a sudden outburst
of anger in his voice. ‘Every attempt at being something better than a
man—the result’s always the same. Death, some sort of death. You try to
be more than you are by nature and you kill something in yourself and
become much less. I’m so tired of all this rubbish about the higher life
and moral and intellectual progress and living for ideals and all the
rest of it. It all leads to death. Just as surely as living for money.
Christians and moralists and cultured aesthetes, and bright young
scientists and Smilesian business men—all the poor little human frogs
trying to blow themselves up into bulls of pure spirituality, pure
idealism, pure efficiency, pure conscious intelligence, and just going
pop, ceasing to be anything but the fragments of a little frog—decaying
fragments at that. The whole thing’s a huge stupidity, a huge disgusting
lie. Your little stink-pot of a St. Francis, for example.’ He turned to
Burlap, who protested. ‘Just a little stink-pot,’ Rampion insisted. ‘A
silly vain little man trying to blow himself up into a Jesus and only
succeeding in killing whatever sense or decency there was in him, only
succeeding in turning himself into the nasty smelly fragments of a real
human being. Going about getting thrills of excitement out of licking
lepers! Ugh! The disgusting little pervert! He thinks himself too good
to kiss a woman; he wants to be above anything so vulgar as natural
healthy pleasure, and the only result is that he kills whatever core of
human decency he ever had in him and becomes a smelly little pervert who
can only get a thrill out of licking lepers’ ulcers. Not curing the
lepers, mind you. Just licking them. For his own amusement. Not theirs.
It’s revolting!’

Philip leaned back in his chair and laughed. But Rampion turned on him
in a fury.

‘You may laugh,’ he said.

‘But don’t imagine you’re any better, really. You and your intellectual,
scientific friends. You’ve killed just as much of yourselves as the
Christian maniacs. Shall I read you your programme?’ He picked up the
book that was lying beside him on the table and began to turn the pages.
‘I came upon it just now, as I was coming here in the ‘bus. Here we
are.’ He began to read, pronouncing the French words carefully and
clearly. ‘_Plus un obstacle materiel toutes les rapidites gagnees par la
science et la richesse. Pas une tare a l’independance. Voir un crime de
lese-moi dans toute frequentation, homme ou pays, qui ne serait pas
expressement voulu. L’energie, le recueillement, la tension de la
solitude, les transporter dans ses rapports avec de vrais semblables.
Pas d’amour peut-etre, mais des amities rares, difficiles, exaltees,
nerveuses; vivre comme on revivrait en esprit de detachement,
d’inquietude et de revanche_.’ Rampion closed the book and looked up.
‘That’s your programme,’ he said to Philip. ‘Formulated by Marie Leneru
in 1901. Very brief and neat and complete. And, my God, what a horror!
No body, no contact with the material world, no contact with human
beings except through the intellect, no love…’

‘We’ve changed _that_ a little since 1901,’ said Philip, smiling.

‘Not really. You’ve admitted promiscuous fornication, that’s all. But
not love, not the natural contact and flow, not* the renunciation of
mental selfconsciousness, not the abandonment to instinct. No, no. You
stick to your conscious will. Everything must be _expressement voulu_,
all the time. And the connections must be purely mental. And life must
be lived, not as though it were life in a world of living people, but as
though it were solitary recollection and fancy and meditation. An
endless masturbation, like Proust’s horrible great book. That’s the
higher life. Which is the euphemistic name of incipient death. It’s
significant, it’s symbolic that that Leneru woman was deaf and purblind.
The outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual truth. Poor
creature! She had some excuse for spirituality. But the other
HigherLifers, the ones who haven’t any physical defect—they’re not so
forgivable. They’ve maimed themselves deliberately, for fun. It’s a pity
they don’t develop visible hunch-backs or wall-eyes. One would know
better who one was dealing with.’

‘Quite,’ said Philip, nodding, and laughed with an affectation of
amusement that was meant to cover the embarrassment he felt at Rampion’s
references to physical disability. ‘Quite.’ Nobody should think that,
because he had a game leg, he didn’t entirely appreciate the justice of
Rampion’s remarks about deformity.

The irrelevant loudness of his laugh made Rampion glance questioningly
at him. What was up? He couldn’t be bothered to discover.

‘It’s all a damned lie,’ he went on, ‘and an idiotic lie at that—all
this pretending to be more than human. Idiotic because it never comes
off. You try to be more than human, but you only succeed in making
yourself less than human. Always…’

‘Hear, hear!’ said Philip. ‘“We walk on earth and have no need of
wings.”’ And suddenly he heard his father’s loud voice saying, ‘I had
wings. I had wings’; he saw his flushed face and feverishly pink
pyjamas. Ludicrous and deplorable. ‘Do you know who that’s by?’ he went
on. ‘That’s the last line of the poem I wrote for the Newdigate prize at
Oxford, when I was twenty-one. The subject was “King Arthur,” if I
remember rightly. Needless to say I didn’t get the prize. But it’s a
good line.’

‘A pity you didn’t live up to it,’ said Rampion, ‘instead of whoring
after abstractions. But of course, there’s nobody like the lover of
abstraction for denouncing abstractions. He knows by experience how
lifedestroying they are. The ordinary man can afford to take them in his
stride. He can afford to have wings too, so long as he also remembers
that he’s got feet. It’s when people strain themselves to fly all the
time that they go wrong. They’re ambitious of being angels; but all they
succeed in being is either cuckoos and geese on the one hand or else
disgusting vultures and carrion crows on the other.’

‘But all this,’ said Spandrell, breaking a long silence, ‘is just the
gospel of animalism. You’re just advising us to behave like beasts.’

‘I’m advising you to behave like human beings,’ said Rampion. ‘Which is
slightly different. And anyhow,’ he added, ‘it’s a damned sight better
to behave like a beast—a real genuine undomesticated animal, I mean—than
to invent a devil and then behave like one’s invention.’

There was a brief silence.’suppose I were to tell them,’ Spandrell was
thinking,’suppose I were to tell them that I’d just jumped out on a man
from behind a screen and hit him on the side of the head with an Indian
club.’ He took another sip of brandy. ‘No,’ he said aloud, ‘I’m not so
sure of what you say. Behaving like an animal is behaving like a
creature that’s below good and evil. You must know what good is before
you can start behaving like the devil.’ And yet it had all been just
stupid and sordid and disgusting. Yes, and profoundly silly, an enormous
stupidity. At the core of the fruit from the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil he had found, not fire and poison, but only a brown
disgusting putrefaction and a few small maggots. ‘Things exist only in
terms of their opposites,’ he went on, frowning at his own thoughts.
‘The devil implies God.’

‘No doubt,’ said Rampion impatiently. ‘A devil of absolute evil implies
a God of absolute good. Well, what of it? What’s that got to do with you
or me?’

‘A good deal, I should have thought.’

‘It’s got about as much to do with us as the fact of this table being
made of electrons, or an infinite series of waves undulating in an
unknown medium, or a large number of point-events in a four-dimensional
continuum, or whatever else Philip’s scientific friends assure us it is
made of. As much as that. That is to say, practically nothing. Your
absolute God and absolute devil belong to the class of irrelevant
nonhuman facts. The only things that concern us are the little relative
gods and devils of history and geography, the little relative goods and
evils of individual casuistry. Everything else is nonhuman and beside
the point; and if you allow yourself to be influenced by nonhuman,
absolute considerations, then you inevitably make either a fool of
yourself, or a villain, or perhaps both.’

‘But that’s better than making an animal of oneself,’ insisted
Spandrell. ‘I’d rather be a fool or a villain than a bull or a dog.’

‘But nobody’s asking you to be a bull or a dog,’ said Rampion
impatiently. ‘Nobody’s asking you to be anything but a man. A man, mind
you. Not an angel or a devil. A man’s a creature on a tight-rope,
walking delicately, equilibrated, with mind and consciousness and spirit
at one end of his balancing pole and body and instinct and all that’s
unconscious and earthy and mysterious at the other. Balanced. Which is
damnably difficult. And the only absolute he can ever really know is the
absolute of perfect balance. The absoluteness of perfect relativity.
Which is a paradox and nonsense intellectually. But so is all real,
genuine, living truth—just nonsense according to logic. And logic is
just nonsense in the light of living truth. You can choose which you
like, logic or life. It’s a matter of taste. Some people prefer being
dead.’

‘Prefer being dead.’ The words went echoing through Spandrell’s mind.
Everard Webley lying on the floor, trussed up like a chicken. Did he
prefer being dead? ‘All the same,’ he said slowly,’some things must
always remain absolutely and radically wrong. Killing, for example.’ He
wanted to believe that it was more than merely low and sordid and
disgusting. He wanted to believe that it was also terrible and tragic.
‘That’s an absolute wrong.’

‘But why more absolute than anything else?’ said Rampion. ‘There are
circumstances when killing’s obviously necessary and right and
commendable. The only absolutely evil act, so far as I can see, that a
man can perform, is an act against life, against his own integrity. He
does wrong if he perverts himself, if he falsifies his instincts.’

Spandrell was sarcastic. ‘We’re getting back to the’ beasts again,’ he
said. ‘Go ravening round fulfilling all your appetites as you feel them.
Is that the last word in human wisdom?’

‘Well, it isn’t really so stupid as you try to make out,’ said Rampion.
‘If men went about satisfying their instinctive desires only when they
genuinely felt them, like the animals you’re so contemptuous of, they’d
behave a damned sight better than the majority of civilized human beings
behave to-day. It isn’t natural appetite and spontaneous instinctive
desire that make men so beastly—no, “beastly” is the wrong word; it
implies an insult to the animals—so all-too-humanly bad and vicious,
then. It’s the imagination, it’s the intellect, its principles, its
tradition and education. Leave the instincts to themselves and they’ll
do very little mischief. If men made love only when they were carried
away by passion, if they fought only when they were angry or terrified,
if they grabbed at property only when they had need or were swept off
their feet by an uncontrollable desire for possession—why, I assure you,
this world would be a great deal more like the Kingdom of Heaven than it
is under our present Christian-intellectual-scientific dispensation.
It’s not instinct that makes Casanovas and Byrons and Lady Castlemaines;
it’s a prurient imagination artificially tickling up the appetite,
tickling up desires that have no natural existence. If Don Juans and Don
Juanesses only obeyed their desires, they’d have very few affairs. They
have to tickle themselves up imaginatively before they can start being
casually promiscuous. And it’s the same with the other instincts. It’s
not the possessive instinct that’s made modem civilization insane about
money. The possessive instinct has to be kept artificially tickled by
education and tradition and moral principles. The money-grubbers have to
be told that money-grubbing’s natural and noble, that thrift and
industry are virtues, that persuading people to buy things they don’t
want is Christian Service. Their possessive instinct would never be
strong enough to keep them grubbing away from morning till night all
through a lifetime. It has to be kept chronically gingered up by the
imagination and the intellect. And then, think of civilized war. It’s
got nothing to do with spontaneous combativeness. Men have to be
compelled by law and then tickled up by propaganda before they’ll fight.
You’d do more for peace by telling men to obey the spontaneous dictates
of their fighting instincts than by founding any number of Leagues of
Nations.’

‘You’d do still more,’ said Burlap, ‘by telling them to obey Jesus.’

‘No, you wouldn’t. Telling them to obey Jesus is telling them to be more
than human. And, in practice, trying to be more than human always means
succeeding in being less than human. Telling men to obey Jesus literally
is telling them, indirectly, to behave like idiots and finally like
devils. Just consider the examples. Old Tolstoy—a great man who
deliberately turned himself into an idiot by trying to be more than a
great man. Your horrid little St. Francis.’ He turned to Burlap.

‘Another idiot. But already on the verge of diabolism. With the monks of
Thebaid you see the process carried a step further. They went over the
verge. They got to the stage of being devils. Self-torture, destruction
of everything decent and beautiful and living. That was their programme.
They tried to obey Jesus and be more than men; and all they succeeded in
doing was to become the incarnation of pure diabolic destructiveness.
They could have been perfectly decent human beings if they’d just gone
about behaving naturally, in accordance with their instincts. But no,
they wanted to be more than human. So they just became devils. Idiots
first and then devils, imbecile devils. Ugh! ‘ Rampion made a grimace
and shook his head with disgust. ‘And to think,’ he went on indignantly,
‘that the world’s full of these creatures! Not quite so far gone as St.
Anthony and his demons or St. Francis and his halfwits. But of the same
kind. Different only in degree. And all perverted in the same wayby
trying to be nonhuman. Nonhumanly religious, nonhumanly moral,
nonhumanly intellectual and scientific, nonhumanly specialized and
efficient, nonhumanly the business man, nonhumanly avaricious and
property-loving, nonhumanly lascivious and Don Juanesque, nonhumanly the
conscious individual even in love. All perverts. Perverted towards
goodness or badness, towards spirit or flesh; but always away from the
central norm, always away from humanity. The world’s an asylum of
perverts. There are four of them at this table now.’ He looked round
with a grin. ‘A pure little Jesus pervert.’ Burlap forgivingly smiled.
‘An intellectual-aesthetic pervert.’ ‘Thanks for the compliment,’ said
Philip.

‘A morality-philosophy pervert.’ He turned to Spandrell. ‘Quite the
little Stavrogin. Pardon my saying so, Spandrell; but you really are the
most colossal fool.’ He looked intently into his face.

‘Smiling like all the tragic characters of fiction rolled into one! But
it won’t do. It doesn’t conceal the simple-minded zany underneath.’
Spandrell threw back his head and noiselessly laughed. If he knew, he
was thinking, if he knew… But if he knew, would he think him any less of
a fool?

‘Laugh away, old Dostoievsky! But let ife tell you, it’s Stavrogin who
ought to have been called the Idiot, not Mishkin. He was incomparably
the bigger fool, the completer pervert.’

‘And what sort of a fool and pervert is the fourth person at this
table?’ asked Philip.

‘What indeed!’ Rampion shook his head. His fine hair floated up silkily.
He smiled. ‘A pedagogue pervert. A Jeremiah pervert. A
worry-about-the-bloodyold-world pervert. Above all a gibber pervert.’ He
got up. ‘That’s why I’m going home,’ he said. ‘The way I’ve been
talking—it’s really nonhuman. Really scandalous. I’m ashamed. But that’s
the trouble: when you’re up against nonhuman things and people, you
inevitably become nonhuman yourself. It’s all your fault.’ He gave a
final grin, waved goodnight and was gone.

 

__ __

 

Burlap came home to find Beatrice, as usual, waiting up for him.
Sitting—for such was the engagingly childlike habit he had formed during
the last few weeks—on the floor at her feet, his head, with the little
pink tonsure in the middle of the dark curls, against her knee, he
sipped his hot milk and talked of Rampion. An extraordinary man, a great
man, even. Great? queried Beatrice, disapprovingly. She didn’t like to
hear greatness attributed to any living man (the dead were a different
matter; they were dead), unless it was to Denis himself. Hardly _great_,
she insisted jealously. Well, perhaps not quite. But very nearly. If he
hadn’t that strange insensitiveness to spiritual values, that prejudice,
that blind spot. The attitude was comprehensible. Rampion was reacting
against something which had gone too far in one direction; but in the
process of reacting he had gone too far in the other. His incapacity to
understand St. Francis, for example. The grotesque and really hideous
things he could say about the saint. That was extraordinary and
deplorable.

‘What does he say?’ asked Beatrice severely. Since knowing Burlap, she
had taken St. Francis under her protection.

Burlap gave her an account, a little expurgated, of what Rampion had
said. Beatrice was indignant. How could he say such things? How did he
dare? It was an outrage. Yes, it was a defect in him, Burlap admitted, a
real defect. But so few people, he added in charitable palliation, were
born with a real feeling for spiritual beauty. Rampion was an
extraordinary man in many ways, but it was as though he lacked that
extra sense-organ which enables men like St. Francis to see the beauty
that is beyond earthly beauty. In a rudimentary form he himself, he
thought, had the power. How rarely he met anyone who seemed to be like
him! Almost everybody was in this respect a stranger. It was like seeing
normally in a country where most people were colour blind. Didn’t
Beatrice feel that too? For of course she was one of the rare
clear-seeing ones. He had felt it at once, the first time he met her.
Beatrice nodded gravely. Yes, she too felt like that. Burlap smiled up
at her; he knew it. She felt proud and important. Rampion’s idea of
love, for example; Burlap shook his head. So extraordinarily gross and
animal and corporeal.

‘Dreadful,’ said Beatrice feelingly. Denis, she was thinking, was so
different. Tenderly she looked down at the head that reposed, so
trustingly, against her knee. She adored the way his hair curled, and
his very small, beautiful ears, and even the pink bare spot on the top
of his crown. That little pink tonsure was somehow rather engagingly
pathetic. There was a long silence.

Burlap at last profoundly sighed. ‘How tired I am!’ he said.

‘You ought to go to bed.’

‘Too tired even to move.’ He pressed his cheek more heavily against her
knee and shut his eyes.

Beatrice raised her hand, hesitated a moment, dropped it again, then
raised it once more and began to run her fingers soothingly through his
dark curls. There was another long silence.

‘Ah, don’t stop,’ he said, when at last she withdrew her hand. ‘It’s so
comforting. Such a virtue seems to go out from you. You’d almost cured
my headache.’

‘You’ve got a headache?’ asked Beatrice, her solicitude running as usual
to a kind of anger. ‘Then you simply must go to bed,’ she commanded.

‘But I’m so happy here.’

‘No, I insist.’ Her protective motherliness was thoroughly aroused. It
was a bullying tenderness.

‘How cruel you are!’ Burlap complained, rising reluctantly to his feet.
Beatrice was touched with compunction. ‘I’ll stroke your head when
you’re in bed,’ she promised. She too now regretted that soft warm
silence, that speechless intimacy, which her outburst of domineering
solicitude had too abruptly shattered. She justified herself by an
explanation. The headache would return if he didn’t go to sleep the
moment it was cured. And so on.

Burlap had been in bed nearly ten minutes when she came to keep her
promise. She was dressed in a green dressing-gown and her yellow hair
was plaited into a long thick pigtail that swung heavily as she moved,
like the heavy plaited tail of a cart-horse at a show.

‘You look about twelve with that pigtail hanging down your back,’ said
Burlap, enchanted.

Beatrice laughed, rather nervously, and sat down on the edge of the bed.
He raised his hand and took hold of the thick plait. ‘Too charming,’ he
said. ‘It simply invites pulling.’ He gave a little tug at it,
playfully.

‘Look out,’ she warned. ‘I’ll pull back, in spite of your headache.’ She
took hold of one of his dark curls.

‘Pax, pax!’ he begged, reverting to the vocabulary of the preparatory
school. ‘I’ll let go. The real reason,’ he added, ‘why little boys don’t
like fighting with little girls is simply that little girls are so much
more ruthless and ferocious.’

Beatrice laughed again. There was a silence. She felt a little
breathless and fluttering, as one feels when one is anxiously expecting
something to happen. ‘Head bad?’

she asked

‘Rather bad.’ She stretched out a hand and touched his forehead.

‘Your hand’s magical,’ he said. With a quick unexpected movement he
wriggled round sideways under the sheets and laid his head on her lap.
‘There,’ he whispered and, with a sigh of contentment, closed his eyes.

For a moment Beatrice was taken aback, almost frightened. That dark head
lying hard and heavy on her thighs—it seemed strange, terrifying. She
had to suppress a little shudder before she could feel glad at the
confiding childishness of his movement. She began stroking his forehead,
stroking his scalp through the thick dark curls. Time passed. The soft
warm silence enveloped them once more, the dumb intimacy of contact was
reestablished. She was no longer domineering in her protective
solicitude, only tender. The armour of her hardness was as though melted
away from her, melted away in this warm intimacy along with the terrors
which made it necessary.

Burlap sighed again. He was in a kind of blissful doze of sensual
passivity.

‘Better?’ she asked in a soft whisper.

‘Still rather bad on the side,’ he whispered back. ‘Just over the ear.’
And he rolled his head over so that she could more easily reach the
painful spot, rolled it over so that his face was pressed against her
belly, her soft belly that stirred so livingly with her breathing, that
was so warm and yielding against his face.

At the touch of his face against her body Beatrice felt a sudden renewal
of those spasmodic creepings of apprehension. Her flesh was terrified by
the nearness of that physical intimacy. But as Burlap did not stir, as
he made no dangerous gesture, no movement towards a closer contact, the
terrors died gradually down and their flutterings served only to enhance
and intensify that wonderful warm emotion of tenderness which succeeded
them. She ran her fingers through his hair, again and again. The warmth
of his breathing was against her belly. She shivered a little; her
happiness fluttered with apprehensions and anticipations. Her flesh
trembled, but was somehow joyful; was afraid and yet curious; shrank,
but took warmth at the contact and even, through its terrors, timidly
desired.

‘Better?’ she whispered again.

He made a little movement with his head and pressed his face closer to
her soft flesh.

‘Shall I stop now?’ she went on, ‘shall I go away?’

Burlap raised his head and looked at her. ‘No, no,’ he implored. ‘Don’t
go. Not yet. Don’t break the magic. Stay here for a moment longer. Lie
down here for a moment under the quilt. For a moment.’

Without speaking she stretched herself out beside him and he drew the
quilt over her, he turned out the light.

The fingers that caressed her arm under its wide sleeve touched
delicately, touched spiritually and as it were disembodiedly, like the
fingers of those inflated rubber gloves that brush so thrillingly
against one’s face in the darkness of seances, bringing comfort from the
Great Beyond and a message of affection from the loved ones who have
passed over. To caress and yet be a spiritualized rubber glove at a
seance, to make love but as though from the Great Beyond—that was
Burlap’s talent. Softly, patiently, with an infinite disembodied
gentleness he went on caressing. Beatrice’s armour was melted quite
away. It was the soft younggirlish, tremulous core of her that Burlap
caressed with that delicate touch of spirit fingers from the Great
Beyond. Her armour was gone; but she felt so wonderfully safe with
Denis. She felt no fears, or at least only such faint breathless
flutterings of her still almost childish flesh as served to quicken her
happiness. She felt so wonderfully safe even when—after what had seemed
a delicious eternity of patiently repeated caresses from wrist to
shoulder and back again—the spirit hand reached out of the Beyond and
touched her breast. Delicately, almost disembodiedly it touched, like a
skin of rubber stuffed with air; spiritually it slid over the rounded
flesh, and its angelic fingers lingered along the skin. At the first
touch the round breast shuddered; it had its private terrors within
Beatrice’s general happiness and sense of security. But patiently,
gently, unalarmingly, the spirit hand repeated its caress again, again,
till the reassured and at last eager breast longed for its return and
her whole body was alive with the tingling ramifications of the breast’s
desires. In the darkness the eternities prolonged themselves.


CHAPTER XXXV

Next day, instead of whimpering with every return of pain, the child
began to scream—cry after shrill cry, repeated with an almost clockwork
regularity of recurrence for what seemed to Elinor an eternity of hours.
Like the scream of a rabbit in a trap. But a thousand times worse; for
it was a child that screamed, not an animal; _her_ child, trapped and in
agony. She felt as though she too were trapped. Trapped by her own utter
helplessness to alleviate his pain. Trapped by that obscure sense of
guilt, that irrational belief (but haunting in spite of its
irrationality), that ever more closely pressing and suffocating
conviction that it was all, in some inscrutable fashion, _her_ fault, a
punishment, malevolently vicarious, for _her_ offence. Caged within her
own snare, but outside his, she sat there holding the small hand as it
were between invisible bars, unable to come to his aid, waiting through
the child’s quickbreathed and feverish silence for the recurrence of
that dreadful cry, for yet another sight of that suddenly distorted
face, that shuddering little body racked by a pain which was somehow of
her own inflicting.

The doctor came at last with his opiates.

Philip arrived by the twelve-twenty. He had been in no hurry to get up
and come by an earlier train. It annoyed him to have to leave town. His
late arrival was in the nature of a protest. Elinor must really learn
not to make such a fuss every time the child had a stomach-ache. It was
absurd. S

he met him at the door as he stepped out of the car, so white and
haggard, and with such darkcircled and desperate eyes, that he was
shocked to see her.

‘But you’re the one who’s ill,’ he said anxiously ‘What is it?’

She did not answer for a moment, but stood holding him, her face hidden
on his shoulder, pressing herself against him. ‘Dr. Crowther says it’s
meningitis,’ she whispered at last.

At halfpast five arrived the nurse for whom Mrs. Bidlake had telegraphed
in the morning. The evening papers came by the same train; the chauffeur
returned with a selection of them. On the front page was the
announcement of the discovery, in -his own motor car, of Everard
Webley’s body. It was to old John Bidlake, dozing listlessly in the
library, that the papers were first brought. He read and was so excited
by the news of another’s death that he entirely forgot all his
preoccupations with his own. Rejuvenated, he sprang to his feet and ran,
waving the paper, into the hall. ‘Philip!’ he shouted in the strong
resonant voice that had not been his for weeks past. ‘Philip! Come here
at once!’

Philip, who had just come out of the sickroom and was standing in the
corridor, talking to Mrs. Bidlake, hurried down to see what was the
matter. John Bidlake held out the paper with an expression almost of
triumph on his face. ‘Read that,’ he commanded importantly.

When Elinor was told the news, she almost fainted.

 

__ __

 

‘I believe he’s better this morning, Dr. Crowther.’

Dr. Crowther fingered his tie to feel if it were straight. He was a
small man, brisk and almost too neatly dressed. ‘Quieter, eh? Sleeps?’
he enquired telegraphically. His conversation had been reduced to
bed-rock efficiency. It was just comprehensible and nothing more. No
energy was wasted on the uttering of unnecessary words. Dr. Crowther
spoke as Ford cars are made. Elinor disliked him intensely, but believed
in him for just those qualities of perky efficiency and selfconfidence
which she detested.

‘Yes, that’s it,’ she said. ‘He’s sleeping.’

‘He would be,’ said Dr. Crowther, nodding, as though he had known
everything in advance-which indeed he had; for the disease was running
its invariable course.

Elinor accompanied him up the stairs. ‘Is it a good sign?’ she asked in
a voice that implored a favourable answer.

Dr. Crowther pushed out his lips, cocked his head a little on one side,
then shrugged his shoulders. ‘Well…’ he said non-committally and was
silent. He had saved at least five foot-pounds of energy by not
explaining that, in meningitis, a phase of depression follows the
initial phase of excitement.

The child now dozed away his days in a kind of stupor, suffering no pain
(Elinor was thankful for that), but disquietingly unresponsive to what
was going on about him, as though he were not fully alive. When he
opened his eyes she saw that the pupils were so enormously dilated that
there was hardly any iris left. Little Phil’s blue and mischievous
regard had turned to expressionless blackness. The light which had
caused him such an agony during the first days of his illness no longer
troubled him. No longer did he start and tremble at every sound. Indeed,
the child did not seem to hear when he was spoken to. Two days passed
and then, quite suddenly and with a horrible sinking sense of
apprehension, Elinor realized that he was almost completely deaf.

‘Deaf?’ echoed Dr. Crowther, when she told him of her dreadful
discovery. ‘Common symptom.’

‘But isn’t there anything to be done about it?’ she asked. The trap was
closing on her again, the trap from which she had imagined herself free
when that terrible screaming had quieted into silence.

Dr. Crowther shook his head, briskly, but only once each way. He did not
speak. A foot-pound saved is a foot-pound gained.

‘But we can’t let him be deaf,’ she said, when the doctor was gone,
appealing with a kind of incredulous despair to her husband. ‘We can’t
let him be deaf.’ She knew he could do nothing; and yet she hoped. She
realized the horror; but she refused to believe in it.

‘But if the doctor says there isn’t anything to be done…’

‘But deaf?’ she kept repeating, questioningly.’deaf, Phil? Deaf?’

‘Perhaps it’ll pass off by itself,’ he suggested consolingly and
wondered, as he spoke the words, whether she still imagined that the
child would recover.

Early next morning when, in her dressing-gown, she tiptoed upstairs for
nurse’s report on the night, she found the child already awake. One
eyelid was wide open and the eye, all pupil, was looking straight up at
the ceiling; the other was half shut in a permanent wink that imparted
to the thin and shrunken little face an expression of ghastly
facetiousness.

‘He can’t open it,’ the nurse explained. ‘It’s paralysed.’

Between those long and curly lashes, which she had so often envied him,
Elinor could see that the eyeball had rolled away to the exterior corner
of the eye and was staring out sideways in a fixed unseeing squint.

 

__ __

 

‘Why the devil,’ said Cuthbert Arkwright, in the tone of one who has a
personal grievance, ‘why the devil doesn’t Quarles come back to London?’
He hoped to extort from him a preface to his new illustrated edition of
the Mimes of Herondas.

The rustication, Willie Weaver explained polysyllabically, was not
voluntary. ‘His child’s ill,’ he added, uttering his little cough of
self-applause; ‘it seems very reluctant, as they would say in Denmark,
to absent itself from felicity much longer.’

‘Well, I wish it would hurry up about it,’ grumbled Arkwright. He
frowned. ‘Perhaps I’d better try to get hold of someone else for my
preface.’

At Gattenden the days had been like the successive stages of an
impossibly horrible dream. When he had been deaf for a couple of days,
little Phil ceased also to see. The squinting eyes were quite blind. And
after nearly a week’s respite there was a sudden recurrence of the pain
of the first days; he began to scream. Later he was seized several times
with violent attacks of convulsions; it was as though a devil had
entered into him and were torturing him from within. Then, one side of
his face and half his body became paralysed and the flesh began to waste
almost visibly from off his bones, like wax melting away in the heat of
some inward and invisible fire. Trapped by her helplessness and by that
horrible sense of guilt, which the news of Everard’s murder had
enormously intensified, Elinor sat by her child’s bed and watched the
phases of the malady succeeding one another—each one worse, it seemed to
her, than the last, each more atrociously impossible. Yes, impossible.
For such things could not, did not happen. Not to oneself at any rate.
One’s own child was not gratuitously tortured and deformed before one’s
eyes. The man who loved one and whom one had (oh wrongly, guiltily and
as it had turned out, fatally!) almost made up one’s mind to love in
return, was not suddenly and mysteriously murdered. Events like that
simply did not occur. They were an impossibility. And yet, in spite of
this impossibility, Everard was dead and for little Phil each day
reserved a new and more excruciating torment. As in a nightmare, the
impossible was being actualized.

Outwardly Elinor was very calm, silent and efficient. When Nurse Butler
complained that the meals brought up to the sickroom got very cold on
the way (and might she have Indian tea, as China didn’t agree with her
digestion?), she ordered Lipton and arranged, in spite of Dobbs’s
passionate objections, that lunch and dinner should be brought up in the
water-heated breakfast dishes. All that Dr. Crowther telegraphically
ordered her to do, she did, punctually, except to take more rest. Even
Nurse Butler had grudgingly to admit that she was thorough and
methodical. But she backed up the doctor, partly because she wanted to
rule alone and undisputed in the sickroom and partly disinterestedly,
for Elinor’s own sake. That calmness, she could see, was the result of
effort; it was the rigidity of extreme tension. Philip and Mrs. Bidlake
were no less insistent that she should rest; but Elinor would not listen
to them.

‘But I’m perfectly all right,’ she protested, denying the evidence of
her pallor and of those dark circles round her eyes.

She would have liked, if it had been humanly possible, never to eat or
sleep at all. With Everard dead and the child in torture before her
eyes, eating and sleeping seemed almost cynical. But the very possession
of a body is a cynical comment on the soul and all its ways. It is a
piece of cynicism, however, which the soul must accept, whether it likes
it or no. Elinor duly went to bed at eleven and came down to meals—if
only that she might have strength to endure yet more unhappiness. To
suffer was the only thing she could do; she wanted to suffer as much and
intensely as she could.

‘Well, how’s the boy?’ her father would ask perfunctorily, over his
chicken-broth, when they met at lunch. And when she had given some vague
reply, he would hastily pass on to another topic.

John Bidlake had steadily refused, throughout his grandchild’s illness,
to come near the sickroom. He had always hated the spectacle of
suffering and disease, of anything that might remind him of the pain and
death he so agonizingly dreaded for himself. And in this case he had a
special reason for terror. For, with that talent for inventing private
superstitions which had always distinguished him, he had secretly
decided that his own fate was bound up with the child’s. If the child
recovered, so would he. If not… Once formulated, the superstition could
not be disregarded. ‘It’s absurd,’ he tried to assure himself. ‘It’s
utterly senseless and idiotic.’ But every unfavourable bulletin from the
nursery made him shudder. To have entered the room might have been to
discover, quite gratuitously, the most horrible confirmation of his
forebodings. And perhaps (who knows?) the child’s sufferings might in
some mysterious way infect himself. He did not even wish to hear of the
boy. Except for that single brief enquiry at lunch-time, he never
alluded to him and whenever someone else spoke of him, he either changed
the subject of conversation (surreptitiously touching wood as he did so)
or else withdrew out of earshot. After a few days the others learned to
understand and respect his weakness. Moved by that sentiment which
decrees that condemned criminals shall be treated with a special
kindness, they were careful, in his presence, to avoid any allusion to
what was happening upstairs.

Philip, meanwhile, hovered uneasily about the house. From time to time
he went up to the nursery; but after having made an always vain attempt
to persuade Elinor to come away, he would go down again in a few
minutes.

He could not have borne to sit there for long at a time. The futility of
Elinor’s helpless vigil appalled him; he had at all times a dread of
doing nothing and in circumstances like these a long spell of mental
disoccupation would have been a torture. In the intervals between his
visits to the sickroom, he read, he tried to write. And then there was
that affair of Gladys Helmsley to be attended to. The child’s illness
had made a journey to London impossible and so absolved him from the
necessity of personally interviewing Gladys. It was to Willie
Weaver—Willie, who was a solicitor as well as the most reliable of
friends—that he delegated the business. With what immense relief! He had
really dreaded the encounter with Gladys. Willie, on the contrary,
seemed to enjoy the business. ‘My dear Philip,’ he wrote, ‘I have been
doing my best for your Aged Parent; but even my best promises to be
somewhat expensive. The lady has all the endearing young charms (only
professional etiquette prevented me from attempting a little playful
superfoetation on my own account); but she is also a business woman.
Moreover, her feelings about the Aged P. are ferocious. Rather
justifiably so, I must confess to thinking, after what I heard from her.
Do you know where he feeds his paramours? Chez Lyons. The man must be a
barmecidal maniac, as I said to the young lady when she told me.
(Needless to say, she didn’t understand the witticism; so I offer it to
you, on the basis of a five per cent. commission on all royalties
accruing from the sales of any work or works into which you may
introduce it.) Tell the Aged P. that, next time, he must really spend a
little more on his amusements; it’ll probably be cheaper in the long
run. Advise him to indulge his gulosity as well as his lubricity; bid
him control his thrift and temperance. I return to the attack to-morrow,
when I hope to get the terms of the peace treaty set down in black and
white. So sorry to hear your offspring’s not well. Yours, W. W.’

Philip smiled as he read the letter, and ‘Thank goodness,’ he thought,
‘that’s settled.’ But the last phrase made him feel ashamed of his
amusement and his sense of relief. ‘What bottomless selfishness’ he
reproached himself. And as though to make some amends, he limped
upstairs to the nursery to sit for a while with Elinor. Little Phil lay
in a stupor. His face was almost unrecognizably fleshless and shrunken,
and the paralysed side of it was twisted into a kind of crooked grin.
His little hands plucked unceasingly at the bedclothes. He breathed now
very quickly, now so slowly that one began to wonder whether he was
breathing at all.

Nurse Butler had gone to take a nap; for her nights were half sleepless.
They sat together in silence. Philip took his wife’s hand and held it.
Measured by that light irregular breathing from the bed, time slowly
passed.

In the garden John Bidlake was painting—his wife had finally induced him
to make the experiment—for the first time since his arrival at
Gattenden. And for the first time, forgetting himself and his illness,
he was happy. What an enchantment! he was thinking. The landscape was
all curves and bulges and round recessions, like a body. Orbism, by God,
orbism! The clouds were cherubic backsides; and that sleek down was a
Nereid’s glaucous belly; and Gattenden Punch Bowl was an enormous navel;
and each of those elms in the middle distance was a paunchy great
Silenus straight out of Jordaens; and these absurd round bushes of
evergreen in the foreground were the multitudinous breasts of a green
Diana of the Ephesians. Whole chunks of anatomy in leaves and vapour and
swelling earth. Marvellous! And by God, what one could make of it! Those
seraphic buttocks should be the heavenly reflection of Diana’s breasts;
one orbic theme, with variations; the buttocks slanting outwards and
across the canvas towards the surface of the picture; the breasts
slanting inwards, towards the interior. And the sleek belly should be a
transverse and horizontal reconciliation of the two diagonal movements,
with the great Sileni, zigzagging a little, disposed in front of it. And
in the foreground on the left there’d be the silhouetted edge of the
Wellingtonia, imaginatively transplanted there to stop the movements
from running right out of the picture; and the stone griffon would come
in very nicely on the right—for this was to be a closed composition, a
little universe with boundaries beyond which the imagination was not to
be allowed to stray. And the eye was to gaze as through an imaginary
tunnel, unable to stray from the focal point in the middle of the great
navel of Gattenden Punch Bowl, round which all the other fragments of
divine anatomy would be harmoniously grouped. ‘By God,’ John Bidlake
said to himself, swearing aloud in pure satisfaction of spirit, ‘by God!
And he began to paint with a kind of fury.

Wandering through the garden in her endless crusade against weeds, Mrs.
Bidlake halted for a moment behind him and looked over his shoulder.

‘Admirable,’ she said, as much in comment on her husband’s activity as
on its pictorial results.

She moved away and, having uprooted a dandelion, paused and, with eyes
shut, began to repeat her own name, ‘Janet Bidlake, Janet Bidlake, Janet
Bidlake,’ again and again, until the syllables had lost all significance
for her and had become as mysterious, meaningless and arbitrary as the
words of a necromancer’s spell. Abracadabra, Janet Bidlake—was she
really herself? did she even exist? and the trees? and people? this
moment and the past? everything….?

Meanwhile, in the nursery, an extraordinary thing had happened. Suddenly
and without warning, little Phil had opened his eyes and looked about
him. They met his mother’s. As well as his twisted face would permit
him, he smiled.

‘But he can see!’ cried Elinor. And kneeling down by the bed, she put
her arms round the child and began to kiss him with a love that was
quickened by an outburst of passionate gratitude. After all these days
of squinting blindness, she was thankful to him, she was profoundly
grateful for that look of answering intelligence in his eyes, that poor
twisted essay at a smile. ‘My darling,’ she repeated and, for the first
time for days, she began to cry. She averted her face, so that the child
should not see her tears, got up and walked away from the bed. ‘Too
stupid,’ she said apologetically to her husband, as she wiped her eyes.
‘But I can’t help it.’

‘I’m hungry,’ said little Phil suddenly.

Elinor was down on her knees again beside the bed. ‘What would you like
to eat, my darling?’ But the child did not hear her question.

‘I’m hungry,’ he repeated.

‘He’s still deaf,’ said Philip.

‘But he can see again, he can speak.’ Elinor’s face was transfigured.
She had known all the time, in spite of everything, that it was
impossible he shouldn’t get well. Quite impossible. And now she was
being proved right. ‘Stay here,’ she went on. ‘I’ll run and get some
milk.’ She hurried out of the room.

Philip remained at the bedside. He stroked the child’s hand and smiled.
Little. Phil smiled back. He too began to believe that there really
might have been a miracle.

‘Draw me something,’ the child commanded.

Philip pulled out his fountain pen and, on the back of an old letter,
scribbled one of those landscapes full of elephants and airships, trains
and flying pigs and steamers, for which his son had’such a special
partiality. An elephant came into collision with a train. Feebly, but
with a manifest enjoyment, little Phil began to laugh. There could be no
doubt of it; the miracle had really happened.

Elinor returned with some milk and a plate of jelly. There was colour in
her cheeks, her eyes were bright and the face which, all these days, had
been drawn and rigidly set had in a moment recovered all its mobility of
expression. It was as though she had suddenly come to life again.

‘Come and look at the elephants,’ said little Phil. ‘So funny!’ And
between each sip of milk, each spoonful of jelly, Philip had to show him
the latest additions to his crowded landscape—whales in the sea, and
divers being pinched by lobsters, two submarines fighting and a
hippopotamus in a balloon; a volcano in eruption, cannons, a lighthouse,
a whole army of pigs.

‘Why don’t you ever say anything?’ the child suddenly asked.

They looked at one another. ‘He can’t hear us,’ said Philip.

Elinor’s expression of happiness was momentarily clouded. ‘Perhaps
to-morrow,’ she said. ‘If the blindness has gone to-day why shouldn’t he
hear to-morrow?’

‘Why do you whisper?’ said the child. The only answer she could make was
to kiss him and stroke his forehead.

‘We mustn’t tire him,’ said Elinor at last. ‘I think he ought to go to
sleep.’ She shook up his pillow, she smoothed the sheets, she bent over
him. ‘Goodbye, my little darling.’ He could answer at least to her
smile.

Elinor drew the curtains and they tiptoed out. In the passage she turned
and waited for her husband to come up to her. Philip put his arm round
her and she pressed herself against him with a great sigh.

‘I was beginning to be afraid,’ she said, ‘that the nightmare was going
on for ever. To the end.’

Luncheon that day was like a festival of resurrection, an Easter
sacrament. Elinor was unfrozen, a woman of flesh again, not of stone.
And poor Miss Fulkes, in whom the symptoms of misery had been identical
with those of a very bad cold in the head accompanied by pimples,
reassumed an almost human appearance and was moved to all but hysterical
laughter by the jokes and anecdotes of the resuscitated John Bidlake.
The old man had come in, rubbing his hands.

‘What a landscape!’ he exclaimed as he took his seat.’so juicy, so
succulent, if you know what I mean, so fleshy—there’s no other word. It
makes one’s mouth water to look at it. Perhaps that’s why I’m so
ravenously hungry.’

‘Here’s your broth,’ said Mrs. Bidlake.

‘But you can’t expect me to do a morning’s painting on slops!’ And in
spite of protests, he insisted on eating a cutlet.

The news that little Phil was better increased his satisfaction. (He
touched wood three times with both hands at once.) Besides, he was
really very fond of his grandchild. He began to talk, and it was the old
Gargantuan Bidlake who spoke. Miss Fulkes laughed so violently at one of
his anecdotes about Whistler that she choked and had to hide her face in
her napkin. In the vague benevolence even of Mrs. Bidlake’s smile there
was a hint of something like hilarity.

At about three o’clock John Bidlake began to feel a familiar discomfort,
growing momently more acute, in the region of his midriff. He was shaken
by spasmodic hiccoughs. He tried to go on painting; but all his pleasure
in the work had evaporated. Diana’s breasts and the angel’s
hind-quarters had lost all their charm for him. ‘A slight obstruction at
the pylorus.’ Sir Herbert’s medical phrases re-echoed in his memory.
‘The contents of the stomach…a certain difficulty in passing into the
duodenum.’ After a particularly violent hiccough, he put down his
brushes and walked into the house to lie down.

‘Where’s father?’ Elinor enquired, when she came down to tea.

Mrs. Bidlake shook her head. ‘He’s not feeling very well again.’

‘Oh, dear.’

There was a silence, and it was as though death were suddenly in the
room with them. But, after all, he was old, Elinor reflected; the thing
was inevitable. He might be worse, but little Phil was better; and that
was all that really mattered. She began to talk to her mother about the
garden. Philip lighted a cigarette.

There was a knock at the door. It was the housemaid with a message from
Nurse Butler: would they please come up at once.

The convulsions had been very violent; the wasted body was without
strength. By the time they reached the nursery, little Phil was dead.


CHAPTER XXXVI

The Webley Mystery, as the papers lost no time in calling it, was
complete. There was no clue. At the offices of the British Freemen
nobody knew anything. Webley had left at the usual hour and by his usual
mode of conveyance. He was not in the habit of talking to his
subordinates about his private affairs; nobody had been told where he
was going. And outside the office nobody had observed the car from the
time Webley had told his chauffeur he could go and the time when the
policeman in St. James’s Square began to wonder, at about midnight, how
much longer it was going to be left there unattended. Nobody had noticed
the car being parked, nobody had remarked the driver as he left it. The
only finger-prints on the paintwork and the steering wheel were those of
the dead man. The person who drove the car after the murder had
evidently worn gloves. No, there was no clue. Direct evidence was
absolutely lacking. The police did what they could with the indirect.
The fact that the body had not been robbed seemed obviously to point to
a political motive for the crime. At the offices of the British Freemen
reposed a whole collection of threatening letters. Webley received two
or three of them every week. ‘They’re my favourite reading,’ he was fond
of saying. A search was made for the writers. Two Russian Jews from
Houndsditch, a Nottingham typist and an ardent young undergraduate of
Balliol, were identified as the authors of the most menacing and
arrested, only to be released again almost immediately. The days passed.
The murderers remained at large. Public interest in the crime was not
allowed to abate. In part of the conservative press it was openly
affirmed that the LiberalLabour Government had given orders to the
police that the affair was not to be too closely looked into. ‘Screening
the Murderers.’ ‘Socialists fear the Light.’ ‘Politics before the Ten
Commandments.’ The headlines were lively. The crime was a godsend to the
opposition. The _Daily Mail_ offered ten thousand pounds reward to any
person who would give information leading to the arrest of Webley’s
murderers. Meanwhile, the British Freemen had almost doubled their
numbers in a week. ‘Are you on the side of Murder? If not, join the
British Freemen.’ The posters glared from every hoarding. Troops of
Freemen in uniform and plain clothes scoured London canvassing for
recruits, making patriotic demonstrations, doing amateur detective work.
They also took the opportunity to beat a number of people with whose
opinions they disagreed. In Tottenham and East Ham they fought pitched
battles with hostile crowds and damaged numerous policemen. At Everard’s
funeral a green procession more than three miles long followed the
coffin to the grave.

Spandrell read all the papers every morning. They amused him. What a
farce! What knockabout! What an incomparable idiocy! To Illidge, who had
gone down to Lancashire to stay with his mother, he sent a picture
postcard of Everard in uniform on his white horse—the shops were full of
them now; hawkers peddled them in the streets. ‘The dead lion seems
likely to do much more damage than the live dog,’ he wrote on the back.
‘God was always a joker.’

God’s best joke, so far as he himself was concerned, was not being
there. Simply not there. Neither God nor the devil. For if the devil had
been there, God would have been there too. All that was there was the
memory of a sordid disgusting stupidity and now an enormous knockabout.
First an affair of dust-bins and then a farce. But perhaps that was what
the devil really was: the spirit of dust-bins. And God? God in that case
would be simply the absence of dust-bins.

‘God’s not apart, not above, not outside.’ He remembered what Rampion
had once said. ‘At any rate, no relevant, humanly important aspect of
God’s above and outside. Neither is God inside, in the sense that the
Protestants use the phrase—safely stowed away in the imagination, in the
feelings and intellect, in the soul. He’s there, of course among other
places. But he’s also inside in the sense that a lump of bread’s inside
when you’ve eaten it. He’s in the very body, in the blood and bowels, in
the heart and skin and loins. God’s the total result, spiritual and
physical, of any thought or action that makes for life, of any vital
relation with the world. God’s a quality of actions and relations—a
felt, experienced quality. At any rate, he’s that for _our_ purposes,
for purposes of living. Because, of course for purposes of knowing and
speculating he may be dozens of other things as well. He may be a Rock
of Ages; he may be the Jehovah of the Old Testament; he may be anything
you like. But what’s that got to do with us as living corporeal beings?
Nothing, nothing but harm, at any rate. The moment you allow speculative
truth to take the place of felt instinctive truth as a guide to living,
you ruin everything.’

Spandrell had protested. Men must have absolutes, must steer by fixed
external marks. ‘Music exists,’ he concluded, ‘even though you
personally happen to be unmusical. You must admit its existence,
absolutely, apart from your own capacity for listening and enjoying.

‘Speculatively, theoretically, yes. Admit it as much as you like. But
don’t allow your theoretical knowledge to influence your practical life.
In the abstract you know that music exists and is beautiful. But don’t
therefore pretend, when you hear Mozart, to go into raptures which you
don’t feel. If you do, you become one of those idiotic musicsnobs one
meets at Lady Edward Tantamount’s. Unable to distinguish Bach from
Wagner, but mooing with ecstasy as soon as the fiddles strike up. It’s
exactly the same with God. The world’s full of ridiculous God-snobs.
People who aren’t really alive, who’ve never done any vital act, who
aren’t in any living relation with anything; people who haven’t the
slightest personal or practical knowledge of what God is. But they moo
away in churches, they coo over their prayers, they pervert and destroy
their whole dismal existences by acting in accordance with the will of
an arbitrarily imagined abstraction which they choose to call God. Just
a pack of God-snobs. They’re as grotesque and contemptible as the
musicsnobs at Lady Edward’s. But nobody has the sense to say so. The
God-snobs are admired for being so good and pious and Christian. When
they’re merely dead and ought to be having their bottoms kicked and
their noses tweaked to make them sit up and come to life.’

Spandrell thought of the conversation now, as he addressed his postcard
to Illidge. God was not there, the devil was not there; only the memory
of a piece of squalid knockabout among the dust-bins, a piece of dirty
dung-beetle’s scavengering. A God-snob—that’s what Rampion would call
him. Dung-beetling in search of a non-existent God. But no, but no, God
was there, outside, absolute. Else how account for the efficacy of
prayer—for it _was_ efficacious; how explain providence and destiny? God
was there, but hiding. Deliberately hiding. It was a question of forcing
him to come out of his lair, his abstract absolute lair, and compelling
him to incarnate himself as a felt experienced quality of personal
actions. It was a matter of violently dragging him from outsideness and
aboveness to insideness. But God was a joker. Spandrell had conjured him
with violence to appear; and out of the bloody steam of the magically
compelling sacrifice had emerged only a dust-bin. But the very failure
of the incantation had been a proof that God was there, outside. Nothing
happens to a man except that which is like himself. Dust-bin to
dust-bin, dung to dung. He had not succeeded in compelling God to pass
from outsideness to insideness But the appearance of the dust-bin
confirmed the reality of God as a providence, God as a destiny, God as
the giver or withholder of grace, God as the predestinating saviour or
destroyer. Dust-bins had been his predestined lot. In giving him
dust-bins yet again, the providential joker was merely being consistent.

One day, in the London Library, he met Philip Quarles.

‘I was very sorry to hear about your little boy,’ he said.

Philip mumbled something and looked rather uncomfortable, like a man who
finds himself involved in an embarrassing situation. He could not bear
to let anyone come near his misery. It was private, secret, sacred. It
hurt him to expose it, it made him feel ashamed.

‘It was a peculiarly gratuitous horror,’ he said, to bring the
conversation away from the particular and personal to the general.

‘All horrors are gratuitous,’ said Spandrell. ‘How’s Elinor standing
it?’

The question was direct, had to be answered. ‘Badly.’ He shook his head.
‘It’s quite broken her down.’ Why did his voice, he wondered, sound so
strangely unreal and, as it were, empty?

‘What are you going to do now?’

‘We shall go abroad in a few days, if Elinor feels up to the journey. To
Siena, I’d thought. And then perhaps to the seaside somewhere in the
Maremma.’ It was a comfort to be able to go into these geographical
details.

‘No more English domesticity then,’ said Spandrell after a little pause.

‘The reason of it has been taken away.’

Spandrell nodded slowly. ‘Do you remember that conversation we had at
the Club, with Illidge and Walter Bidlake? Nothing ever happens to a man
except what’s like him. Settling down in the country in England wasn’t
at all like you. It didn’t happen. It’s been prevented. Ruthlessly, by
God! But providence uses foul means as well as fair. Travelling about,
being unfixed, being a spectator—that was like you. You’re being
compelled to do what’s like you.’ There was a silence. ‘And living in a
kind of dustheap,’ Spandrell added, ‘that’s like me. Whatever I do,
however hard I try to escape, I remain on the dustheap. I suppose I
always shall.’ Yes always, he went on thinking. He had played the last
card and lost. No, not the last card; for there was one other. The last
but one. Would he also lose with the last?


CHAPTER XXXVII

Spandrell was very insistent that they should come without delay. The
_heilige Dankgesang eines genesenen an die Gottheit, in der lydischen
Tonart_ simply must be heard.

‘You can’t understand anything until you have heard it,’ he declared.
‘It proves all kinds of things—God, the soul, goodness—unescapably. It’s
the only real proof that exists; the only one, because Beethoven was the
only man who could get his knowledge over into expression. You _must_
come.’

‘Most willingly,’ said Rampion, ‘But…’

Spandrell interrupted him. ‘I heard quite by accident yesterday that the
A minor quartet had been recorded for the gramophone. I rushed out and
bought a machine and the records specially for you.’

‘For me? But why this generosity?’

‘No generosity,’ Spandrell answered laughing. ‘Pure selfishness. I want
you to hear and confirm my opinion.’

‘But why?’

‘Because I believe in you and, if you confirm, I shall believe in
myself.’

‘What a man!’ mocked Rampion. ‘Ought to join the Church of Rome and have
a confessor.’

‘But you _must_ come.’ He spoke earnestly.

‘But not now,’ said Mary.

‘Not to-day,’ her husband echoed, wondering as he spoke why the man was
so strangely insistent. What was the matter with him? The way he moved
and spoke, the look in his eyes…. So excited. ‘I have innumerable things
to do this afternoon.’

‘Then to-morrow.’

As though he were drunk, Rampion was reflecting. ‘Why not the day
after?’ he said aloud. ‘It would be much easier for me. And the machine
won’t fly away in the interval.’

Spandrell uttered his noiseless laugh. ‘No, but I may,’ he said. ‘I
shall probably be gone by the day after to-morrow.’

‘You hadn’t told us you were going away,’ said Mary. ‘Where?’

‘Who knows?’ Spandrell answered, laughing once more. ‘All _I_ know is
that I shan’t be here any more.’

‘All right,’ said Rampion, who had been watching him curiously, ‘ I’ll
make it to-morrow.’ Why is he so melodramatic? he wondered.

Spandrell took his leave.

‘What was wrong with him?’ said Rampion, when he was gone.

‘I didn’t notice anything particularly wrong with him,’ Mary answered.

Rampion made a gesture of impatience. ‘You wouldn’t notice the Last
Judgment,’ he said.’didn’t you see that he was holding down his
excitement. Like the lid of a saucepan on the boil—holding it down. And
that melodramatic way of laughing. Like the conscious villain in the
play….’

‘But was he acting?’ said Mary, ‘was he playing the fool for our
benefit?’

‘No, no. He was genuine all right. But when you’re genuinely in the
position of the conscious villain in the melodrama, you inevitably begin
to behave like the conscious villain. You act in spite of yourself.’

‘But what’s he being a conscious villain about?’

‘How on earth should I know?’ said Rampion impatiently. Mary always
expected him, by some mysterious and magical intuition, to know
everything. Her faith sometimes amused and sometimes pleased, but
sometimes also annoyed him.’do you take me for Spandrell’s father
confessor.’

‘There’s nothing to fly in a rage about.’

‘On the contrary,’ said Rampion, ‘there’s practically nothing not to fly
in a rage about. If one keeps one’s temper, it’s because one lives most
of the time with one’s eyes shut, half asleep. If one were always awake,
my God! There wouldn’t be much crockery unsmashed.’ He stalked off to
his studio.

Spandrell walked slowly eastwards from Chelsea along the river whistling
to himself over and over again the opening phrases of the Lydian melody
from the _heilige Dankgesang_. Over and over again. The river stretched
away into the hot haze. The music was like water in a parched land.
After so many years of drought, a spring, a fountain. A watering-cart
rumbled past trailing its artificial shower. The wetted dust was
fragrant. That music was a proof, as he had said to Rampion. In the
gutter a little torrent was hurrying a crumpled cigarette packet and a
piece of orange peel towards the drain. He stopped whistling. The
essential horror. Like carting garbage; that was what it had been. Just
nasty and unpleasant, like cleaning a latrine. Not terrible so much as
stupid, indescribably stupid. The music was a proof; God existed. But
only so long as the violins were playing. When the bows were lifted from
the strings, what then? Garbage and stupidity, the pitiless drought.

In the Vauxhall Bridge Road he bought a shilling packet of writing-paper
and envelopes. For the price of a cup of coffee and a bun he hired a
table in a tea-shop. With a stump of pencil he wrote. ‘To the Secretary
General, Brotherhood of British Freemen. Sir, Tomorrow, Wednesday, at
five p.m., the murderer of Everard Webley will be at 37 Catskill Street,
S.W .7. The flat is on the second floor. The man will probably
answer.the bell in person. He is armed and desperate.’

He read it through and was reminded of those communications (written in
red ink, to imitate blood, and under the influence of the serial stories
in _Chums_ and the _B.O.P._) with which he and Pokinghorne Minor had
hoped, at nine years old, to startle and terrify Miss Veal, the matron
of their preparatory school. They had been discovered and reported to
the head master. Old Nosey had given them three cuts apiece over the
buttocks. ‘He is armed and desperate.’ That was pure Pokinghorne. But if
he didn’t say it, they wouldn’t carry revolvers. And then, why, then it
wouldn’t happen. Nothing would happen. Let it go. He folded the paper
and put it into the envelope. There was an essential silliness, as well
as an essential nastiness and stupidity. He scribbled the address.

‘Well, here we are,’ said Rampion, when Spandrell opened his door to
them the next afternoon. ‘Where’s Beethoven? Where’s the famous proof of
God’s existence and the superiority of Jesus’s morality?’

‘In here.’ Spandrell led the way into his sittingroom. The gramophone
stood on the table. Four or five records lay scattered near it. ‘Here’s
the beginning of the slow movement,’ Spandrell went on, picking up one
of them. ‘I won’t bother you with the rest of the quartet. It’s lovely.
But the _heilige Dankgesang_ is the crucial part.’ He wound up the
clockwork; the disc revolved; he lowered the needle of the sound-box on
to its grooved surface. A single violin gave out a long note, then
another a sixth above, dropped to the fifth (while the second violin
began where the first had started), then leapt to the octave, and hung
there suspended through two long beats. More than a hundred years
before, Beethoven, stone deaf, had heard the imaginary music of stringed
instruments expressing his inmost thoughts and feelings. He had made
signs with ink on ruled paper. A century later, four Hungarians had
reproduced from the printed reproduction of Beethoven’s scribbles that
music which Beethoven had never heard except in his imagination. Spiral
grooves on a surface of shellac remembered their playing. The artificial
memory revolved, a needle travelled in its grooves and through a faint
scratching and roaring that mimicked the noises of Beethoven’s own
deafness, the audible symbols of Beethoven’s convictions and emotions
quivered out into the air. Slowly, slowly, the melody unfolded itself.
The archaic Lydian harmonies hung on the air. It was an unimpassioned
music, transparent, pure and crystalline, like a tropical sea, an Alpine
lake. Water on water, calm sliding over calm; the according of level
horizons and waveless expanses, a counterpoint of serenities. And
everything clear and bright; no mists, no vague twilights. It was the
calm of still and rapturous contemplation, not of drowsiness or sleep.
It was the serenity of the convalescent who wakes from fever and finds
himself born again into a realm of beauty. But the fever was ‘the fever
called living’ and the rebirth was not into this world; the beauty was
unearthly, the convalescent serenity was the peace of God. The
interweaving of Lydian melodies was heaven.

Thirty slow bars had built up heaven, when the character of the music
suddenly changed. From being remotely archaic, it became modern. The
Lydian harmonies were replaced by those of the corresponding major key.
The time quickened. A new melody leapt and bounded, but over earthly
mountains, not among those of paradise.

‘Neue Kraft fuehlend,’ Spandrell quoted in a whisper from the score.
‘He’s feeling stronger; but it’s not so heavenly.’

The new melody bounded on for another fifty bars and expired in
scratchings. Spandrell lifted the needle and stopped the revolving of
the disc.

‘The Lydian part begins again on the other side,’ he explained, as he
wound up the machine. ‘Then there’s more of this lively stuff in A
major. Then it’s Lydian to the end, getting better and better all the
time. Don’t you think it’s marvellous?’ He turned to Rampion. ‘Isn’t it
a proof?’

The other nodded. ‘Marvellous. But the only thing it proves, so far as I
can hear, is that sick men are apt to be very weak. It’s the art of a
man who’s lost his body.’

‘But discovered his soul.’

‘Oh, I grant you,’ said Rampion, ‘sick men are very spiritual. But
that’s because they’re not quite men. Eunuchs are very spiritual lovers
for the same reason.’

‘But Beethoven wasn’t a eunuch.’

‘I know. But why did he try to be one? Why did he make castration and
bodilessness his ideal? What’s this music? Just a hymn in praise of
eunuchism. Very beautiful, I admit. But couldn’t he have chosen
something more human than castration to sing about?’

Spandrell sighed. ‘To me it’s the beatific vision, it’s heaven.’

‘Not earth. That’s just what I’ve been complaining of.’

‘But mayn’t a man imagine heaven if he wants to?’ asked Mary.

‘Certainly, so long as he doesn’t pretend that his imagination is the
last word in truth, beauty, wisdom, virtue and all the rest. Spandrell
wants us to accept this disembodied eunuchism as the last word. I won’t.
I simply won’t.’

‘Listen to the whole movement, before you judge.’ Spandrell reversed the
disc and lowered the needle. The bright heaven of Lydian music vibrated
on the air.

‘Lovely, lovely,’ said Rampion, when the record was finished. ‘You’re
quite right. It _is_ heaven, it _is_ the life of the soul. It’s the most
perfect spiritual abstraction from reality I’ve ever known. But why
should he have wanted to make that abstraction? Why couldn’t he be
content to be a man and not an abstract soul? Why, why? ‘ He began
walking up and down the room. ‘This damned soul,’ he went on, ‘this
damned abstract soul—it’s like a kind of cancer, eating up the real,
human, natural reality, spreading and spreading at its expense. Why
can’t he be content with reality, your stupid old Beethoven? Why should
he find it necessary to replace the real, warm, natural thing by this
abstract cancer of a soul? The cancer may have a beautiful shape; but,
damn it all, the body’s more beautiful. I don’t want your spiritual
cancer.’

‘I won’t argue with you,’ said Spandrell He felt all at once
extraordinarily tired and depressed. It had been a failure. Rampion had
refused to be convinced. Was the proof, after all, no proof? Did the
music refer to nothing outside itself and the idiosyncrasies of its
inventor? He looked at his watch; it was almost five. ‘Hear the end of
the movement at any rate,’ he said. ‘It’s the best part.’ He wound up
the gramophone. Even if it’s meaningless, he thought, it’s beautiful, so
long as it lasts. And perhaps it isn’t meaningless. After all, Rampion
isn’t infallible. ‘Listen.’

The music began again. But something new and marvellous had happened in
its Lydian heaven. The speed of the slow melody was doubled; its
outlines became clearer and more definite; an inner part began to harp
insistently on a throbbing phrase. It was as though heaven had suddenly
and impossibly become more heavenly, had passed from achieved perfection
into perfection yet more deeper and more absolute. The ineffable peace
persisted; but it was no longer the peace of convalescence and
passivity. It quivered, it was alive, it seemed to grow and intensify
itself, it became an active calm, an almost passionate serenity. The
miraculous paradox of eternal life and eternal repose was musically
realized.

They listened, almost holding their breaths. Spandrell looked exultantly
at his guest. His own doubts had vanished. How could one fail to believe
in something which was there, which manifestly existed? Mark Rampion
nodded. ‘Almost thou persuadest me,’ he whispered. ‘But it’s too good.’

‘How can anything be too good?’

‘Not human. If it lasted, you’d cease to be a man. You’d die.’

They were silent again. The music played on, leading from heaven to
heaven, from bliss to deeper bliss. Spandrell sighed and shut his eyes.
His face was grave and serene, as though it had been smoothed by sleep
or death. Yes, dead, thought Rampion as he looked at him. ‘He refuses to
be a man. Not a man—either a demon or a dead angel. Now he’s dead.’ A
touch of discord in the Lydian harmonies gave an almost unbearable
poignancy to the beatitude. Spandrell sighed again. There was a knocking
at the door. He looked up. The lines of mockery came back into his face,
the corners of the mouth became once more ironic.

‘There, he’s the demon again,’ thought Rampion. ‘He’s come to life and
he’s the demon.’

‘There they are,’ Spandrell was saying and without answering Mary’s
question, ‘Who?’ he walked out of the room.

Rampion and Mary remained by the gramophone, listening to the revelation
of heaven. A deafening explosion, a shout, another explosion and
another, suddenly shattered the paradise of sound.

They jumped up and ran to the door. In the passage three men in the
green uniform of British Freemen were looking down at Spandrell’s body.
They held pistols in their hands. Another revolver lay on the floor
beside the dying man. There was a hole in the side of his head and a
patch of blood on his shirt. His hands opened and shut, opened again and
shut, scratching the boards.

‘What _has_…?’ began Rampion.

‘He fired first,’ one of the men interrupted.

There was a little silence. Through the open door came the sound of
music. The passion had begun to fade from the celestial melody. Heaven,
in those longdrawn notes, became once more the place of absolute rest,
of still and blissful convalescence. Long notes, a chord repeated,
protracted, bright and pure, hanging, floating, effortlessly soaring on
and on. And then suddenly there was no more music; only the scratching
of the needle on the revolving disc.

 

__ __

 

The afternoon was fine. Burlap walked home. He was feeling pleased with
himself and the world at large. ‘I accept the Universe,’ was how, only
an hour before, he had concluded his next week’s leader. ‘I accept the
Universe.’ He had every reason for accepting it. Mrs. Betterton had
given him an excellent lunch and much flattery. The _Broad Christian’s
Monthly_ of Chicago had offered him three thousand dollars for the
serial rights of his _St. Francis and the Modern Psyche_. He had cabled
back demanding three thousand five hundred. The _Broad Christian’s_
answer had arrived that afternoon; his terms were accepted. Then there
were the Affiliated Ethical Societies of the North of England. They had
invited him to deliver four lectures each in Manchester, Bradford, Leeds
and Sheffield. The fee would be fifteen guineas per lecture. Which for
England, wasn’t at all bad. And there’d be very little work to do. It
would just be a matter of re-hashing a few of his leaders in the
_World_. Two hundred and forty guineas plus three thousand five hundred
dollars. The best part of a thousand pounds. He would go and have a talk
with his broker about the position and prospects of rubber. Or what
about one of these Investment Trusts? They gave you a very safe six or
seven per cent. Burlap whistled softly as he walked. The tune was
Mendelssohn’s ‘On Wings of Song.’ The _Broad Christian_ and the
Affiliated Ethicals had made him spiritually musical. He whistled with
no less satisfaction when he thought of the day’s other triumph. He had
definitely got rid of Ethel Cobbett. The moment had been auspicious.
Miss Cobbett had gone away for her holiday. These things are easier to
do by post than face to face. Mr. Chivers, the business manager, had
written a business-like letter. For financial reasons a reduction of the
staff of the _Literary World_ was urgently necessary. He regretted, but…
One month’s notice would have been legally sufficient. But as a token of
the directors’ appreciation of her services he was enclosing a cheque
for three months’ salary. Any references she might require would always
be forthcoming and he was hers faithfully. Burlap had tempered Mr.
Chivers’s business-likeness with a letter of his own, full of regrets,
and friendship, and jeremiads against a public that wouldn’t buy the
_Literary World_, and lamentations over the defeat of God, incarnated in
literature and himself, by Mammon in the person of Mr. Chivers and all
business men. He had spoken of her to his friend Judd of the _Wednesday
Review_, as well as to several other people in the journalistic world
and would, of course, do everything in his power to etcetera.

Thank goodness, he reflected, as he walked along whistling ‘On Wings of
Song’ with rich expression, that was the end of Ethel Cobbett so far as
he was concerned. It was the end of her also as far as everybody was
concerned. For some few days later, having written him a twelve-page
letter, which he put in the fire after reading the first scarifying
sentence, she lay down with her head in an oven and turned on the gas.
But that was something which Burlap could not foresee. His mood as he
walked whistling homewards was one of unmixed contentment. That night he
and Beatrice pretended to be two little children and had their bath
together. Two little children sitting at opposite ends of the big
old-fashioned bath. And what a romp they had! The bathroom was drenched
with their splashings. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.
