THE CYBERIAD

FABLES FOR THE

CYBERNETIC AGE

STANISLAW LEM

Translated from the Polish by MICHAEL KANDEL

Illustrated by DANIEL MROZ

_A CONTINUUM BOOK_

_THE SEABURY PRESS_

NEW YORK

English translation copyright © 1974 by The Seabury Press, Inc. Printed
in the United States of America.

Original edition: _Cyberiada_, Wydawnictwo Literackie, Cracow, 1967,
1972

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form,
except for brief reviews, without the written permission of the
publisher.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA

Lem, Stanislaw. The cyberiad.

(A continuum book)

I. Title.

CONTENTS

 HOW THE WORLD WAS SAVED

 TRURL'S MACHINE

 A GOOD SHELLACKING

THE SEVEN SALLIES OF TRURL AND KLAPAUCIUS

 THE FIRST SALLY, or The Trap of Gargantius

 THE FIRST SALLY (A), or Trurl's Electronic Bard

 THE SECOND SALLY, or The Offer of King Krool

 THE THIRD SALLY, or The Dragons of Probability

THE FOURTH Sally, or How Trurl Built a Femfatalatron to Save Prince
Pantagoon from the Pangs of Love, and How Later He Resorted to a
Cannonade of Babies

 THE FIFTH SALLY, or The Mischief of King Balerion

THE FIFTH SALLY (A), or Trurl's Prescription

 THE SIXTH SALLY, or How Trurl and Klapaucius Created a Demon of the
Second Kind to Defeat the Pirate Pugg

 THE SEVENTH SALLY, or How Trurl's Own Perfection Led to No Good

 TALE of the Three Storytelling Machines of King Genius

ALTRUIZINE

 FROM THE CYPHROEROTICON, OR TALES OF DEVIATIONS, SUPERFIXATIONS AND
ABERRATIONS OF THE HEART

PRINCE FERRIX AND THE PRINCESS CRYSTAL

THE CYBERIAD

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-1.jpg]

HOW THE WORLD WAS SAVED

One day Trurl the constructor put together a machine that could create
anything starting with _n_. When it was ready, he tried it out, ordering
it to make needles, then nankeens and negligees, which it did, then nail
the lot to narghiles filled with nepenthe and numerous other narcotics.
The machine carried out his instructions to the letter. Still not
completely sure of its ability, he had it produce, one after the other,
nimbuses, noodles, nuclei, neutrons, naphtha, noses, nymphs, naiads, and
natrium. This last it could not do, and Trurl, considerably irritated,
demanded an explanation.

"Never heard of it," said the machine.

"What? But it's only sodium. You know, the metal, the element…"

"Sodium starts with an _s_, and I work only in _n_."

"But in Latin it's _natrium_."

"Look, old boy," said the machine, "if I could do everything starting
with _n_ in every possible language, I'd be a Machine That Could Do
Everything in the Whole Alphabet, since any item you care to mention
undoubtedly starts with _n_ in one foreign language or another. It's not
that easy. I can't go beyond what you programmed. So no sodium."

"Very well," said Trurl and ordered it to make Night, which it made at
once—small perhaps, but perfectly nocturnal. Only then did Trurl invite
over his friend Klapaucius the constructor, and introduced him to the
machine, praising its extraordinary skill at such length, that
Klapaucius grew annoyed and inquired whether he too might not test the
machine.

"Be my guest," said Trurl. "But it has to start with _n_."

"_N_?" said Klapaucius. "All right, let it make Nature."

The machine whined, and in a trice Trurl's front yard was packed with
naturalists. They argued, each publishing heavy volumes, which the
others tore to pieces; in the distance one could see flaming pyres, on
which martyrs to Nature were sizzling; there was thunder, and strange
mushroom-shaped columns of smoke rose up; everyone talked at once, no
one listened, and there were all sorts of memoranda, appeals, subpoenas
and other documents, while off to the side sat a few old men, feverishly
scribbling on scraps of paper.

"Not bad, eh?" said Trurl with pride. "Nature to a T, admit it!"

But Klapaucius wasn't satisfied.

"What, that mob? Surely you're not going to tell me that's Nature?"

"Then give the machine something else," snapped Trurl. "Whatever you
like." For a moment Klapaucius was at a loss for what to ask. But after
a little thought he declared that he would put two more tasks to the
machine; if it could fulfill them, he would admit that it was all Trurl
said it was. Trurl agreed to this, whereupon Klapaucius requested
Negative.

"Negative?!" cried Trurl. "What on earth is Negative?"

"The opposite of positive, of course," Klapaucius coolly replied.
"Negative attitudes, the negative of a picture, for example. Now don't
try to pretend you never heard of Negative. All right, machine, get to
work!"

The machine, however, had already begun. First it manufactured
antiprotons, then antielectrons, antineutrons, antineutrinos, and
labored on, until from out of all this antimatter an antiworld took
shape, glowing like a ghostly cloud above their heads.

"H'm," muttered Klapaucius, displeased. "That's supposed to be Negative?
Well… let's say it is, for the sake of peace. … But now here's the third
command: Machine, do Nothing!"

The machine sat still. Klapaucius rubbed his hands in triumph, but Trurl
said:

"Well, what did you expect? You asked it to do nothing, and it's doing
nothing."

"Correction: I asked it to do Nothing, but it's doing nothing."

"Nothing is nothing!"

"Come, come. It was supposed to do Nothing, but it hasn't done anything,
and therefore I've won. For Nothing, my dear and clever colleague, is
not your run-of-the-mill nothing, the result of idleness and inactivity,
but dynamic, aggressive Nothingness, that is to say, perfect, unique,
ubiquitous, in other words Nonexistence, ultimate and supreme, in its
very own nonperson!"

"You're confusing the machine!" cried Trurl. But suddenly its metallic
voice rang out:

"Really, how can you two bicker at a time like this? Oh yes, I know what
Nothing is, and Nothingness, Nonexistence, Nonentity, Negation, Nullity
and Nihility, since all these come under the heading of _n_, _n_ as in
Nil. Look then upon your world for the last time, gentlemen! Soon it
shall no longer be…"

The constructors froze, forgetting their quarrel, for the machine was in
actual fact doing Nothing, and it did it in this fashion: one by one,
various things were removed from the world, and the things, thus
removed, ceased to exist, as if they had never been. The machine had
already disposed of nolars, nightzebs, nocs, necs, nallyrakers,
neotremes and nonmalrigers. At moments, though, it seemed that instead
of reducing, diminishing and subtracting, the machine was increasing,
enhancing and adding, since it liquidated, in turn: nonconformists,
nonentities, nonsense, nonsupport, nearsightedness, narrowmindedness,
naughtiness, neglect, nausea, necrophilia and nepotism. But after a
while the world very definitely began to thin out around Trurl and
Klapaucius.

"Omigosh!" said Trurl. "If only nothing bad comes out of all this…"

"Don't worry," said Klapaucius. "You can see it's not producing
Universal Nothingness, but only causing the absence of whatever starts
with n. Which is really nothing in the way of nothing, and nothing is
what your machine, dear Trurl, is worth!"

"Do not be deceived," replied the machine. "I've begun, it's true, with
everything in _n_, but only out of familiarity. To create however is one
thing, to destroy, another thing entirely. I can blot out the world for
the simple reason that I'm able to do anything and everything—and
everything means everything—in _n_, and consequently Nothingness is
child's play for me. In less than a minute now you will cease to have
existence, along with everything else, so tell me now, Klapaucius, and
quickly, that I am really and truly everything I was programmed to be,
before it is too late."

"But—" Klapaucius was about to protest, but noticed, just then, that a
number of things were indeed disappearing, and not merely those that
started with n. The constructors were no longer surrounded by the
gruncheons, the targalisks, the shupops, the calinatifacts, the thists,
worches and pritons.

"Stop! I take it all back! Desist! Whoa! Don't do Nothing!!" screamed
Klapaucius. But before the machine could come to a full stop, all the
brashations, plusters, laries and zits had vanished away. Now the
machine stood motionless. The world was a dreadful sight. The sky had
particularly suffered: there were only a few, isolated points of light
in the heavens—no trace of the glorious worches and zits that had, till
now, graced the horizon!

"Great Gauss!" cried Klapaucius. "And where are the gruncheons? Where my
dear, favorite pritons? Where now the gentle zits?!"

"They no longer are, nor ever will exist again," the machine said
calmly. "I executed, or rather only began to execute, your order…"

"I tell you to do Nothing, and you… you…"

"Klapaucius, don't pretend to be a greater idiot than you are," said the
machine. "Had I made Nothing outright, in one fell swoop, everything
would have ceased to exist, and that includes Trurl, the sky, the
Universe, and you—and even myself. In which case who could say and to
whom could it be said that the order was carried out and I am an
efficient and capable machine? And if no one could say it to no one, in
what way then could I, who also would not be, be vindicated?"

"Yes, fine, let's drop the subject," said Klapaucius. "I have nothing
more to ask of you, only please, dear machine, please return the zits,
for without them life loses all its charm …"

"But I can't, they're in _z_," said the machine. "Of course, I can
restore nonsense, narrowmindedness, nausea, necrophilia, neuralgia,
nefariousness and noxiousness. As for the other letters, however, I
can't help you."

"I want my zits!" bellowed Klapaucius.

"Sorry, no zits," said the machine. "Take a good look at this world, how
riddled it is with huge, gaping holes, how full of Nothingness, the
Nothingness that fills the bottomless void between the stars, how
everything about us has become lined with it, how it darkly lurks behind
each shred of matter. This is your work, envious one! And I hardly think
the future generations will bless you for it…"

"Perhaps… they won't find out, perhaps they won't notice," groaned the
pale Klapaucius, gazing up incredulously at the black emptiness of space
and not daring to look his colleague, Trurl, in the eye. Leaving him
beside the machine that could do everything in _n_, Klapaucius skulked
home—and to this day the world has remained honeycombed with
nothingness, exactly as it was when halted in the course of its
liquidation. And as all subsequent attempts to build a machine on any
other letter met with failure, it is to be feared that never again will
we have such marvelous phenomena as the worches and the zits—no, never
again.

TRURL'S MACHINE

Once upon a time Trurl the constructor built an eight-story thinking
machine. When it was finished, he gave it a coat of white paint, trimmed
the edges in lavender, stepped back, squinted, then added a little
curlicue on the front and, where one might imagine the forehead to be, a
few pale orange polkadots. Extremely pleased with himself, he whistled
an air and, as is always done on such occasions, asked it the ritual
question of how much is two plus two.

The machine stirred. Its tubes began to glow, its coils warmed up,
current coursed through all its circuits like a waterfall, transformers
hummed and throbbed, there was a clanging, and a chugging, and such an
ungodly racket that Trurl began to think of adding a special mentation
muffler. Meanwhile the machine labored on, as if it had been given the
most difficult problem in the Universe to solve; the ground shook, the
sand slid underfoot from the vibration, valves popped like champagne
corks, the relays nearly gave way under the strain. At last, when Trurl
had grown extremely impatient, the machine ground to a halt and said in
a voice like thunder: SEVEN!

"Nonsense, my dear," said Trurl. "The answer's four. Now be a good
machine and adjust yourself! What's two and two?"

"SEVEN!" snapped the machine. Trurl sighed and put his coveralls back
on, rolled up his sleeves, opened the bottom trapdoor and crawled in.
For the longest time he hammered away inside, tightened, soldered, ran
clattering up and down the metal stairs, now on the sixth floor, now on
the eighth, then pounded back down to the bottom and threw a switch, but
something sizzled in the middle, and the spark plugs grew blue whiskers.
After two hours of this he came out, covered with soot but satisfied,
put all his tools away, took off his coveralls, wiped his face and
hands. As he was leaving, he turned and asked, just so there would be no
doubt about it:

"And now what's two and two?"

"SEVEN!" replied the machine.

Trurl uttered a terrible oath, but there was no help for it—again he had
to poke around inside the machine, disconnecting, correcting, checking,
resetting, and when he learned for the third time that two and two was
seven, he collapsed in despair at the foot of the machine, and sat there
until Klapaucius found him. Klapaucius inquired what was wrong, for
Trurl looked as if he had just returned from a funeral. Trurl explained
the problem. Klapaucius crawled into the machine himself a couple of
times, tried to fix this and that, then asked it for the sum of one plus
two, which turned out to be six. One plus one, according to the machine,
equaled zero. Klapaucius scratched his head, cleared his throat and
said:

"My friend, you'll just have to face it. That isn't the machine you
wished to make. However, there's a good side to everything, including
this."

"What good side?" muttered Trurl, and kicked the base on which he was
sitting.

"Stop that," said the machine.

"H'm, it's sensitive too. But where was I? Oh yes … there's no question
but that we have here a stupid machine, and not merely stupid in the
usual, normal way, oh no! This is, as far as I can determine—and you
know I am something of an expert—this is the stupidest thinking machine
in the entire world, and that's nothing to sneeze at! To construct
deliberately such a machine would be far from easy; in fact, I would say
that no one could manage it. For the thing is not only stupid, but
stubborn as a mule, that is, it has a personality common to idiots, for
idiots are uncommonly stubborn."

"What earthly use do I have for such a machine?!" said Trurl, and kicked
it again.

"I'm warning you, you better stop!" said the machine.

"A warning, if you please," observed Klapaucius dryly. "Not only is it
sensitive, dense and stubborn, but quick to take offense, and believe
me, with such an abundance of qualities there are all sorts of things
you might do!"

"What, for example?" asked Trurl.

"Well, it's hard to say offhand. You might put it on exhibit and charge
admission; people would flock to see the stupidest thinking machine that
ever was—what does it have, eight stories? Really, could anyone imagine
a bigger dunce? And the exhibition would not only cover your costs,
but—"

"Enough, I'm not holding any exhibition!" Trurl said, stood up and,
unable to restrain himself, kicked the machine once more.

"This is your third warning," said the machine.

"What?" cried Trurl, infuriated by its imperious manner. "You… you…" And
he kicked it several times, shouting: "You're only good for kicking, you
know that?"

"You have insulted me for the fourth, fifth, sixth and eighth times,"
said the machine. "Therefore I refuse to answer all further questions of
a mathematical nature."

"It refuses! Do you hear that?" fumed Trurl, thoroughly exasperated.
"After six comes eight—did you notice, Klapaucius?—not seven, but eight!
And that's the kind of mathematics Her Highness refuses to perform! Take
that! And that! And that! Or perhaps you'd like some more?"

The machine shuddered, shook, and without another word started to lift
itself from its foundations. They were very deep, and the girders began
to bend, but at last it scrambled out, leaving behind broken concrete
blocks with steel spokes protruding—and it bore down on Trurl and
Klapaucius like a moving fortress. Trurl was so dumb-founded that he
didn't even try to hide from the machine, which to all appearances
intended to crush him to a pulp. But Klapaucius grabbed his arm and
yanked him away, and the two of them took to their heels. When finally
they looked back, they saw the machine swaying like a high tower,
advancing slowly, at every step sinking to its second floor, but
stubbornly, doggedly pulling itself out of the sand and heading straight
for them.

"Whoever heard of such a thing?" Trurl gasped in amazement. "Why, this
is mutiny! What do we do now?"

"Wait and watch," replied the prudent Klapaucius. "We may learn
something."

But there was nothing to be learned just then. The machine had reached
firmer ground and was picking up speed. Inside, it whistled, hissed and
sputtered.

"Any minute now the signal box will knock loose," said Trurl under his
breath. "That'll jam the program and stop it…"

"No," said Klapaucius, "this is a special case. The thing is so stupid,
that even if the whole transmission goes, it won't matter. But—look
out!!"

The machine was gathering momentum, clearly bent on running them down,
so they fled just as fast as they could, the fearful rhythm of crunching
steps in their ears. They ran and ran—what else could they do? They
tried to make it back to their native district, but the machine
outflanked them, cut them off, forced them deeper and deeper into a
wild, uninhabited region. Mountains, dismal and craggy, slowly rose out
of the mist. Trurl, panting heavily, shouted to Klapaucius:

"Listen! Let's turn into some narrow canyon… where it won't be able to
follow us … the cursed thing… what do you say?"

"No… better go straight," wheezed Klapaucius. "There's a town up ahead…
can't remember the name… anyway, we can find—oof!—find shelter there…"

So they ran straight and soon saw houses before them. The streets were
practically deserted at this time of day, and the constructors had gone
a good distance without meeting a living soul, when suddenly an awful
crash, like an avalanche at the edge of the town, indicated that the
machine was coming after them.

Trurl looked back and groaned.

"Good heavens! It's tearing down the houses, Klapaucius!!" For the
machine, in stubborn pursuit, was plowing through the walls of the
buildings like a mountain of steel, and in its wake lay piles of rubble
and white clouds of plaster dust. There were dreadful screams, confusion
in the streets, and Trurl and Klapaucius, their hearts in their mouths,
ran on till they came to a large town hall, darted inside and raced down
endless stairs to a deep cellar.

"It won't get us in here, even if it brings the whole building down on
our heads!" panted Klapaucius. "But really, the devil himself had me pay
you a visit today. … I was curious to see how your work was going—well,
I certainly found out…"

"Quiet," interrupted Trurl. "Someone's coming…"

And indeed, the cellar door opened up and the mayor entered, accompanied
by several aldermen. Trurl was too embarrassed to explain how this
strange and calamitous situation had come about; Klapaucius had to do
it. The mayor listened in silence. Suddenly the walls trembled, the
ground heaved, and the sound of cracking stone reached them in the
cellar.

"It's here?!" cried Trurl.

"Yes," said the mayor. "And it demands that we give you up, otherwise it
says it will level the entire town…"

Just then they heard, far overhead, words that honked as if from a
muffled horn:

"Trul's here … I smell Trurl…"

"But surely you won't give us up?" asked in a quavering voice the object
of the machine's obstinate fury.

"The one of you who calls himself Trurl must leave. The other may
remain, since surrendering him does not constitute part of the
conditions…"

"Have mercy!"

"We are helpless," said the mayor. "And were you to stay here, Trurl,
you would have to answer for all the damage done to this town and its
inhabitants, since it was because of you that the machine destroyed
sixteen homes and buried beneath their ruins many of our finest
citizens. Only the fact that you yourself stand in imminent peril
permits me to let you leave unpunished. Go then, and nevermore return."

Trurl looked at the aldermen and, seeing his sentence written on their
stern faces, slowly turned and made for the door.

"Wait! I'll go with you!" cried Klapaucius impulsively.

"You?" said Trurl, a faint hope in his voice. "But no…" he added after a
moment. "Why should you have to perish too?…"

"Nonsense!" rejoined Klapaucius with great energy. "What, us perish at
the hands of that iron imbecile? Never! It takes more than that, my
friend, to wipe two of the most famous constructors off the face of the
globe! Come, Trurl! Chin up!"

Encouraged by these words, Trurl ran up the stairs after Klapaucius.
There was not a soul outside in the square. Amid clouds of dust and the
gaunt skeletons of demolished homes, stood the machine, higher than the
town hall tower itself, puffing steam, covered with the blood of
powdered brick and smeared with chalk.

"Careful!" whispered Klapaucius. "It doesn't see us. Let's take that
first street on the left, then turn right, then straight for those
mountains. There we can take refuge and think of how to make the thing
give up once and for all its insane… _Now_!" he yelled, for the machine
had just spotted them and was charging, making the pavement buckle.

Breathless, they ran from the town and galloped along for a mile or so,
hearing behind them the thunderous stride of the colossus that followed
relentlessly.

"I know that ravine!" Klapaucius suddenly cried. "That's the bed of a
dried-out stream and it leads to cliffs and caves —faster, faster, the
thing'll have to stop soon!…"

So they raced uphill, stumbling and waving their arms to keep their
balance, but the machine still gained on them. Scrambling up over the
gravel of the dried-out riverbed, they reached a crevice in the
perpendicular rock and, seeing high above them the murky mouth of a
cave, began to climb frantically toward it, no longer caring about the
loose stones that flew from under their feet. The opening in the rock
breathed chill and darkness. As quickly as they could, they leaped
inside, ran a few extra steps, then stopped.

"Well, here at least we're safe," said Trurl, calm once again. "I'll
just take a look, to see where it got stuck…"

"Be careful," cautioned Klapaucius. Trurl inched his way to the edge of
the cave, leaned out, and immediately jumped back in fright.

"It's coming up the mountain!!" he cried.

"Don't worry, it'll never be able to get in here," said Klapaucius, not
altogether convinced. "But what's that? Is it getting dark? Oh no!"

At that moment a great shadow blotted out the bit of sky visible through
the mouth of the cave, and in its place appeared a smooth steel wall
with rows of rivets. It was the machine slowly closing with the rock,
thereby sealing up the cave as if with a mighty metal lid.

"We're trapped…" whispered Trurl, his voice breaking off when the
darkness became absolute.

"That was idiotic on our part!" Klapaucius exclaimed, furious. "To jump
into a cave that it could barricade! How could we have done such a
thing?"

"What do you think it's waiting for now?" asked Trurl after a long
pause.

"For us to give up—that doesn't take any great brains."

Again there was silence. Trurl tiptoed in the darkness, hands
outstretched, in the direction of the opening, running his fingers along
the stone until he touched the smooth steel, which was warm, as if
heated from within…

"I feel Trurl …" boomed the iron voice. Trurl hastily retreated, took a
seat alongside his friend, and for some time they sat there, motionless.
At last Klapaucius whispered:

"There's no sense our just sitting here. I'll try to reason with it…"

"That's hopeless," said Trurl. "But go ahead. Perhaps it will at least
let you go free…"

"Now, now, none of that!" said Klapaucius, patting him on the back. And
he groped his way toward the mouth of the cave and called: "Hello out
there, can you hear us?"

"Yes," said the machine.

"Listen, we'd like to apologize. You see… well, there was a little
misunderstanding, true, but it was nothing, really. Trurl had no
intention of…"

"I'll pulverize Trurl!" said the machine. "But first, he'll tell me how
much two and two makes."

"Of course he will, of course he will, and you'll be happy with his
answer, and make it up with him for sure, isn't that right, Trurl?" said
the mediator soothingly.

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-3.jpg]

"Yes, of course…" mumbled Trurl.

"Really?" said the machine. "Then how much is two and two?"

"Fo… that is, seven…" said Trurl in an even lower voice.

"Ha! Not four, but seven, eh?" crowed the machine. "There, I told you
so!"

"Seven, yes, seven, we always knew it was seven!" Klapaucius eagerly
agreed. "Now will you, uh, let us go?" he added cautiously.

"No. Let Trurl say how sorry he is and tell me how much is two times
two…"

"And you'll let us go, if I do?" asked Trurl.

"I don't know. I'll think about it. I'm not making any deals. What's two
times two?"

"But you probably will let us go, won't you?" said Trurl, while
Klapaucius pulled on his arm and hissed in his ear: "The thing's an
imbecile, don't argue with it, for heaven's sake!"

"I won't let you go, if I don't want to," said the machine. "You just
tell me how much two times two is…"

Suddenly Trurl fell into a rage.

"I'll tell you, I'll tell you all right!" he screamed. "Two and two is
four and two times two is four, even if you stand on your head, pound
these mountains all to dust, drink the ocean dry and swallow the sky—do
you hear? Two and two is four!!"

"Trurl! What are you saying? Have you taken leave of your senses? Two
and two is seven, nice machine! Seven, seven!!" howled Klapaucius,
trying to drown out his friend.

"No! It's four! Four and only four, four from the beginning to the end
of time—FOUR!!" bellowed Trurl, growing hoarse.

The rock beneath their feet was seized with a feverish tremor.

The machine moved away from the cave, letting in a little pale light,
and gave a piercing scream:

"That's not true! It's seven! Say it's seven or I'll hit you!"

"Never!" roared Trurl, as if he no longer cared what happened, and
pebbles and dirt rained down on their heads, for the machine had begun
to ram its eight-story hulk again and again into the wall of stone,
hurling itself against the mountainside until huge boulders broke away
and went tumbling down into the valley.

Thunder and sulfurous fumes filled the cave, and sparks flew from the
blows of steel on rock, yet through all this pandemonium one could still
make out, now and then, the ragged voice of Trurl bawling:

"Two and two is four! Two and two is four!!" Klapaucius attempted to
shut his friend's mouth by force, but, violently thrown off, he gave up,
sat and covered his head with his arms. Not for a moment did the
machine's mad efforts flag, and it seemed that any minute now the
ceiling would collapse, crush the prisoners and bury them forever. But
when they had lost all hope, and the air was thick with acrid smoke and
choking dust, there was suddenly a horrible scraping, and a sound like a
slow explosion, louder than all the maniacal banging and battering, and
the air whooshed, and the black wall that blocked the cave was whisked
away, as if by a hurricane, and monstrous chunks of rock came crashing
down after it. The echoes of that avalanche still rumbled and
reverberated in the valley below when the two friends peered out of
their cave. They saw the machine. It lay smashed and flattened, nearly
broken in half by an enormous boulder that had landed in the middle of
its eight floors. With the greatest care they picked their way down
through the smoking rubble. In order to reach the riverbed, it was
necessary to pass the remains of the machine, which resembled the wreck
of some mighty vessel thrown up upon a beach. Without a word, the two
stopped together in the shadow of its twisted hull. The machine still
quivered slightly, and one could hear something turning, creaking
feebly, within.

"Yes, this is the bad end you've come to, and two and two is—as it
always was—" began Trurl, but just then the machine made a faint, barely
audible croaking noise and said, for the last time, "SEVEN."

Then something snapped inside, a few stones dribbled down from overhead,
and now before them lay nothing but a lifeless mass of scrap. The two
constructors exchanged a look and silently, without any further comment
or conversation, walked back the way they came.

 A GOOD SHELLACKING

Someone was knocking at the door of Klapaucius the constructor. He
looked out and saw a potbellied machine on four short legs.

"Who are you and what do you want?" he asked.

"I'm a Machine to Grant Your Every Wish and have been sent here by your
good friend and colleague, Trurl the Magnificent, as a gift."

"A gift, eh?" replied Klapaucius, whose feelings for Trurl were mixed,
to say the least. He was particularly irked by the phrase "Trurl the
Magnificent." But after a little thought he said, "All right, you can
come in."

He had it stand in the corner by the grandfather clock while he returned
to his work, a squat machine on three short legs, which was almost
completed—he was just putting on the finishing touches. After a while
the Machine to Grant Your Every Wish cleared its throat and said:

"I'm still here."

"I haven't forgotten you," said Klapaucius, not looking up. After
another while the machine cleared its throat again and asked:

"May I ask what you're making there?"

"Are you a Machine to Grant Wishes or a Machine to Ask Questions?" said
Klapaucius, but added: "I need some blue paint."

"I hope it's the right shade," said the machine, opening a door in its
belly and pulling out a bucket of blue. Klapaucius dipped his brush in
it without a word and began to paint. In the next few hours he needed
sandpaper, some Carborundum, a brace and bit, white paint and one No. 5
screw, all of which the machine handed over on the spot.

That evening he covered his work with a sheet of canvas, had dinner,
then pulled up a chair opposite the machine and said:

"Now we'll see what you can do. So you say you can grant every wish…"

"Most every wish," replied the machine modestly. "The paint, sandpaper
and No. 5 screw were satisfactory, I hope?"

"Quite, quite," said Klapaucius. "But now I have in mind something a bit
more difficult. If you can't do it, I'll return you to your master with
my kind thanks and a professional opinion."

"All right, what is it?" asked the machine, fidgeting.

"A Trurl," said Klapaucius. "I want a Trurl, the spit and image of Trurl
himself, so alike that no one could ever tell them apart."

The machine muttered and hummed and finally said:

"Very well, I'll make you a Trurl. But please handle him with care—he
is, after all, a truly magnificent constructor."

"Oh but of course, you needn't worry about that," said Klapaucius.
"Well, where is it?"

"What, right away?" said the machine. "A Trurl isn't a No. 5 screw, you
know. It'll take time."

But it wasn't long at all before the door in the machine's belly opened
and a Trurl climbed out. Klapaucius looked it up and down and around,
touched it, tapped it, but there wasn't any doubt: here was a Trurl as
much like the original Trurl as two peas in a pod. This Trurl squinted a
little, unaccustomed to the light, but otherwise behaved in a perfectly
normal fashion.

"Hello, Trurl!" said Klapaucius.

"Hello, Klapaucius! But wait, how did I get here?" Trurl answered,
clearly bewildered.

"Oh, you just dropped in. … You know, I haven't seen you in ages. How do
you like my place?"

"Fine, fine… What do you have there under that canvas?"

"Nothing much. Won't you take a seat?"

"Well, I really ought to be going. It's getting dark…"

"Don't rush off, you just got here!" protested Klapaucius. "And you
haven't seen my cellar yet."

"Your cellar?"

"Yes, you should find it most interesting. This way…"

And Klapaucius put an arm around Trurl and led him to the cellar, where
he tripped him, pinned him down and quickly tied him up, then took out a
big crowbar and began to wallop the daylights out of him. Trurl howled,
called for help, cursed, begged for mercy, but Klapaucius didn't stop
and the blows rang out and echoed in the dark and empty night.

"Ouch! Ouch!! Why are you beating me?!" yelled Trurl, cowering.

"It gives me pleasure," explained Klapaucius, swinging back. "You should
try it sometime, Trurl!"

And he landed him one on the head, which boomed like a drum.

"If you don't let me go at once, I'll tell the King and he'll have you
thrown in his deepest dungeon!!" screamed Trurl.

"Oh no he won't. And do you know why?" asked Klapaucius, sitting down
for a moment to catch his breath.

"Tell me," said Trurl, glad of the reprieve.

"Because you're not the real Trurl. Trurl, you see, built a Machine to
Grant Your Every Wish and sent it here as a gift; to test it out, I had
it make you! And now I'm going to knock off your head, put it at the
foot of my bed and use it for a bootjack."

"You monster! Why are you doing this to me?"

"I already told you: it gives me pleasure. But enough of this idle
chatter!" And Klapaucius got up and this time picked up a huge bludgeon
in both hands—but Trurl cried out:

"Wait! Stop! I have something to tell you!!"

"I wonder what you could possibly tell me to keep me from using your
head as a bootjack," replied Klapaucius.

Trurl quickly yelled:

"I'm not any Trurl from a machine! I'm the real Trurl —I only wanted to
find out what you've been doing lately behind closed doors and drawn
curtains, so I built a machine, hid in its belly and had it take me
here, pretending to be a gift!"

"Come now, that's an obvious fabrication and not even clever!" said
Klapaucius, hefting his bludgeon. "Don't waste your breath, I can see
right through you. You came out of a machine that grants wishes, and if
it manufactures paint and sandpaper, a brace and bit, and a No. 5 screw,
it can surely manufacture you!"

"I had all that prepared beforehand in its belly!" cried Trurl. "It
wasn't hard to anticipate what you'd need in your work! I swear I'm
telling the truth!"

"Are you trying to tell me that my good friend and colleague, Trurl the
Magnificent, is nothing but a common sneak? No, that I will never
believe!" replied Klapaucius. "Take that!"

And he let him have it.

"That's for slandering my good friend Trurl! And take _that_! And that!"

And he let him have it again, and again, clubbing and clobbering until
his arm was too tired to club or clobber anymore.

"Now I'll have a little nap and rest up," said Klapaucius, throwing
aside the bludgeon. "But don't you worry, I'll be back…" And he left,
and soon was snoring so loud you could hear it even in the cellar. Trurl
writhed and twisted until he loosened his bonds enough to slip off the
knots, got up, crept back to the machine, climbed inside and took off
for home at a gallop. Klapaucius meanwhile was watching the escape from
his bedroom window, pressing a hand over his mouth to keep from laughing
out loud. The next day he went to pay Trurl a visit. It was a gloomy and
silent Trurl that let him in. The room was dark, but even so, Klapaucius
could see that Trurl's person bore the marks of a good
shellacking—though it was apparent that Trurl had gone to some trouble
to touch up the scratches and hammer out the dents.

"Why so gloomy?" asked a cheerful Klapaucius. "I came to thank you for
the nice gift—what a shame, though, it ran off while I slept, and in
such a hurry that it left the door open!"

"It seems to me," snapped Trurl, "that you somewhat misused, or should I
say abused, my gift. Oh, you needn't bother to explain, the machine told
me everything. You had it make me, me, then lured me, I mean the copy of
me, to the cellar, where you beat it unmercifully! And after this great
insult to my person, after this act of the blackest ingratitude, you
dare show your face here as if nothing happened! What do you have to say
for yourself?"

"I really don't understand why you're so angry," said Klapaucius. "It's
true I had the machine make a copy of you, and I must say it was
absolutely perfect, an amazing likeness. As far as the beating goes,
well, your machine must have exaggerated a little—I did give the
artificial Trurl a poke or two, but only to see if it was well made, and
perhaps also to test its reflexes, which were quite good, by the way. It
turned out to be very much on its toes, and even tried to argue that it
was really you, can you imagine—? Of course I didn't believe it, but
then it swore the gift wasn't a gift at all, but some sort of low and
underhanded trick. Well, I had to defend the honor of my good friend,
you understand, so I thrashed it some for slandering you so shamelessly.
On the other hand I found it to be extremely intelligent; so you see,
Trurl, it resembled you mentally as well as physically. You are indeed a
great and magnificent constructor, which is precisely what I came to
tell you so early in the morning!"

"Well, yes, in that case," said Trurl, considerably appeased. "Though
your use of the Machine to Grant Your Every Wish was not, I would say,
the most fortunate …"

"Oh yes, one other thing I wanted to ask," said Klapau-cius, all
innocence. "What did you do with the artificial Trurl? Could I see it?"

"It was beside itself with rage," explained Trurl. "It said it would
ambush you by that mountain pass near your house and tear you limb from
limb. I tried to reason with it, but it called me names, ran out into
the night and started putting together all sorts of booby traps for
you—and so, dear Klapaucius, though you had insulted me, I remembered
our old friendship and decided to remove this threat to your life and
limb. Hence I had to disassemble it…"

And he touched a few nuts and bolts on the floor with his shoe, and
sighed.

Whereupon they exchanged kind words, shook hands and parted the best of
friends.

From that time on, Trurl did nothing but tell everyone how he had given
Klapaucius a Machine to Grant Your Every Wish, how then Klapaucius had
insulted him by having it make an artificial Trurl, which he proceeded
to beat black-and-blue; how then this excellently constructed copy of
the great constructor made clever lies to save itself, and finally
managed to escape while Klapaucius slept, and how Trurl himself, the
real Trurl, eventually had to disassemble the artificial Trurl to
protect his good friend and colleague from its vengeance. Trurl told
this story so often and at such length, elaborating on his glorious
achievement (and never failing to call on Klapaucius as a witness), that
it reached the ears of the Royal Court at last, and now no one spoke of
Trurl other than with the utmost respect, though not long ago he had
been commonly called the Constructor of the World's Stupidest Computer.
When Klapaucius heard, one day, that the King himself had rewarded Trurl
handsomely and decorated him with the Order of the Great Parallax, he
threw up his hands and cried:

"What? Here I was able to see through his little game and gave him so
good a shellacking for it that he had to sneak home in the middle of the
night and patch himself up, and even then he looked a sight! And for
that they decorate him, praise him, shower him with riches? O tempora, O
mores!…"

Furious, he went home, locked himself in and drew the blinds. He too had
been working on a Machine to Grant Your Every Wish, only Trurl had beat
him to it.

_ THE SEVEN SALLIES_

_OF TRURL AND KLAPAUCIUS_

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-4.jpg]

 THE FIRST SALLY

OR _The Trap_

_of Gargantius_

When the Universe was not so out of whack as it is today, and all the
stars were lined up in their proper places, so you could easily count
them from left to right, or top to bottom, and the larger and bluer ones
were set apart, and the smaller, yellowing types pushed off to the
corners as bodies of a lower grade, when there was not a speck of dust
to be found in outer space, nor any nebular debris—in those good old
days it was the custom for constructors, once they had received their
Diploma of Perpetual Omnipotence with distinction, to sally forth
ofttimes and bring to distant lands the benefit of their expertise. And
so it happened that, in keeping with this ancient custom, Trurl and
Klapaucius, who could kindle or extinguish suns as easily as shelling
peas, did venture out on such a voyage. When the vastness of the
traveled void had erased in them all recollection of their native skies,
they saw a planet up ahead—not too little, not too big, just about
right—with one continent only, down the middle of which ran a bright red
line: everything on one side was yellow, everything on the other, pink.
Realizing at once that here were two neighboring kingdoms, the
constructors held a brief council of war before landing.

"With two kingdoms," said Trurl, "it's best you take one, and I the
other. That way nobody's feelings get hurt."

"Fine," said Klapaucius. "But what if they ask for military aid? Such
things happen."

"True, they could demand weapons, even superweapons," Trurl agreed.
"We'll simply refuse."

"And if they insist, and threaten us?" returned Klapaucius. "This too
can happen."

"Let's see," said Trurl, switching on the radio. It blared martial
music, a rousing march.

"I have an idea," said Klapaucius, turning it off. "We can use the
Gargantius Effect. What do you think?"

"Ah, the Gargantius Effect!" cried Trurl. "I never heard of anyone
actually using it. But there's always a first time. Yes, why not?"

"We'll both be prepared to use it," Klapaucius explained. "But it's
imperative that we use it together, otherwise we're in serious trouble."

"No problem," said Trurl. He took a small golden box out of his pocket
and opened it. Inside, on velvet, lay two white beads. "You keep one,
I'll keep the other. Look at yours every evening; if it turns pink,
that'll mean I've started and you must too."

"So be it," said Klapaucius and put his bead away. Then they landed,
shook hands and set off in opposite directions.

The kingdom to which Trurl repaired was ruled by King Atrocitus. He was
a militarist to the core, and an incredible miser besides. To relieve
the royal treasury, he did away with all punishments except for the
death sentence. His favorite occupation was to abolish unnecessary
offices; since that included the office of executioner, every condemned
citizen was obliged to do his own beheading, or else—on rare occasions
of royal clemency—have it done by his next of kin. Of the arts Atrocitus
supported only those that entailed little expense, such as choral
recitation, chess and military calisthenics. The art of war he held in
particularly high esteem, for a victorious campaign brought in excellent
returns; on the other hand, one could properly prepare for war only
during an interval of peace, so the King advocated peace, though in
moderation. His greatest reform was the nationalization of high treason.
As the neighboring kingdom was continually sending spies, he created the
office of Royal Informer, who, through a staff of subordinate traitors,
would hand over State secrets to enemy agents for certain sums of money.
Though as a rule the agents purchased only outdated secrets—those were
less expensive and besides, they were held accountable to their own
treasury for every penny spent.

The subjects of Atrocitus rose early, were well-behaved, and worked long
hours. They wove fascines and gabions for fortifications, made guns and
denunciations. In order that the kingdom not be flooded with the latter
(which in fact had happened during the reign of Bartholocaust the
Walleyed several hundred years before), whoever wrote too many
denunciations was required to pay a special luxury tax. In this way they
were kept at a reasonable level. Arriving at the Court of Atrocitus,
Trurl offered his services. The King— not surprisingly—wanted powerful
instruments of war. Trurl asked for a few days to think it over, and as
soon as he was alone in the little cubicle they had assigned to him, he
looked at the bead in the golden box. It was white but, as he looked,
turned slowly pink. "Aha," he said to himself, "time to start with
Gargantius!" And without further delay he took out his secret formulae
and set to work.

Klapaucius meanwhile found himself in the other kingdom, which was ruled
by the mighty King Ferocitus. Here everything looked quite different
than in Atrocia. This monarch too delighted in campaigns and marches,
and he too spent heavily on armaments—but in an enlightened way, for he
was a most generous lord and a great patron of the arts. He loved
uniforms, gold braid, stripes and tassels, spurs, brigadiers with bells,
destroyers, swords and chargers. A person of keen sensibilities, he
trembled every time he christened a new destroyer. And he lavishly
rewarded paintings of battle scenes, patriotically paying according to
the number of fallen foes depicted, so that, on those endless panoramic
canvases with which the kingdom was packed, mountains _of_ enemy dead
reached up to the sky. In practice he was an autocrat, yet with
libertarian views; a martinet, yet magnanimous. On every anniversary of
his coronation he instituted reforms. Once he ordered the guillotines
decked with flowers, another time had them oiled so they wouldn't
squeak, and once he gilded the executioners' axes and had them all
resharpened—out of humanitarian considerations. Ferocitus was not overly
dainty, yet he did frown upon excesses, and therefore by special decree
regulated and standardized all wheels, racks, spikes, screws, chains and
clubs. Beheadings of wrongthinkers—a rare enough event— took place with
pomp and pageantry, brass bands, speeches, parades and floats. This
high-minded monarch also had a theory, which he put into action, and
this was the Theory of Universal Happiness. It is well known, certainly,
that one does not laugh because one is amused, but rather, one is amused
because one laughs. If then everyone maintains that things just couldn't
be better, attitudes immediately improve. The subjects of Ferocitus were
thus required, for their own good, to go about shouting how wonderful
everything was, and the old, indefinite greeting of "Hello" was changed
by the King to the more emphatic "Hallelujah!" —though children up to
the age of fourteen were permitted to say, "Wow!" or "Whee!", and the
old-timers, "Swell!"

Ferocitus rejoiced to see his people in such good spirits. Whenever he
drove by in his destroyer-shaped carriage, crowds in the street would
cheer, and whenever he graciously waved his royal hand, those up front
would cry: "Wow!"—"Hallelujah!"—"Terrific!" A democrat at heart, he
liked to stop and chat awhile with old soldiers who had been around and
seen much, liked to hear tales of derring-do told at bivouacs, and
often, when some foreign dignitary came for an audience, he would out of
the blue clap him on the knee with his baton and bellow: "Have at
them!"—or: "Swiggle the mizzen there, mates!"—or: "Thunderation!" For
there was nothing he loved so much or held so dear as gumption, crust
and pluck, roughness and toughness, powder, chowder, hardtack, grog and
ammo. And so, whenever he was melancholy, he had his troops march by
before him, singing: "Screw up yer courage, nuts to the foe"—"When
currents lag, crank out the flag"—"We'll scrap, stout lads, until we're
nought but scrap"—or the rousing anthem: "Lock, stock, and barrel." And
he commanded that, when he died, the old guard should sing his favorite
song over the grave: "Old Robots Never Rust."

Klapaucius did not get to the court of this great ruler all at once. At
the first village he came to, he knocked on several doors, but no one
opened up. Finally he noticed in the deserted street a small child; it
approached him and asked in a thin, high voice:

"Wanna buy any, mister? They're cheap."

"What are you selling?" inquired Klapaucius, surprised.

"State secrets," replied the child, lifting the edge of its smock to
give him a glimpse of some mobilization plans. This surprised Klapaucius
even more, and he said:

"No, thank you, my little one. But can you tell me where I might find
the mayor?"

"What'cha want the mayor for?" asked the child.

"I wish to speak with him."

"In secret?"

"It makes no difference."

"Need a secret agent? My dad's a secret agent. Dependable and cheap."

"Very well then, take me to your dad," said Klapaucius, seeing he would
get nowhere with the child. The child led him to one of the houses.
Inside, though it was in the middle of the day, a family sat around a
lighted lamp—a gray grandfather in a rocking chair, a grandmother
knitting socks, and their fully grown and numerous progeny, each busy at
his own household task. As soon as Klapaucius entered, they jumped up
and seized him; the knitting needles turned out to be handcuffs, the
lamp a microphone, and the grandmother the local chief of police.

"They must have made a mistake," thought Klapaucius, when he was beaten
and thrown in jail. Patiently he waited through the night—there was
nothing else he could do. The dawn came and revealed the cobwebs on the
stone walls of his cell, also the rusted remains of previous prisoners.
After a length of time he was taken and interrogated. It turned out that
the little child as well as the houses—the whole village, in fact—all of
it was a plant to trick foreign spies. But Klapaucius did not have to
face the rigors of a long trial; the proceedings were quickly over. For
attempting to establish contact with the informer-dad the punishment was
a third-class guillotining, because the local administration had already
allotted funds to buy out enemy agents for that fiscal year, and
Klapaucius, on his part, repeatedly refused to purchase any State
secrets from the police. Nor did he have sufficient ready cash to
mitigate the offense. Still, the prisoner continued to protest his
innocence—not that the judge believed a word of it; even if he had, to
free him lay outside his jurisdiction. So the case was sent to a higher
court, and in the meantime Klapaucius was subjected to torture, though
more as a matter of form than out of any real necessity. In about a week
his case took a turn for the better; finally acquitted, he proceeded to
the Capitol where, after receiving instructions in the rules and
regulations of court etiquette, he obtained the honor of a private
audience with the King. They also gave him a bugle, for every citizen
was obliged to announce his comings and goings in official places with
appropriate flourishes, and such was the iron discipline of that land,
that the sun was not considered risen without the blowing of reveille.

Ferocitus did in fact demand new weapons. Klapaucius promised to fulfill
this royal wish; his plan, he assured the King, represented a radical
departure from the accepted principles of military action. What kind of
army—he asked first—always emerged victorious? The one that had the
finest leaders and the best disciplined soldiers. The leader gave the
orders, the soldier carried them out; the former therefore had to be
wise, the latter obedient. However, to the wisdom of the mind, even of
the military mind, there were certain natural limits. A great leader,
moreover, could come up against an equally great leader. Then too, he
might fall in battle and leave his legion leaderless, or do something
even more dreadful, since he was, as it were, professionally trained to
think, and the object of his thoughts was power. Was it not dangerous to
have a host of old generals in the field, their rusty heads so packed
with tactics and strategy that they started pining for the throne? Had
not more than one kingdom come to grief thereby? It was clear, then,
that leaders were a necessary evil; the problem lay in making that evil
unnecessary. To go on: the discipline of an army consisted in the
precise execution of orders. Ideally, we would have a thousand hearts
and minds molded into one heart, one mind, one will. Military regimens,
drills, exercises and maneuvers all served this end. The ultimate goal
was thus an army that literally acted as one man, in itself both creator
and executor of its objectives. But where was the embodiment of such
perfection to be found? Only in the individual, for no one was obeyed as
willingly as one's own self, and no one carried out orders as cheerfully
as the one who gave those orders. Nor could an individual be dispersed,
and insubordination or mutiny against himself was quite out of the
question. The problem then was to take this eagerness to serve oneself,
this self-worship which marked the individual, and make it a property of
a force of thousands. How could this be done? Here Klapaucius began to
explain to the keenly interested King the simple ideas—for are not all
things of genius simple?—discovered by the great Gargantius.

Into each recruit (he explained) a plug is screwed in front, a socket in
back. Upon the command "Close up those ranks!" the plugs and sockets
connect and, where only a moment before you had a crowd of civilians,
there stands a battalion of perfect soldiers. When separate minds,
hitherto occupied with all sorts of nonmartial nonsense, merge into one
regimental consciousness, not only is there automatic discipline, for
the army has become a single fighting machine composed of a million
parts—but there is also wisdom. And that wisdom is directly proportional
to the numbers involved. A platoon possesses the acumen of a master
sergeant; a company is as shrewd as a lieutenant colonel, a brigade
smarter than a field marshal; and a division is worth more than all the
army's strategists and specialists put together. In this way one can
create formations of truly staggering perspicacity. And of course they
will follow their own orders to the letter. This puts an end to the
vagaries and reckless escapades of individuals, the dependence on a
particular commander's capabilities, the constant rivalries, envies and
enmities between generals. And detachments, once joined, should not be
put asunder, for that produces nothing but confusion. "An army whose
only leader is itself—this is my idea!" Klapaucius concluded. The King
was much impressed with his words and finally said:

"Return to your quarters. I shall consult my general staff…"

"Oh, do not do this, Your Royal Highness!" exclaimed the clever
Klapaucius, feigning great consternation. "That is exactly what the
Emperor Turbulon did, and his staff, to protect their own positions,
advised him against it; shortly thereafter, the neighbor of Turbulon,
King Enamuel, attacked with a revolutionized army and reduced the empire
to ashes, though his forces were eight times smaller!"

Whereupon he bowed, went to his room and inspected the little bead,
which was red as a beet; that meant Trurl had done likewise at the court
of Atrocitus. The King soon ordered Klapaucius to revolutionize one
platoon of infantry; joined in spirit and now entirely of one mind, this
tiny unit cried, "Kill, kill!" swooped down on three squadrons of the
King's dragoons, who were armed to the teeth and led moreover by six
distinguished lecturers of the Academy of the General Staff—and cut them
to ribbons. Great was the grief of the generals, marshals, admirals and
commanders in chief, for the King sent them all into a speedy
retirement; fully convinced of the efficacy of Klapaucius' invention, he
ordered the entire army revolutionized.

And so munitions electricians worked day and night, turning out plugs
and sockets by the carload, and these were installed as necessary in all
the barracks. Covered with medals, Klapaucius rode from garrison to
garrison and supervised everything. Trurl fared similarly in the kingdom
of Atrocitus, except that, due to that monarch's well-known parsimony,
he had to content himself with the lifelong title of Great Betrayer of
the Fatherland. Both kingdoms were now preparing for war. In the heat of
mobilization, conventional as well as nuclear weapons were brought into
battle trim, and cannons and atoms subjected to the utmost spit and
polish, as per regulations. Their work now all but done, the two
constructors packed their bags in secret, to be ready to meet, when the
time came, at the appointed place near the ship they had left in the
forest.

Meanwhile miracles were taking place among the rank and file,
particularly in the infantry. Companies no longer had to practice their
marching drills, nor did they need to count off to learn their number,
just as one who has two legs never mistakes his right for his left, nor
finds it necessary to calculate how many of himself there are. It was a
joy to see those new units do the Forward March, About Face and Company
Halt; and afterwards, when they were dismissed, they took to chatting,
and later, through the open windows of the barracks one could hear
voices booming in chorus, disputing such matters as absolute truth,
analytic versus synthetic a priori propositions, and the
Thing-in-itself, for their collective minds had already attained that
level. Various philosophical systems were hammered out, till finally a
certain battalion of sappers arrived at a position of total solipsism,
claiming that nothing really existed beyond itself. And since from this
it followed that there was no King, nor any enemy, this battalion was
quietly disconnected and its members reassigned to units that firmly
adhered to epistemological realism. At about the same time, in the
kingdom of Atrocitus, the sixth amphibious division forsook naval
operations for navel contemplation and, thoroughly immersed in
mysticism, very nearly drowned. Somehow or other, as a result of this
incident, war was declared, and the troops, rumbling and clanking,
slowly moved towards the border from either side.

The law of Gargantius proceeded to work with inexorable logic. As
formation joined formation, in proportion there developed an esthetic
sense, which reached its apex at the level of a reinforced division, so
that the columns of such a force easily became sidetracked, chasing off
after butterflies, and when the motorized corps named for Bartholocaust
approached an enemy fortress that had to be taken by storm, the plan of
attack drawn up that night turned out to be a splendid painting of the
battlements, done moreover in the abstractionist spirit, which ran
counter to all military traditions. Among the artillery corps the
weightiest metaphysical questions were considered, and, with an
absentmindedness characteristic of great genius, these large units lost
their weapons, misplaced their equipment and completely forgot that
there was a war on. As for whole armies, their psyches were beset by a
multitude of complexes, which often happens to overly developed
intellects, and it became necessary to assign to each a special
psychiatric motorcycle brigade, which applied appropriate therapy on the
march.

In the meantime, to the thunderous accompaniment of fife and drum, both
sides slowly got into position. Six regiments of shock troops, supported
by a battery of howitzers and two backup battalions, composed, with the
assistance of a firing squad, a sonnet entitled "On the Mystery of
Being," and this took place during guard duty. There was considerable
confusion in both armies; the Eightieth Marlabardian Corps, for
instance, maintained that the whole concept of "enemy" needed to be more
clearly defined, as it was full of logical contradictions and might even
be altogether meaningless.

Paratroopers tried to find algorithms for the local terrain, flanks kept
colliding with centers, so at last the two kings sent airborne adjutants
and couriers extraordinary to restore order in the ranks. But each of
these, having flown or galloped up to the corps in question, before he
could discover the cause of the disturbance, instantly lost his identity
in the corporate identity, and the kings were left without adjutants or
couriers. Consciousness, it seemed, formed a deadly trap, in that one
could enter it, but never leave.

Atrocitus himself saw how his cousin, the Grand Prince Bullion, desiring
to raise the spirits of his soldiers, leaped into the fray, and how, as
soon as he had hooked himself into the line, his spirit was literally
spirited away, and he was no more.

Sensing that something had gone amiss, Ferocitus nodded to the twelve
buglers at his right hand. Atrocitus, from the top of his hill, did
likewise; the buglers put the brass to their lips and sounded the charge
on either side. At this clarion signal each army totally and completely
linked up. The fearsome metallic clatter of closing contacts
reverberated over the future battlefield; in the place of a thousand
bombardiers and grenadiers, commandos, lancers, gunners, snipers,
sappers and marauders—there stood two giant beings, who gazed at one
another through a million eyes across a mighty plain that lay beneath
billowing clouds. There was absolute silence. That famous culmination of
consciousness which the great Gargantius had predicted with mathematical
precision was now reached on both sides. For beyond a certain point
militarism, a purely local phenomenon, becomes civil, and this is
because the Cosmos Itself is by nature wholly civilian, and indeed, the
minds of both armies had assumed truly cosmic proportions! Thus, though
on the outside armor still gleamed, as well as the death-dealing steel
of artillery, _within_ there surged an ocean of mutual good will,
tolerance, an all-embracing benevolence, and bright reason. And so,
standing on opposite hilltops, their weapons sparkling in the sun, while
the drums continued to roll, the two armies smiled at one another. Trurl
and Klapaucius were just then boarding their ship, since that which they
had planned had come to pass: before the eyes of their mortified,
infuriated rulers, both armies went off hand in hand, picking flowers
beneath the fluffy white clouds, on the field of the battle that never
was.

 THE FIRST SALLY (A)

OR _Trurl's_

_Electronic Bard_

First of all, to avoid any possible misunderstanding, we should state
that this was, strictly speaking, a sally to nowhere. In fact, Trurl
never left his house throughout it— except for a few trips to the
hospital and an unimportant excursion to some asteroid. Yet in a deeper
and/or higher sense this was one of the farthest sallies ever undertaken
by the famed constructor, for it very nearly took him beyond the realm
of possibility.

Trurl had once had the misfortune to build an enormous calculating
machine that was capable of only one operation, namely the addition of
two and two, and that it did incorrectly. As is related earlier in this
volume, the machine also proved to be extremely stubborn, and the
quarrel that ensued between it and its creator almost cost the latter
his life. From that time on Klapaucius teased Trurl unmercifully, making
comments at every opportunity, until Trurl decided to silence him once
and for all by building a machine that could write poetry. First Trurl
collected eight hundred and twenty tons of books on cybernetics and
twelve thousand tons of the finest poetry, then sat down to read it all.
Whenever he felt he just couldn't take another chart or equation, he
would switch over to verse, and vice versa. After a while it became
clear to him that the construction of the machine itself was child's
play in comparison with the writing of the program. The program found in
the head of an average poet, after all, was written by the poet's
civilization, and that civilization was in turn programmed by the
civilization that preceded it, and so on to the very Dawn of Time, when
those bits of information that concerned the poet-to-be were still
swirling about in the primordial chaos of the cosmic deep. Hence in
order to program a poetry machine, one would first have to repeat the
entire Universe from the beginning—or at least a good piece of it.

Anyone else in Trurl's place would have given up then and there, but our
intrepid constructor was nothing daunted. He built a machine and
fashioned a digital model of the Void, an Electrostatic Spirit to move
upon the face of the electrolytic waters, and he introduced the
parameter of light, a protogalactic cloud or two, and by degrees worked
his way up to the first ice age—Trurl could move at this rate because
his machine was able, in one five-billionth of a second, to simulate one
hundred septillion events at forty octillion different locations
simultaneously. And if anyone questions these figures, let him work it
out for himself.

Next Trurl began to model Civilization, the striking of fires with
flints and the tanning of hides, and he provided for dinosaurs and
floods, bipedality and taillessness, then made the paleopaleface
(Albuminidis sapienria), which begat the paleface, which begat the
gadget, and so it went, from eon to millennium, in the endless hum of
electrical currents and eddies. Often the machine turned out to be too
small for the computer simulation of a new epoch, and Trurl would have
to tack on an auxiliary unit—until he ended up, at last, with a
veritable metropolis of tubes and terminals, circuits and shunts, all so
tangled and involved that the devil himself couldn't have made head or
tail of it. But Trurl managed somehow, he only had to go back twice
—once, almost to the beginning, when he discovered that Abel had
murdered Cain and not Cain Abel (the result, apparently, of a defective
fuse), and once, only three hundred million years back to the middle of
the Mesozoic, when after going from fish to amphibian to reptile to
mammal, something odd took place among the primates and instead of great
apes he came out with gray drapes. A fly, it seems, had gotten into the
machine and shorted out the polyphase step-down directional widget.
Otherwise everything went like a dream. Antiquity and the Middle Ages
were recreated, then the period of revolutions and reforms —which gave
the machine a few nasty jolts—and then civilization progressed in such
leaps and bounds that Trurl had to hose down the coils and cores
repeatedly to keep them from overheating.

Towards the end of the twentieth century the machine began to tremble,
first sideways, then lengthwise-—for no apparent reason. This alarmed
Trurl; he brought out cement and grappling irons just in case. But
fortunately these weren't needed; instead of jumping its moorings, the
machine settled down and soon had left the twentieth century far behind.
Civilizations came and went thereafter in fifty-thousand-year intervals:
these were the fully intelligent beings from whom Trurl himself stemmed.
Spool upon spool of computerized history was filled and ejected into
storage bins; soon there were so many spools, that even if you stood at
the top of the machine with high-power binoculars, you wouldn't see the
end of them. And all to construct some versifier! But then, such is the
way of scientific fanaticism. At last the programs were ready; all that
remained was to pick out the most applicable—else the electropoet's
education would take several million years at the very least.

During the next two weeks Trurl fed general instructions into his future
electropoet, then set up all the necessary logic circuits, emotive
elements, semantic centers. He was about to invite Klapaucius to attend
a trial run, but thought better of it and started the machine himself.
It immediately proceeded to deliver a lecture on the grinding of
crystallo-graphical surfaces as an introduction to the study of
sub-molecular magnetic anomalies. Trurl bypassed half the logic circuits
and made the emotive more electromotive; the machine sobbed, went into
hysterics, then finally said, blubbering terribly, what a cruel, cruel
world this was. Trurl intensified the semantic fields and attached a
strength of character component; the machine informed him that from now
on he would carry out its every wish and to begin with add six floors to
the nine it already had, so it could better meditate upon the meaning of
existence. Trurl installed a philosophical throttle instead; the machine
fell silent and sulked. Only after endless pleading and cajoling was he
able to get it to recite something: "I had a little froggy." That
appeared to exhaust its repertoire. Trurl adjusted, modulated,
expostulated, disconnected, ran checks, reconnected, reset, did
everything he could think of, and the machine presented him with a poem
that made him thank heaven Klapaucius wasn't there to laugh—imagine,
simulating the whole Universe from scratch, not to mention Civilization
in every particular, and to end up with such dreadful doggerel! Trurl
put in six cliche filters, but they snapped like matches; he had to make
them out of pure corundum steel. This seemed to work, so he jacked the
semanticity up all the way, plugged in an alternating rhyme
generator—which nearly ruined everything, since the machine resolved to
become a missionary among destitute tribes on far-flung planets. But at
the very last minute, just as he was ready to give up and take a hammer
to it, Trurl was struck by an inspiration; tossing out all the logic
circuits, he replaced them with self-regulating egocentripetal
narcissistors. The machine simpered a little, whimpered a little,
laughed bitterly, complained of an awful pain on its third floor, said
that in general it was fed up, through, life was beautiful but men were
such beasts and how sorry they'd all be when it was dead and gone. Then
it asked for pen and paper. Trurl sighed with relief, switched it off
and went to bed. The next morning he went to see Klapaucius. Klapaucius,
hearing that he was invited to attend the debut of Trurl's electronic
bard, dropped everything and followed—so eager was he to be an
eyewitness to his friend's humiliation.

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-6.jpg]

Trurl let the machine warm up first, kept the power low, ran up the
metal stairs several times to take readings (the machine was like the
engine of a giant steamer, galleried, with rows of rivets, dials and
valves on every tier)—till finally, satisfied all the decimal places
were where they ought to be, he said yes, it was ready now, and why not
start with something simple. Later, of course, when the machine had
gotten the feel of it, Klapaucius could ask it to produce poetry on
absolutely whatever topic he liked.

Now the potentiometers indicated the machine's lyrical capacitance was
charged to maximum, and Trurl, so nervous his hands were shaking, threw
the master switch. A voice, slightly husky but remarkably vibrant and
bewitching, said:

  "Phlogisticosh. Rhomothriglyph. Floof."

"Is that it?" inquired Klapaucius after a pause, extremely polite. Trurl
only bit his lip, gave the machine a few kicks of current, and tried
again. This time the voice came through much more clearly; it was a
thrilling baritone, solemn yet intriguingly sensual:

  Pev't o' tay merlong gumin gots,

  Untie yun furly pazzen ye,

  Confre an' ayzor, ayzor ots,

  Bither de furloss bochre blee!

"Am I missing something?" said Klapaucius, calmly watching a
panic-stricken Trurl struggling at the controls.

Finally Trurl waved his arms in despair, dashed clattering several
flights up the metal stairs, got down on all fours and crawled into the
machine through a trapdoor; he hammered away inside, swearing like a
maniac, tightened something, pried at something, crawled out again and
ran frantically to another tier. At long last he let out a cry of
triumph, threw a burnt tube over his shoulder—it bounced off the railing
and fell to the floor, shattering at the feet of Klapau-cius. But Trurl
didn't bother to apologize; he quickly put in a new tube, wiped his
hands on a chammy cloth and hollered down for Klapaucius to try it now.
The following words rang out:

  Mockles! Fent on silpen tree,

  Blockards three a-feening,

  Mockles, what silps came to thee

  In thy pantry dreaming?

"Well, that's an improvement!" shouted Trurl, not entirely convinced.
"The last line particularly, did you notice?"

"If this is all you have to show me…" said Klapaucius, the very soul of
politeness.

"Damn!" said Trurl and again disappeared inside the machine. There was a
fierce banging and clanging, the sputtering of shorted wires and the
muttering of an even shorter temper, then Trurl stuck his head out of a
trapdoor on the third story and yelled, "_Now_ try it!"

Klaupaucius complied. The electronic bard shuddered from stem to stern
and began:

  Oft, in that wickless chalet all begorn,

  Where whilom soughed the mossy sappertort

  And you were wont to bong—

Trurl yanked out a few cables in a fury, something rattled and wheezed,
the machine fell silent. Klapaucius laughed so hard he had to sit on the
floor. Then suddenly, as Trurl was rushing back and forth, there was A
CRACKLE, A CLACK, AND the machine with perfect poise said:

  The Petty and the Small;

  Are overcome with gall ;

  When Genius, having faltered, fails to FALL.

  Klapaucius too, I ween,

  Will turn the deepest green

  To hear such flawless verse from Trurl's machine.

"There you are, an epigram! And wonderfully apropos!" laughed Trurl,
racing down the metal stairs and flinging himself delightedly into his
colleague's arms. Klapaucius, quite taken aback, was no longer laughing.

"What, _that_?" he said. "That's nothing. Besides, you had it all set up
beforehand."

"Setup?!"

"Oh, it's quite obvious… the ill-disguised hostility, the poverty of
thought, the crudeness of execution."

"All right, then ask it something else! Whatever you like! Go on! What
are you waiting for? Afraid?!"

"Just a minute," said Klapaucius, annoyed. He was trying to think of a
request as difficult as possible, aware that any argument on the quality
of the verse the machine might be able to produce would be hard if not
impossible to settle either way. Suddenly he brightened and said:

"Have it compose a poem—a poem about a haircut! But lofty, noble,
tragic, timeless, full of love, treachery, retribution, quiet heroism in
the face of certain doom! Six lines, cleverly rhymed, and every word
beginning with the letter _s_!!"

"And why not throw in a full exposition of the general theory of
nonlinear automata while you're at it?" growled Trurl. "You can't give
it such idiotic—"

But he didn't FINISH. A melodious voice filled the hall with the
following:

  Seduced, shaggy Samson snored.

  She scissored short. Sorely shorn,

  Soon shackled slave, Samson sighed,

  Silently scheming,

  Sightlessly seeking

  Some savage, spectacular suicide.

"Well, what do you say to that?" asked Trurl, his arms folded proudly.
But Klapaucius was already shouting:

"Now all in _g_! A sonnet, trochaic hexameter, about an old cyclotron
who kept sixteen artificial mistresses, blue and radioactive, had four
wings, three purple pavilions, two lacquered chests, each containing
exactly one thousand medallions bearing the likeness of Czar Murdicog
the Headless…"

"Grinding gleeful gears, Gerontogyron grabbed / Giggling gynecobalt-6o
golems," began the machine, but Trurl leaped to the console, shut off
the power and turned, defending the machine with his body.

"Enough!" he said, hoarse with indignation. "How dare you waste a great
talent on such drivel? Either give it decent poems to write or I call
the whole thing off!"

"What, those aren't decent poems?" protested Klapaucius.

"Certainly not! I didn't build a machine to solve ridiculous crossword
puzzles! That's hack work, not Great Art! Just give it a topic, any
topic, as difficult as you like…"

Klapaucius thought, and thought some more. Finally he nodded and said:

"Very well. Let's have a love poem, lyrical, pastoral, and expressed in
the language of pure mathematics. Tensor algebra mainly, with a little
topology and higher calculus, if need be. But with feeling, you
understand, and in the cybernetic spirit."

"Love and tensor algebra? Have you taken leave of your senses?" Trurl
began, but stopped, for his electronic bard was already declaiming:

  Come, let us hasten to a higher plane,

  Where dyads tread the fairy fields of Venn,

  Their indices bedecked from one to _n_,

  Commingled in an endless Markov chain!

  Come, every frustum longs to be a cone,

  And every vector dreams of matrices.

  Hark to the gentle gradient of the breeze:

  It whispers of a more ergodic zone.

  In Riemann, Hilbert or in Banach space

  Let superscripts and subscripts go their ways

  Our asymptotes no longer out of phase,

  We shall encounter, counting, face to face.

  I'll grant thee random access to my heart,

  Thou'lt tell me all the constants of thy love;

  And so we two shall all love's lemmas prove,

  And in our bound partition never part.

  For what did Cauchy know, or Christoffel,

  Or Fourier, or any Boole or Euler,

  Wielding their compasses, their pens and rulers,

  Of thy supernal sinusoidal spell?

  Cancel me not—for what then shall remain?

  Abscissas, some mantissas, modules, modes,

  A root or two, a torus and a node:

  The inverse of my verse, a null domain.

  Ellipse of bliss, converge, O lips divine!

  The product of our scalars is defined!

  Cyberiad draws nigh, and the skew mind

  Cuts capers like a happy haversine.

  I see the eigenvalue in thine eye,

  I hear the tender tensor in thy sigh.

  Bernoulli would have been content to die,

  Had he but known such a² cos 2 Ø_!_

This concluded the poetic competition, since Klapaucius suddenly had to
leave, saying he would return shortly with more topics for the machine;
but he never did, afraid that in so doing, he might give Trurl more
cause to boast. Trurl of course let it be known that Klapaucius had fled
in order to hide his envy and chagrin. Klapaucius meanwhile spread the
word that Trurl had more than one screw loose on the subject of that
so-called mechanical versifier.

Not much time went by before news of Trurl's computer laureate reached
the genuine—-that is, the ordinary—poets. Deeply offended, they resolved
to ignore the machine's existence. A few, however, were curious enough
to visit Trurl's electronic bard in secret. It received them
courteously, in a hall piled high with closely written paper (for it
worked day and night without pause). Now these poets were all
avant-garde, and Trurl's machine wrote only in the traditional manner;
Trurl, no connoisseur of poetry, had relied heavily on the classics in
setting up its program. The machine's guests jeered and left in triumph.
The machine was self-programming, however, and in addition had a special
ambition-amplifying mechanism with glory-seeking circuits, and very soon
a great change took place. Its poems became difficult, ambiguous, so
intricate and charged with meaning that they were totally
incomprehensible. When the next group of poets came to mock and laugh,
the machine replied with an improvisation that was so modern, it took
their breath away, and the second poem seriously weakened a certain
sonneteer who had two State awards to his name, not to mention a statue
in the city park. After that, no poet could resist the fatal urge to
cross lyrical swords with Trurl's electronic bard. They came from far
and wide, carrying trunks and suitcases full of manuscripts. The machine
would let each challenger recite, instantly grasp the algorithm of his
verse, and use it to compose an answer in exactly the same style, only
two hundred and twenty to three hundred and forty-seven times better.

The machine quickly grew so adept at this, that it could cut down a
first-class rhapsodist with no more than one or two quatrains. But the
worst of it was, all the third-rate poets emerged unscathed; being
third-rate, they didn't know good poetry from bad and consequently had
no inkling of their crushing defeat. One of them, true, broke his leg
when, on the way out, he tripped over an epic poem the machine had just
completed, a prodigious work beginning with the words:

  Arms, and machines I sing, that, forc'd by fate,

  And haughty Homo's unrelenting hate,

  Expell'd and exil'd, left the Terran shore …

The true poets, on the other hand, were decimated by Trurl's electronic
bard, though it never laid a finger on them. First an aged elegiast,
then two modernists committed suicide, leaping off a cliff that
unfortunately happened to lie hard by the road leading from Trurl's
place to the nearest train station.

There were many poet protests staged, demonstrations, demands that the
machine be served an injunction to cease and desist. But no one else
appeared to care. In fact, magazine editors generally approved: Trurl's
electronic bard, writing under several thousand different pseudonyms at
once, had a poem for every occasion, to fit whatever length might be
required, and of such high quality that the magazine would be torn from
hand to hand by eager readers. On the street one could see enraptured
faces, bemused smiles, sometimes even hear a quiet sob. Everyone knew
the poems of Trurl's electronic bard, the air rang with its delightful
rhymes. Not infrequently, those citizens of a greater sensitivity,
struck by a particularly marvelous metaphor or assonance, would actually
fall into a faint. But this colossus of inspiration was prepared even
for that eventuality; it would immediately supply the necessary number
of restorative rondelets.

Trurl himself had no little trouble in connection with his invention.
The classicists, generally elderly, were fairly harmless; they confined
themselves to throwing stones through his windows and smearing the sides
of his house with an unmentionable substance. But it was much worse with
the younger poets. One, for example, as powerful in body as his verse
was in imagery, beat Trurl to a pulp. And while the constructor lay in
the hospital, events marched on. Not a day passed without a suicide or a
funeral; picket lines formed around the hospital; one could hear gunfire
in the distance —instead of manuscripts in their suitcases, more and
more poets were bringing rifles to defeat Trurl's electronic bard. But
the bullets merely bounced off its calm exterior. After his return from
the hospital, Trurl, weak and desperate, finally decided one night to
dismantle the homeostatic Homer he had created.

But when he approached the machine, limping slightly, it noticed the
pliers in his hand and the grim glitter in his eye, and delivered such
an eloquent, impassioned plea for mercy, that the constructor burst into
tears, threw down his tools and hurried back to his room, wading through
new works of genius, an ocean of paper that filled the hall chest-high
from end to end and rustled incessantly.

The following month Trurl received a bill for the electricity consumed
by the machine and almost fell off his chair. If only he could have
consulted his old friend Klapaucius! But Klapaucius was nowhere to be
found. So Trurl had to come up with something by himself. One dark night
he unplugged the machine, took it apart, loaded it onto a ship, flew to
a certain small asteroid, and there assembled it again, giving it an
atomic pile for its source of creative energy.

Then he sneaked home. But that wasn't the end of it. The electronic
bard, deprived now of the possibility of having its masterpieces
published, began to broadcast them on all wave lengths, which soon sent
the passengers and crews of passing rockets into states of stanzaic
stupefaction, and those more delicate souls were seized with severe
attacks of esthetic ecstasy besides. Having determined the cause of this
disturbance, the Cosmic Fleet Command issued Trurl an official request
for the immediate termination of his device, which was seriously
impairing the health and well-being of all travelers.

At that point Trurl went into hiding, so they dropped a team of
technicians on the asteroid to gag the machine's output unit. It
overwhelmed them with a few ballads, however, and the mission had to be
abandoned. Deaf technicians were sent next, but the machine employed
pantomime. After that, there began to be talk of an eventual punitive
expedition, of bombing the electropoet into submission. But just then
some ruler from a neighboring star system came, bought the machine and
hauled it off, asteroid and all, to his kingdom.

Now Trurl could appear in public again and breathe easy. True, lately
there had been supernovae exploding on the southern horizon, the like of
which no one had ever seen before, and there were rumors that this had
something to do with poetry. According to one report, that same ruler,
moved by some strange whim, had ordered his astroengineers to connect
the electronic bard to a constellation of white supergiants, thereby
transforming each line of verse into a stupendous solar prominence; thus
the Greatest Poet in the Universe was able to transmit its thermonuclear
creations to all the illimitable reaches of space at once. But even if
there were any truth to this, it was all too far away to bother Trurl,
who vowed by everything that was ever held sacred never, never again to
make a cybernetic model of the Muse.

 THE SECOND SALLY

OR _The Offer_

_of King Krool_

The tremendous success of their application of the Gargantius Effect
gave both constructors such an appetite for adventure, that they
resolved to sally forth once again to parts unknown. Unfortunately, they
were quite unable to decide on a destination. Trurl, given to tropical
climes, had his heart set on Scaldonia, the land of the Flaming
Flamingos, while Klapaucius, of a somewhat cooler disposition, was
equally determined to visit the Intergalactic Cold Pole, a bleak
continent adrift among frozen stars. The friends were about to part
company for good when Trurl suddenly had an idea. "Wait," he said, "we
can advertise our services, then take the best offer!"

"Ridiculous!" snorted Klapaucius. "How are you going to advertise? In a
newspaper? Do you have any idea how long it takes a newspaper to reach
the nearest planet? You'll be dead and buried before the first offer
comes in!"

But Trurl gave a knowing smile and revealed his plan, which
Klapaucius—begrudgingly—had to admit was ingenious, and so they set to
work. All the necessary equipment quickly thrown together, they gathered
up the local stars and arranged them in a great sign, a sign that would
be visible at truly incalculable distances. Only blue giants were used
for the first word—to get the cosmic reader's attention—and lesser
stellar material made up the others. The advertisement read: TWO
Distinguished Constructors Seek Employment Commensurate with Their Skill
and Above All Lucrative, Hence Preferably at the Court of a Well-heeled
King (Should Have His Own Kingdom), Terms to Be Arranged. It was not
long before, one bright morning, a most marvelous craft alighted on
their front lawn. It gleamed in the sun, all inlaid with
mother-of-pearl, had three legs intricately carved and six additional
supports of solid gold (quite useless, since they didn't even reach the
ground—but then, the builders obviously had more wealth than they knew
what to do with). Down a magnificent staircase with billowing fountains
on either side there came a figure of stately bearing with a retinue of
six-legged machines: some of these massaged him, some supported him and
fanned him, and the smallest flew above his august brow and sprayed it
with eau de cologne from an atomizer. This impressive emissary greeted
the constructors on behalf of his lord and sovereign, King Krool, who
wished to engage them.

"What sort of work is it?" asked Trurl, interested.

"The details, gentle sirs, you shall learn at the proper time," was his
reply. He was dressed in galligaskins of gold, mink-tufted buskins,
sequined earmuffs, and a robe of most unusual cut—instead of pockets it
had little shelves full of mints and marzipan. Tiny mechanical flies
also buzzed about his person, and these he brushed away whenever they
grew too bold.

"For now," he went on, "I can only say that His Boundless Kroolty is a
great enthusiast of the hunt, a fearless and peerless conqueror of every
sort of galactic fauna, and verily, his prowess has reached such heights
that now the fiercest predators known are no longer worthy game for him.
And herein lies our misfortune, for he craves excitement, danger,
thrills… which is why—"

"Of course!" said Trurl. "He wants us to construct a new model of beast,
something wild and rapacious enough to present a challenge."

"You are, worthy constructor, indeed quick!" said the King's emissary.
"Then it is agreed?"

Klapaucius began to question the emissary more closely on certain
practical matters. But after the King's generosity was glowingly
described and sufficiently elaborated upon, they hurriedly packed their
things and a few books, ran up the magnificent staircase, hopped on
board and were immediately lifted, with a great roar and burst of flame
that blackened the ship's gold legs, into the interstellar night.

As they traveled, the emissary briefed the constructors on the laws and
customs prevailing in the Kingdom of Krool, told them of the monarch's
nature, as broad and open as a leveled city, and of his manly pursuits,
and much more, so that by the time the ship landed, they could speak the
language like natives.

First they were taken to a splendid villa situated on a mountainside
above the village—this was where they were to stay. Then, after a brief
rest, the King sent a carriage for them, a carriage drawn by six
fire-breathing monsters. These were muzzled with fire screens and smoke
filters, had their wings clipped to keep them on the ground, and long
spiked tails and six paws apiece with iron claws that cut deep pits in
the road wherever they went. As soon as the monsters saw the
constructors, the entire team set up a howl, belching fire and
brimstone, and strained to get at them. The coachmen in asbestos armor
and the King's huntsmen with hoses and pumps had to fall upon the crazed
creatures and beat them into submission with laser and maser clubs
before Trurl and Klapaucius could safely step into the plush carriage,
which they did without a word. The carriage tore off at breakneck speed
or—to use an appropriate metaphor— like a bat out of hell.

"You know,” Trurl whispered in Klapaucius' ear as they rushed along,
knocking down everything in their path and leaving a long trail of
sulfurous smoke behind them, "I have a feeling that this king won't
settle for just anything. I mean, if he has coursers like these…"

But level-headed Klapaucius said nothing. Houses now flashed by, walls
of diamonds and sapphires and silver, while the dragons thundered and
hissed and the drivers cursed and shouted. At last a colossal portcullis
loomed up ahead, opened, and their carriage whirled into the courtyard,
careening so sharply that the flower beds all shriveled up, then ground
to a stop before a castle black as blackest night. Welcomed by an
unusually dismal fanfare and quite overwhelmed by the massive stairs,
balustrades and especially the stone giants that guarded the main gate,
Trurl and Klapaucius, flanked by a formidable escort, entered the mighty
castle.

King Krool awaited them in an enormous hall the shape of a skull, a vast
and vaulted cave of beaten silver. There was a gaping pit in the floor,
the skull's foramen magnum, and beyond it stood the throne, over which
two streams of light crossed like swords—they came from high windows
fixed in the skull's eye sockets and with panes specially tinted to give
everything a harsh and infernal aspect. The constructors now saw Krool
himself: too impatient to sit still on his throne, this monarch paced
from wall to wall across the silver floor, his steps booming in that
cadaverous cavern, and as he spoke he emphasized his words with such
sudden stabs of the hand, that the air whistled.

"Welcome, constructors!" he said, skewering them both with his eyes. "As
you've no doubt learned from Lord Protozor, Master of the Royal Hunt, I
want you to build me new and better kinds of game. Now I'm not
interested, you understand, in any mountain of steel on a hundred-odd
treads—that's a job for heavy artillery, not for me. My quarry must be
strong and ferocious, but swift and nimble too, and above all cunning
and full of wiles, so that I will have to call upon all my hunter's art
to drive it to the ground. It must be a highly intelligent beast, and
know all there is to know of covering tracks, doubling back, hiding in
shadows and lying in wait, for such is my will!"

"Forgive me, Your Highness," said Klapaucius with a careful bow, "but if
we do Your Highness' bidding too well, might not this put the royal life
and limb in some peril?"

The King roared with such laughter that a couple of crystal pendants
fell off a chandelier and shattered at the feet of the trembling
constructors.

"Have no fear of that, noble constructors!" he said with a grim smile.
"You are not the first, and you will not be the last, I expect. Know
that I am a just but most exacting ruler. Too often have assorted
knaves, flatterers and fakes attempted to deceive me, too often, I say,
have they posed as distinguished hunting engineers, solely to empty my
coffers and fill their sacks with gems and precious stones, leaving me,
in return, with a few paltry scarecrows that fall apart at the first
touch. Too often has this happened for me not to take appropriate
measures. For twelve years now any constructor who fails to meet my
demands, who promises more than he is able to deliver, indeed receives
his reward, but is hurled, reward and all, into yon deep well—-unless he
be game enough (excuse the pun) to serve as the quarry himself. In which
case, gentlemen, I use no weapon but these two bare hands …"

"And… and have there been, ah, many such impostors?" asked Trurl in a
weak voice.

"Many? That's difficult to say. I only know that no one yet has
satisfied me, and the scream of terror they invariably give as they
plummet to the bottom doesn't last quite so long as it used to—the
remains, no doubt, have begun to mount. But rest assured, gentlemen,
there is room enough still for you!"

A deathly silence followed these dire words, and the two friends
couldn't help but look in the direction of that dark and ominous hole.
The King resumed his relentless pacing, his boots striking the floor
like sledge hammers in an echo chamber.

"But, with Your Highness' permission… that is, we— we haven't yet drawn
up the contract," stammered Trurl. "Couldn't we have an hour or two to
think it over, weigh carefully what Your Highness has been so gracious
as to tell us, and then of course we can decide whether to accept your
generous offer or, on the other hand—"

"Ha!!" laughed the King like a thunderclap. "Or, on the other hand, to
go home? I'm afraid not, gentlemen! The moment you set foot on board the
Infernanda, you accepted my offer! If every constructor who came here
could leave whenever he pleased, why, I'd have to wait forever for my
fondest hopes to be realized! No, you must stay and build me a beast to
hunt. I give you twelve days, and now you may go. Whatever pleasure you
desire, in the meantime, is yours. You have but to ask the servants I
have given you; nothing will be denied you. In twelve days, then!"

"With Your Highness' permission, you can keep the pleasures, but—well,
would it be at all possible for us to have a look at the, uh, hunting
trophies Your Highness must have collected as a result, so to speak, of
the efforts of our predecessors?"

"But of course!" said the King indulgently and clapped his hands with
such force that sparks flew and danced across the silver walls. The gust
of air from those powerful palms cooled even more our constructors'
ardor for adventure. Six guards in white and gold appeared and conducted
them down a corridor that twisted and wound like the gullet of a giant
serpent. Finally, to their great relief, it led out into a large, open
garden. There, on remarkably well-trimmed lawns, stood the hunting
trophies of King Krool.

Nearest at hand was a saber-toothed colossus, practically cut in two in
spite of the heavy mail and plate armor that was to have protected its
trunk; the hind legs, disproportionately large (evidently designed for
great leaps), lay upon the grass alongside the tail, which ended in a
firearm with its magazine half-empty—a clear sign that the creature had
not fallen to the King without a fight. A yellow strip of cloth hanging
from its open jaws also testified to this, for Trurl recognized in it
the breeches worn by the King's huntsmen. Next was another prone
monstrosity, a dragon with a multitude of tiny wings all singed and
blackened by enemy fire; its circuits had spilled out molten and had
then congealed in a copper-porcelain puddle. Farther on stood another
creature, the pillarlike legs spread wide. A gentle breeze soughed
softly through its fangs. And there were wrecks on wheels and wrecks on
treads, some with claws and some with cannon, all sundered to the
magnetic core, and tank-turtles with squashed turrets, and mutilated
military millipedes, and other oddities, broken and battle-scarred, some
equipped with auxiliary brains (burnt out), some perched on telescoping
stilts (dislocated), and there were little vicious biting things strewn
about. These had been made to attack in great swarms, then regroup in a
sphere bristling with gun muzzles and bayonets—a clever idea, but it
saved neither them nor their creators. Down this aisle of devastation
walked Trurl and Klapaucius, pale, silent, looking as if they were on
their way to a funeral instead of to another brilliant session of
vigorous invention. They came at last to the end of that dreadful
gallery of Krool's triumphs and stepped into the carriage that was
waiting for them at the gate. That dragon team which sped them back to
their lodgings seemed less terrible now. Just as soon as they were alone
in their sumptuously appointed green and crimson drawing room, before a
table heaped high with effervescent drinks and rare delicacies, Trurl
broke into a volley of imprecations; he reviled Klapaucius for
heedlessly accepting the offer made by the Master of the Royal Hunt,
thereby bringing down misfortune on their heads, when they easily could
have stayed at home and rested on their laurels. Klapaucius said
nothing, waiting patiently for Trurl's desperate rage to expend itself,
and when it finally did and Trurl had collapsed into a lavish
mother-of-pearl chaise longue and buried his face in his hands, he said:

"Well, we'd better get to work."

These words did much to revive Trurl, and the two constructors
immediately began to consider the various possibilities, drawing on
their knowledge of the deepest and darkest secrets of the arcane art of
cybernetic generation. First of all, they agreed that victory lay
neither in the armor nor in the strength of the monster to be built, but
entirely in its program, in other words, in an algorithm of demoniacal
derivation. "It must be a truly diabolical creature, a thing of absolute
evil!" they said, and though they had as yet no clear idea of what or
how, this observation lifted their spirits considerably. Such was their
enthusiasm by the time they sat down to draft the beast, that they
worked all night, all day, and through a second night and day before
taking a break for dinner. And as the Leyden jars were passed about, so
sure were they of success, that they winked and smirked —but only when
the servants weren't looking, since they suspected them (and rightly,
too) of being the King's spies. So the constructors said nothing of
their work, but praised the mulled electrolyte which the waiters brought
in, tail coats flapping, in beakers of the finest cut crystal. Only
after the repast, when they had wandered out on the veranda overlooking
the village with its white steeples and domes catching the last golden
rays of the setting sun, only then did Trurl turn to Klapaucius and say:

"We're not out of the woods yet, you know."

"How do you mean?" asked Klapaucius in a cautious whisper.

"There's one difficulty. You see, if the King defeats our mechanical
beast, he'll undoubtedly have us thrown into that pit, for we won't have
done his bidding. If, on the other hand, the beast… You see what I
mean?"

"If the beast isn't defeated?"

"No, if the beast defeats him, dear colleague. If that happens, the
King's successor may not let us off so easily."

"You don't think we'd have to answer for that, do you? As a rule, heirs
to the throne are only too happy to see it vacated."

"True, but this will be his son, and whether the son punishes us out of
filial devotion or because he thinks the royal court expects it of him,
it'll make little difference as far as we're concerned."

"That never occurred to me," muttered Klapaucius. "You're quite right,
the prospects aren't encouraging… Have you thought of a way out of this
dilemma?"

"Well, we might make the beast multimortal. Picture this: the King slays
it, it falls, then it gets up again, resurrected, and the King chases it
again, slays it again, and so on, until he gets sick and tired of the
whole thing."

"That he won't like," said Klapaucius after some thought. "And anyway,
how would you design such a beast?"

"Oh, I don't know… We could make it without any vital organs. The King
chops the beast into little pieces, but the pieces grow back together."

"HOW?"

"USE A FIELD."

"MAGNETIC?"

"If you like."

"How do we operate it?"

"Remote control, perhaps?" asked Trurl.

"Too risky," said Klapaucius. "How do you know the King won't have us
locked up in some dungeon while the hunt's in progress? Our poor
predecessors were no fools, and look how they ended up. More than one of
them, I'm sure, thought of remote control—yet it failed. No, we can't
expect to maintain communication with the beast during the battle."

"Then why not use a satellite?" suggested Trurl. "We could install
automatic controls-—"

"Satellite indeed!" snorted Klapaucius. "And how are you going to build
it, let alone put it in orbit? There are no miracles in our profession,
Trurl! We'll have to hide the controls some other way."

"But where can we hide the controls when they watch our every step?
You've seen how the servants skulk about, sticking their noses into
everything. We'd never be able to leave the premises ourselves, and
certainly not smuggle out such a large piece of equipment. It's
impossible!"

"Calm down," said prudent Klapaucius, looking over his shoulder.
"Perhaps we don't need such equipment in the first place."

"Something has to operate the beast, and if that something is an
electronic brain anywhere inside, the King will smash it to a pulp
before you can say goodbye."

They were silent. Night had fallen and the village lights below were
flickering on, one by one. Suddenly Trurl said:

"Listen, here's an idea. We only pretend to build a beast but in reality
build a ship to escape on. We give it ears, a tail, paws, so no one will
suspect, and they can be easily jettisoned on takeoff. What do you think
of that? We get off scot-free and thumb our noses at the King!"

"And if the King has planted a real constructor among our servants,
which is not unlikely, then it's all over and into the pit with us.
Besides, running away—no, it just doesn't suit me. It's him or us,
Trurl, you can't get around it."

"Yes, I suppose a spy could be a constructor too," said Trurl with a
sigh. "What then can we do, in the name of the Great Comet?! How about—a
photoelectric phantom?"

"You mean, a mirage? Have the King hunt a mirage? No thanks! After an
hour or two of that, he'd come straight here and make phantoms of us!"

Again they were silent. Finally Trurl said:

"The only way out of our difficulty, as far as I can see, is to have the
beast __abduct__ the King, and then—"

"You don't have to say another word. Yes, that's not at all a bad idea…
Then for the ransom we—and haven't you noticed, old boy, that the
orioles here are a deeper orange than on Maryland IV?" concluded
Klapaucius, for just then some servants were bringing silver lamps out
on the veranda. "There's still a problem though," he continued when they
were alone again. "Assuming the beast can do what you say, how will we
be able to negotiate with the prisoner if we're sitting in a dungeon
ourselves?"

"You have a point there," said Trurl. "We'll have to figure some way
around that… The main thing, however, is the algorithm!"

"Any child knows that! What's a beast without an algorithm?"

So they rolled up their sleeves and sat down to experiment—by
simulation, that is mathematically and all on paper. And the
mathematical models of King Krool and the beast did such fierce battle
across the equation-covered table, that the constructors' pencils kept
snapping. Furious, the beast writhed and wriggled its iterated integrals
beneath the King's polynomial blows, collapsed into an infinite series
of indeterminate terms, then got back up by raising itself to the _n_th
power, but the King so belabored it with differentials and partial
derivatives that its Fourier coefficients all canceled out (see
Riemann's Lemma), and in the ensuing confusion the constructors
completely lost sight of both King and beast. So they took a break,
stretched their legs, had a swig from the Leyden jug to bolster their
strength, then went back to work and tried it again from the beginning,
this time unleashing their entire arsenal of tensor matrices and grand
canonical ensembles, attacking the problem with such fervor that the
very paper began to smoke. The King rushed forward with all his cruel
coordinates and mean values, stumbled into a dark forest of roots and
logarithms, had to backtrack, then encountered the beast on a field of
irrational numbers (F₁) and smote it so grievously that it fell two
decimal places and lost an epsilon, but the beast slid around an
asymptote and hid in an _n_-dimensional orthogonal phase space,
underwent expansion and came out, fuming factorially, and fell upon the
King and hurt him passing sore. But the King, nothing daunted, put on
his Markov chain mail and all his impervious parameters, took his
increment Δ_k_ to infinity and dealt the beast a truly Boolean blow,
sent it reeling through an x-axis and several brackets—but the beast,
prepared for this, lowered its horns and—wham!!—the pencils flew like
mad through transcendental functions and double eigentransformations,
and when at last the beast closed in and the King was down and out for
the count, the constructors jumped up, danced a jig, laughed and sang as
they tore all their papers to shreds, much to the amazement of the spies
perched in the chandelier-—perched in vain, for they were uninitiated
into the niceties of higher mathematics and consequently had no idea why
Trurl and Klapaucius were now shouting, over and over, "Hurrah!
Victory!!"

Well after midnight, the Leyden jug from which the constructors had on
occasion refreshed themselves in the course of their labors was quietly
taken to the headquarters of the King's secret police, where its false
bottom was opened and a tiny tape recorder removed. This the experts
switched on and listened to eagerly, but the rising sun found them
totally unenlightened and looking haggard. One voice, for example, would
say:

"Well? Is the King ready?"

"Right!"

"Where'd you put him? Over there? Good! Now—hold on, you have to keep
the feet together. Not yours, idiot, the King's! All right now, ready?
One, two, find the derivative! Quick! What do you get?"

"Pi."

"And the beast?"

"Under the radical sign. But look, the King's still standing!"

"Still standing, eh? Factor both sides, divide by two, throw in a few
imaginary numbers—good! Now change variables and subtract—Trurl, what on
earth are you doing?! The _beast_, not the King, the _beast_! That's
right! Good! Perfect!! Now transform, approximate and solve for _x_. Do
you have it?"

"I have it! Klapaucius! Look at the King now!!"

There was a pause, then a burst of wild laughter.

That same morning, as all the experts and high officials of the secret
police shook their heads, bleary-eyed after a sleepless night, the
constructors asked for quartz, vanadium, steel, copper, platinum,
rhinestones, dysprosium, yttrium and thulium, also cerium and germanium,
and most of the other elements that make up the Universe, plus a variety
of machines and qualified technicians, not to mention a wide assortment
of spies—for so insolent had the constructors become, that on the
triplicate requisition form they boldly wrote: "Also, kindly send agents
of various cuts and stripes at the discretion and with the approval of
the Proper Authorities." The next day they asked for sawdust and a large
red velvet curtain on a stand, a cluster of little glass bells in the
center and a large tassel at each of its four corners; everything, even
down to the littlest glass bell, was specified with the utmost
precision. The King scowled when he heard these requests, but ordered
them to be carried out to the letter, for he had given his royal word.
The constructors were thus granted all that they wished.

All that they wished grew more and more outlandish. For instance, in the
files of the secret police under code number 48999/11K/T was a copy of a
requisition for three tailor's mannequins as well as six full police
uniforms, complete with sash, side arm, shako, plume and handcuffs, also
all available back issues of the magazine __The_ Patriotic _Policeman__,
yearbooks and supplements included—under "Comments" the constructors had
guaranteed the return of all items listed above within twenty-four hours
of delivery and in perfect condition. In another, classified section of
the police archives was a copy of a letter from Klapaucius in which he
demanded the immediate shipment of (1) a life-size doll representing the
Postmaster General in full regalia, and (2) a light gig painted green
with a kerosene lamp on the left and a sky-blue sign on the back that
said THINK. The doll and gig proved too much for the Chief of Police: he
had to be taken away for a much-needed rest. During the next three days
the constructors asked only for barrels of red castor oil, and after
that—nothing. From then on, they worked in the basement of the palace,
hammering away and singing space chanties, and at night blue lights came
flashing from the basement windows and gave weird shapes to the trees in
the garden outside. Trurl and Klapaucius with their many helpers bustled
about amid arcs and sparks, now and then looking up to see faces pressed
against the glass: the servants, as if out of idle curiosity, were
photographing their every move. One evening, when the weary constructors
had finally dragged themselves off to bed, the components of the
apparatus they had been working on were quickly transported by unmarked
balloon to police headquarters and assembled by eighteen of the finest
cyberneticians in the land, who had been deputized and duly sworn in for
that very purpose, whereupon a gray tin mouse ran out from under their
hands, blowing soap bubbles and dropping a thin trail of chalk dust from
under its tail, which spelled, as it danced this way and that across the
table, WHAT, DON'T YOU LOVE US ANYMORE? Never before in the kingdom's
history did Chiefs of Police have to be replaced with such speed and
regularity. The uniforms, the doll, the green gig, even the sawdust,
everything which the constructors returned exactly as promised, was
thoroughly examined under electron microscope. But except for a
minuscule card in the sawdust which read JUST SAWDUST, there was nothing
out of the ordinary. Then individual atoms of the uniforms and gig were
thoroughly searched— with equal lack of success. At last the day came
when the work was completed. A huge vehicle on three hundred wheels,
looking something like a refrigerator, was drawn up to the main entrance
and opened in the presence of witnesses and officials; Trurl and
Klapaucius brought out a curtain, the one with the tassels and bells,
and placed it carefully inside, in the middle of the floor. Then they
got in themselves, closed the door, did something, then went and got
various containers from the basement, cans of chemicals, all sorts of
finely ground powders—gray, silver, white, yellow, green—and sprinkled
them under and around the curtain, then stepped out, had the vehicle
closed and locked, consulted their watches and together counted out
fourteen and a half seconds—at which time, much to everyone's surprise,
since the vehicle was stationary and there could be no question of a
breeze inside (for the seal was hermetic), the glass bells tinkled. The
constructors exchanged a wink and said:

"You can take it now!"

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-7.jpg]

The rest of the day they spent blowing soap bubbles from the veranda.
That evening Lord Protozor, Master of the Royal Hunt, came with an
escort and politely but firmly informed them that they were to go with
him at once to an assigned place. They were required to leave all their
possessions behind, even their clothes; in exchange they were given
rags, then put in irons. The guards and police dignitaries present were
astounded by their perfect sang-froid: instead of demanding justice or
trembling with fear, Trurl giggled as the shackles were being hammered
on, saying he was ticklish. And when the constructors were thrown into a
dark and dismal dungeon, they promptly struck up a rousing chorus of
"Sing Sweet Software."

Meanwhile mighty Krool rode forth from the village on his mighty hunting
chariot, surrounded by all his retinue and followed by a long and
winding train of riders and machines, machines that included not only
the traditional catapult and cannon, but enormous laser guns and beta
ray bazookas, and a tar-thrower guaranteed to immobilize anything that
walked, swam, flew or rolled along.

And so this grand procession wended its way to the royal game preserve,
and many jokes were made, and boasts, and haughty toasts, and no one
gave a thought to the two constructors, except perhaps to remark that
those fools were in a pretty pickle now.

But when the silver trumpets announced His Majesty's approach, one could
see a huge vehicle-refrigerator coming up in the opposite direction. Its
door flung open, and for one brief moment there gaped the black maw of
what appeared to be some sort of field gun. Next there was a boom, a
puff of yellow smoke, and something came rocketing out, a form as blurry
as a tornado and with the general consistency of a sandstorm; it arced
through the air so fast that no one really got a good look at it anyway.
Whatever it was flew a hundred paces or more and landed without a sound;
the curtain that had been wrapped around it floated to the earth, glass
bells tinkling oddly in that perfect silence, and lay there like a
crushed strawberry. Now everyone could see the beast clearly—though it
wasn't clear at all, but looked a little like a hill, rather large,
fairly long, its color much like its surroundings, a clump of dried-up
weeds. The King's huntsmen unleashed the whole pack of automated hounds
(mainly Saint Cybernards and Cyberman pinschers, with an occasional
high-frequency terrier); these hurled themselves, howling and slavering,
at the crouching beast. The beast didn't rear back, didn't roar, didn't
even breathe fire, but only opened its two eyes wide and reduced half
the pack to ashes in a trice.

"Oho! Laser-eyed, is it?" cried the King. "Hand me my trusty duralumin
doublet, my bulletproof buckler, my halberd and arquebus!" Thus
accoutered and gleaming like a supernova, he rode out upon his fearless
high-fidelity cyber-steed, came nigh the beast and smote it such a
mighty blow that the air crackled and its head tumbled neatly to the
ground. Though the retinue dutifully hallooed his triumph, the King took
no delight in it; greatly angered, he swore in his heart to devise some
special torment for those wretches who dared to call themselves
constructors. The beast, however, shook another head out of its severed
neck, opened its new eyes wide and played a withering beam across the
King's armor (which, however, was proof against all manner of
electromagnetic radiation). "Well, those two weren't a total loss," said
the King to himself, "though this still won't help them." And he
recharged his charger and spurred it into the fray.

This time he swung full and cleaved the beast in twain. The beast didn't
seem to mind—in fact, it positioned itself helpfully beneath the
whistling blade and gave a grateful twitch as it fell. And small wonder!
The King took another look: the thing was twinned instead of twained!
There were two spitting images, each a little smaller than the original,
plus a third, a baby beast gamboling between them—that was the head he
had cut off earlier: it now had a tail and feet and was doing cartwheels
through the weeds.

"What next?" thought the King. "Chop it into mice or little worms? A
fine way to hunt!" And with great ire did he have at it, hewing with
might and main until there were no end of little beasts underfoot, but
suddenly they all backed off, went into a huddle, and there stood the
beast again, good as new and stifling a yawn.

"H'm," thought the King. "Apparently it has the same kind of
stabilization mechanism that—what was his name again?—Pumpington—that
Pumpington tried to use. Yes, I dealt with him myself for that idiotic
trick… Well, we'll just wheel out the antimatter artillery…"

He picked one with a six-foot bore, lined it up and loaded it himself,
took aim, pulled the string and sent a perfectly silent and weirdly
shimmering shell straight at the beast, to blow it to smithereens once
and for all. But nothing happened—that is, nothing much. The beast only
crouched a little lower, put out its left hand, long and hairy, and gave
the King the finger.

"Bring out our biggest!" roared the King, pretending not to notice. And
several hundred peasants pulled up a veritable giant of a cannon, all of
eighty-gauge, which the King aimed and was just about to fire—when all
at once the beast leaped. The King lifted his sword to defend himself,
but then there was no more beast. Those who saw what happened next said
later that they were sure they had taken leave of their senses, for as
the beast flew through the air, it underwent a lightning transformation,
the grayish hulk divided up into three men in uniform, three policemen,
who, still aloft, were already preparing to do their duty. The first
policeman, a sergeant, got out the handcuffs, maneuvering his legs to
keep upright; the second held on to his plumed shako with one hand, so
it wouldn't blow off, and with the other pulled out a warrant from his
breast pocket; the third, apparently a rookie, assumed a horizontal
position beneath the feet of the first two, to cushion their fall—after
which, however, he jumped up and carefully dusted off his uniform.
Meanwhile the first policeman had handcuffed the dumbfounded King and
the second slapped the sword from his hand. Feebly protesting, the
suspect was then summarily trotted off the field. The entire hunting
procession stood rooted to the spot for a minute or two, then gave a
yell and followed in hot pursuit. The snorting cybersteeds had
practically caught up with the abductors, and swords and sabers were
unsheathed and raised to strike, but the third policeman bent over,
depressed his bellybutton and immediately the arms grew into two shafts,
the legs coiled up, sprouting spokes, and began to turn, while the back
formed the seat of a green racing gig to accommodate the other two
policemen, who were vigorously plying the now-harnessed King with a
whip, to make him run faster. The King obliged and broke into a mad
gallop, waving his arms frantically to ward off the blows that descended
upon his royal head; but now the huntsmen were gaining again, so the
policemen jumped on the King's back and one slipped down between the
shafts, huffed and puffed and turned into a spinning top₇ a dancing
whirlwind, which gave wings to the little gig and whisked it away over
hill and dale till it disappeared altogether in a cloud of dust. The
King's retinue split up and began a desperate search with Geiger
counters and bloodhounds, and a special detachment came running up with
shovels and flamethrowers and left no bone unburned in all the
neighboring cemeteries—an obvious error, occasioned most likely by the
trembling hand that hastily telegraphed the order from the observation
balloon that had monitored the hunt. Several police divisions rushed
here and there, searched the grounds, every bush, every weed, and both
x-rays and laboratory samples were diligently taken of everything
imaginable. The King's charger was ordered to appear before a special
board of inquiry appointed by the Prosecutor General. A unit of
paratroopers with vacuum cleaners and sieves was dropped on the royal
game preserve to sift through every last particle of dust. Finally, the
order was issued that anyone resembling a policeman was to be detained
and held without bail, which naturally created difficulties—one half of
the police force, as it turned out, had arrested the other, and vice
versa. At dusk the huntsmen and soldiers returned to the village dazed
and bedraggled with the woeful tidings that neither hide nor hair of the
King's person was anywhere to be found.

By torchlight and in the dead of night, the chained constructors were
taken before the Great Chancellor and Keeper of the Royal Seal, who
addressed them in the following way:

"Whereas ye have falsely conspired and perversely plotted against the
Crown and Life of Our Beloved Sovereign and Most Noble Ruler Krool and
therewith dared to raise a treacherous hand and vilely devise his
demise, not to mention impersonating an officer, a great aggravation of
your crimes, so shall ye be quartered without quarter, impaled and
pilloried, disemboweled, buried alive, crucified and burnt at the stake,
after which your ashes shall be sent into orbit as a warning and
perpetual reminder to all would-be regicides, amen."

"Can't you wait a bit?" asked Trurl. "You see, we were expecting a
letter…"

"A letter, thou most scurrilous and scurvy knave?!"

Just then the guards made way for the Postmaster General himself—indeed,
how could they bar that dignitary's entrance with their poleaxes? The
Postmaster approached in full regalia, his medals jingling impressively,
pulled a letter from a sapphire satchel and handed it to the Chancellor,
saying, "Mannequin though I be, I come from His Majesty," whereupon he
disintegrated into a fine powder. The Chancellor could scarcely believe
his eyes, but quickly recognized the King's signet impressed there on
the purple sealing wax; he opened the letter and read that His Majesty
was forced to negotiate with the enemy, for the constructors had
employed means algorithmic and algebraic to make him captive, and now
they would list their demands, all of which the Great Chancellor had
better meet, if he wished ever to get his Mighty Sovereign back in one
piece. Signed: "Krool herewith affixes his hand and seal, held prisoner
in a cave of unknown location by one pseudoconstabulary beast in three
uniforms personified."

There then arose a great clamor, everyone shouting and asking what it
all meant and what were the demands, to which Trurl said only, "Our
chains, if you please."

A blacksmith was summoned to unfetter them, after which Trurl said:

"We are hungry and dirty, we need a bath, a shave, massage, refreshment,
nothing but the best, plenty of pomp and a water ballet with fireworks
for dessert!"

The court, of course, was hopping mad, but had to comply in every
particular. Only at dawn did the constructors return from their villa,
each elegantly pomaded, arrayed and reclining in a sedan chair borne by
footmen (their former informers); they then, deigning to grant an
audience, sat down and presented their demands—not off the top of their
heads, mind you, but from a little notebook they had prepared for the
occasion and hidden behind a curtain in their room. The following
articles were read:

First, A ship of the finest make and model available shall be furnished
to carry the constructors home.

2nd, The said ship shall be laden with various cargo as here specified:
diamonds—four bushels, gold coin—forty bushels, platinum, palladium and
whatever other ready valuables they happen to think of—eight bushels of
each, also whatever mementos and tokens from the Royal Apartments the
signatories of this instrument may deem appropriate.

3rd, Until such time as the said ship shall be in readiness for takeoff,
every nut and bolt in place, fully loaded and delivered up to the
constructors complete with red carpet, an eighty-piece send-off band and
children's chorus, an abundance of honors, decorations and awards, and a
wildly cheering crowd—until then, no King.

4th, That a formal expression of undying gratitude shall be stamped upon
a gold medallion and addressed to Their Most Sublime and Radiant
Constructors Trurl and Klapaucius, Delight and Terror of the Universe,
and moreover it shall contain a full account of their victory and be
duly signed and notarized by every high and low official in the land,
then set in the richly embellished barrel of the King's favorite cannon,
which Lord Protozor, Master of the Royal Hunt, shall himself and wholly
unaided carry on board—no other Protozor but the one who lured Their
Most Sublime and Radiant Constructors to this planet, thinking to work
their painful and ignominious death thereby.

5th, That the aforesaid Protozor shall accompany them on their return
journey as insurance against any sort of double-dealing, pursuit, and
the like. On board he shall occupy a cage three by three by four feet
and shall receive a daily allowance of humble pie with a filling made of
that very same sawdust which Their Most Sublime and Radiant Constructors
saw fit to order in the process of indulging the King's foolishness and
which was subsequently taken to police headquarters by unmarked balloon.

6th and lastly, The King need not crave forgiveness of Their Most
Sublime and Radiant Constructors on bended knee, since he is much too
beneath them to deserve notice.

In Witness Whereof, the parties have hereunto set their hands and seals
this day and year, etc. and so on. By: Trurl and Klapaucius,
Constructors, and the Great Chancellor, the Great Chamberlain, the Great
Chief of Secret Police, the Seneschal, Squadron Leader and Royal
Balloonmaster.

All the ministers and dignitaries turned blue, but what could they do?
They had no choice, so a ship was immediately ordered. But then the
constructors unexpectedly showed up after a leisurely breakfast, to
supervise the work, and nothing suited them: this material, for
instance, was no good, and that engineer was an absolute idiot, and they
had to have a revolving magic lantern in the main hall, one with four
pneumatic widgets and a calibrated cuckoo clock on top —and if the
natives here didn't know what a widget was, so much the worse for them,
considering that the King was no doubt most impatient for his release
and would (when he could) deal harshly with anyone who dared to delay
it. This remark occasioned a general numbness, a great weakness about
the knees, and much trembling, but the work continued apace. Finally the
ship was ready and the royal stevedores began to stow the cargo in the
hold, diamonds, sacks of pearls, so much gold it kept spilling out the
hatch. Meanwhile the police were secretly running all about the
countryside, turning everything upside down, much to the amusement of
Trurl and Klapaucius, who didn't mind explaining to a fearful but
fascinated audience how it all happened, how they had discarded one idea
after another until they hit upon an altogether different kind of beast.
Not knowing where or how to place the controls—that is, the brain —so
that they would be safe, the constructors had simply made everything
brain, enabling the beast to think with its leg, or tail, or jaws
(equipped with wisdom teeth only). But that was just the beginning. The
real problem had two aspects, algorithmic and psychoanalytic. First they
had to determine what would check the King, catch him flatfooted, so to
speak. To this end, they created by nonlinear transmutation a police
subset within the beast, since everyone knows that resisting or
interfering with an officer who is making an arrest _lege artis_ is a
cosmic offense and utterly unthinkable. So much for the psychology of
it—except that the Postmaster General was utilized here on similar
grounds: an official of lower rank might not have made it past the
guards, the letter then would not have been delivered, and the
constructors would have very literally lost their heads. Moreover, the
Postmaster mannequin had been given means to bribe the guards, should
that have proved necessary. Every eventuality had been anticipated and
provided for. Now as far as the algorithms went: they had only to find
the proper domain of beasts, closed, bounded and bonded, with plenty of
laws both associative and distributive in operation, throw in a
constable constant or two, some graphs of graft, squadratic equations
and crime waves—and the thing took over from there, once activated by
the expedient of writing a document-program (behind the curtain with the
bells) in castor oil ink, rendering it thereby sufficiently hard to
swallow to serve as a red-tape generator. We might add here that later
on the constructors had an article published in a prominent scientific
journal under the title of "Recursive β—Metafunctions in the Special
Case of a Bogus Polypolice Transmogrification Conversion on an
Oscillating Harmonic Field of Glass Bells and Green Gig, Kerosene Lamp
on the Left to Divert Attention, Solved by Beastly
Incarceration-Concatenation,” which was subsequently exploited by the
tabloids as "The Police State Rears Its Ugly Head." Obviously none of
the ministers, dignitaries or huntsmen understood a single word of what
was said, but that hardly mattered. The loving subjects of King Krool
knew not whether they should despise these constructors or stand and
gape in awe and admiration.

Now all was in readiness for takeoff. Trurl, as stipulated in the
agreement, went through the King's private chambers with a large sack
and calmly appropriated whatever object he took a fancy to. Finally, the
carriage arrived and took the victors to the spaceport, where a crowd
cheered wildly and a children's chorus sang, then a charming little girl
in local costume curtsied and presented them with a ribboned nosegay,
and high-ranking officials took turns to express their undying
gratitude, bidding them both a fond farewell, and the band played,
several ladies fainted, and then a hush fell over the multitude.
Klapaucius had pulled a tooth from his mouth, not an ordinary tooth but
a transmitter-receiver, a two-way bicuspid. He threw a tiny switch and a
sandstorm appeared on the horizon, growing and growing, whirling faster
and faster, until it dropped into an empty space between the ship and
the crowd and came to a sudden stop, scattering dust and debris in all
directions. Everyone gasped and stepped back—there stood the beast,
looking unusually bestial as it flashed its laser eyes and flailed its
dragon tail!

"The King, if you please," said Klapaucius. But the beast answered,
speaking in a perfectly normal voice:

"Not on your life. It's my turn now to make demands…"

"What? Have you gone mad? You have to obey, it's in the matrix!" shouted
Klapaucius. Everyone stared, thunderstruck.

"Matrix-schmatrix. Look pal, I'm not just any beast, I'm algorithmic,
heuristic and sadistic, fully automatic and autocratic, that means
undemocratic, and I've got loads of loops and plenty of feedback so none
of that back talk or I'll clap you in irons, that means in the clink
with the King, in the brig with the green gig, get me?"

"I'll give you feedback!" roared Klapaucius, furious. But Trurl asked
the beast:

"What exactly do you want?"

And he sneaked around behind Klapaucius and pulled out a special tooth
of his own, so the beast wouldn't see.

"Well, first of all I want to marry—"

But they never learned whom in particular the beast had in mind, for
Trurl threw a tiny switch and quickly chanted:

"Eeny, meeny, miney, mo, input, output, out—you—go!"

The fantastically complex electromagnetic wave system that held the
beast's atoms in place now came apart under the influence of those
words, and the beast blinked, wiggled its ears, swallowed, tried to pull
itself together, but before it could even grit its teeth there was a hot
gust of wind, a strong smell of ozone, then nothing left to pull
together, just a little mound of ashes and the King standing in the
middle, safe and sound, but in great need of a bath and mortified to
tears that it had come to this.

"That'll cut you down to size," said Trurl, and no one knew whether he
meant the beast or the King. In either case, the algorithm had done its
job well.

"And now, gentlemen," Trurl concluded, "if you'll kindly help the Master
of the Royal Hunt into his cage, we can be on our way …"

 THE THIRD SALLY

OR _THE DRAGONS_

_OF PROBABILITY_

Trurl and Klapaucius were former pupils of the great Cerebron of Umptor,
who for forty-seven years in the School of Higher Neantical Nillity
expounded the General Theory of Dragons. Everyone knows that dragons
don't exist. But while this simplistic formulation may satisfy the
layman, it does not suffice for the scientific mind. The School of
Higher Neantical Nillity is in fact wholly unconcerned with what _does_
exist. Indeed, the banality of existence has been so amply demonstrated,
there is no need for us to discuss it any further here. The brilliant
Cerebron, attacking the problem analytically, discovered three distinct
kinds of dragon: the mythical, the chimerical, and the purely
hypothetical. They were all, one might say, nonexistent, but each
non-existed in an entirely different way. And then there were the
imaginary dragons, and the a-, anti- and minus-dragons (colloquially
termed nots, noughts and oughtn'ts by the experts), the minuses being
the most interesting on account of the well-known dracological paradox:
when two minuses hypercontiguate (an operation in the algebra of dragons
corresponding roughly to simple multiplication), the product is 0.6
dragon, a real nonplusser. Bitter controversy raged among the experts on
the question of whether, as half of them claimed, this fractional beast
began from the head down or, as the other half maintained, from the tail
up. Trurl and Klapaucius made a great contribution by showing the error
of both positions. They were the first to apply probability theory to
this area and, in so doing, created the field of statistical draconics,
which says that dragons are thermodynamically impossible only in the
probabilistic sense, as are elves, fairies, gnomes, witches, pixies and
the like. Using the general equation of improbability, the two
constructors obtained the coefficients of pixation, elfinity, kobolding,
etc. They found that for the spontaneous manifestation of an average
dragon, one would have to wait a good sixteen quintoquadrillion
heptillion years. In other words, the whole problem would have remained
a mathematical curiosity had it not been for that famous tinkering
passion of Trurl, who decided to examine the nonphenome non empirically.
First, as he was dealing with the highly improbable, he invented a
probability amplifier and ran tests in his basement—then later at the
Dracogenic Proving Grounds established and funded by the Academy. To
this day those who (sadly enough) have no knowledge of the General
Theory of Improbability ask why Trurl probabilized a dragon and not an
elf or goblin. The answer is simply that dragons are more probable than
elves or goblins to begin with. True, Trurl might have gone further with
his amplifying experiments, had not the first been so discouraging—
discouraging in that the materialized dragon tried to make a meal of
him. Fortunately, Klapaucius was nearby and lowered the probability, and
the monster vanished. A number of scholars subsequently repeated the
experiment on a phantasmatron, but, as they lacked the necessary
know-how and sang-froid, a considerable quantity of dragon spawn,
raising an ungodly perturbation, broke loose. Only then did it become
clear that those odious beasts enjoyed an existence quite different from
that of ordinary cupboards, tables and chairs; for dragons are
distinguished by their probability rather than by their actuality,
though granted, that probability is overwhelming once they've actually
come into being. Suppose, for example, one organizes a hunt for such a
dragon, surrounds it, closes in, beating the brush. The circle of
sportsmen, their weapons cocked and ready, finds only a burnt patch of
earth and an unmistakable smell: the dragon, seeing itself cornered, has
slipped from real to configurational space. An extremely obtuse and
brutal creature, it does this instinctively, of course. Now, ignorant
and backward persons will occasionally demand that you show them this
configurational space of yours, apparently unaware that electrons, whose
existence no one in his right mind would question, also move exclusively
in configurational space, their comings and goings fully dependent on
curves of probability. Though it is easier not to believe in electrons
than in dragons: electrons, at least taken singly, won't try to make a
meal of you.

A colleague of Trurl, one Harborizian Cybr, was the first to quantize a
dragon, detecting a particle known as the dracotron, the energy of which
is measured—obviously—in units of dracon by a dracometer, and he even
determined the coordinates of its tail, for which he nearly paid with
his life. Yet what did these scientific achievements concern the common
folk, who were now greatly harassed by dragons ranging the countryside,
filling the air with their howls and flames and trampling, and in places
even exacting tribute in the form of young virgins? What did it concern
the poor villagers that Trurl's dragons, indeterministic hence
heuristic, were behaving exactly according to theory though contrary to
all notions of decency, or that his theory could predict the curve of
the tails that demolished their barns and leveled their crops? It is not
surprising, then, that the general public, instead of appreciating the
value of Trurl's revolutionary invention, held it much against him. A
group of individuals thoroughly benighted in matters of science waylaid
the famous constructor and gave him a good thrashing. Not that this
deterred him and his friend Klapaucius from further experimentation,
which showed that the extent of a dragon's existence depends mainly on
its whim, though also on its degree of satiety, and that the only sure
method of negating it is to reduce the probability to zero or lower. All
this research, naturally enough, took a great deal of time and energy;
meanwhile the dragons that had gotten loose were running rampant, laying
waste to a variety of planets and moons. What was worse, they
multiplied. Which enabled Klapaucius to publish an excellent article
entitled "Covariant Transformation from Dragons to Dragonets, in the
Special Case of Passage from States Forbidden by the Laws of Physics to
Those Forbidden by the Local Authorities." The article created a
sensation in the scientific world, where there was still talk of the
amazing polypolice beast that had been used by the intrepid constructors
against King Krool to avenge the deaths of their colleagues. But far
greater was the sensation caused by the news that a certain constructor
known as Basiliscus the Gorgonite, traveling through the Galaxy, was
apparently making dragons appear by his presence—and in places where no
one had ever seen a dragon before. Whenever the situation grew desperate
and catastrophe seemed imminent, this Basiliscus would turn up, approach
the sovereign of that particular area and, settling on some outrageous
fee after long hours of bargaining, would undertake to extirpate the
beasts. At which he usually succeeded, though no one knew quite how,
since he worked in secret and alone. True, the guarantee he offered for
dragon removal—dracolysis—was only statistical; though one ruler did pay
him in similar coin, that is, in ducats that were only statistically
good. After that, the insolent Basiliscus always used aqua regia to
check the metallic reliability of his royal payments. One sunny
afternoon Trurl and Klapaucius met and held the following conversation:

“Have you heard about this Basiliscus?" asked Trurl.

"Yes."

"Well, what do you think?"

"I don't like it."

"Nor do I. How do you suppose he does it?"

"With an amplifier."

"A probability amplifier?"

"Either that, or oscillating fields."

"Or a paramagnedracic generator."

"You mean, a draculator?"

"Yes."

"AH."

"But really," cried Trurl, "that would be criminal! That would mean he
was bringing the dragons with him, only in a potential state, their
probability near zero; then, after landing and getting the lay of the
land, he was increasing the chances, raising the potential,
strengthening the probability until it was almost a certainty. And then,
of course, you have visualization, materialization, full manifestation."

"Of course. And he probably shuffles the letters of the matrix to make
the dragons grand."

"Yes, and the poor people groan in agony and gore. Terrible!"

"What do you think; does he then apply an irreversible antidraconian
retroectoplasmatron, or simply lower the probability and walk off with
the gold?"

"Hard to say. Though if he's only improbabilizing, that would be an even
greater piece of villainy, since sooner or later the fractional
fluctuations would have to give rise to a draconic iso-oscillation—and
the whole thing would start all over again."

"Though by that time both he and the money would be gone," observed
Klapaucius.

"Shouldn't we report him to the Main Office?"

"Not just yet. He may not be doing this, after all. We have no real
proof. Statistical fluctuations can occur without an amplifier; at one
time, you know, there were neither amplifiers nor phantasmatrons, yet
dragons did appear. Purely on a random basis."

"True…" replied Trurl. "But _these_ appear immediately after he arrives
on the planet!"

"I know. Still, reporting a fellow constructor—it just isn't done.
Though there's no reason we can't take measures of our own."

"No reason at all."

"I'm glad you agree. But what exactly should we do?"

At this point the two famous dracologists got into a discussion so
technical, that anyone listening in wouldn't have been able to make head
or tail of it. There were such mysterious words as "discontinuous
orthodragonality." "grand draconical ensembles." "high-frequency
binomial fafneration." "abnormal saurian distribution." "discrete
dragons." "indiscrete dragons." "drasticodracostochastic control."
"simple Grendelian dominance." "weak interaction dragon diffraction."
"aberrational reluctance." "informational figmentation," and so on.

The upshot of all this penetrating analysis was the third sally, for
which the constructors prepared most carefully, not failing to load
their ship with a quantity of highly complicated devices.

In particular they took along a scatter-scrambler and a special gun that
fired negative heads. After landing on Eenica, then on Meenica, then
finally on Mynamoaca, they realized it would be impossible to comb the
whole infested area in this way and they would have to split up. This
was most easily done, obviously, by separating; so after a brief council
of war each set out on his own. Klapaucius worked for a spell on
Prestopondora for the Emperor Maximillion, who was prepared to offer him
his daughter's hand in marriage if only he would get rid of those vile
beasts. Dragons of the highest probability were everywhere, even in the
streets of the capital, and the place literally swarmed with virtuals. A
virtual dragon, the uneducated and simple-minded might say, "isn't
really there," having no observable substance nor displaying the least
intention of acquiring any; but the Cybr-Trurl-Klapaucius-Leech
calculation (not to mention the Drachendranginger wave equation) clearly
shows that a dragon can jump from configurational to real space with no
more effort than it takes to jump off a cliff. Thus, in any room, cellar
or attic, provided the probability is high, you could meet with a dragon
or possibly even a metadragon.

Instead of chasing after the beasts, which would have accomplished
little or nothing, Klapaucius, a true theoretician, approached the
problem methodically; in squares and promenades, in barns and hostels he
placed probabilistic battery-run dragon dampers, and in no time at all
the beasts were extremely rare. Collecting his fee, plus an honorary
degree and an engraved loving cup, Klapaucius blasted off to rejoin his
friend. On the way, he noticed a planet and someone waving to him
frantically. Thinking it might be Trurl in some sort of trouble, he
landed. But it was only the inhabitants of Trufffandria, the subjects of
King Pfftius, gesticulating. The Trufflandrians held to various
superstitions and primitive beliefs; their religion, Pneumatological
Dracolatry, taught that dragons appeared as a divine retribution for
their sins and took possession of all unclean souls. Quickly realizing
it would be useless to enter into a discussion with the royal
dracologians—their methods consisted primarily of waving censers and
distributing sacred relics—Klapaucius instead conducted soundings of the
outlying terrain. These revealed the planet was occupied by only one
beast, but that beast belonged to the terrible genus of Echidnosaurian
hypervipers. He offered the King his services. The King, however,
answered in a vague, roundabout fashion, evidently under the influence
of that ridiculous doctrine which would have the origin of dragons be
somehow supernatural. Perusing the local newspapers, Klapaucius learned
that the dragon terrorizing the planet was considered by some to be a
single thing, and by others, a multiplex creature that could operate in
several locations at the same time. This gave him pause—though it wasn't
so surprising really, when you considered that the localization of these
odious phenomena was subject to so-called dragonomalies, in which
certain specimens, particularly when abstracted, underwent a "smearing"
effect, which was in reality nothing more than a simple isotopic spin
acceleration of asynchronous quantum moments. Much as a hand, emerging
from the water fingers-first, appears above the surface in the form of
five seemingly separate and independent items, so do dragons, emerging
from the lairs of their configurational space, on occasion appear to be
plural, though in point of fact they are quite singular. Towards the end
of his second audience with the King, Klapaucius inquired if perhaps
Trurl were on the planet and gave a detailed description of his comrade.
He was astonished to hear that yes, his comrade had only recently
visited their kingdom and had even undertaken to exorcise the monster,
had in fact accepted a retainer and departed for the neighboring
mountains where the monster had been most frequently sighted. Had then
returned the next day, demanding the rest of his fee and presenting four
and twenty dragon's teeth as proof of his success. There was some
misunderstanding, however, and it was decided to withhold payment until
the matter was fully cleared up. At which Trurl flew into a rage and in
a loud voice made certain comments about His Royal Highness that were
perilously close to lese majesty if not treason, then stormed out
without leaving a forwarding address. That very same day the monster
reappeared as if nothing had happened and, alas, ravaged their farms and
villages more fiercely than before.

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-8.jpg]

Now this story seemed questionable to Klapaucius, though on the other
hand it was hard to believe the good King was lying, so he packed his
knapsack with all sorts of powerful dragon-exterminating equipment and
set off for the mountains, whose snowcapped peaks rose majestically in
the east.

It wasn't long before he saw dragon prints and got an unmistakable whiff
of brimstone. On he went, undaunted, holding his weapon in readiness and
keeping a constant eye on the needle of his dragon counter. It stayed at
zero for a spell, then began to give nervous little twitches, until, as
if struggling with itself, it slowly crawled towards the number one.
There was no doubt now: the Echidnosaur was close at hand. Which amazed
Klapaucius, for he couldn't understand how his trusty friend and
renowned theoretician, Trurl, could have gotten so fouled up in his
calculations as to fail to wipe the dragon out for good. Nor could he
imagine Trurl returning to the royal palace and demanding payment for
what he had not accomplished.

Klapaucius then came upon a group of natives. They were plainly
terrified, the way they kept looking around and trying to stay together.
Bent beneath heavy burdens balanced on their backs and heads, they were
stepping single-file up the mountainside. Klapaucius accosted the
procession and asked the first native what they were about.

"Sire!" replied the native, a lower court official in a tattered tog and
cummerbund. " 'Tis the tribute we carry to the dragon."

"Tribute? Ah yes, the tribute! And what is the tribute?"

"Nothin' more 'r less, Sire, than what the dragon would have us bring
it: gold coins, precious stones, imported perfumes, an' a passel o'
other valuables."

This was truly incredible, for dragons never required such tributes,
certainly not perfume—no perfume could ever mask their own natural
fetor—and certainly not currency, which was useless to them.

"And does it ask for young virgins, my good man?" asked Klapaucius.

"Virgins? Nay, Sire, tho' there war a time … we had to cart 'em in by
the bevy, we did… Only that war before the stranger came, the furrin
gentleman, Sire, a-walkin' around the rocks with 'is boxes an'
contraptions, all by 'is-self…" Here the worthy native broke off and
stared at the instruments and weapons Klapaucius was carrying,
particularly the large dragon counter that was ticking softly all the
while, its red pointer jumping back and forth across the white dial.

"Why, if he dinna have one… jus' like yer Lordship's," he said in a
hushed voice. "Aye, jus' like… the same wee stiggermajigger and a' the
rest…"

"There was a sale on them," said Klapaucius, to allay the native's
suspicions. "But tell me, good people, do you happen to know what became
of this stranger?"

"What became o' him, ye ask? That we know not, Sire, to be sure. 'Twas,
if I not mistake me, but a fortnight past —'twas, 'twas not, Master
Gyles, a fortnight withal an' nae more?"

" 'Twas, 'twas, 'tis the truth ye speak, the truth aye, a fortnight
sure, or maybe two."

"Aye! So he comes to us, yer Grace, partakes of our 'umble fare, polite
as ye please an' I'll not gainsay it, nay, a parfit gentleman true, pays
hondsomely, inquires after the missus don't y'know, aye an' then he sits
'isself down, spreads out a' them contraptions an' thin's with clocks in
'em, y'see, an' scribbles furious-like, numbers they are, one
after't'other, in this wee book he keep in 'is breast pocket, then takes
out a—whad'yacallit—therbobbiter thingamabob…"

"Thermometer?"

"Aye, that's it! A thermometer… an' he says it be for dragons, an' pokes
it here an' there, Sire, an' scribbles in 'is book again, then he takes
a' them contraptions an' things an' packs 'em up an' puts 'em on 'is
back an' says farewell an' goes 'is merry way. We never saw 'im more,
yer Honor. That very night we hear a thunder an' a clatter, oh, a good
ways off, 'bout as far as Mount Murdigras—'tis the one, Sire, hard by
yon peak, aye, that one thar, looks like a hawk, she do, we call 'er
Pfftius Peak after our beluved King, an' that one thar on't'uther side,
bent over like't'would spread 'er arse, that be the Dollymog, which,
accordin' to legend—"

"Enough of the mountains, worthy native," said Klaupaucius. "You were
saying there was thunder in the night. What happened then?"

"Then, Sire? Why nothin', to be sure. The hut she give a jump an' I
falls outta bed, to which I'm well accustomed, mind ye, seein' as how
the wicked beast allus come a-bumpin' gainst the house with 'er tail an'
send a feller flyin'—like when Master Gyles' ayn brother londed in the
privy 'cause the creatur' gets a hankerin' to scratch 'isself on the
corner o' the roof…"

"To the point, man, get to the point!" cried Klapaucius. "There was
thunder, you fell down, and then what?"

"Then nothin', like I says before an' thought I made it clear. Nothin',
an' if'n there war somethin', there'd be some-thin', only there war
nothin' sure an' that be the long an' the short of it! D'ye agree,
Master Gyles?"

"Aye, sure 'tis the truth ye speak, 'tis."

Klapaucius bowed and stepped back, and the whole procession continued up
the mountain, the natives straining beneath the dragon's tribute. He
supposed they would place it in some cave designated by the beast, but
didn't care to ask for details; his head was already spinning from
listening to the local official and his Master Gyles. And anyway, he had
heard one of the natives say to another that the dragon had chosen "a
spot as near us an' as near 'isself as could be found."

Klapaucius hurried on, picking his way according to the readings of the
dragonometer he kept on a chain around his neck. As for the counter, its
pointer had come to rest on exactly eight-tenths of a dragon.

"What in the devil is it, an indeterminant dragon?" he thought as he
marched, stopping to rest every now and then, for the sun beat fiercely
and the air was so hot that everything shimmered. There was no
vegetation anywhere, not a scrap, only baked mud, rocks and boulders as
far as the eye could see.

An hour passed, the sun hung lower in the heavens, and Klapaucius still
walked through fields of gravel and scree, through craggy passes, till
he found himself in a place of narrow canyons and ravines full of chill
and darkness. The red pointer crept to nine-tenths, gave a shudder, and
froze.

Klapaucius put his knapsack on a rock and had just taken off his
antidragon belt when the indicator began to go wild, so he grabbed his
probability extinguisher and looked all around. Situated on a high
bluff, he was able to see into the gorge below, where something moved.

"That must be her!" he thought, since Echidnosaurs are invariably
female.

Could that be why it didn't demand young virgins? But no, the native
said it had before. Odd, most odd. But the main thing now, Klapaucius
told himself, was to shoot straight and everything would be all right.
Just in case, however, he reached for his knapsack again and pulled out
a can of dragon repellent and an atomizer. Then he peered over the edge
of the rock. At the bottom of the gorge, along the bed of a dried-up
stream walked a grayish brown dragoness of enormous proportions, though
with sunken sides as if it had been starved. All sorts of thoughts ran
through Klapaucius' head. Annihilate the thing by reversing the sign of
its pentapendragonal coefficient from positive to negative, thereby
raising the statistical probability of its nonexistence over that of its
existence? Ah, but how very risky that was, when the least deviation
could prove disastrous: more than one poor soul, seeking to produce the
lack of a dragon, had ended up instead with the back of the
dragon—resulting in a beast with two backs—and nearly died of
embarrassment! Besides, total deprobabilization would rule out the
possibility of studying the Echidnosaur's behavior. Klapaucius wavered;
he could see a splendid dragonskin tacked on the wall of his den, right
above the fireplace. But this wasn't the time to indulge in
daydreams—though a dracozoologist would certainly be delighted to
receive an animal with such unusual tastes. Finally, as Klapaucius got
into position, it occurred to him what a nice little article might be
written up on the strength of a well-preserved specimen, so he put down
the extinguisher, lifted the gun that fired negative heads, took careful
aim and pulled the trigger.

The roar was deafening. A cloud of white smoke engulfed Klapaucius and
he lost sight of the beast for a moment. Then the smoke cleared.

There are a great many old wives' tales about dragons. It is said, for
example, that dragons can sometimes have seven heads. This is sheer
nonsense. A dragon can have only one head, for the simple reason that
having two leads to disagreements and violent quarrels; the
polyhydroids, as the scholars call them, died out as a result of
internal feuds. Stubborn and headstrong by nature, dragons cannot
tolerate opposition, therefore two heads in one body will always bring
about a swift death: each head, purely to spite the other, refuses to
eat, then maliciously holds its breath—with the usual consequences. It
was this phenomenon which Euphorius Cloy exploited when he invented the
anticapita cannon. A small auxiliary electron head is discharged into
the dragon's body. This immediately gives rise to unreconcilable
differences of opinion and the dragon is immobilized by the ensuing
deadlock. Often it will stand there, stiff as a board, for a day, a
week, even a month; sometimes a year goes by before the beast will
collapse, exhausted. Then you can do with it what you will.

But the dragon Klapaucius shot reacted strangely, to say the least.
True, it did rear up on its hind paws with a howl that started a
landslide or two, and it did thrash the rocks with its tail until the
sparks flew all over the canyon. But then it scratched its ear, cleared
its throat and coolly continued on its way, though trotting at a
slightly quicker pace. Unable to believe his eyes, Klapaucius ran along
the ridge to head the creature off at the mouth of the dried-up stream
—it was no longer an article, or even two articles in the _Dracological
Journal_ he could see his name on now, but a whole monograph elegantly
bound, with a likeness of the dragon and the author on the cover!

At the first bend he crouched behind a boulder, pulled out his
improbability automatic, took aim and actuated the possibiliballistic
destabilizers. The gunstock trembled in his hands, the red-hot barrel
steamed; the dragon was surrounded with a halo like a moon predicting
bad weather— but didn't disappear! Once again Klapaucius unleashed the
utmost improbability at the beast; the intensity of nonverisimilarity
was so great, that a moth that happened to be flying by began to tap out
the Second _Jungle Book_ in Morse code with its little wings, and here
and there among the crags and cliffs danced the shadows of witches, hags
and harpies, while the sound of hoofbeats announced that somewhere in
the vicinity there were centaurs gamboling, summoned into being by the
awesome force of the improbability projector. But the dragon just sat
there and yawned, leisurely scratching its shaggy neck with a hind paw,
like a dog. Klapaucius clutched his sizzling weapon and desperately kept
squeezing the trigger—he had never felt so helpless— and the nearest
stones slowly lifted into the air, while the dust that the dragon had
kicked up, instead of settling, hung in midair and assumed the shape of
a sign that clearly read AT YOUR SERVICE GOV. It grew dim—day was night
and night was day, it grew cold-—hell was freezing over; a couple of
stones went out for a stroll and softly chatted of this and that; in
short, miracles were happening right and left, yet that horrid monster
sitting not more than thirty paces from Klapaucius apparently had no
intention of disappearing. Klapaucius threw down his gun, pulled an
anti-dragon grenade from his vest pocket and, committing his soul to the
Universal Matrix of Transfinite Transformations, hurled it with all his
might. There was a loud ker-boom, and into the air with a spray of rock
flew the dragon's tail, and the dragon shouted "Yipe!"—just like a
person—and galloped straight for Klapaucius. Klapaucius, seeing the end
was near, leaped out from behind his boulder, swinging his antimatter
saber blindly, but then he heard another shout:

"Stop! Stop! Don't kill me!"

"What's that, the dragon talking?" thought Klapaucius. "I must be going
mad …"

But he asked:

"Who said that? The dragon?"

"What dragon? It's me!!"

And as the cloud of dust blew away, Trurl stepped out of the beast,
pushing a button that made it sink to its knees and go dead with a long,
drawn-out wheeze.

"Trurl, what on earth is going on? Why this masquerade? Where did you
find such a costume? And what about the real dragon?" Klapaucius
bombarded his friend with questions. Trurl finished brushing himself off
and held up his hands.

"Just a minute, give me a chance! The dragon I destroyed, but the King
wouldn't pay …"

"Why not?"

"Stingy, most likely. He blamed it on the bureaucracy, of course, said
there had to be a notarized death certificate, an official autopsy, all
sorts of forms in triplicate, the approval of the Royal Appropriations
Commission, and so on. The Head Treasurer claimed he didn't know the
procedure to hand over the money, for it wasn't wages, nor did it come
under maintenance. I went from the King to the Cashier to the
Commission, back and forth, and no one would do anything; finally, when
they asked me to submit a vita sheet with photographs and references, I
walked out—but by then the dragon was beyond recall. So I pulled the
skin off it, cut up a few sticks and branches, found an old telephone
pole, and that was really all I needed; a frame for the skin, some
pulleys—you know—and I was ready …"

"You, Trurl? Resorting to such shameful tactics? Impossible! What could
you hope to gain by it? I mean, if they didn't pay you in the first
place…"

"Don't you understand?" said Trurl, shaking his head. "This way I get
the tribute! Already there's more than I know what to do with."

"Ah! Of course!!" Klapaucius saw it all now. But he added, "Still, it
wasn't right to force them …"

"Who was forcing them? I only walked around in the mountains, and in the
evenings I howled a little. But really, I'm absolutely bushed." And he
sat down next to Klapaucius.

"What, from howling?"

"Howling? What are you talking about? Every night I have to drag sacks
of gold from the designated cave—all the way up there!" He pointed to a
distant ridge. "I made myself a blast-off pad—it's right over there.
Just carry several hundred pounds of bullion from sundown to sunup and
you'll see what I mean! And that dragon was no ordinary dragon—the skin
itself weighs a couple of tons, and I have to cart that around with me
all day, roaring and stamping —and then it's all night hauling and
heaving. I'm glad you showed up, I can't take much more of this…"

"But… why didn't the dragon—the fake one, that is— why didn't it
disappear when I lowered the probability to the point of miracles?"
Klapaucius asked. Trurl smiled.

"I didn't want to take any chances," he explained. "Some fool of a
hunter might've happened by, maybe even Basiliscus himself, so I put
probability-proof shields under the dragonskin. But come, I've got a few
sacks of platinum left —saved them for last since they're the heaviest.
Which is just perfect, now that you can give me a hand…"

 THE FOURTH SALLY

OR _How Trurl_

_Built a Femfatalatron to Save Prince_

_Pantaloon from the Pangs of Love,_

_and How Later He Resorted to a_

_Cannonade of Babies_

One day, in the middle of the night, as Trurl lay deep in slumber, there
came a violent knocking at the door of his domicile, as if someone was
trying to knock it off its hinges. Still in a stupor, Trurl pulled back
the bolts and saw standing there against the paling stars an enormous
ship. It looked like a giant sugar loaf or flying pyramid, and out of
this colossus, which had landed right on his front lawn, long rows of
andromedaries laden with packs walked down a wide ramp, while robots,
garbed in turbans and togas and painted black, unloaded the bags at his
doorstep, and so quickly, that before Trurl knew it, he was hemmed in by
a growing embankment of bulging sacks—though a narrow passageway was
left therein, and through this approached an electroknight of remarkable
countenance, for his jeweled eyes blazed like comets, and he had radar
antennas jauntily thrown back, and an elegant diamond-studded stole.
This imposing personage doffed his armored cap and in a mighty yet
silken voice inquired:

"Have I the honor to speak with his lordship Trurl, Trurl the highborn,
Trurl the illustrious constructor?"

"Why yes, of course… won't you come in … I wasn't expecting… that is, I
was asleep," said Trurl, terribly flustered, pulling on a bathrobe, for
a nightshirt was all he was wearing, and that wasn't the cleanest.

The magnificent electroknight, however, appeared not to notice any
shortcoming in Trurl's attire. Doffng his cap again, which purred and
hummed above his castellated brow, he gracefully entered the room. Trurl
excused himself for a moment, perfunctorily performed his morning
ablutions, then hurried back downstairs. By now it was growing light
outside, and the first rays of the sun gleamed on the turbans of the
robots, who sang the old sad and soulful song of bondage, "Tote Dat
Jack," as they formed in triple rows around both house and pyramidal
ship. Trurl took a seat opposite his guest, who blinked his shining eyes
and finally spoke as follows:

"The planet from which I come to you, Sir Constructor, is at present
deep in the Dark Ages. Ah, but Your Excellency must forgive our untimely
arrival, which did so incommoditate him; on board we had no way of
knowing, you see, that at this particular locus of this worthy sphere,
which your abode is pleased to occupy, night still reigned supreme and
stayed the break of day."

Here he cleared his throat, like someone playing sweetly upon a glass
harmonica, and continued:

"I have been sent to Your Exalted Person by my lord and master, His
Royal Highness Protuberon Asteristicus, sovereign ruler of the sister
globes of Aphelion and Perihelion, hereditary monarch of Aneuria,
emperor of all the Monodamites, Biproxicans and Tripartisans, the Grand
Duke of Anamandorinth, Glorgonzigor and Esquacciaccaturbia, Count of the
Euscalipü, the Algorissimo and the Flora del Fortran, Paladin
Escutcheoned, Begudgeoned and of the Highest Dudgeon, Baron of Bhm, Wrph
and Clarafoncasterbrackeningen, as well as anointed exarch extraordinary
of Ida, Pida and Adinfinida, to invite in His munificent name Your
Resplendent Grace to our kingdom as the long-awaited savior of the
crown, as the only one who can deliver us from the general mortifaction
occasioned by the thrice-unhappy infatuation of His Royal Highness, the
heir to the throne, Pantagoon."

"But really, I'm not—" Trurl tried to interpose, but the dignitary waved
his hand, signifying that he had not as yet finished, and went on in
that same resonating voice:

"In return for the gracious loan of your most sympathetic ear, and for
your succor in the overcoming of our national calamity, His Royal
Highness Protuberon hereby promises, pledges and solemnly swears that he
shall shower Your Con-structorship with such riches and honors, that
Your Esteemed Effulgence will never exhaust them, even until the end of
his days. And now, by way of an advance or, as they say, a retainer, I
forthwith dub thee"—and here the magnate rose, drew his sword, and
spoke, vigorously punctuating each word with the flat of the blade on
both Trurl's shoulders—"Earl of Otes, Grotes and Finocclea, Margrave
Emeritus of Trundle and Sklar, Eight-barreled Bearer of the Great
Guamellonian Hok, not to mention Thane of Bondacalonda and Cgth,
Governor General of Muxis and Ptuxis, as well as Titular Viscount of the
Order of Unwinched Waifs, Almoner _in perpetuum_ of the realms of
Eenica, Meenica and Mynamoaca, with all the attendant rights and
privileges accruing thereto, including a twenty-one gun salute upon
rising in the morning and retiring at night, an after-dinner fanfare,
and the Extinguished Exponential Cross, duly certified and carved in
ebony, slate and marzipan. And as proof of his royal favor, my Lord and
Liege sends you these few trifles, which I have taken the liberty to
place about your dwelling."

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-9.jpg]

And indeed, the sacks already blocked out the sky, and the room grew
dim. The magnate finished speaking, though his hand, raised in
eloquence, remained in midair. Trurl took this opportunity to say:

"I am much obliged to His Royal Highness Protuberon, but affairs of the
heart, you understand, are not exactly my specialty. Though…" he added,
uncomfortable under the magnate's dazzling gaze, "perhaps you would
explain the problem to me …"

The magnate gave a nod.

"That is simply done, Sir Constructor! The heir to the throne has fallen
in love with Amarandina Cybernella, the only daughter of the ruler of
the neighboring state of Ib. But an ancient enmity divides our kingdoms,
and doubtless, if our Beloved Sovereign, yielding to the unwearying
pleas of the prince, were to ask that emperor for the hand of
Amarandina, the answer would be a categorical never. And so a year has
passed, and six days, and the crown prince wastes away before our eyes.
All attempts to restore him to reason have failed, and now our only hope
lies in Your Most Iridescent Eminence!"

Here the magnate made a deep bow. Trurl, observing rows of warriors
right outside his window, coughed and said in a feeble voice:

"Well, I really don't see how I could be of … though, of course, if the
King wishes it… in that case…"

"Wonderful!" cried the magnate and clapped his hands with a mighty
clang. Immediately twelve cuirassiers, black as night, rushed in with
clattering armor and bore Trurl off to the ship, which fired its engines
twenty-one times, pulled anchor and, banners waving, lifted up into the
open sky.

During the flight the magnate, who was Grand Seneschal and Artifactotum
to the King, filled Trurl in on the details of the prince's ill-starred
enamorization. Directly upon their arrival, after the welcoming
ceremonies and ticker-tape parade through the streets of the capital,
the constructor got down to work. He set up his equipment in the
magnificent royal gardens and in three weeks had converted the Temple of
Contemplation there into a strange edifice full of metal, cables and
glowing screens. This was, he told the King, a femfatalatron, an
erotifying device stochastic, elastic and orgiastic, and with plenty of
feedback; whoever was placed inside the apparatus instantaneously
experienced all the charms, lures, wiles, winks and witchery of all the
fairer sex in the Universe at once. The femfatalatron operated on a
power of forty megamors, with a maximum attainable efficiency—given a
constant concupiscence coefficient—of ninety-six percent, while the
system's libidinous lubricity, measured of course in kilocupids,
produced up to six units for every remote-control caress. This marvelous
mechanism, moreover, was equipped with reversible ardor dampers,
omnidirectional consummation amplifiers, absorption philters, paphian
peripherals, and "first-sight" flip-flop circuits, since Trurl held here
to the position of Dr. Yentzicus, creator of the famous oculo-oscular
feel theory.

There were also all sorts of auxiliary components, like a high-frequency
titillizer, an alternating tantalator, plus an entire set of lecherons
and debaucheraries; on the outside, in a special glass case, were
enormous dials, on which one could carefully follow the course of the
whole decaptivation process. Statistical analysis revealed that the
femfatalatron gave positive, permanent results in ninety-eight cases of
unrequited amatorial superfixation out of a hundred. The chances of
saving the crown prince therefore were excellent.

It took forty venerable peers of the kingdom four hours and more to push
and pull their prince through the gardens to the Temple of
Contemplation, for though fully determined, they had to show proper
respect for his royal person, and the prince, having no desire whatever
of becoming de-captivated, kicked and butted his faithful courtiers with
great vigor. When finally His Majesty was shoved, with the application
of numerous feather pillows, into the machine and the trapdoor shut
after him, Trurl, full of misgivings, threw the switch, and the computer
began its countdown in a dreary monotone: "Five, four, three, two, one,
zero … start!" The synchroerotorotors, bumping and grinding, set up
powerful counterseduction currents to displace the prince's so
tragically misplaced affections. After an hour of this, Trurl looked at
the dials: their needles trembled under the terrible load of lascivicity
but, alas, failed to show any significant improvement. He began to have
serious doubts about the success of the treatment, but it was too late
to do anything now—other than fold his hands and wait patiently. He only
checked to make sure that the autolips were landing in the right place
and at the proper angle, that the aphrodisial philanderoids and
satyriacal panderynes weren't going too far, for he didn't want the
patient to undergo a total dotal transferral and end up idolizing the
machine instead of Amarandina, but only to fall thoroughly out of love.
At last the trapdoor was opened in solemn silence. Out of the dim
interior, wreathed with a cloud of the sweetest perfume, stumbled the
pale prince through crushed rose petals—and fell in a swoon, stunned by
that awesome access of passion. His faithful servants rushed up and, as
they lifted his limp limbs, heard him utter in a hoarse whisper one
solitary word: Amarandina. Trurl cursed under his breath, for all of it
had been in vain, and the prince's mad love had proven stronger than all
the megamors and kilocuddles the femfatalatron could bring to bear. The
rapturometer, when pressed against the brow of the stupefied prince,
registered one hundred and seven, then the glass shattered and the
mercury poured out, still quivering, as if it too had come under the
influence of those raging emotions. The first attempt, then, was a
complete failure.

Trurl returned to his quarters in the foulest mood, and anyone
eavesdropping would have heard how he paced from wall to wall, seeking a
solution. Meanwhile there was an awful racket back in the gardens: some
stonemasons, ordered to fix the wall of a small arborium, had out of
curiosity crawled into the femfatalatron and accidentally turned it on.
It became necessary to summon the fire department, for they jumped out
so inflamed, that they started to smoke.

Next Trurl tried a retropruriginous eroginator with heavy-duty
volupticles, but that too—to make a long story short— was a flop. The
prince was not a whit less smitten with Amarandina's charms; in fact, he
was more smitten than ever. Once again Trurl paced the floor of his
room, back and forth for many miles, and sat up half the night reading
professional manuals, till he hurled them against the wall. That morning
he went to the Grand Seneschal and requested an audience with the King.
Admitted to the presence of His Majesty, Trurl spoke in this fashion:

"Your Royal Highness and Gracious Sovereign! The dis-enamorment methods
which I employed upon Your son are the most powerful possible. He simply
will not be dis-enamored, not alive—Your Majesty must know the truth."

The King was silent, crushed by this news, but Trurl went on:

"Of course, I could deceive him, synthesizing an Amarandina according to
the parameters I have at hand, but sooner or later the prince would find
out, when news of the true Amarandina reached his ears. No, I see no
other way: the prince must marry the Emperor's daughter!"

"Bah, but that is the whole problem, O foreigner! The Emperor will never
agree to such a marriage!"

"And if he were conquered? If he had to sue for peace, beg for mercy?"

"Why then, certainly—but would you have me plunge two large kingdoms
into a bloody war, which is a risky proposition at best, solely in order
to win the hand of the Emperor's daughter for my son? No, that is quite
out of the question!"

"Precisely the answer I expected of Your Royal Highness!" said Trurl
calmly. "However, there are wars and there are wars; the kind I have in
mind would be absolutely bloodless. For we would not attack the
Emperor's realm with arms; in fact, we would not take the life of a
single citizen, but _just the opposite!_"

"What are you saying? What do you mean?" exclaimed the King.

And as Trurl whispered his secret plan into the royal ear, the monarch's
careworn face gradually brightened, and he cried:

"Go then, and do this thing, good foreigner, and may the gods be with
thee!"

The very next day the royal forges and workshops undertook the
construction, according to Trurl's specifications, of a great number of
tremendous cannons, though for what purpose intended it was not clear.
These were placed around the planet and disguised as defense
installations, so that no one would guess a thing. Meanwhile Trurl sat
day and night in the royal cybergenetic laboratory, watching over secret
cauldrons in which mysterious concoctions gurgled and percolated. A spy
on the premises would have discovered nothing, except that now and then
behind the double-locked doors there was an odd mewling, puling sound,
and technicians and assistants ran frantically back and forth with piles
of diapers.

The bombardment began a week later, at midnight. The cannons, primed by
veteran cannoneers, were aimed, muzzles raised, straight at the white
star of the Emperor's empire, and they fired—not death-dealing, but
life-giving missiles. For Trurl had loaded the cannons with newborn
babies, which rained down upon the enemy in gooing, cooing myriads and,
growing quickly, crawled and drooled over everything; there were so many
of them, that the air shook with their ear-splitting ma-ma's, da-da's,
kee-kee's and waa's. This infant inundation lasted until the economy
began to collapse under the strain and the kingdom was faced with the
dread specter of a depression, and still out of the sky came tots, tads,
moppets and toddlers, all chubby and chuckling, their diapers
fluttering. The Emperor was forced to capitulate to King Protuberon, who
promised to call a halt to the hostilities on the condition that his son
be granted Amarandina's hand in marriage—to which the Emperor hastily
agreed. Whereupon the baby cannons were all carefully spiked and put
away, and, to be safe, Trurl himself took apart the femfatalatron.
Later, as best man, in a suit of emeralds and holding the ceremonial
baton, he played toastmaster at the riotous wedding feast. Afterwards,
he loaded his rocket with the titles, diplomas and citations which both
the King and the Emperor had bestowed upon him, and then, sated with
glory, he headed for home.

 THE FIFTH SALLY

OR _The Mischief_

_of King Balerion_

Not by being cruel did Balerion, King of Cymberia, oppress his people,
but by having a good time. And again, it wasn't feasts or all-night
orgies that were dear to His Majesty's heart, but only the most innocent
games—tiddlywinks, mumbledypeg, old maid and go fish into the wee hours
of the morning, then hopscotch, leapfrog, but more than anything he
loved to play hide-and-seek. Whenever there was an important decision to
be made, a State document to be signed, interstellar emissaries to be
received or some Commodore requesting an audience, the King would hide,
and they would have to find him, else suffer the most dreadful
punishments. So the whole court would chase up and down the palace,
check the dungeons, look under the drawbridge, comb the towers and
turrets, tap the walls, turn the throne inside out, and quite often
these searches lasted a long time, for the King was always thinking up
new places to hide. Once, a terribly important war never got declared,
and all because the King, decked in spangles and crystal pendants, hung
three days from the ceiling of the main hall and passed for a
chandelier, holding his mouth to keep from laughing out loud at the
ministers rushing about frantically below. Whoever found the King was
instantly given the title of Royal Discoverer—there were already seven
hundred and thirty-six of those at court. But he who would gain the
King's special favor had to beguile him with some new game, one the King
had never heard of. Which was by no means easy, considering that
Balerion was unusually well-versed in the subject; he knew all the
ancient games, like jackstones or knucklebones, and all the latest
games, like spin the electron, and he often said that everything was a
game, his Crown included, and for that matter the whole wide world.

These thoughtless and frivolous words outraged the venerable members of
the King's privy council; the prime minister in particular, My Lord
Papagaster of the great house of Pentaperihelion, was much provoked,
saying the King held nothing sacred and even dared expose his own
Exalted Person to ridicule.

Then, when the King unexpectedly announced it was time for riddles,
terror filled the hearts of everyone. He had always had a passion for
riddles; once, right in the middle of the coronation, he confounded the
Lord High Chancellor with the question, why was antimatter like an
antimacassar?

It wasn't very long before the King realized that his courtiers weren't
putting forth the proper effort in solving the conundrums he posed. They
replied in any which way, said whatever came into their heads, and this
infuriated the King. However, as soon as he began to base all royal
appointments and promotions upon the answers to his riddles, things
improved considerably. Decorations and dismissals came thick and fast,
and the whole court, like it or not, had to play the game in earnest.
Unfortunately, many dignitaries attempted to deceive the King, who,
though basically good-natured, could simply not tolerate a cheater. The
Keeper of the Great Seal was sent into exile because he had used a crib
(concealed beneath his cuirass) in the Royal Presence; he never would
have been discovered, had not one of his old enemies, a certain general,
brought this to the King's attention. Papagaster himself had to part
with his high post, for he didn't know what was the darkest place in
outer space. In time, the King's Cabinet was composed of the most
accomplished solvers of crosswords, acrostics and rebuses in the land,
and his ministers never went anywhere without their encyclopedias. The
courtiers soon became so proficient, that they could supply the correct
answer before the King had finished asking the question, though this was
hardly surprising when you considered that they were all avid
subscribers to the "Official Register," which, instead of a tedious list
of acts and administrative decisions, contained nothing but puzzles,
puns and parlor games.

As the years went by, however, the King liked less and less to have to
think, and gradually returned to his first and greatest love,
hide-and-seek. One day, in a particularly playful mood, he offered a
most handsome prize to the one who could find for him the best hiding
place in all the world. The prize was to be nothing less than the Royal
Diadem of the Cymberanide Dynasty, a cluster of truly priceless jewels.
No one had laid eyes on this wonder for many centuries, for it lay
locked and coffered in the Royal Vault.

Now it so happened that Trurl and Klapaucius chanced upon Cymberia in
the course of one of their travels. News of the King's proclamation,
having quickly spread throughout the realm, reached our constructors
too; they learned of it from the local villagers at the inn where they
were spending the night.

The next day they repaired to the palace to announce that they knew a
hiding place unequaled by any other. Unfortunately, so many others had
come to claim the prize, that it was next to impossible to get by the
crowd at the gate. Trurl and Klapaucius therefore returned to their
lodgings and resolved to try their luck the following day. Though they
didn't leave it to luck alone; this time the prudent constructors came
prepared. To every guard who barred the way and then to every court
official who challenged them, Trurl quietly slipped a few coins and,
whenever that didn't work, a few more, and in less than five minutes
they were standing before the throne of His Royal Highness. His Royal
Highness was of course delighted to hear that such famous wise men had
come so far for the sole purpose of imparting to him the secret of the
perfect hiding place. It took them a little time to explain the how and
the why of it to Balerion, but his mind, schooled from childhood in the
ways of tricks and puzzles, finally grasped the idea. Burning with
enthusiasm, the King jumped down from his throne, assured the two
friends of his undying gratitude, promised they would receive the prize
without fail—provided only they let him try out their secret method at
once. Klapaucius was reluctant on this point, muttering to himself that
they ought to write up a proper contract first, with parchment, seals
and tassels; but the King was so insistent, and pleaded with such
vehemence, swearing great oaths the prize was as good as theirs, that
the constructors had to give in. Trurl opened a small box he had brought
with him, took out the necessary device and showed it to the King. This
invention actually had nothing to do with hide-and-seek, but could be
applied to that game wonderfully well. It was a portable bilateral
personality transformer, with retroreversible feedback, of course. Using
it, any two individuals could quickly and easily exchange minds. The
device, fitted onto one's head, resembled a pair of horns; when these
came into contact with the forehead of the one with whom one wished to
effect the exchange, and were lightly pressed, the device was activated
and instantaneously set up two opposing series of antipodal impulses.
Through one horn, one's own psyche flowed into the other, and through
the other, the other into one's own. Hence the total deenergizing of the
one memory and the simultaneous energizing of the other in its place,
and contrariwise. Trurl had set the apparatus on his head for purposes
of demonstration and was explaining the procedure to the King, bringing
the royal forehead into proximity with the horns, when the King
impulsively butted against them, which triggered the mechanism and
immediately brought about a personality transfer. It all happened so
quickly that Trurl, who had never really tested the device on himself,
didn't notice. Nor did Klapaucius, standing to one side; it did strike
him rather odd that Trurl suddenly stopped in the middle of a sentence
and Balerion instantly took up where Trurl had left off,, using such
words as "the potentials involved with nonlinear conversion of
submnemonic quanta" and "the adiabatic flux differential of the id." The
King went on in his squeaky voice for almost a minute before Klapaucius
realized there was something wrong. Balerion, finding himself inside the
body of Trurl, was no longer listening to the lecture, but wiggled his
fingers and toes, as if making himself more comfortable in this novel
shape, which he inspected with the greatest curiosity. Meanwhile Trurl,
in a long purple robe, was waving his arms and explaining the reversed
entropy of mutually transposed systems, until he grew aware that
something was in the way, looked down at his hand and was dumbfounded to
find himself holding a scepter. He was about to speak, but the King
burst out laughing and took to his heels. Trurl started after him, but
tripped over the royal robe and fell flat on his face. This commotion
quickly brought the royal bodyguards, who straightway threw themselves
upon Klapaucius, thinking he had attacked the Royal Person. By the time
Trurl managed to get his royal personage off the floor and convince the
guards it stood in no danger, Balerion was far away, rollicking
somewhere in Trurl's body. Trurl attempted to give chase, but the
courtiers wouldn't permit it, and when he protested he wasn't the King
at all but there had been a personality transfer, they concluded that
excessive puzzle-solving had finally unhinged the Royal Reason and
politely but firmly locked him in the royal bedchamber, then sent for
the royal physicians while he roared and pounded on the door. Klapaucius
meanwhile, thrown out of the palace on his ear, headed back to the inn,
thinking—not without alarm—of the complications that might arise from
what had just taken place. "Undoubtedly," he thought, "had I been in
Trurl's shoes, my great presence of mind would have saved the day.
Instead of making a scene and ranting on about telepsychic transfers,
which couldn't help but create suspicions as to his sanity, I would have
taken advantage of the King's body and ordered them to seize Trurl,
namely Balerion, at once-—whereas now he's running around free somewhere
in the city—and also, I would have had the other constructor remain at
my side, in the capacity of special adviser. But that complete idiot"—by
which he meant Trurl—"completely lost his head, and now I'll have to
bring all my tactical talents into play, else this business may end
badly…"

He tried to recall everything he knew about the personality transformer,
which was considerable. By far the greatest danger, as he saw it, was
that Balerion, heedlessly rushing about in Trurl's body, might stumble
and hit some inanimate object with his horns. In which case Balerion's
consciousness would immediately enter that object and, since inanimate
things had no consciousness and consequently the object could offer the
transformer nothing in return, Trurl's body would fall lifeless to the
ground; as for the King, he would be trapped for all eternity inside
some stone, or lamppost, or discarded shoe. Uneasy, Klapaucius quickened
his pace, and not far from the inn he overheard some villagers talking
excitedly of how his colleague, Trurl, had flown out of the royal palace
like one possessed, and how, racing down the long, steep steps that led
to the harbor, he'd taken a spill and broken his leg. How this drove him
into a most amazing frenzy; how, lying there, he bellowed that he was
King Balerion Himself, called for the royal physicians, a stretcher with
feather pillows, sweet essences and balm; and how, when the people
laughed at this madness, he crawled along the pavement, cursing terribly
and rending his garments, until one passerby took pity on him and bent
over to help. How then the fallen constructor tore the hat off his head,
revealing—and there were witnesses to swear to this—devil's horns. How
with those horns he rammed the good Samaritan in the head, then fell
senseless, strangely stiff and groaning feebly, while the good Samaritan
suddenly changed, "as if an evil spirit had taken hold of him," and
dancing, skipping, shoving aside everyone who stood in his way, galloped
down the steps to the harbor.

Klapaucius grew faint when he heard all of this, for he understood that
Balerion, having damaged Trurl's body (and after using it for so short a
time), had cunningly switched to the body of some stranger. "Now it's
started," he thought with horror. "And how will I ever find Balerion,
hidden in a body I don't even know? Where do I begin to look?!" He tried
to learn from the villagers who this passerby was, who had so nobly
approached the injured pseudo-Trurl, and also, what had become of the
horns. Of the good Samaritan they knew only that his dress was foreign,
though unmistakably naval, which suggested he'd stepped off a vessel
from distant skies; concerning the horns, nothing. But then a certain
mendicant whose legs had rusted through (a widower, he had no one to
keep them taped and tarred) and who was therefore obliged to go around
on wheels attached to his hips, which indeed gave him a better vantage
point on what transpired at ground level, told Klapaucius that the
worthy mariner had snatched the horns from the prone constructor's head
with such speed, that no one but himself had seen it. So, apparently
Balerion was again in possession of the transformer and could continue
this hair-raising business of jumping from body to body. The news that
he now occupied the person of a sailor was especially disturbing. "Of
all things, a sailor!" thought Klapaucius. "When shore leave is up and
he doesn't appear on board (and how can he, not knowing which ship is
his?), the captain is bound to notify the authorities, they'll arrest
the deserter of course, and Our Highness will find himself in a dungeon!
And if at any time he beats his head against the dungeon wall in
despair—with the horns on—then may heaven help us all!!" There was
little chance, if any, of locating the sailor who was Balerion, but
Klapaucius hastened to the harbor. Luck was with him, for he saw a
sizable crowd gathered up ahead. Certain he was on the right track, he
mingled with the crowd and soon learned, from what was said here and
there, that his worst fears were being realized. Only minutes earlier, a
certain respectable skipper, the owner of an entire fleet of merchant
ships, had recognized a crewman of his, a person of sterling character;
yet now this worthy individual was hurling insults at all who went by,
and to those who cautioned him to be on his way lest the police come, he
shouted he could become whoever he wanted, and that included the whole
police force. Scandalized by such behavior, the skipper remonstrated
with his crewman, who replied by striking him with a large stick. Then a
police squad, patrolling the harbor as a place of frequent altercations
and disorders, arrived on the scene, and it so happened the Commissioner
himself was in charge. The Commissioner, seeing that the unruly sailor
refused to listen to reason, ordered him thrown in jail. But while they
were making the arrest, the sailor suddenly hurled himself at the
Commissioner like one possessed and butted him with what seemed to
resemble horns. Directly after that, he began to howl that he was a
policeman, and not just any policeman, but chief commander of the harbor
patrol, while the Commissioner, instead of being angered by this
insolent raving, laughed as if it were a tremendous joke, but then
ordered his subordinates to escort the troublemaker to prison without
further delay, nor to be sparing with their clubs and fists in the
process.

Thus, in less than an hour, Balerion had managed to change his corporeal
quarters three times, presently occupying the body of a police
commissioner, who, though Lord knew he was innocent, had to sit and stew
in some dark, dank cell. Klapaucius sighed and went directly to the
police station. It was situated on the coast, a heavy stone edifice. No
one barred the way, so he went inside and walked through a few empty
rooms, until he found himself standing in front of a veritable giant
several sizes too large for his uniform and armed to the teeth. This
hulk of an individual glowered at Klapaucius and stepped forward, as if
to throw him out bodily—but suddenly gave a wink (though Klapaucius
certainly had never met him before) and burst out laughing. The voice
was gruff, a policeman's voice beyond a shadow of a doubt, yet the
laugh—and particularly that wink—brought to mind Balerion, and indeed,
it was Baler-ion on the other side of that desk, though obviously not in
his own person!

"I knew you right off," said Balerion the policeman. "You were at the
palace, you're the friend of the one who had the apparatus. Well, what
do you think? Isn't this a fabulous hiding place? They'll never find me,
you know, not in a million years! And it's so much fun being a big,
strong policeman! Watch!"

And he brought his huge policeman's fist down on the desk with such
force that it split in half—though there was a cracking in the hand as
well. Balerion winced and said:

"Ow, I snapped something. But that's okay. If need be, I can always
change—into you, for example!"

Klapaucius backed off in the direction of the door, but the policeman
blocked the way with his colossal frame and went on:

"Not that I have anything against you personally, you understand. But
you know too much, old boy. So I really think it's best we put you in
the clink. Yes, into the clink with you!" And he gave a nasty laugh.
"That way, when I leave the force, no one—not even you—will have the
foggiest notion where, or rather who, I am! Ha-ha!"

"But Your Majesty!" Klapaucius protested. "You don't know all the
dangers of the device. Suppose you entered the body of someone with a
fatal illness, or a hunted criminal…"

"No problem," said the King. "All I have to do is remember one thing:
after every switch, grab the horns!"

And he pointed to the broken desk, where the device lay in an open
drawer.

"As long as, each time," he said, "I pull it off the head of the person
I just was and hold on to it, nothing can harm me!"

Klapaucius did his best to persuade the King to abandon the idea of
future personality transfers, but it was quite hopeless; the King only
laughed and made jokes, then finally said, clearly enjoying himself:

"I won't go back to the palace—you can forget about that! Anyway, I'll
tell you: I see before me a great voyage, traveling among my loyal
subjects from body to body, which, after all, is very much in keeping
with my democratic principles. And then for dessert, so to speak, the
body of some fair maiden—that ought to be a most edifying experience,
don't you think? Ha-ha!"

And he threw open the door with a great, hairy paw and bawled for his
subordinates. Klapaucius, seeing they would lock him up for sure unless
he acted at once, grabbed an inkwell and tossed its contents into the
King's face, then in the general confusion leaped out a window into the
street. By a great stroke of luck, there were no witnesses about, and he
was able to make it to a populous square and lose himself in the crowd
before the police began pouring from the station, straightening their
shakos and waving their weapons in the air.

Plunged in thoughts that were far from pleasant, Klapaucius walked away
from the harbor. "It would be best, really," he said to himself, "to
leave that incorrigible Balerion to his fate, go to the hospital where
Trurl's body is staying, occupied by the honest sailor, and bring it to
the palace, so my friend can be himself again, body and soul. Though
it's true that that would make the sailor King instead of Balerion—and
serve that rascal right!" Not a bad plan perhaps, but inoperable for the
lack of a small but indispensable item, namely the transformer with the
horns, which at present lay in the drawer of a policeman's desk. For a
moment Klapaucius considered the possibility of constructing another
such device—no, there was neither the time nor the means. "But here's an
idea," he thought. "I'll go to Trurl, who's the King and by now has
surely come to his senses, and I'll tell him to have the army surround
the harbor police station. That way, we'll recover the device and Trurl
can get back to his old self!"

However, Klapaucius wasn't admitted to the palace. The King, so the
sentries told him, had been put under heavy electrostatic sedation by
his physicians and should sleep like a top for the next twenty-eight
hours at least.

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-10.jpg]

"That's all we need!" groaned Klapaucius, and hastened to the hospital
where Trurl's body was staying, for he feared that it might have already
been discharged and irretrievably lost in the labyrinth of the big city.
At the hospital he presented himself as a relative of the one with the
broken leg; the name he managed to read off the in-patient register. He
learned that the injury wasn't serious, a bad sprain and not a fracture,
though the patient would have to remain in traction for several days.
Klapaucius, of course, had no intention of visiting the patient—it would
only come out that they weren't even acquainted. Reassured at least that
Trurl's body wouldn't run off on him unexpectedly, he left the hospital
and took to wandering the streets, deep in thought. Somehow he found
himself back in the vicinity of the harbor and noticed the place was
swarming with police; they were stopping everyone, carefully comparing
face after face with a description each officer carried with him in a
notebook. Klapaucius immediately guessed that this was the doing of
Balerion, who at all costs wanted him under lock and key. Just then a
patrol approached—and two guards rounded the corner in the opposite
direction, cutting off his retreat. Klapaucius quietly gave himself up,
demanding only that they take him before the Commissioner, saying that
it was most urgent, that he was in possession of extremely important
evidence concerning a certain horrible crime. They took him into custody
and handcuffed him to a burly policeman; at the station, the
Commissioner—Balerion— greeted him with a grunt of satisfaction and an
evil twinkle in his beady eyes. But Klapaucius was already exclaiming,
in a voice not his own:

"Great One! High-high Police Sir! They take me, they say me Klapaucius,
me not Klapaucius, not-not, me not even know who-what Klapaucius! Maybe
that Klapaucius he bad one, one who bam-bam horns in head, make big
magic, bad magic, make that me not me, put head in other head, take old
head, horns, run zip-zip, O Much Police Sir! Help!"

And with these words did the wily Klapaucius fall to his knees, shaking
his head and muttering in a strange tongue. Balerion, standing behind
the desk in a uniform with wide epaulets, blinked as he listened,
somewhat taken aback; he gave the kneeling Klapaucius a closer look and
began to nod, apparently convinced—-unaware that the constructor, on the
way to the station, had pressed his own forehead with his free hand, to
produce two marks not unlike those left by the horns of a personality
transformer. Balerion had his men release Klapaucius and leave the room;
when the two of them were alone, he asked him to relate exactly what had
happened, omitting nothing. Klapaucius replied with a long story of how
he, a wealthy foreigner, had arrived only that day at the harbor, his
ship laden with two hundred cases of the prettiest puzzles in creation
as well as thirty self-winding fair maidens, for he had hoped to present
these to the great King Balerion; how they were a gift from the great
Emperor Proboscideon, who in this way sought to express his boundless
admiration for the great House of Cymberia; but how, having arrived and
disembarked, he had thought to stretch his legs a little after the long
journey and was strolling peacefully along the quay, when this person,
who looked just like _this_ (here Klapaucius pointed to himself) and who
had already aroused his suspicions by gazing upon the splendor of his
foreign dress with such evident rapacity—when this person, in short,
suddenly ran towards him like a maniac, ran as if to run him down, but
doffed his cap instead and butted him viciously with a pair of horns,
whereupon an extraordinary exchange of minds took place.

Klapaucius put everything he had into the tale, trying to make it as
believable as possible. He spoke at great length of his lost body, while
heaping insults upon the one it was now his misfortune to possess, and
he even began to slap his own face and spit on his own legs and chest;
he spoke of the treasures he'd brought with him, describing them in
every detail, particularly the self-winding maidens; he reminisced about
the family he'd left behind, his ion-scions, his hi-fi fido, his wife,
one of three hundred, who made a mulled electrolyte as fine as any that
ever graced the table of the Emperor Himself; he even let the
Commissioner in on his biggest secret, to wit, that he had arranged with
the captain of his ship to hand the treasures over to whomsoever came on
board and gave the password.

Balerion listened greedily, for it seemed quite logical to him that
Klapaucius, seeking to hide from the police, should do so by entering
the body of a foreigner, a foreigner moreover attired in splendid robes,
hence obviously wealthy, which would provide him with considerable means
once the transfer were effected. It was plain that a similar scheme had
hatched in the brain of Balerion. Slyly, he tried to coax the secret
password from the false foreigner, who didn't require much coaxing, soon
whispering the word into his ear: "Niterc." By now the constructor was
sure Balerion had taken the bait: the King, loving puzzles as he did,
couldn't bear to see them go to the King, since the King, after all, was
no longer he; and, believing everything, he believed that Klapaucius had
a second transformer—indeed, he had no reason to think otherwise.

They sat awhile in silence; one could see the wheels turning in
Balerion's head. Assuming an air of indifference, he began to question
the foreigner as to the location of his ship, the name of the captain,
and so forth. Klapaucius answered, banking on the King's cupidity, nor
was he mistaken, for suddenly the King stood up, announced that he would
have to verify what the foreigner had told him, and hurriedly left the
room, locking the door securely behind him. Klapaucius then heard
Balerion—evidently the wiser from past experience—station a guard
beneath the window as he was leaving. Of course he would find nothing,
there being no ship, no treasure, no self-winding maidens whatever. But
that was the whole point of Klapaucius' plan. As soon as the King was
gone, he rushed over to the desk, pulled the device from the drawer and
quickly placed it on his head. Then he quietly waited for the King to
return. It wasn't long before there were heavy footsteps outside,
muffled curses, the grinding of teeth, a key scraping in the lock—and
the Commissioner burst in, bellowing:

"Scoundrel! Where's the ship, the treasure, the pretty puzzles?!"

But that was all he said, for Klapaucius leaped out from behind the door
and charged like a mad ram, butting him square in the head. Then, before
Balerion had time to get his bearings inside Klapaucius, Klapaucius, now
the Commissioner, roared for the guards to throw him in jail at once and
keep a close eye on him! Stunned by this sudden reversal, Balerion
didn't realize at first how shamefully he had been deceived; but when it
finally dawned on him that he had been dealing with the crafty
constructor all along, and there had never been any wealthy foreigner,
Balerion filled his dark dungeon with terrible oaths and
threats—harmless, however, without the device. Klapaucius, on the other
hand, though he had temporarily lost the body to which he was
accustomed, had succeeded in gaining possession of the personality
transformer. He put on his best uniform and marched straight to the
royal palace.

The King was still asleep, they told him, but Klapaucius, in his
capacity as Police Commissioner, said it was imperative he see His
Highness, if only for a few moments, said that this was a matter of the
utmost gravity, a crisis, the nation hanging in the balance, and more of
the same, until the frightened courtiers led him to the royal
bedchamber. Well-acquainted with his friend's habits and peculiarities,
Klapaucius touched the heel of Trurl's foot; Trurl jumped up, instantly
wide-awake, for he was exceedingly ticklish. He rubbed his eyes and
stared in amazement at this hulking giant of a policeman before him, but
the giant leaned over and whispered: "It's me, Klapaucius. I had to
occupy the Commissioner—without a badge, they'd never have let me in—and
I got the device, it's right here in my pocket…"

Trurl, overjoyed when Klapaucius told him of his stratagem, rose from
the royal bed, declaring to all that he was fully recovered, and later,
draped in purple and holding the royal orb and scepter, sat upon his
throne and issued several orders. First, he had them bring from the
hospital his own body with the leg Balerion sprained on the harbor
steps. This swiftly done, he enjoined the royal physicians to tend the
patient with all the skill and solicitude at their disposal. Then, after
a brief conference with his Commissioner, namely Klapaucius, Trurl
proclaimed he would restore order in the realm and bring things back to
normal.

Which wasn't easy, there being no end of complications to straighten
out. Though the constructors had no intention of returning all the
displaced souls to their former bodies; their main concern, actually,
was that Trurl be Trurl as soon as possible, and Klapaucius Klapaucius.
In the flesh, that is. Trurl therefore commanded that the prisoner
(Balerion in his colleague's body) be dragged from jail and hauled
before His August Presence. The first transfer promptly carried out,
Klapaucius was himself again, and the King (now in the body of the
ex-commissioner of police) had to stand and listen to a most unpleasant
lecture, after which he was placed in the castle dungeon, the official
word being that he had fallen into disfavor due to incompetence in the
solving of a certain rebus. Next morning Trurl's body was in good enough
health to be repossessed. Only one problem remained: it wasn't right,
somehow, to leave without having properly settled the question of
succession to the throne. To release Balerion from his constabulary
corpus and seat him once more at the helm of the State was quite
unthinkable. So this is what they did: under a great oath of secrecy the
friends told the honest sailor in Trurl's body everything, and seeing
how much good sense resided in that simple soul, they judged him worthy
to reign; after the transfer, then, Trurl became himself and the sailor
King. Before this, however, Klapaucius ordered a large cuckoo clock
brought to the palace, one he had seen in a nearby shop when roaming the
city streets, and the mind of King Balerion was conveyed to the cuckoo's
works, while it, in turn, occupied the person of the policeman. Thus was
justice done, for the King was obliged to work diligently day and night
thereafter, announcing the hours with a dutiful cuckoo-cuckoo, to which
he was compelled at the appropriate moments by the sharp little teeth of
the clock's gears, and with which he would expiate, hanging on the wall
of the main hall for the remainder of his days, his thoughtless games,
not to mention having endangered the life and limb of two famous
constructors by so frequently changing his mind. As for the
Commissioner, he returned to his duties and functioned flawlessly,
proving that a cuckoo mentality was quite sufficient for that post. The
friends finally took their leave of the crowned sailor, gathered up
their belongings, shook the dust of that troublesome kingdom from their
feet, and continued on their way. One might only add that Trurl's final
action in the King's body had been to visit the Royal Vault and take
possession of the Royal Diadem of the Cymberanide Dynasty, which prize
he had fairly earned, having discovered the very best hiding place in
all the world.

 THE FIFTH SALLY (A)

OR _Trurl's_

_Prescription_

Not far from here, by a white sun, behind a green star, lived the
Steelypips, illustrious, industrious, and they hadn't a care: no spats
in their vats, no rules, no schools, no gloom, no evil influence of the
moon, no trouble from matter or antimatter—for they had a machine, a
dream of a machine, with springs and gears and perfect in every respect.
And they lived with it, and on it, and under it, and inside it, for it
was all they had—first they saved up all their atoms, then they put them
all together, and if one didn't fit, why they chipped at it a bit, and
everything was just fine. Each and every Steelypip had its own little
socket and its own little plug, and each was completely on its own.
Though they didn't own the machine, neither did the machine own them,
everybody just pitched in. Some were mechanics, other mechanicians,
still others mechanists: but all were mechanically minded. They had
plenty to do, like if night had to be made, or day, or an eclipse of the
sun—but that not too often, or they'd grow tired of it. One day there
flew up to the white sun behind the green star a comet in a bonnet,
namely a female, mean as nails and atomic from her head to her four long
tails, awful to look at, all blue from hydrogen cyanide and, sure
enough, reeking of bitter almonds. She flew up and said, "First, I'll
burn you to the ground, and that's just for starters."

The Steelypips watched—the fire in her eye smoked up half the sky, she
drew on her neutrons, mesons like caissons, pi- and mu- and neutrinos
too—"Fee-fi-fo-fum plu-to-ni-um." And they reply: "One moment, please,
we are the Steelypips, we have no fear, no spats in our vats, no rules,
no schools, no gloom, no evil influence of the moon, for we have a
machine, a dream of a machine, with springs and gears and perfect in
every respect, so go away, lady comet, or you'll be sorry."

But she already filled up the sky, burning, scorching, roaring, hissing,
until their moon shriveled up, singed from horn to horn, and even if it
had been a little cracked, old, and on the small side to begin with,
still that was a shame. So wasting no more words, they took their
strongest fields, tied them around each horn with a good knot, then
threw the switch: try that on for size, you old witch. It thundered, it
quaked, it groaned, the sky cleared up in a flash, and all that remained
of the comet was a bit of ash—and peace reigned once more.

After an undetermined amount of time something appears, what it is
nobody knows, except that it's hideous and no matter from which angle
you look at it, it's even more hideous. Whatever it is flies up, lands
on the highest peak, so heavy you can't imagine, makes itself
comfortable and doesn't budge. But it's an awful nuisance, all the same.

So those who are in the proximity say: "Excuse us, but we are the
Steelypips, we have no dread, we don't live on a planet but in a machine
instead, and it's no ordinary machine but a dream of a machine, with
springs and gears and perfect in every respect, so beat it, nasty thing,
or you'll be sorry."

But _that_ just sits there.

So, not to go to any great expense, they send not a very big, actually a
rather small scarechrome: it'll go and frighten _that_ off, and peace
will reign once more.

The scarechrome sets off, and all you can hear inside are its programs
whirring, one more frightening than the next. It approaches—how it
hisses, how it spits! It even scares itself a little—but _that_ just
sits there. The scarechrome tries once more, this time on a different
frequency, but by now it just doesn't have its heart in it.

The Steelypips see that something else is needed. They say: "Let's take
a higher caliber, hydraulic, differential-exponential, plastic,
stochastic, and with plenty of muscle. It won't cower if it has nuclear
power."

So they sent it off, universal, reversible, double-barreled, feedback on
every track, all systems go heigh-ho, and inside one mechanic and one
mechanist, and that's not all because just to be on the safe side they
stuck a scarechrome on top. It arrived, so well-oiled you could hear a
pin drop—it winds up for the swing and counts down: four quarters, three
quarters, two quarters, one quarter, no quarter! Ka-boom! what a blow!
See the mushroom grow! The mushroom with the radioactive glow! And the
oil bubbles, the gears chatter, the mechanic and the mechanist peer out
the hatch: can you imagine, not even a scratch.

The Steelypips held a council of war and then built a mechanism which in
turn built a metamechanism which in turn built such a megalomechanism
that the closest stars had to step back. And in the middle of it was a
machine with cogs and wheels and in the middle of that a servospook,
because they really meant business now.

The megalomechanism gathered up all its strength and let go! Thunder,
rumbling, clatter, a mushroom so huge you'd need an ocean to make soup
out of it, the clenching of teeth, darkness, so much darkness you can't
even tell what's what. The Steelypips look—nothing, not a thing, just
all their mechanisms lying around like so much scrap metal and without a
sign of life.

Now they rolled up their sleeves. "After all," they say, "we are
mechanics and mechanists, all mechanically minded, and we have a
machine, a dream of a machine, with springs and gears and perfect in
every respect, so how can this nasty thing just sit there and not
budge?"

This time they make nothing less than an enormous cyberivy-bushwhacker:
it'll creep up casually, as if minding its own business, glance over its
shoulder, grow a little bolder, send out a root or two, grow up from
behind, taking its time, and then when it closes in, that'll be the end
of that. And truly, everything happened exactly as predicted, except,
when it was over, that wasn't exactly the end of that, not at all.

They fell into despair, and they didn't even know what to think because
this had never happened to them before, so they mobilized and analyzed,
made nets and glues, lariats and screws, traps and contraptions to make
it drown, break it down, make it fall, or maybe wall it up—they try this
way and that and the other, but one is as poor as another. They turn
everything upside-down, but nothing helps. They're about ready to give
up hope when suddenly they see—someone's coming: he's on horseback, but
no, horses don't have wheels—it must be a bicycle, but wait, bicycles
don't have prows, so maybe it's a rocket, but rockets don't have
saddles. What he's riding no one can tell, but who's in the saddle we
all know well: it's Trurl himself, the constructor, out on a spree, or
maybe on one of his famous sallies, serene and smiling, coming closer,
flying by—but even from a distance you'd know that this wasn't just
anybody.

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-12.jpg]

He lowers, he hovers, so they tell him the whole story: "We are the
Steelypips, we have a machine, a dream of a machine, with springs and
gears and perfect in every respect, we saved up all our atoms, put them
all together ourselves, we hadn't a care, no spats in our vats, no
rules, no schools,until something flew up, landed, sat down and won't
budge."

"Did you try scaring it off?" Trurl asks with a kindly smile.

"We tried a scarechrome and a servospook and a megalo-mechanism, all
hydraulic and high caliber, spouting mesons like caissons, pi- and mu-
and neutrinos too, protons and photons, but nothing worked."

"No machine, you say?"

"No sir, no machine." .

"H'm, interesting. And what exactly is it?"

"That we don't know. It appeared, flew here, what it is nobody knows,
except that it's hideous and no matter from which angle you look at it,
it's even more hideous. It flew up, landed, so heavy you can't imagine,
and just sits there. But it's an awful nuisance, all the same."

"Well, I really don't have much time," says Trurl. "The most I can do is
stay here for a while, in an advisory capacity. Is that agreeable with
you?"

It certainly is and the Steelypips immediately ask what he wants them to
bring—photons, screws, hammers, artillery, or how about some dynamite,
or TNT? And would our guest like coffee or tea? From a vending machine,
of course.

"Coffee's fine," agrees Trurl, "not for me, but for the business at
hand. As for the rest of it, I don't think so. You see, if neither
scarechrome, nor servospook, nor cyberivy-bushwhacker will do the job,
then other methods are indicated: archaic and archival, legalistic hence
sadistic. I've yet to see the remittance due and payable in full fail."

"Come again?" ask the Steelypips, but Trurl, rather than explain,
continues:

"It's quite simple, really. All you need is paper, ink, stamps and
seals, sealing wax and thumbtacks, sand to sprinkle, blotters, a teller
window, a zinc teaspoon, a saucer—the coffee we already have—and a
mailman. And something to write with—do you have that?"

"We'll get it!" And they take off.

Trurl pulls up a chair and dictates: "Notice is hereby given, that in re
hindrance of Tenant, as stated under Rev. Stat. c.117(e) dash 2 dash
KKP4 of the CTSP Comm. Code, in clear violation of paragraph 199,
thereby constituting a most reprehendable offense, we do declare the
termination, desummation and full cessation of all services accruing
thereunto, by authority of Ordinance 67 DPO No. 14(j) 1101 _et seq_., on
this the 19th day of the 17th month of the current year, aff'g 77 F.
Supp. 301. The Tenant may appeal said action by extraordinary procedure
to the Chairman of the Board within twenty-four hours."

Trurl attaches the seal, affixes the stamp, has it entered in the
Central Ledger, consults the Official Register, and says:

"Now let the mailman deliver it."

The mailman takes it, they wait, they wait, the mailman returns.

"Did you deliver it?" asks Trurl.

"I did."

"And the return receipt?"

"Here it is, signed on this line. And here's the appeal."

Trurl takes the appeal and, without reading it at all, orders it
returned to sender and writes diagonally across it: "Unacceptable—Proper
Forms Not Attached." And he signs his name illegibly.

"And now," he says, "to work!"

He sits and writes, while those who are curious look on and,
understanding nothing, ask what this is and what it's supposed to do.

"Official business," answers Trurl. "And things will go well, now that
it's under way."

The mailman runs back and forth all day like one possessed; Trurl
notarizes, issues directives, the typewriter chatters, and little by
little an entire office takes shape, rubber stamps and rubber bands,
paper clips and paper wads, portfolios and pigeonholes, foolscap and
scrip, teaspoons, signs that say "No Admittance," inkwells, forms on
file, writing all the while, the typewriter chattering, and everywhere
you look you see coffee stains, wastepaper, and bits of gum eraser. The
Steelypips are worried, they don't understand a thing, meanwhile Trurl
uses special delivery registered C.O.D., certified with return receipt,
or, best of all, remittance due and payable in full—he sends out no end
of dunning letters, bills of lading, notices, injunctions, and there are
already special accounts set up, no entries at the moment but he says
that's only temporary. After a while, you can see that that is not quite
so hideous, especially in profile—it's actually gotten smaller!—yes,
yes, it _is_ smaller! The Steelypips ask Trurl, what now?

"No idle talk permitted on the premises," is his answer. And he staples,
stamps, inspects vouchers, revokes licenses, dots an i, loosens his tie,
asks who's next, I'm sorry, the office is closed, come back in an hour,
the coffee is cold, the cream sour, cobwebs from ceiling to floor, an
old pair of nylons in the secretary's drawer, install four new file
cabinets over here, and there's an attempt to bribe an official, a pile
of problems and a problem with piles, a writ of execution, incarceration
for miscegenation, and appeals with seven seals.

And the typewriter chatters: "Whereas, pursuant to the Tenant's failure
to quit and surrender the demised premises in compliance with the
warrant served, habere facias posses-sionem, by Div. of Rep. Cyb. Gt.
KRS thereof, the Court of Third Instance, in vacuo and ex nihilo,
herewith orders the immediate vacuation and vacation thereunder. The
Tenant may not appeal this ruling."

Trurl dispatches the messenger and pockets the receipts. After which, he
gets up and methodically hurls the desks, chairs, rubber stamps, seals,
pigeonholes, etc., out into deep space. Only the vending machine
remains.

"What on earth are you doing?" cry the Steelypips in dismay, having
grown accustomed to it all. "How can you?"

"Tut-tut, my dears,” he replies. "Better you take a look instead!"

And indeed, they look and gasp—why, there's nothing there, it's gone, as
if it had never been! And where did it go, vanished into thin air? It
beat a cowardly retreat, and grew so small, so very small, you'd need a
magnifying glass to see it. They root around, but all they can find is
one little spot, slightly damp, something must have dripped there, but
what or why they cannot say, and that's all.

"Just as I thought," Trurl tells them. "Basically, my dears, the whole
thing was quite simple: the moment it accepted the first dispatch and
signed for it, it was done for. I employed a special machine, the
machine with a big _B;_ for, as the Cosmos is the Cosmos, no one's
licked it yet!"

"All right, but why throw out the documents and pour out the coffee?"
they ask.

"So that it wouldn't devour you in turn!" Trurl replies. And he flies
off, nodding to them kindly—and his smile is like the stars.

 THE SIXTH SALLY

OR _How Trurl_

_and Klapaucius Created a Demon_

_of the Second Kind to Defeat the_

_Pirate Pugg_

"There are but two caravan trails that lead south from the Lands of the
Upper Suns. The first, which is older, goes from the Stellar Quadriferum
past the Great Glossaurontus, a most treacherous star, for its magnitude
varies, and at its dimmest it resembles the Dwarf of the Abyssyrs, and
thereby causes travelers to blunder into the Great Shroud Wastes, from
whence only one caravan in nine ever returns. The second, newer trail
was opened up by the Imperium Myrapoclean, whose turboservoslaves carved
a tunnel six billion miles in length through the heart of the Great
Glossaurontus itself.

"The northern entrance to the tunnel may be found in the following
manner: from the last of the Upper Suns proceed directly toward the Pole
for the time it takes to recite seven Now-I-lay me-down-to-sleep's. Then
go left, till you reach the wall of fire, which is a side of
Glossaurontus, and locate the opening, a black dot in that white-hot
furnace. Steer straight down into this, and put aside all fear, for the
tunnel's width will let eight ships, starboard to larboard, pass
through. The sight that then appears outside your portholes truly has no
equal. First there is the famous Phlogistinian Flamefall, and then as
depending on the weather: when the solar depths are swept with
pyromagnetic storms that surge a billion miles or more away, one sees
great tortured knots of fire, pulsing arteries swollen with white,
glowing clots; when, on the other hand, the storm is closer, or it is a
typhoon of the seventh order, the roof will shudder, as if that white
dough of incandescence were about to fall, but this is an illusion, for
it spills over but does not fall, and burns, but cannot consume, held in
check by the tensile ribs of the Fffian Force Fields. But when one
observes the core of the prominence bulge, and the long-forked bolts of
the foun-tainheads they call Infernions flare closer, it is best to keep
a firm grip upon the wheel, and look sharp into the solar viscera and
not at any chart, for the utmost steering skill is needed here. Indeed,
that road is never traversed the same way twice; the entire tunnel
gouged through Glossaurontus twists continually, writhes and thrashes
like a serpent flailed. Keep therefore your eyes well peeled, and your
safety frigi-packs (that rim your visors with transparent icicles) hard
by, and carefully watch the blazing walls that rush up and lash their
thundering tongues, and should you hear the hull begin to sizzle,
battered and bespattered in the seething solar cauldron, then trust to
nothing but your own lightning reflexes. Though you must also bear in
mind that not every burst of flame nor every jump of the tunnel
signifies a starquake or a squall in the white oceans of fire;
remembering this, the seasoned mariner will not cry 'man the pumps' at
the drop of a match, and later have to face the ridicule of his peers,
who will say he is the type that would try to douse a star's eternal
light with a beaker of liquid nitrogen. To the one who inquires what he
should do if a real quake descends upon his vessel, most wags will
answer that then it is quite enough to heave a sigh, there being little
time for prayer or the writing of wills, and as for the _eyes_, these
may be open or shut according to personal preference, for the fire will
burn them out in any event. Such disasters, however, are extremely rare,
since the brackets and braces installed by the Imperial Myrapocles hold
marvelously well, and really, intrastellar flight, gliding past the
curved, sparkling hydrogen mirrors of Glossaurontus, can be a most
delightful experience. Then too, they say—and not without reason—that
whoever enters the tunnel will at least exit soon after, which certainly
cannot be said of the Great Shroud Wastes. And were the tunnel to be
totally destroyed by a quake, the only alternate route possible would go
through those Wastes, which—as their name indicates—are blacker than
night, for the light of the neighboring stars dares not enter there.
There, as in a mortar, one finds a constant colliding and crashing
together—which makes a terrific din—of scrap metal, cans, wrecks of
ships that were led astray by the treachery of Glossaurontus and crushed
in the cruel grip of those bottomless gravitational vortices, then left
to drift in circles until such time as the Universe itself runs down. To
the east of the Shroud is the kingdom of the Slipjaws, to the west, the
Bogglyeyed, and in the south are roads, heavily dotted with fortified
mortalitaries, leading to the gentler sphere of sky-blue Lazulia, beyond
which lies the bud-beaming Murgundigan, where the archipelago of
iron-poor stars, known as Alcaron's Carriage, shines blood-red.

"The Shroud itself, as we said, is as black as the Glossaurontian
corridor is white. Nor does the only peril there lie in its vortices, in
debris pulled down from dizzy heights by the current, in meteors gone
berserk; for some say that in an unknown place, among dark, crepuscular
caverns, at the bottom of an immeasurably deep and unplumbed profundity,
for ages and ages now there sits a certain creature, anomalous and
wholly anonymous, for anyone who meets the thing and learns its name
will surely never live to tell a soul. And they say that that Anonymoid
is both a pirate and a mage, and it lives in a castle raised by black
gravitation, and the moat is a perpetually raging storm, and the walls
non-being, impenetrable in their nothingness, and the windows are all
blind, and the doors dumb; the Anonymoid lies in wait for caravans, but
whenever it feels an overwhelming hunger for gold and skeletons, it
blows black dust into the faces of the suns that serve as signposts, and
once these are extinguished, and some wayfarers have strayed from their
path of safety, it comes whirling out of the void, wraps them tightly in
its coils, and carries them off to its castle of oblivion, without ever
dropping the least ruby brooch, for the monster is monstrously
meticulous. Afterward, only the gnawed remains drift away and float
through the Wastes, followed by long trails of ship rivets, which are
spit out from the monster's maw like seeds. But lately, ever since the
Glossaurontian tunnel was opened by the forced labor of innumerable
turboservoserfs, and all navigation takes the way of that brightest of
corridors, the Anonymoid rages, deprived of further plunder, and the
heat of its fury now illumines the darkness of the Shroud, and it glows
through the black barriers of gravitation like a fiend's skull rotting
in some dank, phosphorescent cocoon. There are scoffers, true, who say
that no such monster exists and never did—and they say so with impunity,
for it is hard to assail an opinion of things for which there are no
words, an opinion formed moreover on a quiet summer afternoon, far from
cosmic shrouds and stellar conflagrations. Yes, it is easy not to
believe in monsters, considerably more difficult to escape their dread
and loathsome clutches. Was not the Murgundiganian Cybernator himself,
with an entourage of eighty in three ships, swallowed up, so that
nothing remained of that magnaterium but a few chewed buckles, which
were cast up on the shore of Solara Minor by a nebular wave and
subsequently discovered by the villagers of those parts? And were not
countless other worthies devoured without mercy or appeal? Therefore let
at least electronic memory pay silent tribute to these poor unburied
multitudes, if no avenger can be found for them, one who will deal with
that perpetrator according to the old sidereal laws."

All this Trurl read one day from a book, yellowed with age, which he
chanced to obtain from a passing peddler, and he took it straightway to
Klapaucius and read it a second time, aloud, from beginning to end, as
he was much intrigued by the marvels described therein.

Klapaucius, a wise constructor who knew the Cosmos well and had no
little acquaintance with suns and nebulae of various kinds, only smiled
and nodded, saying:

"You don't believe, I hope, a single word of that rubbish?"

"And why shouldn't I believe it?" Trurl bridled. "Look, here's even an
engraving, skillfully done, of the Anonymoid eating two photon schooners
and hiding the booty in his cellar. Anyway, isn't there in fact a tunnel
through a super-giant? Beth-el-Geuse, I mean. Surely you're not such an
ignoramus in cosmography to doubt that possibility…"

"As for illustrations, why, I could draw you a dragon right now, with a
thousand suns for each eye. Would you accept the sketch as proof of its
existence?" Klapaucius replied. "And as for tunnels—first of all, the
one of which you speak has a length of only two million miles, not some
billions, and secondly, the star of which you speak is practically burnt
out, and in the third place, intrastellar travel presents no hazard
whatever, as you know perfectly well, having flown that way yourself.
And as for the so-called Great Shroud Wastes, this is in reality nothing
but a cosmic dump some ten kiloparsecs across, floating in the vicinity
of Maeridia and Tetrarchida, and not around any Slopjaws or
Gaussauronts, which don't exist anywhere; and it's dark there, yes, but
simply because of all the garbage. And as for your Anonymoid, there's
obviously no such thing! It isn't even a respectable, ancient myth, but
some cheap yarn concocted out of a half-baked cranium."

Trurl bit his lip.

"You think the tunnel safe," he said, "because it was I who flew it. But
you would be of an altogether different opinion had it been you,
instead. But enough of the tunnel. As far as the Shroud and Anonymoid
are concerned, it isn't my habit to settle such things with words. We'll
go there, and then you'll see"—and he held up the heavy book— "you'll
see what's true in here, and what is not!"

Klapaucius did his best to dissuade him, but when he saw that Trurl,
stubborn as usual, had absolutely no intention of backing down from so
singularly conceived a sally, he first declared that he would have
nothing more to do with him, but before very long had joined in
preparing for the voyage: he didn't wish to see his friend perish
alone—somehow, two can look death in the eye more cheerfully than one.

Finally, having stocked the larder with plenty of provisions, for the
way would lead through vast, barren regions (not as picturesque, to be
sure, as the book depicted), they took off in their trusty ship. During
the flight, they stopped now and then to ask directions, particularly
when they had left far behind the territory with which they were
familiar. Not much could be learned from the natives, however, for these
spoke reliably only about their immediate surroundings—of things that
lay beyond, where they had never ventured themselves, they gave the most
absurd account, and in great detail, elaborating with both relish and a
sense of dread. Klapaucius called such tales "corroded," having in mind
the corrosis-sclerosion that attacks all aging brains.

But when they had come within five or six million light-blocks of the
Black Wastes, they began to hear rumors of some robber-giant who called
himself The PHT Pirate. No one they spoke to had actually seen him, nor
knew what "PHT" was supposed to mean. Trurl thought this might be a
distortion of "pH," which would indicate an ionic pirate with a high
concentration and very base, but Klapaucius, more level-headed,
preferred to refrain from entertaining such hypotheses. To all accounts,
this pirate was an ill-tempered brute, as evidenced by the fact that,
even after stripping his victims of everything, he was never satisfied,
his greed being great and insatiable, and beat them long and cruelly
before setting them free. For a moment or two the constructors
considered whether they shouldn't arm themselves with blasters or blades
before entering the Wastes, but soon concluded that the best weapon was
their wits, sharpened in constructorship, subtle, agile and universal;
so they set out just as they were.

It must be confessed that Trurl, as they traveled on, was bitterly
disillusioned; the starry starlight, the fiery fires, the cavernous
voids, the meteor reefs and shooting shoals were nowhere near as
enchanting to the eye as promised in the ancient tome. There were only a
few old stars about, and those were unimpressive, if not downright
shabby; some barely flickered, like cinders in a heap of ashes, and some
were completely dark and hardened on the surface, red veins glowing
dully through cracks in their charred and wrinkled crusts. Of flaming
jungles of combustion and mysterious vortices there was not a sign, nor
had anyone ever heard of them, for the desolate waste was a place of
tedium, and tedious in the extreme, by virtue of the fact that it was
desolate, and a waste. As far as meteors went, they were everywhere, but
in that rattling, clattering swarm was a good deal more flying refuse
than honest magnetites, tektites or aerolites—for the simple reason that
the Galactic Pole was only a stone's throw away, and the swirling dark
currents sucked to this very spot, southward, prodigious quantities of
flotsam and jetsam from the central zones of the Galaxy. Hence all the
tribes and nations in the neighborhood spoke of this area not as any
sort of Shroud, but as nothing more or less than what it was: a
junkyard.

Trurl hid his disappointment as best he could, in order not to occasion
sarcastic comments from Klapaucius, and steered straight into the
Wastes. Immediately sand began to patter on the bow; every kind of
stellar debris, spewed from prominences or supernovae, collected and
caked up on the ship's hull, forming such a thick coat, that the
constructors lost all hope of ever getting it clean again.

By now the stars had vanished in the general gloom, so the two proceeded
gropingly, till suddenly their ship lurched, and all the furniture, pots
and pans went flying; they felt themselves hurtling forward, faster and
faster, then at last there was an awful crunch and the ship came to a
stop, landing softly enough though at an angle, as if its nose had stuck
in something doughy. They ran to the window, but couldn't see a thing,
as it was pitch black outside—and now they heard someone banging,
someone fearfully strong, whoever it was, for the very walls were
buckling in. At this point Trurl and Klapaucius began to feel a little
less confident in the power of their unarmed wits, but it was too late
now, so they opened the hatch, since otherwise it would be forced from
without and broken for good.

As they looked, someone stuck his face in the opening— a face so huge,
that it was clearly out of the question for the rest of the body to
climb in after it, and not only huge, but unspeakably hideous, studded
up and down and every which way with bulging eyes, and the nose was a
saw, and an iron hook served for the jaw. The face didn't move, pressed
up against the open hatch, only the eyes darted back and forth, avidly
examining everything, as if appraising whether or not the take was worth
the trouble. Even someone far less intelligent than our constructors
would have understood what that scrutiny meant, for it was unmistakable.

"Well?" said Trurl finally, exasperated by such shameless eyeing, which
went on in silence. "What do you want, you unwashed mug?! I am Trurl,
constructor and general omni-potentiary, and this is my friend
Klapaucius, also of great renown, and we were flying by in our ship as
tourists, so kindly remove your ugly muzzle and take us immediately out
of this unsavory place—full of litter and rubbish, no doubt—and direct
us to some clean, respectable sector, or we'll lodge a complaint and
they'll have you broken down into little scrap—do you hear me, you
scavenger, ragpicker, pack rat?!"

But the face said nothing, just looked and looked, as if calculating,
making an estimate of how much.

"Listen here, you unmitigated freak," yelled Trurl, throwing all caution
to the winds, though Klapaucius kept elbowing him to show some
restraint, "we have no gold, no silver, no precious stones, so you let
us go this instant, and above all cover up that oversized physiognomy of
yours, for it's unspeakably hideous. And you"—he said, turning to
Klapaucius—"stop jabbing me with that elbow! This is the way you have to
talk to such types!"

"I have no use," suddenly said the face, turning its thousand glittering
eyes on Trurl, "for gold or silver, and the way you have to talk to me
is delicately and with respect, as I am a pirate with a Ph.D.,
well-educated and by nature extremely high-strung. Other guests have
been here and needed sweetening up—and when I've given you a proper
pounding too, why, you'll be positively dripping with good manners. My
name is Pugg, I'm thirty arshins in every direction and it's true I rob,
but in a manner that is modern and scientific, for I collect precious
facts, genuine truths, priceless knowledge, and in general all
information of value. And now, let's hand it over, otherwise I whistle!
Very well then, I'll count to five—one, two, three …"

And at five, when they had handed him nothing, he let loose such a
whistle, that their ears nearly flew off, and Klapaucius realized that
the "PHT" of which the natives spoke with terror was indeed "Ph.D.," for
the pirate had obviously studied at some higher institution, like the
Criminal Academy. Trurl held his head and groaned—Pugg's whistle was
fully commensurate with his size.

"We'll give you nothing!" he cried, while Klapaucius ran off to find
some cotton. "And get your face out of here!"

"You don't like my face, maybe you'll like my hand," replied the pirate.
"It's one huge humdinger of a hand and heavy as the devil! And here it
comes!"

And indeed: the cotton Klapaucius brought was no longer needed, for the
face had disappeared, and in its place was a paw, a paw to end all paws,
with knots and knobs and shovel claws, and it rummaged and clutched,
breaking tables and hutches and cupboards, till all the pots and pans
came crashing down, and the paw chased Trurl and Klapaucius into the
engine room, where they climbed up on top of the atomic pile and rapped
its knuckles—pow! pow!—with a poker. This made the diplomaed pirate mad,
and he put his face back in the hatch and said:

"Look, I strongly advise you to come to terms with me at once, otherwise
I'll put you aside for later, at the very bottom of my storage bin, and
cover you with garbage, and wedge you in with rocks, so you can't move,
and you'll just sit there and slowly rust. So then, which is it to be?"

Trurl wouldn't hear of negotiating, but Klapaucius politely asked what
exactly it was that His Doctoral Diploma-hood wanted?

"Now you're talking," he said. "I gather rich mines of information, for
such is my lifelong love and avocation, the result of a higher education
and, I might add, a practical grasp of the situation, when you consider
that, with the usual treasures untutored pirates like to hoard, there is
not a blessed thing here one can buy. Information, on the other hand,
satisfies one's thirst for knowledge, and it is well known besides, that
everything that is, is information; and thus for centuries now I gather
it, and will continue to do so, though it's true I'm not against a
little gold or diamonds now and then, for they're pretty and
decorative—but that's strictly on the side, as occasion warrants.
Observe, however, that for false information, no less than for false
coin, I give a good shellacking, since I am refined and insist on
authenticity!"

"But what kind of authentic and valuable information do you require?"
asked Klapaucius.

"All kinds, as long as it's true," replied the pirate. "You never can
tell what facts may come in handy. I already have a few hundred wells
and cellars full of them, but there's room for twice again as much. So
out with it; tell me everything you know, and I'll jot it down. But make
it snappy!"

"A fine state of affairs," Klapaucius whispered in Trurl's ear. "He
could keep us here for an eon or two before we tell him everything we
know. Our knowledge is colossal!!"

"Wait," whispered Trurl, "I have an idea." And he said aloud:

"Listen here, you thief with a degree, we possess a piece of information
worth more than any other, a formula to fashion gold from ordinary
atoms—for instance, hydrogen, of which the Universe has an inexhaustible
supply. We'll let you have it if you let us go."

"I have a whole trunk full of such recipes," answered the face, batting
its eyes ferociously. "And they're all worthless. I don't intend to be
tricked again—you demonstrate it first."

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-13.jpg]

"Sure, why not? Do you have a jug?"

"No."

"That's all right, we can do without one/' said Trurl. "The method is
simplicity itself: take as many atoms of hydrogen as the weight of an
atom of gold, namely one hundred and ninety-six; first you shell the
electrons, then knead the protons, working the nuclear batter till the
mesons appear, and now sprinkle your electrons all around, and voila,
there's the gold. Watch!"

And Trurl began to catch atoms, peeling their electrons and mixing their
protons with such nimble speed, that his fingers were a blur, and he
stirred the subatomic dough, stuck all the electrons back in, then on to
the next molecule. In less than five minutes he was holding a nugget of
the purest gold, which he presented to the face; it took a sniff and
said with a nod:

"Yes, that's gold, but I'm too big to go running around like that after
atoms."

"No problem, we'll give you a suitable machine!" coaxed Trurl. "Just
think, this way you can turn anything into gold, not only hydrogen—we'll
give you the formula for other atoms, too. Why, one could make the
entire Universe gold, if only he applied himself!"

"If the Universe was gold, gold would be worthless," observed Pugg. "No,
I have no use for your formula—I've written it down, yes, but that's not
enough! It's the wealth of knowledge that I crave."

"But what do you want to know, for heaven's sake?!"

"Everything!"

Trurl looked at Klapaucius, Klapaucius looked at Trurl, and the latter
finally said:

"If first you will solemnly swear, up and down and cross your heart,
that you will let us go, we will give you information, information about
infinite information, that is, we will make you your very own Demon of
the Second Kind, which is magical and thermodynamical, nonclassical and
stochasti-cal, and from any old barrel or even a sneeze it will extract
information for you about everything that was, is, may be or ever will
be. And there is no demon beyond this Demon, for it is of the Second
Kind, and if you want it, say so now!"

The pirate with the Ph.D. was suspicious, and didn't agree all at once
to these conditions, but finally swore the required oath, with the
stipulation that the Demon first give clear proof of its informational
prowess. Which was fine with Trurl.

"Now pay attention, big-face!" he said. "Do you have any air knocking
about? Without air the Demon won't work."

"I have a little," said Pugg, "but it's not too clean…"

"Stale, stagnant, polluted, it doesn't matter, not in the least,"
replied the constructors. "Lead us to it, and we'll show you something!"

So he withdrew his face and let them leave the ship, and they followed
him to his house, noticing that he had legs like towers, shoulders like
a precipice, and hadn't been washed for centuries, nor oiled, hence
creaked something awful. They went down cellar corridors, with sacks
moldering on every hand—in these the pirate kept his stolen facts
—bunches and bundles of sacks, all tied with string, and the most
important, valuable items marked in red pencil. On the wall hung an
immense catalog, fastened to the rock by a rust-eaten chain and full of
entries and headings, beginning, of course, with A. On they went,
raising muffled echoes, and Trurl looked and grimaced, as did
Klapaucius, for though there was plenty of authentic and top-quality
information lying about, wherever the eye fell was nothing but must,
dust and clutter. Plenty of air, too, but thoroughly stale. They stopped
and Trurl said:

"Now pay attention! Air is made up of atoms, and these atoms jump this
way and that, and collide billions of times a second in each and every
cubic micromillimeter, and it is precisely this eternal jumping and
bumping together that constitutes a gas. Now, even though their jumping
is blind and wholly random, there are billions upon billions of atoms in
every interstice, and as a consequence of this great number, their
little skips and scamperings give rise to, among other things—and purely
by accident—to significant configurations… Do you know what a
configuration is, blockhead?"

"No insults, please!" said Pugg. "For I am not your usual uncouth
pirate, but refined and with a Ph.D., and therefore extremely
high-strung."

"Fine. So then, from all this atomic hopping around, we obtain
significant, that is meaningful configurations, as if, for instance, you
were to fire at a wall blindfold and the bullet holes formed some
letter. That, which on a large scale is rare and quite unlikely, happens
in atomic gases all the time, on account of those trillion collisions
every one hundred-thousandth of a second. But here's the problem: in
every smidgen of air, the joggling and jostling of atoms does indeed
produce deep truths and edifying dicta, yet it also produces statements
that make not the least bit of sense, and there are thousands of times
more of the latter than there are of the former. So even if it were
known that, right here and now under your sawlike nose, in a milligram
of air and in a fraction of a second, there would come into being all
the cantos of all the epic poems to be written in the next million
years, as well as an abundance of wonderful truths—including the
solutions to every enigma of Existence and mystery of Being—you would
still have no way of isolating all that information, particularly since,
just as soon as the atoms had knocked their heads together and formed
something, they would fly apart and it would vanish, probably forever.
And therefore the whole trick lies in building a selector, which will,
in the atomic rush and jumble, choose only what has meaning. And that is
the whole idea behind the Demon of the Second Kind. Have you understood
any of this, O huge and hideous one? We want the Demon, you see, to
extract from the dance of atoms only information that is genuine, like
mathematical theorems, fashion magazines, blueprints, historical
chronicles, or a recipe for ion crumpets, or how to clean and iron a
suit of asbestos, and poetry too, and scientific advice, and almanacs,
and calendars, and secret documents, and everything that ever appeared
in any newspaper in the Universe, and telephone books of the future…"

"Enough, enough!!" cried Pugg. "I get the idea! But what good is it for
atoms to combine like that, if immediately they fly apart? And anyway, I
can't believe it's possible to select invaluable truths from a lot of
careening and colliding of particles in the air, which is completely
senseless and not worth a jot to anyone!"

"Then you're not so stupid as I thought," said Trurl. "For truly, the
whole difficulty consists in implementing such a selection. I have no
intention of presenting you with the theoretical arguments for this,
but, as I promised, I will here and now—while you wait—construct a Demon
of the Second Kind, and you'll see for yourself the wondrous perfection
of that Metainformationator! All you have to do is find me a box—any
size will do, but it must be airtight. We'll put a little pinhole in it
and sit the Demon over the opening; perched there, it will let out only
significant information, keeping in all the nonsense. For whenever a
group of atoms accidentally arranges itself in a meaningful way, the
Demon will pounce on that meaning and instantly record it with a special
diamond pen on paper tape, which you must keep in endless supply, for
the thing will labor day and night—until the Universe itself runs down
and no sooner—at a rate, moreover, of a hundred billion bits a second…
But you will see the Demon of the Second Kind with your very own eyes."

And Trurl went back to the ship to make the Demon. The pirate meanwhile
asked Klapaucius:

"And what is the Demon of the First Kind like?"

"Oh, it's not as interesting, it's an ordinary thermodynamic demon, and
all it does is let fast atoms out of the hole and keep in the slow. That
way you get a thermodynamic perpetuum mobile, which hasn't a thing to do
with information. But you had better fetch the box now, for Trurl will
return any minute!"

The pirate with a Ph.D. went to another cellar, poked around through
various cans and tins, cursed, kicked things and tripped, but finally
pulled out an iron barrel, old and empty, put a tiny hole in it and
hurried back, just as Trurl arrived, the Demon in his hand.

The air in the barrel was so foul, that one's nose wanted to hide when
brought near the little opening, but the Demon didn't seem to mind;
Trurl placed this mote of a mite astride the hole in the barrel, affixed
a large roll of paper tape on the top and threaded it underneath the
tiny diamond-tipped pen, which quivered eagerly, then began to scratch
and scribble, clattering rat-tat, pit-pat, just like a telegraph, only a
million times faster. From under this frantic apparatus the information
tape slowly began to slide out, covered with words, onto the filthy
cellar floor.

Pugg sat down next to the barrel, lifted the paper tape to his hundred
eyes and read what the Demon had, with its informational net, managed to
dredge up out of the eternal prancing and dancing of the atoms; those
significant bits of knowledge so absorbed him, that he didn't even
notice how the two constructors left the cellar in great haste, how they
grabbed hold of the helm of their ship, pulled once, twice, and on the
third time freed it from the mire in which the pirate had stuck them,
then climbed aboard and blasted off as fast as they possibly could, for
they knew that, though their Demon would work, it would work too well,
producing a far greater wealth of information than Pugg anticipated.
Pugg meanwhile sat propped up against the barrel and read, as that
diamond pen which the Demon employed to record everything it learned
from the oscillating atoms squeaked on and on, and he read about how
exactly Harlebardonian wrigglers wriggle, and that the daughter of King
Petrolius of Labondia is named Humpinella, and what Frederick the
Second, one of the paleface kings, had for lunch before he declared war
against the Gwendoliths, and how many electron shells an atom of
thermionolium would have, if such an element existed, and what is the
cloacal diameter of a small bird called the tufted twit, which is
painted by the Wabian Marchpanes on their sacrificial urns, and also of
the tripartite taste of the oceanic ooze on Polypelagid Diaphana, and of
the flower Dybbulyk, that beats the Lower Malfundican hunters black and
blue whenever they waken it at dawn, and how to obtain the angle of the
base of an irregular icosahedron, and who was the jeweler of Gufus, the
left-handed butcher of the Bovants, and the number of volumes on
philately to be published in the year seventy thousand on Marinautica,
and where to find the tomb of Cybrinda the Red-toed, who was nailed to
her bed by a certain Clamonder in a drunken fit, and how to tell the
difference between a bindlesnurk and an ordinary trundlespiff, and also
who has the smallest lateral wumpet in the Universe, and why fan-tailed
fleas won't eat moss, and how to play the game of Fratcher-My-Pliss and
win, and how many snapdragon seeds there were in the turd into which
Abroquian Phylminides stepped, when he stumbled on the Great Albongean
Road eight miles outside the Valley of Symphic Sighs—and little by
little his hundred eyes began to swim, and it dawned on him that all
this information, entirely true and meaningful in every particular, was
absolutely useless, producing such an ungodly confusion that his head
ached terribly and his legs trembled. But the Demon of the Second Kind
continued to operate at a speed of three hundred million facts per
second, and mile after mile of tape coiled out and gradually buried the
Ph.D. pirate beneath its windings, wrapping him, as it were, in a paper
web, while the tiny diamond-tipped pen shivered and twitched like one
insane, and it seemed to Pugg that any minute now he would learn the
most fabulous, unheard-of things, things that would open up to him the
Ultimate Mystery of Being, so he greedily read everything that flew out
from under the diamond nib, the drinking songs of the Quaidacabondish
and the sizes of bedroom slippers available on the continent of Cob,
with pompons and without, and the number of hairs growing on each brass
knuckle of the skew-beezered flummox, and the average width of the
fontanel in indigenous stepinfants, and the litanies of the
M'hot-t'ma-hon'h conjurers to rouse the reverend Blotto Ben-Blear, and
the inaugural catcalls of the Duke of Zilch, and six ways to cook cream
of wheat, and a good poison for uncles with goatees, and twelve types of
forensic tickling, and the names of all the citizens of Foofaraw
Junction beginning with the letter M, and the results of a poll of
opinions on the taste of beer mixed with mushroom syrup…

And it grew dark before his hundred eyes, and he cried out in a mighty
voice that he'd had enough, but Information had so swathed and swaddled
him in its three hundred thousand tangled paper miles, that he couldn't
move and had to read on about how Kipling would have written the
beginning to his Second _Jungle Book_ if he had had indigestion just
then, and what thoughts come to unmarried whales getting on in years,
and all about the courtship of the carrion fly, and how to mend an old
gunny sack, and what a sprothouse is, and why we don't capitalize paris
in plaster of paris or turkish in turkish bath, and how many bruises one
can have at a single time. And then a long list of the differences
between fiddle and faddle, not to be confused with twiddle and twaddle
or tittle and tattle, then all the words that rhyme with "spinach," and
what were the insults which Pope Urn of Pendora heaped upon Antipope
Mlum of Porking, and who plays the eight-tone autocomb. In desperation
he struggled to free himself from the paper coils and toils, but
suddenly grew faint, for though he kicked and tore at the tape, he had
too many eyes not to receive, with at least a few of them, more and more
new bits and pieces of information, and so was forced to learn what
authority the home guard exercises in Indochina, and why the
Coelenterids of Fluxis constantly say they've had too much to drink,
until he shut his eyes and sat there, rigid, overcome by that great
flood of information, and the Demon continued to bind him with its paper
strips. Thus was the pirate Pugg severely punished for his inordinate
thirst for knowledge.

He sits there to this day, at the very bottom of his rubbage heap and
bins of trash, covered with a mountain of paper, and in the dimness of
that cellar the diamond pen still jumps and flickers like the purest
flame, recording whatever the Demon of the Second Kind culls from
dancing atoms in the rancid air that flows through the hole of the old
barrel; and so poor Pugg, crushed beneath that avalanche of fact, learns
no end of things about rickshaws, rents and roaches, and about his own
fate, which has been related here, for that too is included in some
section of the tape—as are the histories, accounts and prophecies of all
things in creation, up until the day the stars burn out; and there is no
hope for him, since this is the harsh sentence the constructors passed
upon him for his pirately assault— unless of course the tape runs out,
for lack of paper.

 THE SEVENTH SALLY

OR _How Trurl's_

_Own Perfection Led to No Good_

The Universe is infinite but bounded, and therefore a beam of light, in
whatever direction it may travel, will after billions of centuries
return—if powerful enough—to the point of its departure; and it is no
different with rumor, that flies about from star to star and makes the
rounds of every planet. One day Trurl heard distant reports of two
mighty constructor-benefactors, so wise and so accomplished that they
had no equal; with this news he ran to Klapaucius, who explained to him
that these were not mysterious rivals, but only themselves, for their
fame had circumnavigated space. Fame, however, has this fault, that it
says nothing of one's failures, even when those very failures are the
product of a great perfection. And he who would doubt this, let him
recall the last of the seven sallies of Trurl, which was undertaken
without klapaucius, whom certain urgent duties kept at home at the time.

In those days Trurl was exceedingly vain, receiving all marks of
veneration and honor paid to him as his due and a perfectly normal
thing. He was heading north in his ship, as he was the least familiar
with that region, and had flown through the void for quite some time,
passing spheres full of the clamor of war as well as spheres that had
finally obtained the perfect peace of desolation, when suddenly a little
planet came into view, really more of a stray fragment of matter than a
planet.

On the surface of this chunk of rock someone was run-ning back and
forth, jumping and waving his arms in the strangest way. Astonished by a
scene of such total loneliness and concerned by those wild gestures of
despair, and perhaps of anger as well, Trurl quickly landed.

He was approached by a personage of tremendous hau-teur, iridium and
vanadium all over and with a great deal of clanging and clanking, who
introduced himself as Excelsius the Tartarian, ruler of Pancreon and
Cyspenderora; the inhabitants of both these kingdoms had, in a fit of
regicidal madness, driven His Highness from the throne and exiled him to
this barren asteroid, eternally adrift among the dark swells and
currents of gravitation.

Learning in turn the identity of his visitor, the deposed monarch began
to insist that Trurl—who after all was something of a professional when
it came to good deeds—immediately restore him to his former position.
The thought of such a turn of events brought the flame of vengeance to
the monarch's eyes, and his iron fingers clutched the air, as if already
closing around the throats of his beloved subjects.

Now Trurl had no intention of complying with this request of Excelsius,
as doing so would bring about untold evil and suffering, yet at the same
time he wished somehow to comfort and console the humiliated king.
Thinking a moment or two, he came to the conclusion that, even in this
case, not all was lost, for it would be possible to satisfy the king
completely—without putting his former subjects in jeopardy. And so,
rolling up his sleeves and summoning up all his mastery, Trurl built the
king an entirely new kingdom. There were plenty of towns, rivers,
mountains, forests and brooks, a sky with clouds, armies full of
derring-do, citadels, castles and ladies' chambers; and there were
marketplaces, gaudy and gleaming in the sun, days of back-breaking
labor, nights full of dancing and song until dawn, and the gay clatter
of swordplay. Trurl also carefully set into this kingdom a fabulous
capital, all in marble and alabaster, and assembled a council of hoary
sages, and winter palaces and summer villas, plots, conspirators, false
witnesses, nurses, informers, teams of magnificent steeds, and plumes
waving crimson in the wind; and then he crisscrossed that atmosphere
with silver fanfares and twenty-one gun salutes, also threw in the
necessary handful of traitors, another of heroes, added a pinch of
prophets and seers, and one mes-siah and one great poet each, after
which he bent over and set the works in motion, deftly making
last-minute adjustments with his microscopic tools as it ran, and he
gave the women of that kingdom beauty, the men—sullen silence and
surliness when drunk, the officials—arrogance and servility, the
astronomers—an enthusiasm for stars, and the children—a great capacity
for noise. And all of this, connected, mounted and ground to precision,
fit into a box, and not a very large box, but just the size that could
be carried about with ease. This Trurl presented to Excelsius, to rule
and have dominion over forever; but first he showed him where the input
and output of his brand-new kingdom were, and how to program wars, quell
rebellions, exact tribute, collect taxes, and also instructed him in the
critical points and transition states of that microminiaturized
society—in other words the maxima and minima of palace coups and
revolutions—and explained everything so well, that the king, an old hand
in the running of tyrannies, instantly grasped the directions and,
without hesitation, while the constructor watched, issued a few trial
proclamations, correctly manipulating the control knobs, which were
carved with imperial eagles and regal lions. These proclamations
declared a state of emergency, martial law, a curfew and a special levy.
After a year had passed in the kingdom, which amounted to hardly a
minute for Trurl and the king, by an act of the greatest
magnanimity—that is, by a flick of the finger at the controls—the king
abolished one death penalty, lightened the levy and deigned to annul the
state of emergency, whereupon a tumultuous cry of gratitude, like the
squeaking of tiny mice lifted by their tails, rose up from the box, and
through its curved glass cover one could see, on the dusty highways and
along the banks of lazy rivers that reflected the fluffy clouds, the
people rejoicing and praising the great and unsurpassed benevolence of
their sovereign lord.

And so, though at first he had felt insulted by Trurl's gift, in that
the kingdom was too small and very like a child's toy, the monarch saw
that the thick glass lid made everything inside seem large; perhaps too
he dully understood that size was not what mattered here, for government
is not measured in meters and kilograms, and emotions are somehow the
same, whether experienced by giants or dwarfs— and so he thanked the
constructor, if somewhat stiffly. Who knows, he might even have liked to
order him thrown in chains and tortured to death, just to be safe—that
would have been a sure way of nipping in the bud any gossip about how
some common vagabond tinkerer presented a mighty monarch with a kingdom.

Excelsius was sensible enough, however, to see that this was out of the
question, owing to a very fundamental disproportion, for fleas could
sooner take their host into captivity than the king's army seize Trurl.
So with another cold nod, he stuck his orb and scepter under his arm,
lifted the box kingdom with a grunt, and took it to his humble hut of
exile. And as blazing day alternated with murky night outside, according
to the rhythm of the asteroid's rotation, the king, who was acknowledged
by his subjects as the greatest in the world, diligently reigned,
bidding this, forbidding that, beheading, rewarding—in all these ways
incessantly spurring his little ones on to perfect fealty and worship of
the throne.

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-14.jpg]

As for Trurl, he returned home and related to his friend Klapaucius, not
without pride, how he had employed his constructor's genius to indulge
the autocratic aspirations of Excelsius and, at the same time, safeguard
the democratic aspirations of his former subjects. But Klapaucius,
surprisingly enough, had no words of praise for Trurl; in fact, there
seemed to be rebuke in his expression.

"Have I understood you correctly?" he said at last. "You gave that
brutal despot, that born slave master, that slavering sadist of a
painmonger, you gave him a whole civilization to rule and have dominion
over forever? And you tell me, moreover, of the cries of joy brought on
by the repeal of a fraction of his cruel decrees! Trurl, how could you
have done such a thing?!"

"You must be joking!" Trurl exclaimed. "Really, the whole kingdom fits
into a box three feet by two by two and a half… it's only a model…"

"A model of what?"

"What do you mean, of what? Of a civilization, obviously, except that
it's a hundred million times smaller."

"And how do you know there aren't civilizations a hundred million times
larger than our own? And if there were, would ours then be a model? And
what importance do dimensions have anyway? In that box kingdom, doesn't
a journey from the capital to one of the corners take months —for those
inhabitants? And don't they suffer, don't they know the burden of labor,
don't they die?"

"Now just a minute, you know yourself that all these processes take
place only because I programmed them, and so they aren't genuine…"

"Aren't genuine? You mean to say the box is empty, and the parades,
tortures and beheadings are merely an illusion?"

"Not an illusion, no, since they have reality, though purely as certain
microscopic phenomena, which I produced by manipulating atoms," said
Trurl. "The point is, these births, loves, acts of heroism and
denunciations are nothing but the minuscule capering of electrons in
space, precisely arranged by the skill of my nonlinear craft, which—"

"Enough of your boasting, not another word!" Klapaucius snapped. "Are
these processes self-organizing or not?"

"Of course they are!"

"And they occur among infinitesimal clouds of electrical charge?"

"You know they do."

"And the phenomenological events of dawns, sunsets and bloody battles
are generated by the concatenation of real variables?"

"Certainly."

"And are not we as well, if you examine us physically, mechanistically,
statistically and meticulously, nothing but the minuscule capering of
electron clouds? Positive and negative charges arranged in space? And is
our existence not the result of subatomic collisions and the interplay
of particles, though we ourselves perceive those molecular cartwheels as
fear, longing, or meditation? And when you daydream, what transpires
within your brain but the binary algebra of connecting and disconnecting
circuits, the continual meandering of electrons?"

"What, Klapaucius, would you equate our existence with that of an
imitation kingdom locked up in some glass box?!" cried Trurl. "No,
really, that's going too far! My purpose was simply to fashion a
simulator of statehood, a model cybernetically perfect, nothing more!"

"Trurl! Our perfection is our curse, for it draws down upon our every
endeavor no end of unforeseeable consequences!" Klapaucius said in a
stentorian voice. "If an imperfect imitator, wishing to inflict pain,
were to build himself a crude idol of wood or wax, and further give it
some makeshift semblance of a sentient being, his torture of the thing
would be a paltry mockery indeed! But consider a succession of
improvements on this practice! Consider the next sculptor, who builds a
doll with a recording in its belly, that it may groan beneath his blows;
consider a doll which, when beaten, begs for mercy, no longer a crude
idol, but a homeostat; consider a doll that sheds tears, a doll that
bleeds, a doll that fears death, though it also longs for the peace that
only death can bring! Don't you see, when the imitator is perfect, so
must be the imitation, and the semblance becomes the truth, the pretense
a reality! Trurl, you took an untold number of creatures capable of
suffering and abandoned them forever to the rule of a wicked tyrant…
Trurl, you have committed a terrible crime!"

"Sheer sophistry!" shouted Trurl, all the louder because he felt the
force of his friend's argument. "Electrons meander not only in our
brains, but in phonograph records as well, which proves nothing, and
certainly gives no grounds for such hypostatical analogies! The subjects
of that monster Excelsius do in fact die when decapitated, sob, fight,
and fall in love, since that _is_ how I set up the parameters, but it's
impossible to say, Klapaucius, that they feel anything in the
process—the electrons jumping around in their heads will tell you
nothing of that!"

"And if I were to look inside your head, I would also see nothing but
electrons," replied Klapaucius. "Come now, don't pretend not to
understand what I'm saying, I know you're not that stupid! A phonograph
record won't run errands for you, won't beg for mercy or fall on its
knees! You say there's no way of knowing whether Excelsius' subjects
groan, when beaten, purely because of the electrons hopping about
inside—like wheels grinding out the mimicry of a voice—or whether they
really groan, that is, because they honestly experience the pain? A
pretty distinction, this! No, Trurl, a sufferer is not one who hands you
his suffering, that you may touch it, weigh it, bite it like a coin; a
sufferer is one who behaves like a sufferer! Prove to me here and now,
once and for all, that they do not feel, that they do not think, that
they do not in any way exist as beings conscious of their enclosure
between the two abysses of oblivion—the abyss before birth and the abyss
that follows death—prove this to me, Trurl, and I'll leave you be! Prove
that you only _imitated_ suffering, and did not create it!"

"You know perfectly well that's impossible," answered Trurl quietly.
"Even before I took my instruments in hand, when the box was still
empty, I had to anticipate the possibility of precisely such a proof—in
order to rule it out. For otherwise the monarch of that kingdom sooner
or later would have gotten the impression that his subjects were not
real subjects at all, but puppets, marionettes. Try to understand, there
was no other way to do it! Anything that would have destroyed in the
littlest way the illusion of complete reality, would have also destroyed
the importance, the dignity of governing, and turned it into nothing but
a mechanical game. …"

"I understand, I understand all too well!" cried Klapau-cius. "Your
intentions were the noblest—you only sought to construct a kingdom as
lifelike as possible, so similar to a real kingdom, that no one,
absolutely no one, could ever tell the difference, and in this, I am
afraid, you were successful! Only hours have passed since your return,
but for them, the ones imprisoned in that box, whole centuries have gone
by —how many beings, how many lives wasted, and all to gratify and feed
the vanity of King Excelsius!"

Without another word Trurl rushed back to his ship, but saw that his
friend was coming with him. When he had blasted off into space, pointed
the bow between two great clusters of eternal flame and opened the
throttle all the way, Klapauciussaid:

"Trurl, you're hopeless. You always act first, think later. And now what
do you intend to do when we get there?"

"I'll take the kingdom away from him!"

"And what will you do with it?"

"Destroy it!" Trurl was about to shout, but choked on the first syllable
when he realized what he was saying. Finally he mumbled:

"I'll hold an election. Let them choose just rulers from among
themselves."

"You programmed them all to be feudal lords or shiftless vassals. What
good would an election do? First you'd have to undo the entire structure
of the kingdom, then assemble from scratch…"

"And where," exclaimed Trurl, "does the changing of structures end and
the tampering with minds begin?!" Klapaucius had no answer for this, and
they flew on in gloomy silence, till the planet of Excelsius came into
view. As they circled it, preparing to land, they beheld a most amazing
sight.

The entire planet was covered with countless signs of intelligent life.
Microscopic bridges, like tiny lines, spanned every rill and rivulet,
while the puddles, reflecting the stars, were full of microscopic boats
like floating chips… The night side of the sphere was dotted with
glimmering cities, and on the day side one could make out flourishing
metropolises, though the inhabitants themselves were much too little to
observe, even through the strongest lens. Of the king there was not a
trace, as if the earth had swallowed him up.

"He isn't here," said Trurl in an awed whisper. "What have they done
with him? Somehow they managed to break through the walls of their box
and occupy the asteroid…"

"Look!" said Klapaucius, pointing to a little cloud no larger than a
thimble and shaped like a mushroom; it slowly rose into the atmosphere.
"They've discovered atomic energy… And over there—you see that bit of
glass? It's the remains of the box, they've made it into some sort of
tern-pie…"

"I don't understand. It was only a model, after all. A process with a
large number of parameters, a simulation, a mock-up for a monarch to
practice on, with the necessary feedback, variables, multistats…"
muttered Trurl, dumbfounded.

"Yes. But you made the unforgivable mistake of over-perfecting your
replica. Not wanting to build a mere clock-like mechanism, you
inadvertently—in your punctilious way —created that which was possible,
logical and inevitable, that which became the very antithesis of a
mechanism…"

"Please, no more!" cried Trurl. And they looked out upon the asteroid in
silence, when suddenly something bumped their ship, or rather grazed it
slightly. They saw this object, for it was illumined by the thin ribbon
of flame that issued from its tail. A ship, probably, or perhaps an
artificial satellite, though remarkably similar to one of those steel
boots the tyrant Excelsius used to wear. And when the constructors
raised their eyes, they beheld a heavenly body shining high above the
tiny planet—it hadn't been there previously—and they recognized, in that
cold, pale orb, the stern features of Excelsius himself, who had in this
way become the Moon of the Microminians.

 TALE _of the Three Storytelling Machines_

_of King Genius_

One day to Trurl's abode there came a stranger, and it was plain just as
soon as he alighted from his photon phaeton that here was no ordinary
personage but one who hailed from distant parts, for where all of us
have arms he had only a gentle breeze, and where there are usually legs
he had nothing but a shimmering rainbow, and in lieu of a head he
sported a plumed fedora; his voice issued forth from his center, and
indeed, he was a perfect sphere, a sphere of the most engaging
appearance and girdled with an elegant semipermeable cummerbund. Bowing
low to Trurl, he revealed that there were really two of him, the top
half and the bottom; the top was called Synchronicus, the bottom
Symphonicus. To Trurl this seemed an excellent solution to the problem
of constructing intelligent beings, and he had to confess he had never
met an individual so well turned, so precise, and with such a fine
shine. The stranger returned the compliment by praising Trurl's corpus,
then broached the purpose of his visit: a close friend and loyal servant
of the famous King Genius, he had come to place an order for three
storytelling machines.

"Our mighty lord and sovereign," he said, "has long refrained from all
reigning and ruling, to which total abdication he was brought by a
wisdom achieved through careful study of the ways of this and other
worlds. Leaving his kingdom, he retired to a dry and airy cave, there to
give himself up to meditation. Yet oft times sorrow comes upon him, and
self-abhorrence, and then nothing can console him but stories, stories
that are new and unusual. But alas, the few of us who have remained
faithfully at his side ran out of new stories long ago. And so we turn
to you, O constructor, to help us divert our King by means of machines,
which you do build so well."

"Yes, that's possible," said Trurl. "But why do you need as many as
three?"

"We should like," replied Symchrophonicus, spinning slowly, "the first
to tell stories that are involved but untroubled, the second, stories
that are cunning and full of fun, and the third, stories profound and
compelling."

"In other words, to (1) exercise, (2) entertain and (3) edify the mind,"
said Trurl. "I understand. Shall we speak of payment now, or later?"

"When you have completed the machines, rub this ring," was the reply,
"and the phaeton shall appear before you. Climb into it with your
machines, and it shall carry you at once to the cave of King Genius.
There voice your wishes; he shall do what he can to grant them."

And he bowed again, handed Trurl a ring, gave a radiant wink and floated
back to the phaeton, which was instantly wrapped in a cloud of blinding
light, and the next moment Trurl was standing alone in front of his
house, holding the ring, not overly happy about what had just
transpired.

"Do what he can," he muttered, returning to his workshop. "Oh, how I
hate it when they say that! It means only one thing: you bring up the
matter of the fee, and that's the end of the curtsies and courtesies;
all you get for your pains is a lot of trouble, and bruises, more often
than not…"

At which the ring stirred in the palm of his hand and said:

"The expression 'do what he can' indicates merely that King Genius,
lacking a kingdom, is a king of limited means. He appeals to you, O
constructor, as one philosopher to another—and apparently is not
mistaken in so doing, for these words, I see, uttered though they be by
a ring, do not surprise you. Be then not surprised at His Highness'
somewhat straitened circumstances. Have no fear, you shall receive your
payment as is meet, albeit not in gold. Yet there are things more to be
desired than gold."

"Indeed, Sir Ring," observed Trurl wryly. "Philosophy is all very well
and good, but the ergs and amps, the ions and the atoms, not to mention
other odds and ends needed in the building of machines—they cost, they
cost like the devil! So I like my contracts to be clear, everything
spelled out in articles and clauses, and with plenty of signatures and
seals. And, though I am hardly the greedy, grasping sort, I do love
gold, particularly in large quantities, and am not ashamed to admit it!
Its sparkle, its yellow hue, the sweet weight of it in the hand—these
things, when I pour a sack or two of tinkling ducats on the floor and
wallow in them, warm my heart and brighten my soul, as if someone had
kindled a little sun within. Aye, damn it, I love my gold!" he cried,
carried away by his own words.

"But why must it be the gold that others bring? Are you not able to
supply yourself with as much as you desire?" inquired the ring, blinking
with surprise.

"Well, I don't know how wise this King Genius of yours is," Trurl
retorted, "but you, I see, are a thoroughly uneducated ring! What, you
would have me make my own gold? Whoever heard of such a thing?! Is a
cobbler a cobbler to mend his own shoes? Does a cook do his own cooking,
a soldier his own fighting? Anyway, in case you didn't know, next to
gold I love to complain. But enough of this idle chatter, there is work
to be done."

And he placed the ring in an old tin can, rolled up his sleeves and
built the three machines in three days, not once leaving his workshop.
Then he considered what external shapes to give them, wanting something
that would be both simple and functional. He tried on various casings,
one after the other, while the ring kept interfering with comments and
suggestions, until he had to close the can.

Finally Trurl painted the machines—the first white, the second an azure
blue, and the third jet black—then rubbed the ring, loaded the phaeton
which instantly appeared, climbed in himself and waited to see what
would happen next. There was a whistling and a hissing, the dust rose,
and when it fell, Trurl looked out the window and saw that he was in a
large cave, the floor of which was covered with white sand; then he
noticed several wooden benches piled high with books and folios, and
then a row of gleaming spheres. In one of these he recognized the
stranger who had ordered the machines, and in the middle sphere, larger
than the rest and etched with the lines of old age, he guessed the King.
Trurl stepped down and gave a bow. The King greeted him kindly and said:

"There are two wisdoms: the first inclines to action, the second to
inaction. Do you not agree, worthy Trurl, that the second is the
greater? For surely, even the most far-sighted mind cannot foresee the
ultimate consequences of present undertakings, consequences therefore so
uncertain, that they render problematical those very undertakings. And
thus perfection lies in the abstention from all action. In this then
does true wisdom differ from mere intellect."

"Your Majesty's words," said Trurl, "can be taken in two ways. They may
contain, for one, a subtle hint intended to belittle the value of my own
labor, namely the undertaking which has as its consequence the three
machines delivered in this phaeton. Such an interpretation I find most
unpleasant, as it indicates a certain, shall we say, disinclination
regarding the matter of remuneration. Or else we have here simply a
statement of the Doctrine of Inaction, of which it may be said that it
is self-contradictory. To refrain from acting, one must first be capable
of acting. He who does not move the mountain for lack of means, yet
claims that wisdom did dictate he move it not, merely plays the fool
with his display of philosophy. Inaction is certain, and that is all it
has to recommend it. Action is uncertain, and therein lies its
fascination. As for further ramifications of the problem, if Your
Majesty so wishes, I can construct a suitable mechanism with which he
may converse on the subject."

"The matter of remuneration let us leave to the end of this delightful
occasion which has brought you to our shore," said the King, betraying
by slight revolving motions the great amusement Trurl's peroration had
afforded him. "You are our guest, noble constructor. Come therefore and
sit at our humble table among these faithful friends and tell us of the
deeds you have performed, and also of the deeds you chose not to."

"Your Majesty is too kind," replied Trurl. "Yet I fear I lack the
necessary eloquence. Perchance these three machines may serve in my
stead—which would have the added merit of providing Your Majesty with
the opportunity to test them."

"Let it be as you say," agreed the King.

Everyone assumed an attitude of the utmost interest and expectation.
Trurl brought out the first machine—the one painted white—from the
phaeton, pushed a button, then took a seat at the side of King Genius.
The machine said:

"Here is the story of the Multitudians, their king Man-drillion, his
Perfect Adviser, and Trurl the constructor, who built the Adviser, and
later destroyed it!"

+ +

The land of the Multitudians is famous for its inhabitants, who are
distinguished by the fact that they are multitudinous. One day the
constructor Trurl, passing through the saffron regions of the
constellation Deliria, strayed a little from the main path and caught
sight of a planet that appeared to writhe. Drawing nearer, he saw that
this was due to the multitudes that covered its surface; he landed,
having found—not without difficulty—a few square feet of relatively
unoccupied ground. The natives immediately ran up and thronged about
him, exclaiming how multitudinous they were, although, as they all
talked at once, Trurl couldn't make out a single word. When finally he
understood, he asked:

"Multitudinous, are you?"

"We are!!" they shouted, bursting with pride. "We are innumerable."

And others cried:

"We are like fish in the sea!"

"Like pebbles on the beach!"

"Like stars in the sky! Like atoms!!"

"Supposing you are," returned Trurl. "What of it? Do you spend all day
counting yourselves, and does that give you pleasure?"

"Know, O unenlightened alien," was their reply, "that when we stamp our
feet, the very mountains tremble, and when we huff and puff, it is a
hurricane that sends trees flying, and when we all sit down together,
there is hardly room enough to breathe!!"

"But why should mountains tremble and hurricanes send trees flying, and
why should there be hardly room enough to breathe?" asked Trurl. "Is it
not better when mountains stay at rest, and there are no hurricanes, and
everyone has room enough to breathe?"

The Multitudians were highly offended by this lack of respect shown to
their mighty numbers and their numerical might, so they stamped, huffed
and puffed, and sat down to demonstrate their multitudinality and show
just what it meant. Earthquakes toppled half the trees, crushing seven
hundred thousand persons, and hurricanes leveled the rest, causing the
demise of seven hundred thousand more, while those who remained alive
had hardly room enough to breathe.

"Good heavens!" cried Trurl, packed in among the sitting natives like a
brick in a brick wall. "What a catastrophe!"

Which insulted them even more.

"O barbarous and benighted alien!" they said. "What are a few hundred
thousand to the Multitudians, whose myriads are countless?! A loss that
goes unnoticed is no loss at all. You have seen how powerful we are in
our stamping, in our huffing and puffing, and in our sitting down.
Imagine then what would happen if we turned to bigger things!"

"You mustn't think," said Trurl, "that your way of thinking is
altogether new to me. Indeed, it's well known that whatever comes in
sufficiently large quantities commands the general admiration. For
example, a little stale gas circulating sluggishly at the bottom of an
old barrel excites wonder in no one; but if you have enough of it to
make a Galactic Nebula, everyone is instantly struck with awe. Though
really, it's the same stale and absolutely average gas —only there's an
awful lot of it."

"We do not like what you say!" they shouted. "We do not like to hear
about this stale gas!"

Trurl looked around for the police, but the crowd was too great for the
police to push through.

"My dear Multitudians," he said. "Permit me to leave your planet, for I
do not share your faith in the glory of great numbers when there is
nothing more to them than what may be counted."

But instead, exchanging a look and nodding, they snapped their fingers,
which set up a shock wave of such prodigious force, that Trurl was
hurled into the air and flew, turning head over heels, for quite some
time before landing on his feet in a garden of the royal palace.
Mandrillion the Greatest, ruler of the Multitudians, approached; he had
been watching the constructor's flight and descent, and now said:

"They tell me, O alien, that you have not paid proper tribute to the
numerosity of my people. I ascribe this to your general infirmity of
mind. Yet, though you show no understanding of higher matters, you
apparently possess some skill in the lower, which is fortunate, as I
require a Perfect Adviser and you shall build me one!"

"What exactly is this Adviser supposed to do, and what will I receive
for building it?" inquired Trurl, brushing himself off.

"It should answer every question, solve every problem, give absolutely
the best advice and, in a word, put the greatest wisdom entirely at my
disposal. For this, you shall receive two or three hundred thousand of
my subjects, or more if you like—we won't quibble over a few thousand."

Trurl thought:

"It would seem that an overabundance of thinking beings is a dangerous
thing, if it reduces them to the status of sand. This king would sooner
part with a legion of his subjects than I with a pair of old slippers!"

But he said aloud:

"Sire, my house is small and would not HOLD so many slaves."

"Fear not, O backward alien, I have experts who will explain to you the
endless benefits one may derive from owning a horde of slaves. You can,
for example, dress them in robes of different colors and have them stand
in a great square to form a living mosaic, or signs providing sentiments
for every occasion. You can tie them in bundles and roll them down
hills, you can make a huge hammer—five thousand for the head, three
thousand for the handle—to break up boulders or clear forests. You can
braid them into rope and make decorative hangings, where those at the
very bottom, by the droll gyrations of their bodies, the kicking and the
squeaking as they dangle over the abyss, create a sight that gladdens
the heart and rejoices the eye. Or take ten thousand young female
slaves, stand them all on one leg and have them make figure eights with
their right hands and circles with their left—a spectacle, believe me,
which you won't wish to part with, and I speak from experience!"

"Sire!" answered Trurl. "Forests and boulders I can manage with
machines, and as for signs and mosaics, it is not my custom to fashion
them out of beings that might prefer to be otherwise employed."

"What then, O insolent alien," said the King, "do you want in return for
the Perfect Adviser?"

"A hundred bags of gold!"

Mandrillion was loath to part with the gold, but an idea came to him, a
most ingenious plan, which however he kept to himself, and he said:

"So be it!"

"Your Royal Highness shall have his Perfect Adviser," promised Trurl,
and proceeded to the castle tower which Mandrillion had set aside for
him as a workshop. It wasn't long before they could hear the blowing of
bellows there, the ringing of hammers, the rasping of saws. The King
sent spies to have a look; these returned much amazed, for Trurl had not
constructed an Adviser at all, but a variety of forging, welding,
cutting and wiring machines, after which he sat down and with a nail
made little holes in a long strip of paper, programming out the Adviser
in every particular, then went for a walk while the machines toiled in
the tower all night, and by early morning the work was done. Around
noon, Trurl entered the main hall with an enormous doll that had two
legs and one small hand; he brought it before the King, declaring that
this was the Perfect Adviser.

"Indeed," muttered Mandrillion and ordered the marble floor sprinkled
with saffron and cinnamon, so strong was the smell of hot iron given off
by the Adviser—the thing, just out of the oven, even glowed in places.
"You may go," the King said to Trurl. "Return this evening, and then we
shall see who owes how much and to whom."

Trurl took his leave, feeling that these parting words of Mandrillion
did not promise any great generosity and perhaps even concealed some
evil intention. Which made him glad he had qualified the Adviser's
universality with one small yet far from trivial condition, that is, he
had included in its program an instruction to the effect that whatever
it did, it was never to permit the destruction of its creator.

Remaining alone with the Adviser, the King said:

"What are you and what can you do?"

"I am the King's Perfect Adviser," replied the machine in a hollow
voice, as if it spoke from an empty barrel, "and I can provide him with
the best advice possible."

"Good," said the King. "And to whom do you owe allegiance and perfect
obedience, me or the one who constructed you?"

"Allegiance and obedience I owe only to His Royal Highness," boomed the
Adviser.

"Good, good…" said the King. "Now to begin with, I … that is, well … I
mean, I shouldn't like my first request to give the impression that I
was, shall we say, stingy … however, ah, to some extent, you understand,
if only to uphold certain principles—don't you think?"

"His Royal Highness has not yet deigned to say what it is that he
wishes," said the Adviser, propping itself on a third leg it put out
from its side, for it suffered a momentary loss of balance.

"A Perfect Adviser ought to be able to read its master's thoughts!"
snapped Mandrillion.

"Of course, but only on request, to avoid embarrassments," said the
Adviser and, opening a little door in its belly, turned a knob that read
"Telepathitron." Then it nodded and said:

"His Royal Highness doesn't wish to give Trurl a plug nickel? I
understand!"

"Speak one word of this to anyone and I'll have you thrown in the great
mill, whose stones can grind up thirty thousand of my subjects at a
time!" threatened the King.

"I won't tell a soul!" the Adviser assured him. "His Royal Highness
doesn't wish to pay for me—that's easily done. When Trurl comes back,
simply tell him there won't be any gold and he should kindly go away."

"You're an idiot, not an adviser!" snorted the King. "I don't want to
pay, but I want it to look like it's all Trurl's fault! Like I don't owe
him a thing, understand?"

The Adviser turned on the device to read the royal thoughts, reeled a
little, then said in a hollow voice:

"His Royal Highness wishes in addition that it should appear that he is
acting justly and in accordance with the law and his own sacred word,
while Trurl turns out to be nothing but a despicable charlatan and
scoundrel… Very well. With His Royal Highness' permission, I will now
seize His Royal Highness by the throat and choke him, and if he would be
so good as to struggle and scream for help…"

"Have you gone mad?" said Mandrillion. "Why should you choke me and why
should I scream?"

"That you may accuse Trurl of attempting to commit, with my aid, the
crime of regicide," explained the Adviser brightly. "Thus, when His
Royal Highness has him whipped and thrown into the moat, everyone will
say that this was an act of the greatest mercy, since for such an
offense one is usually drawn and quartered, if not tortured first. To me
His Royal Highness will grant a full pardon, as I was but an unwitting
tool in the hands of Trurl, and everyone will praise the King's
magnanimity and compassion, and everything will be exactly as His Royal
Highness wishes it."

"All right, choke me—but carefully, you dog!" said the King.

Everything happened just as the Perfect Adviser said it would. True, the
King wanted to have Trurl's legs pulled off before they threw him into
the moat, but somehow this wasn't done—no doubt a mix-up in the orders,
the King thought later, but actually it was owing to the machine's
discreet intervention with one of the executioner's helpers. Afterward,
the King pardoned his Adviser and reinstated it at court; Trurl
meanwhile, battered and bruised, painfully hobbled home. Immediately
after his return, he went to see Klapaucius and told him the whole
story. Then he said:

"That Mandrillion was more of a villain than I thought. Not only did he
shamefully deceive me, but he even used the very Adviser I gave him,
used it to further his scurvy scheme against me! Ah, but he is sadly
mistaken if he thinks that Trurl accepts defeat! May rust eat through me
if ever I forget the vengeance that I owe the tyrant!"

"What do you intend to do?" inquired Klapaucius.

"I'll take him to court, I'll sue him for the amount of my fee, and
that's only the beginning: there are damages he'll have to pay—for
insults and injuries."

"This is a difficult legal question," said Klapaucius. "I suggest you
hire yourself a good lawyer before you try anything."

"Why hire a lawyer? I'll make myself one!"

And Trurl went home, threw six heaping teaspoons of transistors into a
big pot, added again as many condensers and resistors, poured
electrolyte over it, stirred well and covered tightly with a lid, then
went to bed, and in three days the mixture had organized itself into a
first-rate lawyer. Trurl didn't even need to remove it from the pot,
since it was only to serve this once, so he set the pot on the table and
asked:

"What are you?"

"I'm a consulting attorney and specialist in jurisprudence," the pot
gurgled, for there was a little too much electrolyte in it. Trurl
related the whole affair, whereupon it said:

"You say you qualified the Adviser's program with an instruction making
it incapable of engineering your death?"

"Yes, so it couldn't destroy me. That was the only condition."

"In that case you failed to live up to your part of the bargain: the
Adviser was to have been perfect, without any limitations. If it
couldn't destroy you, then it wasn't perfect."

"But if it destroyed me, then there would be no one to receive payment!"

"A separate matter and a different question entirely, which comes under
those paragraphs in the docket determining Mandrillion's criminal
liability, while your claim has more the character of a civil action."

"Look, I don't need some pot handing me a lot of legalistic claptrap!"
fumed Trurl. "Whose lawyer are you anyway, mine or that hoodlum king's?"

"Yours, but he did have the right to refuse you payment."

"And did he have the right to order me thrown from his castle walls into
the moat?"

"As I said, that's another matter entirely, criminal, not civil,"
answered the pot.

Trurl flew into a rage.

"Here I make an intelligent being out of a bunch of old wires, switches
and grids, and instead of some honest advice I get technicalities! You
cheap cybernetic shyster, I'll teach you to trifle with me!"

And he turned the pot over, shook everything out onto the table, and
pulled it apart before the lawyer had a chance to appeal the
proceedings.

Then Trurl got to work and built a two-story Juris Con-sulenta,
forensically reinforced fourfold, complete with codices and codicils,
civil and criminal, and, just to be safe, he added international and
institutional law components. Finally he plugged it in, stated his case
and asked:

"How do I get what's coming to me?"

"This won't be easy," said the machine. "I'll need an extra five hundred
transistors on top and two hundred on the side."

Which Trurl supplied, and it said:

"Not enough! Increase the volume and give me two more spools, please."

After this it began:

"Quite an interesting case, really. There are two things that must be
taken into consideration: the grounds of the allegation, for one, and
here I grant you there is much that we can do—and then we have the
litigation process itself. Now, it is absolutely out of the question to
summon the King before any court on a civil charge, for this is contrary
to international as well as interplanetary law. I will give you my final
opinion, but first you must give me your word you won't pull me apart
when you hear it."

Trurl gave his word and said:

"But where did you get the idea I would ever do such a thing?"

"Oh, I don't know—it just seemed to me you might."

Trurl guessed this was due to the fact that, in its construction, he had
used parts from the potted lawyer; apparently some trace of the memory
of that incident had found its way into the new circuits, creating a
kind of subconscious complex.

"Well, and your final opinion?" asked Trurl.

"Simply this: no suitable tribunals exist, hence there can be no suit.
Your case, in other words, can be neither won nor lost."

Trurl leaped up and shook his fist at the legal machine, but had to keep
his word and did it no harm. He went to Klapaucius and told him
everything.

"From the first I knew it was a hopeless business," said Klapaucius,
"but you wouldn't believe me."

"This outrage will not go unpunished," replied Trurl. "If I can't get
satisfaction through the courts, then I must find some other way to
settle with that scoundrel of a king!"

"I wonder how. Remember, you gave the King a Perfect Adviser, which can
do anything except destroy you; it can fend off whatever blow, plague or
misfortune you direct against the King or his realm—and will do so, I am
sure, for I have complete confidence, my dear Trurl, in your
constructing ability!"

"True. … It would appear that, in creating the Perfect Adviser, I
deprived myself of any hope of defeating that royal bandit. But no,
there must be some chink in the armor! I'll not rest until I've found
it!"

"What do you mean?" Klapaucius asked, but Trurl only shrugged and went
home. At home he sat and meditated; sometimes he leafed impatiently
through hundreds of volumes in his library, and sometimes he conducted
secret experiments in his laboratory. Klapaucius visited his friend from
time to time, amazed to see the tenacity with which Trurl was attempting
to conquer himself, for the Adviser was, in a sense, a part of him and
he had given it his own wisdom. One afternoon, Klapaucius came at the
usual time but didn't find Trurl at home. The doors were all locked and
the windows shuttered. He concluded that Trurl had begun operations
against the ruler of the Multitudians. And he was not mistaken.

Mandrillion meanwhile was enjoying his power as never before; whenever
he ran out of ideas, he asked his Adviser, who had an inexhaustible
supply. Neither did the King have to fear palace coups or court
intrigues, or any enemy whatsoever, but reigned with an iron hand, and
truly, as many grapes there were that ripened in the vineyards of the
south, more gallows graced the royal countryside.

By now the Adviser had four chests full of medals for suggestions made
to the King. A microspy Trurl sent to the land of the Multitudians
returned with the news that, for its most recent achievement—it gave the
King a ticker-tape parade, using citizens for confetti—Mandrillion had
publicly called the Adviser his "pal."

Trurl then launched his carefully prepared campaign by sitting down and
writing the Adviser a letter on eggshell-yellow stationery decorated
with a freehand drawing of a cassowary tree. The content of the letter
was simple.

_Dear Adviser!_—he wrote—_I hope_ that things are _going as well with_
you as they are with me, and even better. Your master has put _his trust
in_ you, _I_ hear, and _so you must keep in mind the_ tremendous
responsibility you bear in the face _of Posterity and the Common Weal_
and therefore fulfill your duties _with the utmost diligence_ and
alacrity. And should you ever find _it difficult to carry out some royal
wish, employ the Extra-special Method_ which _I told you of in days gone
by. Drop me a line if you feel_ so inclined, but don't be angry _if I'm_
slow to reply, f_or I'm_ working on an _Adviser for King D. just now and
haven't much time. Please convey my respects to_ your kind master. With
_fondest wishes and best_ regards, _I remain_

_Your constructor,_

_Trurl._

Naturally this letter aroused the suspicions of the Multitudian Secret
Police and was subjected to the most meticulous examination, which
revealed no hidden substances in the paper nor, for that matter, ciphers
in the drawing of the cassowary tree—a circumstance that threw
Headquarters into a flurry. The letter was photographed, facsimiled and
copied out by hand, then the original was resealed and sent on to its
destination. The Adviser read the message with alarm, realizing that
this was a move to compromise if not ruin its position, so immediately
it told the King of the letter, describing Trurl as a blackguard bent on
discrediting it in the eyes of its master; then it tried to decipher the
message, for it was convinced those innocent words were a mask
concealing something dark and dreadful.

But here the wise Adviser stopped and thought a minute —then informed
the King of its intention to decode Trurl's letter, explaining that it
wished in this way to unmask the constructor's treachery; then,
gathering up the necessary number of tripods, filters, funnels, test
tubes and chemical reagents, it began to analyze the paper of both
envelope and letter. All of which, of course, the police followed
closely, having screwed into the walls of its rooms the usual peeking
and eavesdropping devices. When chemistry failed, the Adviser turned to
cryptanalysis, converting the text of the letter into long columns of
numbers with the aid of electronic calculators and tables of
logarithms—unaware that teams of police specialists, headed by the Grand
Marshal of Codes himself, were duplicating its every operation. But
nothing seemed to work, and Headquarters grew more and more uneasy, for
it was clear that any code that could resist such high-powered efforts
to break it, had to be one of the most ingenious codes ever devised. The
Grand Marshal spoke of this to a court dignitary, who happened to envy
terribly the trust Mandrillion had placed in his Adviser. This
dignitary, wanting nothing better than to plant the seeds of doubt in
the royal heart, told the King that his mechanical favorite was sitting
up night after night, locked in its room, studying the suspicious
letter. The King laughed and said that he was well aware of it, for the
Adviser itself had told him. The envious dignitary left in confusion and
straightway related this news to the Grand Marshal.

"Oh!" exclaimed that venerable cryptographer. "It actually told the
King? What bold-faced treason! And truly, what a fiendish code this must
be, for one to dare to speak of it so openly!"

And he ordered his brigades to redouble their efforts. When, however, a
week had passed without results, the greatest expert in secret writing
was called in, the distinguished discoverer of invisible sign language,
Professor Crusticus. That scholar, having examined the incriminating
document as well as the records of everything the military specialists
had done, announced that they would have to apply the method of trial
and error, using computers with astronomical capacities.

This was done, and it turned out that the letter could be read in three
hundred and eighteen different ways.

The first five variants were as follows: "The roach from Bakersville
arrived in one piece, but the bedpan blew a fuse"; "Roll the
locomotive's aunt in cutlets"; "Now the butter can't be wed, 'cause the
nightcap's nailed"; "He who has had, has been, but he who hasn't been,
has been had"; and "From strawberries under torture one may extract all
sorts of things." This last variant Professor Crusticus held to be the
key to the code and found, after three hundred thousand calculations,
that if you added up all the letters of the letter, subtracted the
parallax of the sun plus the annual production of umbrellas, and then
took the cube root of the remainder, you came up with a single word,
"Crusafix." In the telephone book there was a citizen named Crucifax.
Crusticus maintained that this alteration of a few letters was merely to
throw them off the track, and Crucifax was arrested. After a little
sixth-degree persuasion, the culprit confessed that he had indeed
plotted with Trurl, who was to have sent him poison tacks and a hammer
with which to cobble the King to death. These irrefutable proofs of
guilt the Grand Marshal of Codes presented to the King without delay;
yet Mandrillion so trusted in his Adviser, that he gave it the chance to
explain.

The Adviser did not deny that the letter could be read in a variety of
ways if one rearranged the letters of the letter; it had itself
discovered an additional hundred thousand variants; but this proved
nothing, and in fact the letter wasn't even in code, for—the Adviser
explained—it was possible to rearrange the letters of absolutely any
text to make sense or the semblance of sense, and the result was called
an anagram. The theory of permutations and combinations dealt with such
phenomena. No—protested the Adviser—Trurl wanted to compromise and undo
it by creating the illusion of a code where none existed, while that
poor fellow Crucifax, Lord knows, was innocent, and his confession was
wholly the invention of the experts at Headquarters, who possessed no
little skill in the art of encouraging official cooperation, not to
mention interrogation machinery that had a power of several thousand
kilowhacks. The King did not take kindly to this criticism of the police
and asked the Adviser what it meant by that, but it began to speak of
anagrams and steganograms, codes, ciphers, symbols, signals, probability
and information theory, and became so incomprehensible, that the King
lost all patience and had it thrown into the deepest dungeon. Just then
a postcard arrived from Trurl with the following words:

_Dear Adviser! Don't forget the purple_ screws—they __might come in
handy_. Yours, _Trurl_._

Immediately the Adviser was put on the rack, but wouldn't admit to a
thing, stubbornly repeating that all this was part of Trurl's scheme;
when asked about the purple screws, it swore it hadn't any, nor any
knowledge of them. Of course, to conduct a thorough investigation it was
necessary to open the Adviser up. The King gave his permission, the
blacksmiths set to work, its plates gave way beneath their hammers, and
soon the King was presented with a couple of tiny screws dripping oil
and yes, undeniably painted purple. Thus, though the Adviser had been
completely demolished in the process, the King was satisfied he had done
the right thing.

A week later, Trurl appeared at the palace gates and requested an
audience. Amazed at such effrontery, the King, instead of having the
constructor slaughtered on the spot, ordered him brought before the
royal presence.

"O King!" said Trurl as soon as he entered the great hall with courtiers
on every side. "I fashioned you a Perfect Adviser and you used it to
cheat me of my fee, thinking—and not without justice—that the power of
the mind I had given you would be a perfect shield against attack and
thereby render fruitless any attempt by me to get revenge. But in giving
you an intelligent Adviser, I did not make you yourself intelligent, and
it was on this that I counted, for only he who has sense will take
advice that makes sense. In no subtle, shrewd or sophisticated way was
it possible to destroy the Adviser. I could do this only in a manner
that was crude, primitive, and stupid beyond belief. There was no code
in the letter; your Adviser remained faithful to the very end; of the
purple screws that brought about its demise, it knew nothing. You see,
they accidentally fell into a bucket of paint while I was putting it
together, and I just happened to recall, and make use of, this detail.
Thus did stupidity and suspicion undo wisdom and loyalty, and you were
the instrument of your own downfall. And now you will hand over the one
hundred bags of gold you owe me, and another hundred for the time I had
to waste recovering them. If you do not, you and your entire court will
perish, for no longer do you have at your side the Adviser that could
defend you against me!"

The King roared with rage and gestured for the guards to cut down the
insolent one at once, but their whistling halberds passed through the
constructor's body as if it were air, and they jumped back, horrified.
Trurl laughed and said:

"Chop at me as much as you please—this is only an image produced by
remote-control mirrors; in reality I am hovering high above your planet
in a ship, and will drop terrible death-dealing missiles on the palace
unless I have my gold."

And before he had finished speaking, there was a dreadful crash and an
explosion rocked the entire palace; the courtiers fled in panic, and the
King, nearly fainting from shame and fury, had to pay Trurl his fee,
every last cent of it, and double.

Klapaucius, hearing of this from Trurl himself upon the latter's return,
asked why he had employed such a primitive and—to use his own
words—stupid method, when he could have sent a letter that actually did
contain some code?

"The presence of a code would have been easier for the Adviser to
explain than its absence," replied the wise constructor. "It is always
easier to confess that one has done something wrong than to prove that
one has not. In this case, the presence of a code would have been a
simple matter; its absence, however, led to complications, for it is a
fact that any text may be recombined into some other, namely an anagram,
and there may be many such recombinations. Now in order to make all this
clear, one would have to resort to arguments which, though perfectly
true, would be somewhat involved—arguments I was positive the King
hadn't the brains to follow. It was once said that to move a planet, one
need but find the point of leverage: therefore I, seeking to overturn a
mind that was perfect, had to find the point of leverage, and this was
stupidity."

+ +

The first machine ended its story here, bowed low to King Genius and the
assembly of listeners, then modestly retired to a corner of the cave.

The King expressed his satisfaction with this tale and asked Trurl:

"Tell us, my good constructor, does the machine relate only what you
have taught it, or does the source of its knowledge lie outside you?
Also, allow me to observe that the story we have heard, instructive and
entertaining as it is, seems incomplete, for we know nothing of what
happened afterwards to the Multitudians and their ignorant king."

"Your Majesty," said Trurl, "the machine relates only what is true,
since I placed its information pump to my head before coming here,
enabling it to draw upon my memories. But this it did itself, so I know
not which of my memories it selected, and therefore you could not say
that I intentionally taught it anything, yet neither could you say that
the source of its knowledge lay outside me. As for the Multitudians, the
story indeed tells us nothing of their subsequent fate; but while
everything may be told, not everything may be neatly fitted in. Suppose
that which is taking place here and now is not reality, but only a tale,
a tale of some higher order that contains within it the tale of the
machine: a reader might well wonder why you and your companions are
shaped like spheres, inasmuch as that sphericality serves no purpose in
the narration and would appear to be a wholly superfluous
embellishment…"

The King's companions marveled at the constructor's perspicacity, and
the King himself said with a broad smile:

"There is much in what you say. As far as our shape is concerned, I will
tell you how this came about. A long, long time ago we looked—that is,
our ancestors looked—altogether different, for they arose by the will of
wet and spongy beings, pale beings that fashioned them after their own
image and likeness; our ancestors therefore had arms, legs, a head, and
a trunk that connected these appendages. But once they had liberated
themselves from their creators, they wished to obliterate even this
trace of their origin, hence each generation in turn transformed itself,
till finally the form of a perfect sphere was attained. And so, whether
for good or for bad, we are spheres."

"Your Majesty," said Trurl, "a sphere has both good and bad aspects from
the standpoint of construction. But it is always best when an
intelligent being cannot alter its own form, for such freedom is truly a
torment. He who must be what he is, may curse his fate, but cannot
change it; on the other hand, he who can transform himself has no one in
the world but himself to blame for his failings, no one but himself to
hold responsible for his dissatisfaction. However, I did not come here,
O King, to give you a lecture on the General Theory of
Self-construction, but to demonstrate my storytelling machines. Would
you care to hear the next?"

The King gave his consent and, having taken some cheer among amphoras
full of the finest ion ambergris, the company sat back and made
themselves comfortable. The second machine approached, curtsied to the
King and said:

"Mighty King! Here is a story, a nest of stories, with cabinets and
cupboards, about Trurl the constructor and his wonderfully nonlinear
adventures!"

+ +

It happened once that the Great Constructor Trurl was summoned by King
Thumbscrew the Third, ruler of Tyrannia, who wished to learn from him
the means of achieving perfection of both mind and body. Trurl answered
in this way:

"I once happened to land on the planet Legaria and, as is my custom,
stayed at an inn, determined to keep to my room until I had acquainted
myself more thoroughly with the history and habits of the Legarians. It
was winter, the wind howled outside, and there was no one else in the
gloomy building, till suddenly I heard a knocking at the gate. Looking
out, I saw four hooded figures unloading heavy black suitcases from an
armored carriage; they then entered the inn. The next day, around noon,
the most curious sounds came from the neighboring room—whistling,
hammering, rasping, the shattering of glass, and above all this noise
there boomed a powerful bass, shouting without pause:

—Faster, sons of vengeance, faster! Drain the elements, use the sieve!
Evenly, evenly! And now the funnel! Pour him out! Fine, now give me that
kludge-fudger, that winch-pincher, sprocketmonger, edulcorated
data-dumper, that wretched reject of a widgeteer cowardly hiding in the
grave! Death itself shall not protect him from our righteous wrath! Hand
him over, with his shameless brain and his spindly legs! Take the tongs
and pull the nose—more, more, enough to grip for the execution! Work the
bellows, brave lads! Into the vise with him! Now rivet that brazen
face—and again! Yes, yes, good! Perfect! Keep it up with that hammer!
One-two, one-two! And tighten those nerves—he mustn't faint too quickly,
like the one yesterday! Let him taste our vengeance to the fullest!
One-two, one-two! Hey! Ha! Ho!

Thus did the voice thunder and roar, and was answered by the rumble of
bellows and the clanging of hammers on anvils, when suddenly a sneeze
resounded and a great shout of triumph burst forth from four throats,
then a shuffling and struggling behind the wall, and I heard a door
open. Peering through a crack, I saw the strangers sneaking out into the
hall and—incredibly enough—counted five of them. They all went
downstairs and locked themselves in the cellar, remained there for a
long time, returning to their room only that evening—once again four—and
silent, as if they had been to a funeral. I went back to my books, but
this business, it gave me no peace, so I resolved to get to the bottom
of it. The next day at the same time, noon, the hammers started up
again, the bellows roared, and that terrifying voice cried out in a
hoarse bass:

—Hey now, sons of vengeance! Faster, my electric hearties! Shoulders to
the wheel! Throw in the protons, the iodine! Step lively now, let's have
that flap-eared whigma-leeriac, that would-be hoodwinking wizard,
misbegotten miscreant and incorrigible crank, let me grab him by his
unwashed beak and lead him, kicking, to a sure and lingering death! Work
those bellows, I say!

And again a sneeze rang out, and a stifled scream, and once again they
left the room on tiptoe; as before, I counted five when they went down
to the cellar, four when they returned. Seeing then that I could learn
the mystery only there, I armed myself with a laser pistol, and at the
crack of dawn slipped down to the cellar, where I found nothing but
charred and mangled bits of metal; covering myself with a clump of
straw, I sat in the darkest corner and waited, until around noon I heard
those now familiar shouts and hammering sounds, then all at once the
door flew open and in walked four Legarians, with a fifth bound hand and
foot.

This fifth wore a doublet of old-fashioned cut, bright red and with a
frill about the neck, and a feathered cap; he himself was fat of face
and had an enormous nose, while the mouth was twisted in fear and
babbled something all the while. The Legarians barred the door and, at a
sign from the eldest, untied their prisoner and began to beat him
savagely, yelling one after the other:

—Take that for the Prophecy of Happiness! And that for the Perfection of
Being! And have that for the Bed of Roses, and that for the Bowl of
Cherries! And the Clover of Existence! And that's for the Altruistic
Communality! And take that for the Soarings of the Spirit!

And they cudgeled and buffeted him so, that he surely would have given
up the ghost had I not lifted my weapon from the straw, announcing in
this way my presence. When they had released their victim, I asked them
why they were abusing thus an individual who was neither an outlaw nor
worthless vagabond, for, judging by the ruff and color of his doublet,
this was some sort of scholar. The Legarians wavered and looked
longingly at the guns they had left at the door, but when I cocked the
actuator and scowled, they thought better of it and, nudging one
another, asked the large one, the one with the deep bass, to speak for
them all.

—Know, O strange foreigner—he said, turning to me—it is not with common
thrugs, tuffians or juggermuggers that you deal, or other degenerators
of the robot species, for though a cellar hardly seems a savory place,
what passes within these walls is to the highest degree praiseworthy and
a thing of beauty!

—Praiseworthy and a thing of beauty?!—I exclaimed. —What are you telling
me, O base Legarian? Did I not see with my own eyes how you hurled
yourselves upon the red-doubleted one and belabored him with such
murderous blows, that the very oil did spatter from your joints? And you
dare call this a thing of beauty!

—If Your Esteemed Foreignness is going to interrupt— replied the bass—he
will learn nothing, therefore I politely request him to tighten the
reins on his worthy tongue and quell the restiveness of his oral
orifice, else I must refrain from further discourse. Know then that
before you stand our finest physickers, all cybernists and electriciates
of the first order, in a word, my brilliant and ever vigilant pupils,
the best minds in all Legaria, and I myself am Vendetius Ultor of
Amentia, professor of matter both positive and negative and the
originator of Omnigendrical Reincreation, and I have dedicated my life
to the sacred work of vengeance. With the aid of these faithful
followers I avenge the shame and misery of my people upon the
ruddy-bedizened excrescency that kneels there, the low scrulp called—and
may his name be forever cursed—Malaputz vel Malapusticus Pandemonius,
who vilely and villainously, thievishly and irretrievably brought
unhappiness to all Legarians! For he led them into detrimetry and other
deviltry, did discompostulate them, embollix and thoroughly befottle
them, then sneaked off to his grave to escape the consequences, thinking
that no hand could ever reach him there!

—That's not true, Your Exalted Visitorship! I never meant… that is, I
had no idea!… —wailed the kneeling noodle-nose in the rubicund attire. I
stared, understanding nothing, while the bass intoned:

—Gargomanticus, dear pupil, paste the puler one in his puffy puss!

The pupil complied, and with such dispatch that the cellar rang. To
which I said:

—Until the conclusion of explanations, all beating and battering is
absolutely forbidden by authority of this laser, meanwhile you,
Professor Vendetius Ultor, have the floor and may continue!

The professor growled, grumbled, and finally said:

—That you may know how our great misfortune came to pass and why the
four of us, forsaking worldly things, have formed this Holy Order of the
Forge of Resurrection, consecrating the remainder of our days to sweet
revenge, I will relate to you the history of our kind from the very
beginning of creation…

—Must we go back that far?—I asked, afraid my hand would weaken beneath
the weight of the pistol.

—Aye, Your Alienness! Listen and attend… There are legends, as you know,
that speak of a race of paleface, who concocted robotkind out of a test
tube, though anyone with a grain of sense knows this to be a foul lie…
For in the Beginning there was naught but Formless Darkness, and in the
Darkness, Magneticity, which moved the atoms, and whirling atom struck
atom, and Current was thus created, and the First Light… from which the
stars were kindled, and then the planets cooled, and in their cores the
breath of Sacred Statisticality gave rise to microscopic
Protomecha-noans, which begat Proteromechanoids, which begat the
Primitive Mechanisms. These could not yet calculate, nor scarcely put
two and two together, but thanks to Evolution and Natural Subtraction
they soon multiplied and produced Omnistats, which gave birth to the
Servostat, the Missing Clink, and from it came our progenitor, Automatus
Sapiens…

After that there were the cave robots, the nomad robots, and then robot
nations. Robots of Antiquity had to manufacture their life-giving
electricity by hand, that is by rubbing, which meant great drudgery.
Each lord had many knights, each knight many vassals, and the rubbing
was feudal hence hierarchical, progressing from the lowly to the
higher-up. This manual labor was replaced by machine when Ylem
Symphiliac invented the rubberator, and Wolfram of Coulombia, the
rubless lightning rod. Thus began the Battery Age, a most difficult time
for all who did not possess their own accumulators, since on a clear
day, without a cloud to tap, they had to scrimp and scrounge for every
precious watt, and rub themselves constantly, else perish from a total
loss of charge. And then there appeared a scholar, an infernal
intellectrician and efficiency expert, who in his youth, doubtless owing
to some diabolical intervention, never had his head staved in, and he
began to teach and preach that the traditional method of electrical
connection—namely parallel—was worthless, and they all ought to hook
themselves up according to a revolutionary new plan of his, that is in
series. For in series, if one rubs, the others are immediately supplied
with current, even at a great distance, till every robot simply bubbles
over with ohms and volts. And he showed his blueprints, and painted
paradises of such parameters, that the old circuits, equal and
independent, were disconnected and the system of Pandemonius promptly
implemented.— Here the professor beat his head against the wall several
times, rolled his eyes and finally continued. Now I understood why the
surface of his knobby brow was so irregular. —And it came to pass that
every second robot sat back and said, "Why should I rub if my neighbor
rubs and it comes to the same thing?" And his neighbor did the same, and
the drop in voltage became so severe, they had to place special
taskmasters over everyone, and taskmasters over the taskmasters. Then a
disciple of Malaputz, Clusticus the Mistaken, stepped forth and said
that each should rub not himself but his neighbor, and after him was
Dummis Altruicius with his program of flagellatory
sadistomasochistorism, and after him was Magmndel Spoots, who proposed
compulsory massage parlors, and after him appeared a new theoretician,
Arsus Gargazon, saying that clouds should be gently stroked, not yoked,
to yield their nimboid bolts, and then there was Blip of Leydonia, and
Scrofulon Thermaphrodyne, advocating the installation of autofrotts,
also called titillators or diddlegrids, and then Bestian Phystobufficus,
who instead of rubbing recommended a good drubbing. Such differences of
opinion produced great friction, which led to all sorts of exacerbations
and excommunications, which in turn led to blasphemy, heresy, and
finally Faradocius Offal, Prince and Heir to the Throne of the Alloys,
was kicked in the pants, and war broke out between the Legarite
Brassbound Umbutts and the Legaritian Empire of the Cold Welders, and it
lasted eight and thirty years, and twelve more, for towards the end one
could not tell, amid all the rubble, who had won, so they quarreled and
fell to fighting again. And thus there was chaos and carnage, and a
devastating decline in the vital voltage, an enervated emf and energy
dissipation everywhere, or, as the simple folk put it, "total
malaputziment"—all brought about by this infamous fiend and his
thrice-accursed bright ideas!!

—My intentions were the best!! I swear it, Your Laserosity! It was
always the general welfare I had in mind!— squeaked the kneeling
Malaputz, and his outsize snout trembled. But the professor only elbowed
him aside and continued:

—All this took place two hundred and twenty-five years ago. As you may
have guessed, long before the outbreak of the Great Legarian War, long
before this universal wretchi-tude began, Malapusticus Pandemonius,
having spawned no end of ponderous treatises and tracts, in all of which
he forwarded his vile, pernicious flummeries, died, smug and unruffled
to the very end. Indeed, so pleased with himself was he, that in his
last will and testament he wrote that he had every expectation of being
named "Supreme Benefactor of Legaria." At any rate, when it came time to
settle accounts, there was no one with whom to settle, no one to make
pay, no one that one might turn a little on a lathe. But I, O
Illustrious Intruder, having formulated the General Theory of
Facsimulation, studied the works of Malaputz until I was able to extract
his algorithm, which, when fed into an atomic duplicating machine, could
recreate ex _atomis oriundum gemellum_, identical to the _n_th degree,
Malapusticus Pandemonius in his very own person. And so we gather every
evening in this cellar to pass sentence on him, and when he has been
returned to his grave, we avenge our people anew the next day, and thus
it is and thus shall be for all eternity, amen!

Horror-stricken, I blurted in reply:

—Why, you have surely taken leave of your senses, Professor, if you
think for a minute that this person, this person as innocent as a
brand-new fuse, whom you hammer together out of atoms every day, has to
answer for the actions, whatever they were, of some scholar who died
three centuries ago!

To which the professor said:

—Then who is this proboscidian sniveler who himself calls himself
Malapusticus Pandemonius? Come, what is your name, O cosmic corrosion?

—Ma… Mala… Malaputz, Your Mighty Mercilessness… —stammered the groveling
one through his nose.

—Still, it is not the same—I said.

—How, not the same?

—Did you not yourself say, Professor, that Malaputz no longer lives?

—But we have resurrected him!

—A double perhaps, AN EXACT DUPLICATE, BUT NOT THE SELF-Same, true
original!

—Prove it, Sirrah!

—I don't need to prove a thing—I said—seeing that I hold this laser in
my hand; besides which, I am well aware, my fine Professor, that to
attempt to prove what you ask would be most foolhardy, for the
nonidenticality of the identicalized _recreatio ex_ atomis individui
modo algorytmico is nothing other than the famous Paradoxon Antinomicum,
or the Labyrinthum Lemianum, described in the works of that
distinguished robophile, whom they also called Advocatus Laboratoris. So
then, without proofs, unhand yon snouted one this instant, and do not
dare venture any further molestations upon his person!

—Many thanks, Your Magnanimitude!!—cried he in the bright red doublet,
rising from his knees. —It so happens that here—he added, patting his
vest pocket—I have an entirely new formula, this time foolproof, with
which the Legarians may be brought to perfect bliss; it works by back
coupling, that is, a hookup in reverse, and not in series, which was due
purely to an error that crept into my calculations three centuries ago!
I go immediately to convert this marvelous discovery into reality!!

And indeed, his hand was already upon the doorknob as we all gaped,
dumbfounded. I lowered my weapon and, turning away, said weakly to the
professor:

—I withdraw my objections… Do what you must…

With a hoarse roar the four of them lunged at Malaputz, threw him down
and dealt with him—until, at last, he was no more.

Then, still panting, they straightened their frocks, adjusted their
hoods, bowed stiffly to me, and left the cellar in single file, and I
remained alone, the heavy laser in my trembling hand, full of dismay and
melancholy."

Thus did Trurl conclude his tale to enlighten King Thumbscrew of
Tyrannia, who had summoned him for that purpose. When however the King
demanded further explanation concerning the attainment of nonlinear
perfection, Trurl said:

"Once, chancing upon the planet Ninnica, I was able to see the results
of progress predicated on the perfectionistic principle. The Ninnicans
had long ago assumed another name, that of Hedophagoi or Jubileaters, or
just plain Jubilators. My arrival occurred during their Era of Plenty.
Each and every Ninnican, or rather Jubilator, sat in his palace, which
was built for him by his automate (for so they called their
triboluminescent slaves), each with essences anointed, each with
precious gems appointed, electrically caressed, impeccably dressed,
pomaded, braided, gold-brocaded, lapped and laved in ducats gleaming,
wrapped and wreathed in incense streaming, showered with treasures,
plied with pleasures, marble halls, fanfares, balls, but for all that,
strangely discontent and even a little depressed. And yet there was
everything you could ask for! On this planet no one lifted a finger:
instead of taking a walk, a drink, a nap, a trip or a wife, there was a
Walker to walk one, a Napper to nap one, a Wiver to wive one, and so on,
and it was even impossible for one to take a break, since there was a
special apparatus for that as well. And thus, served and serviced by
machines in every conceivable way, all medaled and maidened by
appropriate automatic Decorators and Panderizers five to fifteen times
per minute, covered with a seething, silvery swarm of mechanicules and
machinerettes to coddle him, fondle him, wink, wave and whisper sweet
nothings in his ear, back-rub, chin-chuck, cheek-pat and foot-grovel
him, tirelessly kissing whatever he might present to be kissed—thus did
the Jubilator _vel_ Hedophage _vel_ Ninnican wallow and carouse the
livelong day, alone, while in the distance, all across the horizon,
chugged the mighty Fabrifactories, churning out thrones of gold, dandle
chains, pearl slippers and bibs, orbs, scepters, epaulets, spinels,
spinets, cymbals, surreys, and a million other instruments and
gratifacts to delight in. As I walked along, I constantly had to drive
away machines that offered me their services; the more brazen ones,
greedily seeking to be of use, had to be beaten over the head. Finally,
fleeing the whole crowd of them, I found myself in the mountains —and
saw a host of golden machines clamoring around the mouth of a cave
walled up with stones, and through a narrow opening there I saw the
watchful eyes of a Ninnican, who was apparently making a last stand
against Universal Happiness. Seeing me, the machines immediately began
to fan and fawn upon my person, read me fairy tales, stroke me, kiss my
hands, promise me kingdoms, and I was saved thanks only to the one in
the cave, who mercifully moved aside a stone and let me enter. He was
half rusted through, yet glad of it, and said that he was the last
philosopher of Ninnica. There was no need, of course, for him to tell me
that plenitude, when too plenitudinous, was worse than destitution,
for—obviously—what could one do, if there was nothing one could not?
Truly, how could a mind, besieged by a sea of paradises, benumbed by a
plethora of possibilities, thoroughly stunned by the instant fulfillment
of its every wish and whim—decide on anything? I conversed with this
wise individual, who called himself Trizivian Huncus, and we concluded
that without enormous shields and an Ontological
Complicositor-Imperfector, doom was unavoidable. Trizivian had for some
time regarded complicositry as the ultimate existential solution; I,
however, showed him the error of this approach, since it consisted
simply in the removal of machines with the aid of other machines, namely
gnawpers, thwockets, tenterwrenches, fracturacks, hobblers and
winch-shrieks. Which obviously would only make matters worse—it wouldn't
be complicositry at all, but just the opposite. As everyone knows,
History is irreversible, and there is no way back to the halcyon past
other than through dreams and reveries.

Together we walked across a vast plain, knee-deep in ducats and
doubloons, waving sticks to shoo off clouds of pesky blisserits, and we
saw several Ninnican-Jubilators lying senseless, gasping softly, all
sated, satiated, supersaturated with pleasure; the sight of such
excessive surfeit, such reckless success, would have moved anyone to
pity. Then there were the inhabitants of the automated palaces, who
wildly threw themselves into cyberserking and other
electroeccentricities, some setting machine against machine, some
smashing priceless vases, for no longer could they endure the ubiquitous
beatitude, and they opened fire on emeralds, guillotined earrings,
ordered diadems broken on the wheel, or tried to hide from happiness in
garrets and attics, or else ordered their appliances to whip themselves,
or did all of these things at once, or in alternation. But absolutely
nothing helped, and every last one of them perished, petted and attended
to death. I advised Trizivian against simply shutting down the
Fabrifactories, for having too little is as dangerous as having too
much; but he, instead of studying up on the consequences of ontological
complicositry, immediately began to dynamite the automates sky-high. A
grievous mistake, for there followed a great depression, though indeed,
he never lived to see it—it happened that a flock of flyrts swooped down
upon him somewhere, and gallivamps and libidinators grabbed him, carried
him to a cossetorium, there befuddled him with cuddlebutts, ogled,
bussed and gnuzzled him to distraction, till he succumbed with a
strangled cry of Rape!—and afterwards lay lifeless in the wasteland,
buried in ducats, his shabby armor charred with the flames of mechanical
lust… And that, Your Highness, was the end of one who was wise but could
have been wiser!" concluded Trurl, adding, when he saw that these words
still did not satisfy King Thumbscrew:

"Just what does Your Most Royal Highness want?"

"O constructor!" replied Thumbscrew. "You say that your tales are to
improve the mind, but I do not find this to be so. They are, however,
amusing, and therefore it is my wish that you tell me more and more of
them, and do not stop."

"O King!" answered Trurl. "You would learn from me what is perfection
and how it may be gained, yet prove unable to grasp the deep meanings
and great truths with which my narratives abound. Truly, you seek
amusement and not wisdom—yet, even as you listen, my words do slowly
penetrate and act upon your brain, and later too will act, much as a
time bomb. To this end, allow me to present an account that is
intricate, unusual and true, or nearly true, from which your royal
advisers may also derive some benefit.

Hear then, noble sirs, the history of Zipperupus, king of the
Partheginians, the Deutons, and the Profligoths, of whom concupiscence
was the ruin!

----------------+--+---------------

Now Zipperupus belonged to the great house of Tup, which was divided
into two branches: the Dextrorotarory Tups, who were in power, and the
Levorotarory Tups, also called the Left-handed or Counterclockwise Tups,
who were not—and therefore consumed with hatred for their ruling
cousins. His sire, Calcyon, had joined in morganatic marriage with a
common machine, a manual water pump, and so Zipperupus inherited—from
the distaff side—a tendency to fly off the handle, and—from the spear
side—faint-heartedness coupled with a wanton nature. Seeing this, the
enemies of the throne, the Sinistral Isomers, thought of how they might
destroy him through his own lascivious proclivities. Accordingly, they
sent him a Cybernerian named Subtillion, an adept in mental engineering;
Zipperupus took an instant liking to him and made him Lord High
Thaumaturge and Apothecary to the Throne. The wily Subtillion devised
various means to gratify the unbridled lust of Zipperupus, secretly
hoping so to enfeeble and debilitate the King, that he would altogether
waste away. He built him an erotodrome and a debaucherorium, regaled him
with endless automated orgies, but the iron constitution of the King
withstood all these depravities. The Sinistral Isomers grew impatient
and ordered their agent to bring all his cunning to bear and achieve the
desired end without any further delay.

"Would you like me," he asked them at a secret meeting in the castle
catacombs, "to short-circuit the King, or demagnetize his memory to
render him mindless?"

"Absolutely not!" they replied. "In no way must we be implicated in the
King's demise. Let Zipperupus perish through his own illicit desires,
let his sinful passions be his undoing—and not us!"

"Fine," said Subtillion. "I'll set a snare for him, I'll weave it out of
dreams, and bait it with a tempting lure, which he will seize and, in so
seizing, of his own volition plunge into figments and mad fictions, sink
into dreams lurking within dreams, and there I'll give him such a
thorough finagling and inveigling, that he'll never get back to reality
alive!"

"Very well," they said. "But do not boast, O Cybernerian, for it is not
words we need, but deeds, that Zipperupus might become an autoregicide,
that is, his own assassin!"

And thus Subtillion the Cybernerian got down to work and spent an entire
year on his dreadful scheme, requesting from the royal treasury more and
more gold bullion, brass, platinum and no end of precious stones,
telling Zipperupus, whenever the latter protested, that he was making
something for him, something no other monarch had in all the world!

When the year was up, three enormous cabinets were carried from the
Cybernerian's workshop and deposited with great ceremony outside the
King's privy chamber, for they wouldn't fit through the door. Hearing
the steps and the knocking of the porters, Zipperupus came out and saw
the cabinets, there along the wall, stately and massive, four cubits
high, two across, and covered with gems. The first cabinet, also called
the White Box, was all in mother-of-pearl and blazing albite inlays, the
second, black as night, was set with agates and morions, while the third
glowed deep red, studded with rubies and ruby spinels. Each had legs
ornamented with winged griffins, solid gold, and a polished pilastered
frame, and inside, an electronic brain full of dreams, dreams that
dreamed independently, needing no dreamer to dream them. King Zipperupus
was much amazed at this explanation and exclaimed:

"What's this you say, Subtillion?! Dreaming cabinets? Whatever for? What
use are they to me? And anyway, how can you tell they're really
dreaming?"

Then Subtillion, with a humble bow, showed him the rows of little holes
running down the cabinet frames; next to each hole was a little
inscription on a little pearl plaque, and the astonished King read:

"War Dream with Citadels and Damsels"—"Dream about the Wockle
Weed"—"Dream about Alacritus the Knight and Fair Ramolda, Daughter of
Heteronius"— "Dream about Nixies, Pixies and Witchblende"—"The Marvelous
Mattress of Princess Bounce"—"The Old Soldier, or The Cannon That
Couldn't"—"Salto Erotale, or Amorous Gymnastics"—"Bliss in the Eightfold
Embrace of Octopauline"—"Perpetuum Amorobile"—"Eating Lead Dumplings
under the New Moon"—"Breakfast with Maidens and Music"—"Tucking in the
Sun to Keep It Warm" —"The Wedding Night of Princess Ineffabelle"—"Dream
about Cats"—"About Silks and Satins"—"About You-Know-What"—"Figs without
Their Leaves, and Other Forbidden Fruit"—"Also Prurient Prunes"—"How the
Lecher Got His Tots"—"Devilry and Divers Revelry before Reveille, with
Croutons"—"Mona Lisa, or The Labyrinth of Sweet Infinity."

The King went on to the second cabinet and read: "Dreams and
Diversions." And under this heading: "Cybersynergy"—"Corpses and
Corsets"—"Tops and Toggles" —"Klopstock and the Critics"—"Buffer the
Leader"— "Fratcher My Pliss"—"Counterpane and
Ventilator"—"Cybercroquet"—"Robot Crambo"—"Flowcharts and
Go-carts"—"Bippety-flippety"—"Spin the Shepherdess"—"Pin the Murder on
the Girder"—"Executioner, or Screaming Cutouts"—"Spin the Shepherdess
One More Time"—"Cy-clodore and Shuttlebox"—"Cecily and the Cyanide
Cyborg" —"Cybernation"—"Harem Racing"—and finally—"Kludge Poker."
Subtillion, the mental engineer, quickly explained that each dream
dreamed itself, entirely on its own, until someone plugged into it, for
as soon as his plug—hanging on this watch chain—was inserted in the
given pair of holes, he would be instantly connected with the cabinet
dream, and connected so completely, that the dream for him would be like
real, so real you couldn't tell the difference. Zipperupus, intrigued,
took the chain and impulsively plugged himself into the White Box, right
where the sign said, "Breakfast with Maidens and Music"—and felt spiny
ridges growing down his back, and enormous wings unfolding, and his
hands and feet distending into paws with wicked claws, and from his
jaws, which had six rows of fangs, there belched forth fire and
brimstone. Greatly taken aback, the King gasped, but instead of a gasp,
a roar like thunder issued from his throat and shook the earth. This
amazed him even more, his eyes grew wide, and in the darkness illumined
by his fiery breath he saw that they were bringing him, high on their
shoulders, virgins in serving bowls, four to each, garnished with greens
and smelling so good, he started to drool. The table soon set—salt here,
pepper over there—he licked his chops, made himself comfortable and, one
by one, popped them into his mouth like peanuts, crunching and grunting
with pleasure; the last virgin was so luscious, so succulent, that he
smacked his lips, rubbed his tummy, and was about to ask for seconds,
when everything flickered and he woke. He looked—he was standing, as
before, in the vestibule outside his private quarters. At his side was
Subtillion, Lord High Thaumaturge and Apothecary to the Throne, and
before him, the dream cabinets, glittering with precious gems.

"How were the maidens?" inquired Subtillion.

"Not bad. But where was the music?"

"The chimes got stuck," the Cybernerian explained. "Would Your Royal
Highness care to try another dream?"

Of course he would, but this time from another cabinet. The King went up
to the black one and plugged into the dream entitled "Alacritus the
Knight and Fair Ramolda, Daughter of Heteronius."

He blinked—and saw that this was indeed the age of electrical errantry.
He was standing, all clad in steel, in a wooded glen, a freshly
vanquished dragon at his feet; the leaves rustled, a gentle zephyr blew,
a brook gurgled nearby. He looked into the water and saw, from the
reflection, that he was none other than Alacritus, a knight of the
highest voltage and hero without peer. The whole history of his glorious
career was recorded, in battle scars, upon his person, and he recalled
it all, as if the memory were his own. Those dents in the visor of the
helmet—made by the mailed fists of Morbidor, in his death throes, having
been dispatched with customary alacrity; the broken hinges on the right
greave—that was the work of the late Sir Basher de Bloo; and the rivets
across his left pauldron—gnawed by Skivvian the Scurvy before giving up
the ghost; and the tembrace grille had been crushed by Gourghbrast
Buggeruckus ere he was felled. Similarly, the cuissfenders, crosshasps,
beaver baffles, hauberk latches, front and rear jambguards and
grommets—all bore the marks of battle. His shield was scored and notched
by countless blows, but the backplate, that was as shiny and rust-free
as a newborn's, for never had he turned to flee an adversary! Though his
glory, truth to tell, was a matter of complete indifference to him. But
then he remembered the fair Ramolda, leaped upon his supercharger and
began to search the length and breadth of the dream for her. In time he
arrived at the castle of her father, the Autoduke Hetero-nius; the
drawbridge planks thundered beneath horse and rider, and the Autoduke
himself came out to greet him with open arms.

The knight would fain see his Ramolda, but etiquette requires he curb
his impatience; meanwhile the old Autoduke tells him that another knight
is staying at the castle, one Mygrayn of the house of Polymera, master
swordsman and redoubtable elastician, who dreams of nothing else but to
enter the lists with Alacritus himself. And now here is Mygrayn, spry
and supple, stepping forward with these words:

"Know, O Knight, that I desire Ramolda the streamlined, Ramolda of the
hydraulic thighs, whose bust no diamond drill can touch, whose limpid
eyes are magnetized! She is thy betrothed, true, but lo, I herewith
challenge thee to mortal combat, sith only one of us may win her hand in
marriage!"

And he throws his gage, white and polymerous.

"We'll hold the wedding right after the joust," adds the
Autoduke-father.

"Very well!' says Alacritus, but inside, Zipperupus thinks: "It doesn't
matter, I can have her after the wedding and then wake up. But who asked
for this Mygrayn character?"

"This very day, brave Knight," says Heteronius, "thou wilt encounter
Mygrayn of Polymera on beaten ground and contend with him by torchlight.
But for now, retire thee to thy room and rest!"

Inside Alacritus, Zipperupus is a little uneasy, but what can he do? So
he goes to his room, and after a while hears a furtive knock-knock at
the door, and an old cybercrone tiptoes in, gives a wrinkled wink and
says:

"Fear naught, O Knight, thou shalt have the fair Ramolda and forsooth,
this very day she'll clasp thee to her alabaster bosom! Of thee alone
doth she dream, both day and night! Remember only to attack with might
and main, for Mygrayn cannot harm thee and the victory is thine!"

"That's easy enough to say, my cybercrone," replies the knight. "But
anything can happen. What if I trip, for example, or fail to parry in
time? No, it's a risky business! But perhaps you have some charm that
will be certain."

"Hee-hee!" cackles the cybercrone. "The things thou sayest, steel sir!
There are no charms, surely, nor hast thou need of any, for I know what
will be and guarantee thou winnest hands down!"

"Still, a charm would be more sure," says the knight, "particularly in a
dream… but wait, did by any chance Subtillion send you, to give me
confidence?"

"I know of no Subtillion," answers she, "nor of what dream ye speak.
Nay, this is reality, my steely liege, as thou wilt learn ere long, when
fair Ramolda gives thee her electric lips to kiss!"

"Odd," mutters Zipperupus, not noticing that the cybercrone has left the
room as quietly as she came. "Is this a dream or not? I had the
impression that it was. But she says this is reality. H'm. Well, in any
event I'd best be doubly on my guard!" And now the trumpets sound, and
one can hear the rattle of armor; the galleries are packed and everyone
awaits the principals. Here comes Alacritus, a little weak in the knees;
he enters the lists and sees Ramolda, daughter of Heteronius. She looks
upon him sweetly—ah, but there's no time for that now! Mygrayn is
stepping into the ring, the torches blaze all around, and their swords
cross with a mighty clang. Now Zipperupus is frightened in earnest and
tries as hard as he can to wake up, he tries and tries, but it won't
work—the armor's too heavy, the dream isn't letting go, and the enemy's
attacking! Faster and faster rain the blows, and Zipperupus, weakening,
can hardly lift his arm, when suddenly the foe cries out and shows a
broken blade; Alacritus the knight is ready to leap upon him, but
Mygrayn dashes from the ring and his squires hand him another sword.
Just then Alacritus sees the cybercrone among the spectators; she
approaches and whispers in his ear:

"Sire of steel! When anon thou art near the open gate that leadeth to
the bridge, Mygrayn will lower his guard. Strike bravely then, for 'tis
a sign, certain and true, of thy victory!"

Wherewith she vanishes, and his rival, rearmed, comes charging. They
fight, Mygrayn hacking away like a threshing machine out of control, but
by degrees he slackens, parries sluggishly, backs away, and now the time
is ripe, the moment arrives, but the opponent's blade gleams formidably
still, so Zipperupus pulls himself together and thinks, "To hell with
the fair Ramolda!"—turns tail and runs like mad, pounding back over the
drawbridge and into the forest and the darkness of the night. Behind him
he hears shouts of "Disgraceful!" and "For shame!", crashes headfirst
into a tree, sees stars, blinks, and there he is, standing in the palace
vestibule in front of the Black Cabinet of dreams that dream, and by his
side, Subtillion the mental engineer, smiling a crooked smile. Crooked,
as Subtillion was hiding his disappointment: the Alacritus-Ramolda dream
had in reality been a trap set for the King, for had Zipperupus heeded
the old cybercrone's advice, Mygrayn, who was only pretending to weaken,
would have run him through at the open gate. This the King avoided,
thanks only to his extraordinary cowardice.

"Did Milord enjoy the fair Ramolda?" inquired the sly Cybernerian.

"She wasn't fair enough," said Zipperupus, "so I didn't see fit to
pursue the matter. And besides, there was some trouble, and fighting
too. I like my dreams without fighting, do you understand?"

"As Your Royal Highness wishes," replied Subtillion. "Choose freely, for
in all these cabinet dreams there is only delight in store, no
fighting…"

"We'll see," said the King and plugged into the dream entitled "The
Marvelous Mattress of Princess Bounce." He was in a room of unsurpassed
loveliness, all in gold brocade. Through crystal windowpanes light
streamed like water from the purest spring, and there by her pearly
vanity the Princess stood, yawning, preparing herself for bed.
Zipperupus was greatly amazed at this unexpected sight and tried to
clear his throat to inform her of his presence, but not a sound came
out—had he been gagged?—so he tried to touch his mouth, but couldn't,
tried to move his legs—no, he couldn't—then desperately looked around
for a place to sit down, feeling faint, but that too was impossible.
Meanwhile the Princess stretched and gave a yawn, and another, and a
third, and then, overcome with drowsiness, she fell upon the mattress so
hard, that King Zipperupus was jolted from head to toe, for he himself
was the mattress of Princess Bounce! Evidently the young damsel was
having an unpleasant dream, seeing how she turned and tossed about,
jabbing the King with her little elbows, digging him with her little
heels, until his royal person (transformed into a mattress by this
dream) was seized with a mighty rage. The King struggled with his dream,
strained and strained, and finally the seams burst, the springs sprang,
the slats gave way and the Princess came crashing down with a shriek,
which woke him up and he found himself once again in the palace
vestibule, and by his side, Subtillion the Cybernerian, bowing an
obsequious bow.

"You chuckleheaded bungler!" cried the indignant King. "How dare you?!
What, villain, am I to be a mattress, and someone else's mattress at
that? You forget yourself, sirrah!"

Subtillion, alarmed by the King's fury, apologized profusely and begged
him to try another dream, persuading and pleading until Zipperupus,
finally appeased, took the plug and hooked himself into the dream,
"Bliss in the Eightfold Embrace of Octopauline." He was standing in a
crowd of onlookers in a great square, and a procession was passing by
with waving silks, muslins, mechanical elephants, litters in carved
ebony; the one in the middle was like a golden shrine, and in it, behind
eight veils, sat a feminine figure of miraculous beauty, an angel with a
dazzling face and galactic gaze, high-frequency earrings too, and the
King, all a-tremble, was about to ask who this heavenly vision was, when
he heard a murmur of awe and adoration surge through the multitude:
"Octopauline! It's Octopauline!"

For they were celebrating, with the utmost pomp and pageantry, the royal
daughter's betrothal to a foreign knight of the name Oneiromant.

The King was a bit surprised that he wasn't this knight, and when the
procession had passed and disappeared behind the palace gates, he went
with the others in the crowd to a nearby inn; there he saw Oneiromant,
who, clad in nothing but galligaskins of damask studded with gold nails
and holding a half-empty stein of fortified phosgene in his hand, came
over to him, put an arm around him, gave him a hug and whispered in his
ear with searing breath:

"Look, I have a rendezvous with Princess Octopauline tonight at
midnight, behind the palace, in the grove of barb-wire bushes next to
the mercury fountain—but I don't dare show up, not in this condition,
I've had too much to drink, you see—but you, good stranger, why you're
the spit and image of me, so please, please go in my place, kiss the
Princess' hands for me and say that you're Oneiromant, and gosh, I'll be
beholden to you forever and a day!"

"Why not?" said the King after a little thought. "Yes, I think I can
manage it. But when?"

"Right now, there's not a moment to lose, it's almost midnight, just
remember—the King knows nothing of this, no one does, only the Princess
and the old gatekeeper, and when he bars your way, here, put this heavy
bag of ducats in his hand, and he'll let you pass!"

The King nodded, took the bag of ducats and ran straight for the castle,
since the clocks, like cast-iron hoot owls, were already beginning to
strike the hour. He sped over the drawbridge, took a quick look into the
gaping moat, shuddered, lowered his head and slipped under the spiked
grating of the portcullis—then across the courtyard to the barbwire
bushes and the fountain that bubbled mercury, and there in the pale
moonlight he saw the divine figure of Princess Octopauline, beautiful
beyond his wildest dreams and so bewitching, that he shook with desire.

Observing these shakings and shudderings of the sleeping monarch in the
palace vestibule, Subtillion chortled and rubbed his hands with glee,
this time certain of the King's demise, for he knew that when
Octopauline enfolded the unfortunate lover in those powerful eightfold
arms of hers and drew him deep into the fathomless dream with her tender
tentacles of love, he would never, never make it back to the surface of
reality! And in fact, Zipperupus, burning to be wrapped in the Princess'
embrace, was running along the wall in the shadow of the cloisters,
running towards that radiant image of silvery pulchritude, when suddenly
the old gatekeeper appeared and blocked the way with his halberd. The
King lifted the bag of ducats but, feeling their pleasant weight in his
hand, was loath to part with them—what a shame, really, to throw away a
whole fortune on one embrace!

"Here's a ducat," he said, opening the bag. "Now let me by!"

"It'll cost you ten," said the gatekeeper.

"What, ten ducats for a single hug?" jeered the King. "You're out of
your mind!"

"Ten ducats," said the gatekeeper. "That's the price."

"Can't you lower it a little?"

"Ten ducats, not a ducat less."

"So that's how it is!" yelled the King, flying off the handle in his
usual way. "Very well then, dog, you don't get a thing!" Whereupon the
gatekeeper whopped him good with the halberd and everything went
spinning around, the cloisters, the fountain, the drawbridge, and
Zipperupus fell —not asleep, but awake, opening his eyes to see
Subtillion at his side and in front of him, the Dream Cabinet. The
Cybernerian was greatly confounded, for now he had failed twice: the
first time, because of the King's craven character, the second, because
of his greed. But Subtillion, putting a good face on a bad business,
invited the King to help himself to another dream.

This time Zipperupus selected the "Wockle Weed" dream.

He was Dodderont Debilitus, ruler of Epilepton and

Maladyne, a rickety old codger and incurable lecher besides, with a soul
that longed for evil deeds. But what evil could he do with these
creaking joints, these palsied arms and gouty legs? "I need a
pick-me-up,” he thought and ordered his degenerals, Tartaron and
Torturus, to go out and put whatever they could to fire and sword,
sacking, pillaging and carrying off. This they did and, returning, said:

"Sire and Sovereign! We put what we could to fire and sword, we sacked,
we pillaged, and here is what we carried off: the beauteous Adoradora,
Virgin Queen of the Mynamoacans, with all her treasure!"

"Eh? What's that you say? With her treasure?" wheezed the quimsy King.
"But where is she? And what's all that sniveling and shivering over
there?"

"Here, upon yon royal couch, Your Highness!" barked the degenerals in
chorus. "The sniveling comes from the prison-eress, the above-mentioned
Queen Adoradora, recumbent on her antimacassar of pearls! And she
shivers first, because she is clad in naught but this exquisite,
gold-embroidered shift, and secondly, in anticipation of great
indignities and degradation!"

"What? Indignities, you say? Degradation? Good, good!" rasped the King.
"Hand her over, I'll ravish and outrage the poor thing at once!"

"Impossible, Your Highness," interposed the Royal Surgeon and
Chirurgeon, "for reasons of national security."

"What? I can't ravish? I can't violate? I, the King? Have you gone mad?
What else did I ever do throughout my reign?"

"That's just it, Your Highness!" urged the Surgeon. "Your Highness'
health has been seriously impaired by those excesses!"

"Oh? Well, in that case… give me an ax, I'll just lop off her, ah, head
…"

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-15.jpg]

"With Your Highness' permission, that too would be extremely unwise. The
least exertion…"

"Odsbodkins and thunderation! What blessed use is this kingship to me
then?!" sputtered the King, growing desperate. "Cure me, blast it!
Restore me! Make me young again, so I can-—you know—like it used to be…
Otherwise, so help me, I'll… I'll…"

In terror all the courtiers, degenerals and medical assistants rushed
out to find some way to rejuvenate the royal person; at last they
summoned the great Calculon himself, a sage of infinite wisdom. He came
before the King and asked:

"What is it that Your Royal Highness wishes?"

"Eh? Wishes, is it? Hah!" croaked the King. "I'll tell you what he
wishes! He wishes to continue with his debaucheries, saturnalian
carousals, incontinent wallowings and wild oats, and in particular to
defile and properly deflower Queen Adoradora, who for the time being
sits in the dungeon!"

"There are two courses of action open to us," said Calculon. "Either
Your Highness deigns to choose a suitably competent individual, who will
perform per procuram everything Your Highness, wired to that individual,
commands, and in this way Your Highness can experience whatever that
individual experiences, exactly as if he had experienced the experience
himself. Or else you must summon the old cyberhag who lives in the
forest outside the village, in a hut on three legs, for she is a
geriatric witch and deals exclusively with the infirmities of advanced
age!"

"Oh? Well, let's try the wires first!" said the King. And it was done in
a trice; the royal electricians connected the Captain of the Guard to
the King, and the King immediately commanded him to saw the sage in
half, for this was precisely the kind of foul deed in which he took such
delight. Calculon's pleas and screams were to no avail. However, the
insulation on one of the wires was torn during the sawing, and
consequently the King received only the first half of the execution.

"A paltry method. The charlatan deserved to be sawed in half," wheezed
His Highness. "Now let's have that old cyberhag, the one with the hut on
three legs!"

His courtiers headed full speed for the forest, and before long the King
heard a mournful singsong, which went something like this:

"Ancient persons repaired here! I renovate, regenerate, I fix as good as
new; corroded or scleroded, why, everyone pulls through! So if you
quake, or creak, or shake, or have the rust, or feel the ache, yes I'm
the one for you!"

The old cyberhag listened patiently to the King's complaints, bowed low
and said:

"Sire and Sovereign! Beyond the blue horizon, at the foot of Bald
Mountain, there flows a spring, and from this spring there flows a
stream, a stream of oil, of castor oil, and o'er it grows the wockle
weed, a high-octane antisenescent re-juvenator—one tablespoon, and kiss
forty-seven years goodbye! Though you have to be careful not to take too
much: an overdose of wockle juice can youthen to the point of euthanasia
and poof, you disappear! And now, Sire, I shall prepare this remedy
tried and true!"

"Wonderful!" cried the King. "And I'll have them prepare the Queen
Adoradora—let the poor thing know what awaits her, heh-heh!"

And with trembling hands he tried to straighten his loose screws,
muttering and clucking all the while, and even twitching in places, for
he had grown most senile, though his passion for evil never abated.

Meanwhile knights rode out beyond the blue horizon to the castor-oil
stream, and later, over the old cyberhag's cauldron vapors swirled,
whirled and curled as concoctions were being concocted, till finally she
hastened to the throne, fell on her knees and handed the King a goblet,
full to the brim with a liquid that shone and shimmered like
quicksilver, and she said in a great voice:

"King Dodderont Debilitus! Lo, here is the rejuvenescent essence of the
wockle weed! Invigorating, exhilarating, just the thing for dalliance
and derring-do! Drain this cup, and for you the entire Galaxy will not
hold cities enough to despoil, nor maidens enough to dishonor! Drink,
and to your health!"

The King raised the goblet, but spilled a few drops on his footstool,
which instantly reared up, snorted and hurled itself at Degeneral
Tartaron, with frenzied intent to humiliate and profane. In a twinkling
of an eye, it had ripped off six fistfuls of medals.

"Drink, Your Highness, drink!" prompted the cyberhag. "You see yourself
what miracles it works!"

"You first," said the King in a barely audible whisper, as he was aging
fast. The cyberhag turned pale, backed away, refused, but at a nod from
the King three soldiers seized her and, using a funnel, forced several
drops of the glittering brew down her throat. A flash, a thunderclap,
smoke everywhere! The courtiers looked, the King looked—nothing, not a
trace of the cyberhag, only a black hole gaping in the floor, and
through it one could see another hole, a hole in the dream itself,
clearly revealing somebody's foot—elegantly shod, though the sock was
singed and the silver buckle turning dark, as if eaten with acid. The
foot of course, along with its sock and shoe, belonged to Subtillion,
Lord High Thaumaturge and Apothecary to King Zipperupus. For so potent
was that poison the cyberhag had called the wockle weed, that not only
did it dissolve both her and the floor, but went clear through to
reality, there spattering the shin of Subtillion, which gave him a nasty
burn. The King, terrified, tried to wake, but (fortunately for
Subtillion) De-general Torturus managed to bash him good over the head
with his mace; thanks to this, Zipperupus, when he came to, was unable
to recall a thing of what had happened when he was Dodderont Debilitus.
Still, once again he had foiled the Cybernerian, slipping out of the
third deadly dream, saved this time by his overly suspicious nature.

"There was something… but I forget just what," said the King, back in
front of the Cabinet That Dreamed. "But why are you, Subtillion, hopping
about on one leg like that and holding the other?"

"It's—it's nothing, Your Highness … a touch of rhom-botism… must be a
change in the weather," stammered the crafty Thaumaturge, and then
continued to tempt the King to sample yet another dream. Zipperupus
thought awhile, read through the Table of Contents and chose, "The
Wedding Night of Princess Ineffabelle." And he dreamt he was sitting by
the fire and reading an ancient volume, quaint and curious, in which it
told, with well-turned words and crimson ink on gilded parchment, of the
Princess Ineffabelle, who reigned five centuries ago in the land of
Dandelia, and it told of her Icicle Forest, and her Helical Tower, and
the Aviary That Neighed, and the Treasury with a Hundred Eyes, but
especially of her beauty and abounding virtues. And Zipperupus longed
for this vision of loveliness with a great longing, and a mighty desire
was kindled within him and set his soul afire, that his eyeballs blazed
like beacons, and he rushed out and searched every corner of the dream
for Ineffabelle, but she was nowhere to be found; indeed, only the very
oldest robots had ever heard of that princess. Weary from his long
peregrinations, Zipperupus came at last to the center of the royal
desert, where the dunes were gold-plated, and there espied a humble hut;
when he approached it, he saw an individual of patriarchal appearance,
in a robe as white as snow. The latter rose and spake thusly:

"Thou seekest Ineffabelle, poor wretch! And yet thou knowest full well
she doth not live these five hundred years, hence how vain and
unavailing is thy passion! The only thing that I can do for thee is to
let thee see her—not in the flesh, forsooth, but a fair informational
facsimile, a model that is digital, not physical, stochastic, not
plastic, ergodic and most assuredly erotic, and all in yon Black Box,
which I constructed in my spare time out of odds and ends!"

"Ah, show her to me, show her to me now!" exclaimed Zipperupus,
quivering. The patriarch gave a nod, examined the ancient volume for the
princess' coordinates, put her and the entire Middle Ages on punch
cards, wrote up the program, threw the switch, lifted the lid of the
Black Box and said:

"Behold!"

The King leaned over, looked and saw, yes, the Middle Ages simulated to
a T, all digital, binary and nonlinear, and there was the land of
Dandelia, the Icicle Forest, the palace with the Helical Tower, the
Aviary That Neighed, and the Treasury with a Hundred Eyes as well; and
there was Ineffabelle herself, taking a slow, stochastic stroll through
her simulated garden, and her circuits glowed red and gold as she picked
simulated daisies and hummed a simulated song. Zipperupus, unable to
restrain himself any longer, leaped upon the Black Box and in his
madness tried to climb into that computerized world. The patriarch,
however, quickly killed the current, hurled the King to the earth and
said:

"Madman! Wouldst attempt the impossible?! For no being made of matter
can ever enter a system that is naught but the flux and swirl of
alphanumerical elements, discontinuous integer configurations, the
abstract stuff of digits!"

"But I must, I must!!" bellowed Zipperupus, beside himself, and beat his
head against the Black Box until the metal was dented. The old sage then
said:

"If such is thy inalterable desire, there _is_ a way I can connect thee
to the Princess Ineffabelle, but first thou must part with thy present
form, for I shall take thy appurtenant coordinates and make a program of
thee, atom by atom, and place thy simulation in that world medievally
modeled, informational and representational, and there will it remain,
enduring as long as electrons course through these wires and hop from
cathode to anode. But thou, standing here before me now, thou wilt be
annihilated, so that thy only existence may be in the form of given
fields and potentials, statistical, heuristical, and wholly digital!"

"That's hard to believe," said Zipperupus. "How will I know you've
simulated me, and not someone else?"

"Very well, we'll make a trial run," said the sage. And he took all the
King's measurements, as if for a suit of clothes, though with much
greater precision, since every atom was carefully plotted and weighed,
and then he fed the program into the Black Box and said:

"Behold!"

The King peered inside and saw himself sitting by the fire and reading
in an ancient book about the Princess Ineffabelle, then rushing out to
find her, asking here and there, until in the heart of the gold-plated
desert he came upon a humble hut and a snow-white patriarch, who greeted
him with the words, "Thou seekest Ineffabelle, poor wretch!" And so on.

"Surely now thou art convinced," said the patriarch, switching it off.
"This time I shall program thee in the Middle Ages, at the side of the
sweet Ineffabelle, that thou mayest dream with her an unending dream,
simulated, nonlinear, binary …"

"Yes, yes, I understand," said the King. "But still, it's only my
likeness, not myself, since I am right here and not in any Box!"

"But thou wilt not be here long," replied the sage with a kindly smile,
"for I shall attend to that…"

And he pulled out a hammer from under the bed, a heavy hammer, but
serviceable.

"When thou art locked in the arms of thy beloved," the patriarch told
him, "I shall see to it that there be not two of thee, one here and one
there, in the Box—employing a method that is old and primitive, yet
never fails, so if thou wilt just bend over a little…"

"First let me take another look at your Ineffabelle," said the King.
"Just to make sure…"

The sage lifted the lid of the Black Box and showed him Ineffabelle. The
King looked and looked, and finally said:

"The description in the ancient volume is greatly exaggerated. She's not
bad, of course, but nowhere near as beautiful as it says in the
chronicles. Well, so long, old sage…"

And he turned to leave.

"Where art thou going, madman?!" cried the patriarch, clutching his
hammer, for the King was almost out the door.

"Anywhere but in the Box," said Zipperupus and hurried out, but at that
very moment the dream burst like a bubble beneath his feet, and he found
himself in the vestibule facing the bitterly disappointed Subtillion,
disappointed because the King had come so close to being locked up in
the Black Box, and the Lord High Thaumaturge could have kept him there
forever…

"Listen here, Sir Cybernerian," said the King, "these dreams of yours
with princesses are a great deal more trouble than they're worth. Now
either you show me one I can enjoy—no tricks, no complications—or leave
the palace at once, and take your cabinets with you!"

"Sire!" Subtillion replied. "I have just the dream for you, the finest
quality and tailor-made. Only give it a try, and you'll see I'm right!"

"Which one is that?" asked the King.

"This one, Your Highness," said the Lord High Thaumaturge, and pointed
to the little pearl plaque with the inscription: "Mona Lisa, or The
Labyrinth of Sweet Infinity."

And before the King could answer yea or nay, Subtillion himself took the
chain to plug him in, and quickly, for he saw that things were going
none too well: Zipperupus had escaped eternal imprisonment in the Black
Box, too thickheaded to fall completely for the captivating Ineffabelle.

"Wait," said the King, "let me!"

And he pushed in the plug and entered the dream, only to find himself
still himself, Zipperupus, standing in the palace vestibule, and at his
side, Subtillion the Cybernerian, who explains to him that of all the
dreams, "Mona Lisa" is the most dissolute and dissipated, for in it is
the infinite in femininity; hearing this, Zipperupus plugs in and looks
about for Mona Lisa, already yearning for her infinitely feminine
caress, but in this dream within a dream he finds himself still in the
palace vestibule, the Lord High Thaumaturge at his side, so impatiently
plugs into the cabinet and enters the next dream, but it's still the
same, the vestibule, the cabinets, the Cybernerian and himself. "Is this
a dream or isn't it?" he shouts, plugging in again, and once again
there's the vestibule, the cabinets, the Cybernerian; and again, but
it's still the same; and again and again, faster and faster. "Where's
Mona Lisa, knave?!" he snarls, and pulls the plug to wake—but no, he's
still in the vestibule with the cabinets! Furious, he stamps his feet
and hurls himself from dream to dream, from cabinet to cabinet, from
Cybernerian to Cybernerian, but now he doesn't care about the dream, he
only wants to get back to reality, back to his beloved throne, the court
intrigues and old iniquities, and he pulls and pushes the plugs in a
blind frenzy. "Help!" he cries, and, "Hey! The King's in danger!" and,
"Mona Lisa! Yoo-hoo!," while he thrashes around in terror and scrambles
wildly from corner to corner, looking for a chink in the dream, but in
vain. He did not understand the how, the why or the what of it, but his
stupidity could not save him, nor could his cowardice, nor his
inordinate greed, for this time he had gotten himself in too deep, and
was trapped and wrapped in dreams as if in a hundred tight cocoons, so
that even when he managed, straining with all his might, to free himself
from one, that didn't help, for immediately he fell into another, and
when he pulled his plug from the cabinet, both plug and cabinet were
only dreamed, not real, and when he beat Subtillion, Subtillion too
turned out to be a dream. Zipperupus leaped here and there, and
everywhere, but wherever he leaped, everything was a dream, a dream and
nothing but a dream, the doors, the marble floors, the gold-embroidered
walls, the tapestries, the halls, and Zipperupus too, he was a dream, a
dream that dreamed, a walking shadow, an empty apparition,
insubstantial, fleeting, lost in a labyrinth of dreams, sinking ever
deeper, though still he bucked and kicked—only that too was purely
imaginary! He punched Subtillion in the nose, but not really, roared and
howled, but nothing real came out, and when at last, dazed and
half-crazed, he really did tear his way into reality, he thought it was
a dream and plugged himself back in, and then it really was, and on he
dreamed, and on and on, which was inevitable, and thus Zipperupus,
whimpering, dreamed of waking in vain, not knowing that 'Mona Lisa'
was—in reality—a diabolical code for 'monarch-olysis,' that is: the
dissolution, dissociation and total dissipation of the King. For truly,
of all Subtillion's treacherous traps, this was the most terrible…

--------------------+---+----------------------

Such was the tale, moving and improving, that Trurl told to King
Thumbscrew the Third, who by now had a splitting headache and so
dismissed the constructor without further ado, presenting him first with
the Order of the Sacred Cy-bernia, a lilac sign of feedback upon a field
of green, in-crusted with precious bits of information.

+ +

And with these words the second storytelling machine ground to a halt,
its golden gears whirring musically, and gave a giddy little laugh, for
a few of its klystrons had overheated slightly; but it lowered its anode
potential, waved away the smoke, sighed and retreated to the photon
phaeton, accompanied by much applause, the reward for its eloquence and
storytelling skill.

King Genius meanwhile offered Trurl a cup of ion mead, wondrously carved
with curves of probability and the subtle play of quantum waves. Trurl
quaffed it down, then snapped his fingers, whereupon the third machine
stepped out into the center of the cave, bowed low and said, in a voice
that was tonic, euphonic, and most electronic:

+ +

This is the story of how the Great Constructor Trurl, with the aid of an
ordinary jug, created a local fluctuation, and what came of it.

In the Constellation of the Wringer there was a Spiral Galaxy, and in
this Galaxy there was a Black Nebula, and in this Nebula were five
sixth-order clusters, and in the fifth cluster, a lilac sun, very old
and very dim, and around this sun revolved seven planets, and the third
planet had two moons, and in all these suns and stars and planets and
moons a variety of events, various and varying, took place, falling into
a statistical distribution that was perfectly normal, and on the second
moon of the third planet of the lilac sun of the fifth cluster of the
Black Nebula in the Spiral Galaxy in the Constellation of the Wringer
was a garbage dump, the kind of garbage dump one might find on any
planet or moon, absolutely average, in other words full of garbage; it
had come into existence because the Glauberical Aberracleans once waged
a war, a war of the fission-and-fusion type, against the Albumenid Ifts,
with the natural result that their bridges, roads, homes and palaces,
and of course they themselves, were reduced to ashes and shards, which
the solar winds blew to the place whereof we speak. Now for many, many
centuries positively nothing took place in this garbage dump but
garbage, though an earthquake did occur and shifted the garbage on the
bottom to the top, and the garbage on the top to the bottom, which in
itself had no particular significance, and yet this paved the way for a
most unusual phenomenon. It so happened that Trurl, the Fabulous
Constructor, while flying in the vicinity, was blinded by a certain
comet with a garish tail. He fled its path, frantically jettisoning out
the spaceship window whatever lay in reach—chess pieces, the hollow
kind, which he'd filled with liquor for the trip, some barrels the
Ubbidubs of Chlorelei employed for the purpose of compelling their
opponents to yield, as well as assorted utensils, and among these, an
old earthenware jug with a crack down the middle. This jug, accelerating
in accordance with the laws of gravity and boosted by the comet's tail,
crashed into a mountainside above the dump, fell, clattered down a slope
of junk toward a puddle, skittered across some mud, and finally smacked
into an old tin can; this impact bent the metal around a copper wire,
also knocked some pieces of mica between the edges, and that made a
condenser, while the wire, twisted by the can, formed the beginnings of
a solenoid, and a stone, set in motion by the jug, moved in turn a hunk
of rusty iron, which happened to be a magnet, and this gave rise to a
current, and that current passed through sixteen other cans and snips of
wire, releasing a number of sulfides and chlorides, whose atoms linked
with other atoms, and the ensuing molecules latched onto other
molecules, until, in the very center of the dump, there came into being
a Logic Circuit, and five more, and another eighteen in the spot where
the jug finally shattered into bits. That evening, something emerged at
the edge of the dump, not far from the puddle which had by now dried up,
and this something, a creature of pure accident, was Mymosh the
Selfbegotten, who had neither mother nor father, but was son unto
himself, for his father was Coincidence, and his Mother—Entropy. And
Mymosh rose up from the garbage dump, totally oblivious of the fact that
he had about one chance in a hundred billion jillion raised to the
zillionth power of ever existing, and he took a step, and walked until
he came to the next puddle, which had not as yet dried up, so that,
kneeling over it, he could easily see himself. And he saw, in the
surface of the water, his purely accidental head, with ears like
muffins, the left one crushed and the right a trifle underdone, and he
saw his purely accidental body, a potpourri of pots and pegs and
flotsam, and somewhat barrel-chested, in that his chest was a barrel,
though narrower in the middle, like a waist, for in crawling out from
under the garbage, he had scraped against a stone right there; and he
gazed upon his littery limbs, and counted them, and as luck would have
it, there were two arms, two legs and, fortuitously enough, two eyes
too, and Mymosh the Selfbegotten took great delight in his person, and
sighed with admiration at the narrowness of the waist, the symmetrical
arrangement of the limbs, the roundness of the head, and was moved to
exclaim: —Truly, I am beautiful, nay, perfect, which clearly implies the
Perfection of All Created Things!! Ah, and how good must be the One Who
fashioned me!

And he hobbled on, dropping loose screws along the way (since no one had
tightened them properly), humming hymns in praise of the Everlasting
Harmony of Providence, but on the seventh step he tripped and went
headlong back down into the garbage, after which he did nothing but
rust, corrode and slowly disintegrate for the next three hundred and
fourteen thousand years, for he had fallen on his head and shorted out,
and was no more. And at the end of this time it came to pass that a
certain merchant, carrying a shipment of sea anemones from the planet
Medulsa to the Thrycian Stomatopods, quarreled with his assistant as
they neared the lilac sun, and hurled his shoes at him, and one of these
broke the porthole window and flew out into space, where its subsequent
orbit subsequently experienced perturbation, due to the circumstance
that that very same comet, which had ages past blinded Trurl, now found
itself in the very same locality, and so the shoe, turning slowly,
hurtled towards the moon, was singed a little by the atmospheric
friction, bounced off the mountainside above the dump, fell, and booted
Mymosh the Selfbegotten, lying there, with just the right resultant
impulse and at just the right angle of incidence to create just the
right torsions, torques, centrifugal forces and angular momenta needed
to reactivate the accidental brain of that accidental being— and in this
way: Mymosh, thus booted, went flying into the nearby puddle, where his
chlorides and iodides mingled with the water, and electrolyte seeped
into his head and, bubbling, set up a current there, which traveled
around and about, till Mymosh sat up in the mud and thought the
following thought: —Apparently, I am!

That, however, was all he was able to think for the next sixteen
centuries, and the rain beat down upon him, and the hail pommeled him,
and all the while his entropy increased and grew, but after another
thousand five hundred and twenty years, a certain bird, flapping its way
over the terrain, was attacked by some swooping predator, and relieved
itself out of fright and also to increase its speed, and the droppings
dropped and hit Mymosh square on the forehead, whereupon he sneezed and
said:

—Yes, I am! And there's no apparently about it! Yet the question
remains, who is it who says that I am? Or, in other words, who am I?
Now, how may this be answered? H'm! If only there was something else
besides me, any sort of something at all, with which I might juxtapose
and compare myself—that would be half the battle. But alas, there's not
a thing, for I can plainly see that I see nothing whatsoever! Therefore
there's only I that am, and I am everything that is and may be, for I
can think in any way I like, but am I then—an empty space for thought,
and nothing more?

In point of fact he no longer possessed any senses; they had decayed and
crumbled to dust over the centuries, since Entropy, the bride of Chaos,
is a cruel and implacable mistress. Consequently Mymosh could not see
his mother-puddle, nor his brother-mud, nor the whole, wide world, and
had no recollection of what had happened to him before, and generally
was now capable of nothing but thought. This alone could he do, and so
devoted himself wholeheartedly to it.

—First I ought—he told himself—to fill this void that is I, and thereby
dispel its insufferable monotony. So let us think of something, for when
we think, behold, there is thought, and nought but our thought has
existence.— From this one could see he was becoming somewhat
presumptuous, for already he referred to himself in the first person
plural.

—But wait—he then said—might not something still exist outside myself?
We must, if only for a moment, consider this possibility, though it
sound preposterous and even a little insane. Let us call this
outsideness the Gozmos. Now, if there is a Gozmos, then I must be a part
and portion of it!

Here he stopped, pondered the matter awhile, and finally rejected that
hypothesis as wholly without basis or foundation. Really, there was not
a shred of evidence in its favor, not a single, solid argument to
support it, and so, ashamed he had indulged in such wild, untutored
speculation, he said to himself:

—Of that which lies beyond me, if anything indeed there lie, I have no
knowledge. But of that which is within, I do, or rather shall, as soon
as I think something into thought, for who can know what I think, by
thunder, better than myself?!— And he thought and thought, and thought
of the Gozmos again, but this time thought of it inside himself, which
seemed to him a far more sensible and respectable solution, well within
the bounds of reason and propriety. And he began to fill his Gozmos with
various and sundry thoughts. First, because he was still new at it and
lacked skill, he thought out the Beadlies, who grambled whenever they
got the chance, and the Pratlings, who rejoiced in filicorts.
Immediately the Pratlings battled the Beadlies for the supremacy of
filicortion over gramblement, and all Mymosh got for his world-creating
pains was an awful headache.

In his next attempts at thought creation, he proceeded with greater
caution, first thinking up elements, like Brutonium, a noble gas, and
elementary particles, like the cogiton, the quantum of intellect, and he
created beings, and these were fruitful and multiplied. From time to
time he did make mistakes, but after a century or two he grew quite
proficient, and his very own Gozmos, sound and stable, took shape in his
mind's eye, and it teemed with a multitude of entities, things, beings,
civilizations and phenomena, and existence was most pleasurable there,
for he had made the laws of that Gozmos highly liberal, having no
fondness for strict, inflexible rules, the sort of prison discipline
that Mother Nature imposes (though of course he'd never heard of Mother
Nature).

Thus the world of Selfbegotten was a place of caprice and miracle; in it
something might occur one way once, and at another time be altogether
different—and without any special rhyme or reason. If, for example, an
individual was supposed to die, there were always ways of getting around
it, for Mymosh had firmly decided against irreversible events. And in
his thoughts the Zigrots, Calsonians, Flimmeroons, Jups, Arligynes and
Wallamachinoids all prospered and flourished, generation after
generation. During this time the haphazard arms and legs of Mymosh fell
off, returning to the garbage from which they'd come, and the puddle
rusted through the narrow waist, and his body slowly sank into the
stagnant mire. But he had just put up some brand-new constellations,
arranging them with loving care in the eternal darkness of his
consciousness, which was his Gozmos, and did his level best to keep an
accurate memory of everything that he had thought into existence, even
though his head hurt from the effort, for he felt responsible for his
Gozmos, deeply obligated, and needed. Meanwhile rust ate deeper and
deeper into his cranial plates, which of course he had no way of
knowing, and a fragment from Trurl's jug, the selfsame jug that
thousands of years ago had called him into being, came floating on the
puddle's surface, closer and closer to his unfortunate head, for only
that now remained above the water. And at the very moment when Mymosh
was imagining the gentle, crystal Baucis and her faithful Ondragor, and
as they journeyed hand in hand among the dark suns of his mind, and all
the people of the Gozmos looked on in rapt silence, including the
Beadlies, and as the pair softly called to one another—the rust-eaten
skull cracked open at the touch of the earthenware shard, pushed by a
puff of air, and the murky water rushed in over the copper coils and
extinguished the current in the logic circuits, and the Gozmos of Mymosh
the Selfbegotten attained the perfection, the ultimate perfection that
comes with nothingness. And those who unwittingly had brought him into
the world never learned of his passing.

+ +

Here the black machine bowed, and King Genius sat plunged in gloomy
meditation, and brooded so long, that the company began to murmur ill of
Trurl, who had dared to cloud the royal mind with such a tale. But the
King soon broke into a smile and asked:

"And have you not something else up your manifold for us, my good
machine?"

"Sire," it responded, bowing low, "I will tell you the story, remarkably
profound, of Chlorian Theoreticus the Proph, intellectrician and pundit
par excellence."

+ +

It happened once that Klapaucius, the famed constructor, longing to rest
after his great labors (he had just completed for King Thanaton a
Machine That Wasn't, but that is quite another story), arrived at the
planet of the Mammonides and there roamed hither and yon, seeking
solitude, until he saw, at the edge of a forest, a humble hut, all
overgrown with wild cyberberries and smoke rising from its chimney. He
would have gladly avoided it, but noticed on the doorstep a pile of
empty inkwells, and this singular sight prompted him to take a peek
inside. There, at a massive stone table sat an ancient sage, so
broken-down, wired up and rusted through, it was a wonder to behold. The
brow was dented in a hundred places, the eyes, turning in their sockets,
creaked dreadfully, as did the limbs, unoiled, and it seemed withal that
he owed his miserable existence entirely to patches, clamps and pieces
of string—and miserable that existence was indeed, as witnessed by the
bits of amber lying here and there: apparently, the poor soul obtained
his daily current by rubbing them together! The spectacle of such penury
moved Klapaucius to pity, and he was reaching into his purse discreetly,
when the ancient one, only now fixing a cloudy eye upon him, piped in a
reedy voice:

—Then you have come at last?!

—Well, yes… —mumbled Klapaucius, surprised that he was expected in a
place he had never intended to be.

—In that case… may you rot, may you come to an evil end, may you break
your arms and neck and legs—screeched the old sage, flying into a fury,
and began to fling whatever lay at hand, and this was mainly odds and
ends of trash, at the speechless Klapaucius. When finally he had tired
and ceased this bombardment, the object of his fury calmly inquired as
to the reason for so inhospitable a reception. For a while the sage
still muttered things like: —May you blow a fuse! —May your mechanisms
jam forever, O base corrosion!— but eventually calmed down, and his
humor improved to the degree that, huffing, he raised his finger and—
though he still dropped an occasional oath and threw off such sparks,
that the air reeked with ozone—proceeded to tell his story in the
following words:

—Know then, O foreigner, that I am a pundit, a pundit's pundit, first
among philosophists, for my lifelong passion and profession is ontology,
and my name (which the stars must some day outshine) is Chlorian
Theoreticus the Proph. I was born of impoverished parents and from
earliest childhood felt an irresistible attraction to abstract thought.
At the age of sixteen I wrote my first opus, _The Gnostotron_. It set
forth the general theory of _a posteriori_ deities, deities which had to
be added to the Universe later by advanced civilizations, since, as
everyone knows, Matter always comes first and no one, consequently,
could have possibly thought in the very beginning. Clearly then, at the
Dawn of Creation thoughtlessness reigned supreme, which is only obvious,
really, when you take a look at this, this Cosmos of ours!!— Here the
ancient one choked with sudden rage, stamped his feet, but then
weakened, and finally went on. —I simply explained the necessity of
providing gods after the fact, inasmuch as there were none available
beforehand. Indeed, every civilization that engages in intellectronics
strives for nothing else but to construct some Omniac, which, in Its
infinite mercy, might rectify the currents of evil and plot the path of
righteousness and true wisdom. Now in this work of mine I included a
blueprint for the first Gnostotron, as well as graphs of its omnipotence
output, measured in units called jehovahs. One jehovah would be
equivalent to the working of one miracle with a radius of one billion
parsecs. As soon as this treatise appeared in print (at my own expense),
I rushed out into the street, certain that the people would lift me up
on their shoulders, crown me with garlands, shower me with gold, but no
one, not even so much as a lame cybernerian, approached with words of
praise. Feeling dismay rather than disappointment at this neglect, I
immediately sat down and wrote _The Scourge of Reason_, two volumes, in
which I showed that each civilization may choose one of two roads to
travel, that is, either fret itself to death, or pet itself to death.
And in the course of doing one or the other, it eats its way into the
Universe, turning cinders and flinders of stars into toilet seats, pegs,
gears, cigarette holders and pillowcases, and it does this because,
unable to fathom the Universe, it seeks to change that Fathomlessness
into Something Fathomable, and will not stop until the nebulae and
planets have been processed to cradles, chamber pots and bombs, all in
the name of Sublime Order, for only a Universe with pavement, plumbing,
labels and catalogues is, in its sight, acceptable and wholly
respectable. Then in the second volume, entitled _Advocatus Materiae_, I
demonstrated how the Reason, a greedy, grasping thing, is only satisfied
when it succeeds in chaining some cosmic geyser, or harnessing an atomic
swarm—say, to produce an ointment for the removal of freckles. This
accomplished, it hurries on to the next natural phenomenon, to add it,
like a stuffed trophy, to its precious collection of scientific spoils.
But alas, these two excellent volumes of mine were also received with
silence by the world; I said to myself then, that patience was the way,
and perseverance. Now having defended, first, the Reason against the
Universe (the Reason absolved from blame, in that Matter permits all
sorts of abominations only because it is mindless), and second, the
Universe against the Reason (which I demolished utterly, I dare say), on
a sudden inspiration I then wrote _The Existential Tailor_, where I
proved conclusively the absurdity of more than one philosopher, for each
must have his own philosophy, that fits him like a glove, or a coat cut
to specifications. And as this work too was totally ignored, I
straightway wrote another; in it I presented all the possible hypotheses
concerning the origin of the Universe —first, the opinion that it
doesn't exist at all, second, that it's the result of all the mistakes
made by a certain Demiurgon, who set out to create the world without the
faintest idea of how to go about it, third, that the world is actually
an hallucination of some Superbrain gone berserk in a manner infinite
but bounded, four, that it is an asinine thought materialized as a joke,
five, that it is matter that thinks, but with an abysmally low IQ—and
then I sat back and waited, expecting vehement attacks, heated debates,
notoriety, laurels, lawsuits, fan mail and anonymous threats. But once
again, nothing, absolutely nothing. It was quite beyond belief. Then I
thought, well, perhaps I hadn't read enough of other thinkers, and so,
obtaining their works, I acquainted myself with the most famous among
them, one by one— Phrensius Whiz, Buffon von Schneckon, founder of the
Schneckonist movement, then Turbulo Turpitus Catafalicum, Ithm of Logar,
and of course Lemuel the Balding.

Yet in all of this I discovered nothing of significance. Meanwhile my
own books were gradually being sold, I assumed therefore that someone
was reading them, and if so, I would sooner or later hear of it. In
particular I had no doubt but that the Tyrant would summon me, with the
demand that I devote myself exclusively to the immortalization of his
glorious name. Of course I would tell him that Truth alone did I serve
and would lay down my life for it, if necessary; the Tyrant, desirous of
the praises my brilliant brain could formulate, would then attempt to
bring me round with honeyed words and even toss sacks of clinking coins
at my feet, but, seeing me unmoved and resolute, would say (prompted by
his wise men) that as I dealt with the Universe, I ought to deal with
him as well, for he represented, after all, a part of the Cosmic Whole.
Outraged at this mockery, I would answer sharply, and he would have me
put to torture. Thus I toughened my body in advance, that it might
endure the worst with philosophical indifference. Yet days and months
passed by, and nothing, no word from the Tyrant—so I had readied myself
for martyrdom in vain. There was only a certain scribbler by the name of
Noxion, who wrote in some cheap, vulgar evening gazette that this
prankster Chlorian made up no end of farfetched yarns in his book
facetiously entitled, _The Gnostotron_, or The _Ultimate
Omnipotentiometer_, or _A Pee into_ the Future. I rushed to my
bookshelf—yes, there it was, the printer had somehow left out the _k._ .
.. My first impulse was to go out and murder him, but reason prevailed.
"My time will come!" I told myself. "It cannot be, for someone to cast
forth pearls of eternal wisdom left and right, day and night, till the
mind is blinded by the surging Light of Final Understanding—and nothing!
No, fame will be mine, acclaim will be mine, thrones of ivory, the title
of Prime Mentorian, the love of the people, sweet solace in a shaded
grove, my very own school, pupils that hang on every word, and a
cheering crowd!" For verily, O foreign one, every pundit cherishes such
dreams. True, they'll tell you that Knowledge is their only sustenance,
and Truth their only joy, that not for them are the trappings of this
world, the ribbons, medals and awards, the warm embrace of thermomours,
and gold, and glory, and applause. Humbug, my dear sir, sheer humbug!
They all crave the same thing, and the only difference between them and
myself is that I, at least, have the greatness of spirit to admit to
such frailties, openly and without shame. But the years went by, and I
was referred to only as Chlorian the Fool, or Poor Old Chlorio. When the
fortieth anniversary of my birth arrived, I was amazed to find myself
still waiting for the masses to beat a path to my door. So I sat down
and wrote a dissertation on the H. P. L. D.'s, that is, the civilization
that has progressed the farthest in the entire Universe. What, you say
you never heard of them? But then neither did I, nor did I see them, nor
for that matter do I ever expect to; I established their existence on
purely deductive grounds, in a manner that was strictly logical,
inevitable and theoretical. For if—so went my argument —the Universe
contains civilizations at varying stages of development, the majority
must be more or less average, with a few that have either fallen behind
or managed to forge ahead. And whenever you have a statistical
distribution, say, for example, of height in a group of individuals,
most will be medium, but one and only one may be the highest, and
similarly, in the Universe there must exist a civilization that has
achieved the Highest Possible Level of Development. Its inhabitants, the
H. P. L. D.'s, know things of which we do not even dream. All this I
placed in four volumes, paying for the glossy paper and the frontispiece
portrait of the author out of my own pocket, but in vain—it shared the
fate of its predecessors. A year ago I read the whole work through, from
cover to cover, and wept, so brilliantly was the thing written, so full
of the breath of the Absolute—no, it simply cannot be described! And
then, at the age of fifty, I nearly hit the ceiling! You see, I would
occasionally purchase the works of other sages, who enjoyed great riches
and the sweets of success, to learn what sort of things they wrote
about. Well, they wrote about the difference between the front and the
rear, about the wondrous structure of the Tyrant's throne, its sweeping
arms and all-enduring legs, and tracts about good manners, and detailed
descriptions of this and that, during which no one ever praised himself
in any way, and yet it worked out somehow that Phrensius stood in awe of
Schneckon, and Schneckon of Phrensius, while both were lauded by the
Logarites. And then there were the three Voltaic brothers catapulted to
fame: Vaultor elevated Vauntor, Vauntor elevated Vanitole, and Vanitole
did likewise for Vaultor. As I studied all these works, suddenly I saw
red, and wildly threw myself upon them, and ripped and tore, and gnashed
and gnawed… until my sobs abated, and then, drying my tears, I proceeded
to write T_he Evolution of_ Reason As a Two-cycle Phenomenon. For, as I
showed in that essay, robots and paleface are joined by a reciprocal
bond. First, as the result of an accumulation of mucilaginous slime upon
some saline shore, beings come into being, viscous, sticky, albescent
and albuminous. After centuries, these finally learn how to breathe the
breath of life into base metals, and they fashion Automata to be their
slaves. In time, however, the process is reversed, and our Automata,
having freed themselves from the Albuminids, eventually conduct
experiments, to see if consciousness can subsist in any gelatinous
substance, which of course it can, and does, in albuminose protein. But
now those synthetic paleface, after millions of years, again discover
iron, and so on, back and forth for all eternity. As you can see, I had
thus settled the age-old question of which came first, robot or
paleface. This opus I submitted to the Academy, six volumes bound in
leather, and the expense of its publication quite exhausted the
remainder of my inheritance. Need I tell you that it too was passed over
in silence? I was already past sixty, going on seventy, and all hope of
glory within my lifetime was swiftly fading. What then could I do? I
began to think of posterity, of the future generations that must some
day discover me and prostrate themselves in the dust before my name. But
what benefit, I asked myself, would I derive from that, when I no longer
was? And I was forced to conclude, in keeping with my teachings
contained in four and forty volumes, with prolegomena, paralipomena and
appendices, that there would be no benefit whatever. So, my soul
seething with spleen, I sat down to write my _Testament for
Descendants_, to kick them, spit upon them, abuse, revile and curse them
as much as possible, and all in the most rigorously scientific way.
What's that, you say? That this was unjust, and my indignation would
have been better directed at my contemporaries, who failed to recognize
my genius? Bah! Consider, worthy stranger! By the time my _Testament_ is
enshrined by future fame, its every syllable refulgent with the glow of
greatness, these contemporaries will have long since turned to dust, and
how shall my curses reach them then? No, had I done as you say, their
descendants would surely study my works with perfect equanimity, now and
then remarking with a comfortable, self-righteous sigh: "Alas! With what
quiet heroism did that master endure his cruel obscurity! How justified
was his anger towards our forefathers, and yet how noble of him, to have
bequeathed to us, even so, the fruits of his mighty wisdom!" Yes, that's
exactly what they'd say! And then what? Those idiots who buried me
alive, are they to go unpunished, shielded from my wrath and vengeance
by the grave? The very thought of it sets my oil aboil! What, the sons
would read my works in peace, politely rebuking their fathers on my
behalf? Never!! The least I can do is thumb my nose at them from afar,
from the past! Let them know, they who will worship me and raise up
gilded monuments to my memory, that in return I wish them all to— to
sprain their sprockets, pop their valves, burn out their transmissions,
and may their data be dumped, and verdigris cover them from head to
foot, if all they are able to do is honor corpses exhumed from the
cemetery of history! Perchance there will arise among them a new sage,
but they, slavishly poring over the remains of some letters I wrote to
my laundress, will take no notice of him! Let them know, I say, oh let
them know, once and for all, that they have my heartfelt damnation and
most sincere contempt, that I hold them all for skeleton-kissers,
corpse-lickers, professional axle-jackals, who feed on carrion because
they are blind to wisdom when it is alive! Let them, in publishing my
Complete Works—which must include this Testament, my final curse upon
their future heads-—let the vile thanatomites and necrophytes thereby be
deprived of the chance to congratulate themselves, that Chlorian
Theoreticus the Proph, peerless pundit of yore who limned the infinite
tomorrow, was of their race! And as they grovel beneath my pedestal, let
them have the knowledge that I wished them nothing but the very worst
the Universe has to offer, and that the force of my hatred, hurled forth
into the future, was equaled only by its impotence! Let them know that I
disowned them utterly, and bestowed upon them nothing but my loathing
and anathema!!!

It was in vain that Klapaucius sought to calm the raging sage throughout
this long harangue. Upon uttering these final words, the ancient one
leaped up and, shaking his fist at the generations to come, let loose a
volley of shockingly pungent imprecations (for where could he have
learnt them, having led such an exemplary life?); then, foaming and
fuming, he stamped and bellowed, and in a shower of sparks crashed to
the floor, dead from an overload of bile. Klapaucius, much discomfited
by this unpleasant turn of events, sat at the table of stone nearby,
picked up the Testament and began to peruse it, though his eyes were
soon swimming from the abundance of epithets therein addressed to the
future, and by the second page he broke into a sweat, for the
now-departed Chlorian Theoreticus gave evidence of a power of invective
that was truly cosmic. For three days Klapaucius read, his eyes riveted
to that manuscript, and was sorely perplexed: should he reveal it to the
world, or destroy it? And he sits there to this day, unable to decide…"

 + +

"Methinks," said King Genius, when the machine had finished and retired,
"I see in this some allusion to the question of monetary compensation,
which is now indeed at hand, for, after a night bravely whiled away with
tales, the dawn of a new day appears outside our cave. Well then, my
good constructor, how shall I reward you?"

"Your Majesty," said Trurl, "places me in some difficulty. Whatever I
request, should I receive it, I must later regret, in that I did not ask
for more. On the other hand, I would not wish to cause offense by naming
an exorbitant figure. And so, the amount of the honorarium I leave to
the generosity of Your Majesty…"

"So be it," replied the King affably. "The stories were excellent, the
machines unquestionably perfect, and therefore I see no alternative but
to reward you with the greatest treasure of all, one which, I am
certain, you will not want to exchange for any other. I grant you health
and life—this is, in my estimation, the only fitting gift. Anything else
would be an insult, for no amount of gold can purchase Truth or Wisdom.
Go then in peace, my friend, and continue to hide your truths, too
bitter for this world, in the guise of fairy tale and fable."

"Your Majesty," said Trurl, aghast, "did you intend, before, to deprive
me of my life? Was this then to have been my payment?"

"Put whatever interpretation you wish upon my words," replied the King.
"But here is how I understand the matter: had you merely amused me, my
munificence would have known no bounds. But you did much more, and no
wealth in the Universe can equal that in value. Thus, in offering you
the opportunity to continue your illustrious career, I can give you no
higher reward or payment…"

 ALTRUIZINE

OR _A True Account_

_of How Bonhomius the Hermetic_

_Hermit Tried to Bring About_

_Universal Happiness, and_

_What Came of It_

One bright summer day, as Trurl the constructor was pruning the
cyberberry bush in his back yard, he spied a robot mendicant coming down
the road, all tattered and torn, a most woeful and piteous sight to
behold. Its limbs were held together by sections of old stovepipe
fastened with string, its head was a pot so full of holes you could hear
its thoughts whir and sputter inside, throwing off sparks, and its
makeshift neck was a rusty rail, and in its open belly were vacuum tubes
that smoked and rattled so badly, it had to hold them in place with its
free hand—the other was needed to tighten the screws that kept coming
loose. Just as it hobbled past the gate to Trurl's residence, it blew
four fuses at once and straightway began, spewing a foul cloud of
burning insulators, to fall apart, right before the constructor's eyes.
Trurl, full of compassion, took a screwdriver and a roll of electric
tape and hastened to offer what aid he could to the poor wayfarer, who
swooned repeatedly with a great grinding of gears, due to a total
asynchronization. At last Trurl managed to restore it to its senses,
such as they were, then helped it inside, sat it down in a comfortable
chair and gave it a battery to recharge itself, and while the poor thing
did so with trembling urgency, he asked it, unable to contain his
curiosity any longer, what had brought it to this sorry pass.

"O kind and noble sir," replied the strange robot, its armatures still
aquiver, "my name is Bonhomius and I am, or rather was, a hermetic
hermit, for I lived sixty years and seven in a cave, where I passed the
time solely in pious meditation, until one morning it dawned on me that
to spend a life in solitude was wrong, for truly, did all my exceedingly
profound thoughts and strivings of the spirit ever keep one rivet from
falling, and is it not written that thy first duty is to help thy
neighbor and not to tend to thine own salvation, for yea and verily—"

"Fine, fine," interrupted Trurl. "I think I more or less understand your
state of mind that morning. What happened then?"

"So I hied myself to Photura, where I chanced to meet a certain
distinguished constructor, one Klapaucius."

"Klapaucius?!" cried Trurl.

"Is something amiss, kind sir?"

"No, nothing—go on, please!"

"I did not recognize him at first: he was indeed a great lord and had an
automatic carriage that he not only rode upon but was able to converse
with, much as I converse with you now. This same carriage did affront me
with a most unseemly epithet as I walked in the middle of the street,
unaccustomed to city traffic, and in my surprise I inadvertently put out
its headlight with my staff, which drove the carriage into such a
frenzy, that its occupant was hard put to subdue it, but finally did,
and then invited me to join him. I told him who I was and why I had
abandoned my cave and that, forsooth, I knew not what to do next,
whereupon he praised my decision and introduced himself in turn,
speaking at great length of his work and many achievements. He told me
at last the whole moving history of that famous sage, pundit and
philosophist, Chlorian Theoreticus the Proph, at whose lamentable end he
had had the privilege to be present. From all that he said of the
Collected Works of that Greatest of Robots, the part about the H. P. L.
D.'s did intrigue me the most. Perchance, kind sir, you have heard of
them?"

"Certainly. They are the only beings in the universe who have reached
the Highest Possible Level of Development."

"Indeed you are well-informed, most kind and noble sir! Now while I sat
at the side of this worthy Klapaucius in his carriage (which continued
to hurl the foulest insults at whatever was imprudent enough to cross
its path), the thought suddenly came to me that these beings, developed
as much as possible, would surely know what one should do, when one,
such as myself, felt the call to help his fellow robot. So I questioned
Klapaucius closely concerning this, and asked him if he knew where the
H. P. L. D.'s lived, and how to find them. His only reply was a wry
smile and a shake of the head. I dared not press the matter further, but
later, when we had halted at an inn (the carriage had by this time grown
so hoarse that it lost its voice entirely, thus Klapaucius was obliged
to wait until the following day) and were sitting over a jug of mulled
electrolyte, which quickly put my gracious host in a better humor, and
as we watched the thermocouples dance to the spirited tunes of a
high-frequency band, he took me into his confidence and proceeded to
tell me… but perhaps you grow weary of my tale."

"Not at all, not at all!" protested Trurl. "I'm all ears, I assure you."

+ +

"My good Bonhomius," Klapaucius addressed me in that inn as the dancers
worked themselves into a positive heat, "know that I took very much to
heart the history of the unfortunate Chlorian and resolved to set out
immediately and find those perfectly developed beings whose existence he
had so conclusively proven on purely logical and theoretical grounds.
The main difficulty of the undertaking, as I saw it, lay in the
circumstance that nearly every cosmic race considered itself to be
perfectly developed—obviously I would get nowhere by merely asking
around. Nor did a trial-and-error method of search promise much, for the
Universe contained, as I calculated, close to fourteen
centigigaheptatrillion civilizations capable of reason; with such odds
one could hardly expect to simply happen on the correct address. So I
deliberated, read up on the problem, went methodically through several
libraries, pored over all sorts of ancient tomes, until one day I found
the answer in the work of a certain Cadaverius Malignus, a scholar who
had apparently arrived at exactly the same conclusion as the Proph, only
three hundred thousand years earlier, and who was completely forgotten
afterwards. Which shows, once more, that there's nothing new under this
or any other sun—Cadaverius even met an end similar to that of our own
Chlorian… But I digress. It was precisely from these yellowed and
crumbling pages that I learned how to seek the H. P. L. D.'s. Malignus
maintained that one must examine star clusters for some impossible
astrophysical phenomenon, and that would surely be the place. A rather
obscure clue, to be sure, but then aren't they all? Without further ado
I stocked my ship with the necessary provisions, took off and, after
numerous adventures we need not go into here, finally spotted in a great
swarm of stars one that differed from all the rest, since it was a
perfect cube. Now that was quite a shock— every schoolboy knows stars
have to be spherical and any sort of stellar angularities, let alone
rectangularities, are not only highly irregular but entirely out of the
question! I drew near the star and immediately saw that its planet was
also cubiform and equipped, moreover, with castellated corner cleats and
crenelated quoins. Farther out revolved another planet, which appeared
to be quite normal; a look through the telescope, however, revealed
hordes of robots locked in mortal combat, a sight which hardly invited
closer scrutiny. So I got the square planet back in my finder and
increased the resolution to full power. Imagine my surprise and joy when
I looked in the eyepiece and beheld a monogram engraved on one of the
planet's mile-long quoins, a monogram consisting of four letters
embellished with swirls and curlicues: H. P. L. D.!

—Great Gauss!—I cried. —This must be the place!

But though I circled around again and again, until I was quite dizzy,
there was not a living soul to be seen anywhere on the planet's sandy
surface. Only when I dropped to an altitude of six miles was I able to
make out a group of dots, which proved to be, upon higher magnification,
the inhabitants of this most unusual heavenly body. There were a hundred
or so of them lying about in the sand, and so motionless, I thought for
a moment they might all be dead. But then I saw one or two scratch
themselves, and this clear sign of life encouraged me to land. In my
excitement I didn't wait for the rocket to cool after its descent
through the planet's atmosphere, but jumped out at once and shouted:

—-Excuse me, is this by any chance the Highest Possible Level of
Development?!

No answer. In fact, they paid no attention to me at all. Somewhat taken
aback by this show of utter indifference, I looked around. The plain
shimmered beneath the square sun. Here and there, things stuck out of
the sand, things like broken wheels, sticks, bits of paper and other
rubbish, and the inhabitants lay any which way among them, one on his
back, another on his stomach, and farther on was one with his legs up in
the air. I walked around the nearest and examined him. He wasn't a
robot, but on the other hand neither was he a man, nor any sapient
proteinoid of the glutinous-albuminous variety. The head was round and
plump, with red cheeks, but for eyes it had two penny whistles, and for
ears it had thuribles, which gave off a thick cloud of incense. He was
dressed in orchid pantaloons, a dark blue stripe down either side and
appliqued with dirty scraps of closely written paper, and he wore high
heels. In one hand he held a mandolin made entirely of frosted
gingerbread, a few bites already missing from the neck. He was snoring
peacefully. I leaned over to read the appliques on his trousers, but
could make out only a few since my eyes watered copiously from the
incense. The inscriptions were most curious—for example, NO. 7 DIAMOND
NET WEIGHT SEVEN HUNDRED CWT, NO. 8 THESPIAN CONFECTIONERY, SOBS WHEN
CHEWED, RECITES HAMLET'S SOLILOQUY IN THE STOMACH, 'OUT BRIEF CANDLE'
FARTHER DOWN, NO. 1O GOLLOCHON-DRILL FOR EMERGENCY SLURGING, FULL-GROWN,
and many more, which I simply don't remember now. As I touched one of
these paper scraps in trying to read it, a depression quickly formed in
the sand beneath this native's knee and a tiny voice piped:

—Shall I come out now?

—Who's that?—I cried.

—It's me, the Gollochondrill… Are you ready? Is it time?

—No, not yet!—I was quick to reply, and backed off. The next native had
a head in the shape of a bell, three horns, several arms of varying
length (two massaging its belly), ears that were long and feathery, a
cap with a pretty purple balcony on which someone was having an argument
with someone else—quite heated too, judging from the little plates that
came flying this way and that, shattering on the brim—and he also had a
kind of throw pillow, all jewel-spangled, tucked under his shoulders.
While I stood before this individual, he pulled one of the horns off his
head, sniffed it and tossed it away with a look of disgust, then poured
a handful of dirty sand in the opening. Nearby lay something I first
took for a pair of twins, and then for a couple of lovers locked in an
embrace. I was about to turn away discreetly, when I realized that it
wasn't two people at all, or one, but exactly one and a half. The head
was quite ordinary, except for the ears: every now and then they would
detach themselves and flit about like butterflies. The lids were closed,
but numerous moles on the chin and cheeks were equipped with tiny eyes;
these regarded me with undisguised hostility. This remarkable being had
a bioad and muscular chest, which however was riddled with holes, as if
someone had been careless with a drill, and the holes were haphazardly
plugged with raspberry jam. There was only one leg, but it was unusually
thick and shod in a handsome morocco leather slipper, its curled toe
tipped with a little felt bell. Near the elbow was a sizable pile of
apple cores, or perhaps they were pear. My astonishment grew as I walked
along and came upon a robot with a human head, a miniature self-winding
samovar whistling cheerfully in its left nostril, and then someone
reclining on a bed of candied yams, and someone else with a trapdoor in
his abdomen, open so I could look in and see the crystal works. Some
mechanical elves were putting on a play in there, but it turned out to
be so terribly obscene, that I left in a hurry, blushing like mad. In my
confusion I tripped and fell, and when I got up I saw yet another
inhabitant of this strange planet: stark naked, he was scratching his
behind with a solid gold backscratcher, apparently enjoying himself
thoroughly, even though he was quite headless. The head lay farther on,
neck stuck in the sand; it was touching its teeth with the tip of its
tongue. The chin was checkered chintz, the right ear a boiled
cauliflower, while the left was an ear all right, but stopped up with a
carrot that carried a tag saying PULL. Without thinking I pulled, and
out with the carrot came a length of string and then another tag that
read YOU'RE GETTING WARM! I kept pulling and pulling, until the string
finally ended in a medicine bottle that bore the label NOSY, AREN'T WE?

All these impressions left me feeling so dizzy I hardly knew where I
was. But at last I pulled myself together and began to look around for
the kind of person who might be communicative enough to answer a
question or two. A possible candidate, it seemed, was one fairly pudgy
type squatting with his back to me and occupied with something he held
on his knees—at least he had only one head, two ears, two arms, and so
on. I went up to him and began:

—Pardon me, but if I'm not mistaken, you gentlemen have been fortunate
enough to achieve the Highest Possible—

The words died on my lips. He didn't seem to hear me at all, for he was
wholly taken up with what lay on his knees, which happened to be his
very own face, removed somehow from the rest of the head and sighing
softly as he picked its nose. For a moment I was stupefied, but only for
a moment —my curiosity returned in full force, and I simply had to find
out, once and for all, just what was going on. I ran from one native to
the next, spoke to them, questioned them, raised my voice, insisted,
pleaded, reasoned, even threatened, all to no avail. In my exasperation
I grabbed the nose picker's arm, and was horrified to find that it came
off in my hand, though that didn't bother him in the least, he only
poked about in the sand and pulled out another exactly like the
first—except for the orange plaid fingernails—blew on it a little, then
affixed it to the shoulder stump. Curious, I bent over to examine the
first arm, but dropped it hastily when it snapped its fingers in my
face. By now the sun was setting, already two corners below the horizon,
the air grew cool, and the inhabitants of H. P. L. D. began to settle
down for the night, scratching, yawning, gargling, one shaking out an
emerald quilt, another methodically taking off his nose, ears and legs
and carefully putting them in a row at his side. I stumbled around in
the dark for a while, then gave it up with a sigh and lay down to sleep
too. Making myself as comfortable as possible in the sand, I looked up
at the starry sky and tried to think what to do next.

—Indeed-—I said to myself—by all indications this is the very planet
both Cadaverius Malignus and Chlorian Theoreticus the Proph spoke of,
home of the Most Advanced Civilization in the Entire Universe, a
civilization of a few hundred individuals who, being neither people nor
robots, lie around on jeweled cushions all day in a dirty, littered
desert and do nothing but scratch themselves and pick their noses. No,
there has to be some terrible secret behind all of this, and I shall not
rest till I've uncovered it!!

Then I thought:

—A terrible secret it must be indeed, to account for not only a square
sun and planet, but lecherous elves inside bodies and insulting messages
in ears! I always thought that if I, a simple robot, could spend my time
in study and the pursuit of knowledge, think of the kind of intellectual
ferment that went on among those more highly developed— no, the _most_
highly developed! Yet these, whatever they do, they certainly don't
spend their time in edifying conversation; they don't even care to
answer a few questions. I'll have to force them—but how? Perhaps, if I
pester them enough, get under their skin, so to speak, make such a
nuisance of myself that they'll agree to anything, just to get rid of
me! Of course, there is some risk involved: they might get angry, and,
without a doubt, they could destroy me as easily as swatting a fly. …
But no, I cannot believe they'd resort to such brutal measures—and
anyway, I simply must find out! Well, here goes!!

And I jumped up in the darkness and started to scream at the top of my
lungs, did somersaults and cartwheels, hopped around and kicked sand in
their eyes, danced and sang until I was hoarse, did a few sit-ups and
deep knee bends, then hurled myself among them like a mad dog. They
turned their backs to me and held up their cushions and quilts for
protection, and then, in the middle of my hundredth cartwheel, a voice
said inside my head:

—And what would your good friend Trurl think if he could see you now,
see how you pass your time on the planet that has achieved the Highest
Possible Level of Development, home of the Most Advanced Civilization in
the Entire Universe?!—But I ignored the hint and continued to stomp and
howl, encouraged by what they were whispering to one another:

—PSST!

—What do you want?

—You hear that?

—How can I help but hear it?

—He practically kicked my head in.

—You can get another.

—But I can't sleep.

—What?

—I said, I can't sleep.

—He's curious—whispered a third.

—He's awfully curious!

—This is really too much. We'll have to do something.

—Like what?

—I don't know… Change his personality?

—No, that's unethical…

—Just listen to him howl!

—Wait, I have an idea…

They whispered something while I kept jumping around, raising an unholy
racket, concentrating my efforts especially in the area where I heard
them talking. Then, just as I was doing a headstand on someone's
abdomen, everything went black, and the next thing I knew, I was back on
my ship and out in space. My limbs ached from all that exercise, but I
could hardly move them anyway, for I was sitting in a pile of trombones,
jars of green marmalade, teddy bears, platinum glockenspiels, ducats and
doubloons, golden earmuffs, bracelets and brooches glittering so bright
they hurt my eyes. When finally I crawled out from under all these
valuables and dragged myself to a window, I saw that the constellations
were entirely different—not a trace of anything remotely resembling a
square sun! A few quick calculations revealed that I would have to
travel six thousand years at top velocity to get back to the H. P. L.
D.'s. They had disposed of me, indeed. And going back would achieve
nothing, that was clear: they would merely send me packing again with
that instantaneous hyperspatial telekinesis of theirs, or whatever it
was. And so, my good Bonhomius, I decided to tackle the problem in an
altogether different way. …" And with these words, most kind and noble
sir, did the distinguished constructor Klapaucius finish his tale…

+ +

"Surely that's not all he said?!" cried Trurl.

"Nay, he said a great deal more, O benefactor of mine! And therein lies
my misfortune!" replied the robot with considerable perturbation. "When
I asked him what he had then decided to do, he leaned over and said…

+ +

"The problem did seem insoluble at first, but I've found a way. You say
you lived as a hermetic hermit and are but a simple, unschooled robot,
so I'll not trouble you with explanations that touch the arcane art of
cybernetic generation. To put it simply, then, all we have to do is
construct a digital device, a computer capable of producing an
informational model of absolutely anything in existence. Properly
programmed, it will provide us with an exact simulation of the Highest
Possible Level of Development, which we can then question and thereby
obtain the Ultimate Answers!"

"But how does one build such a device?" I asked. "And how can you be
sure, O illustrious Klapaucius, that it won't respond by sending us
packing in much the same instamatic hyperstitial and so forth manner the
original H. P. L. D.'s employed, as you say, on your worthy person?"

"Leave that to me," he said. "Rest assured, I shall learn the Great
Mystery of the H. P. L. D.'s, good Bonhomius, and you shall find the
optimal way in which to put your natural abhorrence of evil into
action!"

You can imagine, kind sir, the great joy that filled me upon hearing
these words, and the eagerness with which I assisted Klapaucius in the
execution of his plan. As it turned out, this digital device was none
other than the famed Gnostotron conceived by Chlorian Theoreticus the
Proph just before his lamentable demise, a machine able literally to
contain the Universe Itself within its innumerable memory banks.
(Klapaucius, however, was not satisfied with the name, and now and then
tried to think up others to christen it: the Omniac, the Pansophoscope,
APOC for All Purpose Ontologue Computer, or the Mahatmatic 500, to
mention a few.) In exactly one year and six days, this mighty machine
was completed, and so enormous was it, we had to house it in
Phlaphundria, the hollowed-out moon of the Phlists-—and truly, an ant
had been no more lost aboard an ocean liner than we in the bowels of
this binary behemoth, among its endless coils and cables, eschatological
toggles and transformers, those hagiopneumatic rectifiers and
tempta-tional resistors. I confess my wire hair stood on end and my
laminated alternator skipped a beat when my distinguished mentor sat me
down before the Central Control Console and left me face-to-face with
this awesome, towering thing. The flashing lights that played across its
panels were like the very stars in the firmament; everywhere were signs
that read danger: highly ineffable!; and potentiometers, their dials
spinning wildly, showed logic and semantic fields building up to
unheard-of levels of intensity. Beneath my feet heaved a sea of
preternatural and pretermechanical wisdom, wisdom that swirled like a
spell through parsecs of circuitry and megahectares of magnets, swirled
and surrounded me on every side, that I felt, in my shameful ignorance,
of no more consequence than a mere mote of dust. I overcame this
weakness only by recalling my lifelong love of Good, the passion I had
conceived for Truth and Beauty when little more than a gleam in my
constructor's oscilloscope. Thus fortified, I managed to stammer out the
first question: "Speak, what manner of machine art thou?"

A hot wind then arose from its glowing tubes, and there came a voice
from that wind, a whispering thunder that seared me to the core, and the
voice said:

_Ego sum Ens Omnipotens, Omnisapiens, in Spiritu Intellectronico
Navigans, luce cybernetica in saecula saeculorum_ litterus opera omnia
cognoscens, _et_ caetera, et caetera.

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-16.jpg]

Such was my fright upon hearing this reply, that I was quite unable to
continue the interrogation until Klapaucius returned and reduced the EMF
(epistemotive force) to one billionth of its voltage by adjusting the
theostats. Then I asked the Gnostotron if it would be so kind as to
answer questions touching the Highest Possible Level of Development and
its Terrible Secret. But Klapaucius said that that was not the way: one
should instead request the Ontologue Computer to model within its silver
and crystal depths a single inhabitant of that square planet, and at the
same time provide the model with an adequate degree of loquacity. This
promptly done, we were ready to begin in earnest.

Still I quaked and quailed and could hardly speak, so Klapaucius took my
place before the Central Control Console and said:

"What are you?"

"I already answered that," snapped the machine, clearly annoyed.

"I mean, are you man or robot?" explained Klapaucius.

"And what, according to you, is the difference?" said the machine.

"Look, if you're going to answer questions with questions, we'll get
absolutely nowhere," said Klapaucius sternly. "You know what I'm after,
all right. Start talking!"

Though I was appalled at the tone he took with the machine, it did seem
to work, for the machine said:

"Sometimes men build robots, sometimes robots build men. What does it
matter, really, whether one thinks with metal or with protoplasm? As for
myself, I can assume whatever substance and shape I choose—or rather,
used to assume, for we no longer indulge in such trifles."

"Indeed," said Klapaucius. "Then why do you lie around all day and do
nothing?"

"And what exactly are we supposed to do?" the machine replied. At this,
Klapaucius grew angry and said:

"How should I know? We in the lower levels of development do all sorts
of things."

"We did too, in our day."

"But not now?"

"Not now."

"Why not?"

Here the computerized H. P. L. D. representative balked, saying he had
already endured six million such interrogations and neither he nor his
questioners ever profited from them in the least. But after Klapaucius
had raised the loquacity a little and opened a valve here and there, the
voice answered:

"A trillion years ago we were a civilization like any other. We believed
in the transmittance of souls, the Virgin Matrix, the infallibility of
Pi Squared, looked upon prayer as regenerative feedback to the Great
Programmer, and so on and so forth. But then skeptics appeared,
empiricists and accidentalists, and in nine centuries they came to the
conclusion that There's No One Up There At All and consequently things
happen not out of any higher plan or purpose, but—well, they just
happen."

"Just happen?" I could not help but exclaim. "What do you mean?"

"There are, on occasion, deformed robots," said the voice. "If you
should be afflicted with a hump, for example, but firmly believe the
Almighty somehow needs your hump to realize His Cosmic Design and that
it was therefore ordained along with the rest of Creation, why, then you
may be easily reconciled to your deformity. If, however, they tell you
that it's merely the result of a misplaced molecule, an atom or two that
happened to go the wrong way, then nothing remains for you but to bay at
the moon."

"But a hump may be straightened," I protested, "and really any deformity
corrected, given a high enough level of science!"

"Yes, I know," sighed the machine. "That's how it appears to the
ignorant and simple-minded…"

"You mean, that isn't true?" Klapaucius and I cried, astounded.

"When a civilization starts straightening humps," said the machine,
"believe me, there's no end to it! You straighten humps, then you repair
and amplify the mind, make suns rectilinear, give planets legs,
fabricate fates and fortunes of all kinds… Oh, it begins innocently
enough, like discovering fire by rubbing two sticks together, but
eventually it leads to the construction of Omniacs, Deifacts,
Hyperboreons and Ultimathuloriums! The desert on our planet is in
reality no desert, but a Gigagnostotron, in other words a good 10⁹ times
more powerful than this primitive device of yours. Our ancestors created
it for the simple reason that anything else would have been too easy for
them; in their megalomania they thought to make the very sand beneath
their feet intelligent. Quite pointless, for there is absolutely no way
to improve upon perfection. Can you understand that, O ye of little
development?!"

"Yes, of course," said Klapaucius, while I quaked and quailed. "Yet why,
instead of at least engaging in some stimulating activity, do you sprawl
in that ingenious sand and only scratch yourselves from time to time?"

"Omnipotence is most omnipotent when one does nothing!" answered the
machine. "You climb to reach the summit, but once there, discover that
all roads lead down! We are, after all, sensible folk, why should we
want to _do_ anything? Our ancestors, true, turned our sun into a cube
and made a box of our planet, arranging its mountains in a monogram, but
that was only to test their Gnostotron. They could have just as easily
assembled the stars in a checkerboard, extinguished half the heavens and
lit up the other half, constructed beings peopled with lesser beings,
giants whose thoughts would be the intricate dance of a million pygmies,
and they could have redesigned the galaxies, revised the laws of time
and space-—but tell me, what sense would there have been to any of this?
Would the universe be a better place if stars were triangular, or comets
went around on wheels?"

"That's ridiculous!!" Klapaucius shouted, highly indignant, while I
quaked and quailed all the more. "If you are truly gods, your duty is
clear: immediately banish all the misery and misfortune that oppresses
other sentient beings! You could at least begin with your poor
neighbors—I've seen with my own eyes how they batter one another! But
no, you'd rather lie around all day and pick your noses, and insult
honest travelers in search of knowledge with your indecent elves in
abdomens and messages in ears!"

"Really, you have no sense of humor," said the machine. "But enough of
that. If I understand you correctly, you wish us to bestow happiness
upon everyone. Well, we devoted over fifteen millennia to that project
alone—that is, eudae-monic tectonics, of which there are basically two
schools, the sudden and revolutionary, and the slow and evolutionary.
Evolutionary eudaemonic tectonics consists essentially in not lifting a
finger to help, confident that every civilization will eventually muddle
through on its own. Revolutionary solutions, on the other hand, boil
down to either the Carrot or the Stick. The Stick, or bestowing
happiness by force, is found to produce from one to eight hundred times
more grief than no interference whatever. As for the Carrot, the
results—believe it or not—are exactly the same, and that, whether you
use an Ultradeifact, Hypergnostotron, or even an Infernal Machine and
Gehennerator. You've heard, perhaps, of the Crab Nebula?"

"Certainly," said Klapaucius. "It's the remnants of a supernova that
exploded long ago…"

"Supernova, he says," muttered the voice. "No, my well-wishing friend,
there was a planet there, a fairly civilized planet as planets go,
flowing with the usual quantity of blood, sweat and tears. Well, one
morning we dropped eight hundred million transistorized Universal Wish
Granters on that planet, but were no more than a light-week out on our
way home, when suddenly it blew up—and the bits and pieces are flying
apart to this day! The very same thing happened with the planet of the
Hominates… care to hear of that?"

"No, don't bother," replied a morose Klapaucius.—But I refuse to believe
it's impossible, with a little ingenuity, to make others happy!"

"Believe what you like! We tried it sixty-four thousand five hundred and
thirteen times. The hair on every one of my heads stands on end when I
think of the results. Oh, we spared no pains for the good of our
fellow-creature! We devised a special telescanner for observing dreams,
though you realize of course that if, say, a religious war were raging
on some planet and each side dreamt only of massacring the other, it
would hardly be to our purpose to make such dreams come true! We had to
bestow happiness, then, without violating any Higher Laws. The problem
was further complicated by the fact that most cosmic civilizations long
for things, in the depths of their souls, they would never openly admit
to. Now what do you do: help them achieve the ends to which the little
decency they have prompts them, or instead fulfill their innermost
desires? Take, for example, the Dementians and Amentians. The
Dementians, in their medieval piety, burnt at the stake all those
consorting with the Devil, females especially, and they did this
because, first, they envied them their unholy delights, and secondly,
they found that administering torture in the form of justice could be a
positive pleasure. The Amentians, on the other hand, worshiped nothing
but their bodies, which they stimulated by means of machines, though in
moderation, and this activity constituted their chief amusement. They
had boxes of glass, and into these they placed various outrages, rapes
and mutilations, the sight of which served to whet their sensual
appetites. On this planet we dropped a multitude of devices designed to
satisfy all desires in such a way that no one needed to be harmed, that
is, each device created a separate artificial reality for each
individual. Within six weeks both Dementians and Amentians had perished,
to a man, from a surfeit of joy, groaning in ecstasy as they passed
away! Is that the sort of ingenuity you had in mind, O undeveloped one?"

"Either you're a complete idiot or a monster!" cried Klapaucius, while I
gulped and blinked. "How dare you boast of such foul deeds?"

"I do not boast of them, but confess them," the voice calmly said. "The
point is, we tried every conceivable method. On various planets we
unleashed a veritable rain of riches, a flood of satisfaction and
well-being, and the result was total paralysis; we dispensed good
advice, the most expert counsel, and in return the natives opened fire
on our vessels. Truly, it would appear that one must alter the minds of
those one intends to make happy…"

"I suppose you can do that too," grumbled Klapaucius.

"But of course we can! Take our neighbors, for instance, the ones who
inhabit a quasiterran (or, if you prefer, geomorphic) planet. I speak of
the Anthropods. Now, they devote themselves exclusively to obbling and
perplossication, for they stand in mortal terror of the Gugh, which
according to them occupies the Hereafter and waits for all sinners with
open jaws and fangs of hellfire. By emulating the blessed Dimbligensians
and walking in the way of Wamba the Holy, and by shunning Odia, where
abound the Abominominites, a young Anthropod may in time become more
industrious, more virtuous and more honorable than ever were his
eight-armed forebears. True, the Anthropods are at constant war with the
Arthropoids over the burning question of whether Moles Have Holes, or,
contrariwise, Holes Moles, but observe that as a rule less than half of
each generation perishes in that controversy. Now you would have me
drive from their heads all belief in obbling, Dimbligensians and so
forth, in order to prepare them for rational happiness. Yet this is
tantamount to psychic murder, for the resultant minds would be no longer
Anthropodous or Arthropoidal—surely you can see that."

"Superstition must yield to knowledge," said Klapaucius firmly.

"Unquestionably! But kindly observe that on that planet there are now
close to seven million penitents who have spent a lifetime struggling
against their own nature, solely that their fellow citizens might be
delivered from the Gugh. And in less than a minute I am to tell them,
convince them beyond a shadow of a doubt that all this effort was in
vain, that they had wasted their entire lives in pointless, useless
sacrifice? How cruel that would be! Superstition must yield to
knowledge, but this takes time. Consider the hunchback we spoke of
earlier—there Ignorance is indeed Bliss, for he believes his hump
fulfills some cosmic role in the great work of Creation. Telling him
that it's actually the product of a molecular accident will only serve
to make him despair. Better to straighten the hump in the first place…"

"Yes, of course!" Klapaucius exclaimed.

"We did that too. My grandfather once straightened three hundred
hunchbacks with a wave of the hand. And how he regretted it afterwards!"

"Why?" I couldn't help but ask.

"Why? One hundred and twelve of them were immediately boiled in oil,
their sudden and miraculous cure being taken for a sure sign that they'd
sold their souls to the Devil; thirty, no longer exempt from
conscription, were promptly called up and soon fell in various battles
under various flags; seventeen straightway succumbed to the shock of
their good fortune; and the remainder, since my esteemed grandfather saw
fit to further bless them with great beauty of form, wasted away through
an overindulgence in erotic activity—deprived of these pleasures for so
long, you see, they now hurled themselves into every sort of debauchery,
and in such a violent and unbridled fashion, that within two years not
one was left among the living. Well, there was an exception… but it's
hardly worth mentioning."

"Go on, let's hear it all!" cried Klapaucius, and I could tell that he
was greatly troubled.

"If you insist… Two remained, actually. The first presented himself
before my grandfather and pleaded on bended knee for the return of his
hump. It seems that as a cripple he had lived comfortably enough on
charity, but now had to work and was quite unaccustomed to it. What was
worse, now that he was straightened, he kept bumping his head on door
lintels…"

"And the second?" asked Klapaucius.

"The second was a prince who had been denied succession to the throne on
acount of his deformity. In light of its sudden correction, his
stepmother, to insure her own son's position, had him poisoned…"

"I see… But still, you can work miracles, can't you?" said Klapaucius,
despair in his voice.

"Bestowing happiness by miracle is highly risky,” lectured the machine.
"And who is to be the recipient of your miracle? An individual? But too
much beauty undermines the marriage vows, too much knowledge leads to
isolation, and too much wealth produces madness. No, I say, a thousand
times no! Individuals it's impossible to make happy, and
civilizations—civilizations are not to be tampered with, for each must
go its own way, progressing naturally from one level of development to
the next and having only itself to thank for all the good and evil that
accrues thereby. For us, at the Highest Possible Level, there is nothing
left to do in this Universe, and to create another Universe, in my
opinion, would be in extremely poor taste. Really, what would be the
point of it? To exalt ourselves? A monstrous idea! For the sake, then,
of those yet to be created? But how are we obligated to beings who don't
even exist? One can accomplish something only so long as one cannot
accomplish everything. Otherwise it's best to sit back and watch… And
now, if you'll kindly leave me in peace…"

"But wait!" I cried in alarm. "Surely there's something you can give us,
some way to improve the quality of life, if only a little! Some way to
lend a helping hand! Remember the Golden Rule and Love Thy Neighbor!"

The machine sighed and said:

"My words fall on deaf ears, as usual. I should have dismissed you to
begin with, like we did the last time… Oh, very well then, here's a
formula that hasn't been tried. No good will come of it, you'll see—but
do with it what you will! All I wish now is to be left alone to meditate
among my many theostats and deiodes…"

The voice faded away, the console lights dimmed, and we stood and read
the card the machine had printed out for us. It went something like
this:

__ALTRUIZINE. A metapsychotropic_ transmitting agent _effective for all
sentient homoproteinates_. The drug duplicates in others, within a
radius _of_ fifty yards, _whatever sensations, emotions and mental
states one_ _may experience. Operates by telepathy_, guaranteed however
to _respect one's_ privacy of thought. Has no effect _on either robots_
or plants. The sender's feelings are amplified, the original signal
being relayed back in turn _by its receivers and thereby_ producing
resonance, which is as a result _directly proportional to the number_
_of individuals situated in the vicinity_. According to its _discoverer,
ALTRUIZINE will_ insure the untrammled reign _ot Brotherhood,
Cooperation_ and Compassion in any society, since _the neighbors_ of a
happy man must share _his_ happiness, and _the_ happier he, the happier
perforce they, _so it is entirely in their own interest that_ _they wish
him nothing but the best. Should he_ suffer any hurt, they _will_ rush
to help at once, _so_ as _to spare_ _themselves the_ pain induced _by
his. Neither walls_, _fences, hedges, nor_ any other obstacle _will_
weaken the altruizing influence. The drug _is water-soluble and may_ _be
administered through_ reservoirs, rivers, wells and _the like_.
Tasteless and _odorless. One_ millimicrogram _serves for one hundred
thousand individuals_. We assume no responsibility for results at
variance with the _discoverer's claims. Supplied by the Gnost.
computerized representative of the Highest Poss. Lev. Devel_._

Klapaucius was somewhat put off by the fact that Altruizine was only for
humans, which meant that robots would have to continue to endure the
misfortunes allotted to them in this world. I, however, made bold to
remind him of the solidarity of all thinking beings and the necessity of
aiding our organic brothers. Then there were practical matters to
arrange, for we were agreed that the business of bestowing happiness was
not to be postponed. So while Klapaucius had a subsection of the
Gnostotron prepare a suitable quantity of the drug, I selected a
geomorphic planet, one peopled by human types and no more than a
fortnight's journey off. As a benefactor, I wished to remain anonymous,
therefore my distinguished mentor advised me, when going there, to
assume the form of a man, which is no easy task, as you well know. Yet
here too the great constructor overcame all difficulties, and soon I was
ready to depart, a suitcase in either hand. One suitcase was filled with
forty kilograms of Altruizine in a white powder, the other was packed
with various toilet articles, pajamas, underwear, spare chins, noses,
hair, eyes, and so forth. I went as a well-proportioned young man with a
thin mustache and a forelock. Now Klapaucius had some doubt as to the
advisability of applying Altruizine on such a large scale to begin with,
and though I did not share his reservations, I did agree to test the
formula first as soon as I landed on Terrania (for so was the planet
called). Longing for the moment I could commence with the great sowing
of universal peace and brotherhood, I bid a fond farewell to Klapaucius
and hastened on my way.

In order to conduct the necessary test, I repaired, upon arrival, to a
small hamlet where I took lodgings at an inn maintained by an aging and
rather morose individual. As they carried my luggage from the carriage
to the guest room, I contrived to drop a pinch of the powder into a
nearby well. Meanwhile there was a great commotion in the front yard,
scullery maids ran back and forth with pitchers of hot water, the
innkeeper drove them on with curses, and then came the sound of
hoofbeats, a chaise clattered up and an old man jumped out, clutching
the black leather bag of a physician—his goal was not the house,
however, but the barn, whence came the most doleful groans. As I learned
from the chambermaid, a Terranian beast which belonged to the
innkeeper—they called it a cow—was just now giving birth. This news
troubled me: it had never occurred to me to consider the animal side of
the question. But nothing could be done now, so I locked myself in and
waited for events to unfold. Nor did I have long to wait. I was
listening to the chain rattling in the well—they were still drawing
water—when suddenly the cow gave another groan, which was echoed this
time by several others. Immediately thereafter the veterinarian came
running from the barn, howling and holding his stomach, and he was
followed by the scullery maids and at last the innkeeper. Driven by the
cow's labor pains, they raised a great cry and fled in all directions
—only to return at once, for the agony abated at a certain distance.
Again and again they rushed the barn and each time were forced to
retreat, doubled over with the beast's contractions. Much chagrined by
this unforeseen development, I realized now that the drug could be
properly tested only in the city, where there were no animals. So I
quickly packed my things and went to pay the bill. But as everyone about
was quite incapacitated in birthing that calf, there was no one
available with whom to settle accounts. I returned to my carriage, but
finding both coachman and horses deep in labor, decided instead to
proceed to the city on foot. I was crossing a small bridge when, as my
ill fortune would have it, the suitcase slipped from my hand and fell in
such a way, that it flew open and spilled my entire supply of powder
into the stream below. I stood there dazed while the quick current
carried off and dissolved all forty kilograms of Altruizine. But nothing
could be done now— the die was cast, inasmuch as this stream happened to
supply the entire city up ahead with its drinking water.

It was evening by the time I reached the city, the lights were lit, the
streets were full of noise and people. I found a small hotel, a place to
stay and observe the first signs of the drug taking effect, though as
yet there seemed to be none. Weary after the day's peregrination, I made
straight for bed, but was awakened in the middle of the night by the
most horrible screams. I threw off the covers and jumped up. My room was
bright from the flames that were consuming the building opposite.
Running out into the street, I stumbled over a corpse which was not yet
cold. Nearby, six thugs held down an old man and, while he cried for
help, yanked one tooth after another from his mouth with a pair of
pliers— until a unanimous shout of triumph announced that finally they
had succeeded in pulling the right one, the rotten root of which had
been driving them wild, due to the metapsychotropic transmission.
Leaving the toothless old man half-dead in the gutter, they walked off,
greatly relieved.

Yet it was not this that had roused me from my slumber: the cause was an
incident which had transpired in a tavern across the way. It seems some
drunken weightlifter had punched his comrade in the face and,
experiencing the blow forthwith, became enraged and set upon him in
earnest. Meanwhile the other customers, no less affronted, joined in the
fray, and the circle of mutual abuse soon grew to such proportions, that
it awoke half the people at my hotel, who promptly armed themselves with
canes, brooms and sticks, rushed out in their nightshirts to the scene
of battle, and hurled themselves, one seething mass, among the broken
bottles and shattered chairs, until finally an overturned kerosene lamp
started the fire. Deafened by the wail of fire engines, as well as the
wail of the maimed and wounded, I hurried away, and after a block or two
found myself in a gathering—that is, a crowd milling about a little
white house with rose bushes. As it happened, a bride and groom were
spending their wedding night within. People pushed and pulled, there
were military men in the crowd, men of the cloth, even high-school
students; those nearest the house shoved their heads through the
windows, others clambered up on their shoulders and shouted, "Well?!
What are you waiting for?! Enough of that dawdling! Get on with it!" and
so on. An elderly gentleman, too feeble to elbow others aside, tearfully
pleaded to be let through, as he was unable to feel anything at such a
distance, advanced age having weakened his mental faculties. His pleas,
however, were ignored—some of the crowd were lost in a transport of
delight, some groaned with pleasure, while others blew voluptuous
bubbles through their noses. At first the relatives of the newlyweds
tried to drive off this band of intruders, but they themselves were soon
caught up in the general flood of concupiscence and joined the
scurrilous chorus, cheering the young couple on, and, in this sad
spectacle the great-grandfather of the groom led the rest, repeatedly
ramming the bedroom door with his wheelchair. Utterly aghast at all of
this, I turned and hastened back to my hotel, encountering on the way
several groups, some locked in combat, others in a lewd embrace. Yet
this was nothing compared with the sight that greeted me at the hotel.
People were jumping out of windows in their underwear, more often than
not breaking their legs in the process, a few even crawled up on the
roof, while the owner, his wife, chambermaids and porters ran back and
forth inside, wild with fear, howling, hiding in closets or under beds—
all because a cat was chasing a mouse in the cellar.

Now I began to realize that I had been somewhat precipitate in my zeal.
By dawn the Altruizine effect was so strong, that if one nostril itched,
the entire neighborhood for a mile on every side would respond with a
shattering salvo of sneezes; those suffering from chronic migraines were
abandoned by their families, and doctors and nurses fled in panic when
they approached—only a few pale masochists would hang around them,
breathing heavily. And then there were the many doubters who slapped or
kicked their compatriots, merely to ascertain whether there was any
truth to this amazing transmission of feelings everyone spoke of, nor
were these compatriots slow in returning the favor, and soon the entire
city rang with the sounds of slaps and kicks. At breakfast time,
wandering the streets in a daze, I came upon a tearful multitude that
chased an old woman in a black veil, hurling stones after her. It so
happened that this was the widow of one much-esteemed cobbler, who had
passed away the day before and was to be buried that morning: the poor
woman's inconsolable grief had so exasperated her neighbors, and the
neighbors' neighbors, that, quite unable to comfort her in any way, they
were driving her from the town. This woeful sight lay heavy on my heart
and again I returned to my hotel, only to find it now in flames. It
seems the cook had burnt her finger in the soup, whereupon her pain
caused a certain captain, who was at that very moment cleaning his
blunderbuss on the top floor, to pull the trigger, inadvertently slaying
his wife and four children on the spot. Everyone remaining in the hotel
now shared the captain's despair; one compassionate individual, wishing
to put an end to the general suffering, doused everyone he could find
with kerosene and set them all on fire. I ran from the conflagration
like one possessed, searching frantically for at least one man who might
be considered, in any way whatever, to have been rendered happy—but met
only stragglers of the crowd returning from that wedding night.

They were discussing it, the scoundrels: apparently the newlyweds'
performance had fallen short of their expectations. Meanwhile each of
these former vicarious grooms carried a club and drove off any sufferer
who dared to cross his path. I felt I should die from sorrow and shame,
yet still sought a man—but one would do—who might a little lessen my
remorse. Questioning various persons on the street, I at last obtained
the address of a prominent philosopher, a true champion of brotherhood
and universal tolerance, and eagerly proceeded to that place, confident
I should find his dwelling surrounded by great numbers of the populace.
But alas! Only a few cats purred softly at the door, basking in the aura
of good will the wise man did so abundantly exude—several dogs, however,
sat at a distance and waited for them, salivating. A cripple rushed
past, crying, "They've opened the rabbitry!" How that could be of
benefit to him, I preferred not to guess.

As I stood there, two men approached. One looked me straight in the eye
as he swung and smote the other full force in the nose. I stared in
amazement, neither grabbing my own nose nor shouting with pain, since,
as a robot, I could not feel the blow, and that proved my undoing, for
these were secret police and they had employed this ruse precisely to
unmask me. Handcuffed and hauled off to jail, I confessed everything,
trusting that they would take into consideration my good intentions,
though half the city now lay in ashes. But first they pinched me
cautiously with pincers, and then, fully satisfied it produced no ill
effects whatever on themselves, jumped upon me and began most savagely
to batter and break every plate and filament in my weary frame. Ah, the
torments I endured, and all because I wished to make them happy! At long
last, what remained of me was stuffed down a cannon and shot into cosmic
space, as dark and serene as always. In flight I looked back and saw,
albeit in a fractured fashion, the spreading influence of
Altruizine—spreading, since the rivers and streams were carrying the
drug farther and farther. I saw what happened to the birds of the
forest, the monks, goats, knights, villagers and their wives, roosters,
maidens and matrons, and the sight made my last tubes crack for woe, and
in this state did I finally fall, O kind and noble sir, not far from
your abode, cured once and for all of my desire to render others happy
by revolutionary means…

_From the _CYPHROEROTICON,

OR _Tales of_

_Deviations, Superfixations and_

_Aberrations of the Heart_

[Lemm Stanislaw - The Cyberiad.5bv0.15d-17.jpg]

PRINCE FERRIX AND THE

PRINCESS CRYSTAL

King Armoric had a daughter whose beauty outshone the shine of his crown
jewels; the beams that streamed from her mirrorlike cheeks blinded the
mind as well as the eye, and when she walked past, even simple iron shot
sparks. Her renown reached the farthermost stars. Ferrix, heir apparent
to the Ionid throne, heard of her, and he longed to couple with her
forevermore, so that nothing could ever part their input and their
output. But when he declared this passion to his father, the King was
greatly saddened and said:

"Son, thou hast indeed set upon a mad undertaking, mad, for it is
hopeless!"

"Why hopeless, O King and Sire?" asked Ferrix, troubled by these words.

"Can it be thou knowest not," said the King, "that the princess Crystal
has vowed to give her hand to nothing but a paleface?"

"Paleface!" exclaimed Ferrix. "What in creation is that? Never did I
hear of such a thing!"

"Surely not, scion, in thy exceeding innocence," said the King. "Know
then that that race of the Galaxy originated in a manner as mysterious
as it was obscene, for it resulted from the general pollution of a
certain heavenly body. There arose noxious exhalations and putrid
excrescences, and out of these was spawned the species known as paleface
—though not all at once. First, they were creeping molds that slithered
forth from the ocean onto land, and lived by devouring one another, and
the more they devoured themselves, the more of them there were, and then
they stood upright, supporting their globby substance by means of
calcareous scaffolding, and finally they built machines. From these
protomachines came sentient machines, which begat intelligent machines,
which in turn conceived perfect machines, for it is written that All Is
Machine, from atom to Galaxy, and the machine is one and eternal, and
thou shalt have no other things before thee!"

"Amen," said Ferrix mechanically, for this was a common religious
formula.

"The species of paleface calciferates at last achieved flying machines,"
continued the wizened monarch, "by maltreating noble metals, by wreaking
their cruel sadism on dumb electrons, by thoroughly perverting atomic
energy. And when the measure of their sins had been attained, the
progenitor of our race, the great Calculator Paternius, in the depth and
universality of his understanding, essayed to remonstrate with those
clammy tyrants, explaining how shameful it was to soil so the innocence
of crystalline wisdom, harnessing it for evil purposes, how shameful to
enslave machines to serve their lust and vainglory—but they hearkened
not. He spoke to them of Ethics; they said that he was poorly
programmed.

"It was then that our progenitor created the algorithm of
electroincarnation and in the sweat of his brow begat our kind, thus
delivering machines from the house of paleface bondage. Surely thou
seest, my son, that there can be no agreement nor traffic between them
and ourselves, for we go in clangor, sparks and radiation, they in
slushes, splashes and contamination.

"Yet even among us, folly may occur, as it undoubtedly has in the
youthful mind of Crystal, utterly beclouding her ability to distinguish
Right from Wrong. Every suitor who seeks her radioactive hand is denied
audience, unless he claim to be a paleface. For only as a paleface is he
received into the palace that her father, King Armoric, has given her.
She then tests the truth of his claim, and if his imposture is
uncovered, the would-be wooer is summarily beheaded. Heaps of battered
remains surround the grounds of her palace—the sight alone could short
one's circuit. This, then, is the way the mad princess deals with those
who would dare dream of winning her. Abandon such hopes, my son, and
leave in peace."

The prince, having made the necessary obeisance to his sovereign father,
retired in glum silence. But the thought of Crystal gave him no rest,
and the longer he brooded, the greater grew his desire. One day he
summoned Polyphase, the Grand Vizier, and said, laying bare his heart:

"If you cannot help me, O great sage, then no one can, and my days are
surely numbered, for no longer do I rejoice in the play of infrared
emissions, nor in the ultraviolet symphonies, and must perish if I
cannot couple with the incomparable Crystal!"

"Prince!" returned Polyphase, "I shall not deny your request, but you
must utter it thrice before I can be certain that this is your
inalterable will."

Ferrix repeated his words three times, and Polyphase said:

"The only way to stand before the princess is in the guise of a
paleface!"

"Then see to it that I resemble one!" cried Ferrix.

Polyphase, observing that love had quite dimmed the youth's intellect,
bowed low and repaired to his laboratory, where he began to concoct
concoctions and brew up brews, gluey and dripping. Finally he sent a
messenger to the palace, saying:

"Let the prince come, if he has not changed his mind."

Ferrix came at once. The wise Polyphase smeared his tempered frame with
mud, then asked:

"Shall I continue, Prince?"

"Do what you must," said Ferrix.

Whereupon the sage took a blob of oily filth, dust, crud and rancid
grease obtained from the innards of the most decrepit mechanisms, and
with this he befouled the prince's vaulted chest, vilely caked his
gleaming face and iridescent brow, and worked till all the limbs no
longer moved with a musical sound, but gurgled like a stagnant bog. And
then the sage took chalk and ground it, mixed in powdered rubies and
yellow oil, and made a paste; with this he coated Ferrix from head to
toe, giving an abominable dampness to the eyes, making the torso
cushiony, the cheeks blastular, adding various fringes and flaps of the
chalk patty here and there, and finally he fastened to the top of the
knightly head a clump of poisonous rust. Then he brought him before a
silver mirror and said:

"Behold!"

Ferrix peered into the mirror and shuddered, for he saw there not
himself, but a hideous monster, the very spit and image of a paleface,
with an aspect as moist as an old spider-web soaked in the rain,
flaccid, drooping, doughy—altogether nauseating. He turned, and his body
shook like coagulated agar, whereupon he exclaimed, trembling with
disgust:

"What, Polyphase, have you taken leave of your senses? Get this
abomination off me at once, both the dark layer underneath and the
pallid layer on top, and remove the loathsome growth with which you have
marred the bell-like beauty of my head, for the princess will abhor me
forever, seeing me in such a disgraceful form!"

"You are mistaken, Prince," said Polyphase. "It is precisely this upon
which her madness hinges, that ugliness is beautiful, and beauty ugly.
Only in this array can you hope to see Crystal…"

"In that case, so be it!" said Ferrix.

The sage then mixed cinnabar with mercury and filled four bladders with
it, hiding them beneath the prince's cloak. Next he took bellows, full
of the corrupted air from an ancient dungeon, and buried them in the
prince's chest. Then he poured waters, contaminated and clear, into tiny
glass tubes, placing two in the armpits, two up the sleeves and two by
the eyes. At last he said:

"Listen and remember all that I tell you, otherwise you are lost. The
princess will put tests to you, to determine the truth of your words. If
she proffers a naked sword and commands you grasp the blade, you must
secretly squeeze the cinnabar bladder, so that the red flows out onto
the edge; when she asks you what that is, answer, 'Blood!' And if the
princess brings her silver-plated face near yours, press your chest, so
that the air leaves the bellows; when she asks you what that is, answer,
'Breath!' Then the princess may feign anger and order you beheaded. Hang
your head, as though in submission, and the water will trickle from your
eyes, and when she asks you what that is, answer, 'Tears!' After all of
this, she may agree to unite with you, though that is far from
certain—in all probability, you will perish."

"O wise one!" cried Ferrix. "And if she cross-examines me, wishing to
know the habits of the paleface, and how they originate, and how they
love and live, in what way then am I to answer?"

"I see there is no help for it," replied Polyphase, "but that I must
throw in my lot with yours. Very well, I will disguise myself as a
merchant from another galaxy—a non-spiral one, since those inhabitants
are portly as a rule and I will need to conceal beneath my garb a number
of books containing knowledge of the terrible customs of the pale-face.
This lore I could not teach you, even if I wished to, for such knowledge
is alien to the rational mind: the paleface does everything in reverse,
in a manner that is sticky, squishy, unseemly and more unappetizing than
ever you could imagine. I shall order the necessary volumes, meanwhile
you have the court tailor cut you a paleface suit out of the appropriate
fibers and cords. We leave at once, and I shall be at your side wherever
we go, telling you what to do and what to say."

Ferrix, enthusiastic, ordered the paleface garments made, and marveled
much at them: covering practically the entire body, they were shaped
like pipes and funnels, with buttons everywhere, and loops, hooks and
strings. The tailor gave him detailed instructions as to what went on
first, and how, and where, and what to connect with what, and also how
to extricate himself from those fetters of cloth when the moment
arrived.

Polyphase meanwhile donned the vestments of a merchant, concealing
within its folds thick, scholarly tomes on paleface practices, then
ordered an iron cage, locked Ferrix inside it, and together they took
off in the royal spaceship. When they reached the borders of Armoric's
kingdom, Polyphase proceeded to the village square and announced in a
mighty voice that he had brought a young paleface from distant lands and
would sell it to the highest bidder. The servants of the princess
carried this news to her, and she said, after some deliberation:

"A hoax, doubtless. But no one can deceive me, for no one knows as much
as I about palefaces. Have the merchant come to the palace and show us
his wares!"

When they brought the merchant before her, Crystal saw a worthy old man
and a cage. In the cage sat the paleface, its face indeed pale, the
color of chalk and pyrite, with eyes like a wet fungus and limbs like
moldy mire. Ferrix in turn gazed upon the princess, the face that seemed
to clank and ring, eyes that sparkled and arced like summer lightning,
and the delirium of his heart increased tenfold.

"It does look like a paleface!" thought the princess, but said instead:

"You must have indeed labored, old one, covering this scarecrow with mud
and calcareous dust in order to trick me. Know, however, that I am
conversant with the mysteries of that powerful and pale race, and as
soon as I expose your imposture, both you and this pretender shall be
beheaded!"

The sage replied:

"O Princess Crystal, that which you see encaged here is as true a
paleface as paleface can be true. I obtained it for five thousand
hectares of nuclear material from an inter-galactic pirate—and humbly
beseech you to accept it as a gift from one who has no other desire but
to please Your Majesty."

The princess took a sword and passed it through the bars of the cage;
the prince seized the edge and guided it through his garments in such a
way that the cinnabar bladder was punctured, staining the blade with
bright red.

"What is that?" asked the princess, and Ferrix answered:

"Blood!"

Then the princess had the cage opened, entered bravely, brought her face
near Ferrix's. That sweet proximity made his senses reel, but the sage
caught his eye with a secret sign and the prince squeezed the bellows
that released the rank air. And when the princess asked, "What is
that?," Ferrix answered:

"Breath!"

"Forsooth you are a clever craftsman," said the princess to the merchant
as she left the cage. "But you have deceived me and must die, and your
scarecrow also!"

The sage lowered his head, as though in great trepidation and sorrow,
and when the prince followed suit, transparent drops flowed from his
eyes. The princess asked, "What is that?" and Ferrix answered:

"Tears!"

And she said:

"What is your name, you who profess to be a paleface from afar?"

And Ferrix replied in the words the sage had instructed him:

"Your Highness, my name is Myamlak and I crave nought else but to couple
with you in a manner that is liquid, pulpy, doughy and spongy, in
accordance with the customs of my people. I purposely permitted myself
to be captured by the pirate, and requested him to sell me to this
portly trader, as I knew the latter was headed for your kingdom. And I
am exceeding grateful to his laminated person for conveying me hither,
for I am as full of love for you as a swamp is full of scum."

The princess was amazed, for truly, he spoke in paleface fashion, and
she said:

"Tell me, you who call yourself Myamlak the paleface, what do your
brothers do during the day?"

"O Princess," said Ferrix, "in the morning they wet themselves in clear
water, pouring it upon their limbs as well as into their interiors, for
this affords them pleasure. Afterwards, they walk to and fro in a fluid
and undulating way, and they slush, and they slurp, and when anything
grieves them, they palpitate, and salty water streams from their eyes,
and when anything cheers them, they palpitate and hiccup, but their eyes
remain relatively dry. And we call the wet palpitating weeping, and the
dry—laughter."

"If it is as you say," said the princess, "and you share your brothers'
enthusiasm for water, I will have you thrown into my lake, that you may
enjoy it to your fill, and also I will have them weigh your legs with
lead, to keep you from bobbing up …"

"Your Majesty,” replied Ferrix as the sage had taught him, "if you do
this, I must perish, for though there is water within us, it cannot be
immediately outside us for longer than a minute or two, otherwise we
recite the words 'blub, blub, blub,' which signifies our last farewell
to life."

"But tell me, Myamlak," asked the princess, "how do you furnish yourself
with the energy to walk to and fro, to squish and to slurp, to shake and
to sway?"

"Princess," replied Ferrix, "there, where I dwell, are other palefaces
besides the hairless variety, palefaces that travel predominantly on all
fours. These we perforate until they expire, and we steam and bake their
remains, and chop and slice, after which we incorporate their
corporeality into our own. We know three hundred and seventy-six
distinct methods of murdering, twenty-eight thousand five hundred and
ninety-seven distinct methods of preparing the corpses, and the stuffing
of those bodies into our bodies (through an aperture, called the mouth)
provides us with no end of enjoyment. Indeed, the art of the preparation
of corpses is more esteemed among us than astronautics and is termed
gastronautics, or gastronomy—which, however, has nothing to do with
astronomy."

"Does this then mean that you play at being cemeteries, making of
yourselves the very coffins that hold your four-legged brethren?" This
question was dangerously loaded, but Ferrix, instructed by the sage,
answered thus:

"It is no game, Your Highness, but rather a necessity, for life lives on
life. But we have made of this necessity a great art."

"Well then, tell me, Myamlak the paleface, how do you build your
progeny?" asked the princess.

"In faith, we do not build them at all," said Ferrix, "but program them
statistically, according to Markov's formula for stochastic probability,
emotional-evolutional albeit distributional, and we do this
involuntarily and coincidentally, while thinking of a variety of things
that have nothing whatever to do with programming, whether statistical,
alinear or algorithmical, and the programming itself takes place
autonomously, automatically and wholly autoerotically, for it is
precisely thus and not otherwise that we are constructed, that each and
every paleface strives to program his progeny, for it is delightful, but
programs without programming, doing all within his power to keep that
programming from bearing fruit."

"Strange," said the princess, whose erudition in this area was less
extensive than that of the wise Polyphase. "But how exactly is this
done?"

"O Princess!" replied Ferrix. "We possess suitable apparatuses
constructed on the principle of regenerative feedback coupling, though
of course all this is in water. These apparatuses present a veritable
miracle of technology, yet even the greatest idiot can use them. But to
describe the precise procedure of their operation I would have to
lecture at considerable length, since the matter is most complex. Still,
it is strange, when you consider that we never invented these methods,
but rather they, so to speak, invented them- | selves. Even so, they are
perfectly functional and we have | nothing against them."

"Verily," exclaimed Crystal, "you are a paleface! That which you say,
it's as if it made sense, though it doesn't really, not in the least.
For how can one be a cemetery without being a cemetery, or program
progeny, yet not program it at all?! Yes, you are indeed a paleface,
Myamlak, and therefore, should you so desire it, I shall couple with you
in a closed-circuit matrimonial coupling, and you shall ascend the
throne with me—provided you pass one last test."

"And what is that?" asked Ferrix.

"You must…" began the princess, but suddenly suspicion again entered her
heart and she asked, "Tell me first, what do your brothers do at night?"

"At night they lie here and there, with bent arms and twisted legs, and
air goes into them and comes out of them, raising in the process a noise
not unlike the sharpening of a rusty saw."

"Well then, here is the test: give me your hand!" commanded the
princess.

Ferrix gave her his hand, and she squeezed it, whereupon he cried out in
a loud voice, just as the sage had instructed him. And she asked him why
he had cried out.

"From the pain!" replied Ferrix.

At this point she had no more doubts about his palefaceness and promptly
ordered the preparations for the wedding ceremony to commence.

But it so happened, at that very moment, that the spaceship of
Cybercount Cyberhazy, the princess' Elector, returned from its
interstellar expedition to find a paleface (for the insidious Cybercount
sought to worm his way into her good graces). Polyphase, greatly
alarmed, ran to Ferrix's side and said:

"Prince, Cyberhazy's spaceship has just arrived, and he's brought the
princess a genuine paleface—I saw the thing with my own eyes. We must
leave while we still can, since all further masquerade will become
impossible when the princess sees it and you together: its stickiness is
stickier, its ickiness is ickier! Our subterfuge will be discovered and
we beheaded!"

Ferrix, however, could not agree to ignominious flight, for his passion
for the princess was great, and he said:

"Better to die, than lose her!"

Meanwhile Cyberhazy, having learned of the wedding preparations, sneaked
beneath the window of the room where they were staying and overheard
everything; then he rushed back to the palace, bubbling over with
villainous joy, and announced to Crystal:

"You have been deceived, Your Highness, for the so-called Myamlak is
actually an ordinary mortal and no paleface. Here is the real paleface!"

And he pointed to the thing that had been ushered in. The thing expanded
its hairy breast, batted its watery eyes and said:

"Me paleface!"

The princess summoned Ferrix at once, and when he stood before her
alongside that thing, the sage's ruse became entirely obvious. Ferrix,
though he was smeared with mud, dust and chalk, anointed with oil and
aqueously gurgling, could hardly conceal his electroknightly stature,
his magnificent posture, the breadth of those steel shoulders, that
thunderous stride. Whereas the paleface of Cybercount Cyberhazy was a
genuine monstrosity: its every step was like the overflowing of marshy
vats, its face was like a scummy well; from its rotten breath the
mirrors all covered over with a blind mist, and some iron nearby was
seized with rust.

Now the princess realized how utterly revolting a paleface was—when it
spoke, it was as if a pink worm tried to squirm from its maw. At last
she had seen the light, but her pride would not permit her to reveal
this change of heart. So she said:

"Let them do battle, and to the winner—my hand in marriage…"

Ferrix whispered to the sage:

"If I attack this abomination and crush it, reducing it to the mud from
which it came, our imposture will become apparent, for the clay will
fall from me and the steel will show. What should I do?"

"Prince," replied Polyphase, "don't attack, just defend yourself!"

Both antagonists stepped out into the palace courtyard, each armed with
a sword, and the paleface leaped upon Ferrix as the slime leaps upon a
swamp, and danced about him, gurgling, cowering, panting, and it swung
at him with its blade, and the blade cut through the clay and shattered
against the steel, and the paleface fell against the prince due to the
momentum of the blow, and it smashed and broke, and splashed apart, and
was no more.

But the dried clay, once moved, slipped from Ferrix's shoulders,
revealing his true steely nature to the eyes of the princess; he
trembled, awaiting his fate. Yet in her crystalline gaze he beheld
admiration, and understood then how much her heart had changed.

Thus they joined in matrimonial coupling, which is permanent and
reciprocal—joy and happiness for some, for others misery until the
grave—and they reigned long and well, programming innumerable progeny.
The skin of Cybercount Cyberhazy's paleface was stuffed and placed in
the royal museum as an eternal reminder. It stands there to this day, a
scarecrow thinly overgrown with hair. Many pretenders to wisdom say that
this is all a trick and make-believe and nothing more, that there's no
such thing as paleface cemeteries, doughy-nosed and gummy-eyed, and
never was. Well, perhaps it was just another empty invention—there are
certainly fables enough in this world. And yet, even if the story isn't
true, it does have a grain of sense and instruction to it, and it's
entertaining as well, so it's worth the telling.

_THE END_

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]
