

CHAIN OF CHANCE


 Stanislaw Lem

  

  

 Copyright © 1975 by Stanislaw Lem

 English translation copyright © 1978 by Stanislaw Lem

  

  

 Contents

 

 Naples - Rome

 Rome - Paris

 Paris (Orly-Garges-Orly)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

 


  Naples-Rome

  

  

 The last day was by far the longest and most drawn out. Not that I was
nervous or scared; I had no reason to be. Surrounded by a multilingual
crowd, I felt lonely the whole time. No one took any notice of me; even
my escorts kept out of sight. Besides, they were total strangers to me.
I should actually have felt relieved knowing that by tomorrow I would be
shedding my false skin, because not for a moment did I believe I was
tempting fate by sleeping in Adams's pajamas, shaving with his razor,
and retracing his steps around the bay. Nor was I expecting an ambush
along the way-not the slightest harm had come to him on the highway-and
during my one night in Rome I was to be given special protection. I was
just anxious to get it over with, I told myself, now that the mission
had proved a failure anyway. I told myself a lot of other sensible
things, but that didn't stop me from continually upsetting my daily
schedule.

 After a trip to the baths I was scheduled to be back at the Vesuvio by
three o'clock. But at twenty past two I was already heading toward the
hotel as if hounded there by something. There was no chance of
anything's happening in my room, so I walked up and down the street for
a while. I knew the neighborhood inside out -the barbershop on the
corner, the tobacconist's a few doors down, the travel agency, followed
by the hotel parking lot set back in a row of houses. If you walked
uphill past the hotel, you passed the boot shop where Adams had left the
suitcase with the broken handle for repair-and a small, round-the-clock
movie house. The first evening I almost ducked inside, after mistaking
the rosy-pink spheres on the posters for planets. Not until I was
standing in front of the box office did I notice my mistake: displayed
on the poster was an enormous fanny. The stagnant heat was starting to
get to me, so I hurried back to the corner and turned, to find a street
vendor peddling his almonds-last year's supply of chestnuts had already
run out. After scanning the selection of pipes in the window, I stepped
into the tobacconist's and bought a pack of Kools, even though I was not
in the habit of smoking menthols. The hoarse guttural sounds from the
movie loudspeakers carried above the noisy traffic, reminding me of a
slaughterhouse. Meanwhile the almond vendor had pushed his cart into the
shade of the Vesuvio's sheltered driveway.

 Everything testified to the gradual decline of what must have been an
elegant hotel at one time. The lobby was practically deserted, and the
inside of the elevator was cooler than my room. I scrutinized my
surroundings. Packing in this heat would mean working up a good sweat,
in which case the sensors wouldn't stick. I decided to pack in the
bathroom, which in this old hotel was nearly as big as my room. The air
in the bathroom was just as stuffy, but at least there was a marble
floor. I took a shower in a tub supported by lions' paws; then, without
drying off completely, standing barefoot to savor the coolness beneath
my feet, I began stuffing things into my suitcases. While I was filling
my toilet kit, I came across something solid. The automatic. It had
completely slipped my mind. At that moment I would have liked nothing
better than to ditch it under the bathtub; instead I buried it in the
larger suitcase, under my shirts, then carefully dried off the skin
around my chest and stood before the mirror to attach the sensors. There
had been a time when my body used to show marks in these places, but
they were gone now. To attach the first electrode I located my heart's
apex beat between my ribs, but the other electrode refused to stick in
the region of the clavicular fossa. I dried off the skin a second time
and fixed some tape on either side, so the sensor wouldn't stick out
beyond the collarbone. I was new at this game; I'd never had to do it on
my own before. Next: shirt, pants, and suspenders. I'd started wearing
suspenders after my return trip to earth. I was more comfortable that
way, because I didn't have to keep reaching for my pants, which always
felt as if they were on the verge of falling. When you're in orbit your
clothes are weightless, but as soon as you're back on earth the "trouser
reflex" sets in; hence the suspenders.

 I was ready. I had the whole plan down pat. Three-quarters of an hour
for lunch, taking care of the bill, and picking up the car keys; a half
hour to reach the highway, which allowed for rush-hour traffic with ten
minutes to spare. I checked the chest of drawers, set my luggage down by
the door, splashed some cold water on my face, made a final inspection
in the mirror to make sure the sensors weren't visible, and took the
elevator downstairs. The restaurant was already packed. A waiter
dripping with sweat set a bottle of chianti down in front of me, and I
ordered a spaghetti dish with a basil sauce, and a Thermos of coffee.
I'd just finished my meal and was checking the time when a garbled
message came over the loudspeaker: "Telephone call for Mr. Adams!" I
watched as the tiny bristles lining the back of my hands stood on end.
Should I go to the phone, or shouldn't I? A barrel-bellied man in a
peacock-blue shirt got up from a small table by the window and headed
for the telephone booth. Somebody else with the same name. Adams was
certainly a common enough name. I realized now it was a false alarm, but
I was still annoyed with myself: it turned out my composure was only
skin deep. I wiped my mouth to get rid of the olive oil, swallowed a
bitter-tasting pill, washed it down with the rest of the wine, and got
up to go to the reception desk. The hotel still prided itself on its
plush furniture, stucco ornaments, and velvet coverings, though it
wasn't hard to detect various kitchen odors coming from the back. The
hotel: an aristocrat belching with sauerkraut.

 That was the extent of my farewell. A porter carried out my bags, and I
followed him into the stubborn heat A Hertz rental car was waiting, with
two wheels rolled up onto the curb. A Hornet, black as a hearse. I
stopped the porter just in time from loading my luggage into the trunk,
where I had a hunch the transmitter was stored, and sent him on his way
with a tip. Climbing into the car was like climbing into an oven. I
immediately broke out in a sweat and reached into my pocket for the
gloves. Unnecessary, since the steering wheel was upholstered with
leather. The trunk turned out to be empty-so where could they have put
the amplifier? It was lying on the floorboard on the passenger's side,
hidden underneath a magazine that was spread out in such a way that a
naked blonde on the cover lay staring up at me passively, with her moist
and shiny tongue hanging out. I made no sound, but something inside me
quietly groaned as I began merging with the heavy traffic. A solid line
from one light to the next. Even though I'd slept enough, I felt moody
and on edge, first grouchy and then a little giddy. That's what I got
for eating all that damned spaghetti, which I normally couldn't stand.
It was always the same: the greater the danger, the more weight I'd put
on. At the next intersection I turned on the blower, which immediately
began bubbling with exhaust fumes. I switched it off. Cars were lined up
bumper to bumper, Italian style. A detour. In both mirrors nothing but
car roofs and automobile hoods, la potente benzina italiana stank of
carbon monoxide, and I was stalled behind a bus, trapped in its smelly
exhaust fumes. Some kids, all wearing the same green caps, sat gawking
at me through the rear window. My stomach felt like a lump of dough, my
head was on fire, and stuck to my heart was a sensor that caught on my
suspenders every tune I turned the wheel. I broke open a package of
Kleenex and stuck a few tissues on top of the steering column. My nose
was starting to tickle the way it always did before a storm. I sneezed
once, twice, and soon was so busy sneezing I lost track of ever having
left Naples, now fading in the azure coastal sky. I was cruising along
the Strada del Sole now. Traffic was pretty light for the rush hour, but
it was as if I'd never taken the Plimasine: my eyes were tingling and my
nose was running, though my mouth was dry. I could have used some
coffee, though I'd already drunk two cappuccinos back at the hotel, but
the first coffee break wasn't till Magdalena. The Herald wasn't on the
stands again because of some strike or other. While I was boxed in
between some smoking Fiats and a Mercedes, I turned on the radio. It was
a news broadcast, though most of it was lost on me. Some demonstrators
had set fire to a building. One of the security guards was interviewed.
The feminist underground promised more demonstrations in the future;
then a woman, speaking in a deep alto, read a proclamation by the
terrorists condemning the Pope, followed by various voices of the press.
. . .

 A woman's underground. Nothing took one by surprise any more. People
had lost all capacity to be surprised. What were they fighting against,
anyhow? The tyranny of men? I didn't feel like a tyrant, any more than
others did. Woe to the playboys! What were they planning to do to them?
Would they wind up kidnapping the clergy, too? I shut off the radio as
if slamming shut a garbage chute.

 To have been in Naples and not seen Vesuvius-it was almost unforgivable
of me. All the more so since I'd always been amiably disposed toward
volcanoes. Half a century ago my father used to tell me bedtime stories
about them. I'm turning into an old man, I thought, and was as stunned
by this last thought as if I'd said I was on the verge of becoming a
cow. Volcanoes were something solid, something that inspired trust. The
earth erupts, lava spills, houses collapse. Everything looks so
marvelous and simple to a five-year-old.

 I was sure you could reach the center of the earth by climbing down a
crater, though my father had disputed that. Too bad he died when he did;
he'd have been so proud of me. You don't have tune to contemplate the
terrifying silence of those infinite expanses when you're listening to
the marvelous sound of the couplers as they moor the space vehicle to
the module. Granted, my career had been a short one, and all because I'd
proved myself unworthy of Mars. He'd have taken the news a lot harder
than I did. What the hell-would you rather have had him die right after
your first flight, so he could have closed his eyes still believing in
you? Now, was that cynical or just plain petty of me? Better keep your
eyes on the road.

 As I was squeezing in behind a psychedelic-painted Lancia, I glanced in
the mirror. Not a sign of the Hertz-rented Chrysler. Something had
flashed back in the vicinity of Marianelli, but I couldn't be sure,
because the other car had dropped out of sight again. On me alone did
this short and monotonous highway, now teeming with an energetic mob on
wheels, bestow the privilege of its secret, a secret that had uncannily
eluded the police of both the old and new worlds combined. I alone had
in my car trunk an air mattress, a surfboard, and a badminton racket
intended not for sport and recreation but for inviting a treacherous
blow from out of the unknown. I tried to get a little worked up, but the
whole affair had ceased to be an adventure, had lost its charm. My
thoughts were no longer on the mystery of the deadly conspiracy, only on
whether it was time for another Plimasine to stop my constantly runny
nose. I didn't care any more where the Chrysler was; besides, the
transmitter had a hundred-mile range. My grandmother once had had a pair
of bloomers on the attic line matching the color of that Lancia.

 At six-twenty I began stepping on the gas. For a while I stayed behind
a Volkswagen with a pair of sheep's eyes painted on the back that kept
staring at me in tender reproach. The car is an amplifier of the
personality. Later I cut in behind a fellow countryman from Arizona with
a bumper sticker that read: have A nice day. In front and in back of me
were cars piled high with outboards, water skis, golf bags, fishing
gear, paddle boards, and bundles in all shapes and colors including
orange and raspberry-red: Europe was doing its damnedest to "have a nice
day." I held up my right hand and then my left one, as I'd done so many
times in the past, and examined my outstretched fingers. Not one of them
was shaking. They say that's the first sign. But who's to say for sure?
No one can claim to be an authority in such matters. If I held my breath
for a whole minute, Randy would certainly panic. What a half-assed idea!

 A viaduct. The air made a flapping noise along the concrete uprights. I
stole a glance at the scenery, a marvelous panorama of desolate green
stretching all the way to the mountains that framed the horizon. A
Ferrari as flat as a bedbug chased me out of the fast lane, and I broke
out in another fit of sneezing that sounded more like swearing. My
windshield was dotted with the remains of flies, my pant legs were
sticking to my calves, and the glare from the wipers was killing my
eyes. As I went to blow my nose, the package of Kleenex slipped down
into the gap between the front seats and made a rustling noise. Who can
describe that still-life spectacle that takes place in orbit? Just when
you think you've got everything tied, secured, magnetized, and taped
down with adhesive, the real show begins-that whirling swarm of felt-tip
pencils, eyeglasses, and the loose ends of cables writhing about in
space like lizards. Worst of all were the crumbs, hunting for crumbs
with a vacuum cleaner. . . .

 Or dandruff. The hidden background of mankind's cosmic steps was
usually passed over in silence. Only children would dare to ask how you
pee on the moon. The mountains loomed up brown and sturdy, serene and
somehow familiar. One of earth's more scenic spots. When the road later
changed direction, the sun started shifting around the car's interior in
a rectangular pattern, reminding me of the silent and majestic rotation
of light inside the cabin. Day lurking within night, the one merging
with the other as before the creation of the world, and then man's dream
of flying becomes a reality, and the body's confusion, its dismay when
the impossible becomes possible . . .

 Although I'd attended a number of lectures on motion sickness, I had my
own thoughts on the subject. Motion sickness was no ordinary attack of
nausea, but a panic of the intestines and the spleen; though not usually
conspicuous, they protested. Their bewilderment evoked only pity in me.
All the time we were enjoying the cosmos, it was making them sick. They
couldn't take it from the start. When we insisted on dragging them
there, they revolted, though training obviously helped. But even if a
bear can be taught to ride a bicycle, that doesn't mean he's cut out for
it. The whole thing was ridiculous. We kept at it till the cerebral
congestion and hardening of the intestines went away, but that was only
postponing the inevitable: sooner or later we had to come back down.
After landing on earth we had to put up with the excruciating pressure,
the painful ordeal of having to unbend our knees and backs, and the
sensation of having our heads spin around like bullets. I was fully
aware of the effects, because I'd often seen athletically trained men
made so uncomfortable by their inability to move that they would have to
be lowered into tubs where they could be momentarily freed of bodily
weight. Damned if I know what made me think it'd be any different with
me.

 According to that bearded psychologist, my own case was not
exceptional. But even after you regained your sense of gravity, the
experience of orbital weightlessness would come back to haunt you as a
kind of nostalgia. We're not meant for the cosmos, and for that very
reason we'll never give up.

 A flashing red signal traveled straight to my foot, short-circuiting by
brain. My tires made a crunching sound as they rolled over something
like spilled rice, only bigger, like hailstones, which turned out to be
glass. Traffic was slowing down to a crawl; the right lane was blocked
off with traffic cones. I tried to get a glimpse beyond the line-up of
cars and caught sight of a yellow helicopter in the process of making a
slow landing in a field, the dust swirling under its fuselage like
flour. On the ground lay two metal hulks, their hoods up and their front
ends rammed into each other. But why so far off the road? And why were
there no people around? Again the sound of glass crunching under tires
as we drove at a snail's pace past a line of policemen waving us on with
the words "Faster, faster!" Police helmets, ambulances, stretchers, an
overturned car with one wheel still spinning and its directional signal
still blinking . . . The highway was under a cloud of smoke. From
burning asphalt? More likely gasoline. Cars began switching back to the
right lane, and breathing became easier as soon as traffic started
picking up speed. A death toll of forty had been predicted. Soon an
elevated restaurant came into view. Next door the sparks of a welder's
torch lit up the dark interior of the car repair shops located inside
the sprawling area di servizio. Judging by my odometer, Cassino was the
next exit. At the first bend in the road, my nose suddenly stopped
tickling: the Plimasine had finally worked its way through the
spaghetti.

 Another curve. At one point I had the chilling sensation of being
stared at from below, as if someone were lying on his back and watching
my every move from underneath the car seat. The sun had fallen on the
magazine cover featuring the blonde with the tongue on display. Without
taking my eyes from the road I leaned forward and flipped the magazine
over. For an astronaut you lead a pretty rich inner life-I was told by
the psychologist after the Rorschach test. I couldn't remember which of
us had started up the conversation, he or I. There were two kinds of
anxiety, he claimed-one high, the other low, the first coming from the
imagination, the second straight from the guts. Was he serious, or was
he just trying to console me by implying I was too sensitive?

 A hazy, washed-out film was all that was left of the clouds. Gradually
a gas station drew near. I was just slowing down when some crazy old
sport, his long hair blowing in the wind, raced ahead of me with a lot
of racket and show in a broken-down Votan. I branched off toward the
pumps, and while the tank was being filled I finished the rest of the
Thermos, with is yellowish-brown residue of sugar at the bottom. No one
bothered to wipe off the oil and blood spots on the window. After
pulling up next to a construction site, I climbed out of the driver's
seat and stretched my bones. Not far from where I was parked stood the
glass-walled shopping pavilion where Adams had stopped to buy a deck of
cards, imitation of Italian tarot cards dating from the eighteenth or
nineteenth century. The station was in the process of being expanded; a
mound of white, unlaid gravel stood surrounding a trench that had been
dug out for a new gas pump. A glass door parted and I went inside the
shop, which turned out to be deserted. Was it siesta time, I wondered?
No, it was too late in the day for that. I wandered in and out of stacks
of gaudy boxes and artificial fruit. A white escalator going to the
second floor started moving whenever I came near it but stopped the
moment I walked away. I saw a profile of myself on the television
monitor installed near the front windows. The black-and-white picture
flickered in the sunlight and made me look paler than usual. Not a clerk
in sight. The shelves were piled high with cheap souvenirs and stacks of
postcards all of the same variety. I reached into my pocket for some
change. While looking around for a clerk, I beard the crunching of
gravel under tires. A white Opel skidded to a halt, and out stepped a
blonde in a pair of jeans who made her way around the ditches and into
the shop. Though my back was turned, I could see her on the television
monitor. She was standing perfectly still, only a dozen or so steps in
back of me. From the counter I picked up a facsimile of an ancient
woodcut showing a smoking Vesuvius towering above the bay. On the same
counter were some cards featuring reproductions of Pompeian frescoes of
the sort that would have shocked our fathers. The blonde took a few
steps toward me as if trying to make up her mind whether I was a
sales-clerk. The escalator began moving without a sound, but the tiny
figure in pants kept her distance.

 I turned around and started for the exit. So far nothing out of the
ordinary. She had a childlike face, a blank expression in the eyes, a
delicate little mouth. Only once did I slow down while passing her; it
was when she fixed me with those gaping eyes of hers, at the same time
scratching the neck of her blouse with her fingernail; then she keeled
over backward without uttering a sound or batting an eyelash, I was so
unprepared for this reaction that before I could lunge toward her she
slumped to the floor. Unable to catch her, I managed only to break her
fall by grabbing hold of her bare arms as if helping her stretch out on
her back of her own free will. She lay there, stifl as a doll. Anyone
looking in from the outside would have thought I was kneeling beside an
overturned dummy, several of which stood in the windows on either side
of me, dressed in Neapolitan costumes. I grabbed her wrist; her pulse
was weak but steady. Her teeth were partly showing, and the whites of
her eyes were visible as if she were sleeping on her back with her
eyelids half open. Less than a hundred meters away, cars were pulling up
to the pumps, then wheeling around again and rejoining the steady stream
of traffic roaring along the del Sole. Only two cars were parked out in
front-mine and the girl's. Slowly I got up and gazed down at the figure
stretched out on the floor. Her forearm, the one whose slender wrist I
had just let go of, swung limply to one side; as it pulled the rest of
the arm along with it and exposed the light-blond hairs lining her
armpit, I noticed two tiny marks resembling scratches or a miniature
tattoo. I had seen similar marks once before, on concentration-camp
prisoners-runic signs of the SS. But these looked more like an ordinary
birthmark. I had the urge to kneel down again but checked the impulse
and headed for the exit instead. As if to emphasize the fact that the
scene was over, the escalator suddenly came to a stop. On my way out I
threw a final backward glance. A bunch of brightly colored balloons
stood in the way, but I could still see her prostrate body on the far
television screen. The picture jiggled, but I could have sworn it was
she who moved. I waited two or three seconds more, but nothing happened.
The glass door obligingly let me pass; I jumped across the mounds,
climbed into the Hornet, and backed up so I could make out the Opel's
license plate. It was a German plate. A golf club was sticking up out of
a motley pile of junk crammed into the back seat.

 After merging with the traffic, I found I now had other thoughts to
occupy me. The whole thing had the appearance of a quiet epileptic fit,
un petit mal. Such attacks were not uncommon, even without convulsions.
She might have felt the first symptoms coming on, decided to stop the
car, then once inside the pavilion suddenly fainted. That would explain
the blank stare and that insectlike movement of the fingers as she went
to scratch the neck of her blouse. Then again, there was always the
possibility of a simulation. I couldn't recall having seen her Opel
along the way, but then I hadn't been that observant; besides, there was
no telling how many Opels I'd come across with the same white finish and
rectangular lines. I went over every detail in my mind, re-examining
each as if through a magnifying glass. A shop like that must have had at
least two if not three attendants on duty. Had.they all gone out for a
drink at the same tune? Strange. Though nowadays even that was possible.
Maybe they'd ducked out to a cafe, knowing that no customer would drop
in at the pavilion at that time of day. And the girl must have thought
it better to have the attack there, rather than at the station, where
she had no intention of creating a scene for the benefit of those
fellows in the Super-cortemaggiori overalls. That all seemed logical
enough, maybe even a bit too logical. She was traveling alone. Now what
person in her condition would risk traveling alone? Even if she'd pulled
out of it, I wouldn't have let her get behind the wheel again; I'd have
advised her to leave the Opel parked where it was and to climb into my
car. Anyone in my shoes would have done the same. That's exactly what I
would have done if I had been just a tourist.

 The heat was beginning to get to me. I should have stayed behind and
let myself fall into the trap-assuming it was a trap. That's what I was
here for, damn it! The more convinced I became that her fainting spell
had been real, the less sure I was of it. And not only where her
fainting spell was concerned. People just don't leave a shopping
pavilion unattended like that, not when it's nearly the size of a
department store. At least there should have been a cashier behind the
register. But even the cashier's desk had been empty. True, the inside
of the store was clearly visible from the little cafe that stood facing
it across the ditches. But who could have guessed that I would be going
in there? No one. Anyway, it wasn't I they were after-unless I was
singled out as an anonymous victim. If so, then whose victim? Unless
they were all in on it together- the attendants, the cashier, the girl.
But that struck me as being too far-fetched. A pure coincidence, then.
So we were back where we'd started. Adams had driven all the way to Rome
without incident. Alone, too. But what about the others? Suddenly I
remembered the golf club in the Opel. Good Lord, those were the same
kind of clubs that . . .

 I was determined to get a firm grip on myself, even if I'd already made
a fool of myself. Like a bad but stubborn actor, I went back to playing
the role I'd flubbed so miserably. At the next gas station I asked for
an inner tube without getting out of the car. A handsome, dark-haired
man inspected my tires. "You're driving tubeless, sir." But I was
adamant. While I paid for the tube, I kept one eye on the highway so I
wouldn't miss the Chrysler. Not a sign of it. Fourteen kilometers down
the road I replaced one of the good tires with the spare. I did it
because Adams had made a tire change. As I crouched down beside the
jack, the heat finally caught up with me. The jack needed oiling and
squeaked. Overhead the sky was rent by the screeching roar of invisible
jets, reminding me of the barrage of ship artillery covering the
Normandy bridgehead. What made me think of that now? Later I had made
another trip to Europe, this time as an official showpiece, as one of
the crew from the Mars mission-though, as a backup pilot, only a
second-rate, make-believe one. In those days Europe had shown me its
more flattering side, whereas only now was I getting to know it if not
better then at least more informally: the pissy back streets of Naples,
the gruesome-looking prostitutes, even the hotel still boasting of its
starlets but inwardly decayed and infested with street hustlers; the
porno house, which once upon a time would have been unthinkable
alongside such a shrine. But maybe it was the other way around. Maybe
there was some truth to the rumor that Europe was rotting from above,
from the top.

 The metal paneling and tool kit were blazing hot. I cleaned my hands
with some cleansing cream, wiped them dry with Kleenex, then climbed
back into the car. At the last station I'd bought a bottle of Schweppes,
but it took me a while to open it, because I couldn't lay my hands on
the pocketknife with the bottle opener. As I swallowed the bitter liquid
I thought of Randy, who was listening to me drink while driving along
somewhere on the highway. The headrest was scorching hot from the sun's
rays, and the back of my neck felt baked to a crisp. A metallic sheen
lay shimmering on the asphalt near the horizon like a pool of water. Was
that thunder in the distance? Sure enough, a thunderstorm. Most likely
it was thundering that time the jets had roared across the sky, and the
constant drone of the highway had drowned out the storm's fainter
rumblings. Now everything was drowned out by the thunder, which cracked
through the yellow-gold clouds till a pall of strident yellow hung over
the mountains.

 Some road signs announced the approach of Frosinone. Sweat was
trickling down my back as if someone were running a feather between my
shoulder blades. The storm, displaying all the theatricality of the
Italians, rumbled menacingly without shedding a drop of rain, while gray
tufts of cloud drifted across the landscape like an autumnal haze. Once,
as I was starting around a winding curve, I could see where a long
diagonal column was trying to pull a cloud down to the road. The sound
of the first heavy drops splattering on the windshield was a welcome
relief. Suddenly I was caught in a furious downpour.

 By this time my windshield had become a battlefield. I waited a while
before turning on the wipers. When the last of the insect debris had
been washed away, I switched off the wipers and pulled over to the
shoulder of the road, where I was supposed to stay parked for a full
hour. The rain came in sheets and pounded on the roof, and the passing
cars left blurry streaks of irdescent drops and billowing sprays of
water in their tracks, while I just sat back and relaxed. Soon the water
came trickling through the side vent onto my knee. I lit a cigarette,
cupping it with my palm to keep it dry. The menthol left a bad taste in
my mouth. A silver-colored Chrysler drove by, but the windshield was so
flooded with water I couldn't be sure it was the right one. The sky was
turning darker. First came the lightning, then peals of thunder cracking
like sheet metal that was being ripped apart. To pass the time I counted
the seconds between a bolt of lightning and a clap of thunder. The
highway rumbled and roared; nothing could silence it. The hands on my
watch showed it was past seven: it was time. I got out reluctantly. At
first the cold rain shower was uncomfortable, but after a while it felt
invigorating. All the time I pretended to be fixing the windshield
wipers, I kept glancing out onto the road. No one seemed to take any
notice of me; not one patrol car came my way. Soaked to my skin, I got
back into the car and drove off.

 Even though the storm was starting to ease up, it was getting darker by
the moment. Past Frosinone the rain let up completely, the road was
drier, and the puddles lying on either side of the road gave off a low
white steam that mingled with the headlight beams. Finally, as if the
land were eager to show itself in a new light just before nightfall, the
sun came out from behind the clouds. With everything cast in an eerie
pink glow, I drove the car into the parking lot of a Pavesi restaurant
arching above the highway. After unsticking my shirt from my body to
make the sensors less noticeable, I went upstairs. I hadn't noticed the
Chrysler in the lot. Upstairs, people were babbling away in ten
different languages and eating without so much as a glance at the cars
shooting by down below like bowling balls. At some point, though I
couldn't say exactly when, a sudden calm came over me, and I gave up
worrying. It was as if the incident with the girl had taken place years
ago. I relaxed over a couple of cups of coffee and a glass of Schweppes
with lemon, and might have gone on relaxing if it hadn't dawned on me
that the building was made of reinforced concrete: the interference
might have made them lose track of my heartbeat. When you're
transmitting between Houston and the moon, you don't have to worry about
such problems. On my way out I washed my hands and face in the rest
room, smoothed my hair in front of the mirror with a look of
self-annoyance, then drove off again.

 I still had some time to kill, so I drove as though the horse knew the
way and all I had to do was to let up on the reins. I neither wandered
in my thoughts nor passed the time daydreaming, but just switched off
and pretended I wasn't there-"the vegetable life," I used to call it.
Still, I must have been somewhat alert, because I managed to stop the
car right on schedule. It was a good place to park, situated just below
the summit of a gentle rise where the highway knifed through the top of
the ridge like a perfect geometric incision. Through this slitlike
opening I could see all the way to the horizon, where, with resolute
energy, the asphalt strip cut straight across the next sloping hump. The
one closest to me looked like a sighting notch, the one farthest like a
rifle bead. Before cleaning the windshield I first had to open the
trunk, because I'd already used up the last of the Kleenex. I touched
the suitcase's soft bottom, where the weapon was resting peacefully. As
though by some unconscious design, practically all the headlights went
on at the same time. I scanned the broad expanse below. The route to
Naples was streaked with patches of white that turned progressively
redder as one approached Rome, where the road was now a bed of glowing
coals. At the bottom of the grade, drivers were having to use their
brakes, transforming that particular stretch into a vibrant strip of
shimmering red-a pretty example of a stationary wave. If the road had
been three times as wide, it could have been a road in Texas or Montana.
Though standing only a few steps away from the edge of the road, I felt
so alone I was overcome by a serene calm. People need grass every bit as
much as goats do, and no one knows that better than the goats. As soon
as I heard a helicopter churning through the invisible sky, I tossed my
cigarette away and got into the car, whose warm interior still preserved
traces of the afternoon heat.

 Stark neon lights beyond the hills announced the approach of Rome. I
still had some driving ahead of me, because my instructions were to
circle the city first. The growing darkness obscured the faces of the
people in the other cars, and the things piled high on the roofs took on
weird and mysterious shapes. Everything was assuming a grave and
impersonal aspect, full of hidden implications, as if matters of an
extremely urgent nature were waiting at the road's end. Every backup
astronaut has to be a little bit of a bastard, because something in him
is always waiting for the regulars to slip up, and if not, then he's a
stupid ass. I had to make another stop. The coffee in combination with
the Plimasine, Schweppes, and ice water did the trick. I felt the side
of the road on foot and was struck by the surroundings. Not only the
traffic but time along with it seemed to fade. Standing with my back to
the highway, and despite the exhaust fumes, I could make out the scent
of flowers in the gently fluttering breeze. What would I have done now
if I were thirty? No sense brooding over such questions; better to
button your fly and get behind the wheel again. The ignition key slipped
between my fingers, and I fumbled around in the dark for it between the
pedals, not wanting to switch on the interior light. As I drove along, I
felt neither drowsy nor alert, neither edgy nor relaxed, but somehow
strange, vulnerable, even a little astonished. The tight from the
lampposts streamed through the front windshield, turning my hands on the
steering wheel white, then gradually retreated to the back of the car.
Billboards came and went like phantoms, the concrete road joints drummed
softly underneath. Now to the right, to pick up the city bypass that
would bring me out onto the same northern route Adams had used to enter
the city. He no longer meant anything to me now. He was just one case
out of eleven. It was just a fluke that I'd inherited his things. Randy
had insisted on it, and he was right: if you're going to do a job, then
do it properly. The fact that I was using a dead man's shirts and
luggage didn't faze me in the slightest, and if it was a little hard
going at first, then it was only because these things belonged to a
stranger, not because their owner was dead. While driving down a lonely
and deserted stretch, I kept feeling that something was missing. The
windows were rolled down, and the breeze brought the smell of flowers in
bloom. Luckily the grasses had already retired for the night. Not once
did I have the sniffles. They could talk all they liked about
psychology; in the end it was the hay fever that had been the deciding
factor. Of that I was sure, even though they'd tried to make me believe
otherwise. What they'd said made sense, I suppose, because since when
does grass grow on Mars? Besides, being allergic to dust is not a
defect. Even so, somewhere in my files, in the space reserved for
comments, they must have written the word "allergic"-in other words,
defective. Because of that diagnosis I became a backup astronaut-a
pencil sharpened with the best possible instruments so that in the end
it couldn't be used to make a single dot. A backup Christopher Columbus,
as it were.

 I was being blinded now by a steady stream of oncoming traffic; I tried
closing one eye and then the other. Had I taken the wrong route? I
couldn't find a single exit. A mood of apathy came over me: I had no
choice but to keep driving through the night. A towering billboard sign
lit at an angle read roma tiberina. So I was headed in the right
direction, after all. The closer I got to the downtown area, the more
congested were the lights and traffic. Luckily all the hotels on my
itinerary were located close to one another. At each of them I was
greeted by the same gesture of outstretched hands-"The season! No
vacancy!"-forcing me to get behind the wheel again. At the last hotel
there was a vacancy, but I asked for a quiet room in one of the side
wings. The porter gave me an inquisitive look; I shook my head with
regret and walked back to the car.

 The empty sidewalk in front of the Hilton was flooded with light. As I
climbed out of the car I couldn't see the Chrysler anywhere, and it
occurred to me that they might have had an accident, which would have
explained why I hadn't seen them on the road. I routinely slammed the
car door shut, and as I did I caught a glimpse of the Chrysler's front
end in a fleeting reflection in the window. It was parked just outside
the lot in the shadows, between the chains and a no parking sign. On my
way back into the hotel I could make out the car's dark interior, which
looked to be deserted, though one of its windows was rolled down. When I
came to within five paces of the car, the head of a cigarette lit up the
interior. I felt an impulse to wave but resisted, giving my hand only a
slight jerk before sticking it back into my pocket and entering the
lobby.

 This was just a minor incident, magnified by the fact that one chapter
was over and another was beginning. The cold night air lent everything a
marvelous clarity -the car trunks in the parking lot, the sound of my
footsteps, the sidewalk markings-which made my inability to wave even
more frustrating. Till now I'd stuck to my timetable as faithfully as a
school kid, not giving a single thought to the guy who'd driven the same
route before me, stopped off at the same place, taken the same number of
coffee breaks, and made the same rounds of the hotels so that he could
wind up here, at the Hilton, which he would never leave again alive. At
that moment my assumed role struck me as something of a mockery, a
willful defiance of fate.

 A young punk, swaggering with self-importance, or perhaps only
disguising his drowsiness, followed me out to the car, where he grabbed
hold of the dusty suitcases with gloved hands while I smiled absently at
his shiny buttons. The lobby was deserted. Another bruiser loaded by
luggage into the elevator, which traveled upstairs to the sounds of
piped music. I was still feeling the rhythm of the road, which, like a
haunting tune, I couldn't shake off. The bellboy stopped, opened a set
of double doors, switched on the wall light and overhead lamp, and
turned on the living-room and bedroom lights; as soon as he was finished
arranging my bags, I was alone again. Though Naples and Rome were no
farther than a handshake away from each other, I felt tired, but it was
a tiredness of a different kind, more tense, and that came as the next
surprise. It was as if I'd polished off a can of beer in spoonfuls-a
kind of stupefying sobriety. I made a tour of the rooms. The bed reached
all the way to the floor, so there was no point in playing
hide-and-seek. I opened all the closet doors, knowing ahead of time I
wouldn't surprise any assassins because that would have been too easy,
but I did my duty anyway. I lifted the sheets, the double mattress, and
then the headrest, though I didn't seriously believe I'd never get up
out of this bed again. Oh, yeah? Man is an undemocratic institution. His
brain center, those voices from the right and the left, are nothing but
a sham legislature, because there are also the catacombs, which bully
him. The gospel according to Freud. I checked the air conditioner, then
tested the blinds by raising and lowering them a few times. The room
ceilings were plain and cheerful, unlike those at the Three Witches Inn,
where the element of danger was so grimly conspicuous and where the bed
canopy looked as if any moment it might collapse and smother you. Here
there was no canopy, none of that syrupy, romantic atmosphere. Here
everything-armchairs, desk, carpets-was neatly arranged in the usual
display of comfort. Had I turned off the headlights?

 The windows faced the other way, so I couldn't see the car. I was
pretty sure I'd switched them off, and if not, well . . . let Hertz
worry about it. I closed the curtains and started getting undressed, not
caring where my shirt and pants landed. When I was completely stripped,
I carefully detached the sensors. After taking a shower I'd have to
stick them on again. I opened the larger suitcase, the one with the
Band-Aid box lying on top, but I couldn't find the scissors, Standing in
the middle of the room, I could feel a slight pressure in my head and
the soft carpet pile beneath my feet. Then I remembered-I'd slipped them
into my briefcase. Impatiently I yanked at the clasp, and out fell the
scissors, along with a relic of the past-a photo of Sinus Aurorae,
mounted in a Plexiglass frame and looking as yellow as the Sahara:
landing site number I, the one I never made it to. On the carpet, next
to my bare feet, it looked embarrassing, silly, full of nasty innuendo.
I picked it up and studied it in the white light of the overhead lamp:
ten degrees north latitude by fifty-two degrees east longitude, the
patch of Bosporus Gemmatus at the top and tropical formation below. The
places I was to have reconnoitered on foot. I stood there with the photo
in my hand, but instead of putting it back into my suitcase, I laid it
down on the nightstand, next to the telephone, and went into the
bathroom.

 It was a jewel of a shower; the water came shooting out in a hundred
hot streams. Civilization began with the invention of running water,
with the lavatories of King Minos on Crete. For his tombstone one of the
Pharaohs ordered a brick made of all the dirt that had been scraped from
his skin over the period of a lifetime. And there has always been
something vaguely symbolic about washing the body. When I was a
teenager, if there was anything wrong with my car I used to put off
washing it till after some work had been done to it, restoring its honor
with a good wax job. For what could I have known then about the symbolic
rites of purity and impurity and the fact that they had survived in all
religions? In expensive apartments the only things I care about are the
bathrooms. A person feels only as good as his skin. In the full-length
mirror I caught a glimpse of my soap-covered body still showing the
imprint left by the electrode, almost as if I were back in Houston. My
hips were still white from the swimming trunks. When I turned up the
water, the pipes let out a mournful howl. The computation of turbulent
flow that causes no resonances is still one of the seemingly unsolvable
problems of hydraulics. What a lot of useless facts.

 When I had finished drying off, not being too choosy which towel I
used, I walked back into the bedroom stark naked, leaving a trail of wet
footprints as I went. I taped on the heart electrode, but instead of
lying down I sat on the edge of the bed and did some quick calculations;
seven cups of coffee, counting what was in the Thermos. I never used to
have any trouble going to sleep, but lately I'd acquired the habit of
tossing from side to side. In one of my suitcases, unknown to Randy, I'd
stashed some Seconal, a medicine prescribed for astronauts. Adams had
never used the stuff, being apparently a sound sleeper. For me to take
it now would have been an act of disloyalty. I'd forgotten to switch off
the light in the bathroom. Though my bones were unwilling, I climbed out
of bed. My hotel suite seemed to expand in the dark. Standing there
naked, with my back to the bed, I hesitated. Oh, yes-I was supposed to
lock the door and leave the key in the lock. Room 303. They'd even seen
to it that I was given the same room number. So what the hell. I looked
for some sign of fear in myself but was conscious only of something
vague and undefined, of something bordering on shame. But I couldn't
tell whether my anxiety came from the prospect of a sleepless night or
from that of my own death. Everyone is superstitious, though not
everyone is aware of it. I again surveyed my surroundings in the glare
of the night light, only this time with genuine suspicion. My suitcases
were half open, my clothes were scattered all over the armchairs. A real
dress rehearsal. Should I get out the automatic? Nonsense. I shook the
self-pity out of my head, then lay down and turned off the night light,
relaxing my muscles until my breathing became more regular.

 Knowing how to fall asleep on schedule was an essential part of the
mission. Especially when two people were sitting down below in a car and
watching on an oscilloscope as a luminous white line recorded every move
of my heart and lungs. If the door was locked from the inside and the
windows hermetically sealed, what difference did it make if he'd gone to
sleep in the same bed and at the same time?

 There was a world of difference between the Hilton and the Three
Witches Inn. I tried to picture my homecoming; I saw myself pulling up
to the house unannounced, or better yet, parking the car by the
drugstore and walking the rest of the way on foot, as if on my way back
from a stroll. The boys would be home from school already; as soon as
they saw me coming, the stairs would reverberate with their footsteps.
It suddenly dawned on me that I was supposed to take another shot of
gin. For a moment I lay there undecided, sitting up on one elbow. The
bottle was still in the suitcase. I dragged myself out of bed, groped my
way over to the table, located the flat bottle under my shirts, then
filled the cap till the stuff started dripping down my fingers. While
emptying the small metal tumbler, I again had the sensation of being an
actor in an amateur play. A job's a job, I said by way of
self-justification. As I walked back to the bed, my suntanned trunk,
arms, and legs merged with the darkness, and my hips stood out like a
white girdle. I lay down on the bed, the slug of gin gradually warming
my stomach, and slammed my fist into the pillow: so this is what you've
come to, you backup man! OK, pull up the covers and get some sleep.

 Then I fell into the sort of drowse where the final flickerings of
consciousness can be extinguished only by a state of total relaxation. A
vision. I was sailing through space. Strangely enough, it was the same
dream I'd had just before my trip to the orbital station. It was as if
the stubborn catacombs of my mind refused to acknowledge any corrections
dictated by experience. Flying in dreams is deceptive, because the body
never really loses its normal sense of direction and the arms and legs
can be manipulated as easily as in reality, though with greater
facility. The real thing is another story. The muscles are thrown
completely out of whack; if you try to push something away, you find
yourself getting shoved backward; if you try to sit up straight, you
find yourself tucking your knees under your chin. One careless move and
you can knock yourself out. The body goes wild the moment it's liberated
from earth's beneficial resistance.

 I woke up with a choking sensation. Something soft but unyielding was
interfering with my breathing, I bolted upright with my arms stretched
out as if trying to grab the person who was choking me. Sitting up in
bed, I tried to clear my mind, but it was like peeling some horribly
sticky wrapper from my brain. A quicksilver glare from outside was
streaming into the room through a crack between the curtains; in its
shimmering brightness I saw that I was alone. I could hardly breathe any
more: my nose felt cemented together, my mouth was caked, and my tongue
was all dried up. I must have been snoring dreadfully. It was the
snoring that had reached me toward the tail end, just as I was waking
up.

 I got up, still a little shaky on my feet because even though I was
awake my dream kept weighing me down like motionless gravity. Carefully
I bent over my suitcase, groping blindly in the side pocket for the
elastic band holding the tube of Pyribenzamine in place. The blooming
season had reached Rome. The spore capsules in the south are the first
to turn reddish-brown, and then gradually the fading process spreads to
higher regions, a fact well known to anyone who suffers from chronic hay
fever. It was two in the morning. I was a little worried that my escorts
might jump out of the car when they saw my heart playing funny tricks on
the oscilloscope, so I lay down again and turned my head sideways on the
pillow, this being the fastest way to relieve a congested nose. I lay
there with one ear tuned to the corridor to make sure no unwanted help
was on the way, but all was quiet. My heart resumed its normal rhythm
again.

 I gave up trying to picture the house. I was no longer in the mood for
it, or maybe I realized it was wrong of me to drag the kids into this. A
hell of a thing if you couldn't go to sleep without the help of the
kids! The yoga would have to do, the kind adapted especially for
astronauts by Dr. Sharp and his assistants. I knew it backward and
forward like the Lord's Prayer. The exercises worked so well that before
long my nose began to make a soft whistling sound as the passages opened
up to let the air through, and the Pyribenzamine, once it lost its
effect as a stimulant, trickled into my brain and induced its familiar
but somehow impure sleepiness, so that before I knew it I was sound
asleep.

  

  

  Rome-Paris

  

  

 At eight the next morning I went to see Randy. I was in a fairly decent
mood, because I'd started the day with Plimasine and despite the dry
heat my nose wasn't bothering me. Randy's hotel was nowhere near my
hotel; it was located on a crowded back street paved in the Roman style,
not far from the Spanish Steps. I'd forgotten the name of the street.
While I waited for Randy in a narrow passageway containing lobby,
reception desk, and coffee shop, I browsed through a copy of The Herald
I'd picked up on the way to the hotel. I was interested in negotiations
under way between Air France and the government, because I didn't relish
the thought of being stranded at Orly. A strike had been declared by the
airport's auxiliary crew, but Paris was still open to incoming flights.

 It wasn't long before Randy showed up. Considering he'd been up most of
the night he was in pretty good shape, except for being a little down in
the mouth, but then by now it was obvious the mission had been a flop.
Paris was our last resort, our last refuge. Randy offered to drive me to
the airport, but I didn't let him; I thought it was better he got some
sleep. He insisted it was impossible to sleep in his hotel room, so I
followed him upstairs. As a matter of fact, his room was bright as day,
and from the bathroom came the smell of hot suds instead of cool air.

 Luckily we were in a high-pressure area. Relying on my professional
knowledge, I drew the curtains, dampened them underneath to improve the
air circulation, and left all the faucets running slightly. Having done
my Samaritan duty, I said good-bye, promising to give him a call as soon
as I came up with something concrete. I took a taxi out to the airport,
stopping off at the Hilton for my things, and shortly before eleven was
already pushing my luggage cart toward the departure area. It was my
first trip to the new airport terminal in Rome, and I kept my eyes
peeled for the wonders of its technical security system, which had been
publicized in all the papers, never suspecting I would become something
of an expert on it.

 The press had greeted the opening of the new terminal as an event
signaling the end of all terrorist attacks. The glassed-in-departure
area was the only thing that looked somehow familiar. Viewed from above,
the building resembled a drum, traversed by a network of escalators and
ramps that discreetly filtered the boarding passengers. Lately people
had begun smuggling aboard weapons and explosives in parts, later
assembling them in the airport toilets, which was why the Italians were
the first to stop using magnetometers. The screening was now conducted
by means of ultrasonic detection devices while the passengers were being
transported on the escalators; the data obtained from this invisible
search was then instantly evaluated by a computer programmed to identify
smuggling suspects. It was reported that these ultrasonic waves were
able to sense every tooth filling and suspender clasp, that not even a
non-metallic explosive could escape detection.

 The new terminal was known unofficially as the Labyrinth. During a
trial run lasting several weeks, intelligence experts armed with the
most ingeniously concealed weapons had crammed the escalators, and not
one of these smuggling attempts was known to have succeeded. The
Labyrinth had been operating since April without any serious incidents;
the only ones caught were those having in their possession objects as
harmless as they were strange: a toy cap pistol, for example, or a
metalized plastic replica of a gun. Some of the experts argued that such
incidents amounted to a kind of psychological diversion on the part of
frustrated terrorists, while others claimed they were merely meant to
test the system's effectiveness. These pseudo smugglers posed something
of a problem for the legal experts because, although their motives were
unmistakable, they could not be considered punishable by law. So far the
only serious incident had taken place on the day of my departure from
Naples. An Asian passenger, after being detected by the sensors, had
unloaded a live bomb on the Bridge of Sighs, which spanned the entire
width of the Labyrinth. Hurled straight down into the hall, it caused an
explosion that did little damage except to the nerves of the other
passengers. In retrospect, I now believe these minor incidents were
staged in preparation for an operation aimed at penetrating the new
security system with a new type of offense.

 My Alitalia flight was delayed an hour because of the uncertainty over
whether we were to land at Orly or De Gaulle. Since the forecast was for
thirty degrees Celsius in Paris, I decided to change clothes. I couldn't
remember which suitcase I'd packed my summer shirts in, so I set out for
the rest room with my luggage cart, which was too big for the escalator.
I wandered in and out of the lower-level ramps until a rajah finally
showed me the way-he was on his way to the rest room, too. I couldn't
tell whether he was really a rajah, because although he wore a turban he
had a very weak command of English. I was curious to see if he would
take off his turban in the rest room. My little excursion with the cart
had consumed so much time that I had to shower in a hurry and change
quickly into my cotton summer suit and laced canvas sneakers. By
sticking my toilet kit into a suitcase I was able to free my hands to
make my way back to departures and to check in all my things as luggage.
As it turned out this was a smart move, since I doubt whether the rolls
of microfilm-they were stashed in the toilet kit-would have survived
"the massacre of the steps."

 The terminal's air-conditioning system was on the blink, blowing
ice-cold air in some places and warm air in others. At the Paris gate it
was warm, so I slung my jacket over my shoulder, which also turned out
to be a lucky move. Each of us was handed an Ariadne Pass- a plastic
pouch equipped with an electronic resonator- without which it was
impossible to board any of the planes. On the other side of the
turnstile was an escalator so narrow it could only be boarded single
file. The ride was a little reminiscent of Tivoli and a little of
Disneyland. The escalator climbed straight up till it gradually leveled
off into a moving ramp that spanned the hall in a flood of fluorescent
lights while the ground floor remained dark, though how they managed to
achieve such a lighting effect was beyond me. Once past the Bridge of
Sighs, the ramp swerved around and became an escalator again, cutting
back at a steep angle across the same hall, which was now recognizable
only by the openwork ceiling, as both sides of the ramp were lined with
aluminum panels decorated with mythological scenes. I never did find out
what the rest of it looked like. The idea was simple: any passenger
having something suspicious in his possession was reported by means of
an uninterrupted sound transmitted by the plastic pouch. The suspect had
no possible escape, since the conveyor ramp was too narrow, and the
constant repetition of passageways was designed to weaken him
psychologically and force him to dispose of his weapon. The departure
area was posted with signs in twenty different languages warning that
anyone attempting to smuggle weapons or explosives aboard would place
his own life in jeopardy if he tried to commit an act of terrorism
against his fellow passengers. This cryptic warning was variously
interpreted. There were even rumors that a team of sharpshooters was
kept concealed behind the aluminum walls, but I didn't believe a word of
it.

 The flight had originally been a charter, but because the Boeing made
available turned out to be larger than the number of passengers, the
remaining seats were sold over the counter. Those who eventually landed
in trouble were those like myself who bought their tickets at the last
minute. The Boeing had been rented by a bank consortium, though the
people standing closest to me hardly looked like bankers. The first to
step on the escalator was an elderly lady with a cane; then came a blond
woman carrying a small dog, then myself, a little girl, and a Japanese.
Glancing back down the stairs, I noticed that a couple of men had
unfolded their newspapers. Since I was more in the mood for sightseeing,
I tucked my Herald under the top of my suspenders like a fatigue cap.

 The blonde, whose pearl-trimmed pants fit so snugly you could see the
outline of her panties on her fanny, turned out to be carrying a stuffed
animal; it was the way it blinked that made it seem alive. I was
reminded of the blonde on the magazine cover who had accompanied me on
my trip to Rome. In her white outfit and with her quick eyes, the little
girl looked more like a doll. The Japanese, who wasn't much taller than
the girl, was dressed to perfection and had all the mannerisms of an
avid tourist. Crisscrossing the top of his buttoned-up checkered suit
were the straps of a transistor radio, a pair of binoculars, and a
powerful Nikon Six. While I happened to be looking around, he was in the
process of opening the camera case to get a shot of the Labyrinth and
the wonders of its interior. At the point where the stairs leveled off
to form a ramp, I heard a shrill, drawn-out whistle; I spun around. It
was coming from the direction of the Japanese. The little girl could be
seen backing anxiously away from him, hugging her purse, which contained
the ticket pouch. With a deadpan expression the Japanese turned up the
volume on his radio, naively mistaken if he thought he could drown out
the whistle: it was only the first warning.

 We were gliding over the hall's vast interior. Looming up in the
fluorescent light on either side of the bridge ramp were Romulus, Remus,
and the she-wolf. By this time the whining noise coming from the ticket
pouch of the Japanese had reached a piercing intensity. A tremor passed
through the crowd, but no one dared to raise his voice. The only one who
didn't bat an eyelash was the Japanese, who stood there expressionless,
with only a few beads of sweat visible on his forehead. All of a sudden
he yanked the pouch from his pocket and started wrestling with it like a
madman, before a crowd of speechless onlookers-not a single woman cried
out. As for me, I was only waiting to see how they would yank him out of
the crowd. As the Bridge of Sighs came to an end and the ramp veered
around a corner, the Japanese crouched down so suddenly and so low it
looked as if he'd vanished from sight. It took me a while to realize
what he was doing down there. Pulling the Nikon out of its case, he
opened it just as the escalator was straightening out and beginning to
climb again; it was now obvious that this second Bridge of Sighs was
nothing more than an escalator moving back across the main hall at an
angle. As soon as he was back on his feet again, there emerged from his
Nikon a rounded, cylindrical object that glittered like a Christmas-tree
ornament and that would barely have fit into the palm of my hand. A
nonmetallic corundum grenade with a notched casing and no stem. The
plastic pouch stopped whining. Using both hands, the Japanese pressed
the bottom of the grenade to his mouth in the manner of a kiss; not
until he removed it did I realize he'd pulled out the pin with his teeth
and it was now sticking out between his lips. I made a dive for the
grenade but only brushed it because the Japanese suddenly lunged
backward with such force that he knocked those behind him off their feet
and kicked me in the knee. My elbow landed in the girl's face; the
impact sent me reeling against the railing. I banged into her again and
this time took her with me as we both cleared the railing and went
sailing through the air. Then something solid hit me in the back, and I
passed from light into darkness.

 I was expecting to land on sand. Though the papers hadn't mentioned
explicitly what covered the floor, they were quite emphatic about the
fact that no damage had resulted from the previous bomb explosion.
Anticipating sand, I tried to get my legs into position while I was
still in the air. But instead I encountered something soft and wet that
gave way under me like foam until I landed in a freezing liquid.
Simultaneously the blast of the explosion rocked my insldes. I lost
sight of the girl as my legs sank into some kind of sticky slime or mud;
deeper and deeper I sank, righting desperately with my hands, until a
sudden calm took hold of me. I had about a minute, maybe a bit longer,
to scramble out. First think-then act. It must have been a tank designed
to soften the impact of a shock wave-a tank shaped more like a funnel
than a bowl, spread with a layer of some sticky substance, filled with
water, and then covered with a thick coating of an asphyxiating foam.
There was no way I could charge uphill-I was knee-deep in the stuff-so I
crouched down like a frog and began groping around on the bottom with my
hands spread out; it was sloped to the right. Using the palm of my hands
like shovels and pulling my feet out of the muck one at a time, I
started crawling in that direction with all my strength. I kept it up,
sometimes sliding back down the sloping incline and having to start all
over again, using my hands to hoist myself up like a mountain climber
trying to scale a snowy cliff without any handholds-but at least one can
breathe in the snow.

 I worked my way up high enough so that the big blistery bubbles on my
face began to pop; half asphyxiated and gasping for air, I emerged into
a shadowy penumbra filled with the concerted howls of those directly
above me. With my head barely sticking out above the surface of tossing
foam, I looked around. The girl was gone. I took a deep breath and dove
below. I had to keep my eyes closed; something in the water made them
burn like hell. Three times I surfaced and went below, getting
noticeably weaker after each dive: since there was no way to bounce back
up from the slime, I had to keep swimming over it to avoid being sucked
under. Just when I'd given up hope, my hand accidentally touched her
long hair. The foam had left it slippery as a fish. While I was trying
to tie a knot in her blouse as a grip, the blouse ripped.

 How we made it to the surface again I'll never know. All I can remember
is the frantic struggle, the huge bubbles I kept wiping from her face,
the awful metallic taste of the water, how I kept swearing under my
breath, and how I managed to shove her over the edge of the funnel-a
thick, rubberlike embankment. When she was safely on the other side, I
hung there for a while before getting out, standing up to my neck in the
softly hissing foam and trying to get my breath while the howling
continued in the background. I had the illusion that it was raining-a
warm, fine sort of rain. I could even feel a few drops falling on me.
You're hallucinating, I thought. Rain? In here? Arching back my head I
caught sight of the bridge: aluminum sheets were dangling from it like
rags, the floor was riddled like a sieve, and the stairs looked like a
honeycomb cast in metal, deliberately perforated to filter the air blast
and catch any flying debris.

 I heaved myself up over the curved embankment in the gentle downpour
and laid the girl face down across my knee. She was not as far gone as I
thought, because she was starting to vomit. As I rhythmically massaged
her back and sides, I could feel her laboring with all her little bones.
She was still choking and gasping, but as least she was breathing
normally again. I felt like vomiting, too, so I helped it along with my
finger. Though it left me feeling better, I still didn't have the nerve
to get up. For the first time I was able to make out where I was, though
the poor visibility was made even worse by the blowout of a section of
the fluorescent lighting. The howling overhead was giving way to sounds
of groaning and gurgling. People are dying up there, I thought-why isn't
anyone coming to their aid? There was a lot of racket nearby, mostly
clanking, as if someone was trying to get the stalled escalator in
service again. I could hear people crying out-healthy people, uninjured
people. I couldn't figure out what was happening up there. The entire
length of the escalator was jammed with people who had piled on top of
one another out of panic. There was no way of reaching the dying without
first removing those in a state of shock. Shoes and articles of clothing
had become wedged between the steps. There was no access from the side:
the bridge had turned out to be a trap.

 Meanwhile I looked after myself and the girl. She was obviously
conscious now and sitting up. I told her not to worry, that everything
would be OK, that we'd be out of there in no time. And sure enough, once
my eyes got accustomed to the dark it wasn't long before I spotted an
exit: a hatchway that had inadvertently been left open. If it hadn't
been for someone's negligence, we might have been stranded there like a
couple of trapped mice. The hatchway opened up onto a sewer-like tunnel
in which another hatchway, or, rather, a convex shield, also stood ajar.
A corridor lined with recessed-light cages led us into a squat,
bunkerlike basement full of cables, pipes, and plumbing installations.

 "These pipes might lead to the rest rooms."

 I turned to the girl, but she was gone.

 "Hey . . . where are you?" I yelled, at the same time scouting the
entire length and width of the basement. I caught sight of her as she
was running barefoot from one concrete pillar to another. Backache or no
backache, I caught up with her in a couple of leaps, grabbed her by the
hand, and said in a stern voice:

 "What's the big idea, honey? You and I have to stick together, or we'll
both get lost."

 She tagged along after me in silence. It was starting to get brighter
up ahead: a ramp flanked by white-tiled walls. We came out and found
ourselves standing on a higher level. One glance at our surroundings and
I knew where we were. A short distance away was the very same ramp I'd
pushed my luggage cart down an hour ago. Around the corner was a
corridor lined with doors. I took some change from my pocket, dropped a
coin in the first door, and grabbed the little girl's hand on the hunch
she was planning to run away again. She still looked to be in a state of
shock. Small wonder. I dragged her into the bathroom. She said nothing,
and when I saw in the light how she was covered all over with blood I
stopped talking, too: I knew now what the warm rain was. I must have
looked a sight, too. After stripping both of us down, I dumped all our
things into the tub, turned on the faucet, and, dressed only in my
underwear, I shoved her under the shower. The hot water had a soothing
effect on my backache and ran off our bodies in red streams. I rubbed
her small back and sides. Not only to wash off the blood, but also to
revive her. She submitted willingly, even passively, while I rinsed her
hair as best I could.

 When we came out of the shower, I asked her casually what her name was.

 "Annabella."

 "English?"

 "French."

 "From Paris?"

 "No, from Clermont."

 I switched to French, and started fishing our things out of the tub one
by one to give them a rinse.

 "If you feel up to it," I suggested, "would you mind rinsing out your
dress?" She bent over the tub obediently.

 While I was wringing out my pants and shirt, I contemplated our next
move. By this time the airport would be shut down and crawling with
police. So now what? Go merrily on our way till we got stopped
somewhere? The Italian authorities weren't wise to my little game yet.
The only other person in the know was du Bois Fenner, the embassy's
first secretary. My airplane ticket was made out to a different name
from the one on the hotel bill, and it was somewhere back in the hall
along with my jacket. The automatic and the electrodes were still at the
Hilton, all packaged and ready to be picked up by Randy that same
evening. If they intercepted the package, I'd make a damned nice
suspect, which I probably was anyway after making such a slick getaway
and after going to such trouble to get rid of the blood. They might even
accuse me of being an accomplice. No one was above suspicion, not since
some respectable lawyers and a few other big shots had been caught in
the act of smuggling bombs out of ideological sympathy. Eventually I'd
be cleared of everything, but only after landing behind bars. Nothing
like being helpless to get the police all excited. I gave Annabella a
thorough inspection. A black eye, wet hair hanging down in strands,
dress drying under the hand dryer; a bright kid. I started formulating a
plan.

 "Listen, honey," I said, "do you know who I am? An American astronaut,
and I'm here incognito on a very important mission. Follow me? I've got
to be in Paris by today at the latest, but if we stick around well be
interrogated and that'll mean a delay. So I have to phone the embassy
right away to get the first secretary to come down. He's going to help
us. The airport's shut down, but there are other planes besides the
normal ones, special planes they use for taking out the embassy mail.
That's the kind we'll be flying on. You and me. Wouldn't you like that?"

 She just stood there and stared. Not yet recovered, I thought. I
started getting dressed. Thanks to the laces I still had my shoes, but
Annabella had lost her sandals, though nowadays it was nothing to see
girls running around barefoot in the street, and if worst came to worst
her slip could pass for a blouse. I helped her straighten the pleats on
her dress, now almost dry.

 "Now we're going to play father and daughter," I said. "That way we
won't have any trouble getting to a telephone. OK?"

 She nodded, and off we went, hand in hand, to face the world. We ran
into the first barricade the moment we stepped ofl the ramp. Some
reporters armed with cameras were being forced back outside by the
carabinieri; firemen, their helmets already on, were charging in the
other direction. No one took any notice of us. One of the
carabinieri-the one I happened to be talking to-could even get along in
English. I fed him a story about how we'd been swimming, but without
listening to a word I said, he told us to take escalator B upstairs to
the European section, where all the passengers were being assembled. We
started for the escalator, but the moment it blocked us from view I
turned down a side corridor, leaving all the commotion behind. We
entered a deserted waiting room where passengers came to claim their
luggage. A row of telephone booths stood on the other side of some
conveyor belts now moving quietly along. I took Annabella with me into
one of the booths and dialed Randy's number. My call jolted him out of
his sleep. Standing in a yellow glare, with my hand cupped around the
receiver, I told him the whole story. He interrupted me only once,
thinking possibly he'd misunderstood me. Then all I could hear was his
heavy breathing, followed by a long pause as if he'd suddenly gone numb.

 "Still there?" I asked when I was finished.

 "Man!" he said. Then a second time: "Man!" Nothing else.

 Then I came to the most critical part. He was to get Fenner from the
embassy and drive down in the car with him right away. They'd have to
make it fast; otherwise we'd be caught between two barricades. The
airport would be shut down, but Fenner would find a way to get through.
The girl would be right here with me. In the left wing of the building,
next to luggage claim counter E10, right by the telephone booths. In
case we weren't there, they could find us together with the other
passengers in the European section, or else, for sure, in the custody of
the police. I got him to recapitulate, then hung up, hoping the girl
would acknowledge our success with a smile, or at least a look of
relief, but she remained just as remote and tight-lipped as before,
Several times I caught her spying on me, as if she were expecting
something. An upholstered bench stood between the booths. We sat down.
Through the plate-glass walls in the distance, the airport's approach
ramps could be seen. Ambulance after ambulance kept pulling up in front;
the continual racket of sirens and alarms was punctuated by women's
spasmodic cries coming from inside the building. To make conversation I
inquired about the girl's parents, about her trip, about who had brought
her out to the airport. Her answers were evasive, monosyllabic; not even
her Clermont address could I pry out of her. It was starting to get on
my nerves. It was 1:40 by my watch. A half hour had gone by since my
talk with Randy on the phone. Some guys dressed in overalls and wheeling
what looked like an electric welding machine came trotting through the
waiting room, but without so much as a glance in our direction. Again
the sound of footsteps. A technician wearing earphones came in and
started moving down the row of telephone booths, holding the little
round plate attached to the mine detector up close to the doors as he
went. He stopped in his tracks the moment he saw us. Two policemen
closed in from behind till we were surrounded by all three.

 "What are you doing here?"

 "We're waiting." I was telling the truth.

 One of the carabinieri rushed off somewhere and came back a few minutes
later accompanied by a tall man in civilian clothes. When I was asked
the same question again, I replied that we were waiting for a
representative from the American embassy. The plainclothesman asked to
see my papers. As I was reaching for my wallet, the technician pointed
to the booth adjacent to us. Its glass panels were fogged up on the
inside-the steam left by our wet clothes. They were all eyes. The other
carabinieri touched my pants.

 "Wet!"

 "Right!" I snapped back. "Sopping wet!"

 They pointed their rifles at us.

 "Don't worry," I whispered to Annabella.

 The man in civilian clothes took a pair of handcuffs out of his pocket.
Without wasting any time on formalities, he handcuffed me to himself
while one of the other policemen looked after Annabella, who kept giving
me a funny look. The plainclothesman had a walkie-talkie strapped over
his shoulder; lifting it up close to his mouth, he said something in
Italian, but so fast I couldn't catch a word of it. He seemed pleased
with the reply. Then we were escorted through a side exit where three
more carabinieri joined the procession. The escalator was still out of
order. A generous flight of stairs brought us out into the departure
area. On the way I caught a glimpse of the patrol cars lined up outside,
and had just begun pondering our fate when a black Continental bearing
the embassy banner pulled up in front. I can't remember when the sight
of the Stars and Stripes has ever given me such a thrill. The scene that
followed could only have happened on stage: just as we were making our
way downstairs toward a glass door, du Bois, Randy, and one of the
embassy interpreters entered the building. They were a strange
sight-Randy in his Levis, the others in their dinner jackets. Randy
started when he saw me and leaned over to Fenner, who turned to the
interpreter, and it was he who approached us first.

 Both groups halted, and a short, picturesque scene followed. The
spokesman for the rescue team started up a conversation with the
plainclothesman, the one I was chained to. The talking was done in a
staccato manner; forgetting he was impeded by the handcuffs, my Italian
escort kept yanking my hand up every time he made a gesture. I didn't
understand a thing except "astronauto americano" and "presto, presto!"
When my escort appeared satisfied, he again resorted to the portable
radio. Even Fenner was granted the privilege of talking into it. Then
the agent spoke a few more words into the set, which responded in a way
that made him snap to attention; the situation was becoming more
farcical by the moment. The cuffs were taken off, there was an
about-face, and, falling into the same formation as before, only now
with the roles completely reversed--those arrested were now acting as
honorary escort-we headed upstairs to the first floor. On the way we
passed a waiting room filled with passengers bivouacked on whatever was
at hand, crossed a line of uniforms, filed through two
leather-upholstered doors, and finally wound up in a crowded office.

 With our arrival an apoplectic-looking giant started chasing people out
the door. All but about ten people actually left the room. The hoarse,
apoplectic-looking man turned out to be a deputy police chief. Someone
offered me an armchair; Annabella was already seated. Despite the fact
that it was broad daylight outside, all the lights in the room were on.
Cross sections of the Labyrinth on the wall, a model of same on a
portable stand next to the desk, glistening wet photos in the process of
drying on the desk top. It wasn't hard to guess what was in the photos.
Fenner, who was sitting behind me, gave my arm a slight squeeze: things
had gone so well because he'd phoned the police chief directly from the
embassy. There were a few people huddled around the desk, some others
perched on the window sill, and the deputy police chief paced the floor
in silent concentration. A teary-eyed secretary was ushered in from the
next room. The interpreter kept shifting his head back and forth between
me and the girl, ready to come to our rescue, but somehow my Italian
improved significantly. I learned that my jacket, along with Annabella's
purse, had been salvaged by a team of frogmen, thanks to which I was now
a chief suspect, because in the meantime they'd already got in touch
with the Hilton. I was suspected of being an accomplice of the Japanese.
After releasing the grenade, we had planned to make a getaway toward the
front, which was why we'd been among the first to board the escalator.
But somehow there must have been a mixup in plans: the Japanese was
killed in the explosion, while I saved myself by jumping over the
bridge. On this point there was a difference of opinion. Some took
Annabella to be a terrorist, others claimed I'd taken her as a hostage.

 All this was passed on to me confidentially; they were still waiting
for the arrival of the head of airport security before starting the
interrogation. As soon as the latter had appeared, Randy, acting as
self-appointed spokesman for the Americans, began briefing everyone on
the nature of our mission. I listened, at the same time discreetly
freeing my wet pant legs from my calves. He included in his report only
what was absolutely necessary. Fenner was no less sparing in details,
confirming that the embassy had been informed of our mission and that
Interpol, which had also been briefed, was supposed to have notified the
Italian authorities. This was a shrewd move on Former's part, because
now the burden of responsibility had been shifted to an international
organization. The Italians were not the least bit interested in our
operation; they were much keener to know what had happened on the
escalator. An engineer from the airport's staff said it was
inconceivable that I could have escaped from either the tank or the hall
without being familiar with the technical layout of the place. To which
Randy replied that one shouldn't underestimate the sort of commando
training administered by the USAF to people like me. He neglected to
mention that my training days had been over thirty years ago. The sound
of hammering vibrated through the walls. The rescue operation was still
under way; they were cutting away a part of the bridge, the section torn
apart by the explosion. So far they had dug out a total of nine bodies
from the rubble, plus twenty-two wounded, seven of them critically. A
commotion was heard outside the door; the deputy police chief motioned
to one of his officers to investigate. As he was leaving the room I had
a chance to observe, through a gap in the gathering, a little side table
where my jacket was lying, with all the seams ripped open, and right
beside it Annabella's purse, likewise demolished. The contents of her
purse were neatly arranged, like stacks of poker chips, on little
squares of white paper. The officer returned and, wringing his hands,
said, "Newspaper reporters!" A few of the more enterprising reporters
had managed to get this far before being turned back. Meanwhile another
officer introduced himself to me.

 "Lieutenant Canetti What can you tell us about the explosive used? How
was it smuggled in?"

 "The camera had a false bottom. He opened it and the back popped
out-film and all-like a jack-in-the-box. All he had to do then was to
pull out the hand grenade."

 "Are you familiar with this type of grenade?"

 "I've come across something like it in the States. Part of the primer
is located in the handle. As soon as I saw the handle was missing, I
realized the primer was a modified one. A highly explosive antipersonnel
bomb, metal content almost nil, with a casing made of solidified silicon
carbide."

 "And you just happened to be standing in that particular place on the
escalator? Is that it?"

 "Not quite."

 I took advantage of the pause, a nerve-racking pause interrupted only
by the hammering outside, to select my words carefully.

 "It wasn't just by accident that I was standing there. The Japanese let
the girl go ahead of him because he figured a kid would be the least
likely to cramp his style. The girl"-I nodded in her direction-"was at
the head of the line because she was intrigued by a stuffed dog. That's
my impression, anyway. Am I right, Annabella?"

 "Yes." She was visibly surprised,

 I smiled at her.

 "And as for me . . . I was in a hurry. It's irrational, I agree, but
when you're in a hurry you automatically want to be the first to board
the plane. And that goes for the boarding ramp as well. . . . It wasn't
deliberate on my part, it just happened that way."

 Everyone sighed. Canetti murmured something to the deputy police chief,
who nodded.

 "We would like to spare you, young lady . . . certain details of the
inquiry. Would you mind stepping outside for a while?"

 I glanced over at Annabella. A girlish smile-her first-just for me. She
got up. Someone opened the door for her. As soon as she was out of the
room, Canetti went at it again.

 "Now for the next question. When did you begin to suspect the
Japanese?"

 "I never suspected him for a moment; he was so totally convincing in
that tourist getup of his. Till the moment he crouched down, that is. At
first I thought he was out of his mind. But as soon as I saw he'd
triggered the grenade, I figured I had about three seconds, more or
less."

 "How many did you have exactly?"

 "Hard to say. The grenade didn't explode right away when he pulled the
pin, it must have had a delay mechanism. My guess is two, maybe two and
a half seconds."

 "That would coincide with our own estimate," said one of the men over
by the window.

 "You seem to have trouble walking. Were you injured?"

 "Yes, but not by the explosion. The blast came just as I was landing in
the water. How high up is the bridge? About five meters?"

 "Four and a half."

 "That would account for one second. My reaching for the grenade and
clearing the railing would account for another. You asked if I was
injured. I banged my back against something while I was in the air. I
once fractured my tail bone."

 "You hit a deflector," explained the man seated on the window sill. "A
boom equipped with a diagonal shield designed to deflect an object into
the center of the funnel. You've never heard of such a deflector?"

 "No."

 "I beg your pardon, but it's still my turn!" protested Canetti. "Did
that man-that Japanese-actually throw the grenade?"

 "No. He held on to it till the very end."

 "Didn't he try to escape?"

 "Nope."

 "Poltrinelli, head of airport security." The newcomer was leaning
against the desk, dressed in a pair of grease-stained overalls. "Are you
absolutely sure the man wanted to die?"

 "Did he want to die? Yes. He made no attempt to save his own skin. He
could have unloaded the whole camera if he'd wanted to."

 "Excuse me, but this is an important point for us. Isn't it possible he
planned to jump over the bridge after throwing the grenade but was
prevented from doing so by your surprise attack?"

 "Impossible. Though I could be wrong," I conceded. "For one thing, I
didn't attack him. I was only trying to get the grenade out of his hands
after he pulled it away from his face; I could see the pin sticking out
between his teeth. It was made of nylon instead of metal. He was using
both hands to hold the thing. That's not how you throw a hand grenade."

 "How did you attack him? From above?"

 "That's how I would have attacked if the stairs had been empty or if
we'd been last in line. That's why he knew better than to stand at the
back. Any hand grenade can be knocked loose by a straight jab from
above, in which case it would just have gone sailing down the stairs. If
I'd only poked it out of his hand, it would have landed close by. Even
though it's against regulations, people still put their hand luggage on
the steps. In which case the grenade wouldn't have rolled very far.
That's why I swung from the left, and that's what took him by surprise."

 "From the left, you say? Are you left-handed?"

 "Yes. He wasn't expecting that. He ducked the wrong way. The guy was a
real pro. He stuck out his elbow to guard from the right."

 "Then what happened?"

 "After that he kicked me in the knee and threw himself backward. He
must have been extremely well trained; even if you're willing to die,
it's hard as hell to throw yourself backward down a flight of stairs.
Most of us would rather die facing forward."

 "But the stairs were crowded."

 "Right! And yet there was no one standing behind him. Everyone was
trying to move back out of the way."

 "He wasn't counting on that."

 "I know, but nothing was left to chance. He was too slick, he had every
move down pat."

 The security chief squeezed the desk top till his knuckles turned
white. He fired away with his questions as if conducting a
cross-examination.

 "I wish to emphasize that as far as we're concerned your behavior is
beyond reproach. But I repeat: it is of vital importance to us that we
get at the facts in this case. You understand why, don't you?"

 "The question is whether they have people ready to face certain death."

 "Precisely. That's why I must ask you to reconsider the exact sequence
of events that took place during that one second. Let me put myself in
his place. I release the safety catch. Next I plan to jump over the
bridge. If I stick to my plan, you intercept the grenade and throw it
back at me as I'm going down. I hesitate, and it's that split second of
hesitation that proves decisive. Couldn't that have been the way it
happened?"

 "No. A person planning to throw a hand grenade doesn't hold it with
both hands."

 "But you shoved him as you were going for the grenade."

 "No. If my fingers hadn't slipped I would've pulled him toward me. I
couldn't get a grip on him; he got away from me by kneeling over
backward. That was a deliberate move on his part. I confess I
underestimated him. I should have just grabbed him and dumped him over
the railing along with the grenade. That's what I would have done if I
hadn't been so startled."

 "He might dropped the grenade by your feet."

 "Then I'd have gone over the railing with him. Or tried to, at least.
Of course it's easy to say afterward, but I think I would have gambled.
I weighed twice as much as he did, and his arms were no bigger than a
kid's."

 "Thank you. No further questions."

 "Scarron, engineer." The man introducing himself was young looking but
prematurely gray; he wore civilian clothes and a pair of horn-rimmed
glasses. "Can you think of any security measures that might have
prevented such an attack?"

 "You're asking too much of me. It looks to me as if you've taken care
of everything."

 They were prepared for many things, he said, but not everything. They'd
even found a way of counteracting the so-called Lod Type Operation. At
the push of a button, isolated sections of the escalator could be
converted into a sloping plane capable of depositing people in a water
tank.

 "One equipped with the same kind of foam?"

 "No. That's an antidetonation tank designed strictly for under the
bridge. No, I had other kinds in mind."

 "Well, then . . . what was stopping you? Not that it would have
mattered, really. . ."

 "Exactly. His execution was too fast."

 He pointed to the ulterior of the Labyrinth shown on the display map.
The entire route was in fact conceived as a kind of firing zone, one
that could be flooded from above with water released at a pressure great
enough to sweep away everything in its path. The funnel was thought to
be escape-proof; the failure to secure the escape hatches had been a
serious oversight. He offered to take me over to the model, but I
declined.

 The engineer looked flustered. He was dying to show me the results of
his farsightedness, even though he must have realized it was a waste of
time. He had solicited my opinion hoping I wouldn't be able to offer
any.

 Just when I thought the interrogation was over, an elderly man sitting
in the chair left vacant by Annabella raised his hand.

 "Dr. Torcelli. I have only one question. Can you explain how you were
able to save the girl?" I gave it a moment's thought.

 "It was a lucky coincidence, that's all. She was standing between us.
To get at the Japanese I had to shove her out of the way; the impact of
his fall made me collide with her. It was a low railing; if she'd been
an adult I would never have got her over. I doubt whether I would've
even attempted it."

 "What if it had been a woman?"

 "There was a woman," I said, meeting his gaze. "In front of me. A
blonde in pearl-trimmed pants, the one with the stuffed dog. What ever
happened to her?"

 "She bled to death." The comment came from the head of security. "She
had both legs torn off by the explosion."

 There was a lapse in the conversation. Those seated on the window sill
stood up, and there was a shuffling of chairs, but my thoughts kept
going back to that moment on the escalator. One thing I knew: I hadn't
wasted any time in going over the railing. Grabbing hold of it with my
right arm, I'd taken off from the step with my other arm wrapped around
the girl. By hurdling the railing in the manner of a side vault, I'd
forced her to accompany me on my way down. Whether I'd put my arm around
her deliberately or because she just happened to be standing there, I
couldn't say.

 Although they were through with me, I wanted some assurance I would be
spared any publicity. This was interpreted as an expression of undue
modesty, something I refused to admit. It had nothing to do with
modesty. I simply had no desire to become personally implicated in the
"massacre on the steps." The only one who guessed my real motive was
Randy.

 Fenner suggested I stay overnight in Rome as a guest of the embassy.
But on this point I was equally adamant: I insisted on taking the next
available flight to Paris, which turned out to be a Cessna carrying a
shipment of materials used at a conference that had ended that afternoon
with a cocktail reception; this explained why Fenner and the interpreter
had arrived in dinner jackets. We were drifting toward the door in small
groups, still engaged in conversation, when a woman with magnificent
dark eyes, whose presence I had overlooked till now, took me aside. She
turned out to be a psychologist, the one who'd been looking after
Annabella. She asked if I was serious about wanting to take the girl
along with me to Paris.

 "Why, yes. She must have told you about my promise."

 A smile. She asked whether I had any children of my own.

 "No. Well . . . let's say not quite. I have two nephews."

 "And are they very fond of you?"

 "You bet they are."

 She then revealed Annabella's secret. The girl had been worried sick.
Even though I'd saved her life she had a very low opinion of me, taking
me for an accomplice of the Japanese or something very close to it.
That's why she'd tried to run away. In the rest room I gave her an even
worse scare.

 "How, for God's sake?"

 Not for a moment did she fall for the story about the astronaut. Nor
for the one about the embassy. The telephone conversation she took to be
with another accomplice. And since her father owned a winery, she
assumed I was inquiring about her Clermont address as part of a plan to
kidnap her in exchange for a ransom. The psychologist made me swear not
to breathe a word of this to Annabella.

 "Maybe she'll feel like telling me herself," I said. "Never, or perhaps
ten years from now. You may know something about boys, but girls are
different."

 Another smile, and she was gone. I went to take care of our flight
reservations. Only one seat left; I insisted there had to be two.
Negotiations by telephone. Finally some VIP was persuaded to give up his
seat. To Annabella. Fenner was in a hurry but offered to cancel some
important meeting if I agreed to join him for lunch. I declined a second
time. After Randy and the others had driven off, I inquired whether the
girl and I could get a bite to eat in one of the airport facilities. The
bars and cafeterias had all been closed down, but an exception was made
in our case: we were now above the law. A man-dark-featured,
bushy-haired, an undercover agent-escorted us to a small restaurant
located on the other side of the departure area. Annabella's eyes were
red and swollen: she'd been crying. Before long she started getting
prissy. While the waiter was taking our order and I was debating what
she should have to drink, she commented in a rather brisk,
matter-of-fact tone that at home she was always served wine. She had on
a blouse that was a couple of sizes too big, with rolled-up sleeves, and
a pair of shoes that also looked a size too large. I was just beginning
to enjoy the comfort of dry pants and the fact that I didn't have to
stick to a diet of spaghetti any more, when I suddenly remembered her
parents. There was a chance the news story might make the afternoon
edition. We quickly drafted a telegram message, but when I got up from
the table our cicerone sprang out of nowhere and offered to take care of
it. When it came time to pay, we were treated as guests of the
management. I tipped the waiter with the sort of generosity Annabella
might have expected of a real astronaut. In her eyes I had suddenly
become a celebrity and a hero-and a confidant, to the point where she
even told me how she was dying to change clothes. Our chaperon escorted
us to the Alitalia Hotel, where our luggage was already waiting for us
in our room.

 I had to hurry her along a little. At last, looking very prim and
proper, she was ready, and with due decorum we embarked for the
airplane. We were picked up by the airport's acting managing
director-the managing director was temporarily indisposed, owing to a
slight nervous breakdown-and driven out to the Cessna in one of the
little Fiats used by the air controllers. At the foot of the ladder a
rather courtly young Italian apologized for intruding and asked whether
I cared for any souvenir photos of the recent drama. The photos would be
forwarded to any address requested. I thought of the blond woman and
thanked him anyway. A round of farewell handshakes. In the flurry of
handshakes I could have sworn that I shook the same hand that had held
me captive a short while ago.

 I enjoyed flying in small planes. After a birdlike takeoff our Cessna
veered northward. We landed at Orly shortly after seven. Annabella's
father was there to meet her. Before landing we exchanged addresses, and
to this day I still have fond memories of her. I wish I could say the
same about her father. He was profusely grateful, even paying me a
farewell compliment inspired no doubt by his having watched the
television coverage of the "massacre on the steps." He said I had esprit
de I'escalier.

  

  

 Paris

 (Orly-Garges-Orly)

  

  

 I spent the night at Orly, at the Hotel Air France, since by now my
contact had already left the Centre National de Recherche Scientifique
and I didn't particularly feel like bothering him at home. Before going
to sleep I had to get up and close the windows, because my nose was
starting to act up again. It was then I realized I'd gone the whole day
without sneezing once.

 As it turned out I could have taken Fenner up on his offer, but then
I'd been in such a hurry to reach Paris.

 The next morning, the first thing after breakfast, I called the CNRS
only to find out that my contact was on vacation, moving into a new
house, but that he could still be reached. I then placed a call to his
house in Garges, but it turned out he was just having his new phone
connected. Announced or unannounced, I decided to pay him a visit. At
the Gare du Nord the suburban trains were not in service, due to a
strike. Seeing the mile-long line-up in front of the cabstand, I
inquired about the nearest car rental agency-it turned out to be another
Hertz-and settled for a Peugeot compact.

 Trying to get around Paris, especially when you're unsure of your
destination, is sheer hell. Not far from the Opera-it wasn't on my
itinerary; I wound up there quite by accident-a delivery van rammed into
my bumper; the damage was so minor I kept on going, my mind now
conjuring up visions of Canadian lakes and glacial waters as a
distraction from the downpour of blazing-hot sun, unseasonable for this
time of year. By mistake I wound up in a place called Sarcelles, one of
those ugly, nondescript little settlements; then later I got stuck in
front of a railway crossing, sweated, and pined after an air
conditioner. Dr. Philippe Barth, my contact, was a well-known French
computer scientist who also served as a scientific consultant for the
Surete. The team he headed was in the process of programming a computer
capable of solving multifactorial problems in which the number of
case-related facts exceeded the storage capacity of the human memory.

 The exterior of the house had just been freshly stuccoed. Surrounding
the house was an old-fashioned garden: one wing shaded by stately elms,
a gravel driveway, a flower bed in the center-marigolds, if I'm not
mistaken (botany is the only subject astronauts are spared). Parked in
front of a shed serving temporarily as a garage was a 2 CV,
mud-spattered from the windows down, and right beside it a cream-colored
Peugeot 604, its doors wide open, floormats spread out on the lawn, and
dripping all over with soapsuds. Some kids were washing the car, but
with such bustle and teamwork I had trouble counting them at first. They
were all Barth's kids. The oldest two, a boy and a girl, greeted me in
collective English: as soon as one began to falter, the other would fill
in the missing word. How did they know they were supposed to speak
English? A telegram had come from Randy announcing the arrival of an
American astronaut. How could they tell I was the astronaut? No one else
was in the habit of wearing suspenders. Good old Randy. While I was
talking with the older kids, the younger one-I couldn't tell whether it
was a boy or a girl-kept circling around me, hands folded behind its
back, as if hunting for the spot that presented me in the most
interesting light. I was told their father was very busy, and just as I
was debating whether to go inside the house or to join the car-washing
party, Dr. Barth leaned out of the ground-floor window. He looked
surprisingly young, but then I was still not accustomed to my own age. I
was given a polite but restrained welcome, which made me wonder if I
hadn't made a mistake in approaching him by way of the Surete, rather
than the CNRS. But Randy was on friendlier terms with the police than
with the scientific community.

 Barth snowed me into the library-his study was still in a state of
chaos following the move-and then briefly excused himself while he went
to change out of his varnish-stained smock. The house had been made to
look like new already; rows of books stood freshly arrayed on the
shelves, the smell of wax and varnish was everywhere. On the wall I
noticed a blowup of Barth and his kids mounted on an elephant. Judging
from the face in the photo I would never have guessed he was the promise
of French computer science, but then I'd already had occasion to observe
that people in the exact sciences tend to be less conspicuous in
appearance than those in the humanities.

 Barth came back into the room, frowning at his hands, which still
showed traces of varnish, prompting me to suggest various ways of
getting rid of the stains. We sat down by the window. I started out by
saying I was neither a detective nor a criminologist, but that I had
become involved in a rather bizarre and morbid case, and that I had come
to him as a last resort. He was impressed by my fluent but not very
European French. I explained that I was of French Canadian origin.

 Randy had more confidence in my personal charm than I did. I was so
anxious to gain this man's favor that I was somewhat embarrassed by the
situation. The Surete was not a reference that he seemed to hold in
particularly high esteem. Then, too, the attitude prevailing in academic
circles is a decidedly antimilitaristic one. In such circles it's widely
believed that astronauts are recruited from the armed forces, which was
not always so, at least not in my case. But then I could hardly confide
in him my whole life history. I was in doubt, therefore, as to what
course I should take to break the ice. It wasn't till much later that he
confessed to having been somewhat moved by the look of utter desperation
on my face. My guess had been right: the colonel Randy had got to
introduce me was in Barth's eyes a clown; nor was Barth exactly on the
best of terms with the Surete. But sitting there in the library, I had
no way of knowing that this indecision of mine was the best possible
strategy.

 He agreed to hear my story. I'd been involved with the case for so long
I could have recited every detail from memory. I'd also brought along a
set of microfilms containing all the documentation needed to illustrate
my lecture, and Barth had just finished unpacking his projector. We
plugged it in, leaving the windows and curtains open since the trees
were already suffusing the room with a greenish half-light.

 "It's a jigsaw puzzle," I began, feeding the first reel into the
projector. "A puzzle, consisting of numerous pieces; each of them is
distinct enough on its own, but when fitted together they make for an
indistinct whole. Not even Interpol has been able to crack the case.
Just recently we conducted a simulation mission, the details of which
I'll save till later on. The results were negative."

 I was aware that his computer program was still in the experimental
stage, that it had never been tested in the field, and that it was the
subject of conflicting reports; but I was anxious to arouse his
curiosity, and so I decided to give him a succinct version of the whole
affair.

 On June 27 of last year, the management of the Savoy Hotel in Naples
notified the police that Robert T. Coburn, an American, aged fifty, had
failed to return after setting out for the beach on the previous
morning. His disappearance was all the more suspicious in that Coburn, a
guest of the hotel for the past ten days, had been in the habit of going
to the beach every morning, even walking the hundred-meter distance in
his beach robe. That same evening his robe was found in his cabin by the
beach attendant.

 Coburn had the reputation of being an excellent swimmer. Twenty years
ago he had been a member of the American crawling team, and though he
had a tendency to gain weight, he had managed to keep reasonably fit for
a man his age. Since the beach was crowded, his disappearance went
unnoticed. Five days later his body was washed ashore by the waves of a
passing storm. His death would have been attributed to accidental
drowning, a not unusual occurrence on every major beach, were it not for
several minor details that later prompted an investigation. The dead
man, a real-estate broker from Illinois, had no wife. Since he had died
of unnatural causes an autopsy was performed, the results of which
indicated that he had drowned on an empty stomach. Yet the hotel
management claimed he had left for the beach right after breakfast. A
minor discrepancy, perhaps, but the police commission was not on the
best of terms with a group of city aldermen who had invested money in
the renovation of certain hotels- among them the Savoy, which had
recently been the scene of another incident, to be discussed later on.
The police commission took a special interest in those hotels in which
guests had met with accidents. A young assistant was put in charge of
conducting a secret investigation, and he immediately placed the hotel
and its guests under close surveillance. Being a freshly minted
detective, he was anxious to sparkle in the eyes of his superior, and,
thanks to his zealous enthusiasm, some very odd things were revealed.
Coburn's daily routine had consisted of mornings at the beach, naps in
the afternoon,  then early-evening visits to the Vittorini brothers'
health spa for the mineral-bath treatment that a local doctor, Dr.
Giono, had prescribed for him- Coburn was being treated for the early
stages of rheumatism. It also developed that during the week before his
death Coburn had been involved in three car accidents, always on his way
back from the Vittorini resort and each time under similar
circumstances, namely, while trying to run a red light at an
intersection. In every case the damage was minor, amounting to no more
than dented fenders, and Coburn got off with only a fine and a warning.
It was also around this time that he began eating supper in his room,
rather than in the hotel dining room-before letting the waiter in,
Coburn would first check through the door to make sure he was an
employee of the hotel-and he soon gave up taking his daily stroll around
the bay at sunset. These were indications that he felt harassed, even
personally threatened-running a red light is a well-known method for
shaking a tailing car-and such an interpretation would also explain why
the deceased man had taken certain precautionary steps inside the hotel.
But the investigation failed to turn up any further evidence. Coburn,
whose childless marriage had ended in divorce fourteen years earlier,
had made no friends either in the Savoy or downtown. It was later
discovered that on the day before his death he had tried to buy a
revolver from a local gun dealer, not realizing that by Italian law he
was required to have a gun license. Since he didn't have one, he bought
an imitation fountain pen designed to spray an attacker with a mixture
of tear gas and an indelible dye. The pen was later found, still
unwrapped, among his personal belongings, and so they were able to trace
it back to the local retailer. Coburn had known no Italian, and the gun
dealer had only a weak command of English. All that was learned was that
Coburn had asked for a weapon capable of repelling a dangerous attacker,
and not just some petty thief. After establishing that all the accidents
had occurred while Coburn was on his way back from the health spa, the
assistant then proceeded to the Vittorinis. Because of the American's
generosity toward the staff, they had no trouble remembering him. There
had been nothing extraordinary about his behavior except that lately he
had seemed more pressed for time, frequently ignoring the bath
attendant's warning to wait ten minutes and dry off before going
outside. Such meager findings failed to satisfy the investigating
officer, who, in a fit of enthusiasm and inspiration, undertook a review
of the establishment's books, which contained a record of payments made
by all its bathing customers as well as those requiring hydrotherapeutic
treatment.

 Since the middle of May a total of ten Americans had visited the
Vittorini spa, four of whom, like Coburn, had paid for a season pass
(one could buy a one-, two-, or four-week pass) but failed to show up
after the eighth or ninth day. Not that there was anything particularly
unusual about that, since any one of them might have been called away
unexpectedly and thus had to forgo whatever refund he had coming. But
now that the assistant knew their names, he decided to follow up his
investigation. When later asked why he had limited himself to American
citizens, he was not able to give a clear-cut answer. At one point he
claimed he had hit on the idea of an American connection after learning
that the police had recently smashed a narcotics ring trafficking in
heroin between Naples and the States; on another occasion he said he had
restricted himself to Americans for the simple reason that Coburn had
been an American.

 Of the four who failed to take full advantage of their subscriptions,
the first, Arthur J. Holler, an attorney from New York, had suddenly
left town after being notified of his brother's death. He was now back
in his native city. Married and thirty-six years of age, he was employed
as legal consultant for a large advertising agency.

 The remaining three showed a certain physical resemblance to Coburn. In
each case the person involved was a single male, between forty and fifty
years of age, reasonably well-to-do, and invariably a patient of Dr.
Giono. One of the Americans, Ross Brunner, Jr., had stayed at the same
hotel as Coburn, the Savoy; the other two, Nelson C. Emmings and Adam
Osborn, at boardinghouses that offered more modest accommodations but
were also situated by the bay. Photos obtained from the States
established beyond any doubt the physical resemblances of the missing:
athletic builds, a tendency toward obesity, signs of balding, obvious
attempts to camouflage same. Though Coburn's body was subjected to a
thorough examination in the Institute of Forensic Medicine and showed no
traces of violence, and though the cause of death was attributed to
accidental drowning due to a muscle cramp or physical exhaustion, the
police commission recommended in favor of continuing the investigation.
Further inquiry was made into the fate of the other three Americans, and
it was soon learned that Osborn had left Rome without notice, that
Emmings had flown to Paris, and that Brunner had gone insane. Brunner's
case was already a matter of police record. Though originally a guest of
the Savoy, he had been lying in the city hospital since early May, He
was an automobile designer from Detroit. During the first week of his
stay in Naples he was a model of good behavior, spending mornings at the
solarium and evenings at the Vittorini spa, except on Sundays, when he
made a habit of going on various sightseeing tours. Since his trips were
all arranged through a local travel agency, a branch of which was
located in the Savoy, it was easy to establish his itineraries. Among
the places he visited were Pompeii and Herculaneum; he took no sea
baths, since his doctor had advised against it because of his kidney
stones. Even though he had paid in advance, he canceled a trip to Anzio
on the day before it was scheduled to leave; for the preceding two days
his behavior had also been somewhat erratic. He gave up walking
altogether, demanding his car even when his destination was only two
blocks away, which turned out to be a nuisance because a new parking lot
was then under construction and cars belonging to the guests had to be
squeezed into a neighboring lot,

 Brunner refused to pick up the car himself and insisted that it be
brought around by one of the hotel staff; this gave rise to several
altercations. That Sunday, he not only passed up the sightseeing tour
but also failed to show up for supper, ordering through room service
instead. No sooner did the waiter set foot inside the door than Brunner
jumped him from behind and tried to strangle him. In the scuffle he
broke one of the waiter's fingers before jumping out the window,
suffering a broken leg and a fractured pelvis in the two-story fall. At
the hospital he was diagnosed as having suffered-in addition to the
multiple fractures-a mental blackout caused by an attack of
schizophrenia. The hotel management was understandably anxious to hush
up the whole affair. It was this incident in particular that prompted
the commission's decision-following the death of Coburn-to widen the
scope of the inquiry. The case now came under general review. The
question arose whether Brunner had in fact jumped from the window, or
whether he had been pushed. Yet no evidence could be found to challenge
the waiter's credibility. He happened to be an elderly man with no
criminal record.

 Brunner remained in the hospital, not because of his mental condition,
which gradually improved, but because of complications arising from the
mending of his bone, while a relative who was supposed to come for him
from the States kept postponing his visit. Finally, a prominent
physician diagnosed Brunners illness as insanity caused by an acute
psychotic seizure of unknown etiology: the investigation had reached a
dead end.

 The second American, Adam Osborn, a middle-aged bachelor with a degree
in economics, had driven an Avis rental car from Naples to Rome on June
5. In his hurry to leave the hotel, he had left behind such personal
items as an electric razor, several brushes, a chest expander, and a
pair of slippers. The management of the Savoy, wishing to forward his
things, phoned the hotel in Rome where Osborn had made a reservation but
was told that no one had checked in under that name. The hotel soon gave
up trying to track down its capricious guest, but a more thorough
investigation revealed that Osborn had never reached his destination. At
the Avis rental agency the detective learned that the rental car, an
Opel Record, had been found parked in the emergency lane in the vicinity
of Zagarolo, just outside Rome-in perfect running condition and with
Osborn's luggage still intact. Since the Opel belonged to and was
registered with the film's fleet in Rome-it had been delivered to Naples
by a French tourist en route from Rome-the agency notified the Rome
police. Osborn's things were seized, and the police in Rome decided to
launch a separate investigation of their own when Osborn was found at
dawn the following day- dead. He had been run over by a car on the
Strada del Sole, at the Palestrina exit, roughly nine kilometers from
where the rental car had been abandoned.

 The assumption was that for no apparent reason he had climbed out of
his car and started walking along the shoulder of the road until
reaching the first exit, where he became the victim of a hit-and-run
accident. The police were able to reconstruct the exact sequence of
events, because Osborn had accidentally spilled some eau de cologne on
the car's rubber matting; a police dog had little trouble in following
the scent, even though it had rained during the night. It seems Osborn
had kept to the side of the road the whole time except when the highway
cut through a hill, at which point he had left the concrete road and
climbed to the top of the nearest knoll. After a while he returned to
the road and resumed hiking. When he came to the exit ramp, he went
zigzagging down the road like a drunk. He died instantly of a fractured
skull. The road was spotted with blood and strewn with splinters of
headlight glass when they found the body. So far the police in Rome had
been unable to track down the hit-and-run driver. The most curious thing
of all was that, despite the heavy afternoon traffic, Osborn had been
able to walk a distance of nine kilometers on the highway without being
noticed. If nothing else, he should have attracted the attention of a
highway patrol car, since pedestrians are not allowed on the highway.
The explanation came a few days later, when a golf bag was found dumped
early one morning in front of a police station and identified as
Osborn's through the name engraved on the handgrips. This led to
speculation that he might have been carrying the golf bag over his
shoulder and that, because the clubs were covered by a hood and he
himself was wearing a pair of jeans and a short-sleeved shirt, the
passing drivers might have mistaken him for a member of the road crew.
The clubs were probably left lying at the scene of the accident; whoever
picked them up must have read about the investigation in the papers,
panicked at the thought of becoming personally implicated in a criminal
matter, and got rid of them.

 Osborn's motive for abandoning the car and taking off with the golf
clubs was still not known. The empty cologne bottle and traces of
spilled cologne found on the floorboard suggested that he might have
splashed the cologne on his face to ward off an attack of nausea or even
a fainting spell. The autopsy failed to turn up any traces of alcohol or
toxins in his blood. Before leaving the hotel Osborn had set fire to
several sheets of handwritten stationery in a wastebasket. Though
nothing could be salvaged from the ashes, they found among the items
left behind an empty envelope addressed to the police, suggesting that
at one point he had considered notifying the police but later changed
his mind.

 The third American, Emmings, was a press correspondent for United Press
International. On a return trip from the Far East, where he had been on
a recent assignment, he decided to stop over in Naples. He made a
two-week reservation when he registered at the hotel but then
unexpectedly left town on the tenth day of his stay. At the British
European Airways agency he booked a seat on a Naples-London flight, and
it took only one phone call to establish that immediately after landing
in London he had committed suicide in one of the airport rest rooms. He
shot himself in the mouth, and died three days later in the hospital
without ever regaining consciousness.

 The reason for his abrupt departure was completely legitimate: he had
received a cable from UPI instructing him to conduct a series of
interviews in connection with rumors of a new scandal in Parliament.
Emmings had the reputation of being a courageous and well-balanced man.
He had served as a war correspondent in Vietnam, and before that as an
apprentice reporter in Nagasaki following the Japanese surrender, where
one of his eyewitness accounts had brought him instant fame.

 Confronted with such facts, the assistant was eager to follow up his
investigation by flying to London, the Far East, and even Japan, but
instead he was instructed to interrogate those persons associated with
Emmings during his stopover in Naples. Emmings had traveled alone, so
they again had to rely on the testimony of hotel personnel. His behavior
revealed nothing out of the ordinary. But the maid recalled that while
cleaning his room after his departure she had come across traces of
blood in the washbasin and bathtub, as well as a bloody bandage on the
floor. According to the autopsy report in London, Emmings had suffered a
laceration on his left wrist. The cut was covered with a bandage and had
a fresh scab. The conclusion reached was that Emmings had tried to
commit suicide in the hotel by slashing his wrists but had then bandaged
the wound before riding out to the airport. He, too, had taken the
mineral baths, made daily trips to the beach, and toured the bay in a
rented motorboat-in other words, had behaved in a most normal fashion.

 Three days before he died, Emmings had gone to Rome to see a press
attache at the American embassy, an old acquaintance of his. The attache
later testified that Emmings had been in high spirits, but that on the
way back to the airport he had never stopped glancing out the rear
window, to the point where it became obvious.

 Jokingly he had asked Emmings if he'd made any enemies in Al Fatah. In
reply Emmings had smiled and hinted he was on to something else,
something he couldn't leak to anyone, not even to his friend, though it
didn't really matter since it would soon be all over the front pages.
Four days later he was dead.

 Enlisting the help of several agents, the assistant went back to the
health spa, this time to review the records of previous years. His
presence at the Vittorini spa was becoming less and less welcome, since
these constant invasions by the police were jeopardizing the
establishment's good name. But when all the books were finally brought
out into the open, eighteen new leads were uncovered.

 Even though the pattern of events remained a mystery, the assistant
began focusing his attention on men who were middle-aged foreigners and
whose daily routine was suddenly interrupted some time between the
second and third weeks of their stay.

 Two of them turned out to be false leads. Both involved American
citizens who had unexpectedly cut short their stay in Naples-one because
a strike had been declared at his company, the other because he had to
appear in court as a plaintiff in a suit filed against a construction
company accused of installing a defective drainage system on his
property. The date of the hearing had been inexplicably moved up.

 In the case of the owner whose company had been struck, the
investigation was finally called off when it was learned that the owner
had died and that a separate inquest was already under way as a matter
of course. Eventually the police in the States reported the man had died
of a cerebral hemorrhage exactly two months after his return trip to
America. For years the deceased man had suffered from a cerebral
vascular disease.

 The next lead, the third, involved an actual criminal case that was
never included in the official file because this American's
"disappearance" was caused by his having been arrested by the local
police. Acting on a tip from Interpol, the police uncovered a large
amount of heroin on the suspect. He was presently awaiting trial in a
Naples prison.

 Three of the eight leads were thus eliminated. Two of the others seemed
questionable. One involved a forty-year-old American who had come to the
Vittorini spa for hydrotherapeutic treatment but who had stopped coming
after injuring his spine in a water-skiing accident. The accident
occurred while he was wearing a sailing kite harnessed to his back that
allowed him to maneuver up and down on the towline; when the motorboat
suddenly made an abrupt turn, the man came crashing down from a height
of more than a dozen meters. Because of his injury he was laid up in a
cast for a long time. The driver of the motorboat was also an American,
a close friend of the victim; the incident still wasn't considered
closed, because while convalescing in the hospital the man with the back
injury developed a fever and began raving in delirium. The diagnosis
wavered between some exotic disease contracted in the tropics and a
delayed case of food poisoning.

 The other questionable lead concerned a pensioner in his sixties, a
naturalized American from Italy who had gone to Naples to collect his
pension in dollars. He had been taking the mineral baths for his
rheumatism when he suddenly interrupted the treatments, claiming they
were bad for his heart. He was found drowned in the bathtub in his own
apartment, exactly one week after his last visit to the spa. The autopsy
ascribed the death to congestive heart failure and sudden cardiac
arrest. Although the coroner uncovered nothing suspicious, the chief
investigator, who had only stumbled on the case while checking the
Vittorini records, ordered it reopened. Speculation arose that the
pensioner might actually have been pushed under water: the bathroom door
had been unlocked from the inside. An interrogation of the dead man's
relatives failed to confirm any of these suspicions; not even a material
motive could be established, since the pension was only a lifetime
annuity.

 Of the original eight leads only the last three led to the discovery of
new victims, victims whose fates were typical of the evolving pattern.
Again it was a matter of single men just past their prime, only now it
was no longer restricted to Americans. The first was Ivar Olaf Leyge, an
engineer from Malmo. The second was Karl Heinz Schimmelreiter, an
Austrian from Graz. The third was James Brigg, a free-lance screenwriter
identifying himself as an author, who, on his way over from Washington,
had stopped off in Paris and contacted Olympia Press, a publisher that
specialized in erotic and pornographic literature. During his stay in
Naples he boarded with an Italian family. His landlord and landlady knew
nothing about him except what he himself had declared when he introduced
himself, namely, that he was interested in exploring the "outer fringes
of life"; it later came as news to them that he had been a regular
visitor to the spa. On the fifth day he failed to return for the night.
He was never again seen alive. Before notifying the police, the owners
entered his room with a spare key to see what their tenant had left
behind, only to discover that all his things were missing except an
empty suitcase. They then recalled having seen their tenant leave the
house every day with his briefcase full, only to return later with it
empty. There was little reason to doubt their testimony, since the same
family had been renting out rooms for years and enjoyed a spotless
reputation. Brigg had been a bald man, of athletic build, with a face
showing the scars of a harelip operation. He left no survivors, at least
none who could be located. When he was later questioned, the publisher
in Paris testified that Brigg had proposed writing a book exposing the
seamier side of American beauty contests, a proposal the publisher had
rejected as being too conventional. These statements could be neither
confirmed nor denied. Brigg's disappearance had been so complete that no
one could be found who had seen him since the day he vacated his room.
Random inquiries made among the city's prostitutes, pimps, and junkies
led nowhere. That was why the Brigg case was still classified as
questionable; and, strange as it might sound, the only reason it was
being kept on active file was that the man suffered from hay fever.

 Not so the Swede and the Austrian, whose fates were never open to
doubt. Leyge, a long-time member of the Himalaya Club and conqueror of
Nepal's seven-thousand-foot range, had landed in Naples after divorcing
his wife. He stayed at the Hotel Roma downtown, never went swimming,
stayed away from the beach, made use of the solarium, took mineral
baths, and made the rounds of the museums. Late in the evening of May 19
he left for Rome, even though he had originally intended to spend the
entire summer in Naples. In Rome he left all his things in the car and
headed straight for the Colosseum, where he climbed his way up to the
highest tier and plunged down the outer wall. The coroner's verdict was
"death due to suicide or accident as a result of a sudden mental
blackout." A tall and well-proportioned blond, the Swede looked young
for his age and was extremely fussy about his outward appearance and
about keeping fit: tennis every morning at six, no drinking, no
smoking-in short, a fanatic when it came to physical fitness. The
divorce had been settled by mutual consent, with incompatibility as the
reason. These facts were established with the help of the Swedish police
to rule out sudden depression as a possible suicide motive following the
breakup of a long marriage. It was later revealed that the couple had
actually been separated for a number of years and had filed for divorce
to make everything legal.

 The story of the Austrian Schimmelreiter turned out to be more
complicated. Although present in Naples since the middle of winter, he
had not started the mineral bath treatment until April. Noticing a
definite improvement in his condition, he had his ticket extended for
the mouth of May. A week later he couldn't sleep, turned grumpy and
irritable, and went around claiming that people were rummaging through
his things; when his spare pair of gold-rimmed glasses disappeared and
later turned up behind the sofa, he insisted it was the work of a thief.
He had been living in a small boardinghouse and had been on friendly
terms with his Italian landlady up to the time of his personality
change, and so it was possible to get an exact description of his
habits. On May 10 Schimmelreiter tripped on the stairs and had to spend
some time in bed recuperating from a bruised knee. Within the space of
two days he became more sociable, made up with his landlady, and, when
his rheumatism refused to go away even after the pain in his knee
subsided, resumed his trips to the baths. A few days later he had the
whole boardinghouse on its feet with screams for help. Possibly
imagining that someone was hiding behind the mirror-unlikely, since it
was a wall mirror-he shattered it with his fist and tried to escape out
the window. The landlady, unable to cope with the hysterical
Schimmelreiter, called in a doctor acquaintance who made a diagnosis of
coronary artery disease, a condition often leading to a minor stroke.
The landlady insisted that the Austrian be transferred to the hospital.
But while still at the boardinghouse he managed to smash the bathroom
mirror and another one on the landing before being relieved of his
walking stick. At the hospital he was given to fits of anxiety and
crying spells and would try to hide under the bed, while frequent
attacks of asthma-he was also an asthmatic-only made his condition
worse. To one of the interns in charge of him he secretly confided that
on two occasions an attendant at the Vittorini spa had tried to kill him
by slipping poison into the bathing water and that this was surely the
work of an Israeli secret agent. The intern debated whether he should
include this information in the patient's medical chart. The ward doctor
interpreted it as a symptom of a persecution complex arising from
presenile dementia. Toward the end of May Schimmelreiter died of lung
cancer. Not having any next of kin, he was buried in Naples at public
expense, since his stay in the hospital had exhausted his funds. His
case therefore represented an exception to the rule; in contrast to all
the other victims, this one involved a foreigner who was financially
destitute. Subsequent investigation revealed that during the war
Schimmelreiter had served as a clerk in the concentration camp at
Mauthausen and that he had stood trial following Germany's defeat but
had escaped sentencing when the majority of witnesses, all of them
former inmates of the camp, testified in his behalf. Although there were
those who accused him of having beaten prisoners, their testimony was
treated as third-hand evidence, and he was finally acquitted. And
despite the apparent coincidence that his health had twice taken a turn
for the worse following visits to the Vittorini establishment, the dead
man's suspicions proved unwarranted, since there is no known poison
capable of affecting the brain once it has been dissolved in bathing
water.

 The bathing attendant accused of having tried to poison the Austrian
turned out to be a Sicilian, and not a Jew, and was in no way connected
with Israeli intelligence.

 Not counting the missing Brigg, the file now included the cases of six
persons who had all met sudden deaths from random causes. Invariably the
trail led back to the Vittorini health spa; and since there were a
number of such spas in Naples it was decided to check their records as
well. The investigation began to avalanche: the number of cases that had
to be checked soon jumped to twenty-six, since it was quite common for
people to discontinue the baths without demanding a refund, especially
as the amount of money involved was usually quite small. The
investigation proceeded slowly, because each and every lead had to be
fully explored. Only when the subject turned up in good health was the
case dropped.

 Herbert Heyne,  a forty-nine-year-old naturalized American of German
origin and owner of a drugstore chain in Baltimore, landed in Naples
around the middle of May. An asthmatic, he had been undergoing treatment
for years in a number of sanatoria when a lung specialist prescribed
sulfur baths as a precaution against rheumatic complications. He began
his treatment in a small place located not far from his hotel on the
Piazza Municipale, taking all his meals in the hotel restaurant where,
nine days later, he created a scene by insisting the food tasted vilely
bitter. After the episode in the restaurant he checked out of the hotel
and traveled to Salerno, where he registered at a seaside resort. Late
that same evening he decided to go for a swim. When the porter tried to
talk him out of it because of the strong tide and poor visibility, Heyne
insisted he would die not from drowning but from a vampire's kiss. He
even showed him where the kiss of death would come -on the wrist. The
porter, a Tirolese who began treating the guest as a fellow countryman
the moment the conversation switched to German, went down to the beach
when he heard Heyne crying for help, A lifeguard was found and the
German was rescued, but when he began showing signs of madness-such as
biting the lifeguard-they decided to have him transferred by ambulance
to the hospital; there, in the middle of the night, he got up out of
bed, smashed the windowpane, and started slashing his wrists with a
sliver of broken glass. The nurse on duty alerted the staff just in time
to save him from bleeding to death, but he came down with a severe
attack of bronchial pneumonia and died three days later, without
regaining consciousness. The inquest ascribed his suicide attempt to the
state of shock caused by his near-drowning, which was also cited as the
cause of his pneumonia. Two months later Interpol was brought into the
case, when Heyne's Baltimore lawyer received a letter mailed by Heyne
shortly before his departure from Naples stating that in the event of
his sudden death the police should be notified at once because he
suspected someone was plotting to kill him.

 The letter gave no other details except that the suspected killer was
staying at the same hotel. The letter was sprinkled with a number of
glaring Germanisms, although Heyne, a resident of the United States for
twenty years, had a perfect command of English. This fact, along with
certain discrepancies in the handwriting, made the lawyer dubious of the
letter's authenticity -it had been written on hotel stationery-and after
learning of his client's death, he went ahead and notified the
authorities. The handwriting expert's report confirmed that Heyne had
written the letter himself but in great haste and a state of extreme
agitation. At this point the case was dropped.

 The next case to come under review was that of Ian E. Swift,
English-born, U.S. citizen, fifty-two, manager of a large furniture
company in Boston, who landed by ship in Naples in early May, paid for a
series of baths at the Adriatica, and stopped showing up after a week of
visits; he stayed for a while at a cheaper hotel called the Livorno,
then moved into the more luxurious Excelsior the same day he quit the
baths. Witnesses were questioned in each of the hotels, but the
testimony seemed to revolve around two different persons. The Swift at
the Livorno spent most of the time in his room slaving over business
correspondence, was an all-day boarder because it was cheaper, and
occasionally went to the movies at night. The Swift at the Excelsior
toured the local nightclubs in a hired, chauffeured car, traveled around
in the company of a private detective, insisted on having his bed
changed every day, had flowers sent to his hotel room, accosted girls on
the street with invitations to join him for a ride and for supper, and
went on periodic shopping sprees. He kept up this boisterous routine for
four days. On the fifth day he left a note for the detective at the
reception desk. When the detective finished reading the note in
astonishment, he tried to reach Swift on the phone, but Swift refused to
answer, even though he was in his room. He kept to his room the whole
day, skipped lunch, and ordered dinner through room service. When the
waiter appeared at the door, he found the room empty and heard Swift
talking to him through a crack in the bathroom door. The same scene was
repeated the following day-as if he couldn't stand the sight of the
waiter. He kept up these antics until one day another man checked into
the hotel, a man named Harold Kahn, an old friend and former business
partner of Swift's who happened to be en route to the States after a
long stay in Japan. Learning by chance that Swift was registered in the
same hotel, he decided to pay him a visit, and forty-eight hours later
they were both aboard a Pan Am jet bound for New York.

 Though it lacked a fatal epilogue and therefore seemed to be an
exception, Swift's case was nonetheless included in the series, since
Swift really had Kahn to thank for his lucky trip home. The private
detective testified that Swift had struck him as being not all there,
that he was constantly talking about his negotiations with a terrorist
organization called "The Terror of the Night," which he said he was
prepared to finance if he was promised protection against a killer hired
by one of his competitors in Boston. The detective was supposed to be a
witness to these negotiations and act as a bodyguard. The whole thing
sounded so preposterous that the detective's first impression was that
his client must be on drugs. Swift's laconic note, in which a
hundred-dollar bill had been enclosed, was in effect a letter of
dismissal. He made no mention of his enemies except to say that they had
come to pay him a visit at the Livorno, though in fact he had not
received a single visitor there.

 It was extremely hard to get any information out of Kahn concerning his
meeting with Swift in Naples. Nor did the Americans have any reason to
launch an investigation, since neither Swift nor Kahn had committed any
crime. Both had returned to the States without incident, and Swift had
gone back to his manager's job. Still the Italians persisted, in the
hope that Kahn was in possession of certain facts that could possibly
shed light on recent events. At first Kahn refused to talk; not until he
was briefed on the case and given assurances of absolute confidentiality
did he agree to make a deposition. His testimony proved disappointing to
the Italians. It seems that Swift had welcomed Kahn in the most cordial
manner but only after checking through the door to make sure it was he.
He admitted with some embarrassment to having played a few "gags" and
blamed it on the fact that he'd been drugged. Though outwardly calm and
rational in his behavior, he refused to leave his room, because he said
he'd lost all confidence in his detective and suspected him of having
"gone over to the enemy." He had shown Kahn part of a letter in which
someone had threatened to poison him unless a demand for twenty thousand
dollars was met. When the letter was first sent to Swift at the Livorno,
he had ignored the death threat, though rashly so, because the day after
the deadline he felt so weak he could hardly get out of bed. For the
better part of the day he was bothered by hallucinations and dizzy
spells, so he wasted no time in packing and moving into the Excelsior.
Realizing there was no easy way out of the extortion plot, he hired a
private investigator, though without immediately divulging the purpose,
because he first wanted to look him over and test him while living it up
in the manner already described. The whole thing was somehow beginning
to make sense, though it still didn't explain why Swift simply hadn't
left town, especially when there was nothing keeping him in Naples. As
Swift explained it, the mineral baths had proved so beneficial for his
rheumatism that he was eager to complete the treatment.

 At first Kahn was inclined to believe him, but after thinking over
everything Swift had told him he began finding his friend's story less
and less credible. The stories he had heard earlier from the hotel staff
only confirmed his doubts. Had Swift been testing the detective that
time he fired a gun at some flies during an orgy with several ladies of
the night?-Kahn asked him straight out. Swift admitted it was true but
repeated that the poison had left him temporarily deranged. Almost
certain now that his friend had been stricken with some mental illness,
Kahn decided to get him back to the States as fast as he possibly could.
He settled Swift's hotel bill, bought plane tickets, and didn't leave
Swift's side until they were both packed and on their way to the
airport. Certain inconsistencies in the record suggest that Swift did
not accept his friend's Samaritan kindness passively. The hotel staff
testified that shortly before their departure the two Americans had had
a serious quarrel. Whether or not Kahn had used physical force as well
as verbal arguments, he would not volunteer any further information
helpful to the inquiry, and the only solid piece of evidence, the
letter, had disappeared. Kahn had seen only the first page, which had
been typewritten-the illegible type made it look like one of a number of
carbon copies-and full of grammatical mistakes in English. Back in the
States, when he asked Swift what had happened to the letter, Swift broke
out laughing and started opening a desk drawer as if he meant to show it
to him, only to find it gone. The experts treated this latest evidence
as a combination of the plausible and the implausible. Typing an
extortion letter through several sheets of thick paper is a common
practice, since once the individual letter traits have been obliterated
in this way, it is next to impossible to trace the machine used. The
fact that this was still a relatively recent practice unknown to most
laymen seemed to argue in favor of the letter's authenticity. On the
other hand, Swift's behavior all seemed inappropriate. A man who is
being extorted doesn't react the way Swift did, not if he believes that
the threats made on his life are actually going to be carried out. The
experts finally concluded they were dealing with two overlapping
factors: real coercion in the form of a shakedown attempt, apparently
the work of a local resident (judging at least by the letter's poor
English), and Swift's temporary insanity. If that was so, then the Swift
case, when viewed within the context of the investigation's previous
findings, only confused matters, since his apparent insanity otherwise
conformed to the typical pattern.

 The next one involved a Swiss by the name of Mittelhorn who arrived in
Naples on May 27. His case differed from the others in that he was a
familiar sight at the hotel, where he was an annual guest. The owner of
a large secondhand bookshop in Lausanne and a well-to-do bachelor, he
was a man given to certain eccentricities of behavior that were
tolerated because he was considered such a desirable guest. He always
occupied two adjoining rooms-one serving as an office, the other as a
bedroom. Because of a food allergy, he always ordered specially prepared
dishes and would carefully inspect the tableware before every meal.
Whenever his face showed signs of swelling, a symptom commonly
associated with Quincke's edema, he would summon the cook into the
dining room and reprimand him severely. Yet the waiters claimed he was
in the habit of eating between meals in some of the cheaper places
downtown, where, although it was strictly against his diet, he would
indulge his craving for fish soup, and then later take it out on the
people at the hotel. During his most recent stay he had revised his
habits somewhat. On his doctor's advice he had begun taking mud baths at
the Vittorini spa, after suffering all winter long from rheumatism. In
Naples he had his own private barber come regularly to the hotel, using
no tools but those supplied by Mittelhorn himself, who refused to be
touched by any blade or comb that had already been used on someone else.
When hearing on his arrival this time that his barber had gone out of
business, he became furious and never stopped complaining until he
finally found another one he could trust.

 On June 7 he requested that the fireplace in his room be lit. The
fireplace served as a decorative piece and had never been used before,
yet no one dared to question his order. His request was granted,
although the temperature outdoors was quite high. The fireplace smoked a
bit, but this did not seem to disturb him. That afternoon he locked
himself in his room and skipped lunch, which was unprecedented, since he
never missed a meal otherwise and was always so concerned about being
punctual that he carried two watches, one on his wrist and another in
his pocket. When he failed to answer either the telephone or the door,
they had to force their way into his room-the lock had been jammed from
the inside with a broken nail-file. They found him unconscious in the
smoke-filled room. An empty bottle of sleeping pills suggested he had
taken an overdose, so he was rushed to the hospital by ambulance. As he
had been scheduled to go to Rome at the end of June to attend an
auction, Mittelhorn had brought along a trunk containing rare and old
prints. This was now empty, and the fireplace was full of charred sheets
of paper. Folios of parchment not damaged by the fire had been cut into
little strips with a pair of barber's scissors, and frames for mounting
woodcuts had been completely demolished. None of the hotel property had
been damaged except for a curtain cord that had been ripped out and made
into a noose, indicating he had tried to hang himself but failed when
the cord wasn't strong enough to support his weight. A stool placed next
to the window provided still further evidence.

 When Mittelhorn finally regained consciousness, after spending two days
in a coma, his doctor, suspecting the early stages of congestive heart
failure, asked for X-rays. That night Mittelhorn became restless and
delirious. At one point he started screaming that he was innocent, that
he was someone else; then he began making threatening gestures, as
though he were fighting with someone, until he finally tried to jump out
of bed. Unable to control him, the nurse ran to get the doctor.
Mittelhorn, taking advantage of her momentary absence, slipped into the
orderly room next to his isolation ward, smashed his fist through a
windowpane in the medicine chest, and drank a whole bottle of iodine. He
died three days later from severe internal burns.

 The coroner's ruling was suicide caused by a sudden fit of depression.
But when the investigation was later  reopened and the hotel staff was
subjected to a more thorough interrogation, the night porter referred to
a curious incident that had taken place the evening before the crucial
day. A box of stationery and envelopes was kept on the reception-desk
counter for the convenience of guests and visitors. After dinner a
messenger came to deliver an opera ticket to Mittelhorn's next-door
neighbor, a German, who was out. The porter slipped the ticket into an
envelope and stuck it into Mittelhorn's box by mistake. Stopping off for
his key on the way up to his room, Mittelhorn was given the envelope,
opened it, and took it over to a lamp in the lobby to read it. He
collapsed into an armchair and covered his eyes. After a while, he
glanced down again at the slip of paper in his hand, then hurried back
to his room almost at a run. At that point the porter remembered the
messenger with the ticket and, recalling having ordered the ticket
himself over the phone, he realized it had been meant for the German and
not for Mittelhorn. The sight of the German's empty box confirmed his
mistake, and he decided to go directly to Mittelhorn's room. He knocked
on the door but, getting no answer, went inside. The room was deserted.
Lying on the table were the torn envelope and a crumpled piece of paper.
The porter peeked into the envelope and found the ticket, which
Mittelhorn had evidently overlooked. He took the ticket and, out of
curiosity, smoothed out the sheet of stationary that had made such an
impression on the Swiss. It was completely blank. The porter left the
room, thoroughly bewildered, but said nothing when he later ran into
Mittelhorn, who was on his way back from the refrigerator with a bottle
of mineral water.

 Since by now the investigation had reached the point of desperation,
the detail of the blank sheet of paper began to acquire a special
significance, all the more so as Mittelhorn had spent all of the
following day burning his precious prints in the fireplace, coming
downstairs only for lunch. Either the blank piece of paper had been a
secret message or signal, or else he had experienced a hallucination in
the hotel lobby and only imagined having read a nonexistent letter. The
first possibility seemed highly implausible, smacking of some cheap
movie thriller, and was not at all consistent with Mittelhorn's
reputation as a man of unimpeachable honesty, a respected antiquarian,
and an authority in his field. An audit of his business transactions
turned up nothing the least bit shady or suspicious. As they probed
deeper into the past, however, the investigation uncovered certain facts
dating from the last world war. During it, Mittelhorn had been manager
of one of Germany's largest secondhand bookshops, located in Munich. The
owner of the shop was a rich and elderly Jew. When the Nuremberg laws
went into effect, Mittelhorn was appointed sole trustee of the shop, and
its former owner was shipped off to Dachau, where he eventually
perished. After the war, Mittelhorn took legal possession of the shop,
supporting his claim with a document designating him as sole heir and
executor of the dead man's estate. But there were rumors that the
document had been signed under duress and that Mittelhorn had had a hand
in it. Two years later, even though these were only rumors, Mittelhorn
transferred his business to Switzerland and settled permanently in
Lausanne. Speculation arose that his mental breakdown was somehow
connected with these events that had transpired some forty years ago,
that, owing perhaps to an optical illusion, he mistook the blank sheet
of paper for some communication reminding him of past sins, became so
disturbed that he decided to destroy his  most  valuable  possessions, 
and  was  eventually driven to the point of attempting suicide. On
regaining consciousness in the hospital, he may have had a vision of the
deceased; helpless against the dead man's reproaches, he was driven
again to suicide. However plausible it may have been, such a hypothesis
appeared too ingenious; above all it did nothing to explain how such a
well-balanced man could suffer a sudden mental breakdown. When they
interviewed Mittelhorn's former neighbor at the hotel, he merely
confirmed the porter's testimony, namely, that he had failed to get the
opera ticket and that by the time he did receive it the following day it
was too late. The case of the eccentric antiquarian thus reached an
impasse, like all the others.

 The files now included nine cases, all following the same mysterious
pattern and all ending in tragedy. Despite their all-too-obvious
similarity, there were still insufficient grounds for launching a
criminal investigation aimed at prosecuting the guilty, since there was
not the slightest hint as to their whereabouts or whether in fact they
even existed. One very curious incident took place soon after the
Mittelhorn case was officially closed; the hotel turned over to the
police a letter recently addressed to the deceased man, even though he
had been dead for more than a year. Postmarked Lausanne and bearing a
typewritten address, the letter contained a blank sheet of paper.
Efforts to trace the letter failed. Nor could it have been someone's
idea of a practical joke, since the press had never made any mention of
the first letter. I had my own thoughts on the matter, though I
preferred not to reveal them for the time being.

 Of the two remaining cases, the first dated from some time ago, the
second was more recent. To start with the older one, some years ago, in
May, a German from Hanover, Johann Titz, took a room in Portici, not far
from Herculaneum. He chose a small boardinghouse with a spectacular view
of Vesuvius, because as a postcard manufacturer he was interested in
producing a series of cards devoted to Vesuvius. But he was also there
for medical reasons: he had suffered from asthma since his childhood.
After too much exposure to the sun, he came down with a severe case of
heat blisters. A dermatologist whom he consulted in Naples advised
against any more sunbathing. To the doctor's astonishment, his patient
vehemently objected, insisting that the sunbathing was absolutely
indispensable for clearing up his asthma and that it had been
recommended by his doctor in Hanover. Titz was taking mud baths in a
small spa to which he commuted every day from Herculaneum-he had driven
down from Germany in his own car. On May 9 he began having dizzy spells
and attributed them to food poisoning. He accused his landlady of
serving him contaminated fish and threatened not to pay his bill. But in
the end he paid it and drove off. When the landlady later went to clean
his room, she found a message inscribed on the wall in red India ink: "I
was poisoned here." The ink had penetrated so deeply into the plaster
that there was no getting rid of it except by repainting the walls, so
the owner of the boardinghouse filed a complaint against her former
tenant.

 On his way north, however, somewhere in the vicinity of Milan, Titz
suddenly swerved to the left on a straight stretch of highway, cut
across a grass island, and, disregarding the blinking lights and honking
horns of the other drivers, started driving down the opposite lane into
the path of the oncoming traffic. Astonishingly enough, he was able to
drive like this for a distance of four kilometers, forcing the oncoming
cars into the most desperate tactical maneuvers. Some of these drivers
later testified that he seemed to be aiming for the "right" car. To
avoid a long-haul Intratrans truck blocking his path, he swerved onto
the island, waited till the truck had passed, then moved back into the
wrong lane, where, less than a kilometer down the road, he collided with
a small Simca carrying a young couple and a child. The child, though
critically injured, was the sole survivor. Titz, who had been driving at
high speed without a safety belt, died behind the wheel. There was
speculation in the press that this was a new form of suicide in which
the suicide victim tried to take Others with him. In a collision
involving the huge tractor-trailer he would probably have been the sole
fatality,   which   explained   why   he   had   passed   up   the
"chance." The case was classified as definitely belonging to the series
when reports came in concerning certain incidents that had taken place
immediately prior to the accident. Just outside Rome, Titz had pulled in
at a service station because of apparent engine trouble and pleaded with
the mechanics to hurry because he said the "red bandit" was on his tail.
At first the mechanics thought he was joking, but they changed their
minds when he promised each of them ten thousand lire if they could fix
his engine in fifteen minutes, and then actually kept his promise. When
he gave all of the nine mechanics on duty the same "bonus," they decided
he was not all there. He might have gone unidentified had it not been
that while he was backing out of the garage the German put a dent in one
of the cars parked outside and drove off without stopping, though not
before they were able to take down his license-plate number. The last
case dealt with Arthur T. Adams II, who checked into the Hotel Vesuvio
in Naples, bought a three-week pass to the mineral baths, then dropped
out a few days later when he discovered he was allergic to sulfur. At
forty-nine, he was a tall and easygoing man, always on the move and
something of a restless type, having tried his hand at some ten
different jobs. At one time or another he had been a bank officer, a
Medicare official, a piano salesman; he had taught correspondence
courses in banking, worked as a judo and later as a karate instructor,
and actively pursued a number of hobbies: he was a licensed parachutist
and an amateur astronomer, and for the past year or so he had been
publishing on an irregular basis The Arthur T. Adams II Newsletter,
featuring editorials on a wide range of subjects of personal concern to
its publisher. Copies of the newsletter were run off on a duplicating
machine at his own expense and distributed free of charge to several
dozen acquaintances. He was also a member of a number of different
societies, ranging from a dianetics circle to an organization for
hay-fever sufferers.

 Adams first began acting suspiciously on his return trip to Rome by
barreling along at high speed, then pulling over in deserted places;
buying an inner tube when his car used tubeless tires; sitting out a
storm in a parked car just outside Rome; and telling a highway patrolman
his windshield wipers were broken when there was actually nothing wrong
with them. That night he arrived in Rome and made the rounds of the
hotels, looking for a vacancy-even though he had already reserved a room
at the Hilton-returning to the Hilton only when he failed to find any.
The next morning he was found lying dead in his bed. The autopsy
disclosed early emphysema, enlargement of the heart, and generalized
hyperemia typical of death due to suffocation. The actual cause of death
was never determined. The coroner's report suggested either
overstimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system or suffocation
caused by cardiac arrest precipitated by a severe asthmatic attack. For
a while the case came under discussion in various medical journals,
where the coroner's ruling was attacked as erroneous. It was argued that
only infants have been known to die of pillow suffocation, whereas an
adult will immediately awaken if his nose and mouth are obstructed. Nor
was there any evidence to substantiate the claim that he had suffered an
asthmatic attack. Finally, there was the position of the body: Adams was
found lying on his stomach, with both ams wrapped around his pillow and
the pillow pressed flat against his face. But if it was a suicide, then
it had no precedent in the records of forensic medicine. Some tried to
attribute his death to extreme fright, but, although such cases have
been known to occur, no one has yet proved nightmares to be a cause of
death. After a long delay, Interpol finally decided to intervene when
two letters turned up in the States, both mailed by the deceased to his
former wife, with whom he remained on friendly terms following their
divorce.

 The letters had been mailed three days apart, but they arrived at the
same time because of the backlog of mail created by a postal strike. In
the first letter Adams wrote he was depressed and that he was having
hallucinations of the "sugar cube" variety. This was a reference to the
period preceding their divorce, when Adams and his wife had been in the
habit of taking psilocibin dished up in sugar cubes. Now, five years
later, he had no idea what was causing these "freaky" hallucinations,
which occurred mainly at night. The second letter was altogether
different in both tone and content. He was still having hallucinations,
but he was no longer alarmed now that he knew what was causing them.

  

  

 A detail you'd never suspect as being important has led me to the most
incredible discovery. I've managed to get my hands on some material for
a series of articles dealing with a completely new type of crime, a
crime that's not only unmotivated but also indiscriminate, in the same
way that scattering nails all over the road is an indiscriminate crime.
You know I'm the last person to exaggerate, but the press won't be the
only ones to sit up and take notice when I start publishing this stuff.
But I've got to be careful. This material is too hot to keep around
here. Don't worry, though; I've got it stored someplace where it's good
and safe. Not another word till I get back. Will write fom Rome as soon
as I can. This is the sort of bonanza every journalist dreams about. And
what a lethal one it is.

  

 There's no need for me to elaborate on the intensive search that was
made into the whereabouts of Adams's secret hiding place. The search
proved to be a waste of time. Either he didn't know anything and the
letter was just another one of his hallucinations, or he had done too
good a job of hiding the material.

 Adams's death brings to a close the list of tragic events originating
in and around Naples. Besides the Italian, the investigation involved
the law-enforcement agencies of Sweden, Germany, Austria, Switzerland,
and the United States, who were drawn into the case because of the
victims' nationality. Interpol, which was supervising and coordinating
the case, revealed a number of irregularities and minor omissions in the
course of their investigation-such as failing to report missing hotel
guests right away, or neglecting to perform an autopsy despite
indications of a violent death-but in no instance were they able to
establish any criminal motives, attributing the mistakes either to
sloppiness, to negligence, or to self-interest.

 Interpol was the first to resign from the case, with all the other
agencies-including the Italian-following suit. It was reopened only on
the initiative of Mrs. Ursula Barbour, Adams's chief executor. Adams had
left an estate worth ninety thousand dollars in stocks and bonds, and
Mrs. Barbour, a woman in her eighties who had been Adams's foster
mother, decided to use a part of the estate for apprehending the
murderers of the man she regarded as her son. After familiarizing
herself with the circumstances of his death, in particular with that
last letter addressed to his former wife, she became thoroughly
convinced that he was the victim of a crime so cunningly executed it had
defied the efforts of all the various international agencies combined.

 Mrs. Barbour turned the matter over to Elgin, Elgin, and Thorn, a
respectable agency headed by Samuel Ohlin-Gaar, a lawyer and former
friend of my father's. This was around the time when the end of my
career as an astronaut was already inevitable. After Ohlin-Gaar's people
had reviewed all the files, checked every possible lead, and gone to
considerable expense to consult the most eminent authorities in
criminology and forensic medicine, and still failed to make any
progress, Ohlin-Gaar, acting on the advice of one of his oldest
associates-a man by the name of Randolph Loers, better known to his
friends as Randy-decided, more out of desperation than hope, to mount a
simulation mission, that is, to send to Naples an unmarried American
matching the type of victim in every possible way. At that time I was a
frequent guest at old man Ohlin's place, and one day he began filling me
in on the case in a casual sort of way, insisting it was not a violation
of professional secrecy to do so since by now the only alternative to
carrying out a simulation mission was to wash one's hands of the whole
affair.

 At first I didn't take the thought of my eligibility too seriously, but
then it turned out the job was mine for the asking. It so happened that
I was fifty and-except for an occasional touch of rheumatism and of
course my hay fever-in top physical condition. Since it looked so
tempting from across the ocean, I volunteered for the mission. Three
weeks ago, using the alias of George L. Simpson, a broker from Boston, I
landed by plane in Naples, where I checked in at the Vesuvio, bought a
pass to the Vittorini spa, got a suntan, and played lots of volleyball.
To make it look as authentic as possible, I used some of Adam's personal
things, which Mrs. Harbour had been saving. During the time I was in
Naples, a six-man team kept me under constant surveillance-two men to a
shift, plus two technicians to monitor my blood, heart, and lungs. I
wore electronic sensors wherever I went, except on the beach, where a
pair of well-hidden binoculars was deployed. As soon as I arrived I put
nineteen thousand dollars in the hotel safe: five days later I picked up
the money, and kept it in my room from then on. I wasn't shy about
making friends; I visited the same museums as Adams, went to the opera
as he had, followed his footsteps around the bay, and drove to Rome in
the exact same Hornet. To increase the range of the sensors, the car was
equipped with an amplifier. A specialist in forensic medicine, Dr.
Sidney Fox, was waiting for me in Rome. His job was to examine all the
medical data recorded on the tapes, which he did, and that's how the
mission ended-a complete flop.

 What I had given Barth was an abbreviated version of the case, the one
we always used when it became necessary to enlist the services of an
outsider. We called it "the panoramic variant."

 The windows of the study faced the north, and the shade thrown by the
giant elms made the room even darker. I disconnected the projector,
Barth switched on the desk lamp, and the room was immediately
transformed. He said nothing,, with only his eyebrows registering mild
astonishment, and suddenly I realized the utter futility of my having
intruded on a complete stranger. I was afraid he was going to ask how I
thought he could be of help-assuming he didn't simply dismiss the whole
thing out of hand. Instead he got up, paced up and down the room, then
came to a stop behind a handsome antique chair, placed his hands on its
carved back rest, and said:

 "You know what you should have done? Sent a whole group of simulators
down there. No fewer than five."

 "You think so?" I asked with some bewilderment.

 "Of course. If we conceive of your mission in terms of a scientific
experiment, then you failed to fulfill either the preliminary or the
accessory conditions. Either you were deficient or your environment was.
In case you were the cause, then you should have selected men having the
same characteristic variability ratio as that exhibited by the victims."

 "Aptly put!" The words slipped out of my mouth.

 He smiled.

 "You're not accustomed to our language, I see. That's because you
associate with people who have a policeman's mentality. That mentality
is all right for prosecuting criminals but not for proving whether in
fact a criminal exists. I suspect if your life had been in danger you
wouldn't have noticed it. Up to a point, of course. Later you'd have
been aware of the accompanying circumstances but not of the casuality
itself."

 "Aren't they one and the same?"

 "They can but need not be."

 "But I was ready for that. I was supposed to record anything that
looked the least bit suspicious."

 "And what did you record?"

 I smiled in embarrassment.

 "Nothing. Oh, once or twice I was tempted to, but then I realized it
was a case of too much introspection."

 "Have you ever used hallucinogens?"

 "In the States, before joining the mission. LSD, psilo-cibin,
mescaline-all under medical supervision."

 "I see . . . part of your training. And would you mind telling me what
you hoped to achieve by taking on the part? You personally."

 "Hoped to achieve? I was fairly optimistic. I thought we could at least
prove whether it was a crime or just a matter of coincidence."

 "You were optimistic, weren't you. Naples is a trap, there's no doubt
about that. But one that operates like a lottery, not like a machine.
The symptoms tend to fluctuate, to behave erratically. They can subside
or disappear altogether, right?"

 "Absolutely correct."

 "All right, suppose now we take a firing zone as a model. You can be
killed either by someone deliberately aiming at you or by the sheer
density of fire. But either way someone on the other end is anxious to
see a lot of people dead."

 "Oh, I see what you're driving at. The element of chance doesn't rule
out the possibility of a crime, is that it?"

 "Precisely. You mean to say that was never considered?"

 "Not really. Someone once raised the possibility, but the reply was
that if that were the case it would mean having to revise the whole
method of investigation. . . ."

 "Either a wicked man or a wicked fate, is that it? But even the
expression corriger la fortune has become proverbial. Why didn't you
hook up a two-way transmission?"

 "Too much of a bother. I couldn't go around loaded down with a lot of
electronic equipment. Besides, there was another catch, one that came up
in connection with the Swift case-Swift was the one rescued by the
friend who had registered at the same hotel. Swift made his
hallucinations sound so convincing he almost had his friend believing
them."

 "I see what you mean. Folie a deux. In other words, you didn't want to
risk having your shadow fall for any of your hallucinations, is that
it?"

 "Exactly."

 "Correct me if I'm wrong. Of the eleven victims, two escaped alive, and
then there's another who is still missing. The missing man's name is
Brigg. Am I right?"

 "Correct. Brigg would have been the twelfth. He hasn't been definitely
classified yet."

 "Due to insufficient evidence, I suppose. Now we come to their
chronological order. In this respect your summary is misleading. It
presents the individual cases in the order of their discovery, which is
something completely incidental, rather than in the order of their
occurrence. What was the time span involved? Two years?"

 "Yes. Titz, Coburn, and Osborn passed away two years ago. Brigg
disappeared around the same time. The rest date from last year."

 "Any this year?"

 "If there have been any, we wouldn't know about them till the fall.
Especially since the original investigation has been discontinued."

 "Assuming your facts are correct, then it would seem to be an expanding
series. Three in the first set, eight in the second. Well, well ... I
see you weren't acting as a decoy only in Italy."

 "Meaning?"

 "That you've been trying to bait me, too. And I have to admit it's
tempting! Your version makes everything seem crystal clear. The pattern
is all too obvious. But the fact that it has everybody stumped leads me
to believe there's more to it than meets the eye. Although the more one
hears of the case histories, the more one begins to suspect some form of
unmotivated insanity. Wouldn't you agree?"

 "Yes. On that point there's general agreement. Otherwise they wouldn't
have called off the investigation."

 "So why should there be any doubt that a crime has been committed?"

 "How should I put it ... it's like looking at a photo -I'm thinking now
of a halftone. The naked eye can make out the general outline but not
the details. A magnifying glass will make some things stand out more
clearly, but the image will remain blurred. If we take it to the
microscope we find the picture gets lost, that it disintegrates into
tiny dots. Each dot is something distinct; they no longer combine to a
meaningful picture."

 "Are you suggesting that once you've accepted the hypothesis of a
random series of poisonings, the more detailed the examination the
flimsier the hypothesis?"

 "Precisely."

 "And the same thing applies if you assume the existence of a culprit?"

 "The same thing applies. The conclusion is almost always the same: not
one of the victims was poisoned by someone else, and not one of them had
the means to do it himself. But the fact still remains . . ."

 I shrugged my shoulders.

 "So then why do you always insist on its being either a crime or a
coincidence?"

 "What alternative is there?"

 "Maybe there is one." He picked up a copy of France-Soir from his desk.
"Have you read today's papers?"

 He showed me the headlines in bold print: BOMB EXPLODES   IN   THE   
LABYRINTH-MASSACRE   ON   THE STEPS-TEEN-AGED   GIRL   RESCUED   BY  
UNIDENTIFIED MAN.

 "Yes," I replied. "I'm familiar with what happened."

 "There you have it. The classic example of a modern crime. Premeditated
and at the same time accidental. Anyone standing in the vicinity
automatically became a victim."

 "But that's not quite the same thing!"

 "Granted, it's not. The victims in Naples were predestined for death
because of certain personality traits, but not those at the airport.
Fair enough. But what about the case of that man Adams who wrote his
wife about the possibility of a random crime, and who compared it to
covering a road with nails. Obviously it was a crude analogy. But it's
just as obvious that whoever's behind these deaths is anxious to create
the impression he doesn't exist."

 I withheld comment. Barth gave me a quick glance, stood up, paced
around the room, then sat down again and asked:

 "What's your own personal opinion?"

 "I can only tell you what struck me most. Suppose the cause of death
was poisoning; wouldn't you expect the symptoms to be the same in every
case?"

 "Well, weren't they? I was of the impression they all followed a
pattern. First the phase of excitement and aggression, then the
hallucinating phase, most often associated with a persecution mania, and
finally the withdrawal phase-withdrawal either from Naples or from life
itself. Eiether they tried to escape by car, plane, or on foot, or they
resorted to a piece of glass, a razor blade, a cord, a bullet in the
mouth, a bottle of iodine. . . ."

 I had the suspicion he was trying to impress me with the power of his
memory.

 "I'll admit they were similar. But when you start looking into the
backgrounds . . ."

 "Go on."

 "Well, as a rule, the manner of death has nothing to do with the
personality of the deceased. Whether a person dies of pneumonia, cancer,
or in a car accident is not something determined by his personality. Of
course there are exceptions, as in the case of a test pilot's
occupational death, but as a rule there's no correlation between the way
a person dies and the way he lives."

 "In short, death is unrelated to personality type. Go on."

 "But here it is related."

 "Ah, now you're feeding me demonology! Just what are you implying?"

 "Exactly what I said. A champion swimmer dies in a drowning accident. A
mountain climber falls to his death. A car fiend gets killed in a
head-on collision."

 "Hold on! Which one was the car fiend-Titz?"

 "Yes, He owned three cars, two of them sports cars. To continue: a
coward is killed while running away. . . ."

 "Who was that?"

 "Osborn. The one who abandoned his car and was taken for a member of
the road gang."

 "You didn't mention anything about his being a coward."

 "I'm sorry. The version I gave you left out many details. Osborn was in
the insurance business, was heavily insured himself, and was known as a
man who avoided taking any risks. The first time he felt threatened he
sat down and wrote a letter to the police, then lost his nerve and took
off. Adams, the eccentric, died as he lived-in an unconventional manner.
The heroic reporter stuck it out till the end and then shot himself. . .
."

 "Wasn't he trying to escape, too?"

 "I don't think so. He had orders to fly to London. He suffered a
momentary breakdown, tried to slash his wrists, then patched himself up
and flew off on his new assignment. When he saw he wasn't up to it, he
shot himself. He must have been a very proud man. I have no idea how
Swift would have died. As a young man he was known for being
wishy-washy, a typical prodigal son, a dreamer, always in need of
someone stronger than himself. A wife, a friend. It was the same way in
Naples."

 Barth sat there with wrinkled brow, tapping his chin, and stared
absently into space.

 "Well, that's easy enough to explain. A case of regression, of
reversion to an earlier time period . . . I'm not a specialist in this
area, but I believe that some hallucinogens . . . What was the consensus
of the toxicologists? Of the psychiatrists?"

 "Certain symptomatic analogies with LSD, except that LSD does not have
such individualized effect. Pharmacology has no record of such a drug.
The deeper I delved into their individual backgrounds, the more I saw
that not one of them had acted contrary to his nature-quite the
opposite, that each had revealed it in grotesquely exaggerated form. A
man who's careful with money becomes a penny pincher. A pedant-I'm
referring now to the rare-book dealer-spends the whole day cutting up a
trunkful of papers into little strips. Examples abound. If I could leave
you the files, you'd see for yourself."

 "By all means. So this factor X would have to be something on the order
of a 'personality drug.' Right . . . But such an approach won't bring us
any closer to a solution. Psychological analysis can tell us how the
factor behaves, but not how it infiltrates the victim."

 He was leaning forward in his chair, his head lowered and his eyes
fixed on his hands, which were cupped around his knees. Suddenly he
looked me straight in the eye.

 "I'd like to ask you a personal question. May I?"

 I nodded.

 "What was it like during the simulation? Were you confident the whole
time?"

 "No. It was altogether an awkward situation, not at all as I had
imagined it would be. Not because I was using a dead man's things-I got
used to that In a very short time. Because of my profession, I was
considered tailor-made for the mission."

 "Is that so?" His eyebrows shot up. "The public imagines it to be
fascinating, but except for a few brief moments of excitement it's all
routine -boring and monotonous routine."

 "I see. In much the same way as in Naples, right?"

 "Yes, especially since we're also trained in the art of self-analysis.
If instruments are always subject to error, then the final indicator has
to be man."

 "Monotonous routine, you say. In what ways were you excited in Naples?
When and where?"

 "When I was afraid."

  

 "Afraid?"

 "At least twice. And each time it gave me something of a thrill."

 The words did not come easily, for I was dealing in intangibles. He
never took his eyes off me. "Did you enjoy being afraid?"

 "I can't give you a yes or no answer. It's best when a person's
abilities coincide with his ambitions. My ambitions have always tended
toward the impossible. There's an infinite variety of risks, but I
personally have never been attracted by such ordinary risks as, say,
Russian roulette. That sort of test strikes me as jejune. On the other
hand, I've always had a great attraction for the unknown, the
unpredictable, the undefinable."

 "Is that why you decided to become an astronaut?"

 "I don't know. Maybe that's the reason. People think of us as clever
chimpanzees guided by a remote-control computer. The highest order, the
symbol of our civilization, whose opposite pole you see before you." I
pointed to the paper featuring a front-page photo of the escalator. "I
don't believe that's necessarily true. And even if it were true, we'd
have been all alone on Mars, completely on our own. I knew all along my
physical disability would hang over me like the blooming season, I'm
totally worthless. Still, I was counting on the fact that since no
vegetation grew on Mars, which everybody, including my superiors, took
for granted . . . but anyhow it was the hay fever that got me demoted to
the backup crew, where I knew I didn't stand a chance."

 "Of flying to Mars?"

 "That's right."

 "And did you go on being a backup member?"

  "No."

 "Aut Caesar aut nihil."

 "That's one way of putting it."

 He unclasped his hands and sank deeper into his armchair.  Sitting 
there  with  eyelids  half  open,  he seemed to be digesting my words.
Then a twitch of the eyebrows and a flicker of a smile.

 "Let's return to earth. Did all the victims have allergies?"

  "Just about, though in one case it was never substantiated. The
allergies varied, dust allergy being the most common, followed by
asthma. . . ."

 "And when was it you were afraid? A moment ago you mentioned . . ."

 "I remember two different occasions. The first time was in the hotel
restaurant, when another Adams was paged to the phone. I knew it was a
popular name, I knew they were paging someone else; still, for a moment
I had the feeling it wasn't just a coincidence."

 "You had the feeling they were paging a dead man, is that it?"

 "Not at all, I thought it was the start of something. That it was a
code word being used so none of the other customers would be the wiser."

 "Did it ever occur to you it might have been someone from your own
team?"

 "Out of the question. Under no circumstances were they to get in touch
with me. Only in the event of a catastrophe, say, a declaration of war,
was Randy, our leader, supposed to approach me directly. But only under
such conditions."

 "Excuse me for being so inquisitive, but this strikes me as important.
So Adams was paged. But what if the caller really had you in mind;
wouldn't that mean he saw through your disguise and was telling you as
much?"

 "That's exactly why I was so scared. I was even tempted to go to the
phone."

 "What for?"

 "To make contact with the other side. Better that than nothing at all."

 "I see. But you didn't go, did you?"

 "No. The real Adams beat me to it."

 "And the second time?"

 "That was during my one night in Rome, at the hotel. I was staying in
the room where Adams had died . in his sleep. Oh yes, there's something
else I should explain. You see, various simulation roles were
considered. I didn't have to pose as Adams, there were alternate roles,
but I sat in on the meetings and tipped the scale in favor of Adams-"

 I broke off, seeing Earth's eyes momentarily light up.

 "Let me guess. It wasn't the temporary insanity, it wasn't the seaside,
and it wasn't the highway. It was just the thought of that safe and
secluded hotel room -the solitude, the comfort, and death. Am I right?"

 "Possibly, though I wasn't aware of it at the time. I guess they
thought I was hoping to find the secret disclosures he was supposed to
have stashed away somewhere, but that wasn't it at all. The truth was, I
found the man somehow likable."

 Even though he'd stung me a moment ago with his "Aut Caesar aut nihil"
I found myself being a lot more talkative than usual, so dependent was I
on this man's help. Exactly when this whole affair had become an
obsession with me I couldn't say. At first I'd treated the impersonation
as just another routine exercise, as a necessary part of the game. I
don't know at what point it had pulled me in so completely that at the
same time it pushed me away. I was looking forward to the danger,
counting on it; I knew it wasn't my imagination; but just when I seemed
to be on the verge of it, it turned out to be an illusion. I was barred
from it. I'd done everything Adams had done-everything except share the
same fate, and that's why I had nothing to show for it. Maybe Barth's
remark had offended me so much because it touched on the truth. One of
Fitzpatrick's medical colleagues on the Mars project, Ken, a Freudian,
would have said I was trying to force a showdown, that I preferred death
to defeat; in other words, he'd have explained my choice of Adams, the
mission itself, in terms of a Freudian death wish. You can bet that's
what he would have said. But who cares. Asking for this Frenchman's help
was tantamount to violating the mountain climber's code: I was giving
him the lead so he could pull me up on the rope. But better that than
total disaster: I had no intention of winding up a loser.

 "Let's talk about methodology." Barth's voice roused me from my
thoughts. "First of all, the class of victims, the mode of
differentiation. In this regard you proceeded far too arbitrarily."

 "What makes you think so?"

 "The fact that the incidents didn't form categories of their own but
were arbitrarily categorized as relevant or irrelevant. Your criteria
were death and insanity, or at least insanity, even when the latter
failed to result in death. Compare the behavior of Swift and Adams.
Swift, you might say, went publicly insane, whereas if it hadn't been
for Adams's letter to his wife, you never would have found out about his
hallucinations. And there's no telling how many other cases there were
like that."

 "Excuse me," I said, "but that's inevitable. What you've just accused
us of is the classic dilemma of every investigation into the unknown.
Before its limits can be defined the agent of causality must be
identified, but before the agent of causality can be identified one must
first of all define the subject under investigation."

 He looked at me with undisguised approval.

 "Well, well, I see you're well versed in the language, too. But it
surely wasn't the detectives who taught it to you, now was it?"

 I said nothing in reply. He sat rubbing his chin.

 "Yes, that is indeed the classic dilemma of induction. But let's turn
to some of the discarded facts, to the false clues. Were there any
promising leads that in the end proved useless?"

 Now it was my turn to look at him with approval.

 "Yes, one very interesting one. We really had our hopes pinned on it.
Before leaving for Italy all of the American victims had been patients
at one of Dr. Stella's clinics. You've heard of Dr. Stella, I suppose?"

 "No, I haven't."

 "People say different things about him-some consider him to be one of
the best, others claim he's a quack. Whenever one of his patients was
suffering from rheumatism, he would prescribe the mineral baths in
Naples."

 "What!"

 "I jumped, too, when I heard that, but it turned out to be a false
lead. He considered the baths around Vesuvius to be far and away the
best, even though we have more than our share in the States. The ones
who were talked into making the trip were in the minority, for it isn't
true that all Americans are spendthrifts. If a patient said he couldn't
afford a trip to Vesuvius, Stella would send him to an American health
spa. We tracked down these people-they numbered about a hundred- and
found them all safe and sound. Some of the patients were just as
handicapped as before, but in any case we didn't come across a single
fatality of the Italian type. Most of them died of natural causes- heart
disease, cancer. . . ."

 "I assume they were married, had families of their own," said Barth,
distracted by some thought or other.

 I couldn't help smiling.

 "Doctor, now you're resorting to the same kind of crazy parlance, the
same c1iches, as those people in the agency. ... As a matter of fact,
most of them did have families, but then there was no shortage of
widowers and old bachelors among them, either. Besides, since when are
wives and children an antidote? And an antidote against what?"

 "You can't reach the truth without crossing a sea of mistakes," Barth
said sententiously but with a wry look in his eye. "And do you happen to
know how many patients this Dr. Stella sent to Naples?"

 "Yes, I do know. And this is one of the most bizarre coincidences of
all. Every time I think about it I feel like I'm on the verge of
cracking the case. Altogether he sent twenty-nine rheumatic patients,
including five of our Americans: Osborn, Brunner, Coburn, Heyne, and
Swift."

 "Five of the seven Americans?"

 "That's right. Neither Emmings nor Adams had gone to Stella's clinic
for treatment. Nor had Brigg, but then, as you know, he was never
classified as a victim."

 "This is all extremely relevant. And the other twenty-four patients?"

 "I know the statistics by heart. Sixteen of them had been sent before
any of the incidents in question had taken place. All returned safely to
the States. Last year he sent thirteen. Five of the victims came from
this group."

 "Five of the thirteen? And of the eight who survived, were there any
conforming to the 'model victim'?"

 "Three of them, in fact. All single men, financially well off, and in
their fifties. All safely returned. All alive."

 "Only men? Didn't Stella ever treat women?"

 "He did treat women. Prior to the deaths in question he sent four women
to Italy, two just last year. None this year."

 "How do you explain this disproportion between the sexes?"

 "Stella's clinics first became famous as teatment centers for men.
Potency disorders, falling hair . . . Later this was played down, but
Stella still has the image of being a man's doctor. So there's a very
logical explanation for the disproportion."

 "Still, the fact remains . . . not a single woman was included among
the victims, even though Europe has its share of elderly ladies, too.
Does Stella operate any clinics in Europe?"

 "No. The European victims never came into contact with Stella. That's
pretty safe to assume, since none of them had visited the States within
the previous five years."

 "Did you ever consider the possibility that there might be two separate
operations-one for the Americans, another for the Europeans?"

 "We did consider that. We compared both groups within the same set, but
nothing came of it."

 "Why did he insist on sending his patients to Naples and not somewhere
else?"

 "Very simple. He's a second-generation Italian, his family comes from
somewhere around Naples, and he probably stood to make a profit through
his connections with some of the local balneologists, such as Dr. Giono.
Medical confidentiality prevented our gaining access to the
correspondence, but it's only logical that a doctor on the other side of
the ocean would recommend patients to his Italian colleagues. At any
rate, we didn't uncover anything suspicious in their relationship. I
suppose that for every patient he recommended he received a certain
percentage."

 "How do you explain that mysterious blank letter delivered after
Mittelhorn's death?"

 "I suspect it was sent by a member of Mittelhorn's own family, someone
who was familiar with the circumstances of his death and who was as
eager as Mrs. Barbour to see the investigation continued but who, for
one reason or another, couldn't or didn't want to intervene as openly as
she did. Someone who had good reason to believe a crime had been
committed and was trying to stir up suspicion so the police would keep
the case open. The letter was postmarked Switzerland, where Mittelhorn
had a number of relatives. . . ."

 "Were there any drug addicts among Dr. Stella's patients?"

 "Two, neither of them heavy users and both of them elderly men-one a
widower, the other a bachelor. Arrived last year around the end of May,
beginning of June, took the baths, sunbathed regularly-in short, did
everything that according to the statistics should have exposed them to
the maximum danger. But the fact is both returned safe and sound. And I
shouldn't forget to mention that one was allergic to pollen and the
other to strawberries!"

 "How disastrous!" exclaimed Barth, but neither of us was in the mood to
laugh.

 "You figured it was the allergy, didn't you? So did I."

 "What kind of drugs were they taking?"

 "Marijuana in the case of the one with the strawberry allergy. The one
with hay fever was taking LSD, but only once in a while. His supply ran
out just before he flew back to the States; that's probably why he quit
the baths and left ahead of schedule. In Naples he couldn't get his
hands on the stuff. The police had just busted up a huge Middle Eastern
ring based in Italy, trafficking had stopped, and the suppliers who
hadn't been arrested were lying low."

 "And the one with the strawberry allergy . . ." mumbled Barth. "Well,
that takes care of that. What about those with mental problems?"

 "Negative. Oh, you know as well as I do there's bound to be something
in everyone's family closet, but that would be stretching it too far.
All the patients in question-victims as well as survivors-were mentally
sound. A few neurotics and insomniacs, but that's about it. Among the
men, that is. Among the women patients we found one case of melancholia,
one case of depression associated with menopause, and one suicide
attempt."

 "A suicide attempt, you say?"

 "One of those false alarms on the part of a typical neurotic. Poisoned
herself under circumstances where she was sure to be saved. With the
others it was just the opposite: not one of them had gone around
proclaiming a suicidal mania. On the contrary, the repeated attempts
give evidence of a ruthless determination."

 "Why only in Naples?" Barth asked. "Weren't there any cases reported in
places like Messina or Etna?"

 "No. Naturally we couldn't check out every sulfur spring in the world,
but a special group was assigned to investigate the ones in Italy. An
absolute blank. There was a case of someone dying of a shark attack,
another in a drowning accident."

 "Coburn died in a drowning accident, too, didn't he?"

 "Yes, but while temporarily deranged."

 "Has that definitely been proved?"

 "Almost. We know relatively little about the man. Only that when he was
served breakfast that time in his room, he hid his toast, butter, and
eggs in an empty cigar box, and later put some food on the window sill
before going out."

 "Of course! He suspected poison and wanted to see if the birds . . ."

 "And he probably wanted to take the box to a toxicologist but drowned
before he had a chance to do so."

 "What about the experts' reports?"

 "Two thick, typewritten volumes. We even resorted to the Delphi method
of polling the experts."

 "Well?"

 "The majority argued in favor of some unknown psychotropic drug similar
in its effect to LSD, though not necessarily having a similar chemical
composition."

 "An unknown drug? What a strange diagnosis."

 "Not necessarily unknown. These same experts believe it might be a
combination of several known substances, since the symptoms of a synergy
can seldom be deduced from the effects of its individual ingredients."

 "What was the minority opinion?"

 "An acute psychosis of unknown etiology. You know how loquacious
doctors and specialists can be when they're in the dark about
something."

 "Only too well. Would you mind giving me another rundown based on the
typology of cause of death?"

 "Not in the least. Coburn died an accidental or premeditated death by
drowning. Brunner jumped from a window but survived it-"

 "Excuse me, but whatever became of him?"

 "He's back in the States, in bad health but still alive. He has a vague
recollection of certain things but doesn't like to be reminded of them.
All he can remember is having taken a waiter for a member of the Mafia
and the feeling of being constantly shadowed. Shall I go on?"

 "Please do."

 "Osborn was the victim of a hit-and-run accident. The driver of the car
has never been found. Emmings twice tried to commit suicide. Died of a
self-inflicted gun wound. Leyge, the Swede, drove to Rome and fell from
the Colosseum. Schimmeleiter died in the hospital of natural causes, of
a lung tumor, after going berserk. Heyne nearly drowned, then slashed
his wrists in the hospital. Pulled through but later died of pneumonia.
Swift escaped injury. Mittelhorn also tried to commit suicide twice-once
with an .overdose of sleeping pills, the second time by consuming
iodine. Died of internal burns. Titz was killed in a highway accident.
Lastly, Adams died in his hotel room at the Hilton in Rome, apparently
from suffocation of unknown cause. The Brigg case is still a mystery,"

 "Thank you. Of those who escaped alive, do any remember the initial
symptoms?"

 "Yes. One symptom was a trembling of the hands and a noticeable change
in the taste of food. We found that out from Swift. Brunner definitely
recalls the food's having an 'off taste' but remembers nothing about any
trembling of the hands. His testimony is probably the result of a
residual psychic effect. At least that was the opinion of the medical
experts."

  "The cause of death covers quite a spectrum, and the suicide victims
always seemed to resort to whatever means was available at the time. Did
you conduct an investigation based on the cui podest principle?"

 "You mean did we investigate those who stood to gain financially? That
would have been pointless, since there was nothing in the way of
evidence to connect any of the heirs with the individual deaths."

 "Any press coverage?"

 "A total news blackout. Of course the local papers ran obituaries on
each of the fatalities, but these got lost among all the other accident
reports. We were worried they might interfere with the investigation.
Only one paper in the States, the name of which escapes me, made any
mention of the tragic fates met by the patients of Dr. Stella. Stella
himself insisted it was the work of some unscrupulous competitor. Even
so, last year he didn't send a single patient to Naples."

 "So he stopped! Doesn't that look suspicious?"

 "Not necessarily. One more incident and the publicity could have cost
him more than he stood to make on the deal. He couldn't have been making
very much on the kickbacks."

 "I now propose we play the following game," suggested Barth. "We'll
call it 'How to die a mysterious death in Naples.' The purpose of the
game will be to find out how one qualifies for such a death. Will you
help me out?"

 "By all means. The list of qualifications will include a person's sex,
age, build, physical disabilities, financial status, plus some other
characteristics that I'll try to specify. To qualify one would have to
be a male in his fifties, rather tall, the athletic or the pyknic type,
a bachelor, a widower, or divorced, but in any case single during the
time spent in Naples. As is evident from the Schimmelreiter case,
financial prosperity is not an absolute requirement. Nor should one know
any Italian, or if so, only a smattering."

 "None of the victims was fluent in Italian?"

 "Not one. Now for the more specific characteristics. To be a candidate
one should not be a diabetic."

 "Is that so?"

 "There wasn't a single diabetic in the whole series. On the other hand,
there were five known diabetics among the rheumatic patients sent to
Naples by Dr. Stella, all of whom returned home safely."

 "How do your experts explain that?"

 "I'm not really sure I can answer that. Some ascribed it to the
patient's metabolism, to the formation of acetone derivatives that might
possibly have acted as an antidote, though this was challenged by some
of the less distinguished-but in my opinion more honest-experts. Acetone
derivatives form in the blood when an organism begins to suffer the
effects of an insulin deficiency. But nowadays every diabetic is warned
to take his prescribed medicine regularly. The next requirement is an
allergy. Hypersensitivity to grass, hay fever, asthma. But then there
were people who met all of the above conditions and still managed to
escape unharmed. Take the patient with the strawberry allergy, or the
one with hay fever."

 "Single, well-to-do men who took the mineral baths, were athletic in
build, suffered from an allergy, and didn't know Italian?"

 "They even used the same antihistamines as the others, in addition to
Plimasine."

 "What's that?"

 "An antihistamine with the added ingredient Ritalin. Ritalin is
a-phenyl-a-piperidineacetic acid methyl ester hydrochloride. The first
substance in Plimasine, Pyribenzamine, neutralizes the symptoms of
allergic reaction but causes drowsiness and a diminution of the
reflexes. That's why drivers are advised to take it in combination with
Ritalin, which is classified as a stimulant."

 "You're quite a chemist, I see!"

 "I've been taking Plimasine for years. Anyone who has an allergy is to
some extent his own doctor. In the States I used to take an equivalent
medication, since Plimasine is manufactured in Switzerland. Charles
Decker, the man with the hay fever, was also on Plimasine, yet no one
touched a hair on his head. Wait a moment,"

 I sat there with gaping mouth like a moron. Barth stared at me in
silence.

 "They all showed signs of baldness," I said at last.

 "Baldness?"

 "The beginning stages, at least. Wait a minute. Right, Decker had a
bald spot, too ... at the back of the head. But that still doesn't . . .
oh, never mind."

 "But you're not exactly bald," observed Barth.

 "Sorry? Oh, right-I'm not. That was an oversight. But if Decker escaped
injury . . . even though he showed signs of baldness . . . But what
connection could there be between baldness and insanity?"

 "Or between insanity and diabetes?"

 "You're right, doctor, that's not a valid question."

 "Was the question of baldness completely overlooked?"

 "The situation was like this. We compared those who died with those who
left Naples unharmed. The question of baldness certainly came up. The
problem was that verification was possible only in the case of the
victims, since most of the survivors would have been reluctant to admit
they were wearing a toupee. Human pride being what it is, this is one
area where people tend to be extremely sensitive, and getting people to
submit willingly to an on-the-spot examination would have been tricky.
Also, it would have meant trying to locate the place where the wig or
hair transplant had been ordered, and we simply had neither the time nor
the staff for that."

 "Wasn't it considered very relevant?"

 "People were divided. Some thought it was a waste of time trying to
establish whether any of the survivors was anxious to conceal his
baldness, and didn't see what connection that would have with the tragic
fates of the others."

 "Well, then, if you had taken the hair factor into consideration, why
did you act so startled a moment ago?"

 "It was a negative correlation, I'm afraid. What startled me was that
none of the deceased had tried to conceal his baldness. Not one of them
had worn a toupee or undergone a hair transplant. There are such
operations, you know."

 "So I've heard. Anything else?"

 "Nothing-except that all the victims were in the process of going bald
and made no effort to conceal it, whereas the survivors included both
those who were balding and those with a normal head of hair. A minute
ago I was reminded of Decker's bald spot, that's all. For a moment I
thought I'd stumbled onto something. It wouldn't have been the first
time, either. You see, I've been at this for so long that now and then I
begin seeing things, phantoms. . . ."

 "Oh, that smacks of magic spells, spirits from the other world. . . .
But maybe there's something to it."

 "Do you believe in the existence of spirits?" A long and hard stare.

 "It's probably enough if they believed in them, isn't it? Let's suppose
some fortuneteller was operating in Naples, someone who went after rich
foreign clients. . . ."

 "All right. Supposing there was such a person," I said, sitting up in
my chair, "what then?"

 "Let's assume this fortuneteller tries to win people's confidence
through various kinds of tricks and seances, gives away samples of some
miraculous elixir imported from Tibet, some type of narcotic that makes
the client totally dependent on him or is passed off as a cure-all for
every conceivable ailment. . . . Now let's suppose that out of a hundred
such cases there are some ten or eleven  who   rashly   consume   an  
overdose   of  the

 stuff. . . ."

 "Right!" I exclaimed. "But in that case wouldn't the Italians have been
wise to his little game? The Italian police, I mean? The fact is that in
some cases we were so familiar with the victim's routine we knew exactly
when he left the hotel, what he liked to wear, which were his favorite
newsstands and even which papers he bought, which cabin he used for
changing clothes at the beach, what and where he ate, which opera
performances he saw. . . . Now we might have missed such a quack or guru
in one or two instances, but not in every single case. No, there never
was any such person. Besides, the whole thing sounds too far-fetched.
It's not just that none of them knew Italian; but would a Swede with a
university education, a rarebook dealer, and a respectable businessman
be likely to visit an Italian fortuneteller? Besides, none of them would
have had the

 time. . . ."

 "Refuted but not defeated. Here goes another wild shot." He sat up in
his chair. "If something had them hooked, then it must have strung them
along gently and without leaving a trace. Right?"

 "Right."

 "No what else could have hooked them in a purely private, intimate, and
casual sort of way but-sex!"

 I hesitated before answering.

 "No. Granted, there were a few brief erotic encounters, but that's
hardly the same thing. Believe me, we did such a thorough background
cheek we couldn't possibly have overlooked anything as 'big' as a woman,
a sex orgy, or a brothel. No, it must have been something else,
something utterly banal. . . ."

 I was a little surprised by these last words of mine, since I'd never
thought of it in such terms before. But it turned out to be grist for
Barth's mill.

 "Banal but lethal . . . Yes, why not! Some shameful and hidden desire,
some secret lust that had to be satisfied . . . Not shameful to us,
perhaps, but something that might have meant a horrible scandal for
others if it were ever made public . . ."

 "The circle has closed," I said. "Because now you've come around to the
very same position you forced me to abandon a while ago, namely,
psychology. . . ."

 Someone honked outside. Looking very young at that moment, the doctor
stood up, peered down below, and shook his finger threateningly. The
honking stopped. I was surprised to notice it had already grown dark. I
consulted my watch and was shocked to discover that I'd taken up three
hours of Barth's time. I stood up to say good-bye, but he refused to
hear anything of the sort.

 "Oh, no, you don't. First of all, you'll stay with us for dinner.
Second, we didn't settle anything. And third, or, rather, first and
foremost, I'd like to apologize for reversing the roles and grilling you
like some examining magistrate. I'll admit I had an ulterior motive, one
not exactly worthy of a host. . . . I wanted to find out certain
things-both about you and from you-things I couldn't get from the files.
It's always been my feeling that only a person can convey the atmosphere
of a case. At times I was even out to provoke you a little, to needle
you, but I must say you took it very well, though you haven't nearly as
good a poker face as you imagine you do. ... If there's anything that
can redeem me in your eyes, then let it be my good intentions, because
I'm ready to offer you my services. But let's sit down until dinner's
served. They'll ring when it's ready."

 We sat down again. I felt enormously relieved.

 "I'll work on the case," he continued, "though I don't believe we'll
have much luck. . . . May I ask exactly how you envision my role?"

 "This is a case lending itself to a multifactorial analysis," I began
cautiously, selecting my words with care. "I'm not familiar with your
program but I am familiar with a number of GPSS-type programs, and I
assume your computer is somewhat analogous. The problem is not so much a
criminal as an intellectual one. Obviously the computer won't be able to
identify the culprit, but it might be able to eliminate the culprit as
an unknown factor. Solving the case would mean positing a theory to
account for the fatalities, a law governing these deaths. . . ."

 Dr. Barth looked at me almost with sympathy. Or perhaps is was only the
way the light fell from above, gently modulating his features every time
he made the slightest movement.

 "When I said we I had in mind a team of men, not electrons. I've
assembled a brilliant interdisciplinary team, including some of the best
minds of France, and I'm sure they'd jump at the chance. . . . But as
for the computer . . . True, we've managed to program one, and so far
the test results have been satisfactory, but with such a case-never. . .
." He shook his head. "Why not?"

 "Very simple. The computer won't work without hard data." He spread out
his arms. "And what are we supposed to use as hard data in this case?
Let's suppose a new narcotics ring is operating in Naples, that a hotel
is being used as a drop, and they are delivering the stuff by
substituting it for the salt in certain salt shakers. Now isn't it
possible for the salt shakers to get switched around occasionally on the
dining-room tables? In that case wouldn't only those who like salt on
their food run the risk of getting drugged? And how, may I ask, is a
computer supposed to process this if the processing data include nothing
about the salt shakers, the drugs, or the culinary habits of the
victims?"

 I looked at him with admiration. How adept he was at manipulating such
ideas. The dinner bell rang, louder and louder till it reached a shrill
intensity, then suddenly stopped, and a woman's voice could be heard
scolding a child,

 "It's time for us to go downstairs. . . . We always eat on schedule."

 The dining room was lit by a long row of pink candles on the table. On
the way down Barth whispered that his grandmother would be joining them
for dinner, adding that for a ninety-year-old woman she was still
extremely fit, if a little on the eccentric side. I took this as a
warning of sorts, but before I had a chance to reply I found myself
being introduced to the other members of the family. Besides the three
children whom I'd already met, and Mrs. Barth, who was already seated
across the table in a hand-carved chair identical to the one in the
library, I saw an elderly lady dressed in a gown of royal purple. An
old-fashioned lorgnette trimmed with diamonds glittered on her chest,
and her small black eyes transfixed me like a couple of shiny pebbles.
She held out her hand, but so high and with such enthusiasm that I
kissed it, something I otherwise never do; and in a surprisingly deep
and masculine voice, one that sounded as false as a voice in a poorly
dubbed film, she said:

 "So you're an astronaut, are you? I've never sat at the same table with
an astronaut before."

 Even the doctor was taken by surprise. Mrs. Barth was quick to remark
that the children had announced my arrival. The old lady told me to sit
down next to her and to speak in a loud voice, as she was hard of
hearing. Next to her table setting was a kidney-shaped hearing aid, but
at no time during the meal did she use it.

 "You can keep me entertained," she said. "I doubt whether I shall have
a similar occasion so soon again. Please, be so kind as to tell me how
the earth really looks from up there? I don't trust the photographs."

 "And rightly so," I said, passing her the salad bowl, secretly charmed
by her blunt and unceremonious manner. "No photo can ever match it,
especially not when the orbital path is close and the earth gradually
takes the place of the sky. It doesn't block the sky, it becomes the
sky. That's the impression one gets."

 "Is it really as beautiful as they say?" Her voice expressed doubt.

 "It was to me, anyhow. What impressed me most was the emptiness of it,
the desolation. Not a sign of any cities, highways, or seaports-nothing
but oceans, continents, and clouds. By the way, the oceans and
continents look much the same as we were taught at school. But the
clouds ... I found the clouds to be the most uncanny thing of all, maybe
because they didn't look like clouds."

 "What did they look like?"

 "That depends on the altitude. From very far away they look like the
old and wrinkly hide of a rhinoceros, all cracked and bluish-gray. But
the closer you get, the more they look like different shades of sheep's
wool after it's been combed out."

 "Were you ever on the moon?"

 "I'm sorry to say I never was." I was preparing myself for more
questions of a cosmological nature when she abruptly changed the
subject.

 "You speak French so fluently, but with a strange accent and a slightly
different vocabulary. You're not from Canada, are you?"

 "My family was Canadian; I was born in the States."

 "Just as I thought: Then your mother is French?"

 "Was French."

 I could see that both husband and wife were trying to dampen the old
lady's curiosity by means of glances from across the table, but she
simply ignored them. "And did your mother speak French with you?"

 "Yes, she did."

 "Your first name is John. So she must have called you Jean."

 "She did."

 "Then I shall call you that. Please take away the asparagus, Jean-I'm
not supposed to eat it. The secret of growing old, Jean, is having lots
of experience you can no longer use. They're right"-she said, indicating
the rest of the family-"not to pay me any attention. You're still too
young to know, but there's quite a difference between being seventy and
being ninety. A fundamental difference," she added for emphasis. She
stopped talking and began eating her meal, and came to life again only
when the table was being cleared in preparation for the next course.

 "How many times did you travel to outer space?"

 "Twice. But I didn't travel very far from earth. If you compare it to
an apple, then only as far as the peel is thick."

 "Aren't you being modest?"

 "Not really."

 The conversation had taken a somewhat strange turn, but I can't say I
found it awkward, especially since the old lady had a special charm
about her. And so I was not the least bit irritated when she went on
with her interrogation.

 "Are you in favor of letting women travel in outer space?"

 "I really haven't given it much thought," I answered honestly. "If
that's their ambition, then why not?"

 "You're the ones who started that whole crazy movement, aren't you?
That women's liberation business. It's so childish, so tasteless, though
it certainly is convenient."

 "Do you think so? Why convenient?"

 "It's always convenient to know who's to blame for everything.
Everything's the fault of men, say the ladies. They're the only ones who
can straighten out the world. They want to take your place. As
preposterous as it may sound, they do have a definite goal in mind,
which is more than can be said of you men."

 After a dessert of rhubarb sprinkled with sugar, the kids sneaked out
of the dining room and I got ready to leave. But when the doctor heard I
was staying at Orly, he insisted I move in with him. I had no desire to
take advantage of him, but I was sorely tempted. To put it bluntly, I
wanted to pester the hell out of him.

 Mrs. Barth seconded her husband's invitation and showed me their
still-empty guest book, saying it would bring good luck if an astronaut
were the first to sign it.

 After a round or two of polite exchanges, I finally gave in. It was
decided that I would move in with them the following day. Dr. Barth
accompanied me to my car and after I was behind the wheel confided that
his grandmother had taken a distinct liking to me, adding that this was
no small honor. He was still standing in the gateway as I drove off and
plunged into a Parisian night.

 To avoid the traffic I swung around the center of the city and headed
for the boulevards along the Seine, where the midnight traffic was sure
to be lighter. I was tired but contented. My conversation with Barth had
left me feeling extremely hopeful. I took it easy on the road, not
trusting myself after drinking all that white wine. Ahead of me a small
2 CV was nervously hugging the curb. The road was deserted. Warehouses
loomed high above the railings that ran along the opposite bank of the
Seine, but I hardly noticed them: my mind was wandering. Suddenly a pair
of car lights blazed in the rear-view mirror like a couple of suns. I
was right in the middle of passing the 2 CV and was a little too far
over to the left, so I decided to make way for the night racer and drop
back into the slow lane, but it was too late. His headlights flooded the
inside of my car, and a second later a flattened-out shape came shooting
through the gap. By the time I recovered from the air blast, he was
gone. Something was missing from the right front fender. All that was
left of the mirror was the stem. Cut off. A little farther down the road
it occurred to me that if it hadn't been for the wine I would have
blocked its path and might now be lying underneath the wreckage of my
own car. Now that would have given Randy food for thought. How
beautifully my death would have fit the Naples pattern. How sure Randy
would have been it was connected with the simulation mission. But it
seems I wasn't fated to be the twelfth victim: I made it back to the
hotel safely.

  

  

 *       *       *

  

 On the fourth day of my visit, on a Sunday, in order to put his team's
involvement in the case on a more personal basis, and also perhaps to
show off his new house, Barth held a little get-together at his place to
which more than twenty people were invited. Since I hadn't been prepared
for any formal affairs, I decided to drive to Paris on Saturday to pick
up something more appropriate for the occasion, but Barth talked me out
of it. So, dressed as I was in a pair of faded jeans and a scraggly
sweater-all my better clothes had been ruined by the Italian police-I
stood at the entrance along with the Barths. The walls on the ground
floor had been opened up, converting the downstairs area into a spacious
drawing room. It was a rather strange situation: surrounded by a crowd
of bearded neophytes and periwigged bluestockings, I felt a little like
a crasher and a little like a host, inasmuch as I was Barth's
house-guest .and was even sharing the honors of the house. Being neatly
trimmed and shaven, I must have made the impression of an overaged Boy
Scout.

 Curiously absent from the party was that atmosphere of courtly
formality, or even worse that revolutionary clowning so characteristic
of intellectuals: ever since the latest events in China, the Maoists had
gone into hiding. I made an effort to socialize with all the guests
because I knew they had come expressly to meet an allergic astronaut, a
roaming detective ad interim. Nonchalantly the conversation turned to
the tribulations of the world. Not nonchalantly, really, but in a mood
of surrender now that Europe's eternal mission had come to an end, a
fact that these graduates of Nanterre and I'Ecole Superieure seemed to
grasp better than their compatriots. Europe had survived, but only in an
economic sense. Prosperity had been restored, but not the feeling of
self-confidence. It was not the cancer patient's fear of malignancy, but
the awareness that the spirit of history had moved on, and that if it
ever returned it would not be here. France had lost its power and
influence, and now that it had been moved from the stage into the
audience it was at liberty to show concern for the sufferings of the
world. McLuhan's prophecies were coming true, but in an inverse sort of
way, as prophecies have a habit of doing. His "global village" was
already here, but split into two halves. The poorer half was suffering,
while the wealthier half was importing that suffering via television and
commiserating from a distance. That it couldn't go on like this was
everywhere taken for granted, but it went on just the same. No one asked
for my opinion on the State Department's new "wait and see" policy
within the economic buffer zone, nor did I venture to offer any. The
conversation then switched from the trials of the world to its follies.
Among other things, I learned that a famous French film director was
planning to make a film about the "massacre on the steps." The part of
the mysterious hero was to be played by Jean Paul Belmondo; the little
girl would be played not by a child actress-since bedding down with a
kid would have been considered in bad taste-but by a famous British
movie star. Being just recently married, this same actress had invited a
number of prominent personalities to her public wedding night-such
pastimes were now the vogue-in order to take up a collection around the
nuptial bed for the benefit of the airport casualties in Rome. Ever
since reading about those Belgian nuns who indulged in charitable
prostitution in order to redeem the hypocrisy of the Church, I'm no
longer appalled by such things. And of course there was a lot of talk
about politics. The latest news item was that members of an Argentine
movement of national patriots had been exposed as government stooges.
Various people expressed the fear that something like that couldn't be
ruled out even in a country like France. Fascism had survived, along
with the most ruthless dictatorships-at least in Europe-whereas the only
way to deal effectively with extremist terror was to exterminate the
activists. Although a democracy refused to condone "preventive murders,"
it nonetheless looked the other way when it came to progovernment
assassinations carried out under discreet supervision and with limited
liability. This was not to be confused with the old-fashioned type of
political execution or repression instituted by the State, but was,
rather, a form of constructive terror per procurationem. I once heard of
a philosophy that advocated the total legalization of violence, which
even de Sade regarded as the epitome of true freedom. It would have
constitutionally sanctioned every sort of activity -revolutionary as
well as reactionary; and since the supporters of the status quo far
outnumbered the subversives, the established order was sure to emerge
intact in a violent confrontation of both extremes, should it ever come
to something like a civil war.

 Around eleven Barth began showing the more curious guests around the
house, leaving only a handful of people downstairs. I decided to join
three of the guests who were sitting around an open patio door. Two were
mathematicians belonging to rival camps: Saussure, a relative of
Lagrange, was specializing in analysis, that is, in pure mathematics;
the other was in applied mathematics, being a programmer and
statistician by profession. Even their outward appearance offered an
amusing contrast. Saussure looked as if he might have stepped out of a
daguerreotype-lean, dark-haired, with chiseled features, bushy
sideburns, a gold pince-nez dangling on a ribbon-and wore a Japanese
transistorized calculator around his neck like a medal, which was
obviously meant as a joke. The statistician, a burly, curly-headed
blond, was a double for the slouchy Boche featured in French postcards
from the time of the First World War, and was in fact of German origin.
His name was Mayer, and not Mailleux, as I thought at first after
hearing it pronounced that way. The mathematicians were in no hurry to
make conversation, unlike the third man, a pharmacologist named Dr.
Lapidus. Sporting a full-length beard, he looked as if he's just
returned from an uninhabited island. He asked me whether the
investigation had turned up any abortive cases, that is, cases where the
outward signs of insanity had simply come and gone. I answered that all
the files were on microfilm, and that unless one wanted to classify the
Swift case as abortive, there were none falling into that category.

 "That's amazing!" he exclaimed.

 "Why amazing?"

 "The symptoms varied in their intensity, but the moment any of the
victims was hospitalized, like that man who jumped out the window, they
immediately subsided. If one assumes the psychosis was chemically
induced, that would mean the dose taken had a strange kind of cumulative
effect. Didn't anyone notice this?"

 "I don't really see your point."

 "There's no psychotropic compound known to have such a delayed effect
that, say, if it were taken on Monday it could begin producing the first
symptoms on Tuesday, cause hallucinations on Wednesday, and reach a
maximum intensity on Saturday. Of course it might be possible to build
up a supply by using a hypodermic injection that it would take several
weeks to absorb; but such a procedure would leave traces in the body,
and I found nothing in the autopsy reports to indicate this."

 "You didn't find anything because nothing like that was ever reported."

 "That's what I find amazing!"

 "But they might have taken the stuff more than once, which would
explain the cumulative effect. . . ."

 He shook his head with disapproval.

 "How? Between the change in routine and the appearance of the first
symptoms there was always a time lapse of six to eight days on the
average, nine in one case. And no chemical agent is capable of having
such a delayed or cumulative effect. Let's assume they started taking
this chemical substance the first or second day after their arrival;
then the initial symptoms would have had to occur within the next
forty-eight hours. In the case of patients with kidney or liver diseases
that's debatable, but then there weren't any such patients."

 "So what's your opinion?"

 "The case histories would indicate they were drugged on a steady,
gradual, and continual basis."

 "So you believe it was a case of premeditated poisoning?"

 He broke out in a smile, revealing his gold teeth.

 "No. Who knows, maybe the goblins are to blame, or maybe some flies
were on their way back from raiding a pharmaceutical lab and happened to
land on the victims' toast after tramping around in the latest
derivatives of lysergic acid. But I do know that the process of
accretion took place gradually"

 "But what if it were an unknown compound?"

 "Unknown to us?"

 He said it in such a way that I couldn't help smiling.

 "Yes. Unknown to you. To chemistry. Would that be impossible?"

 He made a wry grimace and flashed the gold in his mouth.

 "There are more unknown compounds than there are stars in the sky. But
you can't have any that are both resistant and nonresistant to tissue
metabolism. There are many circles, but there is no such thing as a
squared circle."

 "I don't follow you."

 "Very simple. Chemical agents known to cause acute reactions act by
binding irreversibly to the body's hemoglobin to form insoluble
compounds with carbon monoxide or cyanide. An autopsy will always be
able to detect the presence of such agents, especially if micro-methods
are used-chromatography, for example. But even with the help of
chromatography they couldn't find any traces! That means the chemical
agent involved must be easily degradable. If it's easily degradable,
then it would have to be administered in a number of small doses or else
in one massive dose. But if it were administered in a single dose, then
the symptoms would start becoming noticeable in a matter of hours and
not days. Now do you follow me?"

 "Yes. Do you see any other possibilities?"

 "There is one other. And that is if it involved some basically
innocuous substance that began developing psychotropic properties the
moment it started distributing itself in the blood or tissue. In the
liver, for instance. To expel this substance the liver might convert it
into a toxic agent. The result would be an interesting biochemical trap,
though a completely hypothetical one, since nothing like that has ever
been known to happen and I doubt whether it ever could."

 "How can you be so sure?"

 "Because pharmacology has no record of such a toxin, of such a 'Trojan
horse.' And if something has never been known to happen, the chances are
slim that it ever will."

 "So where does that leave us?"

 "I don't know."

 "Is that all you have to say?"

 I was being impolite, but the man was beginning to get on my nerves.
Even so, he didn't seem to take offense.

 "No, that's not all. The effect could be the result of something else."

 "A combination of different substances? Of different toxins?"

 "Yes."

 "But that would definitely make it a case of premeditated murder,
wouldn't it?"

 The answer came unexpectedly from Saussure.

 "A girl from Lombardy was working as a housemaid for a certain Parisian
lawyer living at 48 Rue St-Pierre, on the third floor. One day her
sister came to visit her but forgot the name of the street, confusing it
with St-Michel. When she came to 48 Boulevard St-Michel, she went
upstairs, found a doctor's name-plate, rang the doorbell, and asked for
her sister, Maria Duval. By sheer coincidence it turned out that a woman
with the exact same name-Maria Duval-was working for another doctor, on
another street, but was in fact somebody else entirely. Now in trying to
determine the a priori probability of such a coincidence, we find it
impossible to offer a rational, that is to say, mathematically valid
explanation. The example may appear trivial, but, believe me, it opens
up an endless void. The only model for the theory of probability is
Gibbs's world of recurrent events. When it comes to unique and
statistically unclassifiable' events, the theory of probability is
inapplicable."

 "There are no such things as unique events," said Mayer, who all this
time had been standing there in amusement, grinning wryly.

 "Of course there are," countered Saussure.

 "At least not as a set."

 "You happen to be a unique set of events yourself. Everyone is."

 "Distributively or collectively speaking?"

 Just when it looked as if we were in for a duel of abstraction, Lapidus
placed a hand on each man's knee and said:

 "Gentlemen!"

 Both men smiled. Mayer went on smirking with tongue in cheek while
Sausure tried to pick up where he had left off.

 "One can easily run a frequency analysis on the name Duval or the
residences of Parisian doctors. But what's the ratio between confusing
Rue St-Pierre with Boulevard St-Michel, and the frequency of these names
as street names throughout France? And what numerical value do you
assign to a situation in which the woman finds a house with an occupant
named Duval but on the fourth, rather than the third floor? In short,
the set of possibilities is limitless."

 "But not infinite," interjected Mayer.

 "I can prove it's infinite in both the classical and the transfinite
sense."

 "Excuse me," I interrupted, wishing to pick up the thread. "Dr.
Saussure, I'm sure your story had a moral to it. What exactly was the
moral?"

 Mayer gave me a sympathetic glance and strode out onto the patio.
Saussure seemed somewhat startled by my lack of perspicacity.

 "Have you been out in the garden behind the summerhouse, out where the
strawberry patch is?"

 "Why, yes."

 "Did you happen to notice the round wooden table standing there, the
one trimmed with copper nails?"

 "Yes."

 "Do you think it would be possible to take an eye-dropper and squeeze
out as many drops as there are nails so that each drop hits a nail
head?"

 "Well. . . if a person were to take careful aim, why not?"

 "But not if a person just started firing away at random?"

 "Then obviously not."

 "But five minutes of a steady downpour and each nail would be sure to
get hit by a drop of water."

 "You mean to say . . ." I was beginning to see his point.

 "Yes, yes! My position is an extreme one: there's no such thing as a
mysterious event. It all depends on the magnitude of the set. The
greater the set, the greater the chance of improbable events occurring
within it."

 "Then the victims do not really form a set. . . ?"

 "The victims were the result of a random causality. Out of that realm
of infinite possibilities I mentioned earlier, you chose a certain
fraction of cases that exhibited a multifactorial similarity. You then
treated these as an entire set, and that's why they seem mysterious."

 "So you would agree with Mr. Lapidus that we should investigate the
abortive cases?"

 "No. For the simple reason that they would be impossible to find. The
class of soldiers stationed at the front includes the subclass of both
killed and wounded. While these two groups can be differentiated easily,
you'll never be able to differentiate those soldiers who came within an
inch of being hit from those who missed being hit by a kilometer. That's
why you'll never find out anything except by sheer accident. An
adversary who relies on a strategy of chance can only be defeated by the
same strategy."

 "Are you at it again, Dr. Saussure?" came a voice from behind us. It
was Barth, accompanied by a lean, grizzly-haired man whose name I failed
to catch when we were introduced. Barth treated Saussure not as a member
of his team but more as a curiosity. I later found out that until a year
ago Saussure had been working for Futuribles before joining up with the
French CETI investigating the possibility of extraterrestrial
civilizations, but that he had always been something of a drifter. I
asked him whether he believed such civilizations existed.

 "That's not so simple," he said, rising to his feet. "Other
civilizations exist and at the same time do not exist."

 "Meaning?"

 "They do not exist as projections of our own concept of civilization,
from which it follows that man is incapable of defining what makes these
civilizations be civilizations."

 "Perhaps," I conceded. "Still, it must be possible to define our place
in the cosmos, don't you think? Either we're nothing but a drab
mediocrity, or we're an exception, and a glaring one at that."

 Our listeners broke out laughing, and I was surprised to learn that it
was precisely this line of reasoning that had persuaded Saussure to quit
the CETI. At the moment he was the only one not laughing; he just stood
there, fingering his calculator as if it were a pendant. After luring
him away from the others and maneuvering him over to the table, I
offered him a glass of wine, poured myself one, and, while drinking to
his version of civilization, asked him to share his views with me.

 This was a shrewd tactic, one I'd learned from Fitzpatrick: affecting
an air of seriousness bordering on parody. Saussure began by explaining
that the progress of human knowledge was a gradual renunciation of the
simplicity of the world. "Man wanted everything to be simple, even if
mysterious: one God-in the singular, of course; one form of natural law;
one principle of reason in the universe, and so on. Astronomy, for
example, held that the totality of existence was made up of stars-past,
present, and future-and their debris in the form of planets. But
gradually astronomy had to concede that a number of cosmic phenomena
couldn't be contained within its scheme of things. Man's hunger for
simplicity paved the way for Ockham's razor, the principle stating that
no entity, no category can be multiplied unnecessarily. But the
complexity that we refused to acknowledge finally overcame our
prejudices. Modern physics has turned Ockham's maxim upside down by
positing that everything is possible. Everything in physics, that is;
the complexity of civilizations is far greater than that of physics."

 I could have gone on listening to him, but just then Lapidus insisted
on introducing me to a group of doctors and biologists. All were of the
same opinion: not enough data. The consensus was that one should start
with the hypothesis that the deaths were caused by a congenitally
determined reaction to certain unknown elements in the microbiosphere.
Two groups should be singled out for study-forty in each, all men in
their fifties, all having an athletic or a pyknic build, all randomly
selected-and made to undergo a steady program of sulfur baths,
sunbathing, body massages, sudorifics, ultraviolet lamps, horror films,
and some titillating pornography, until one of them showed signs of
cracking. A genealogical study would then have to be made of their
hereditary backgrounds for any sudden or unexplained deaths, which is
where the computer would come in handy. They had gone on to discuss the
chemical composition of the bathing water and the air, the subject of
adrenochromes, the possibility of a chemogenic schizophrenia of
metabolic origin-when Dr. Barth came to my rescue and began introducing
me to the legal experts on the team. Some of the lawyers argued in favor
of the Mafia, others in favor of some new and hitherto undisclosed
organization that was in no hurry to claim responsibility for the
mysterious deaths. Their motive? But, then, what motive did that
Japanese have for slaughtering all those Serbs, Dutchmen, and Germans in
Rome? And had I seen today's papers? A New Zealand tourist had tried to
protest the kidnapping of an Australian diplomat in Bolivia by hijacking
a charter plane in Helsinki that was carrying pilgrims bound for the
Vatican. That principle of Roman law which said "id fecit cul prodest"
was no longer valid. No, it had to be the Mafia, since any one of the
Italians could have been a mafioso: the street vendor, the hotel porter,
the bath attendant, the taxicab driver. . . . And the acute psychosis
would suggest the presence of hallucinogens; although slipping someone a
hallucinogen in a restaurant might have been tricky, where else would a
person be apt to gulp down a cool, refreshing drink if not in a health
spa after a hot and sweaty bath? The lawyers were then surrounded by the
doctors, whose company I had just left, and an argument broke out on the
subject of baldness, but without resolving anything. The whole scene was
rather comical. Around one o'clock the smaller groups began merging to
form a fairly animated crowd, and while champagne was being served the
subject of sex came up. All were convinced that the list of drugs and
medications found on the victims was incomplete. Why was that? Because
it didn't include any of the latest sex stimulants or aphrodisiacs, and
you could be sure the older men were using them. Topcraft, Bios 6,
Dulong, Antipraecox, Orkasfluid, Sex Tonicum, Samirex Erecta, Elixire
d'Egypte, Erectovite, Topform, Action Cream-the market was flooded with
them. I was overwhelmed by this display of erudition, and also a little
embarrassed, since they'd managed to reveal a flaw in the investigation:
at no time had anyone bothered to investigate the psychotropic effects
of such medications. I was advised to look into it. You mean to say that
not one of these medications was found on the victims? That in itself
was suspicious. A younger man wouldn't make any bones about it, but then
we all know how older men are apt to be secretive, prudish, and
self-conscious when it comes to such matters. They had probably used the
stuff and got rid of the wrappers. . . .

 The party was getting noisy; windows were thrown open; cork went
flying; a smiling Barth kept popping in and out of different doorways;
Spanish girls made the rounds with trays; a platium blonde-Lapidus's
wife, I guessed-not bad-looking in the dark, said I reminded her of an
ex-boyfriend. . . . The party was a grand success. And yet I was in such
a blue, melancholic mood, mellowed by the champagne: I felt cheated. Not
one of these rather amiable hotshots had any of that flair, that special
flash of illumination which in art went by the name of inspiration, that
ability to sniff out what's relevant from a pile of facts. They didn't
care about finding a solution to the problem; they only wanted to
complicate it by inventing new ones. Randy had the gift but was short on
the sort of erudition of which the Barth house was chock full-full but
unfired.

 I stuck around till the very end, joined my hosts in seeing off the
last of the guests, watched as car after car went down the driveway till
it was empty, gazed up at the house ablaze with lights, then went
upstairs feeling defeated and disaffected. More with myself than with
anyone else. Outside, a refulgent Paris loomed beyond the dark stretch
of gardens and suburban clutter, but its refulgence was not enough to
eclipse the planet Mars, now radiantly ascendant above the horizon: a
yellow sphere someone had put there as the final dot.

  

  

 *        *        *

  

  

 There are friends with whom we share neither interests nor any
particular experiences, friends with whom we never correspond, whom we
seldom meet and then only by chance, but whose existence nonetheless has
for us a special if uncanny meaning. For me the Eiffel Tower is just
such a friend, and not merely because it happens to be the symbol of a
city, for Paris leaves me neither hot nor cold. I first became aware of
this attachment of mine when reading in the paper about plans for its
demolition, the mere thought of which filled me with alarm.

 Whenever I'm in Paris I make a point of going to see it. To look and
see, that's all. Toward the end of my visit I like to step under its
foundation, to station myself between its four iron pylons and gaze up
at its interlacing arches, the intricate trusswork outlined against the
sky, and the grand, old-fashioned wheels used to propel the elevator.
The day after the get-together at Barth's was no exception. Though it
was now completely hemmed in by high-rise boxes, the tower was just as
impressive as ever.

 It was a bright and sunny day. Sitting on a bench, I thought about how
I might back out of the whole affair -I'd already made up my mind the
moment I woke up that morning. After all that effort, the mission now
seemed to me so phony and irrelevant and misguided. Especially misguided
was my enthusiasm. It was like a moment of self-revelation: behind all
the major decisions in my life I saw the same impulsiveness, the same
infantile thinking. On impulse I had enlisted in the commandos as an
eighteen-year-old and wound up a spectator of the Normandy invasion-from
a stretcher, that is; my glider, after taking enemy flak, had
crash-landed off target, with me and a crew of thirty on board, right on
top of some German bunkers, and the next day I found myself in an
English field hospital with a broken tailbone. Mars was just a repeat
performance. Even if I'd made it up there and back I couldn't have gone
on reminiscing about it forever; otherwise I might have gone the route
of that astronaut who wound up contemplating suicide because everything
else seemed so anticlimactic by comparison, including offers to sit on
the board of directors of several large corporations. One of my fellow
astronauts had been made managing director of a Florida
beer-distributing company; and now, every time I reach for a can of
beer, I always see him stepping into the elevator in his angel-white
spacesuit That's why I'd joined the Naples mission: I had no intention
of following in their footsteps.

 Now, as I stood looking up at the Eiffel Tower, it all seemed so clear
to me. It was a frustrating profession, so tempting with its promise of
that "big step for mankind" which was, at the same time, in Armstrong's
words, a "small step for man"; but in reality it was a high point, an
apogee (and not only in the astronomical sense); a position in danger of
being lost, a symbolic image of human life in which the lust for the
unattainable consumes all of man's powers and hopes. Only up there hours
take the place of years, and a man's best years at that. Aldrin knew
that the prints left by his space boots would survive not only the
Apollo program but mankind as well, that they would be eroded only when
the sun expanded into the earth's orbit one and a half billion years
from now. So how could a man who'd been so close to eternity settle for
a beer distributor's job? To know that from then on it was all downhill,
and to have experienced it in such an intense and irrevocable manner,
that's more than a letdown; that's a mockery. As I sat there admiring
this iron monument erected to the last century by a master engineer, I
wondered even more at my own fanaticism, at my own stubborn persistence,
and it was now only a feeling of shame that kept me from racing back to
Garges and packing my things on the sly. Shame and a sense of loyalty.

 That afternoon Barth dropped by my guestroom in the attic. He seemed a
little on edge. News. Inspector Pingaud, the Surete's liaison with the
Barth team, had invited of us to his office. To brief us about a past
investigation headed by one of Pingaud's colleagues, Superintendent
Leclerc. Pingaud felt that the case merited our attention. Naturally I
agreed to the interview, and we drove off to Paris together.

 Pingaud was expecting us. The moment I saw him I recognized him as the
quiet, gray-haired man I'd seen at Barth's side the night before, though
he was much older than I'd taken him to be. He greeted us in a little
side room, and as he stood up I noticed a tape recorder lying on his
desk. Dispensing with any preliminaries, he told us the superintendent
had been to see him the day before yesterday-though retired, the
superintendent was in the habit of dropping in on old friends. During
their conversation Leclerc had made reference to a case that he couldn't
brief me on personally but that the inspector persuaded him to record on
tape. Because it was a rather lengthy story, he invited us to make
ourselves comfortable, then left us alone in the room. He did this
seemingly as a matter of courtesy, not wishing to disturb us perhaps,
but the whole thing struck me as fishy.

 I wasn't accustomed to police hospitality, much less from the French
police. Then again, maybe it was too little. Not that I detected any
outright discrepancies in Pingaud's version; I had no reason to believe
it was a fake investigation or that the superintendent wasn't really
retired. Still, nothing would have been easier than to set up a private
meeting somewhere. I could understand it if they were reluctant to drag
out the files-the files being something sacrosanct for these people-but
the tape recorder alone implied they were anxious to avoid any sort of
discussion. The briefing was to take place without commentary: you can't
very well pump a tape recorder. But why the elaborate cover? Barth was
either thrown just as far off balance as I, or else he wanted-was
obliged?-to keep any doubts he may have had to himself. My mind was
still mulling over such thoughts when a rather low, self-assured,
asthmatic voice came on the tape recorder.

 "Monsieur, just so there won't be any misunderstandings-I will tell you
as much of the story as discretion will allow. Inspector Pingaud has
vouched for you; still, there are certain matters that are better left
undiscussed. The dossier you brought with you to Paris is something I've
known about for a long time, longer than you, and I'll give you my
honest opinion: this case doesn't warrant an investigation. Don't take
me wrong. It's just that I have no professional interest in anything
that doesn't come under the penal code. The world's full of
mind-baffling things-flying saucers, exorcisms, guys on TV who can bend
forks from a distance-but none of that means anything to me as a
policeman. Oh, when I read about such things in France-Soir, I can
scratch my head and say, 'Well, I'll be damned!' I may be wrong in
saying the Italian affair doesn't call for an investigation; then again,
I've put in a good thirty years on the force. You may disagree with me;
that's your privilege. Inspector Pingaud had asked me to brief you on a
case I handled a couple of years ago. When I'm finished you'll see why
it was never publicized. At the risk of being rude, I must warn you that
if you ever try to publish any of this material I shall categorically
deny everything. You'll see why. It's a question of raison d'etat, and I
am, after all, a member of the French police force. Please don't take it
personally; it's a matter of professional loyalty. What I'm telling you
is standard procedure.

 "The case has now been shelved, though at one time the police, the
Surete, and even French counterintelligence were all in on it. Well, to
start with, the subject's name was Dieudonne Proque. Proque is not
really a French name; originally it was Procke. He was a German Jew who,
as a young boy, emigrated to France with his parents during the Hitler
regime, in 1937. His parents belonged to the middle class, thought of
themselves-till the time of the Nazis, that is-as German patriots, and
had distant relatives in Strasbourg whose ancestors had settled in
France in the eighteenth century. I'm going so far back in time because
this was one of those cases calling for a through background
investigation. The tougher the case, the more widely the net has to be
thrown.

 "His father left him nothing when he died, and Proque later became an
optician. He spent the occupation years in Marseilles, in the unoccupied
zone, where he stayed with relatives. Except for the war years, he lived
the whole time in Paris, in my arrondissement, where he ran a little
optical shop out of his apartment on Rue Amelie. Since he didn't have
the resources to compete with the more established firms, business was
bad, and he barely made ends meet. He made very little from sales,
mostly from repairs-replacing lenses, fixing broken toys, that sort of
thing. An optician for the poor. He lived with his mother, a woman going
on ninety. A bachelor, he was sixty-one at the time in question. His
record was clean: not one court conviction, though we knew the photo lab
he'd fixed up at the back of the shop was far from being the innocent
little hobby he said it was. There are people who specialize in risque
pictures-not necessarily pornography-but who are unable or unwilling to
do their own developing, in which case they need someone else to handle
it, someone reliable who won't make extra prints for himself. Within
limits, there's not even anything illegal about it. Then there are those
who lure people into tricky situations and take pictures for blackmail
We keep most of the blackmailers on file, and it's not advisable for
them to have their own darkroom or camera equipment or to hire a
photographer who's already had a conviction. Proque was running that
kind of racket, but only as a sideline. We knew that he was developing
pictures and that he usually did it when he was hard pressed
financially. But that was still no reason to move in on him. And
frankly, these aren't the only things that get by the police nowadays.
Not enough full-time staff, not enough funds, and not enough manpower.
Besides, we knew Proque wasn't making a bundle on the deal. He didn't
have the nerve to use extortion against any of his clients. He was the
cautious type, a coward by nature, completely dominated by his mother.
Every July they'd make the same trip to Normandy; they lived always in
the same cluttered apartment above the shop, in the same building, with
the same neighbors they'd known since before the war. A brief physical
description of the man, since that's important for you: short, thin,
prematurely stooped, with a tic in his left eye and a constantly
drooping eyelid. To those who didn't know him, and especially in the
afternoon hours, he gave the impression of being hard of hearing and a
bit of a crank. But he was completely in his right mind, except for
periodic drowsy spells-usually in the afternoon- caused by low blood
pressure. That's why he always kept a Thermos of coffee on his
workbench, to help keep him awake on the job. As the years went by,
these spells grew worse, to the point where he was constantly yawning
and on the verge of fainting or collapsing. Finally his mother made him
go to see a doctor. He saw two doctors, both of whom prescribed harmless
stimulants, which actually helped for a while.

 "What I'm telling you isn't a secret; every tenant in the building knew
about it. People even knew about his shady business deals in the
darkroom. The guy was so easy to see through. And in the end these
pictures were nothing compared to your bread-and-butter sort of stuff.
The fact is, I'm in Homicide; morals offenses are not my department.
Anyway, what happened later had nothing to do with morals offenses. What
else should I tell you to complete the picture? He was a collector of
old postcards, used to grumble a lot about having hypersensitive
skin-too much exposure to the sun made him break out all over, though he
didn't seem like the sort of man who'd go out of his way to get a
suntan. But that fall his complexion started to change, became sort of
coppery, the way it does when it's been exposed to a sun lamp, and some
of his regular customers, friends of his, started saying, Tch, tch,
Monsieur Proque, don't tell me you've been going to a sunroom?!' And,
blushing like a little girl, he'd explain that he had a bad case of
boils-in the most sensitive spot, he said-so bad that his doctor had
prescribed radiation plus vitamins and a special skin ointment.
Apparently the treatment worked.

 "That October was especially cold and rainy. Fall was also the time of
year the optician was most susceptible to attacks of dizziness and
fainting spells, so again he went to see the doctor, and again the
doctor prescribed some pep pills. Around the end of the month, while he
and his mother were eating dinner one night, he became very excited and
began telling her about how he stood to make a killing on a big order
for developing and enlarging lots of prints, in color and in large
format. He figured on netting sixteen hundred francs on the deal, a
small fortune for a man like Proque. At seven that evening he lowered
the shutter and, after telling his mother he wouldn't be back till late,
shut himself up in his darkroom. Around one in the morning his mother
was awakened by a noise coming from her son's room. She found him
sitting on the floor and crying 'worse than any man has ever cried
before,' to quote the transcript. In a sobbing voice he kept screaming
that he'd wasted his whole life and that suicide was the only way out,
started ripping up his favorite postcards, knocking over the furniture .
. . and there was nothing his mother could do to stop him. Though
normally obedient, he completely ignored her. It was like some cheap
melodrama. She kept trailing him around the room and yanking at his
clothes; he kept looking for some rope, ripped off the curtain cord but
was so weak his mother had no trouble getting it away from him; he went
for a knife in the kitchen, and as a last resort threatened to go down
to the darkroom, where he always kept a supply of lethal chemical on
hand. But then he suddenly went limp, slumped to the floor, and before
long was snoring and whining in his sleep. His mother wasn't strong
enough to lift him into bed, so she slipped a pillow under his head and
let him sleep like that through the night.

 "The next morning he was his normal self again, though extremely
demoralized. He complained of a bad headache, said he felt as if he'd
been drinking the whole night, though in fact all he'd had to drink was
a quarter of a bottle of wine at lunch, and a weak table wine at that.
After taking a couple of aspirin tablets, he went down to the shop,
where he spent a routine day. He had very few customers as an optician,
and since he spent most of his time in the back polishing lenses or in
the darkroom developing photos, the shop was usually empty. That
afternoon he waited on a total of four customers. He kept a record of
every order, even the most minor repair job done on the spot. If the
customer was a stranger, he'd merely jot down the order. Needless to
say, he didn't keep a record of his photographic work.

 "The next two days were also uneventful. On the third day he got an
advance for the enlargements and prints, though of course he was shrewd
enough not to enter this amount in the cash receipts. That night he and
his mother ate more extravagantly than usual, at least by their
standards: an elegant wine, a special fish dish-oh, I can't remember all
the dishes any more, though there was a time when I knew all of them by
heart, even what kind of cheeses they ate for dessert. The following day
he received another batch of undeveloped film, from the same client.
During lunch he was in an excellent mood, telling his mother all about
his plans for building a house; then, in the evening, he shut himself up
in his darkroom again. Around midnight his mother heard a terrible
commotion, went downstairs, stood in the hallway, and knocked on the
back door of the darkroom. Through the plywood partition she listened to
him ranting and raving, breaking things, turning the place upside down.
. . . Panic-stricken, she ran to get her neighbor, an engraver whose
workshop was just down the street. The neighbor, an easygoing old
widower, used a chisel to pry open the bolt on the partition door.

 "It was dark inside, hardly any noise. They found Proque lying on the
floor; scattered all around him were the partially developed and still
sticky negatives of pornographic photos. They were everywhere, many of
them torn and others still glued together. The linoleum floor was
covered with chemicals, all the reagent bottles had been smashed to
smithereens, the enlarger lay damaged on the floor, there were acid
burns on Proque's hands and holes in his clothes, the faucet was running
full blast, and he was soaked from head to foot apparently after trying
to revive himself by sticking his head under the faucet. From the looks
of it, he'd tried to poison himself, by mistake grabbed some bromide
instead of cyanide, and went into a narcotic stupor. He put up no
resistance when his neighbor practically carried him back to his
apartment. His mother testified that after the neighbor left, Proque
tried to go on another rampage but was too worn out physically. The
scene that followed was again straight out of some second-rate comedy:
he flopped around in his bed, tried to rip up his top sheet to hang
himself, stuffed his pillowcase into his mouth, and all the time kept
shrieking, crying, swearing. As soon as he tried to get to his feet he
collapsed and fell asleep on the floor, as he had the time before.

 "He woke up the next day feeling miserable as hell. The sight of all
the damage he'd caused only made him feel guiltier and more despondent,
so he spent the whole morning picking up the pieces, rinsing things off,
trying to salvage what was left of the negatives, and mopping up the
mess. When he was finished cleaning up the darkroom, he took his cane-he
was having another one of his dizzy spells-and went out to stock up on a
new supply of chemicals. That evening he complained about having some
sort of mental illness, asked his mother if she knew of any cases of
insanity in the family, and refused to believe her when she said she
didn't. The very fact that he could accuse her of lying convinced her
that he wasn't fully recovered yet, since in the past he wouldn't have
dared even to raise his voice to her. Never before had he acted so
aggressively, but then she could understand how a person might lose his
self-control after two consecutive attacks of hysteria, which would've
been enough to make anybody think he was going insane. He promised his
mother that if it ever happened again he'd go straight to a
psychiatrist. It wasn't like him to make such rash decisions; it had
taken him weeks to go see a dermatologist, and then not until his boils
were really killing him. Not because he was tightfisted-he had no need
to be, since he was medically insured-but because he couldn't put up
with the slightest change in his routine.

 "Not long after that he had a falling out with his client because
several of the pictures turned up missing. We still don't know what
transpired between them; it's the only major dark spot in the whole
affair.

 "The following week passed quietly, Proque became more subdued and
never brought up the subject of his mental illness again. That Sunday he
and his mother went to see a movie. Then on Monday he went completely
berserk. It happened like this. Around eleven in the morning he walked
out of the shop without bothering to close the door behind him. Nor did
he bother to return his friend's greeting-an Italian who ran a little
candy store on the corner-when the man called out to him from in front
of the shop. The Italian later testified that Proque looked 'somehow
funny.' Proque went straight inside the shop, bought some candy, said
he'd pay for it on his way back-which wasn't like him at all-because by
then he'd be 'rolling in dough,' climbed into a taxi even though it was
a good ten years since he'd last taken one, and told the driver to take
him to Avenue de 1'Opera. There he made the driver wait and came back
fifteen minutes later yelling and waving an envelope full of cash, gave
holy hell to some street tramp who tried to make off with the money,
climbed back into the taxi, and told the driver this time to take him to
Notre Dame. When he reached the island, he paid the fare with a
hundred-franc note-the cabby said he saw only hundred-franc notes inside
the envelope-and before the cab had even pulled away from the curb,
started to climb over the bridge railing. A passer-by grabbed hold of
his leg, there was a scuffle, the cabby jumped out of the car, but not
even the two of them could handle him. A gendarme showed up, and
together they managed to shove him into the taxi, leaving the
hundred-franc notes lying on the sidewalk. When Proque wouldn't stop
being hysterical, the gendarme handcuffed him, and they headed straight
for the hospital. On the way there, Proque pulled a fast one. After the
car drove off he collapsed on the seat, went completely limp, then
suddenly lunged forward, and before the gendarme could stop him-they
were driving in heavy traffic now- grabbed hold of the steering wheel.
The cab rammed straight into a Citroen's front door, pinning the
driver's arm between the steering wheel and the door. The gendarme
managed to get Proque to the hospital in another taxi. At first the
hospital didn't treat his case too seriously, since all he did was stand
there in a daze, whimper a little, and refuse to answer any questions.
Finally he was admitted for observation, but later, when the chief
physician was making his rounds, Proque turned up missing. He was found
under the bed, wrapped in a blanket pulled out from under his sheet, and
huddled up so close to the wall that it was a while before he was even
noticed. He was unconscious from loss of blood, having slashed both
wrists with a razor blade smuggled from his clothes into his hospital
gown. It took three blood transfusions, but they pulled him through,
though he later developed complications due to his poor heart condition.

 "I was assigned to the case the day after the incident on the Ile
St-Louis. Though there was nothing to warrant an investigation by the
Surete, the lawyer representing the owner of the Citroen, figuring this
was a good chance to milk the police, came up with a version charging
the police official on duty with criminal negligence. Having in his
custody a deranged criminal, the lawyer claimed, the policeman was
responsible for allowing the taxicab to collide with his client's car,
causing bodily and property damage as well as severe psychological shock
to his client. Since the police were criminally liable, any compensation
for damages would have to come out of government funds.

 "Hoping to gain an advantage, the lawyer leaked his version to the
press, which had the effect of escalating the whole affair, since now it
was the prestige of the Police Judiciaire that was at stake. It was at
this point that I was called in to make an investigation.

 "The preliminary medical report indicated Proque had suffered an acute
psychosis caused by a delayed attack of schizophrenia, but the longer he
was kept under observation after his suicide attempt, the less this
diagnosis seemed to hold up. In the space of just six days he had become
a thoroughly broken and wasted old man, but he was completely sane in
all other respects. On the seventh day of his stay in the hospital he
made a deposition. He testified that instead of paying him the sixteen
hundred francs they had agreed upon, his client had paid him less than
one hundred fifty, for failing to deliver all the prints. That Monday,
while he was grinding some lenses for a new fitting, he suddenly became
so furious he dropped everything and left the shop, 'to get what he had
coming to him.' He had no recollection of going into the candy store or
of anything that happened on the bridge, only that his client had come
up with the balance of the money after Proque went to his apartment and
made a stink. Later that night, after making his deposition, Proque
suddenly took a turn for the worse. He died early the next morning of
heart failure. The doctors were unanimous in ascribing it to a reactive
psychosis.

 "Though Proque's death was only indirectly related to Monday's attack,
the case was becoming more serious. Nothing like having a corpse for a
trump card. The day before he died, I had gone to pay Proque's mother a
visit. For a woman her age she turned out to be very cooperative and
obliging. On my way out to Rue Ame1ie I picked up a man from Narcotics
to examine the darkroom and the photo-lab chemicals. I was tied up for
quite a while with Madame Proque, because once she got started on
something there was nothing I could do but sit and listen patiently.
Near the end of my visit, I thought I heard the shop's doorbell ring
through a crack in the window. I found my helper behind the counter
going through the work ledger.

 "Find anything?' I asked.

 " 'Nothing to speak of.'

 "His voice betrayed uncertainty.

 " 'Did someone come in?'

 " 'Yes. How did you know?'

 "He then told me what had happened. When the bell rang, he had been
standing on a chair searching an electrical cable box, so it was a few
seconds before he was able to enter the shop. The customer heard him
tinkering around in the back and, thinking it was Proque, called out in
a loud voice, 'How are you feeling today, Dieudonne?'

 "Just then my assistant came into the shop and spotted a bareheaded,
middle-aged man who, the moment he saw him, instinctively made a move
for the door. The reason was purely accidental. Normally the Narcotics
Squad wore civilian clothes on the job, but that afternoon they were
obliged to appear in full uniform for a small decoration ceremony being
held in honor of one of their superiors. Since it wasn't scheduled to
begin until four, my assistant had decided to wear his uniform to work
so he wouldn't have to go home again to change clothes.

 "It was obviously the sight of the uniform that had startled the
intruder. He said he had come for his glasses and showed the agent his
repair tag. The agent explained that the owner of the shop had been
incapacitated and that therefore he would have to wait for his glasses.
It looked as if there was nothing left to be said, but the stranger
refused to leave. Then he asked in a low voice if Proque had suddenly
been taken ill. The agent said he had.

 " 'Seriously ill?'

 " 'Fairly seriously, yes.'

 '"I ... desperately need those glasses,' the stranger said quite
unexpectedly, apparently unable to ask the question uppermost in his
mind.

 " 'Is he . . . is he still alive?' he blurted out suddenly.

 "By now my assistant was getting suspicious. Without giving a reply, he
placed his hand on the counter top's hinged lid with the idea of
checking the man's identification, but just then the man spun around and
left the shop. By the time the agent lifted the counter top and ran
outside, the stranger was gone. It was the start of the four o'clock
rush hour, a light drizzle was falling, and the sidewalks were packed.

 "I was upset that he'd let him get away, but I postponed giving him a
reprimand. Besides, we now had the optician's work ledger. I asked the
agent whether he could recall the number on the man's repair tag, but it
had escaped his notice. The ledger included a number of recent entries,
but only the customers' initials were given, which didn't look too
promising. Our only other lead was the missing stranger, who knew Proque
well enough to call him by his first name. I jotted down the most recent
entries, though I wasn't very optimistic. Was the repair tag a pretext
or cover? I wondered. But any drugs that well hidden would have meant it
was the work of professionals. I didn't know what to make of Proque any
more. But even if I'd misjudged the man and his shop was being used as a
drop, it seemed pretty absurd to think Proque would have helped himself
to a dose, much less taken an overdose. The stuff could have been
counterfeit, which was often the case, but it was unusual for dealers
and middlemen to use narcotics themselves: they're too well acquainted
with the aftereffects to be tempted. I was nearly at the end of my wits
when my assistant suddenly recalled that, even though it had been
raining, the stranger had been without an umbrella or a hat, and that
his mohair coat was almost completely dry. We knew he couldn't have come
by car, because the street had been blocked off for repairs, so chances
were that he lived somewhere in the neighborhood. It took us five days
to track him down. How did we find him? Very simple. Based on the
agent's description a composite sketch was made of the missing man and
circulated among all the concierges on Rue Amelie. The man identified
was a prominent scientist, a doctor of chemistry by the name of Dunant.
Jerome Dunant. While going through the ledger I'd noticed something
unusual: the initials J. D. were listed on each of the three days
preceding Proque's attacks. The doctor lived a few doors down the
street, so early one afternoon I went to call on him. When he met me at
the door, I recognized him at once from the sketch.

 " 'Oh, yes,' he said. 'Come right in.'

 " 'It looks as if you were expecting me,' I said as I followed him
inside.

 " 'I was. Is Proque still alive?'

 " 'I beg your pardon, but it was I who wanted to ask you a few
questions, not vice versa. What makes you think Proque might not be
alive?'

 " 'Now it's my turn not to answer. You see, inspector, it's absolutely
essential there be no publicity about this. It must be kept out of the
press. Otherwise the consequences could be disastrous.'

 " 'Disastrous for whom? For yourself?'

 "For France.'

 "I ignored this last comment but couldn't get any more out of him.

 " I'm sorry,' he said, 'but any statement I make will have to be to the
head of the Surete", and then not before I have special clearance from
my superiors.'

 "He volunteered no other information, afraid I might be one of those
policemen who like to pass on sensational news stories to the media.
That I found out only afterward. He gave us quite a hard time, but in
the end he got his way. My superior got in touch with his superior, and
two ministries had to approve before he was allowed to testify.

 "It's a well-known fact that every nation loves peace and makes plans
for war. France is no exception. Chemical warfare is always treated with
moral indignation, but still the research goes on. It just so happened
that Dr. Dunant was working on a project aimed at developing chemical
compounds known as psychotropic depressants, which in pill or gas form
would be capable of paralyzing the enemy's will and morale. Under the
seal of secrecy we were told that for over four years Dr. Dunant had
been trying to synthesize such a depressant. By working with a certain
chemical compound, he had obtained a number of derivatives, one of which
proved to be capable of producing the desired effect on the brain but
only when administered in massive doses. Only when taken by the spoonful
did it produce the symptomatic effects of syperexcitability and
aggression, followed by depression, and culminating in an acute suicidal
mania. Finding the right compound is very often a matter of luck,
arrived at by substituting various chemical groups in the original
compound and then analyzing the derivatives for their pharmacological
properties. Sometimes it can take years of research to find the right
combination; other times one can achieve instantaneous results, the
latter being of course the exception, rather than the rule.

 "Since he was extremely nearsighted, Dr. Dunant was forced to wear his
glasses at all times. For the past several years he had been a steady
customer of Proque's. Since he was severely handicapped without his
glasses, he made it a point always to keep three pairs on hand. He would
wear one pair, carry the second pair around with him as a spare, and
keep the third pair at home. He'd begun taking these precautions after
breaking a pair of glasses in the lab and having to interrupt his work
as a result. And just before his last visit to the shop-three weeks
before, to be exact-he had had another accident. Dunant worked in a
maximum-security laboratory. Before entering the lab he would have to
change into a new set of clothes, including special shoes and underwear,
and deposit all his personal items in a changing room separated from the
work area by a pressure chamber. While he worked he was required to wear
a transparent plastic hood equipped with its own air supply system. At
no time was his body or glasses allowed to come into contact with any of
the chemical substances under investigation. To avoid any further
possible inconvenience, he had got into the habit of putting his extra
pair of glasses on one of the reagent shelves before going to work. One
day, as he was reaching for a reagent, he accidentally knocked them to
the floor, shattering one lens and damaging the frame by stepping on it
with his foot. He immediately took them to Proque for repair, but two
days later, when he went to pick them up, he hardly recognized the
optician, who had the tired and haggard look of someone who's just
recovered from a serious illness. Proque told him he suspected having
been poisoned, because the night before he'd been overcome by a strange
attack that for some reason made him feel like crying even now.

 "Dunant quickly forgot about Proque and his troubles, but he was far
from satisfied with the repair job: not only did one of the stems pinch,
but also one of the newly fitted lenses came loose from its plastic
frame and finally popped out and broke on the laboratory's tiled flood.
Dunant brought the glasses back a second time, but when he stopped by
for them the following day Proque seemed to have aged overnight.
Casually he began inquiring about the details of this latest 'attack.'
Proque's description sounded like an acute depression caused by a
chemically induced psychosis, very similar, in fact, to the symptoms
produced by the compound X he had been working on. But since it would
have taken a hefty dose of at least ten grams in pure form to provoke
such a violent reaction, he failed to see what connection this could
have with the glasses. Twice he had brought for repair the pair that
usually lay on the reagent shelf located above the Bunsen burner. Then
he began wondering whether the chemical fumes might have traveled
through the air and settled on the glasses in microscopic amounts. He
decided to run a test on them. By subjecting the glasses to a chemical
analysis, he established that traces of the compound were indeed present
on the lenses and frame stems, but in amounts measurable in gammas-in
other words, in micrograms. The story of how LSD was discovered is a
familiar one among chemists. Like everyone else at the time, the chemist
experimenting with it was completely unaware of its hallucinogenic
effects. But after returning home from work one night, he started
experiencing all the symptoms of a 'trip'-visions, psychic
manifestations; and the like-though before leaving the lab he had washed
his hands as thoroughly as he always did. But the infinitesimal amount
lodged under his fingernails had been enough to induce the symptoms
while he was making dinner.

 "Dunant began thinking how an optician goes about installing a new set
of lenses and adjusting the stems. He recalled that the synthetically
made stems are passed quickly back and forth over a gas flame. Could the
heat have altered the chemical composition of the compound, in a way
that it made its effect a million times more potent? Taking samples of
the compound, Dunant tried heating them by every means possible-with
burners, spirit lamps, candle flame-but with no results. At that point
he decided to perform the experimentum crucis. He deliberately bent one
of the stems and bathed it with a thin enough solution of compound X so
that a residue amounting to one-millionth of a gram remained on the
frame after the solvent had evaporated. He then brought the glasses back
to the optician for the third time. This was the pair he had come to
pick up when he saw the agent behind the counter.

 "There you have the whole story, monsieur, a story without a solution
or an end. Dr. Dunant theorized that the chemical alteration was caused
by something in the optician's workshop and that the resulting catalytic
reaction made the chemical's effect a million times more powerful. But
since nothing was found to corroborate his theory, we decided to drop
the case: if you have to chase after atoms instead of people, then it's
time to call off the investigation. No crime was committed, since the
amount smeared by Dr. Dunant on the glasses was barely enough to kill a
fly, much less the optician. I later heard that Dunant-or someone acting
on his behalf-acquired the contents of the darkroom from Madame Proque
and tested all the reagents for their effect on compound X, but without
any results.

 "Madame Proque died before Christmas that same year. In the department
it was rumored that after her death Dunant spent the whole winter in the
abandoned shop and during that time took samples of everything- the
plywood partition, the grinding stone, the varnish on the wall, the dust
on the floor-but found nothing. It was Inspector Pingaud who insisted I
tell you the whole story. I suspect your Naples case falls into the same
category. Now that the world has reached a state of scientific
perfection, such things are bound to happen. That's all I have to say."

 Because of the traffic, it took us nearly an hour to drive back to
Garges. Neither of us said very much along the way. The story of
Proque's gradual insanity was as familiar to me as the back of my own
hand. All that was missing was the hallucination phase, but, then, who
knows what sort of visions the poor bastard might have had. Funny, all
along I'd been treating the other victims like the pieces of a puzzle,
but Proque was different. I felt sorry for him. Thanks to Dunant. Oh, I
could understand that mice weren't enough. Mice couldn't be driven to
suicide. For that he needed a human being. He wasn't taking any risks,
either: the moment he saw a cop at the door, he could always use France
as an alibi. Even that I could understand. But what made me so furious
was that "How are you feeling today, Dieudonne?" of his. If that
Japanese assassin in Rome was a criminal, then what was Dunant? I bet
Dunant wasn't even his real name. Why had the inspector let me listen to
the story? I wondered. Not out of sympathy, that's for sure. And what
was the real story behind all this? The ending could have been faked,
too. If that was the case, then the whole thing could have been staged
as a harmless pretext for relaying information to the Pentagon about a
new type of chemical weapon.

 The more I thought about it, the more plausible this seemed. They'd
shown their hand so well that if worst came to worst, they could always
deny everything. Even they had said they came away empty-handed, and how
the hell was I to tell whether they were telling the truth. If I'd been
your ordinary private detective, you can be sure they wouldn't have
bothered with such a show; but an astronaut, even a second-string one,
has ties with NASA, and NASA has ties with the Pentagon. If the whole
thing was planned by the higher-ups, then Pingand was merely carrying
out orders, and Barth's confusion wasn't to be taken at face value,
either. Barth was in a far trickier situation than I. He, too, must have
detected an element of big-league politics in this unexpected
"generosity" of theirs, but he didn't feel it was worth telling me about
because it must have taken him by surprise. I was sure he hadn't been
tipped off in advance; I knew enough about the rules of the game to know
that. They couldn't very well take him aside and say, "OK, all we have
to do is show that Yank one of our high cards and he's bound to pass it
on." That's just not the way it's done. And it would have looked funny
as hell if they'd clued me in and not Barth, especially when they knew
he'd already promised me the use of his team. No, they could afford
neither to leave him out nor to bring him in, so they did the next most
sensible thing: they let him hear exactly what I heard and then left him
to worry about the implications on his own. I would have bet he was
sorry he ever offered me his help. Then I started meditating on what all
this meant in terms of the investigation. It didn't present a very rosy
picture. From the Italian series we'd deduced a number of qualifying
factors: the mineral baths, men past the age of fifty, sturdy physique,
bachelors, sun, allergy, and here was someone well over sixty, skinny,
not allergic to anything, living with his mother, who never took sulfur
baths, never got a tan, and hardly ever left the house! In fact, he
couldn't have been a more dissimilar type. In a fit of magnanimity I
suggested to Barth that each of us digest this latest bit of news on his
own, to avoid influencing the other, and compare notes later on that
evening. He was all for it.

 Around three I went into the garden, where little Pierre was waiting
for me. This meeting was our very own secret. He showed me the parts of
his rocket. The first stage was a washtub. No one is more sensitive than
a child, so I did not mention that a washtub wasn't exactly cut out to
be a booster rocket, and I drew for him on the sand the various stages
of a Saturn V and IX.

 At five I went to keep my appointment with Barth in the library. He
took me somewhat by surprise when he led off by saying that since France
was doing research on factor X, it was safe to assume that other
countries were engaged in similar research. Such work, he said, was
always carried out on a parallel basis, in which case even the Italians
might have . . . Maybe it was time to re-examine the whole affair. The
compound wouldn't have had to come from a government lab; it could also
have originated in a private company. It might have been developed by a
chemist connected with the extremists, or, as seemed more likely, some
of it might have been pirated. Perhaps the people in charge of
administering it did not know how to exploit it to its maximal effect,
and so they decided to conduct some experiments. But, then, why were the
victims all foreigners, all in the same age group, all rheumatics, and
so on?

 He had an answer for that as well.

 "Put yourself in the place of the group's leader. You've heard about
the chemical's powerful reaction, but you're not exactly sure what kind
of effect it has. Since you're a man without any moral scruples, you
decide to try it out on various people. But which people? You can't very
well test it out on your own members. So who? On just anyone? That would
mean an Italian, with a family. But since the initial symptoms would be
interpreted as a personality change, an Italian would very soon wind up
under a doctor's care or as a patient in a clinic. A single man,
however, can do just about anything before anyone will take notice,
especially in hotels, where every sort of whim is indulged. And the
better the hotel, the greater the isolation. At a third-class
boardinghouse, the landlady is likely to keep a watchful eye on her
tenants' every move, whereas at the Hilton you can walk around on your
hands and still not attract any attention. Neither the management nor
the employees will bat an eyelash as long as it doesn't involve a
criminal offense. Speaking a foreign language is another isolating
factor. So far so good?"

 "What about the other factors-age, allergy, rheumatism, the sulfur
treatments?"

 "The greater the difference in behavior before and after the chemical
agent has been administered, the more meaningful the test results, A
young man is always on the go; one day he's in Naples, the next day he's
in Sicily. An older man makes an ideal subject, especially if he's a
patient at a health spa, where all his movements-from the doctor's
office to the baths, from the sunroom to the hotel-are likely to be
according to schedule, in which case the drug's effects will be more
noticeable. . . ."

 "What about the sex factor?"

 "It wasn't a coincidence that all the victims were men. Why? Because
they were out to get only men in the first place. This seems crucial to
me, because it would seem to point to an underlying political motive. If
it's high-ranking politicians you're after, then it's only logical for
you to choose men. . . . What do you think?"

 "You might have something there . . ." I admitted, suddenly awed by the
prospect. "So you think they might have had people planted in the hotels
and selected a certain type of guest matching in age those politicians
they were planning to assassinate as part of a coup d'etat? Is that what
you had in mind?"

 "I'm not one for jumping to conclusions. It's better not to limit the
scope of the inquiry. . . . Well now, fifteen or twenty years ago such
an idea would have smacked of a gimmicky potboiler or thriller, but
today. . . . You see what I mean?"

 I saw what he meant, and sighed: I didn't enjoy the prospect of
reopening the investigation. I quickly weighed the pros and cons.

 "I have to admit I'm speechless. . . . But there are still quite a few
things to be explained. Why only people with allergies? And what about
the baldness? Or the time of year-the end of May, beginning of June?
Have you got an explanation for these as well?"

 "No. At least not an immediate one. In my opinion one should start from
the other end, by classifying not the 'experimental' victims but the
real victims, the ones actually intended. That would mean going down the
list of Italy's political elite. If it turned out that there

 were a few with allergy problems. . . . "

 "I see! In other words, you're sending me back to Rome. And I'm afraid
I'll have to go; this could be the hottest lead so far. .  ."

 "There's no need for you to leave right away, is there?"

 "Tomorrow or the next day at the latest. These are things that can't be
handled over the phone."

 We left it at that. The more I thought over Barth's theory in my room,
the more ingenious I found it. Not only had he put forward a plausible
hypothesis, but he'd also managed to get himself off the hook by
referring the matter to Rome and side-stepped the whole issue of
France's involvement with compound X. This way it no longer mattered
whether Dunant actually succeeded in reconstructing the chemical in the
darkroom on Rue Ame1ie. The more I thought about it, the more positive I
became that Barth's version was right on target. Compound X not only
existed but also worked. I was sure of it, just as I was sure that such
a method for political assassination couldn't help but have a tremendous
impact-and not only in Italy-an impact even greater than that of a
"classic" coup d'etat.

 I now began to view the case of the eleven with an antipathy bordering
on disgust. What was once an inscrutable mystery had now been turned
into a struggle for power as crass as it was bloody. Behind all the
bizarre appearances was something as trite as political murder.

 The next day I headed straight for Rue Ame1ie. I don't really know why.
But around eleven there I was, walking down the sidewalk and browsing in
the shop-windows, though even as I was leaving Garges I was still
debating whether I shouldn't reconsider and go by way of the Eiffel
Tower to bid farewell to Paris. But once I reached the boulevards it was
too late for that. I didn't know my way around this part of Paris, so I
had trouble finding the street, and it took me a while to find a parking
place. I recognized Proque's apartment even before I could make out the
number. It looked more or less as I'd imagined it would, an old
apartment building with closed shutters and that old-fashioned trim
around the gables with which architects of the last century used to lend
their buildings a touch of individuality. The optician's shop was
defunct, the shutter lowered and padlocked. On my way back I stopped in
front of a toy store. It was time to shop around for some souvenirs,
because I had no intention of taking part in a new investigation; I'd
pass on all the information to Randy and then head back to the States.
My mind made up, I went inside to buy something for my sister's boys-as
a way of justifying this latest lark of mine. On the shelves our whole
civilization was gaudily arrayed in miniature. I looked around for toys
I remembered from childhood but found only electronic gadgets, rocket
launchers, and miniature supermen shown in judo or karate attack
positions. You dope, I told myself, who are the toys for, anyway?

 I decided on a couple of plumed parade helmets- the kind worn by the
French Guard-and a Marianne puppet, because these were toys you couldn't
get in Detroit. As I was heading back to the car with my packages, I
spotted a candy store with white curtains on the corner. In the display
window was a bronze-colored Vesuvius covered with roasted almonds; I was
reminded of the almond peddler I used to pass on my way from the hotel
to the beach. I wasn't sure the boys would like the bitter-tasting
almonds, but I went in and bought a couple of bags anyway. How strange,
I thought, that of all places Naples should be saying good-bye to me
here. Grudgingly I made my way back to the car, as if I still hadn't
given up-given what up? I didn't know; maybe it was the purity that all
along I'd unconsciously attached to the mystery. I threw the packages
down on the back seat and, standing there with one hand on the open car
door, said good-bye to Rue Amelie. Was there any more reason to doubt
Leclerc's words or Barth's hypothesis? All my wildest, most private
conjectures vanished. But had I ever really believed I would make some
startling discovery, that I would splice together all the details in a
way no one had ever done before and by some stroke of genius arrive at
the hitherto undisclosed truth? Here and there vestiges of the old Paris
were still to be seen, but they were destined to be obliterated, wiped
out by that army of Molochs at Defense. I had lost all desire to visit
the Eiffel Tower, By now Dr. Dunant would already be at work in his
porcelain and nickel-plated labs. I had visions of him wrapped in his
synthetic turban, eyes aglitter over the distilling apparatus, the
coiled air hose trailing behind his plastic cocoon. I was more than
familiar with that world: in Houston I had seen the most exquisite labs,
the sterile church naves of rocket domes.

 I no longer felt like taking in the scenery as I used to do before
takeoff, moments before everything collapsed below me. I had such a bad
feeling that I jumped behind the wheel, but before I had a chance to
start the car my nose began tickling. Angrily I held my breath for a
moment; then the sneezing started. Thunder rumbled across the rooftops,
the sky was turning darker, and a cloudburst hung overhead. I blew my
nose and went on sneezing, but now I was laughing at myself. The
blooming season was catching up with me in Paris, and the worst time was
always just before a storm. I reached into the glove compartment, but
the Plimasine got stuck in my throat and fell apart into bitter-tasting
pieces. For lack of anything better, I tore open the bag of almonds and
munched on them all the way back to Garges.

 I like driving in the rain, so I took my time. On the highway the steam
given off by the rain was turned a dirty shade of silver by the
headlights. It was a fierce but short storm, so that by the time I
climbed out of the car in front of the house, the rain had stopped. I
wasn't meant to leave town that day, I guess, because on my way down to
the dining room I slipped on the stairs-they'd just been freshly
polished by the Spanish maid-leaving me doubled up and with an aching
tail bone. At the dinner table I tried to play it down and chatted with
the old lady, who was sure I'd injured a disc and said that there was no
better cure for that than flowers of sulfur, the universal remedy for
every sort of rheumatic ailment, and that all I had to do was to
sprinkle it under my shirt. I thanked her for the sulfur powder and,
realizing it was impossible for me to fly to Rome in this condition,
willingly accepted Barth's offer to take me to a famous Parisian
chiropractor.

 Accompanied by expressions of sympathy, I dragged myself upstairs and
crawled into bed like a cripple. I managed to fall asleep after finding
the least painful position, but later woke up sneezing, having inhaled
some sort of acrid power coming from underneath my pillow. I jumped out
of bed and let out a howl: I had forgotten about my back. At first I
thought the Spanish maid, in an excess of zeal, had sprinkled the sheets
with an insecticide, but it turned out to be that infallible remedy for
rheumatism that good old Pierre had secretly administered while I was at
the dinner table. I shook lie yellow dust out of the sheet, pulled the
cover over my head, and dozed off to the steady patter of raindrops
pounding on the roof.

 At breakfast time, I descended the stairs as if lowering myself down an
icy rope ladder on a whaler caught in an arctic storm: a belated
precaution. The chiropractor recommended by Barth turned out to be an
American black; after taking X-rays and hanging the films on a viewer
above the examining table, he went to work on me with hands like
paddles. I experienced a sharp but fleeting pain, crawled down from the
table under my own power, and discovered that I really did feel a lot
better. I had to lie on my back in the office for another half hour, but
after that I headed for the nearest Air France office and booked an
evening flight. I tried to reach Randy by phone, but he wasn't in his
hotel, so I left a message for him.

 Back at Barth's house it occurred to me that I had nothing for Pierre,
so I promised to send him my space helmet from the States, said good-bye
to the whole family, then left for Orly. There I went straight to a
Fleurop shop, ordered some flowers for Mrs. Barth, and settled down in a
waiting room filled with American newspapers. I sat and sat, but still
there was no boarding announcement. I now looked on the case as if it
were a thing of the past. Still undecided about the future, I tried-but
without success-to glamorise this indecision of mine. Meanwhile our
departure time passed, and a steady but indistinct stream of apologies
came over the loudspeaker. Then a stewardess stepped out of an office
and regretfully announced that Rome was no longer taking any incoming
flights.

 There was a lot of running around and a flurry of phone calls until it
was finally confirmed that in fact Rome was accepting only American
planes, Alitalia, and BEA, whereas Swissair, SAS, and my Air France were
canceling all departures until further notice. It seems a selective
strike had been called by ground personnel, though the reason for the
strike was lost in the stampede  to  exchange tickets  and reservations
for those airlines that had been given landing clearance. Before I could
even fight my way through to the ticket counter, all the seats had been
snatched up by the more enlightened passengers. The next available
flight was on BEA, scheduled to leave the following day at a Godawful
time--at 5:40 A.M. I had little choice: I had my ticket rewritten for
the BEA flight, loaded my bags onto a cart, and headed for the Hotel Air
France, where I'd spent the first night after my arrival from Rome.
There I was in for another surprise. The hotel was filled to capacity
with passengers stranded in the same way I was. I was now faced with the
prospect of spending the night in Paris and getting up at four o'clock
in the morning to make my 5:40 flight. There was no point in going back
to Garges, either, since it was situated to the north of Paris and Orly
to the south. I shoved my way through the crowd of disappointed
passengers, reached the exit, and debated my next move. I could always
postpone my departure a day, but that was the last thing I felt like
doing: there's nothing worse than a long delay.

 I was still deliberating what to do when a man carrying a stack of
magazines stepped out of a kiosk and began arranging them on the
newsstand. My attention was caught by the latest edition of Paris-Match.
Staring at me from the black front cover was a man shown suspended in
midair like a gymnast executing a side vault. He was wearing suspenders
and holding against his chest a child with streaming hair whose head was
tilted back in the manner of a trapeze artist. Not believing my own
eyes, I walked up to the newsstand. It was a picture taken of Annabella
and me. I bought a copy of the magazine, which automatically flipped
open to the page featuring the exclusive cover story. Stretched across
the entire page in bold letters above a picture of the demolished and
body-strewn escalator was the following headline: we'd rather die facing
forward. I skimmed through the report. They'd tracked down Annabella,
and on the next page was a picture of her with her family-but nowhere
was my name mentioned. The photos came from the video tape used by the
airport to photograph all those passing through the Labyrinth. I hadn't
counted on the publicity. I was relying on their promises of strict
confidentiality. I ran through the text again; it was accompanied by a
sketch of the escalator and the detonation tank, with arrows indicating
the path of my escape, and an enlarged detail from the cover photo
showing a checkered sleeve situated between my pant legs and the
landing. The caption underneath described it as the arm of the assassin
blown off by the explosion. What I'd have given to buttonhole the author
of that article! What was stopping him from mentioning me by name? Oh, I
figured in it, all right-as "the astronaut." But Annabella's name was
there, that "lovely teen-aged girl" who was still waiting for a letter
from her rescuer. Though it wasn't made explicit, there were sly
insinuations that the airport disaster had given rise to a love affair.
A cold fury took hold of me; I wheeled around, elbowed my way through
the crowd in the lobby, and barged into the manager's office, where
people were all talking at the same time. Cashing in on my recent
heroism, I threw the Paris-Match down on the manager's desk and started
outshouting everyone. I still blush with shame whenever I think back on
that scene, but I got my way. The manager, unaccustomed to dealing with
heroic astronauts, finally broke down and gave me his last vacancy,
swearing up and down that it really was his last when the other
passengers suddenly pounced on him like a pack of hounds let off their
leashes.

 I started to go for my bags but was told the room wouldn't be ready
till eleven o'clock; it was still only eight. I left my luggage at the
reception desk and found myself in command of three hours' leisure. I
regretted having made a spectacle of myself, and since there could have
been serious repercussions if a member of the press had happened to be
present, I decided to keep a safe distance from the hotel till eleven. I
wasn't in the mood for going to a movie or eating out, so on a whim I
decided to do something I'd once thought of doing in Quebec when my
plane was grounded by a blizzard. I headed for the other end of the
terminal, strolled into a barbershop, and ordered the works. The barber
was a Gascon, so much of what he said was lost on me, but, sticking to
my decision, I agreed to all the frills in order not to risk being
hustled out of the chair. After a fairly routine haircut and shampoo, he
shifted into high gear. Tuning in some rock-and-roll music on a
transistor standing between the mirrors, he turned up the volume, rolled
up his sleeves, and, tapping his foot to the music, started to go to
town. He patted my face, pulled my cheeks,   tweaked my chin, slapped a
steaming compress over my eyes and nose, now and then made a small air
hole in the burning-hot towel to keep me from suffocating, and asked me
a question that I didn't catch because my ears were still plugged with
the cotton wads he'd put there before cutting my hair. My "ca va, bien"
sent him scurrying to his cabinet for more bottles and lotions.
Altogether I spent about an hour in the barber's chair. Toward the end
he combed and evened out my eyebrows, stepped back, and examined me with
a critical frown; then he changed my apron, took out of a separate
compartment a small, gold-covered bottle that he held up for my
inspection as if it were some classy wine, smeared some green jelly on
his ringers, and began rubbing it into my scalp. All this was
accompanied by a steady stream of uninterrupted patter, the gist of
which was that my worrying days were over now: I would never grow bald.
After brushing my hair with a series of brisk strokes, he took away all
the hand towels and compresses, pulled the cotton out of my ears, blew
into each ear in a way that was both gentle and intimate, showered me
with powder, snapped his towel in front of my face, then stepped back
and made a dignified bow. He was pleased with himself. With tightened
scalp and cheeks aglow, I got up from the chair in a daze, tipped him
ten francs, and walked out of the shop.

 With some time to go before my room would be ready, I started heading
for the observation deck to take in the airport at night but somehow got
lost. They were doing some repair work inside the terminal; one section
of the escalator was roped off, and mechanics were making a lot of
racket in the shafts below. Somehow I drifted into a crowd of people
racing toward the departure area. Soldiers in foreign uniforms, nuns in
starched bonnets, long-legged blacks who looked to be members of a men's
basketball team . . . Bringing up the rear was a stewardess pushing a
wheelchair in which a gray-haired man in dark glasses sat holding a
furry bundle in his lap; suddenly the bundle jumped down and started
crawling toward me on all fours. A monkey dressed in a green jacket and
a tiny skullcap stared up at me with darting black eyes, then pirouetted
around and started hopping after the moving wheelchair. The
rock-and-roll music coming from the barbershop was so infectious I could
hear it reverberating in peoples' footsteps and voices. Standing
alongside the wall under some neon lights was a TV hockey game; I
dropped in a coin and batted the luminous dot around till my eyes began
to hurt, then got up and left before my turn was up. Passengers were
still streaming toward departures. Among them was a peacock; it stood
calmly with its tail lowered, narrowly missing getting hit, and its head
tilted to one side as if it were trying to decide whose leg to peck
first. Somebody must have lost a peacock, I thought. Unable to fight the
crowd, I circled around, but by the time I reached the spot where the
peacock had been it was gone.

 I thought again of the observation deck but took the wrong corridor by
mistake and wound up downstairs in a maze of jewelers, fur shops,
foreign-exchange offices, and myriad other little shops. Pausing idly in
front of the shop windows, I had the sensation of standing on top of a
frozen lake and looking down into its deepest, blackest part. It was
much as if the terminal had its own mute and murky negative counterpart
underneath. To be more exact, I was conscious of the abyss without
actually seeing or feeling anything. I took the escalator upstairs but
wound up in another wing, in a hall full of golf carts, dune buggies,
and beach cars that stood in narrow rows waiting to be loaded. Squeezing
my way through the aisles, I had fun with the fluorescent sheen given
off by their luminous bodies, an effect I attributed to the lighting and
to the new enamel finish. I paused in front of one buggy that was glazed
a metallic gold and caught a glimpse of my own reflection-a quivering
mass of yellow with a face that kept stretching vertically and then
horizontally; when I held my head in a certain position, my eyes became
dark holes secreting black metal beetles; when I leaned forward,
another, darker, and more imposing reflection would appear behind my
own. I glanced around-no one-but the figure mirrored in gold refused to
go away. An uncanny optical illusion. The hall was sealed off by a
sliding door at the other end, so I went back the way I came, my every
movement and gesture mockingly reflected by my surroundings as in a hall
of mirrors. I was somehow disturbed by this proliferation of images.
Then I realized it was because the reflections were mimicking me but
with a slight delay in time, even though that would have been
impossible. To drown out the rock-and-roll tune banging away in my head,
I started whistling "John Brown's Body."

 I wasn't having any luck finding the observation deck, so I took a side
exit and went outside. Despite the proximity of the streelights, the
night was so black and palpably thick you could have squeezed it with
your hands: a real African night. It occurred to me that I might have
been coming down with night blindness, that something might have been
wrong with my rhod- opsin, but gradually my vision improved. Must have
been that excursion through the gold-plated gallery, I thought-my old
eyes can't adjust to the change of light the way they used to.

 A huge building was under construction in a lighted area beyond the
parking lots. Bulldozers crawled in and out of the columns of light,
pushing their loads of shimmering gold sand. A flat cloud of fiery
quicksilver hung over this nocturnal Sahara like the Milky Way, while
time and again flashes of lightning stitched the backdrop in slow
motion-the headlights of cars turning off the highway for the airport.
There was something strangely magical in this otherwise ordinary
spectacle. It was then that my return trip through the terminal began to
take on an aura of anticipation-not of the hotel room, though I hadn't
forgotten about it, but of something more important. The fateful moment
was approaching. It had the mark of absolute certainty, but, like a man
struggling with a name on the tip of his tongue, I couldn't put my
finger on it, on what it was I was expecting.

 At the main entrance I started mingling with the crowd, or, rather, I
was swept up and flung inside. I decided it was time to get a bit to eat
at a snack bar. My hot dog tasted as bland as paper; I tossed the
half-eaten hot dog and its plastic plate into the trash can and went
into a cafe with a peacock stationed over the entrance in full array. It
was much too big to have been stuffed. A week ago Annabella and I had
sat under the very same peacock while waiting for her father. There were
others in the cafe. I sat down with my coffee at a corner table, my back
to the wall: while standing at the counter I had been conscious of
someone staring at me from the rear. No one was looking my way now-to
the point where it was blatantly obvious. The distant whine of the jet
engines now seemed to come from another, more important world. I sat
there using my spoon to break up the sugar lumps at the bottom of my
cup. A magazine with a black cover and a red band running across the top
lay on the table next to me-a copy of Paris-Match, I guessed-but a woman
sitting with her dark-haired Romeo had managed to cover the title with
her purse. On purpose, probably. Someone had spotted me, but who? An
autograph hound? Some passing reporter? I dropped a copper ashtray on
the floor, pretending it was an accident. Despite the noise, no one
turned around. Suspicions confirmed. Not wanting to be harassed, I
gulped down the rest of my coffee and walked out. I was in a bad way:
legs like a couple of hollow pipes, an aching tail bone that served as a
painful reminder of the recent past....

 Suddenly I was fed up with all the stalling around, so I made my way
past the glittering shopwindows and aimed for the escalator marked air
france in big sky-blue letters. It was a shortcut to the hotel. I held
on tightly to the railing: the combed treads on the steps were slippery,
and I wasn't about to take any chances. Halfway between levels I noticed
that standing in front of me was a woman with a dog in her arms. I
winced: her hair was the exact same shade of blond. Slowly I glanced
back over my shoulder, though I had a pretty good hunch who would be
standing behind me. A flat face, a complexion made livid by the
fluorescent lighting, sunglasses. I shoved my way past the blonde and
worked my way up the escalator, but I couldn't just walk off without
satisfying my curiosity. So I stood by the railing and inspected the
passengers as the escalator dropped them off one by one on the landing.
The blonde gave me the once-over as she strolled by. She was carrying a
folded shawl with a knotted fringe, the same fringe I'd taken for a
dog's tail. The guy in back of me turned out to be fat and
pasty-looking. Not a trace of Mongol blood. Esprit de l'escalier, I
thought- but a week later?! Man, are you ever in had shape- what you
need is a good night's sleep!

 Along the way I picked up a bottle of Schweppes, slipped it into my
coat pocket, and glanced at the clock above the reception desk with a
sigh of relief: my room would be ready. My bellboy went ahead of me with
my bags, set the smaller one down on top of the larger one in the
hallway, pocketed a ten-franc tip, and was on his way. The hotel
breathed a quiet sort of intimacy that made the whining roar of a
landing airplane seem incongruous. Good thing I'd remembered to pick up
a Schweppes. I was thirsty now, but, not having a bottle opener, I
peeked into the corridor to see if there was a refrigerator where I
might be able to lay my hands on one. The warm colors of the hallway
carpet and walls caught my eye, filling me with respect and admiration
for French interior decorators. I found a refrigerator, opened the
bottle of Schweppes, and was already heading back to my room when who
should come around the corner but Annabella. In a dark dress she looked
taller than I'd remembered her, but she had the same white ribbon in her
hair; and when she came toward me, swinging her shoulder bag at her
side, it was with the same serious look in her dark eyes. I recognized
the purse, too, though the last time I'd seen it, it had been ripped
open at the seams. I'd left the door open on my way out, and she slipped
into the doorway.

 "Annabella, what're you doing here?" I wanted to say, being as shocked
as I was glad to see her, but all I could muster was a faint "Aa-"
before she went inside the room, with such an inviting toss of the head
and with such an unequivocal glance of the eyes that I stopped dead in
my tracks. She left the inner door open, and in my momentary panic I
thought maybe she wanted to confide in me, but before I was even in the
room I distinctly heard both her shoes fall to the floor and the bed
squeak. With these sounds still fresh in my ears, feeling morally
indignant, I went in and gasped: the room was empty.

 "Armabella!" I yelled. The bed was untouched. "Annabella!" Silence. In
the bathroom, maybe? I opened the door, but it was dark inside; I waited
in the doorway till the light blinked on. Bathtub, bidet, towel rack,
washbasin, my own reflection in the mirror ... I went back into the
room, not daring to call out any more. Though it was unlikely she would
have had time to hide in the wardrobe cabinet, I opened it anyway.
Empty. My knees began to buckle, so I slumped into an armchair. Even now
I could describe exactly the way she walked, the kind of clothes she
wore. . . . Then I realized why she'd seemed taller: she was wearing
high heels instead of sandals. I could still see that expression in her
eyes as she passed through the doorway, the way her hair spilled over
her shoulder when she motioned with her head. I could still hear her
naughtily kicking off her shoes and the sound made by the creaking
bedsprings, and I remembered my jabbing, stinging sensation at hearing
those sounds. . . . Was it all just a fantasy? A hallucination?

 I touched my knees, my chest, and my face, as if this were the sequence
in which I had to examine them, ran my hands over the chair's rough
upholstery, walked across the room and banged my fist against the
wardrobe's half-open door; everything felt solid, stationary, immutable,
well defined, and yet somehow ambiguous. I paused in front of the
television set and saw a reduced reflection of the bed and a pair of
girls' shoes carelessly flung down on the carpet. I spun around in
horror.

 There was nothing on the floor, nothing anywhere. Next to the
television set was a telephone. I picked up the receiver, heard the dial
tone, but stopped short of dialing. What was I to tell Barth-that I was
in a hotel fantasizing about some girl and was afraid to be left alone?
I hung up the receiver, took my toilet kit out of my suitcase, went into
the bathroom; as I leaned over the basin, I suddenly froze. Everything I
was doing had its immediate and familiar precedent. Like Proque I
splashed my face with cold water. Like Osborn I rubbed my temples with
cologne. Then I went back into the room, not knowing what to do next.
Nothing happened to me. The most sensible thing would have been to climb
into bed and go to sleep. On the other hand, I was afraid of undressing,
as if my clothes were somehow a protection. Moving quietly in order not
to rouse the evil spirit, I took off my pants, shoes, and shirt, and
after switching off the overhead light, pressed my head against the
pillow. Now the threat seemed to come from outside-from the hazy
ambiguity of the objects standing in the penumbra of the night light. I
switched off the lamp. A feeling of inertia came over me; I forced
myself to take long and even breaths. There was a knock at the door; I
didn't move a muscle. There was another knock, and someone-a man-opened
the door and stepped into the passageway. The figure, silhouetted
against the corridor's brightness, started advancing toward my bed.

 "Monsieur . . ."

 I didn't make a sound. Now so close that he stood over me, he laid
something down on the table and quietly withdrew. The lock on the door
clicked; I was alone again. I dragged myself out of bed-more beat than
dazed-and switched on the wall light. Lying on the table was a telegram.
With a pounding heart and wobbly legs I picked it up. It was addressed
to me, care of the Hotel Air France. I glanced down at the sender's
name, and my blood ran cold. I pressed my eyelids together, opened the
telegram, and again read the name of the man who had been buried long
enough to be a rotting corpse.

  

  

 WAITING ROME HILTON RM 303

 ADAMS

  

 I must have read and reread the message ten times, examining the
telegram up close and from every angle. It had left Rome at 10:40, thus
well over an hour ago. It was probably just a slip of the pen. Randy
might have moved into the Hilton-he had settled for the little hotel
near the Spanish Steps for lack of anything better-and this was his way
of letting me know. Or he might have received my message, given up
waiting for me, then heard about the flight cancellations and decided to
wire me. But why the switch in names? And of all names, why that one? I
sat down by the wall and considered whether the whole thing wasn't just
a dream. The wall light was burning right over my head. Everything
around me was taking on a new appearance. The window curtain, the
television set, and the outline of the shadows had all become portents
of something inscrutable. Everything was becoming dependent on me,
subject to my will. I decided to eliminate the wardrobe cabinet. Its
lacquer finish suddenly turned dull, the outline of the door became
blurred, the rear wall burst open, and an unshapely black hole was soon
crawling with writhing, slithering shapes. I tried to restore the
cabinet but couldn't. The center of the room was gradually being
enveloped by the shadows in the corners. I could only rescue those
objects that still remained in the light. I reached for the phone; the
receiver, which had taken on a perverse and mocking shape, slipped out
of my hand. The telephone became a gray rock with a rough surface, the
dial a hole. My fingers penetrated the surface and touched something
cold. There was a ball-point pen lying on the table. Exerting all my
powers of concentration to keep the pen from disappearing, I scrawled a
message across the telegram in large letters:

  

  

 11:00    nausea

 11:50    illusions and delusions

  

 But while I was writing I lost all control over my surroundings and at
any moment I expected the room to collapse. Then the unexpected
happened: I noticed something was going on in my immediate vicinity. I
realized that the immediate vicinity was my own body. It was stretching;
my hands and feet were moving farther away from me. Afraid that I might
bank my head against the ceiling, I made a dive for the bed. I lay on my
back but had trouble breathing; my chest swelled like the dome of Saint
Peter's; my hands became big enough to scoop up several pieces of
furniture, if not the whole room. A nightmare, I told myself. Just
ignore it! But then I had stretched so far my extremities were
dissolving into darkness. They were so distant from me that I'd lost all
sensation in them. Only my interior was left. A vast and labyrinthine
region, a gulf lying between my mind and the world, which in fact had
ceased to exist. I leaned out breathlessly over my own abyss. Where I
once had had a pair of lungs, intestines, and veins, I now saw only
thoughts-gigantic thoughts; and in those, thoughts, my life, my tangled
and splintered life, as it glowed, turned to charcoal and finally into
ashes. I watched it disintegrate into a fiery dust, a black Sahara. The
black Sahara was my life. The room in which I was lying like a fish on
the ocean floor had shrunk to the size of a grain of sand; it, too, was
a part of me. The more I kept expanding beyond the limits of my body,
the more terrified I became. Little by little I was being consumed by an
awesome power, by the power of my expanding mass, which was devouring
everything in a greedy surge. I groaned in despair as I found myself
sucked into the depths; I tried raising myself up by supporting my
elbows on the mattress, now located somewhere in the middle of the
earth. I was afraid that with one jerk of my hand I might cave in the
walls. It can't be, I kept telling myself, but I could feel it in every
nerve and fiber of my body. In a senseless attempt to escape, I crawled
out of bed, got down on my knees, and groped along the wall for the
light switch. The room was inundated by a razor-sharp whiteness. I saw
the table oozing with an iridescent film; the telephone bleached
bonewhite; and in the mirror my own face glistening with sweat. I
recognized the face, but nothing else had changed. I tried to understand
what was happening to me, to get at the force that was bursting to get
out. Was I that force? I was and I wasn't. My swollen hand was still
mine. But what if it turned into a mountain of flesh and tried to crush
me with its seething, bubbling mass? Could I then still claim it as my
own and not the force expanding it? Whenever I tried to resist the
metamorphosis, I was too late; by then the change had already taken
place. With a mere glance I could remove the ceiling; under my gaze
everything buckled, caved in, collapsed -melted like a house of wax on
fire. You're hallucinating! I kept telling myself, and the words would
bounce back like an echo from a well. I shoved myself away from the
wall, spread out my feet, watched as they kept sinking into the mushy
parquet flooring, turned my head like the dome of some lofty cathedral,
and spotted my watch lying on the night stand. The dial was the bottom
of a luminous crater; the second hand was ticking off the seconds in
eerie slow motion, leaving behind it a trail more white than the dial's
enamel finish, while the dial expanded to become a battlefield traversed
by military columns. The chalky ground between the marching ranks was
ripped apart by explosions, the smoke assumed the shape of
faces-malleable masks of mute agony. Swarms of antlike soldiers
congealed into a vitreous mass; their blood ran out to form round pools
of red mud, but they marched on, dust-covered and bloodied, to the
steady accompaniment of a drum roll. The battle gradually diminished in
scale as I put down the watch, but never ceased. Suddenly the room
became tilted, began rotating in slow motion, and hurled me toward the
ceiling. Something broke my fall. I dropped down on my hands and knees
and lay by the bed as the room gradually came to a stop and everything
settled back into place. Stretched out with my head on the floor like a
dog, I glanced up at the watch leaning against the lamp on the night
stand; it was a quarter to one.

 All was quiet again; the second hand crept along like an ant. I sat up
on the floor and was braced by its coolness. In the austere light the
room assumed the appearance of a solid crystal filled with a faint
ringing and a blinding refulgence. In this atmosphere of extreme clarity
the furniture, the folds in the window curtain, the shadows cast by the
table stood out with unspeakable perfection. I paid little attention to
the beauty of my surroundings; I was like an off-duty fireman who,
continually on the lookout for smoke in a theater auditorium, is
oblivious of the beauty on stage. I stood up, feeling woozy, and,
overcoming the estrangement in my fingers, scribbled a few more notes on
the telegram:

  

  

 12:50    relief

 plimasine in the morning

 orly-barbershop

  

 More I didn't know. While I was bent over the table I felt another
change coming on. The reflection on the table top began fluttering like
dragonfly wings; then the whole table rose up and flapped its
gray-ribbed bat wings in my face till it completely shrouded the milky
glow of the night light. The edge of the table turned limp as soon as I
grabbed it with my hands. I could neither escape this rush of
transformations nor catch up with it-they were becoming more accelerated
now, more monstrous, more majestic, more mocking-they passed through me
like a breeze-I closed my eyelids -I didn't need eyes to see them. I
recall making a vague but determined effort to expel the foreign
element, to puke it out; it was no use. I tried to defend myself as best
I could; I was becoming less a spectator and more a part of these
teeming visions-their quivering, shuddering flaw.

 Some time after one o'clock I managed to surface again. It came in
waves now, like the process of peristalsis; at each stage it promised to
be over, only to become more intense during the sequel. The visions
began to let up between two and three, which proved to be even worse
than before because now everything assumed its normal appearance again,
only this time on a different level of consciousness. How to describe
it? The furniture and walls became petrified in the middle of some
horrible transition; time came to a halt, leaving only the surrounding
world, which suddenly stopped advancing toward me like an avalanche and
became frozen in a prolonged flash of magnesium. The whole room was like
a gasp between two successive screams; its intended target was
manifested with undisguised malice in the intricacies of the wallpaper
design, in the picture of the Loire castle hanging above the bed, and in
the castle's green lawns. This greenery was my sentence; I stared up at
it from a kneeling position.and realized that I had to lose. Then I
began attacking the room-yes, the room; I ripped the cords off the
curtains and blinds, yanked the drapes down from their hooks, pulled off
the bedcovers, and threw the whole lethal pile into the bathtub. Then I
shut the bathroom door and broke the key while trying to jam it into the
door's outerlock. Out of breath, I leaned against the doorframe and
surveyed the battlefield. I realized it was all a waste of time: it was
impossible to remove the windows and walls. I dumped the contents of my
bags out onto the floor and dug my way through to the flat metal rings
connected by a short rod; Randy had given them to me back in Naples so I
could handcuff the murderer when the time came. Now I had him. A bunch
of tiny dark objects spilled out from between my shirts -almonds that
had fallen out of the package-but I didn't have time to record them, I
was afraid I wouldn't make it; so I threw a handful on top of the
telegram, pulled an armchair up to the radiator, made myself comfortable
in it, and leaned my back against the upholstery; then I pressed my feet
down on the floor, handcuffed myself to the radiator pipe, and in a
state of unbelievable tension waited for it to happen, as in the moments
before a takeoff. I was propelled neither upward nor downward, however,
but inward, into a hot and reddish fog, surrounded by whirling walls,
shackled and chained. Straining like a dog on a leash, I could reach
only as far as one of the bedposts. I pulled the bed toward me, buried
my face in the mattress as if trying to smother a fire, chewed my way
through to the foam rubber; but it was too porous to suffocate me, so I
grabbed my windpipe with my free hand and squeezed it with all my might.
Despair: I still couldn't kill myself. Just before losing consciousness,
I remember hearing explosions in my head: I must have banged it against
the pipes. I also recall experiencing one final, faint glimmer of hope
that this time I would bring it off. Then nothing; I died, and I didn't
even find anything strange about the fact that I was conscious of dying.
Later I had the sensation of swimming through black waterfalls of
unknown grottoes, where the water's roar was so loud it was as if only
my sense of hearing had survived. I could hear bells chiming. The black
color turned pink. I opened my eyes and beheld a large, strange, pale,
and incredibly calm face bent over me. The face belonged to Dr. Barth. I
recognized him at once and was about to tell him something to that
effect when I suddenly fainted in a most jejune manner.

 They found me around four in the morning, handcuffed to the radiator,
after some Italians next door had alerted the hotel staff. Since it gave
the appearance of being an attack of frenzy, I was given a tranquilizing
shot before being rushed to the hospital. After learning of the flight
cancellation the following day, Barth had telephoned Orly, been told
what had happened to me, and driven straight to the hospital, where I
was still lying unconscious. It was thirty hours before I finally
regained consciousness. I wound up with several broken ribs, a lacerated
tongue, a head full of stitches, and a badly swollen wrist caused by my
chafing on the handcuffs. Luckily the radiator to which I had been
handcuffed was made, of cast iron; one made of synthetic material would
have broken, and I would have jumped out the window.

  

  

 *        *        *

  

 A Canadian biologist has proved that people resistant to balding have
the same nucleic acid in their skin tissue as catarrhine monkeys, which
are also immune to balding. This substance, which goes by the name of
"monkey's hormone," has been proved effective in the treatment of
baldness. In Europe, the manufacture of a hormone ointment was begun
three years ago by a  Swiss company operating under license from the
American firm of Pfizer. The Swiss succeeded in modifying the hormone's
chemical structure in a way that made it more effective but also more
sensitive to heat, a factor resulting in its rapid degradation.

 When the skin is exposed to the sun, the hormone undergoes a chemical
alteration; if it is then combined with Ritalin it can be converted into
Dr. Dunant's compound X, a depressant, though only when administered in
large doses does it produce any toxic effects. Ritalin is present in the
blood stream of those who use it, while the hormone is applied topically
in the form of an ointment that contains the added ingredient
hyaluronidase to enable the medication to be absorbed through the skin
and to enter the circulation. But in order to produce a psychotropic
reaction, one would have to apply at least two hundred grams of the
ointment daily and exceed the recommended dosage of Ritalin.

 Certain compounds, such as cyanide plus sulfur-or thiocyanates-act as
catalysts that can increase the psychotropic toxicity a million times.
The chemical symbols-CNS-provide the key to the riddle. Cyanide is one
of the chemical constituents of bitter almonds; it is what gives them
their distinctively bitter and pungent taste. Some time ago a number of
almond factories in Naples became infested with cockroaches. The
disinfectant used to exterminate them contained sulfur, traces of which
found their way into the emulsion used to coat the almonds before they
were placed in the oven. As long as the oven temperature remained low,
nothing happened; but as soon as the temperature rose high enough to
allow the sugar to caramelize, the cyanide combined with the sulfur to
form cyanogen sulfide, or a thiocyanate. But when introduced into the
body by itself, cyanogen sulfide is incapable of having a catalytic
effect on factor X; ionic sulfur must also be present in the reacting
bodies. Ions in the form of sulfates and sulfites were traced back to
the mineral baths. Therefore, a person would die if he used the hormone
ointment, took Ritalin and mineral baths, and ate the Neapolitan-style
sugar-roasted almonds. The catalytic reaction triggered by the
thiocyanates involved such negligible amounts as to be undetectable
except by chromatography. A prerequisite for involuntary
self-destruction was a fondness for sweets. Those who couldn't eat
sweets because of diabetes, or who weren't partial to sweets, escaped
unharmed. The Swiss version of the ointment had been available on the
European market for two years, which explained why no cases had been
reported before that. No cases were reported in the States, because the
only product available there was Pfizer's, which was not nearly so
sensitive to heat as the European variety. And since the product was
intended exclusively for men, it was only natural that women were not
included among the victims.

 Proque also fell into the trap, but by a different routs. Though he had
never had any need of the scalp ointment, gone to the beach, or taken
mineral baths, the sulfur ions entered his circulation through
inhalation of sulfur dioxide from hypo used in developing photos; the
Ritalin came from the stimulant prescribed for his lethargy; and the
compound X, from Dr. Dunant's glasses. All the time the learned and
patient doctor was busy running tests on every scrap, every speck of
dust inside Proque's shop, taking specimens of the plywood partition and
the grinding powder, little did he realize that the mystery substance
was located approximately four meters above his head-in a bag of
sugar-coated almonds lying at the bottom of a dresser drawer.

 What had alerted Barth's chemists and provided them with the missing
link were the almonds found with my notes on the table.

 One incidental though rather amusing detail: after my return to the
States, I was told by a chemist friend of mine that the flowers of
sulfur sprinkled in my bed by little Pierre could not have acted as a
chemical agent, for the reason that elemental sulfur, obtained as a
solid through sublimation, is monionic and insoluble in water. My friend
came up with the hypothesis that the ionic sulfur found in my blood must
have come from wine that had been allowed to sulfurize. Following the
French custom, I was in the habit of drinking wine with every meal; this
last time, however, I had drunk exclusively at Barth's place, since I
never ate any meals out. The chemists from the CNRS must have been aware
of this but preferred not to embarrass their boss by insinuating he was
serving his guests bad wine.

 I was later asked whether the almonds had been my great discovery.
Nothing would have been easier than to give a yes or no answer, but the
truth was I didn't know. During my rampage, when I'd gone around
destroying everything within reach, dumping everything that seemed
lethal into the bathtub, I had certainly acted like a madman, but in
this madness of mine there was an element of self-preservation. It might
have been similar with the almonds. I'd wanted to make a note of them,
that much I know, though this reflex of mine could have been the result
of many years of practice. I had been trained to record things under
conditions of maximum stress, to assess the relevance of something
regardless of my own personal opinion. It might have been just a flash
of intuition that led me to connect the thunderstorm, my sneezing fit,
the pill stuck in my throat, the almonds, and the image of Proque making
that last trip into the corner candy store on Rue Amelie. But that
strikes me as too good to be true. I might have associated the almonds
with the Naples affair at the sight of the miniature Vesuvius displayed
in the shopwindow. Though not directly related to the case, Vesuvius
turned out to be the magic link that put me on the right trail. Though
if you look back carefully over my report, you will see there were many
times during the investigation when I thought I was on the right trail,
and yet nothing came of it. Barth was on the right track, too, though he
was wrong in suspecting a political motive. He was right in questioning
the method of selection-the "group of eleven"-and also in saying the
victims included only unmarried foreigners because the latter were more
apt to be isolated from their Italian surroundings by their
unfamiliarity with the language and the absence of any dependents. The
first sign of a toxic reaction was always a change in disposition, which
only someone close to the victim would have been able to detect in the
early stages. Subsequent investigation revealed several "abortive cases"
involving Italians and foreigners who had come to Naples with their
wives. In every case the pattern was identical: alarmed by her husband's
erratic behavior, the wife would start to keep a closer eye on him, and
the moment he started having hallucinations she would do her utmost to
persuade him to leave the country. This impulse to return home was an
instinctive reaction in the face of an unknown danger. The Italians, on
the other hand, would immediately be put under a psychiatrist's
care-usually under family pressure-at which time they would be advised
to stop driving, to discontinue the Plimasine, and to interrupt their
bathing treatment; as a result of this abrupt change, the symptoms would
rapidly disappear. A chance circumstance kept the investigation from
uncovering these "abortive cases" earlier. In each and every instance
someone from the victim's immediate family would come to claim the
prepaid subscription, but since the books of the various spas recorded
only the financial transactions, and not the reason for the
cancellation, there was absolutely no way the persons in question could
be traced.

 There were a number of other factors impeding the investigation. No one
likes to brag about using an ointment as a preventive against baldness.
Those who made no fuss about going bald, or who preferred wearing a wig
to using an ointment, escaped unharmed, though there was no way
investigators could know this at the time. Those who avoided the hormone
had no reason to testify, since they were safe and sound, while those
who did use it died. No packages containing the Swiss ointment were ever
found among the victims' personal belongings because the medication was
supposed to be kept stored in the refrigerator. This was easy enough to
do at home, but not in a hotel, so rather than take the medication along
with them on their travels, the more conscientious among the older men
would rely on the local barbers. The directions called for one
application every ten days, which meant that only one application was
needed during the time spent in Naples. And of course during the
investigation it never occurred to anyone to canvass the local
barbershops to find out what they were rubbing into the scalps of
certain customers.

 And lastly, just as all the victims shared a definite physical
resemblance, so, too, they all had certain psychological traits in
common. All were men well past their prime, still very conscious of
their appearance, struggling with old age but reluctant to admit it.
Those men who were already in their sixties and completely bald had
given up trying to look younger than their age and had stopped shopping
around for miraculous cures, whereas those who were thirty and had grown
prematurely bald were not likely to require any bathing treatment for
advanced rheumatism. Therefore the ones who were exposed to the greatest
danger were those who had already crossed the shadow line. In
retrospect, the more closely one examined the facts, the more
interrelated they became. For example, the chemical poisonings all took
place during the blooming season, when drivers were more apt to use
Plimasine, and since patients with acute asthma were physically unable
to drive, they would have had no need for a drug intended for drivers.

 Barth was gracious enough to keep me company during my stay in the
hospital, so I decided to pay him a farewell visit before flying back to
the States. Pierre was keeping a lookout by the stairs but ducked out of
sight the moment he saw me coming. I knew what was on his mind and
promised him I wouldn't forget about his helmet. Barth had another
visitor, Dr. Saussure, now wearing a shirt with frilled cuffs instead of
a frock coat, with a pocket watch dangling from his neck instead of a
calculator. While he browsed through some books in the library, Barth
spoke to me about one of the supreme ironies of the case: even though it
had been inoperative and unprogrammed the whole time, the computer had
proved enormously beneficial to the investigation. Because if I hadn't
flown to Paris with the idea of using the computer, I never would have
stayed at Barth's place, never would have aroused the sympathy of his
grandmother, and little Pierre never would have come to my rescue with
the flowers of sulfur after my fall on the stairs. . . . In short, the
computer played an undisputed role in unraveling the mystery, though in
a purely abstract sort of way. With a laugh I commented that the whole
combination of fortuitous events leading up to the solving of the
mystery now seemed to me more amazing than the mystery itself.

 "Now you're committing the egocentrist fallacy!" Saussure exclaimed as
he turned around to face us from the bookcase. "This series of yours is
not as much a sign of the times as a portent of tomorrow. A vague
premonition of things to come. . . ."

 "Do you understand it?"

 "I see only the warning signs. Mankind has multiplied to such an extent
that it's now starting to be governed by atomic laws. The movement of
gas atoms is chaotic, but out of this chaos are born such things as
stable pressure, temperature, specific gravity, and so on. Your
accidental success looks like a long series of extraordinary
coincidences. But it only seems that way to you. You will probably argue
that besides your falling down Barth's stairs and accidentally inhaling
sulfur, a number of other factors were necessary to trigger the chain
reaction: your scouting trip to Rue Ame1ie, your sneezing fit, the
decision to buy some almonds for your nephews, the flight cancellation,
the crowded hotel, the barber, and even the fact that the barber was a
Gascon. . . ."

 "Oh, why stop there," I intruded. "If I hadn't broken my tail bone in
the liberation of France, I wouldn't have had a relapse on the escalator
in Rome, or here, either, for that matter. And if I hadn't wound up in
front of the assassin on the escalator, my picture wouldn't have landed
on the cover of Paris-Match. And if it hadn't been for the picture, I
would have spent the night in Paris instead of fighting for a room at
the Hotel Air France, and that would have been the end of it. The
chances of my being there at all during the explosion were
astronomically small. I could have booked another flight; I could have
been standing on another step. . . . Not to mention all the other
astronomical improbabilities that came before and after! For instance,
if I hadn't heard about the Proque affair, I wouldn't have decided to
fly back to Rome just when the flights were being canceled . . . and in
a way that was the purest coincidence of all."

 "You mean your finding out about the Proque affair? I don't believe it
was a coincidence. The doctor and I were just talking about it before
you came in. You were briefed because of the political infighting going
on between Surete and Defense. Someone was out to discredit a certain
military official who was playing politics to promote Dr. Dunant. You
were caught in a billiard game."

 "Was I supposed to be a ball or a cue?"

 "Our guess is that they were using you to get the Proque case reopened
so they could damage Dunant's reputation. . . ."

 "But I still don't see what my coming to Paris had to do with all this
political infighting."

 "It had absolutely nothing to do with it. That's why the large number
of coincidences strikes you as being contrary to common sense. But I say
to hell with common sense! By itself each segment of your experience is
plausible enough, but the trajectory resulting from the aggregate of
these segments borders on being a miracle. That's what you thought,
wasn't it?"

 "Yes."

 "But meanwhile the very thing I was telling you about three weeks ago
has happened. Imagine a firing range where a postage stamp is set up as
a target a half mile away. Let's make it a ten-centime stamp, with a
picture of Marianne on it. Along comes a fly and leaves a speck the size
of a dot. Now let several sharpshooters start firing awav at the dot.
They will surely miss it, because at that distance they won't even be
able to see it.

 But now suppose a hundred mediocre marksmen were to start firing for
weeks on end. You can bet that one of their bullets will eventually hit
its target. Not because the man who fired it was a phenomenal
marksman,but because of the sheer density of fire. Wouldn't you agree?"

 "Yes, but that still doesn't explain-"

 "Wait, I'm not finished yet. It's summer now, and the range is crawling
with flies. The probability of hitting the dot was extremely small. But
the probability of simultaneously hitting both the dot and a fly that
happens to wander into the bullet's path is even smaller. The
probability of hitting the dot and three flies with the same bullet
would be-to use your words-astronomically small. And yet I assure you
that such a coincidence would come to pass as long as the firing was
kept up long enough."

 "Excuse me, but you're talking about a whole barrage, while I was just
one of a series. . . ."

 "That's an illusion. At the precise moment the bullet hits both the dot
and the three flies, then it, too, is only one of a series. The lucky
marksman will be just as amazed as you were, even though there would be
nothing so terribly miraculous or unusual about the fact that he hit it,
because, you see, somebody would have had to hit it. See what I mean?
Common sense isn't worth a damn here. My prediction came true. The
Naples mystery was the result of a random causality, and it was the same
random causality that solved it. The law of probability applies to both
members of the proposition. Needless to say, if only one of the set of
necessary conditions had gone unfulfilled, you never would have been
drugged, but sooner or later someone would have met all the conditions.
One, three, five years from now. And that is so because we now live in
such a dense world of random chance, in a molecular and chaotic gas
whose 'improbabilities' are amazing only to the individual human atoms.
It's a world where yesterday's rarity becomes todays cliche, and where
today's exception becomes tomorrow's rule."

 "O.K., but I was the one-"

 He didn't let me finish. Barth, who knew Saussure, looked at both of us
with twinkling eyes, as if trying his best not to laugh.

 "Excuse me, but if it hadn't been you, it would have been someone
else."

 "Who? Some other detective?"

 "I don't know and I don't care. Someone, that's all. By the way, is it
true you're planning to write a book about the case?"

 "As a matter of fact, I am. I even have a publisher . . . but why do
you ask?"

 "Because that's also related. Just as some bullet is bound to hit its
target, someone was bound to crack the case. And if that's so, then
regardless of the publisher or author, the publication of this book was
also a mathematical certainty."

  

  

 November 1975
