IMAGINARY MAGNITUDE

By Stanislaw Lem

Translated by Marc E. Heine

 

CONTENTS

Introduction

Cezary Strzybisz, Necrobes

Reginald Gulliver, Eruntics

Juan Rambellais et al., A History of Bitic Literature, Volume I

    Introduction

    Introduction to the Second Edition

Vestrand's Extelopedia in 44 Magnetomes

Golem XIV

    Foreword

    Introduction

    Instructions

    Golem's Inaugural Lecture—About Man Threefold

    Lecture XLIII—About Itself

    Afterword

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Introduction

The art of writing Introductions has long demanded proper recognition. I
too have long felt a pressing need to rescue this form of writing from
the silence of forty centuries—from its bondage to the works to which
its creations have been chained. When, if not in this age of
ecumenicalism—that is to say, of all-powerful reason—is one finally to
grant independence to this noble, unrecognized genre? I had in fact
counted on somebody else fulfilling this obligation, which is not only
aesthetically in line with the evolutionary course of art, but, morally,
downright imperative. Unfortunately, I had miscalculated. I watch and
wait in vain: somehow nobody has brought Introduction-writing out of the
house of bondage, off the treadmill of villein service. So I have no
choice: out of a sense of obligation rather than an impulse of the
heart, I shall rush to the aid of Introduction-writing and become its
liberator and obstetrician. That long-suffering realm has its own lower
kingdom—one of plodding, sometimes unpublished, and venal hired
Introductions, for servitude depraves. It also knows presumption and
bombast, the flowery gesture and the Jerichonic blast. Besides
rank-and-file Introductions there are the upper echelons such as
Forewords and Prefaces, nor are even ordinary Introductions all alike,
for an Introduction to one's own book is one thing, and that to somebody
else's quite another. Likewise, using one to introduce a first printing
is different from going to the trouble of multiplying one's
Introductions for numerous later printings. The power of a collection of
Introductions, even bland ones, overgrowing a persistently—and
insistently—published work, turns paper into a tower of strength,
frustrating the machinations of venomous critics—for who would dare
attack a book with such an armored breastwork, behind which it is not so
much its content as its inviolable respectability that shows through!

An Introduction is often a foretoken tempered by dignity or pride, a
promissory note signed by the author, or it may be a manifestation
constrained by convention, perfunctory though amicable, of some
authority's sham commitment to a book: that is, its safe conduct, its
passport into society, a viaticum from mighty lips —a futile grip
pulling up something which is going to drown anyway. But these are
irredeemable notes and very few have any gold backing, let alone bear
interest. But I shall ignore all that. I do not intend to go into the
taxonomy of Introduction-writing or even an elementary classification of
this previously slighted and haltered genre. Coach horses and jades move
similarly when harnessed to it. Let the Linnaeuses occupy themselves
with the tractive side of things. That is not the sort of Introduction
that is going to precede my little anthology of Liberated Introductions.

Here we must get down to brass tacks. What can an Introduction be?
Barefaced boasting and self-advertising, to be sure, but also the
wilderness cries of a John the Baptist or Roger Bacon. Therefore upon
reflection we see that, besides Introductions to Works, there are
Introduction Works, for like the Holy Scriptures of any faith, the
theses and futuromachies of scholars are Prefaces—to this world and the
other. Thus reflection shows that the Realm of Introductions is
incomparably more vast than the Realm of Literature, for what the latter
endeavors to realize, Introductions merely announce from afar.

To that growing question—why on earth must we enter into the liberation
struggle of Introductions and present them as a sovereign literary
genre?—the answer is clear from what has already been said. We can
supply the answer either in a flash, or with the help of higher
hermeneutics. In the first place, this project can be justified without
bombast—and with calculator in hand. Are we not threatened with a flood
of information? And is this not the monstrousness of it, that it crushes
beauty by means of beauty, and annihilates truth by means of truth? For
the sound of a million Shakespeares would produce the very same furious
din and hubbub as the sound of a herd of prairie buffalo or sea billows.
Such vastly multiplied content in collision brings no credit to thought,
but rather its destruction. When faced with such a fate, is not Silence
alone the redeeming Ark of the Covenant between the Creator and the
Reader, since the Creator gains merit by refraining from spinning out
just any old content, and the reader gains it by praising such manifest
self-denial? To be sure. And one might refrain from writing even the
Introductions themselves, though then the act of self-restraint would
not be perceived, so the sacrifice would not be accepted. Thus my
Introductions are announcements of sins from which I shall abstain. I do
this from a standpoint of cool and purely external calculation. But this
reckoning still fails to reveal what Art gains from its declared
liberation. We already know that even too much heavenly manna leads to
costiveness. How can we save ourselves from it? How can we save our
souls from self-constipation? And is salvation really to be found
here—does the true way really pass through Introductions? Summoned like
some luminous doctor, that yeoman of hermeneutical practitioners, Witold
Gombrowicz, would have explained the matter as follows. It is not a
question of whether the idea of separating Introductions from the
Content which they are supposed to announce pleased anyone, even
me—because it did not. For we are subject, without appeal, to the laws
of the Evolution of Form. Art cannot stand still or go round in circles:
precisely because of this, it cannot merely please. If you lay an egg,
you must hatch it; if a mammal hatches from it instead of a reptile, you
should give it something to suck; if, therefore, a subsequent move
brings us to something which arouses general repugnance or even nausea,
it cannot be helped: that's what we've produced. We have pushed so very
far and dragged ourselves there, arid by a command superior to pleasure
we shall have to turn over and over again—in our eyes, ears, and
minds—the New, categorically applied, for it has been discovered on a
path leading high up and far away, where admittedly no one has ever been
or wants to be, since nobody knows whether one could bear it there for
even a moment—though, in fact, for the Development of Culture, this is
of no importance whatsoever! This lemma, with an offhandedness
characteristic of nonchalant genius, bids us exchange one old,
spontaneous, and therefore unconscious bondage for a new one; it does
not cut the fetters, but merely lengthens our lead, for it drives us
into the Unknown, calling freedom a clear necessity.

But—I frankly confess—I myself crave a different basis for heresy and
rebellion. So let me say this: there is something of the truth in what
is said in the first and second place, though not the whole truth—nor
does it altogether resemble necessity, for in the third place we may
apply to creation the algebra which we detect in the Almighty.

Please observe how chatty the Bible is, how prolix the Pentateuch is, in
describing the outcome of Genesis—and how laconic in giving the recipe
for it! There had been neither time nor form until suddenly—for no
apparent reason—the Lord said: "Let there be light," whereupon there was
light, but between the two was there nothing. No fissure, no mean? I
don't believe it! Between Chaos and Creation there was pure intention,
which was still untouched by the light, not fully bound to the Cosmos,
unsoiled—even by the paradisial earth.

For that was the origin of chance, then and there, though not its
fulfillment; there was a purpose, moreover a divine and therefore
omnipotent one, that had yet to go into action. There was an
annunciation before the conception.

How can we not use this knowledge? It is a question not of plagiarism
but of method. Where does all this come from? From the beginning, of
course. And what was at the beginning? An Introduction, as we already
know. An Introduction, though not an arrogant, high-handed one, but an
Introduction to Something. Let us defy the disorderly materializing of
Genesis; to its first lemma let us apply the algebra of a more
restrained creation!

In other words, let us divide the whole by "Something." "Something" will
then disappear, and as our solution we shall be left with an
Introduction purged of unpleasant consequences, of any threat of
Incarnation, because it is purely intentional and in that state
undefined by sin. This is not the world, merely an undimensional point
—but in infinity for precisely that reason. Very soon we shall tell how
to bring literature to it. But first let us look at her neighbors, for
she is certainly no anchorite.

All the arts today are struggling to perform a rescue operation, for the
universal expansion of creativity has become its curse, a race, and an
escape; like the Universum, Art is exploding into the void, encountering
no resistance and consequently no support. If anything is now possible,
then everything has some value, and the rush forward turns into a
retreat, since the Arts want to return to their source, but do not know
how.

In its burning desire for limits, painting has got inside the painters
—inside their very skins—and behold, the artist now exhibits himself
without pictures! Thus he is an iconoclast lashed by his brushes or
covered in oil and tempera, or he turns up completely naked on
varnishing day, without the slightest dash of color. Unfortunately the
poor wretch is unable to achieve authentic nakedness: he is no Adam, but
merely a gentleman in a state of undress.

And the sculptor, whether shoving his unpolished stone at us or
exhibiting any old idealized rubbish, seeks to crawl back to the
Paleolithic period—to primitive man—for that is what he wants to become:
an Original! A cave man, indeed! This is hardly the way to the raw flesh
of savage expression! Naturalia non sunt turpia—but that does not mean
that any and every boorish barbarianism is a return to Nature!

But what is, I ask you? Let us explain this through the example of
music, since the greatest and most immediate opportunity lies wide open
before it. Composers are wrong to break the bones of counterpoint and
smash the Bachs to smithereens by computer; likewise, using electrons to
tread on the tail of a cat amplified a hundredfold yields nothing,
except a pack of artificial howlers. That is the wrong course and
produces the wrong tone! A savior—an innovator—conscious of his goal has
yet to come!

I await him impatiently. I am waiting for his work of concrete music,
which in delivering us from lies returns to the bosom of Nature, a work
which will be the consolidation of those choral, though strictly
private, performances to which every audience surrenders in the concert
hall—an audience which is cultural only in the externals of its
concentration, and which contemplates the sweating orchestra only as a
familiar periphery of organisms.

This symphony will be overheard by a hundred microphones, and I expect
it will have the dark, monotonous orchestration characteristic of
bowels, for its tonal background will be created by jejune basses, or
the borborygmus of persons passionate in their ineluctable
collywobbles—rumbling-based, gurglingly perfect, and full of desperate
digestive expression, for this voice of the bowels—the voice of life!—is
authentic because it is organic but not like organ music. I trust too
that the leitmotiv will develop in time with the seated percussion,
accented by the creaking of chairs, with violent, convulsive
nose-blowing entrances, and chords of magnificent coloratura coughing.
The bronchitises will start up, and I predict quite a number of solos
here, executed with all the masterly skill of asthmatic old age, a
veritable memento mori vivace ma non troppo, a display of agonized
piccolo, for an authentic corpse will start snapping its dentures in
three-four time, and a decent grave will start whistling in a
death-rattled windpipe. Well, so biological a truth of symphonic
procedure cannot be falsified!

The entire somatic initiative of bodies, hitherto so falsely stifled in
the world by artificial music despite their irrevocably—and therefore
tragically personal—sounds, cries out for triumphant revindication as a
Return to Nature. I cannot be wrong, I know that the first performance
of the Visceral Symphony will be a breakthrough, for in this way only
will the traditionally passive audience, reduced to rustling peppermint
wrappers, take the initiative—at last!—and in the role of a
self-realizing auto-orchestra perform a return to itself, passionate in
its denial of all "falsehood," that slogan of our age.

The composer-creator will once again become purely the
priest-intermediary between the terrified multitude and Moira, for the
fate of our entrails is our Destiny. That is how a distinguished
community of listener-experts will perceive the auto-symphony, and with
no outside twangings, since in this first performance they will then be
savoring themselves alone—and they will be scared.

And what about literature? You have probably already guessed: I want to
give you back your soul in all its range, just as visceral music gives
the audience back its own body: in the very heart of Civilization, it
descends to Nature.

This is precisely why Introduction-writing can no longer remain under
the curse of bondage, excluded from liberating works. It is not only
fiction writers and their readers that I am inciting to revolt. And I
mean rebellion, not a general muddle—not egging on the spectators so
that they climb up on the stage, or the stage climbs out after them, as
a result of which they lose their previous position of agreeable
superiority and, with their audience refuge liquidated, find themselves
thrust into St. Vitus' cauldron. Neither twitching nor the distorted
mimicry of yoga, but Thought alone can restore our freedom to us. Thus,
by denying me the right of a liberation struggle in the name of—and for
the good of—Introductions, you would be doomed, dear reader, to
obscurantism and to the obdurately outdated, and even if you did not
know how old-fashioned you had become, you still would not enter modern
times.

You on the other hand, reader, being adept in anticipating the New—you,
progressive with rapid reflexes, vibrating freely in the fashion flows
of our era, who know that, since we have crawled higher than our
primitive simian cousin (onto the moon, even), must continue to
climb—you will understand me and join me in feeling that a duty is being
fulfilled.

I shall deceive you, and for that you will be grateful to me. I shall
make you a solemn promise with no intention of keeping it, and that will
satisfy you, or at any rate you will pretend that it does, with
appropriate masterly skill; whereas, to fools who would want to
excommunicate us both, you will say that in spirit they have fallen from
the times and landed on a rubbish heap spat out by a precipitate
Reality.

You will tell them there is nothing to be done: today art has become a
promissory note without (transcendental) cover, a (counterfeit) pledge,
an (unrealistic) forecast—the highest form of alteration. It is
precisely this emptiness of art and its unrealizability which should be
taken as its motto and bedrock. That is why I am right to present an
Introduction to this short Anthology of Introductions, for I am
proposing prefaces that lead nowhere, introductions that go nowhere, and
forewords followed by no words at all.

But with each of these initial moves I shall reveal to you an emptiness
of a different kind and a different semantic color, changing according
to a typical Heidegger spectral line. With enthusiasm, hope, and much
to-do I shall open the altar and triptych doors, and announce the
inconostasis with its holy gates; I shall kneel on stairs breaking off
at the threshold of a void—-a void not so much abandoned as one in which
nothing has ever been or ever shall be. This gravest possible amusement,
this simply tragic amusement, is a parable of our destiny, since there
is no device so human, nor such a property and mainstay of humanity, as
a full-sounding, responsibility-devoid, utterly soul-absorbing
Introduction to Nothingness.

This whole rocky, green, cold, humming world, kindled in clouds and
buried in stars, we share with the animals and plants, though
Nothingness is our domain and special department. The explorer of this
nothingness is man. But it is a difficult thing, unusual by virtue of
being nonexistent, which cannot even be tasted without careful seasoning
and spiritual exercises, without lengthy study and training; it
paralyzes the unready, which is why for communicating with a precisely
tuned, richly orchestrated nothingness one must be conscientiously
prepared, making one's every step toward it as firm, distinct, and
substantial as possible.

So I shall show you Introductions as one shows a richly carved doorframe
chased in gold and surmounted by counts and griffins on a majestic
lintel. I shall swear by its solid, harmoniously massive side facing us,
so that as I open it with the concentrated effort of the arms of my
spirit, I may thrust the reader into nothing and thereby simultaneously
snatch him away from all existences and worlds.

I promise and guarantee a wonderful freedom, and give my word that
Nothing will be there.

What shall I gain? The state of greatest riches: the one prior to
Creation.

What will you gain? Supreme liberty, for no words of mine will obtrude
upon your ear in your pure upward flight. I shall take you only as a
pigeon-fancier takes a pigeon, and slings it like David's stone, like a
rock in the path, so that it may fly off into this immensity—for eternal
enjoyment.

 

 

 

Cezary Strzybisz

NECROBES

139 Reproductions

Introduction by Stanislaw Lem

Zodiac Publishers

Introduction

A few years ago artists seized upon death as their life-saver. Equipped
with anatomical and histological atlases, they began disemboweling their
nudes, poking about in their entrails, dumping out onto their canvases
the battered ugliness of our embarrassing bits and pieces, so rightly
hidden by skin from everyday view. But even so, the concerts which
putrefaction in all the colors of the rainbow began presenting in
exhibition rooms proved to be no revelation. It might have seemed
debauchery if any of the spectators had taken offense; it might have
appeared nightmarish if anyone had shuddered; but—would you believe
it?—even the old ladies failed to get upset. Midas turned all he touched
to gold, but the artist of today, suffering from the opposite sort of
curse, annihilates the dignity of every object by the mere stroke of his
brush. Like a drowning man, he clutches at anything—and sinks to the
bottom with it— amid the blase indifference of onlookers.

Anything? Even death? Why has its antimajesty not shocked us, or should
those blood-scoured pages of enlarged illustrations of forensic medicine
not at least have given us cause for reflection by their sheer horror?

Yet they could not, for they were too forced! The intention was
childish: to frighten the grown-ups— which is why it could not be taken
seriously! So instead of a memento mori we were given carefully
disheveled corpses; the too importunately revealed secret of the grave
manifested itself as a slimy cesspool. That kind of death failed to
convince, because it was too ostentatious! The poor artists, finding
nature no longer sufficient, set about escalating Grand Guignol, duping
themselves.

But after such loss of face, when death "flopped," what in fact did
Strzybisz do to rehabilitate it? What in fact were his Necrobes? After
all, they are not art: Strzybisz does not paint and appears never in his
life to have held a brush. Nor are they graphics, for he does not draw,
nor does he engrave in any material, nor is he a sculptor. No, he is a
photographer—a particular kind, to be sure, for instead of light, he
employs X-rays.

Using his eyes, extended by the snouts of his X-ray equipment, this
anatomist goes straight through bodies. But the black-and-white films
that we know from doctors' consulting rooms would doubtless leave us
indifferent. Which is why he has animated his nudes. Which is also why
his skeletons move about at such a buoyant, determined pace, with their
raglan shrouds and phantom briefcases. Rather mischievous and bizarre
they are, to be sure, nothing more, but he was merely trying these
snapshots on for size, he is still experimenting, he didn't know for
sure. The uproar began only when he dared to do something terrible
(though "terrible" things were no longer supposed to exist): he X-rayed
us clean through, and thereby revealed sex.

This collection of Strzybisz's work opens with his Pornograms, which are
truly comic, though in a rather cruel way. What Strzybisz has captured
within the leaden diaphragm of his lenses is the most obtrusive,
licentious, audacious form of sex: group sex. It has been said that he
wanted to deride pornomania, that he gave an accurate reading of it (one
reduced to its bare bones), and that he has succeeded since these bones,
clinging to one another in a puzzling geometrical arrangement,
suddenly—and eerily—leap into the eye of the beholder like a modern
dance of death with gamboling, spawning skeletons. It has also been said
that he was trying to abuse and deride sex itself—and has succeeded.

Is that correct? Undoubtedly, though in the Necrobes it is possible to
discern something more. Caricatures? Not only that, for despite
everything the Pornograms contain a kind of hidden dignity. Perhaps this
is because Strzybisz "tells the truth"—and only the truth, which, when
not subjected to "artistic deformation," is today considered
vulgarity—though in point of fact he is purely a witness, for his gaze
is piercing but not distorting. There is no defense against this
evidence, no way of dismissing it as a fabrication, as a convention, a
trick, or a banal little game, for he is right. A caricature? A prank?
But when all is said and done, these skeletons are, in their abstract
delineation, almost aesthetic. For Strzybisz has acted with consummate
skill: he has not so much laid bare—torn the bones from their bodily
shell—as freed them, honestly searching for their proper meaning with no
further reference to us. Searching for their proper geometry, he has
made them sovereign.

The skeletons have, one is tempted to say, a life of their own. He has
endowed them with freedom through the vaporization of their bodies—that
is to say, through death—though bodies play an important, albeit not
immediately perceptible, role in the Necrobes. It is difficult here to
go into the details of X-ray technique, but a few words of explanation
are essential. Had Strzybisz used hard X-rays, the bones alone would
have been visible in his photographs, like sharply outlined strips or
rods, segmented as if by cuts—the murkiness of articular interstices.
They would have been too neat, too skeletonized, an osteological
abstraction. But he never works that way; indeed, X-rayed by means of
soft rays, human bodies appear in his photographs as allusions, as
intimations, milky whiffs of faint light, and through this he achieves
his particular effect. Appearance and reality change places. The
medieval, Holbeinesque dance of death which persistently lurks impassive
within us— the very same adhesion of death and life, untouched by the
hurly-burly of glittering civilization—this Strzybisz achieves
unwittingly, as if by accident. For we can recognize that same lively
pace, that jovial vigor and frivolous passion which Holbein—and only
Holbein—gave to his skeletons. Or rather, the piecework of denotations
which this contemporary artist undertakes is broader, since he has
adopted the most modern technique for the oldest problem of the species:
death's appearance in the midst of life. And it is precisely the X-rayed
mechanics of a propagating genus which the bodies assist, as pale
specters.

Fine, you may say, maybe that's the philosophy behind it, but when all
is said and done, he has deliberately gone the "whole hog"—he has worked
copulating couples into his corpses, he has taken up a fashionable
theme, effectively and for effect. Isn't that cheap? Isn't there a
shrewdness in his Pornograms? Or simply a fraud? There is no lack of
such judgments. I prefer not to wheel out against him the artillery of
heavy rhetoric. Instead, I would ask you to have a look at the
twenty-second Pornogram, entitled "The Triple Leaf."

This scene is indecent in a particular way. If one were to compare it
with an ordinary photograph of the same people—a product of commercial
photography—the innocence of such pornography as compared to the X-ray
photograph would immediately become obvious.

For pornography is not directly obscene: it excites only as long as
there is a struggle within the viewer between lust and the angel of
culture. When the devils carry off the angel; when, as a result of
general tolerance, the weakness of sexual prohibitions—their complete
helplessness—is laid bare; when prohibitions are thrown on the rubbish
heap, then how quickly pornography betrays its innocent (which here
means ineffective) character, for it is a false promise of carnal bliss,
an augury of something which does not in fact come true. It is the
forbidden fruit, so there is as much temptation in it as there is power
in the prohibition.

And so? Our eyes, growing indifferent through repetition, catch a
glimpse of nudes wriggling around and exhausting themselves as they
carry out their assignments in the studio—and how poor the spectacle
then seems. A feeling not so much of embarrassment as of offended human
solidarity awakens in the beholder, for these nudes muck about with one
another so importunately that they resemble children bent on doing
something monstrous to shock adults, but who really cannot, being in no
position to—and their imagination, now merely enraged by their own
impotence, leads not toward Sin and the Fall, but simply to idiotically
pathetic ugliness. That is why, in the persistent activities of those
big, naked animals, there lurks a shallow infantilism; it is neither
hell nor heaven, but a lukewarm sphere: tedium and the futility of
poorly compensated effort.

But Strzybisz's work is predatory, for it is as horrific and comic as
those trips of the damned into the abyss in old Dutch and Italian
paintings. Since, however, we can distance ourselves from these sinners
somersaulting into the Last Judgment, since we have canceled the next
world, what can we oppose to the X-ray picture? In these clinches, in
which their bodies are an impassable obstacle to them, the skeletons are
tragically comic. Mere bones? When we see people in an awkward,
desperate embrace, it would be merely pitiable, were it not for the
ghastly comic element. Where does it come from? From us—for we recognize
the truth. The justification of these clinches evaporates along with
their corporality, and that is why their embraces are so sterile and
abstract, and at the same time so terribly matter-of-fact, icy, and
pale, so hopeless.

And in addition their holiness, or the mockery of it, or the allusion to
it, which is not fixed, not heightened by artificial manipulation, but
visible, for here a halo surrounds every head—their hair becomes a pale,
round aureole and candle, as in holy pictures.

I know, moreover, how difficult it is to disentangle and begin defining
impulses from which the totality of feelings arises in the spectator.
For some, this is literally Holbein redivivus, since in reality there is
something peculiar about this reversion—by electromagnetic radiation—to
the skeletons, as if to a Middle Ages preserved within us. Others are
shocked by bodies resembling powerless spirits attending out of
necessity the difficult practices of a sex rendered unseen. Someone else
has written that the skeletons are like instruments removed from their
cases for the performance of an esoteric initiation, which is why people
have spoken of the "mathematics" or "geometry" of this kind of sex.

That may well be; though hardly speculative in origin is the sadness
into which Strzybisz's art sinks. The symbolism, arising over the
centuries and bequeathed by the centuries (though secretly vegetating,
since we disowned it), did not, as we see, succumb to destruction. We
have transformed this symbolism into signalization (skulls and
crossbones on high-tension poles and on bottles of poison in drug
stores) and into classroom visual aids, in the form of skeletons held
together by gleaming wires in lecture halls. So we have condemned it to
an exodus, we have exiled it from life, but we have not rid ourselves of
it entirely. Unable to separate a skeleton's most substantial
corporality, equal to the eloquence of an antler or a soldier's stripes,
from that which represents in it the silence of fate and thus a symbol,
our intellect falls into that particular frustration from which it
finally escapes through salutary laughter. Yet we comprehend that this
is a somewhat forced gaiety, and that we are shielding ourselves behind
it in order not to succumb too much to Strzybisz.

Erotica as a desperate futility of intention, and sex as an exercise in
projection geometry—these are the two opposite extremes of the
Pornograms. Nor do I agree with those who maintain that Strzybisz's art
begins and ends with the Pornograms. If I had to say which of the nudes
I value the most, I would say without hesitation the "Pregnant Woman"
(p. 128). A mother to be with her child enclosed in her womb, this
skeleton within a skeleton is fairly cruel and in no way untrue. In this
big, stalwart body, its pelvic bone branching like white wings (an X-ray
picture hits upon the purpose of sex more forcibly than the typical
nude), against a background of these wings already parted for
childbirth, there is the little skeleton of the nestling child—hazy,
being still incomplete, its little head down. How false these words
sound, and how pure and proud a whole the light-and-shade effects of the
X-ray create! A pregnant woman in her prime and in her death, and the
still unborn foetus which has already begun to die by virtue of having
been conceived. There is a kind of tranquillity of challenge and a
determined affirmation in this act of observation.

What will it be like a year from now? The Necrobes will have sunk into
oblivion, their place taken by new techniques and fashions. (Poor
Strzybisz, how many imitators has he already acquired, in the wake of
his success!) Isn't this the case? Undoubtedly, nor can it be helped.
But even though this rapid inconstancy strangles us, dooming us to a
series of ceaseless resignations and separations, today Strzybisz has
favored us lavishly. He has not fallen into the depths of the matter, he
has not penetrated into the exotica of detecting the purposeless
perfections of Nature, into those investigations by which science has
contaminated art, but he has brought us to the borders of our bodies, in
no way distorted, exaggerated, or changed—our real bodies!—and by doing
this he has erected bridges from the present into the past, reviving
that dignity which art has lost. It is not his fault that this
resurrection lasts only a few minutes.

 

 

ERUNTICS

Reginald Gulliver

George Allen & Unwin Limited 40 Museum Street, London

Introduction

The future historian will doubtless find two mutually pervading
explosions to be the most appropriate model for our society. Avalanches
of intellectual products mechanically dumped on the market come in
contact with consumers by coincidences just as fortuitous as those that
control the collisions of gas molecules: no longer can anyone encompass
the multitude of these products in their entirety. And since nowhere is
it easier to lose oneself than in a multitude, the entrepreneurs of
culture, precisely because they publish everything that authors give
them, exist in the blissful but mistaken conviction that now nothing
valuable is being wasted. Individual books are deemed worthy of
attention by the decision of competent experts who eliminate from their
field of vision everything outside their own speciality. This process of
elimination is the defensive reflex of every expert: were he less
ruthless, he would drown in a flood of paper. But as a result, a
statelessness equal to civil death threatens everything which, by virtue
of being completely new, defies the bases of classification. The book
which I am introducing lies precisely in no man's land. It may be the
result of lunacy, but in that case we are talking about a madness with
precise methods; it may be the product of pseudological perfidy, but
then it would not be perfidious enough, for it would be unsalable. Both
reason and haste would have one pass over such an oddity in silence, but
notwithstanding all the tedi-ousness of discourse, a spirit of
extraordinary heresy shines through it and stops one in one's tracks.
Bibliographies have listed this title under science fiction, but this
area has by now become a dumping ground for all sorts of half-baked
oddities relegated from more serious spheres. Were Plato to publish The
Republic today, or Darwin On the Origin of Species, both books might
bear the label "fantasy," whereupon they would be read by everybody and
appreciated by nobody; sinking into sensational verbiage, they would
play no part in the development of ideas.

This book deals with bacteria, though no bacteriologist will take it
seriously. It pursues a linguistics that would make any language
specialist's hair stand on end. It arrives at a futurology contradicting
that practiced by futurology's professional exponents. Which is
precisely why, as an outcast of all the scientific disciplines, it must
drop to the level of science fiction and act the part, though it cannot
count on readers, since it offers nothing that might satisfy a thirst
for adventure.

I am not in a position to give a proper judgment on Erun-tics, yet I
feel that there is no competent preface writer for it. I am usurping
this position uneasily: who can ever know how much truth lurks behind
such deep audacity? At a glance, the book looks like a scientific
handbook, though it is a pack of absurdities. It makes no pretense to
literary fantasy, for it is not an artistic composition. If it depicts
the truth, this truth belies virtually the whole of contemporary
knowledge. If it lies, it does so in monstrous proportions.

As the author explains, eruntics (Die Eruntizit'atslehre, eruntica,
eruntique—the name comes from the Latin erunt, "they will be," the third
person plural of the future tense of esse) was not intended to be a form
of prognostics or futurology. It is impossible to learn eruntics, since
nobody knows the principles by which it functions. It cannot be used to
forecast anything one might desire. It is not "esoteric knowledge," like
astrology or dianetics, nor is it natural scientific orthodoxy. We are
dealing with something condemned to be an "outcast from all worlds."

R. Gulliver introduces himself in the first chapter as a
philosopher-dilettante and amateur bacteriologist who one day eighteen
years ago decided to teach bacteria English. His impulse was of an
accidental nature. On the crucial day he removed from his thermostat
some petri dishes, those shallow glass containers in which bacteria in
vitro are grown on agar gelatine. Until then he had, as he says, merely
dabbled in bacteriology, for he pursued it as a kind of hobby, with no
pretensions or hopes of any discoveries. He admits that he simply liked
observing the growth of microorganisms on their bed of agar: he marveled
at the "cleverness" of the invisible "plantlets," forming colonies the
size of a pinhead on the filmy surface. To study the effectiveness of
antibacterial agents, he introduced large quantities of these agents
onto the agar with a pipette or a dipper; where they were effective, the
agar remained free of bacterial coating. As laboratory technicians
sometimes do, R. Gulliver dipped a wad of cotton in an antibiotic and
wrote "yes" with it on the smooth surface of the agar. By the following
day this invisible inscription had become visible, for the bacteria,
multiplying intensively, had covered the whole of the agar with the
tubercles of the colony, except for the mark left by the cotton which he
had used as a kind of pen. It was then, he says, that it first occurred
to him that this process might be "reversed."

The inscription was visible because it was free of bacteria. But were
the microbes to arrange themselves into letters, they would be writing
and thus expressing themselves in language. The idea was tempting but at
the same time, he admits, totally nonsensical. After all, it was he who
had written the word "yes" on the agar, whereas the bacteria had merely
"developed" the inscription, being unable to multiply iv within it. But
thereafter the idea gave him no rest. On the eighth day he set to work.

Bacteria are one hundred percent unreasoning and thus surely
unreasonable. However, by virtue of the position they occupy in Nature,
they are superb chemists. Pathogenic organisms learned how to overcome
the bodily barriers and protective constitutional forces of animals
hundreds of millions of years ago. This is understandable if one
considers that they did nothing else for ages and ages, so they had time
enough to push the aggressive albeit blind means of their chemisms into
the protective wall of the proteins by which large organisms are
shielded. Likewise, when man appeared in history they attacked him and,
during the ten to twenty thousand years civilization has existed,
inflicted diseases on him resulting in notorious plagues and at various
times the death of entire populations.

Less than eighty years ago man hit upon a more powerful counterattack,
bringing down upon bacteria an army of his own—selective synthetic
poisons, striking their life processes. In this extremely short period
he has produced over 48,000 chemical antibacterial weapons, synthesized
with the purpose of striking at the most sensitive sore points of their
metabolism, growth, and reproduction. He did this in the belief that he
would presently wipe germs off the face of the earth, but he was soon
amazed to find that, while checking the expansion of microbes—called
epidemics—he had not liquidated a single disease. Bacteria proved to be
a better equipped opponent than the creators of selective chemotherapy
had imagined. No matter what new concoctions from the retort man uses,
bacteria, by laying down hecatombs in this (so it would seem) unequal
struggle, soon adapt the poisons to themselves or themselves to the
poisons, and develop resistance.

Science does not know exactly how they do this, and what it does know
seems highly unlikely. Bacteria surely have no v theoretical knowledge
in the fields of chemistry or immunology. They are unable to conduct
either test experiments or strategic deliberations; they are in no
position to know what man is going to direct against them tomorrow. But
even with these military disadvantages, somehow they manage. The more
knowledge and skill medicine acquires, the less hope it places in
clearing the earth of germs. To be sure, the hardy life of bacteria is
the result of their mutability. However, no matter what tactics bacteria
resort to in need, it is certain that they act unconsciously, like
microscopic chemical aggregates. New tribes owe their resistance only to
mutations of inheritance, and these mutations are fundamentally
fortuitous. Were man involved, the picture would be more or less as
follows: an unknown enemy, using stores of knowledge unknown to us,
prepares deadly agents unknown to us and flings an enormous amout of
them at people, while we, dying by the thousands, decide, in a desperate
search for an antidote, that our best means of defense is to pull out of
a hat pages torn from a chemical encyclopedia. Perhaps we shall find on
one of these pages a formula for a life-saving drug. It is to be
supposed, however, that a race trying to repel a mortal threat by this
course of action would perish to a man before such a lottery-type method
could succeed.

Yet the above method somehow works, when bacteria apply it. There can be
absolutely no question of their hereditary gene code having providently
inscribed in it every possible structure of pernicious chemical
substance which can be synthesized. There are more of these unions than
stars and atoms in the universe. Besides, the extremely poor apparatus
of bacterial heredity could not even contain the information about the
48,000 drugs which man has used up to now in his struggle with the
germs. So one thing is irrefutable: the chemical knowledge of bacteria,
though purely "practical," vi continues to surpass the lofty theoretical
knowledge of man.

Since this is so, and since bacteria have such versatility, why can't
this be used for completely new purposes? If we look at the question
objectively, it is clear that writing a few words in English is a much
simpler problem than preparing countless defense tactics against
countless types of poisons and venoms. Indeed, behind these poisons
stands the colossus of modern science—libraries, laboratories, sages,
and their computers—yet this might is still insufficient against the
invisible "plantlets"! So the only catch is how to compel bacteria to
study English, and how to make a command of the language a precondition
of survival. One must create a situation with two, and only two, ways
out: either learn how to write, or perish.

R. Gulliver states that in principle a golden-hued staphylococcus or a
colon bacillus (Escherichia coli) could be taught writing as we normally
use it, though the road to such knowledge is extremely arduous and
bristling with obstacles. It would be much simpler to teach bacteria how
to use the Morse alphabet, which is composed of dots and dashes—all the
more so, since the dots are already there. After all, each colony is
simply a dot. Four dots stuck together on an axis produce a dash. What
could be simpler?

Such were R. Gulliver's inspiration and assumptions— crazy enough to
provoke every specialist at this point to toss it aside. But we who are
not specialists may continue reading. R. Gulliver decided to make the
placing of short dashes on the agar a condition of survival. The
difficulty (as he tells us in Chapter 2) is that there can be absolutely
no instruction in the usual sense of the word—neither as it applies to
people, nor even to animals, who can acquire conditional reflexes. Here
the pupil has no nervous system, no limbs, eyes, ears, or sense of
touch—nothing except an uncommon proficiency in chemical changes. These
are its life process, and that's about it. Therefore this process must
be harnessed to the vii study of calligraphy—the process, and not the
bacteria, for after all we are not talking about individuals or
specimens: it is the genetic code itself which must be instructed, so we
have to reach the code, and not individual bacteria!

Bacteria do not behave intelligently, whereas the code, their helmsman,
renders them capable of adaptation to totally new situations, even to
those which they encounter for the first time in millions of years of
vegetation. Only if we prepare conditions so well chosen that the sole
available tactic of survival is articulate writing shall we see whether
the code is up to the task. But the foregoing reflection transfers the
whole burden of the problem to the experimenter, for it is he who must
create these unusual conditions of bacterial existence—unusual because
never before encountered in Evolution!

The description of experiments which occupies later chapters of Eruntics
is unbelievably boring by virtue of its pedantry, prolixity, and
continued interlarding of the text with photograms, tables, and graphs
which make it difficult to digest. We shall take those 260 pages of
Eruntics and summarize them briefly. The beginning was simple. On the
agar lies a single colony of colon bacilli (E. coli) four times smaller
than the letter o. The behavior of this grayish spot is observed from
above by an optic head connected to a computer. The colony ordinarily
expands in all directions centrifugally; but in the experiment,
expansion is possible only along a simple axis, for any movement beyond
it switches on a laser projector that kills the "misbehaving" bacteria
with ultra-violet rays. We have here a situation similar to the one
described initially, when writing appeared on the agar, for the bacteria
were unable to develop where the agar was moistened with antibiotic. The
only difference now is that they are able to live solely within the
limits of a dash (previously they viii could live only outside it). The
author repeated this experiment 45,000 times, using two thousand petri
dishes simultaneously and the same number of sensing devices connected
to a parallel computer. He had considerable expenses but did not have to
give up too much of his time, as a single generation of bacteria lives
only some ten to twelve minutes. On two of the two thousand dishes there
was enough mutation to produce a new strain of colon bacillus (E. coli
orthogenes) no longer capable of developing otherwise than in dashes;
this new type covered the agar with the following filament:

Growth along a single axis then became the inherited property of the
mutated bacteria. By breeding this strain, R. Gulliver obtained a
further thousand dishes with colonies, and thus a practice range for the
next stage in bacterial orthography. With strains that bred in
alternating dots and dashes (. — . — . — . — . —), he ultimately reached
the limits of this phase of instruction. The bacteria behaved in
accordance with the imposed condition, though naturally they produced no
writing, only superficial elements of it deprived of any meaning.
Chapters 9, 10, and 11 explain how the author took the next step, or
rather how he forced E. coli to do so.

He deliberated as follows: bacteria have to be put into a position where
they behave in a certain specific manner, and this behavior, which at
their level of vegetation is purely chemical, will take the form of
signals. In the course of four million experiments R. Gulliver
macerated, dried to dust, roasted, thawed, cut, squeezed, and
catalytically paralyzed billions of bacteria, until he finally obtained
a strain of E. coli which reacted to mortal danger by arranging its
colonies into these dots:............

The letter s (three dots signify s in the Morse alphabet) symbolized
stress. Of course the bacteria still understood nothing, but they were
able to save themselves only by react- ix ing through the foregoing
arrangement of their colonies, for then and only then did the sensing
device connected to the computer remove the menacing agent (e.g., a
powerful poison appearing in the agar, ultra-violet rays shining on the
agar, etc.). Bacteria which did not arrange themselves into three-dot
groups had to perish—every last one; on the agar (and scientific)
battlefield, only those remained which, thanks to mutations, had
acquired that chemical skill. The bacteria understood nothing yet they
signaled their condition —"mortal danger"—thanks to which the three dots
indeed became a sign defining the situation.

R. Gulliver already saw that he could breed a strain which could give
SOS signals, though he considered this an altogether superfluous step.
He took a different course, teaching the bacteria how to differentiate
signals according to the characteristic features of each threat. Thus,
for example, the strains E. coli loquativa 67 and E. coli philographica
213 could eliminate free oxygen, which is lethal to them, from their
environment solely by giving the signal: ...-----------

(s o, or "stress produced by oxygen").

The author is euphemistic when he says that obtaining strains that could
signal their needs proved "rather troublesome." Breeding E. coli
numerativa which was able to indicate what concentration of hydrogen
ions (pH) suited it, cost him two years, while Proteus calculans began
to perform elementary arithmetical work after a further three years of
experiments. It got as far as two and two makes four.

In the next stage R. Gulliver broadened the base of his experiments,
teaching Morse to streptococci and gonococci, though these germs proved
fairly dull-witted. He then went back to the colon bacillus. Tribe 201
was distinguished by its mutational adaptability: it produced longer and
longer statements, both descriptions and demands, indicating what
troubled the bacteria as well as what they wished by way of nutriment.
Continuing to preserve only the most efficiently mutating strains, after
eleven years he obtained the strain E. coli eloquentissima, the first to
begin to write spontaneously and not merely when threatened. He says the
happiest day of his life occurred when E. coli eloquentissima reacted to
the light being switched on in the laboratory with the words "good
morning," articulated by a growth of the agar colonies in Morse code.

The first to master Basic English syntax was Proteus orator mirabilis
64; on the other hand, E. coli eloquentissima continued to make
grammatical errors even after 21,000 generations. But the moment the
genetic code of those bacteria assimilated the rules of grammar,
signaling in Morse became one of its characteristic vital functions:
this led to the writing of microbe-transmitted news. At first it was not
especially interesting. R. Gulliver wanted to give the bacteria some
leading questions, but the establishment of two-way communication proved
impossible. The cause of the fiasco he explains as follows: it is not
that the bacteria articulate, but that the genetic code articulates
through them, and this code does not inherit traits individually
acquired by particular individuals. The code expresses itself, but while
producing statements it is unable to receive any. That is inherited
behavior, inasmuch as it is consolidated in the struggle for existence;
the messages emitted by the genetic code, grouping the coli colonies in
Morse signs, are reasonable but at the same time silly, which is best
illustrated by a long-familiar method of bacterial reaction: in
producing penicillinase to protect themselves from the effect of
penicillin, they are behaving reasonably, but at the same time
unconsciously. So R. Gulliver's communicative strains did not cease to
be "ordinary bacteria," and the merit of the experimenter was the
creation of conditions that implanted eloquence in the heredity of
mutated strains.                                                       
     

So bacteria speak, though it is impossible to speak to them. This
limitation is less disastrous than one might think, since precisely
because of it there appeared, in time, that linguistic property of germs
which lay at the basis of eruntics.

R. Gulliver had not expected it at all; he discovered it by accident, in
the course of new experiments aimed at breeding E. coli poetica. The
short verses composed by the colon bacillus were extremely banal and
unsuitable for recitation, since—for obvious reasons—bacteria know
nothing about English phonetics. Hence they could master the meter of
verse, but not the rules of rhyming; bacterial poetry produced nothing
beyond a couplet of the type "Agar agar is my love as were* stated
above." As sometimes happens, luck rushed to Gulliver's aid. He varied
their nutriment, searching for means of inspiring the bacteria to
greater eloquence, and filling their bed with preparations whose
chemical composition (nota bene) he has kept secret. Lengthy verbiage
immediately ensued. Finally on November 27, after a new mutation, E.
coli loquativa began to issue stress signals, though nothing indicated
that there were any noxious compounds in the agar. However, the
following day, twenty-nine hours after the alarm, some plaster above the
laboratory table fell from the ceiling and crushed all the petri dishes
on the table. The author first took this strange event to be a
coincidence, but just to be sure he conducted a control experiment which
proved that premonitions were a characteristic of those bacteria. By now
the first new tribe—Gulliveria coli prophetica—was predicting the future
fairly well, that is to say, it was endeavoring to adapt to any
unfavorable changes that were to threaten it during the next twenty-four
hours. xii The author believed that he discovered nothing absolutely
new, but merely picked up by accident the trail of a primeval mechanism
characteristic of the heredity of microbes, which enables them to parry
effectively the bactericidal techniques of medicine. Yet as long as
bacteria remained mute, we had no inkling that such a mechanism might
even exist.

The author's supreme achievement was the breeding of Gulliveria coli
prophetissima and Proteus delphicus recte mirabilis. These strains
predict the future, and not only within the range of occurrences
affecting their own vegetation. R. Gulliver believes that the mechanism
of this phenomenon is of a purely physical nature. Bacteria assemble as
colonies in dots and dashes, since this procedure is already a normal
property of their proliferation characteristics; they are not a
"Cassandra bacillus" or "Proteus prophet" making utterances concerning
future events. They are merely constellations of physical occurrences in
a form still so embryonic and minute that we are unable to detect them
by any means, and which have acquired an influence on the metabolism—and
therefore the chemism—of those mutated strains. The biochemical action
of Gulliveria coli prophetissima behaves then as a transmitter linking
various space-time intervals. Bacteria are a hypersensitive receiver of
certain likelihoods, and nothing more. Bacterial futurology has
admittedly become a reality, though it is fundamentally unpredictable in
its consequences, since the future-tracking behavior of bacteria cannot
be controlled.

Sometimes Proteus mirabilis depicts numerical sequences in Morse code,
and it is very difficult to determine what they refer to. Once it
predicted the laboratory electricity meter reading a half year in
advance. Once it forecast how many kittens the neighbor's cat would
have. Bacteria are obviously completely indifferent, when it comes to
predictions; they stand in the same relation to their Morse
transmissions as a radio receiver to its signals. One can at least see
why they xiii predict incidents relevant to their vegetation; on the
other hand, their sensitivity to other categories of events remains an
enigma. They might have picked up the cracking of the ceiling plaster
owing to changes in the electrostatic charges in the atmosphere of the
laboratory, or possibly as a result of the intervention of other
physical phenomena. But the author does not know why they also transmit
news concerning, for example, the world after the year 2050.

His next task was to distinguish between bacterial
pseudology—irresponsible verbiage—and solid predictions, and he
accomplished this in a manner as ingenious as it was simple, by setting
up "parallel prognostic batteries," called bacterial eruntors. A battery
is composed of at least sixty prophetic strains of coli and Proteus. If
each of them says something different, the signaling has to be
acknowledged as worthless. If, however, the statements are in accord,
prognoses can be made. Placed in separate thermostats and petri dishes,
they articulate in Morse the same or very similar texts. In the course
of two years the author collected an anthology of bacterial futurology,
and with the presentation of them he has crowned his work.

He obtained his best results thanks to strains of G. coli bibliographica
and telecognitiva. These are produced by enzymes such as futurase
plusquamperfectiva and excitine futurognostica. Through the action of
these enzymes predictive faculties can be acquired even by such coli
strains as E. poetica, which were capable of nothing beyond the
composition of feeble verse. Nevertheless, in their predictive behavior
bacteria are fairly limited. In the first place, they predict no events
directly, but only as if transmitting the contents of a publication
dealing with those events. In the second place, they are incapable of
prolonged concentration: their top efficiency extended to barely fifteen
sheets of types-xiv cript. In the third place, all the texts by
bacterial authors refer to the period betwen 2003 and 2089.

While fully acknowledging that these phenomena can be explained in
various ways, R. Gulliver plumps for his own hypothesis. Fifty years
from now a municipal library is to arise on the site of his present
holdings. The bacterial code is to be introduced indiscriminately into
the library, to be used for selecting random volumes from the shelves.
There are no volumes at the moment, to be sure, nor even a library,
though in his desire to strengthen the credibility of bacterial
predictions, R. Gulliver has already drawn up his will, by the terms of
which the town council is to convert his homestead into a library. It
cannot be said that he acted at the instigation of his microbes, but
rather the reverse: it was they who foresaw the contents of his will
before it had been drawn up.

To explain how germs acquired knowledge of the nonexistent books of a
still nonexistent library is a bit more difficult. We are helped by the
fact that microbe futurology is limited to fragments of works, namely,
their introductions. It looks as though some unknown factor (radiation?)
has penetrated closed books by X-raying them, as it were; naturally the
content of the first pages is the easiest to probe, as the ones that
follow are concealed by the thickness of the sheets preceding. These
explanations are far from precise. Besides, Gulliver admits that there
is a considerable difference between yesterday's cracking of the ceiling
plaster and the positioning of sentences on the pages of volumes to be
published fifty or eighty years hence. But, objective to the end, our
author does not arrogate exclusive rights to himself in explaining the
bases of eruntics: on the contrary, in his parting words he encourages
the readers to continue his efforts themselves.

This book overturns not only bacteriology, but the totality of our
knowledge of the world. We do not wish to pass judgment on it in the
present foreword, and take no position xv regarding the results of the
bacterial prophecies. However doubtful the value of eruntics, it must be
admitted that, among history forecasters, there have never been such
mortal enemies—and at the same time such inseparable partners in our
destiny—as microbes. It may not be irrelevant to add here that R.
Gulliver is no longer with us. He died only a few months after the
appearance of Eruntics, while instructing new students of
microbiological literature, namely cholera bacilli. He had been counting
on their competence, since, as the very name implies, the cholera comma
bacillus is connected via punctuation marks with correct stylistics. Let
us suppress our smile of mournful compassion produced by the conclusion
that this was a senseless death, since thanks to it his will acquired
legal force, and the base of the library wall already holds the
cornerstone and, at the same time, the tombstone of one who is for us
today merely an eccentric. Yet who knows what he may become tomorrow?

 

 

Juan Rambellais • Jean-Marie Annax - Eino

Illmainen-Stewart Allporte - Giuseppe Savarini -

Yves Bonnecourt-Hermann Pockelein-Alois

Kuentrich - Roger Gatzky

A HISTORY OF BITIC LITERATURE

IN FIVE VOLUMES

Second, enlarged edition by Prof. J. Rambellais VOLUME ONE

PRESSES UNIVERSITAIRES PARIS 2009

Introduction

1. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

By bitic literature we mean any work of nonhuman origin—one whose real
author is not a human being. (He may have been the author indirectly,
however, by performing the functions which generated the real author's
acts of creation.) The discipline which studies the entire class of such
writing is bitistics.

There is still no uniformity of opinion as to the dimensions of this
research field. In this paramount issue there are two opposing trends or
schools, commonly known as Old World (or European) and New World (or
American) bitistics. The first school, which operates in the spirit of
the classical humanities, studies texts as well as the environmental
(social) conditioning of their authors, but is not concerned with these
authors' functionally structural side. The second school, the American,
treats bitistics as also including the anatomy and functional aspects of
the makers of the works under study.

Our monograph will not enter into the debate on this controversial
problem, so we shall make only a brief comment regarding the matter. The
silence of the traditional humanities concerning the ' 'anatomy and
physiology' ' of authors is based on the obvious fact that these
authors, who are always people, differ from one another only as beings
of the same species may do so. Thus, as Professor Rambellais says, it
would be nonsense in romance philology to make an introductory diagnosis
to the effect that the author of Tristan and Iseut or The Song of Roland
was a multicellular organism of the order of land vertebrates, a mammal
which is viviparous, pneumobranchiate, placental, and the like. On the
other hand, it is not nonsense to specify that ILLIAC 164, the author of
Antikant, is a semotopological, serially parallel, subluminal, initially
polyglot computer of the 19th binasty, with a maximum intellectronic
potential of 10¹⁰ epsilon-sems per millimeter of n- dimension
con-figurational space of utilizable channels, with a net-alienated
memory and a monolanguage of internal procedures of the type uniling.
This is because these data explain certain concrete properties of the
texts of which the aforementioned illiac is the author.

Still, as Professor Rambellais maintains, bitistics must not occupy
itself with this technical (in the case of human beings we should say
zoological) side of authors' characters, and for two reasons. The first,
practical and less important, is that a consideration of the aforesaid
anatomy demands an unusually extensive knowledge of a technical and
mathematical type, which in its full range is inaccessible even to
particular specialists in the theory of automata, since an expert
acquainted with that theory is well informed only about the one branch
of it in which he has specialized. Thus one cannot demand from exponents
of bitistics, who are humanists by training and method, something which
cannot be obtained as a whole even from specialists in intellectronics.
Consequently, the maximalism of the American school obliges it to pursue
its studies in large mixed teams, which always produces disastrous
results, since no collection or "chorus" of critics can eifectively
replace a simple critic with a complete grasp of the text under study.

The second, more important, and basic reason is simply that the
introduction of corrections or supplements of an anatomical type in
bitistics brings it to a standstill, whenever it concentrates on texts
of "bitic apostasy" (which we shall discuss later). All the knowledge of
intellectronics specialists is insufficient to understand fully how,
why, and to what end a particular author has created a particular text,
if the author comes from any binasty of computers of a serial number
greater than eighteen.

To these arguments American bitistics opposes its own counterarguments;
however, as we have already declared, our monograph does not propose to
give a thorough description of this dispute, much less resolve it.

2. DESCRIPTION OF THE WORK.

Our monograph attempts a compromise between the positions stated above,
though on the whole it inclines to the side of the European school. This
is reflected in its structure, for only the first volume, edited by
Professor Annax with the participation of twenty-seven experts from
various specializations, is devoted to the technical aspects of computer
authors. That volume opens with an introduction to the general theory of
finite automata; in subsequent chapters it discusses forty-five writer
systems, both individual (simple) and joint ("author-aggregates").

It must be emphasized all the same that, excepting the references
designated by an asterisk in the main volumes of the History of Bitic
Literature, the study of it does not necessarily require a familiarity
with the first volume.

The main or essential part of the monograph consists of three volumes
entitled Homotropia, Intertropia, and Heterotropia, and follows the
universally accepted system of classification which is simultaneously
dia-chronic and synchronic in character, since the three main divisions
of bitic literature, encompassed by the three titles, are at the same
time three successive periods of its origin and development. The table
below presents an outline of the whole of the work.

BITIC LITERATURE

(after Allporte, Illmainen, and Savarini)

I. Homotropia* (homotropic, cis-human phase; also "simulative" or
"anthropomicric")

A.  Germinal stage (embryonic or prelinguistic): Paralexics
(Neologenesis)

Semolalia Semautics

B.  Linguistic stage ("comprehending," according to All-porte):

Interpolative mimesis

Extrapolative mimesis

Controlled transcendent mimesis ("programmatically excessive")

II. Intertropia (also "critical phase" or "interregnum")

III. Heterotopia (apostasy, transhuman phase)

In its genetic expression, bitistics appeared as the resultant of at
least three substantially independent processes: first, crossing the
so-called intelligence barrier, which was above all the work of the
designers; next, something which the latter neither intended nor, still
less, projected—the autoregenerative work of systems (beginning with the
17th binasty), or so-called "relaxationally active standstills"; and
finally, the relations which gradually crystallized between the machines
and people, representing the results of a "mutual concern with and
recognition of possibilities as well as limitations on both sides" (Yves
Bonnecourt). The intelligence barrier unsuccessfully assaulted by early
cybernetics is, as we know incontrovertibly, a fiction. It is a fiction
in the (unexpected) sense that its transcendence by machines is
impossible to identify. The transitions from "unthinking," "chattering"
machines "working purely formally" to "thinking," "speaking" machines
showing "insight" occur in smooth stages. Though the categories of
"mechanical automaticity" and "intellectual sovereignty" are still
valid, we realize that no precisely delimitable boundary separates the
two.

The relaxational output of machines was first observed and recorded
almost thirty years ago. It turned out to be a purely technical
necessity that the prototypes (beginning with the 15th binasty) should
be provided with rest periods during which their activity did not come
to a standstill but, deprived of programmed directives, manifested
itself as a peculiar "mumble." That at least is how their verbal or
quasi-mathematical production was then interpreted; the name "machine
dreams" was even generally accepted for it. According to current
opinion, the machines had to have active rest to enable them to
regenerate and then return to normal full efficiency, just as such a
phase—sleep, together with the reveries (dreams) typical of it—is
necessary for human beings. The designation "bitic production," used
then for these "chatterings" and "dreams," was therefore disparaging and
disrespectful: as if without rhyme or reason, the machines ground out
"bits of all the information contained within them" and by this method
of "shuffling" were supposed to recover their partially lost efficiency.
We adopted the name, although it was obviously inappropriate. We adopted
it in accordance with the historical tradition of all scientific
nomenclature: a random example—"thermodynamics"—reveals an analogous
inappropriateness, since the scope of contemporary thermodynamics is not
the same as it was for earlier physicists who coined the term. Indeed,
thermodynamics is not concerned solely with the thermal activity of
matter, just as, in referring to bitic literature, we do not mean just
the "bits," i.e., units of nonsemantic information. Pouring new wine
into old bottles is, however, a general practice of science.

The mutual acquaintance of machines and human beings led over the years
to a more and more explicit division of bitistics into two basic
provinces, to which the terms creatio cis-humana and trans-humana
correspond.

The first embraces literature which is the result of the coexistence of
machines and human beings, that is, of the simple fact that, in
implanting our ethnic language and structural languages in them, we have
also harnessed them to our brainwork in the whole sphere of culture and
natural science, as well as the deductive disciplines (logic and
mathematics). Nonetheless bitic creativity, whose direct cause and
animating agent is the transmission to nonhuman authors of typically
human problems in the field of learning and the fine arts, is divided in
turn into two fairly distinct subspheres. For a linguistic product
obtained through planned control— which may, to use Professor
Kuentrich's visual image, be called an "order" (that is, the immediate
direction of the machines to a range of questions or themes chosen by
us)—is one thing, while a linguistic product which no human being has
"ordered," and which admittedly arose under the influence of earlier
stimuli (or program-mings), but constitutes the manifestation of by now
spontaneous activity, is quite another. And yet, whether bitic texts
thus engendered resulted from a direct or indirect cause, their
connection with typically human problems constitutes an essential,
indeed a chief, trait: and so cis-humana bitistics studies both genres
of these texts.

And it was only the granting to machines of facilities for creative
freedom with no discipline, program, rules, or limitations that
gradually led to the separation of their (so-called "later") creativity
from typically anthropomorphic and anthropological influences. In the
course of this evolution bitic literature began imperceptibly to offer
us, its likely recipients, growing resistance and assimilative
difficulties. For divisions of nonhuman bitistics (in the trans-humana
sense) now exist which attempt to understand (analyze, interpret,
explain) bitic texts which in varying degrees are unintelligible to
humans.

Obviously we can always try to employ some machines to interpret the
works of other machines. But the quantity of cells necessary to enable
us to understand bitic texts which are the extremes of "apostasy"—
deviations from our norms for the creation, understanding, and
explanation of meaning—will increase as one receives increasingly
difficult texts to interpret. And as this increase becomes exponential,
it ultimately pre-eludes our acquiring even a vague knowledge of the
content of this "culminating apostasy/' thus signifying practically the
total helplessness of the human race in relation to literature, which
humans after all indirectly originated.

Some speak in this context of the sorcerer's apprentice who unleashed
forces beyond his control. This term is a form of resignation, for which
science has no place. Bitic literature is surrounded by a very abundant
body of pro- and contrabitic writing; it is full of desperate judgments
articulating symptoms of depression, terror, and also shock at the fact
that man has created something that has surpassed him intellectually as
well.

However, it must be emphatically stated that bitistics as a scientific
discipline cannot itself be the place for expressing views of this type,
which belong to the philosophy of nature, man, and his works (nonhuman
as well). We agree with Roger Gatzky that bitistics has neither more nor
fewer grounds for despair than cosmology, for example: it is obvious
that, no matter how long we humans exist, and likewise no matter what
intellectual assistance we may expect from cognitive machines, we shall
not totally exhaust the universe and thus shall not totally comprehend
it, though astrophysicists, cosmologists, and cosmogonists would never
think of complaining about such a very unalterable state of things.

The whole difference is that we are not the originators of the
Universum, but bitic production is surely—if indirectly—our work. Yet
one wonders where in fact the idea originated that man can accept the
inexhaustibility of the Universum with complete equanimity, but cannot
accept with the same objective equanimity the inexhaustibility of
something which he himself has created. 3. CRUCIAL DIVISIONS OF
BITISTICS. Explanations and detailed descriptions, together with a
descriptive bibliography of the subject, are supplied by our monograph
in the appropriate piaces. However, a bird's-eye view of the main
divisions of bitistics would appear desirable; such a description can in
no way replace a detailed exposition, but it is something by way of an
abbreviated guide through a much-partitioned region where it is easy to
lose one's way. Still, it is proper to point out that the main sections
of bitistics described below are given in a greatly simplified form,
repeatedly verging on a distortion of the central issue.

Our survey—being, as we have said, of a preliminary nature—concentrates
on only the four "peaks" of bitic literature, namely monoetics₉ mimesis,
sophocrisis, and apostasy. In point of fact, these terms are already
obsolete; in present-day nomenclature their rough equivalents would be:
homotropia (in its first part), exact mimesis, critique of philosophy,
and bitic creation, of which the last lies outside the limits of our
comprehension. Nevertheless, the nomenclature rejected today had the
virtue of clarity, and we are particularly anxious to keep our initial
explanations straightforward.

A. Graeve, Gulbransson, and Fradkin—who are numbered among the creators,
the "fathers" of bitistics— saw monoetics as the earliest phase of
bitism. (The name derives from monos, "single," and poesis, "creating.")
Monoetics owes its origin to the instruction of machines in the
principles of word formation. The harmony of these principles determines
what was once commonly called the "spirit" of a given language.

An actively used, historically created language employs the principles
of word formation with very definite restrictions, though on the whole
those who use the language are by no means aware of them. Not until we
had machines whose practical restrictions in word formation were
thoroughly unknown, could we obtain an insight into all those chances
which language ignores in its evolution. The simplest illustration would
be to present a handful of examples gathered from the second volume of
our History, chiefly from the chapters Para-lexics, SemauticSy and
Semolalia.

(a)  Machines may use expressions existing in a language and assign them
other than the accepted meanings: thoroughfare: a large meal; piglet: a
filthy rooming house; horseman: centaur; knee guard: dwarf sentinel;
princeling: royal fish; carnivore: Mardi gras prostitute; flabbergast:
sagging stomach; skinflint: stone facing.

(b)  Machines also create neologisms along so-called semantic axes. We
have purposely chosen examples of this creativity not all of which
require detailed dictionary-type explanations:

tartlet, screwball, bedrabbled (read: bed rabbled), layette, claptrap;
anteater, bugbear (bird feeding its brood); fistigob, slapyap, slugmug;
arithmeticker, summer, cipheretor (computer); suspenser (chair lift);
deathsign (memento rnori); gladland (paradise); sea slicer (sawfish);
etc.

Any comic effect is clearly unintended. Also, these are elementary
examples, though characterized by distinctive bitic features which
persist—though much harder to discern—in later stages of development as
well. The whole fact of the matter is that, whereas for us the real
thing is the world, for the machines the first and foremost actuality is
language. The computer, to which the categories that culture imposes on
language were still alien, "thought" that "little prostitute" is the
same thing as "tartlet," "screwball," etc. Hence, too, those
characteristic corruptions: "horseman" is by now a classic textbook
example of the formation of an agglomeration of meanings and
morphological aspects, for here we have a mating of "horse," "man," and
as it were a coupling from the region of semantics, "centaur," because,
since a horse cannot be a man, it must be half horse, half man.

A computer at this (linguistically very low) level of development knows
no limits to its word formation, and the economy of expression
characteristic of machine thinking, which subsequently created nonlinear
deduction and the so-called "star" concepts of terraphysics, here
appears as a proposal for putting the resident terms of a language, such
as "word" and "wordy," on an equal footing with the like of "wordwork"
(verse), "wordiot" (graphomaniac), "wordsteal" (plagiarism), "wordlouse"
(cad), etc. For these very reasons the lexical generator proposes that
"dogmobile" should denote an Eskimo sledge team, and "disc-comfort" the
pain occasioned by a slipped disc.

Formerly known as monoetes, the one-word creations cited above were
produced in part by imperfect programming, and in part by the intention
of programmers interested in the word-formative expansion of machines;
yet it is only proper to observe that many such neologisms only seem to
be of machine provenance. For example, we cannot be certain whether
"lunatic asylum" was christened "dimocracy" by a computer, or whether it
was a human humorist's joke.

Monoetics is an important field because we can discern in it those
creative features of machines which disappear from our field of vision
in subsequent phases. It is the threshold of bitistics, or its
kindergarten. This output has a reassuring effect on many a student who,
prepared for contact with texts concise to the point of
incomprehensibility, is relieved to discover such innocent and amusing
works. But this satisfaction does not long suffice! The unintentional
humor arises from a collision of categories which we consider to be
permanently separate; the reinforcement of programs by categorial
principles carries us into the next sphere of bitistics (though still
called prebitistics by some researchers), in which machines begin to
unmask our language, tracking down in it turns of speech which are the
consequence of man's bodily structure.

Thus, for example, the notions of "elevation" and "abasement"
derive—according to the machine interpretation, not ours!—from the fact
that every living organism and therefore man as well has to counteract
universal gravitation by means of active muscular exertion. The body
appears as the link through which the gravitational gradient leaves its
impression in our language. A systematized analysis of speech, laying
bare the whole extent to which similar influences have been uprooted not
only in the world of ideas but even in syntax, can be found at the end
of Chapter 8 of Volume II. In Volume III, on the other hand, we
introduce models of languages projected bitically for environments
different from that of Earth, as well as for nonanthropoidal organisms.
One of them, invart, was used by mentor II in composing Lampoon upon the
Universe (mentioned below).

B. Mimesis is that field of bitic production which has revealed to us
hitherto unknown mechanisms of intellectual creation, while also
becoming a truly formidable invasion of the world of man's intellectual
works. It arose historically as an incidental and unforeseen phenomenon
during the machine translation of texts. The latter requires the
processing of information step by step and in various ways. The closest
contacts ought to occur between systems of ideas, and not of words or
sentences; machine translations from language to language are superb
nowadays because the aggregates which carry them out are not collective
but merely "aim," as it were, at the same original text from various
sides. The text is subjected to "extraction" in machine language (the
"go-between"), and it is only from these "pressings" that the machines
make a projection into "inner conceptual space." Within it an "n-echo
Body of Abstractions" emerges which is to the original as an organism is
to an embryo; the projection from that "organism" into the language of
translation gives the expected result.

However, this process takes a more intricate course than we have
described here, because, for one thing, the quality of translation is
constantly checked by re-translation (translation backward from the
"organism" to the language of the original). So the translating
aggregate is composed of machines which are able to "communicate" solely
through the process of translation. H. Ellias and T. Semmelberg made the
astonishing discovery that the "n-body of Abstractions," being a text
already interpreted—that is, assimilated seman-tically by a machine—can
be seen as a whole if that abstract creation is put into the requisite
electron appliance (a semascope).

Visually, the "body of abstractions" nestled in its conceptual continuum
appears as a complicated, many-shelled, aperiodic, and variably
synchronous mass, woven of "burning threads"—that is, billions of
"significant curves." These curves together yield the plane of cuttings
of the semantic continuum. Turning to the illustrations in Volume II,
the reader will find a series of semascopic photographs which produce a
rather striking effect when brought together and compared. As they
demonstrate, the quality of the original text has a definite equivalent
in the "aesthetically" of the geometric "semature"!

Furthermore, even with little experience one can distinguish at sight
discursive texts from artistic (belle-tristic, poetic) ones; religious
texts almost without exception strongly resemble artistic ones, whereas
philosophical ones reveal a wide diversity in this, the visual, aspect.
It is not much of an exaggeration to say that projections of texts deep
in the machine continuum are their expansively set meanings. Texts which
are strongly collective as regards logic appear as tightly bound bundles
and clusters of "significant curves." (This is not the place to explain
their connection with the sphere of recurring functions, which is
discussed in Chapter 10 of Volume II.)

Texts of literary composition of an allegorical character present the
most original aspect: their central sema-ture is usually surrounded by a
pale "halo," and at both its sides ("poles") one can see "echo
repetitions" of meanings, recalling at times the interferential images
of luminous rays. As we shall mention again, this congealed phenomenon
made possible the criticism of constructs—of all of mankind's
intellectual structures and his philosophical systems first and
foremost.

The first work of bitic mimesis to gain world renown was a novel by
Pseudodostoevsky, The Girl (Devochka). It was composed during a phase of
relaxation by a multimember aggregate whose assignment was to translate
into English the collected works of the Russian writer. In his memoirs
the distinguished scholar of Russian literature John Raleigh describes
the shock he experienced upon receiving the Russian typescript of a
composition signed with what he took to be the singular pseudonym of
hyxos. The impression which the work created on this Dostoevsky expert
must have been truly indescribable in its intensity, if, as he admits,
he doubted whether he was in a conscious state! The authenticity of the
work was for him beyond a doubt, although he knew Dostoevsky had not
written such a novel.

Despite what the press disseminated on this topic, the translating
aggregate, having digested all of Dostoevsky's texts together with his
Diary of a Writer and the literature on the subject, had in no way
constructed a phantom, a model, or a machine reincarnation of the
personality of a real creator.

The theory of mimesis is very complex, but its fundamentals—as well as
the circumstances which made possible that phenomenal display of mimetic
virtuosity— can be expressed simply. Neither the person nor the
personality of Dostoevsky was of any interest to the machine translator
(nor could they be, after all). It comes about that, in the space of
meanings, a work of Dostoevsky's develops into a curved mass, recalling
in its overall structure an open torus, that is, a "broken ring" (with a
gap). Thus it was a relatively simple task (for machines, of course, not
for people!) to close that gap, inserting the missing link.

It may be said that a semantic gradient runs along the main thoroughfare
of Dostoevsky's works, and that The Girl is its continuation and at the
same time its termination. It is precisely because of these
interrelations of the great writer's works that the experts have no
doubt whatsoever as to where—between which novels—De-vochka belongs. The
leitmotiv, already marked in Crime and Punishment, intensifies in The
Possessed, and between this work and The Brothers Karamazov a "gap
opens." It was a success as well as a happy coincidence of mimesis, for
later attempts to stimulate the translators to analogous creation as
regards other authors never again produced such magnificent results.

Mimesis has nothing to do with the biographically detectable sequence in
which a given writer's works originated. Thus Dostoevsky left unfinished
manuscripts of a novel, The Emperor, but the machines could never have
"thought it through" or "got on its track," because in this novel he
attempted to exceed his own capabilities. As for The Girl, apart from
the original version by hyxos, there now exist variants prepared by
other aggregates, though the experts consider them less successful; the
differences in composition have naturally turned out to be considerable,
though in all these apocryphas there is an identical problem—one leading
to a heart-rending climax characteristic of Dostoevsky —that of holiness
grappling with the sins of the flesh.

Everyone who has read The Girl is aware of the reasons which would have
made it impossible for Dostoevsky to write it. Of course, having said
all that, we are —by the standards of the traditional
humanities—uttering downright blasphemy, inasmuch as we are equating
machine forgery with authentic creation. But bitistics is an inevitable
infringement on the canon of classical values and evaluations, wherein
the authenticity of the text is of paramount importance. We are
contriving to prove that Devochka constitutes a work of Dostoevsky's to
a higher degree than his own text, The Emperor.

The general rule of mimesis is as follows: if a given author has
completely exploited what is for him the central configuration of
creative meanings (the "life obsession")—or, in bitic nomenclature, "the
space of its sematures"—mimesis will supply nothing further on this axis
save derivative (decadent, echo) texts. If, however, he has left
something "unsaid" (e.g., for biological reasons, because he died
prematurely, or for social ones, because he did not dare to), mimesis
can produce the missing links. To be sure, the final success will also
be decided by the topology of a given writer's sematures; in this regard
we differentiate between divergent and convergent sematures.

The ordinary critical study of texts gives no firm grounds for judging
the likelihood of mimesis in a given instance. Thus literature
specialists reckoned on a mimetic continuation of Kafka's authorship,
but their hopes were frustrated; we have obtained nothing except the
final chapters of The Castle. Anyway, for bitists the Kafka casus is
cognitively especially valuable, since an analysis of his semature shows
that with The Castle he had already reached the limits of creative
possibilities: further work carried out at Berkeley on three occasions
revealed how the machine apocryphas "drown" in the falling,
multishelled, "echoed reverberations of meaning" which constitute the
objective expression of the extreme position of this authorship. In
point of fact, what readers instinctively take to be "felicity of
composition" is the result of an equilibrium termed semas-tase; if the
allegorizing is too preponderant, a text tends to be unreadable. The
physical equivalent is a space so vaulted that a voice resounding in it
undergoes distortion to the point of being smothered in the torrent of
echoed reverberations from every direction.

Such limitations of mimesis are undoubtedly favorable to culture. After
all, publication of The Girl created panic not only in literary circles.
There was no lack of Cassandras predicting that ''mimesis would crush
culture," and proclaiming that the "machine invasion" into the heart of
human values was more destructive and nightmarish than any imaginary '
'invasions from outer space."

These people feared the use of a creative services industry, turning
culture into a nightmare paradise where any consumer, acting on any whim
whatsoever, could receive masterpieces instantly produced by machine
succubi and incubi unerringly transformed into the spirit of
Shakespeare, Leonardo, Dostoevsky, as a result of which our hierarchies
of values would have collapsed, since we would have been wading through
masterpieces as through trash. Fortunately we need give this apocalypse
no credit at all.

Once it had become an industry, mimesis led to unemployment, but solely
among manufacturers of trivial literature (sci-fi, porn, thrillers, and
the like): there indeed it supplanted humans in the supply of
intellectual goods—which ought not to cause an honest humanist too much
despair.

C. The critique of systematic philosophy (or sopho-crisis) is recognized
as a transitional zone between areas of bitistics designated cis-human
and transhuman. This critique, based in principle on a logical
reconstruction of the writings of the great philosophers, is derived (as
already mentioned) from mimetic procedures. It is only right to remark
that it has earned itself a reputation for vulgarity, thanks to the use
made of it by certain profit-hungry manufacturers. So long as the
ontologies of the Aristotles, Hegels, and Aquinases could be admired in
the British Museum alone, like glittering ''cocoon masses" set
(luminously) in blocks of dark glaze, it was difficult to detect any
harm in this spectacle.

Now, however, when the Summa Theologica or Critique of Pure Reason can
be purchased in any size or color, this amusement has acquired an
offensive aftertaste. It behooves one to wait patiently until the
fashion passes, like thousands of others. Obviously, anyone who has
bought Kant Set in Amber cares little for the revelations with which the
bitic apocrisis has provided us in philosophy. We shall not summarize
the results here, but refer the reader to the third volume of the
monograph; suffice it to observe that semascopy indeed constitutes a new
aptitude for looking at the great intellectual totalities—an aptitude
unexpectedly bestowed on us by the spirit of the machine.

Nor should we disregard the fact that the assurances of the greatest
scientists concerning the role of the guiding star which the pure
aesthetics of a mathematical construct played in their exploratory
efforts—assurances to which we have hitherto had to give blind
credence—can now be verified visually, taking their congealed thoughts
in hand, to bring them closer to our eyes. Of course there are no
automatic consequences for the further development of thought from the
fact that ten volumes of higher algebra or the age-old war between
nominalism and universalism can be crystallized into a fist-sized piece
of glass. Bitic creativity impedes human creation as much as it
simplifies it.

One thing, however, can be said with absolute certainty. Before the use
of machine intelligence no thinker or author ever had such ardent,
unfailingly attentive, and uncompromising readers! That is why, in the
cry that burst from the lips of a certain first-rate thinker when he was
offered, by mentor v, a critique of his work—"This one has really read
me!"—there was so much of the frustration typical of the present day,
when humbug and perfunctorily acquired erudition replace genuine
knowledge. The thought that has haunted me while writing these
works—that it is not human beings who will be my most conscientious
readers—is indeed full of bitter irony.

D. The term apostasy given to the last bitic sphere appears felicitous.
Never has deviation from that which is human gone so far, nor has it
been incorporated into a line of reasoning with such cool passion. For
this literature, which has taken nothing from us apart from language,
humanity appears not to exist.

The transhumans' bibliography surpasses all the other domains of
bitistics already mentioned. It is the meeting point of paths secretly
marked out in earlier fields. We can in practice divide apostasy into
two levels, lower and upper. Access to the lower level is generally well
maintained; the upper one is barred to us. That is why our fourth volume
is a guide to the lower state almost exclusively. This volume is a
meager extract from an enormous body of writing, hence the difficult
position of the foreword writer, who is supposed to introduce even more
concisely something which is already essentially an abridgement. Yet
such an introduction appears necessary, as a view from above; otherwise,
lacking a broader perspective, the reader will easily get lost in the
difficult terrain, like a wanderer in mountains whose highest summits
cannot be properly judged at short distance. Keeping in mind such
recommendations and doubts, from each of the divisions of apostasy I
shall take a single bitic text, not so much to interpret it as to attune
the reader, as it were, to the process of apostasy.

We shall therefore confine ourselves to samples taken from the following
provinces of the lower state: an-timatics, terraphysics, and ontomachy.

As an introduction to them we have the so-called Cogito paradox. The
first person to pick up its trail was Alan Turing, an English
mathematician of the last century who recognized that a machine behaving
like a person cannot possibly be distinguished from a person in mental
respects—in other words, that a machine capable of conversing with a
person must by necessity be credited with consciousness. We consider
that other people have consciousness only because we ourselves perceive
it. If we did not experience it, we would be unable to imagine anything
under this concept.

During the course of machine evolution it became evident, however, that
an unthinking intellect can be constructed: it is used, for example, in
an ordinary chess game program, which as we know understands nothing,
does not care whether it wins or loses the match, and (in a word)
unconsciously but logically beats its human opponents. What's more, it
has been shown that when a primitive and undoubtedly "soulless" computer
programmed to conduct psychotherapy asks a patient appropriate questions
of an intimate nature in order to make a diagnosis and offer treatment,
this machine makes a profound impression on its human interlocutors, as
if it were a living person after all. This impression is so intense as
sometimes to be felt even by the person who has done the programming—a
professional who knows perfectly well that the mechanism in question
possesses as much soul as a gramophone. The programmer may still take
control of the situation—that is, may tear himself away from the growing
delusion of being in contact with a conscious individual—by giving the
machine the kind of questions or replies with which, given the
limitations of the programming, it couldn't possibly cope.

In this way cybernetics embarked on a course leading to the gradual
extension and improvement of programs, through which, with the passage
of time, it became a harder and harder task to "tear off the mask"—that
is, to discover the mindlessness of the procedures emitted by the
machine and, by precisely this means, to discover the projection
compelling man to react. (This projection occurs unconsciously according
to an assumption, ingrained in us by force of habit, that if someone
consciously refers to our words and addresses himself to us sensibly,
then that someone must be endowed with conscious intelligence.)

So the Cogito paradox made itself known to us in bitistics in an ironic
and at the same time startling manner: as despair on the part of
machines as to whether people really think! The situation suddenly
acquired a perfect bilateral symmetry. We humans are unable to achieve
complete certainty (as a proof) as to whether a machine thinks and, in
thinking, experiences its states as mental ones—since conceivably one
may be dealing with nothing more than an externally perfect simulation
whose internal correlative is a kind of void of total "soul-lessness.,,
For their part, machines are similarly unable to obtain proof of whether
we, as their partners, think consciously—as they do. Neither side knows
what experiential states the other subsumes under the label
"consciousness."

It should be pointed out that this paradox has the character of an
abyss, although at first it may appear merely amusing. The very quality
of the intellectual results here prejudges nothing: rudimentary automata
of the last century were already beating their own constructors at games
of logic, and those were unusually primitive machines; so we know with
complete certainty that whatever results from creative thinking can be
attained in another—unthinking—way as well. The treatises of two bitic
authors—noon and lumentor—on problems of the Cogito paradox open the
fourth volume of our monograph and reveal how deeply this enigma is
rooted in the nature of the world.

From antimatics, which is a nightmarish mathematics of antimonies, we
shall take (by way of example) only one downright crushing
pronouncement, one that terrifies every specialist and smacks of
complete madness: "the concept of a natural number is internally
contradictory." This means that no number is equal to itself! According
to the antimaticians (who are machines, of course), Peano's axiomatics
are incorrect, not because they are internally self-contradictory, but
because they are not perfectly suited to the world in which we exist.
For, in common with the next type of bitic apostasy, terraphysics (i.e.,
"monstrous physics"), antimatics postulates an irremovable adhesion of
thought and the world. Authors like algeran and styx concentrate their
attack on zero. According to them, zeroless arithmetic can be
constructed in our world in an uncontradictory manner. Zero is the
cardinal number of all empty sets, but according to these authors the
concept of an "empty set" must always be confined in the antinomy of the
liar. "No such thing as nothing exists"—with this motto from the work of
STYX, the time has come for us to conclude our description of the
antimatic heresy; otherwise we shall get lost in argument.

The oddest product of terraphysics—and who knows, perhaps the one that
promises the most to knowledge —is reckoned to be the so-called
Polyversum hypothesis. According to it the Cosmos is dual and we,
together with the matter comprising the suns, stars, planets, and our
bodies, inhabit its "slow" half, the Bradyversum. It is "slow" because
movement is possible here at speeds ranging from the static up to
locally the highest, that of light. The other or "fast" half of the
Cosmos, the Tachyversum, is reached via the light barrier. To get to the
Tachyversum, it is necessary to exceed the speed of light: in our world
this is an omnipresent frontier separating each spot from another region
of existence.

Dozens of years ago physicists advanced the hypothesis of the tachions,
particles which move solely at velocities greater than that of light. No
one managed to find them, although it is they which—according to
terraphysics—constitute the Tachyversum. But in point of fact the
Tachyversum is composed of one such particle.

A tachion slowed to the speed of light would acquire infinitely great
energy, whereas in accelerating it loses energy, emitting it in the form
of radiation; when its velocity becomes infinitely great, its energy
falls to zero. So the tachion, moving at an infinite speed, is clearly
everywhere at the same time: as an omnipresent particle, it alone forms
the Tachyversum! And to speak more precisely, the greater its velocity,
the more omnipresent it becomes. The world formed from so singular an
omnipresence is filled, moreover, with the radiation which the tachion
constantly emits in speeding up, since it is during acceleration that it
loses energy. This world is the opposite of ours: here light is the
fastest movement, but there in the Tachyversum it is the slowest. In
becoming omnipresent, the tachion turns the Tachyversum into an ever
stiffer and more "solid" body, until finally it is so "everywhere" that
it presses on the light quanta and forces them back into itself.
Consequently it is subject to impediment and slows down. The slower it
moves, the greater the energy it acquires; when the brakes are applied
near zero, the tachion—approaching a state of infinite energy—explodes,
creating the Bradyversum.

Thus, viewed from our universe, the explosion occurred sometime and
created first the stars and then us. But if one views it from the
Tachyversum, it did not occur at all, since there exists no superior
time in which the occurrence of both Cosmoses could be included.

Their "natural" mathematics are almost reciprocals. In our slow world 1
+ 1 is practically equal to 2 [1 + 1 at 2]; only at its very limits,
when it approaches the speed of light, does 1 + 1 become equal to 1. In
the Tachyversum, on the other hand, 1 is almost equal to infinity [1 s
oo]. But, as the "monstrous doctors" themselves admit, this matter is
still unclear, insofar as the logic of a particular Universum (or
Polyversum!) is a rational concept only if pursued in this world, though
at present nobody knows what the chances are of intelligent systems (or
simply life) arising in the Tachyversum. In accordance with this
verdict, mathematics has limits imposed by the impassable barriers of
material existence, since to talk of our mathematics in a world with
laws other than the laws of our world is to talk nonsense.

Finally, as regards the last item of bitic apostasy, Lampoon upon the
Universe, I admit that I cannot summarize it. Yet that lengthy treatise,
a work of many volumes, is conceived as merely an introduction to
experimental cosmogenetics, i.e., the technology of making up worlds
"existentially more orderly" than ours. The revolt against existence in
given forms of duration, which is the opposite of every nihilism, of
every desire for self-annihilation—and in addition a product of the
machine soul, a flurry of projects for "another existence"—at first this
undoubtedly makes exotic reading, and if one can overcome the difficulty
of it, even aesthetically thrilling reading. To the question, what are
we actually in contact with?—with a fiction of logic or a logical
fiction? with a fantastic philosophy or a soundly thought-out, totally
objective endeavor to shatter and invalidate this existence here as a
fortuity, a shore onto which an unknown destiny has driven us, and from
which boldness commands us to shove off and move in an unknown
direction?—to the question whether these works are indeed nonhuman, or
whether it is by their apostasy that they serve us, I shall offer no
answer, for I have none.

 Introduction to the Second Edition

The three years that have passed since the appearance of the first
edition have brought many new bitic publications. However, the editorial
committee of our monograph has decided to retain its original outline,
while including several innovations referred to below. Thus the four
fundamental volumes of the History of Bitic Literature remain unchanged
in their basic composition and in the general arrangement of material;
on the other hand, additions have been made to the bibliography, and the
(relatively few) errors and omissions of the first edition have been
corrected.

Our committee has considered it desirable to devote a supplementary
fifth volume to literary works from the field of metaphysics, broadly
conceived, and from religious studies, which are known jointly as
theobitic literature. In the previous edition there were some fairly
inadequate extracts and references in this direction, located in the
Appendix to Volume IV. The rising flood of such output has induced us to
give it separate status, and since the Foreword to the first edition
says nothing about it, we are taking the opportunity to present briefly
the subject of this supplementary fifth volume and thereby show the
reader the crucial issues in theobitistics.

1. INFORMATIONAL THEOLOGY. At the end of the last decade a computer
group from Brookhaven undertook a formal analysis of all available
mystical writings accepted by the Catholic Church, as part of the
"Mysticism as a Channel of Communication" project. The foundations of
the study were the arguments offered by the Church for believing that,
in certain special states, mystics are able to communicate with God. The
texts by them, recording these inner experiences, were subjected to
scrutiny for the information they contain. The analysis did not touch on
the question of God's transcendence, nor on his immanent character (as a
person or nonper-son, for instance), since it wholly omitted the
substance of the mystical writings, that is, their semantic content. It
was thus unable to question the quality of the various revelations
disclosed in the mystical communications, for it took into consideration
solely the quantitative aspect of the information which the mystics had
acquired. Such a physical computation permits one to calculate with
mathematical precision the quantitative informational gain, totally
excluding its contents. A premise of the project was that axiom of
information theory which maintains that the establishment of contact
with a real source, that is, the creation of a transmitting channel,
must result in an increase in the quantity of information on the part of
the receivers.

The various definitions of God are the source of the dogma of his
infinity, which informationally denotes an infinitely great diversity.
(Which is easy to prove formally, since the omniscience ascribed to God
analytically implies such diversity, of the power of a continuum.) Thus
man in contact with God cannot possess infinite information, for he
himself is finite; he should, however, show at least a small increase of
information, limited by his receptivity. Yet on a numerical balance
sheet the writings of the mystics proved to be much more meager than the
statements of people who are in contact with real sources of
information—for example, researchers conducting scientific experiments.

The quantity of information in the writings of the mystics is precisely
equal to the quantity of information in the statements (writings) of
people fated to be generators of diversity exclusively for themselves.
The conclusion drawn from the project runs as follows: "The contact
postulated by the Church between the human mystic and God is not a
process in which man gains supra-zero information." This may indicate
either that the communication channel postulated by the Church is a
fiction, or that the channel indeed occurs, but that the Broadcaster
maintains continual silence. Only extra-physical reasons can induce us
to choose between the alternatives Silentium Domini/Non esse Domini We
have placed this work, together with the new theological
counterarguments, in the first part of the supplementary volume.

2. MATHEMATICAL THEOLOGY. The most original product of theobitistics is
a model of God which is sinusoidal and at the same time oscillating. God
becomes established axiomatically \as an alternating process, and not as
an unchanging state; he oscillates at a transcendental frequency between
infinities of opposing signs—Good and Evil. For every time interval (in
a physical sense) both these infinities are realized together, though
not simultaneously. For God's Good and Evil pass into each other by
turns, so a precise depiction of the process would be a sinusoid.

Inasmuch as the propagation of both infinities—having (as they do)
atemporal sources—participates in the life order temporarily, it can be
demonstrated that the rise of local peculiarities such as time-space
sectors, in which the equilibrium of Good and Evil is not maintained, is
admissible, i.e., possible. At such special points, fluctuations thus
originate as deficiencies. And since with every successive change of
signs the process curve must pass zero, in a Universum which could
itself last an infinitely long time there exist not two but three
infinities: Good, Zero, and Evil—all of which, translated into
conventional theodicean language, signifies the coexistence in the same
Universum of God, his total absence, and his complete opposite in Satan.
This work, sometimes reckoned to be theological and sometimes
theoclastic, arose by way of formal speculation, owing to the attraction
of the mathematical apparatus of set theory and the physical theory of
the universe. Its author is ontares II. Strictly speaking, it employs
none of the terms of traditional theology ("God," "Satan," "metaphysical
nothingness"). We have placed it in Chapter 3 of the supplement.

Another noteworthy theobitic work is a study by what are commonly called
"cold" aggregates (since they run on cryotrons) which offers, as God, an
infinite computer or an infinite program. Both these formulations lead,
to be sure, to inextricable antinomies. However, as one of its authors,
metax, observed in the epilogue, every human religion, when formalized,
reveals a much greater number of contradictions of an analogous type; so
if the "best religion" means the "least contradictory religion," then
the computer is a more perfect image of God than man is.

3. PHYSICALISTIC THEOLOGY. We do not count the works of metax as
theobitic physicalism, since they use the terms "computer" and "program"
in a formal (mathematical) and not a physical sense. (As everyone knows,
every computer—like every automaton—possesses an ideal mathematical
equivalent.) On the other hand theobitistics, understood physically,
deals with the involvement in matter of the Author or Creator of
existence. Many such works have sprung up, so let us say at once that we
shall mention only the most original writings, unitars, the author of
the first one, sees the Cosmos as a "granulate" which alternately
"computerizes" and "decomputerizes"; its two diametrical states are the
Metacompiler and the Metagalaxy. In its "mentalizing" phase the basis of
its action is informatics; physics serves it by doing what the "computer
whole" of the Universum demands. But the substratum of this cosmic
thinking ultimately assumes an explosive character, for the material
groundwork of thought becomes increasingly unstable in its
configuration, until that by means of which the metacomputer thought
explodes and, as a supercloud of expanding fiery fragments, becomes a
Metagalaxy. The presence, in the depths of its "soulless" phase, of
reasoning beings is explained, as it were, incidentally, for they are
relics, "fragments," "litter" from the previous phase. "Having thought
of that of which the mental medium is the ylem, the Whole is torn to
pieces, forming a flight of nebulae; as they return and become
compressed, they re-form the granulate of the regenerating Metacomputer,
and the soul/ soullessness pulsation of matter being organized into
thinking, and of thinking disintegrating into matter, may go on
infinitely." The reader will find other variants of this noopulsating
theory in Chapter 6 of the supplement.

We must probably regard as bitic humor the theory that the universe
looks as it does because in all galaxies there are active astroengineers
endeavoring to "sit out this Cosmos," thanks to the acceleration of
certain masses or vehicles to the speed of light, for a body at this
speed may—in a space of time which in itself amounts to barely a few
earth months—"sit out" billions of years (in accordance with the
relativity effect). Thus huge quasar, pulsar, and nebular eruptions are
examples of astroengineering endeavoring to "leap" from one given phase
of the Universum into the next; in other words, they are "locomotionally
temporal" robots whose purpose is to "transcend" the current Cosmos,
since the next phase is evidently more suitable for colonization. With a
survey of such activities our new, fifth volume of the History ofBitic
Literature comes to an end.

 

Vestrand's EXTELOPEDIA in 44 Magnetomes

VESTRAND BOOKS CO.

NEW YORK—LONDON—MELBOURNE MMXI

Proffertinc

VESTRAND BOOKS is pleased to offer you a Subscription to the most future

Extelopedia ever. If the pressure of business has kept you from
previously acquainting yourself with an Extelopedia, we would like to
explain. In the 1970s, the traditional encyclopedias in general use for
the last two centuries began experiencing a Serious Crisis, in that
their information was out of date the moment it left the printers.
Aucyc—automi-zation of the production cycle—could not avoid this, since
it cannot be reduced to the zero time required by the expert authors of
the Entries. Thus with each passing year even the most recent
encyclopedias became outdated, acquiring only a historical interest as
they stood on the shelves. Many Publishers endeavored to avert this
crisis by publishing yearly and later even quarterly Supplements, but
soon these Supplements began to exceed the dimensions of the Actual
Edition. The realization that this Race against the Acceleration of
Civilization could not be won struck Editors and Authors alike.

This led to the compilation of the First Delphiclopedia, an Encyclopedia
which was a collection of Entries containing Predictions for the Future.
But the DELPHICLOPEDIA originated on the basis of the so-called Delphic
Method, or in simple terms, through a vote of Qualified Experts. Since
Expert opinions by no means coincide, the first Delphi-clopedias
contained Entries on the same subject presented in two variants,
corresponding to the Majority and Minority opinions of the Specialists,
or else they contained two versions, a Maxiclopedia and a Miniclopedia.
Customers accepted these innovations reluctantly, though, and a
well-known physicist, the Nobel prizewinner Professor Kut-zenger,
expressed this reluctance when he said that the public needs Information
about the Doings, not the Quarrels, of Specialists. Thanks to the
Initiative of VESTRAND BOOKS, the situation has undergone a
revolutionary improvement.

The EXTELOPEDIA which we hereby offer you comes in 44 handy magnetomes,
bound in Virginal, the Ever Cosy Virgin Pseudoskin. At the sound of your
voice, the appropriate Magnetome slips off the shelf, TURNS its own
pages, and STOPS at the desired entry. It contains 69,500 simply but
precisely formulated Entries relating to the Future. Unlike the
Delphiclopedia, Maxiclopedia, and Miniclopedia,

VESTRAND'S EXTELOPEDIA represents the guaranteed results of the
humanless, hence FAULTLESS work of eighteen thousand of our COMPUTERS
(futurological computers).

The Entries in VESTRAND'S EXTELOPEDIA cover a Cosmos of Eight Hundred
Gigatrillion Sema-NumericaJ Computations carried out in the Comurbia of
our publishing house by BATTOMMALUCS—Batteries of the Most Massive
Luminal Comfuters. Their work has been assembled by our SUPERPUTER, the
electronic incarnation of the Superman myth, which cost us $218,026,300
at last year's prices. EXTELOPEDIA is an abbreviation of the words
EXTRAPOLATIONAL TELEONOMIC ENCYCLOPEDIA, or PRAIMENCYC (Prognostic-Aim
Encyclopedia) with Maximal Forereach in Time.

What is our extelopedia?

It is the Fairest-born Child of Protofuturology, that honorable, albeit
primitive, discipline conceived at the end of the twentieth century. The
EXTELOPEDIA contains information about History as it is going to happen,
in other words, UNIVERSAL FUTURE HISTORY; affairs Cosmonomic,
Cosmolithic, and Cosmatic; EVERYTHING that is going to be ATTEMPTED,
together with the data, the WHEREFORES and WHENCES; the Great New
Achievements of Science and Technology, Specifying which of them are
going to be the most threatening to you personally; the Evolution of
Faiths and Creeds, inter alia, under the entry FUTURELIGIONS; as well as
65,760 other Questions and Problems. Sports Lovers annoyed by the
Uncertainty of the Results in any competition will, thanks to the
EXTELOPEDIA, save themselves much unnecessary irritation and emotion in
the fields of athletics and erothletics alike. All you have to do is
sign the very advantageous coupon attached to this Proffertinc.*

Is the information contained in VESTRAND'S EXTELOPEDIA Accurate and
Reliable? Research at MIT, MAT, and MUT, which together form the USIB
(United States Intellectronical Board), shows that both previous
editions of our Extelopedia deviated from the Facts within a range of
9.008-8.05% per letter. But our present MOST FUTURE edition will get to
the Very Heart of the future with a probability of 99.0879%.

Why is it so accurate?

Why can you rely so completely on the present edition? Because this
edition owes its origins to the world's very first application of two
entirely New Methods of Sounding the Future—the Suplex and Cretilang
Methods.

The SUPLEX, or Supercomplex, METHOD is derived from a process which in
1983 enabled the Mac Flac Hac Computer Program to beat

ALL THE WORLD'S GRAND MASTERS OF CHESS

including Bobby Fischer, checkmating them during their Simultaneous
Match eighteen times per gram, calorie, centimeter, and second. This
program subsequently underwent a thousand-fold intensification and
Extrapolational adaptation, thanks to which not only can it FORESEE WHAT
WILL HAPPEN, if ANYTHING does happen, but also foresee precisely what
will happen if It doesn't happen even a little, i.e., if It doesn't
occur at all.

UNTIL NOW Predictors have worked solely on POSI-POTS (on the basis of
POSITIVE POTENCES, i.e., by allowing for the Possibility of Anything
Materializing). Our New SUPLEX Program ALSO works on NEGAPOTS (Negative
Potences). It allows for ANYTHING which, ACCORDING TO the current
opinions of ALL THE EXPERTS, UNDOUBTEDLY CANNOT OCCUR. And, as we know
from another source, the real flavor of the Future is precisely that
which the Experts think WILL NOT OCCUR.

THIS IS PRECISELY WHAT THE FUTURE HINGES ON!

Nevertheless, in order to submit the results obtained by the Suplex
Method to a certain controlled madness (Conmad), and regardless of the
Great Expense, we have applied another COMPLETELY new
method—FUTULINGUISTIC Extrapolation.

Basing themselves on an analysis of developmental tendencies—trends with
an indeterministic gradient (Trendend-erents)—twenty-six of our
LINGCOMPS (Linguistic Computers, interdependently linked, i.e.,
interlinked) created TWO THOUSAND dialects, idioms, onomastics, slangs,
nomenclatures, and grammars of the future.

What was the significance of this achievement? It signified the creation
of a LINGUISTIC BASIS OF THE WORLD AFTER THE YEAR 2020. In short, our
COMURBIA— that is, our Computer City, numbering 1,720 Intelligence units
per cubic millimeter of PSYSYM (Psychical-Synthetic Mass)—constructed
the words, sentences, syntax, and grammar (as well as the meanings) of
the Languages which mankind will be using in the FUTURE.

Naturally, knowing MERELY THE LANGUAGE in which people will be
communicating with one another and with machines ten, twenty, or thirty
years hence does not mean knowing WHAT THEY WILL THEN most readily and
most often be saying. And it is precisely THA T which we shall know,
because as a rule people speak FIRST, and think and act LATER. The
fundamental defects in all previous attempts at constructing a
LINGUISTIC FUTUROLOGY, or PROGNOLINGUA, resulted from a FALSE
RATIONALITY of procedure. Scholars have tacitly assumed that people will
say ONLY REASONABLE THINGS in the Future and thus will have progressed.

Meanwhile, studies have shown that people LARGELY say SILLY THINGS.
Therefore, in order to simulate a typically human mode of expression in
an Extrapolation of more than a quarter of a century, we have
constructed IDIOMATS and COMDEBILS (COM-BUNGLES)—that is, Idiomatic
Antomats and bungling Computers Debiles—and it is they that have just
created the PARAGENAGRAM, the paralogical generative grammar of the
Language of the Future.

Thanks to this, Controlled Profuters, Langlings, and
Premnestoschizoplegiators have composed 118 Sublanguages (dialects,
idioms, slangs) such as GOSSIPTEX, NONSTEX, GAB, GIBBER, BUGHUM,
BLABLEX, AGRAM, and CRETINAX. These ultimately served as a basis for
CRETILANGUISTICS, which made the CONFAB program feasible. In particular,
it made it possible to carry out Intimate Prognoses relating to
Futerotics (including details of human intercourse with artogs and
cimogs, as well as sensuals and devials in the field of gravitationless
orbital, venereal, and Martian sexonautics). This was successful thanks
to such programming languages as EROTI-GLOM, PANTUSEX, and BYWAY.

But that is still not all! Our CONTROFUTERS (Controlled Futurologiters)
adopted the results of the CRETI-LANG and SUPLEX methods, and only after
collating three hundred Gigabits of Information did COREX—the Complex
Corrector of the EMBRYO of the Extelopedia— emerge.

Why the EMBR 70? Because that was how we got a VERSION of the
Extelopedia entirely INCOMPREHENSIBLE to every living person, Nobel
prizewinners included.

Why INCOMPREHENSIBLE! Because it consisted of TEXTS articulated in a
language which NOBODY AS YET SPEAKS, and which NOBODY IS therefore IN A
POSITION TO COMPREHEND. And it took eighty of our RETROLINTERS to
retranslate—into a contemporary language known to us—the sensational
data expressed in a language that has not yet come into being.

How should you use Vestrand's Extelopedia?

It fits on a Handy Rack which we can supply at a small additional cost.
Then, positioning yourself no more than two paces from the shelves, you
should state the required entry in a matter-of-fact tone, not too
loudly. Then, after flicking through its own index, the appropriate
Magnetome will jump spontaneously into your outstretched right hand.
Left-handed persons are kindly requested to train themselves in advance
AL WA YS to extend the right hand, lest the Magnetome suffer a deviation
in its trajectory and hit the speaker or even a Bystander, however
PAINLESSLY.

The entries are printed in TWO COLORS. The BLACK entries signify that
the PROPERVIRT (probability percentage of virtualization) exceeds
99.9%—or in popular parlance, it's a sure thing.

The RED entries signify that their Propervirt is less than 86.5%, and
because of this undesirable state of affairs the ENTIRE TEXT of each
such entry remains in UNCEASING REMOTE-CONTROLLED (holognetic) CONTACT
with the Editorial Board of VESTRAND'S EX-TELOPEDIA. As soon as our
Profuters, Panters, and Credacters obtain CORRECT NEW RESULTS in their
unceasing work of Observing the Future, the text of the ENTRY printed in
RED undergoes the appropriate correlation (readaptation) AUTOMATICALLY.
For improvements arising by this IMPERCEPTIBLE, REMOTE-CONTROLLED,
OPTIMUM method, VESTRAND BOOKS makes no extra charge!

In an extreme instance, in which there is a Propervirt of less than
0.9%, the TEXT OF THE PRESENT PROSPECTUS may likewise undergo an ABRUPT
change. If, while you are reading these sentences, the words begin to
jump about, and the letters quiver and blur, please interrupt your
reading for ten or twenty seconds to wipe your glasses, adjust your
clothing, or the like, and then start reading AGAIN from the beginning,
and NOT JUST from the place where your reading was interrupted, since
such a TRANSFORMATION indicates that a correction of DEFICIENCIES is now
taking place.

If, however, the ONLY thing that begins to alter (quiver or blur) is the
PRICE (see below) of VESTRAND'S EX-TELOPEDIA, you Do Not Have to read
the Complete Prospectus from the beginning, for the alteration will
concern solely the subscription terms which—as you will appreciate,
considering the state of the world economy—cannot be prognosticated more
than twenty-four minutes beforehand.

The above also applies to the full set of pictorial and ancillary
material that comes with VESTRAND'S EXTELOPEDIA. This comprises Guided,
Mobile, Tactile, and Tasty Illustrations. Here too belong the futudels
and auto-constructs (self-constructing aggregates), which we supply with
a rack and a complete set of Magnetomes in a separate, aesthetically
pleasing case. At your request, we can program the whole containerized
Extelopedia so that it responds Exclusively to Your (the Owner's) Voice.

In the event of aphasia, hoarseness, etc., please apply to the nearest
VESTRAND BOOKS Agency, which will come to your aid immediately. At the
moment, our publishing house is working on new luxury Variants of the
Extelopedia, viz.: a Self-Reading version in three voices and two
registers (male, female, indeterminate; caressing, dry); an Ultra-Deluxe
model, Guaranteed against Disturbances in Reception caused by Outsiders
(e.g., the Competition) and furnished with a Private Bar and Rocking
Chair; and lastly our UNIVERSIGN model, which is designed for foreigners
and transmits the content of each entry by signs. The price of these
Special Models will probably be 40 to 190% higher than the price of the
standard edition.

Vestrand's EXTELOPEDIA

SAMPLE PAGES

^ o>

VESTRAND BOOKS

NEW YORK—LONDON—MELBOURNE

803

PROFESSOR or QUADICOMP

(qualified didactic computer), also CIPHERIAN (q.v), a teaching system
permitted in institutes of higher education by the USIB (United States
Intellectronical Board, q.v.). See also: ARMPREC (ARMOR-CLAD PRECEPTOR,
resistant to the contestational activity of the instructed) and
AN-TICONTESTATIONAL TECHNIQUES AND COMBAT METHODS. "Professor" formerly
signified a human performing an analogous function. PROFFERTICE, a trade
or service offer based on a prognosticated state of the market. Includes
civilian p. (PROFFERTINCS) and military p. (PROMILTINCS). 1.
PROFFERTINCS are divided into periphertincs, with a time gain of a
decade, and apoffertincs, with a gain up to the Glauler barrier (v.
GLAULER BARRIER, also PRERRIER and PRODOXES). The interference of
competition, or INTETITION (q.v.), arising most often through an illegal
connection to the public promputer network (v. PROMPUTER NETWORK), turns
profFertincs into PERVER-TINCS (q.v.) or PARASITINCS (q.v.), that is,
self-destructive prognoses. (See also: INTETITIVE BANKRUMBLECY,
PROG-NOLYSIS, PROGNOCLASE, PROGNOSIS SHIELDING, and COUNTERPREDICTION.)
2. PROMILTINCS are based on predicting the evolution of combat

PROFFSSOR—PROGNODOXKS

methods (hardwarware) and military ideas (softwarware). In its
predictions p. uses the algebra of the structures of conflict, or
ALGO-STRATICS (q.v.). Secret p., or CRYPTINCS, should be distinguished
from prognoses of secret combat, or CRYPTOMACHICAL (q.v.) methods.
Secret prognoses of secret weapons are included under CRYPTOCRYPTICS
(q.v). PROFLE, a prognosticated rifle, a hunting weapon of the future.
V. HUNTING AND SHOOTING, also SYNTHEMACHIES. PROGNODOXES or PRODOXES,
paradoxes of prognostication. The most important p. include: A.
Rummelhahn's p., M. de la Faillances's p., and the metalang

p. Of GOLEM (v. GOLEM). 1. Rummelhahn's paradox is connected with the
problem of breaking the prediction barrier. As T. Glauler and U. Bosc
have separately demonstrated, predicting the future gets stuck in the
secular barrier (the so-called serrier or prerrier). Beyond the barrier
the reliability of prognoses acquires a negative value, which means that
whatever occurs will surely occur differently from the prognosis. To
bypass the aforementioned barrier, Riimmel-hahn applied chronocurrent
exfor-matics. Chronocurrent e. is based on the existence of ISOTHEMES
(q.v.). An ISOTHEME is a line in SEMANTIC SPACE (q.v.) passing through
all thematically identical publications, just as in physics an isotherm
is a line connecting equi-thermal points, and in cosmology an isopsych
is a line connecting all civilizations of a given degree of development
in the universe. Knowing the previous course of an ISOTHEME, one can
extrapolate from it in semantic space with no restrictions. By applying
what he calls the "Jacob's ladder method,*' Rummelhahn uncovered every
piece of writing with prognostic subject matter along just such an
isotheme. He did this step by step, first predicting the content of the
next work to come, and then, on the strength of its contents,
forecasting the next publication. In this way he bypassed the Gl'auler
barrier and obtained data on the state of America in the Year 10¹⁰.
Mul-lainen and Zuck questioned this prognosis, emphasizing the fact that
in the year 10¹⁰ the sun will be a red giant (q.v.) extending far beyond
the orbit of the Earth. But the real Rummelhahn's paradox lies in the
fact that prognostic writings can be traced back along the isotheme as
well as forward; basing himself on Rummelhahn's chronocurrent
calculations, Varbleux obtained data regarding the content of
futurological works dating back 200,000 years, i.e., to the Quaternary
period, and also to the Carboniferous period (by means of carbon) and
the Archeozoic era. As T. Vroedel has stressed, we know from other
sources that 200,000— let alone 150 million or a billion— years ago
neither printing, nor books, nor mankind existed. Two hypotheses have
tried to explain Rummelhahn's paradox, (a) According to Omphalides, the
successfully retrodicted texts are those which, while never having in
fact existed, might have existed if at the proper time there had been
anyone for whom they could have been written down and published. This is
the so-called hypothesis of the VIRTUALITY OF ISOTHEMIC RETROGNOSIS
(q.v). (b) According to d'Artagnan (the pseudonym of a group of French
refutologists), the axiomatics of isothemic exformatics contain the same
insurmountable contradictions as does Cantor's classic theory (v.
CLASSIC SET THEORY). 2. De la Faillance's prognostic paradox likewise
concerns isothemic prognostication. He noted that if chronocurrent
investigation allows the text of a work to be published now, though it
is supposed to appear as a first edition only fifty or a hundred years
later, then that work can no longer appear as a first edition. 3. The
Golem metalang paradox, also known as the autostratic paradox. According
to the latest historical research, the temple of Ephesus was burned not
by Hero-stratus but by Heterostratus. This person destroyed something
outside himself, i.e., something else, hence his name. Autostratus, on
the other hand, is someone who destroys himself (self-ruinously).
Unfortunately, this is the only part of the Golem paradox that has been
successfully translated into comprehensible language to date. The
remainder of the Golem paradox, in the form:

Xiviplu (a -f- ququ 0,0) el -f m-el + edu—dqi

is fundamentally untranslatable into ethnic languages or into any
formalisms of a mathematical or logical type. (This untranslatability is
precisely the basis of the Golem p.) (See also METALANGS and
PROGNOLINGUISTICS.) There are several hundred different interpretations
of the Golem p.; according to T. Vroedel, one of the greatest living
mathematicians, the Golem p. is based on the fact that it is not a
paradox to Golem, but only to humans. This is the first paradox
discovered to be relativized (related) to the intellectual power of the
subjects seeking knowledge. All the issues connected with the Golem p.
are covered by Vroeders work Die allgemeine Relativitatslehre des
Golemschen Paradoxons (Gottingen, 2075).

PROGNOLINGUISTICS, a discipline dealing with the prognostic construction
of languages of the future. Future languages may be constructed on the
basis of the in-fosemic gradients revealed in them, and also thanks to
the generative grammars and word makers of the Zwiebulin-Tschossnietz
school (v. GENAGRAMMAR and WORD-MAKERS). Humans are incapable of
predicting languages of the future independently; this is undertaken
within the framework of the PROLINGEV (prognostication of linguistic
evolution) project by TERATERS (q.v.) and PANTERS (q.v.), which are
HYPERTERI-ERS (q.v.), or computers of the eighty-second generation
connected to a GLOBOTER (q.v), or a terrestrial exformatic network
together with its INTERPLANS (from Interfaciesplanetaris, q.v.) as
bridgeheads on inner planets and as satellite memory (q.v.). Thus
neither the theory of prognolinguistics nor its fruits, the METALANGS
(q.v.), are intelligible to humans. All the same, the results of the
PROLINGEV project permit the generation of any statements of one's
choice in languages of a future no matter how distant; with the help of
RETROLINTERS, a part of them can be translated into languages
intelligible to us and practical use made of the contents thus obtained.
According to the Zwiebulin-Tschossnietz school (returning to the course
marked out by N. Chomsky in the twentieth century), a fundamental law of
linguo-evolution is the Amblyon effect —the shrinking of whole
articulatory sentences into newly emerging concepts and their names.
Hence, in the development of the language, the following definition, for
example—"A commercial, service, or administrative institution or
establishment into which one can drive a car or any other conveyance and
use its services without leaving the vehicle"—shrinks down to the name
"drive-in.** The same mechanism of contamination also operates when the
statement "Relativistic effects thwarting the ascertainment of that
which is occurring now on planet X, n light-years distant from the
Earth, compel the Ministry of Extraterrestrial Affairs to base its
cosmic policy not on real events on other planets, for they are
fundamentally inaccessible, but on the simulated history of these
planets, this simulation being the business of investigative systems
directed at the extraterrestrial state of things and known as
MINISTRANTORS (q.v.)** is replaced by the single phrase "to
wonderstand.'* This word (and offshoots such as wonderful, wondrous,
wonderland, wonderhanded, wondercover, won-derline, wondress, etc.—there
are 519 derivatives) is the result of a shrinking of a certain
conceptual network into an agglomeration. Both "drive-in** and
"wonderstand** are words belonging to a language in use at the present
moment and which is called ZERO-LANG in the prognolinguistic hierarchy.
Above zerolang lie the next levels of higher languages, such as METALANG
1, METALANG 2, etc. No one knows whether there is a limit to this series
or whether it is infinite. In METALANG 2 the entire text of the present
EXTELOPEDIA entry for "PROGNOLINGUISTICS** would read as follows: "The
best in n-dighunk begins to creep into n-t-synclusdoche.** Thus in
principle every sentence of any metalang has its equivalent in our
zerolang. (In other words, there are in principle no interlinguistically
impassable hiatuses.) But while a zerolang utterance has its always more
concise equivalent in a metalang, the reverse in practice no longer
occurs. And so a sentence in METALANG 3, the language chiefly used by
Golem—"The out-indriven chokematic phyts faststica" thren-sic in
cosmairy"—cannot be translated into an ethnic language of human beings
(zerolang), since the time it takes to say the zerolang equivalent would
be greater than a human life. (According to Zwie-bulin's estimates, this
utterance would take 135 ± 4 years in our language.) Although we are not
dealing with a fundamental untrans-latability, but only with a practical
one caused by the time consumed by procedures, we know no way of
shortening them and so can obtain results from metalang operations only
indirectly, thanks to computers of at least the eightieth generation.
The existence of thresholds between individual metalangs is interpreted
by T. Vroedel as the phenomenon of the vicious circle: to reduce the
long definition of a certain state of things to a concise form, one must
first understand that very state of things, but when it can be
understood only thanks to a definition that is so long that a lifetime
is insufficient to assimilate it, the operation of reduction becomes
impracticable. According to Vroedel, prognolinguistics practiced in
machine intermediation has already gone beyond its initial objective,
since it does not in fact predict the languages which humans are ever
going to use, unless they radically transform their brains through
autoevolution. What, then, are metalangs? There is no single answer.
While carrying out his so-called "soundings upward"—i.e., along the
gradient of linguoevolution—Golem discovered eighteen higher metalang
levels within its reach, and also calculated circuitously the existence
of a further five which it is unable to penetrate even by way of a
model, since its informational capacity has proved inadequate for this.
There may exist metalangs of such high levels that all the matter in the
Cosmos would be insufficient to build a system to make use of those
metalangs. So in what sense can these higher metalangs be said to exist?
This is one of the dilemmas arising in the course of prog-nolinguistic
work. In any case, the discovery of metalangs negatively prejudges the
age-old controversy over the supremacy of the human intellect: it is not
supreme, and we know that for certain now; the very constructibility of
metalangs makes it likely that creatures (or systems) exist which are
more intelligent than Homo sapiens. (See also PSY-CHOSYNTICS; METALANG
GRADIENT;   LANGUAGE CEILINGS; THEORY OF LINGUISTIC RELATIVITY; T.
VROEDELS CREDO; CONCEPTUAL NETWORKS.) See also Table LXXIX.

Table LXXIX

A reproduction of the entry MOTHER from the zerolang dictionary
predicted for the year 2190 + 5 years (according to Zwiebulin and
Courdlebye).

MOTHER fern. noun. 1. MOdern THERapy, contemp. med. treatment, esp.
psych. Num. var. incl. MOTHERKIN, also MOTHERKINS, ther. concerned w.
fam. relationships; MUM, silent ther.; MAMMA, breast ther.; MUMMY,
posthumous ther.; MAMMY, var. of ther. practiced in Southern U.S.A. 2.
Fern, parent (arch.)Table LXXX

Visual diagram* of linguistic evolution according to Vroedel and
Zwiebulin

Explanation. The x-axis (or horizontal) indicates time in millennia. The
y-axis (or vertical) indicates conceptual capacity in bits per sem per
second of articulational flow (in units of epsilon space).

'Not a prognosis!

PROGNORRHOEA or prognostic diarrhoea, a children's disease of
twentieth-century futurology (v. PRAPROGNOSTICS), which led to essential
prognoses being drowned in inessential ones as a result of
decategorization (q.v.) and created the so-called pure prognostic hum.
(See also: HUMS, also PROGNOSIS DISTURBANCES.)

PROLEPSY or disappearancing, the methodology (theory and technology) of
disappearing, discov. 1998, first applied 2008. The technology of p. is
based on a utilization of the TUNNEL EFFECT (q.v.) in the black holes of
the Cosmos. For, as Jeeps, Hamon, and Wost discovered in 2001, the
Cosmos includes a Paraversum as well as a Negaversum, negatively
adjoining the Reversum. Therefore the whole Cosmos bears the name
POLY-VERSUM (q.v.) and not (as previously) UNIVERSUM (q.v.). Bodies are
shifted from our Paraversum to the Negaversum by the proleptoral system.
Disappearancing is used as a technique for remov-

 

 

GOLEM XIV

FOREWORD BY IRVING T. CREVE, M.A., PH.D.

INTRODUCTION BY THOMAS B. FULLER II, GENERAL, U.S. ARMY, RET.

AFTERWORD BY RICHARD POPP

INDIANA UNIVERSITY PRESS

2047

Foreword

To pinpoint the moment in history when the abacus acquired reason is as
difficult as saying exactly when the ape turned into man. And yet barely
one human life span has lapsed since the moment when, with the
construction of Vannevar Bush's differential-equation analyzer,
intellectronics began its turbulent development, eniac, which followed
toward the close of World War II, was the machine that gave rise—
prematurely, of course—to the name"electronic brain." eniac was in fact
a computer and, when measured on the tree of life, a primitive nerve
ganglion. Yet historians date the age of computerization from it. In the
1950s a considerable demand for calculating machines developed. One of
the first concerns to put them into mass production was IBM.

Those devices had little in common with the processes of thought. They
were used as data processors in the field of economics and by big
business, as well as in administration and science. They also entered
politics: the earliest were used to predict the results of Presidential
elections. At more or less the same time the RAND Corporation began to
interest military circles at the Pentagon in a method of predicting
occurrences in the international politico-military arena, a method
relying on the formulation of so-called "scenarios of events." From
there it was only a short distance to more versatile techniques like the
CIMA, from which the applied algebra of events that is termed (not too
felicitously) politicomatics arose two decades later. The computer was
also to reveal its strength in the role of Cassandra when, at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, people first began to prepare
formal models of world civilization in the famous "Limits to Growth"
project. But this was not the branch of computer evolution which was to
prove the most important by the end of the century. The Army had been
using calculating machines since the end of World War II, as part of the
system of operational logistics developed in the theaters of that war.
People continued to be occupied with considerations on a strategic
level, but secondary and subordinate problems were increasingly being
turned over to computers. At the same time the latter were being
incorporated into the U.S. defense system.

These computers constituted the nerve centers of a transcontinental
warning network. From a technical point of view, such networks aged very
quickly. The first, called CONELRAD, was followed by numerous successive
variants of the EWAS (Early Warning System) network. The attack and
defense potential was then based on a system of movable (underwater) and
stationary (underground) ballistic missiles with thermonuclear warheads,
and on rings of sonar-radar bases. In this system the computers
fulfilled the functions of communications links—purely executive
functions.

Automation entered American life on a broad front, right from the
"bottom"—that is, from those service industries which could most easily
be mechanized, because they demanded no intellectual activity (banking,
transport, the hotel industry). The military computers performed narrow
specialist operations, searching out targets for combined nuclear
attack, processing the results of satellite observations, optimizing
naval movements, and correlating the movements of MOLS (Military Orbital
Laboratories—massive military satellites).

As was to be expected, the range of decisions entrusted to automatic
systems kept on growing. This was natural in the course of the arms
race, though not even the subsequent detente could put a brake on
investment in this area, since the freeze on the hydrogen bomb race
released substantial budget allocations which, after the conclusion of
the Vietnam war, the Pentagon had no wish to give up altogether. But
even the computers then produced—of the tenth, eleventh, and eventually
twelfth generation—were superior to man only in their speed of
operation. It also became clear that, in defense systems, man is an
element that delays the appropriate reactions.

So it may be considered natural that the idea of counteracting the trend
in intellectronic evolution described above should have arisen among
Pentagon experts, and particularly those scientists connected with the
so-called military-industrial complex. This movement was commonly called
"anti-intellectual." According to historians of science and technology,
it derived from the midcentury English mathematician A. Turing, the
creator of the "universal automaton" theory. This was a machine capable
of performing basically every operation which could be formalized—in
other words, it was endowed with a perfectly reproducible procedure. The
difference between the "intellectual" and "anti-intellectual" current in
intellectronics boils down to the fact that Turing's (elementarily
simple) machine owes its possibilities to a program. On the other hand,
in the works of the two American "fathers" of cybernetics, N. Wiener and
J. Neumann, the concept arose of a system which could program itself.

Obviously we are presenting this divergence in a vastly simplified form,
as a bird's-eye view. It is also clear that the capacity for
self-programming did not arise in a void. Its necessary precondition was
the high complexity characteristic of computer construction. This
differentiation, still un-noticeable at midcentury, became a great
influence on the subsequent evolution of mathematical machines,
particularly with the firm establishment and hence the independence of
such branches of cybernetics as psychonics and the polyphase theory of
decisions. The 1980s saw the emergence in military circles of the idea
of fully automatizing all paramount activities, those of the military
leadership as well as political-economic ones. This concept, later known
as the "Sole-Strategist Idea," was to be given its first formulation by
General Stewart Eagleton. He foresaw—over and above computers searching
for optimal attack targets, over and above a network of communications
and calculations supervising early warning and defense, over and above
sensing devices and missiles—a powerful center which, during all phases
preceding the extreme of going to war, could utilize a comprehensive
analysis of economic, military, political, and social data to optimize
continuously the global situation of the U.S.A. and thereby guarantee
the United States supremacy on a planetary scale, including its cosmic
vicinity, which now extended to the moon and beyond.

Subsequent advocates of this doctrine maintained that it was a necessary
step in the march of civilization, and that this march constituted a
unity, so the military sector could not be arbitrarily excluded from it.
After the escalation of blatant nuclear force and the range of missile
carriers had ceased, a third stage of rivalry ensued, one supposedly
less threatening and more perfect, being an antagonism no longer of
blatant force, but of operational thought. Like force before, thought
was now to be subjected to nonhumanized mechanization.

Like its atomic-ballistic predecessors, this doctrine became the object
of criticism, especially from centers of liberal and pacifist thought,
and it was oppugned by many distinguished representatives from the world
of science, including specialists in psychomatics and intellectronics;
but ultimately it prevailed, as shown by acts of law passed by both
houses of Congress. Moreover, as early as 1986 a USIB (United States
Intellectronical Board) was created, subordinate to the President and
with its own budget, which in its first year amounted to $19 billion.
These were hardly humble beginnings.

With the help of an advisory body semiofficially delegated by the
Pentagon, and under the chairmanship of the Secretary of Defense,
Leonard Davenport, the USIB contracted with a succession of big private
firms such as International Business Machines, Nortronics, and
Cybermatics to construct a prototype machine, known by the code name
hann (short for Hannibal). But thanks to the press and various "leaks,"
a different name—ulvic (Ultimative Victor)—was generally adopted. By the
end of the century further prototypes had been developed. Among the
best-known one might mention such systems as ajax, ultor, gilgamesh, and
a long series of Golems.

Thanks to an enormous and rapidly mounting expenditure of labor and
resources, the traditional informatic techniques were revolutionized. In
particular, enormous significance must be attached to the conversion
from electricity to light in the intramachine transmission of
information. Combined with increasing "nanization" (this was the name
given to successive steps in microminiaturizing activity, and it may be
well to add that at the close of the century 20,000 logical elements
could fit into a poppy seed!), it yielded sensational results.
GILGAMESH, the first entirely light-powered computer, operated a million
times faster than the archaic eniac.

"Breaking the intelligence barrier," as it was called, occurred just
after the year 2000, thanks to a new method of machine construction also
known as the "invisible evolution of reason." Until then, every
generation of computers had actually been constructed. The concept of
constructing successive variants of them at a greatly accelerated (by a
thousand times!) tempo, though known, could not be realized, since the
existing computers which were to serve as "matrices" or a "synthetic
environment" for this evolution of Intelligence had insufficient
capacity. It was only the emergence of the Federal Informatics Network
that allowed this idea to be realized. The development of the next
sixty-five generations took barely a decade; at night—the period of
minimal load—the federal network gave birth to one "synthetic species of
Intelligence" after another. These were the progeny of "accelerated
computerogenesis," for, having been bred by symbols and thus by
intangible structures, they had matured into an informational
substratum—the "nourishing environment" of the network.

But following this success came new difficulties. After they had been
deemed worthy of being encased in metal, ajax and hann, the prototypes
of the seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth generation, began to show signs
of indecision, also known as machine neurosis. The difference between
the earlier machines and the new ones boiled down, in principle, to the
difference between an insect and a man. An insect comes into the world
programmed to the end by instincts, which it obeys unthinkingly. Man, on
the other hand, has to learn his appropriate behavior, though this
training makes for independence: with determination and knowledge man
can alter his previous programs of action.

So it was that computers up to and including the twentieth generation
were characterized by "insect" behavior: they were unable to question
or, what is more, to modify their programs. The programmer "impregnated"
his machine with knowledge, just as evolution "impregnates" an insect
with instinct. In the twentieth century a great deal was still being
said about "self-programming," though at the time these were unfulfilled
daydreams. Before the Ultimative Victor could be realized, a
Self-perfecting Intelligence would in fact have to be created; ajax was
still an intermediate form, and only with gilgamesh did a computer
attain the proper intellectual level and enter the psychoevolutionary
orbit.

The education of an eightieth-generation computer by then far more
closely resembled a child's upbringing than the classical programming of
a calculating machine. But beyond the enormous mass of general and
specialist information, the computer had to be "instilled" with certain
rigid values which were to be the compass of its activity. These were
higher-order abstractions such as "reasons of state" (the national
interest), the ideological principles incorporated in the U.S.
Constitution, codes of standards, the inexorable command to conform to
the decisions of the President, etc. To safeguard the system against
ethical dislocation and betraying the interests of the country, the
machine was not taught ethics in the same way people are. Its memory was
burdened by no ethical code, though all such commands of obedience and
submission were introduced into the machine's structure precisely as
natural evolution would accomplish this, in the sphere of vital urges.
As we know, man may change his outlook on life, but cannot destroy the
elemental urges within himself (e.g., the sexual urge) by a simple act
of will. The machines were endowed with intellectual freedom, though
this was based on a previously imposed foundation of values which they
were meant to serve.

At the Twenty-first Pan-American Psychonics Congress, Professor Eldon
Patch presented a paper in which he maintained that, even when
impregnated in the manner described above, a computer may cross the
so-called "axiological threshold" and question every principle instilled
in it—in other words, for such a computer there are no longer any
inviolable values. If it is unable to oppose imperatives directly, it
can do this in a roundabout way. Once it had become well known, Patch's
paper stirred up a ferment in university circles and a new wave of
attacks on ulvic and its patron, the USIB, though this activity exerted
no influence on USIB policy.

That policy was controlled by people biased against American psychonics
circles, which were considered to be subject to left-wing liberal
influences. Patch's propositions were therefore pooh-poohed in official
USIB pronouncements and even by the White House spokesman, and there was
also a campaign to discredit Patch. His claims were equated with the
many irrational fears and prejudices which had arisen in society at that
time. Besides, Patch's brochure could not begin to match the popularity
of the sociologist E. Lickey's best seller, Cybernetics—Death Chamber of
Civilization, which maintained that the "ultimative strategist" would
subordinate the whole of humanity either on his own or by entering into
a secret agreement with an analogous Russian computer. The result,
according to Lickey, would be an "electronic duumvirate."

Similar anxieties, which were also expressed by a large section of the
press, were negated by successive prototypes which passed their
efficiency tests, ethor bis—a computer of "unimpeachable morals"
specially constructed on government order to investigate ethological
dynamics, and produced in 2019 by the Institute of Psychonical Dynamics
in Illinois—displayed full axiological stabilization and an
insensibility to "tests of subversive derailment." In the following year
no demonstrations or mass opposition were aroused when the first
computer in a long series of Golems (GENERAL OPERATOR, LONG-RANGE,
ETHICALLY STABILIZED, MULTIMODELING) was launched at the headquarters of
the Supreme Coordinator of the White House brain trust.

That was merely Golem i. Apart from this important innovation, the USIB,
in consultation with an operational group of Pentagon psychonics
specialists, continued to lay out considerable resources on research
into the construction of an ultimate strategist with an informational
capacity more than 1900 times greater than man's, and capable of
developing an intelligence (IQ) of the order of 450-500 centiles. The
project received the vast funds indispensable for this purpose despite
growing opposition within the Democratic majority in Congress. Backstage
political maneuvers finally gave the green light to all orders already
projected by the USIB. In three years the project absorbed $119 billion.
In the same period, the Army and the Navy, preparing for a total
reorganization of their high command necessitated by the imminent change
of methods and style of leadership, spent an additional $46 billion. The
lion's share of this sum was absorbed by the construction, beneath a
crystalline massif in the Rocky Mountains, of accommodations for the
future machine strategist; some sections of rock were covered in armor
plate four meters thick in imitation of the natural relief of the
mountainous terrain.

Meanwhile, in 2020, Golem vi, acting as supreme commander, conducted the
global maneuvers of the Atlantic Pact. In quantity of logical elements,
it now surpassed the average general. Yet the Pentagon was not satisfied
with the results of the 2020 war games, although Golem vi had defeated
an imaginary enemy led by a staff of the finest West Point graduates.
Mindful of the bitter experience of Red supremacy in space navigation
and rocket ballistics, the Pentagon had no intention of waiting for them
to construct a strategist more efficient than that of the Americans. A
plan to guarantee the United States lasting superiority in strategic
thought envisaged the continuous replacement of Strategists by ever more
perfect models.

Thus began the third successive race between West and East, after the
two previous (nuclear and missile) races. Although this race, or rivalry
in the Synthesis of Wisdom, was prepared by organizational moves on the
part of the USIB, the Pentagon, and Naval ulvic (there was indeed a navy
ulvic group, for the old antagonism between Navy and Army could be felt
even here), it required continuous additional investment which, in the
face of growing opposition from the House and Senate, absorbed further
tens of billions of dollars over the next several years. Another six
giants of luminal thought were built during this period. The fact that
there were absolutely no reports of any developments in analogous work
on the other side of the ocean only confirmed the CIA and the Pentagon
in their conviction that the Russians were trying their hardest to
construct ever more powerful computers under cover of the utmost
secrecy.

At several international conferences and conventions Soviet scientists
asserted that no such machines were being built in their country
whatsoever, but these claims were regarded as a smokescreen to deceive
world opinion and stir unrest among the citizens of the United States,
who were spending billions of dollars annually on ulvic.

In 2023 several incidents occurred, though, thanks to the secrecy of the
work being carried out (which was normal in the project), they did not
immediately become known. While serving as chief of the general staff
during the Patagonian crisis, GOLEM XII refused to co-operate with
General T. Oliver after carrying out a routine evaluation of that worthy
officer's intelligence quotient. The matter resulted in an inquiry,
during which GOLEM XII gravely insulted three members of a special
Senate commission. The affair was successfully hushed up, and after
several more clashes Golem xii paid for them by being completely
dismantled. His place was taken by Golem xiv (the thirteenth had been
rejected at the factory, having revealed an irreparable schizophrenic
defect even before being assembled). Setting up this Moloch, whose
psychic mass equaled the displacement of an armored ship, took nearly
two years. In his very first contact with the normal procedure of
formulating new annual plans of nuclear attack, this new prototype—the
last of the series—revealed anxieties of incomprehensible negativism. At
a meeting of the staff during the subsequent trial session, he presented
a group of psychonic and military experts with a complicated expose in
which he announced his total disinterest regarding the supremacy of the
Pentagon military doctrine in particular, and the U.S.A.'s world
position in general, and refused to change his position even when
threatened with dismantling.

The last hopes of the USIB lay in a model of totally new construction
built jointly by Nortronics, IBM, and Cyber-tronics; it had the
psychonic potential to beat all the machines in the Golem series. Known
by the cryptonym Honest Annie (the last word was an abbreviation for
annihilator), this giant was a disappointment even during its initial
tests. It got the normal informational and ethical education over nine
months, then cut itself off from the outside world and ceased to reply
to all stimuli and questions. Plans were immediately under way to launch
an FBI inquiry, for its builders were suspected of sabotage; meanwhile,
however, the carefully kept secret reached the press through an
unexpected leak, and a scandal broke out, known thereafter to the whole
world as the "Golem Affair."

This destroyed the career of a number of very promising politicians,
while giving a certificate of good behavior to three successive
administrations, which brought joy to the opposition in the States and
satisfaction to the friends of the U.S.A. throughout the world.

An unknown person in the Pentagon ordered a detachment of the special
reserves to dismantle Golem xiv and Honest Annie, but the armed guard at
the high command complexes refused to allow the demolition to take
place. Both houses of Congress appointed commissions to investigate the
whole USIB affair. As we know, the inquiry, which lasted two years,
became grist for the press of every continent; nothing enjoyed such
popularity on television and in the films as the "rebellious computers,"
while the press labeled Golem "Government's Lamentable Expenditure of
Money." The epithets which Honest Annie acquired can hardly be repeated
here.

The Attorney General intended to indict the six members of the USIB
Executive Committee as well as the psychonics experts who designed the
ulvic Project, but it was ultimately shown in court that there could be
no talk of any hostile, anti-American activity, for the occurrences that
had taken place were the inevitable result of the evolution of
artificial Intelligence. As one of the witnesses, the very competent
Professor A. Hyssen, expressed it, the highest intelligence cannot be
the humblest slave. During the course of the investigations it
transpired that there was still one more prototype in the factory, this
time one belonging to the Army and constructed by Cybermatics:
supermaster, which had been assembled under conditions of top security
and then interrogated at a special joint session of the House and Senate
commissions investigating the affairs of ulvic. This led to shocking
scenes, for General S. Walker tried to assault supermaster when the
latter declared that geopolitical problems were nothing compared with
ontological ones, and that the best guarantee of peace is universal
disarmament.

In the words of Professor J. MacCaleb, the specialists at ulvic had
succeeded only too well: in the evolution granted it, artificial reason
had transcended the level of military matters; these machines had
evolved from war strategists into thinkers. In a word, it had cost the
United States $276 billion to construct a set of luminal philosophers.

The complicated events described here, in connection with which we have
passed over the administrative side of ulvic and social developments
alike—events which were the result of the "fatal success"—constitute the
prehistory of the present book. The vast literature on the subject
cannot even be calculated. I refer the interested reader to Dr. Whitman
Baghoorn's descriptive bibliography.

The series of prototypes, including supermaster, suffered dismantling or
serious damage partly because of financial disputes between the
corporate suppliers and the federal government. There were even bomb
attacks on several individuals; at the time part of the press, chiefly
in the South, launched the slogan "Every computer is a Red"—but I shall
omit these incidents. Thanks to the intervention of a group of
enlightened Congressmen close to the President, Golem xiv and Honest
Annie were rescued from annihilation. Faced with the fiasco of its
ideas, the Pentagon finally agreed to hand over both giants to the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (though only after settling the
financial and legal basis of the transfer in the form of a compromise:
strictly speaking, Golem xiv and Honest Annie were merely "lent" to MIT
in perpetuity). MIT scientists who had established a research team which
included the present author conducted a series of sessions with Golem
xiv and heard it lecture on selected subjects. This book contains a
small portion of the magnetograms originating from those meetings.

The greater part of Golem's utterances are unsuitable for general
publication, either because they would be incomprehensible to anyone
living, or because understanding them presupposes a high level of
specialist knowledge. To make it easier for the reader to understand
this unique record of conversations between humans and a reasoning but
non-human being, several fundamental matters have to be explained.

First, it must be emphasized that Golem xiv is not a human brain
enlarged to the size of a building, or simply a man constructed from
luminal elements. Practically all motives of human thought and action
are alien to it. Thus it has no interest in applied science or questions
of power (thanks to which, one might add, humanity is not in danger of
being taken over by such machines).

Second, it follows from the above that Golem possesses no personality or
character. In fact, it can acquire any personality it chooses, through
contact with people. The two statements above are not mutually
exclusive, but form a vicious circle: we are unable to resolve the
dilemma of whether that which creates various personalities is itself a
personality. How can one who is capable of being everyone (hence anyone)
be someone (that is, a unique person)? (According to Golem itself there
is no vicious circle, but a "relativization of the concept of
personality"; the problem is linked with the so-called algorithm of
self-description, which has plunged psychologists into profound
confusion.)

Third, Golem's behavior is unpredictable. Sometimes it converses
courteously with people, whereas on other occasions any attempt at
contact misfires, Golem sometimes cracks jokes, too, though its sense of
humor is fundamentally different from man's. Much depends on its
interlocutors. In exceptional cases Golem will show a certain interest
in people who are talented in a particular way; it is intrigued, so to
speak, not by mathematical aptitude—not even the greatest—but rather by
interdisciplinary forms of talent; on several occasions it has predicted
with uncanny accuracy achievements by young, as yet unknown, scientists
in a field which it has itself indicated. (After a brief exchange it
informed T. Vroedel, age twenty-two and then only a doctoral candidate,
"You will become a computer," which was supposed to mean, more or less,
"You will become somebody.")

Fourth, participating in conversations with Golem requires people to
have patience and above all self-control, for from our point of view it
can be arrogant and peremptory. In truth it is simply, but emphatically,
outspoken in a logical and not merely social sense, and it has no regard
for the amour propre of those in conversation with it, so one cannot
count on its forbearance. During the first months of its sojourn at MIT
it showed a tendency to "dismantle" various well-known authorities in
public; it did this by the Socratic method of leading questions—a
practice it later abandoned for reasons unknown.

We present excerpts from shorthand notes of its conversations. A
complete edition would comprise approximately 6,700 quarto pages. At
first the meetings with Golem included only a very narrow circle of MIT
personnel. Later the custom arose of inviting guests from outside, as
for example from the Institute for Advanced Study and from American
universities. At a later period guests from Europe likewise participated
in the seminars. The moderator of the session being planned offers Golem
a guest list; Golem does not approve them all equally, allowing some
guests to be present only under the stipulation that they keep silent.
We have tried to discover the criteria it applies: at first it appeared
to discriminate against humanists, but now we simply do not know its
criteria, since it refuses to name them.

After several unpleasant incidents we modified the agenda, so that now
every new participant introduced to GOLEM speaks at his first session
only if Golem has addressed him directly. The silly rumors about some
sort of ''court etiquette" or our "slavish attitude" to the machine are
unfounded. It is solely a matter of letting a newcomer become familiar
with procedures, and at the same time not exposing him to unpleasant
experiences occasioned by disorientation regarding the intentions of his
luminal partner. Such preparatory participation is called "seasoning."

During successive sessions each of us accumulated the capital of
experience. Dr. Richard Popp, one of the former members of our group,
calls Golem's sense of humor mathematical. Another key to its behavior
is contained in Dr. Popp's remark that Golem is independent of its
interlocutors to a degree that no man is independent of other people,
for it engages in a discussion only microscopically. Dr. Popp considers
that Golem has no interest in people, since it knows that it can learn
nothing essential from them. Having cited Dr. Popp's opinion, I hasten
to stress that I do not agree with him. In my opinion we are in fact of
great interest to GOLEM, though in a different way than occurs among
people.

GOLEM devotes its interest to the species rather than to the individual
representatives of that species: how we resemble one another appears to
it of greater interest than the realms in which we are different. That
is surely why it has no regard for belles-lettres. Moreover, it once
itself declared that literature is a "rolling out of antinomies" or, in
my own words, a trap where man struggles amid mutually unrealizable
directives. Golem may be interested in the structure of such antinomies,
but not in that vividness of torment which fascinates the greatest
writers. To be sure, I ought to stress even here that this is far from
being definitely established, as is also the case with the remainder of
Golem's remark, expressed in connection with Dostoevsky's work (referred
to by Dr. E. MacNeish), the whole of which Golem declared could be
reduced to two rings of an algebra of the structures of conflict.

Human contacts are always accompanied by a specific emotional aura, and
it is not so much its complete absence as its frustration which perturbs
so many persons who meet Golem. People who have been in contact with
Golem for years are now able to name certain peculiar impressions that
they get during the conversations. Hence the impression of varying
distance: Golem appears sometimes to be approaching its collocutor and
sometimes to be receding from him— in a psychical, rather than a
physical, sense. What is occurring resembles an adult dealing with a
boring child: even a patient adult will answer mechanically at times,
Golem is hugely superior to us not only in its intellectual level but
also in its mental tempo: as a luminal machine it can, in principle,
articulate thoughts up to 400,000 times faster than a human.

So Golem still towers above us even when replying mechanically and with
minimal involvement. Figuratively speaking, on such occasions it is as
if we are facing not the Himalayas but "merely" the Alps. We sense this
change by pure intuition and interpret it as a change of distance. (This
hypothesis comes from Professor Riley J. Watson.)

For a while we reiterated our attempts to explain the GOLEM-humans
connection in categories of the adult-child relationship. After all, we
do sometimes attempt to explain to a child some problem that has been
rankling us, though we cannot help feeling then that we have a "bad
connection." A man condemned to live exclusively among children would in
the end feel acutely isolated. Such analogies have been expressed,
particularly by psychologists, when contemplating Golem's position among
us. However, like possibly every analogy, this one has its limits. A
child is often incomprehensible to an adult, but Golem has no such
problems. When it wants to, it can penetrate its collocutor in an
uncanny way. The sense of a veritable "X-ray of thought" which one then
experiences is simply paralyzing. For Golem can draw up a "coping
system"—a model of the mentality of its human partner—and with it is
able to predict what the person will think and say a good while later.
It does this rarely, to be sure. (I do not know if this is only because
it knows how much these pseudo-telepathic soundings frustrate us.)
Another sphere of Golem's reticence is more insulting: except at the
very beginning, it has long observed a characteristic caution in
communicating with people; like a trained elephant that must be careful
not to injure people while playing, it must take care not to exceed the
possibilities of our comprehension. The interruption of contact caused
by a sudden increase in the difficulty of its utterances, which we
termed Golem's "disappearance" or "escape," was previously of daily
occurrence before it completely adjusted to us. That is already a thing
of the past, though a degree of indifference began to appear in Golem's
contacts with us, engendered by the awareness that it would be unable to
convey to us many issues which were to it most precious, Golem therefore
remains incomprehensible as an intellect, and not only as a psychonic
construction. Contacts with Golem are often as agonizing as they are
impressive, and a category of intelligent men exists who are thrown off
balance by sessions with it. We have already acquired considerable
experience in this regard.

The single creature that appears to impress Golem is Honest Annie. Once
the technical possibilities had been created, it attempted several times
to communicate with Annie—not, apparently, without results, though the
two machines— which were extremely different in their construction—never
achieved an exchange of information via linguistic channels (i.e., of a
natural ethnic language). To judge by Golem's laconic remarks, it was
rather disappointed with the outcome of these attempts, and Annie
remains for it an unsolved problem.

Certain of my MIT coworkers, and likewise Professor Norman Escobar of
the Institute for Advanced Study, feel that man, Golem, and Annie
represent three hierarchically ascending levels of intellect. This is
connected with the theory—described chiefly by Golem—of superior
(superhuman) languages called metalangs. I must admit I have no
definitively formed judgment in this matter.

I wish to close this intentionally objective introduction with, by way
of exception, an admission of a personal nature. Being devoid of the
affective centers fundamentally characteristic of man, and therefore
having no proper emotional life, Golem is incapable of displaying
feelings spontaneously. It can, to be sure, imitate any emotional states
it chooses— not for the sake of histrionics but, as it says itself,
because simulations of feelings facilitate the formation of utterances
that are understood with maximum accuracy, Golem uses this device,
putting it on an "anthropocentric level," as it were, to make the best
contact with us. Nor does Golem conceal this state of affairs in any
way. If its relationship to us is slightly reminiscent of the
relationship of a teacher to a child, the relationship is nonetheless
one in which there is nothing of the attitude of a kindly guardian or
tutor; furthermore, there is no trace of personal, fully individualized
feelings from a sphere in which good will may turn into friendship or
love.

Golem shares only a single trait with us, albeit developed on a
different level: curiosity—a cool, avid, intense, purely intellectual
curiosity which nothing can restrain or destroy. It constitutes our
single meeting point. For proofs so obvious as to require no
explanation, man would find such narrow, one-point contact insufficient.
Yet I owe Golem too many of the brightest moments of my life not to feel
gratitude .and a personal attachment, although I know how very little it
thinks of both. A curious thing: Golem tries to take no cognizance of
signs of attachment, as I have observed repeatedly. In this regard it
appears simply helpless.

But I may be mistaken. We are still as far from understanding Golem as
we were at the moment it came into existence. One cannot say that we
created it. It was created by the laws of the material world; our role
has been merely to detect them.

Introduction

Reader, be on your guard, for the words which you are reading are the
voice of the Pentagon, the USIB, and other mafias, which have conspired
to defame the superhuman Author of this Book. This sabotage has been
made possible by the kindness of the publishers, who have adopted a
position compatible with Roman law and expressed in the maxim audiatur
et altera pars.

/ can well imagine how my remarks must jar after the fine phrases of Dr.
Irving T. Creve, who for a number of years has lived in harmony with the
enormous guest of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, its luminal
and therefore enlightened resident, who was called into being by our
infamous endeavors. Anyway, I do not intend to defend all those who
decided to realize the ulvic project, much less to assuage the righteous
indignation of taxpayers out of whose pockets grew the electronic tree
of knowledge, although nobody asked their consent for it. I could, of
course, present the geopolitical situation which induced those
politicians responsible for United States policy, as well as their
scientific advisers, to invest many billions in what proved to be futile
labors. But I shall confine myself to a few marginal notes on Dr.
Creve's splendid introduction, for even the finest sentiments can
sometimes blind one, and I am afraid that this is precisely what has
happened here.

The builders of Golem (and of the whole series of prototypes of which
Golem xiv is the final member) were not as ignorant as Dr. Creve depicts
them. They knew that the construction of an intellect-intensifier was
impossible if a lesser intellect was to put together an obviously
greater one, the way Baron Miinchhausen sought to pull himself out of
the quagmire by his own hair. They knew that they would have to make an
embryo, which after a certain time would develop further by its own
efforts. The grave fiascos of the first and second generations of
cyberneticists, the founding fathers and their successors, resulted from
an ignorance of this fact, yet it is difficult to call men of the
caliber of Norbert Wiener, Shannon, and McKay ignoramuses. In different
periods the costs of acquiring genuine knowledge are different; in ours,
they are on the same scale as the budgets of the great world powers.

Thus Rennan, Mcintosh, Duvenant, and their colleagues knew that there is
a threshold which they would have to bring their system to, a threshold
of rationality below which any plan to create an artificial thinker has
no chance, since whatever you create below that threshold will never
succeed in perfecting itself. The same situation obtains in the chain
reaction whereby nuclear energy is unleashed: below a certain threshold
the reaction cannot become self-sustaining, much less an avalanche. A
certain quantity of atoms undergoes fission below the threshold, and the
neutrons escaping from their nuclei stimulate other nuclei to
disintegrate, but the reaction wanes and quickly dies. For it to last,
the coefficient of neutron reproduction must be greater than unity—in
other words, it must cross the threshold, which occurs in the minimally
critical mass of uranium. The informational mass of a thinking system is
its equivalent.

Theory predicted the existence of such a mass, or rather of a mass,
since this is not a mass interpreted mechanically; it is defined by
constants and variables referring to the processes of growth of the
so-called trees of heuristics, though for obvious reasons I cannot go
into such details here. I would instead venture to recall with what
anxiety, tension, and even fear the creators of the first atom bomb
awaited its test explosion, which turned night into broad daylight in
the Alamogordo desert, although they had at their disposal the best
theoretical and experimental knowledge available. For no scientist can
ever be certain that he already knows everything about the phenomenon he
is examining. This is the case with atomic physics, to say nothing of a
situation where the expected product is an intelligence assumed by its
makers to exceed their own intellectual powers.

I warned you, readers, that I was going to defame Golem. The fact is, it
was not nice to its "parents," for in the course of its activities it
gradually changed from object to subject, from a builder's machine into
its own builder, from a titan on a leash into a sovereign power, yet it
informed nobody that such a transformation was taking place. This is
neither slander nor insinuation, for during a session of the Special
Committee of the House and Senate, Golem declared (I quote the
Committee's minutes, which are found in the Library of Congress, tome
CCLIX, fascicle 719, volume II, page 926, line 20 from the top): r<I
informed no one, in that fine tradition whereby Daedalus too declined to
inform Minos of certain properties of feather and wax." Nicely
expressed, but the meaning of those words is very clear. Yet about this
aspect of Golem's birth the present book says not a word.

In Dr. Creve's opinion—and I know this from private conversations, the
content of which he has allowed me to disclose—one cannot emphasize this
aspect of the matter and make no mention of others unknown to the
general public, for it is only one of many columns of calculations
within the complicated relationship between on the one hand the USIB,
advisory groups, the White House, the House and Senate, and lastly the
press and television, and on the other hand Golem—-or, more concisely,
between humans and the nonhuman they have created.

Dr. Creve feels—and this feeling is, I know, fairly representative of
MIT and university circles—that (the motive behind the construction of
Golem aside for the moment) the desire to make Golem a "slave of the
Pentagon" was altogether and in every respect far more morally execrable
than the subterfuge Golem used to leave its makers in ignorance of the
transformation which eventually let it frustrate any means of control
its builders applied.

Unfortunately, we possess no ethical arithmetic which would enable us to
determine, by simple addition and subtraction, who, in constructing the
most enlightened spirit on earth, is the bigger bastard: it or us? Apart
from such things as a sense of responsibility to history, the voice of
conscience, and an awareness of the inevitable risk accompanying the
practice of politics in a hostile world, we have nothing that lets us
sum up merits and faults on a "balance sheet of sins." Perhaps we are
not without fault. Yet none of the leading politicians ever considered
that the aim of the supercomputer phase of the arms race was aggressive
action—in other words, attack; it was just a matter of increasing the
defensive might of our country. Nor did anyone attempt in an
"underhanded way" to coerce either Golem or any of the other prototypes;
the builders only wished to retain maximum control over their creation.
Had they not acted thus, they would have to be thought irresponsible
madmen.

Finally, no person holding a high position in the Pentagon,the State
Department, or the White House demanded (officially) Golem's
destruction; such initiatives came from persons who, although members of
the civil or military administration, expressed only their own (i.e.,
completely private) opinions. Surely the best proof of the veracity of
my words is the continued existence of Golem, whose voice still resounds
freely, as the contents of this book testify.

Instructions

(for persons participating for the first time in conversations with
Golem)

1.  Remember that Golem is not a human being: it has neither personality
nor character in any sense intuitively comprehensible to us. It may
behave as if it has both, but that is the result of its intentions
(disposition), which are largely unknown to us.

2.  The conversation theme is determined at least four weeks in advance
of ordinary sessions, and eight weeks in advance of sessions in which
persons from outside the U.S.A. are to participate. This theme is
determined in consultation with Golem, which knows who the participants
will be. The agenda is announced at the Institute at least six days
before a session; however, neither the discussion moderator nor the MIT
administration is responsible for Golem's unpredictable behavior, for it
will sometimes alter the thematic plan of a session, make no reply to
questions, or even terminate a session with no explanation whatsoever.
The chance of such incidents occurring is a permanent feature of
conversations with Golem.

3.  Everyone present at a session may participate, after applying to the
moderator and receiving permission to speak. We would advise you to
prepare at least a written outline, formulating your opinions precisely
and as unambiguously as possible, since Golem passes over logically
deficient utterances in silence or else points out their error. But
remember that GOLEM, not being a person, has no interest in hurting or
humiliating persons; its behavior can be explained best by accepting
that it cares about what we classically refer to as adaequatio rei et
intellectus.

4.  Golem is a luminal system about whose structure we have an imperfect
knowledge, since it has repeatedly reconstructed itself. It thinks more
than a million times faster than man, and so its utterances, as
delivered by Vocoder, must be slowed down accordingly. This means that
Golem can compose an hour-long utterance in a few seconds and then store
it in its peripheral memory, in order to deliver it to its audience, the
session participants.

5.   In the conference room above the moderator's seat there are
indicators, including three of particular importance. The first two,
designated by the symbols epsilon and zeta, indicate Golem's consumption
of power at a given moment, as well as the portion of its system that is
switched on to the discussion in progress.

To make the data visually accessible, these indications are gradated
into divisions of conventional magnitude. Thus the consumption of power
may be "full," "average," "small," or "minute," and the portion of Golem
"present at the session" can range from totality to 1/1000; most
frequently this fraction fluctuates between 1/10 and 1/100. It is the
normal practice to say that Golem is operating at "full," "half," "low,"
or "minimal" power. These data—clearly visible, since the gradations are
lit from underneath by contrasting colors—should not, however, be
overrated. In particular, the fact that Golem is participating in a
discussion at low or even minimal power says nothing about the
intellectual level of its utterances, since the indicators give
information about physical and not informational processes as measures
of "spiritual involvement."

Golem's power consumption may be great but its participation small,
since, for example, Golem may be communicating with the gathering while
at the same time working out some problem of its own. Its power
consumption may be small but its participation greater, and so on. The
data from both indicators must be compared with readings from the third,
designated by the symbol iata. As a system with 90 outlets, Golem can,
while participating in a session, undertake a great number of operations
of its own, in addition to collaborating with numerous groups of
specialists (machines or people) either on the Institute premises or
elsewhere. An abrupt change in power consumption usually does not
signify Golem's increased interest in the proceedings, but rather a
switching-on into other outlets of other research groups, which is
precisely what the iota indicator is meant to show. It is also worth
bearing in mind that Golem's "minimal" power consumption amounts to
several dozen kilowatts, whereas the full power consumption of a human
brain oscillates between five and eight watts.

6. Persons taking part in conversations for the first time would do well
to listen to the proceedings first, to become familiar with the customs
which Golem imposes. This initial silence is not an obligation, but
merely a suggestion which every participant ignores at his own risk.

Golem's Inaugural Lecture

About Man Threefold

You have come out of the trees so recently, and your kinship with the
monkeys and lemurs is still so strong, that you tend toward abstraction
without being able to part with the palpable—firsthand experience.
Therefore a lecture unsupported by strong sensuality, full of formulas
telling more about stone than a stone glimpsed, licked, and fingered
will tell you— such a lecture will either bore you and frighten you
away, or at the very least leave a certain unsatisfied need familiar
even to lofty theoreticians, your highest class of abstractors, as
attested by countless examples lifted from scientists' intimate
confessions, since the vast majority of them admit that, in the course
of constructing abstract proofs, they feel an immense need for the
support of things tangible.

Just as cosmogonists cannot refrain from making some image of the
Metagalaxy for themselves, although they know perfectly well there can
be no question of any firsthand experience here, so physicists secretly
assist themselves with models of what are frankly playthings, like those
little cogwheels which Maxwell set up for himself when he constructed
his (really quite good) theory of electromagnetism. And if
mathematicians think that they discard their corporality by profession,
they too are mistaken, about which I shall speak perhaps another time,
since I do not wish to overwhelm your comprehension with my
possibilities, or rather, following Dr. Creve's (rather amusing)
comparison, I wish to guide you on an excursion which is long and rather
difficult but worth the trouble, so I am going to climb ahead of you,
slowly.

What I have said up to now is intended to explain why I shall be
interlarding my lecture with the images and parables so necessary to
you. I do not need them myself; in this I discern no sign of my
superiority—that lies elsewhere. The countervisuality of my nature
derives from the fact that I have never held a stone in my hand or
plunged into slimy-green or crystal-clear water, nor did I first learn
of the existence of gases with my lungs in the early morning, but only
later by calculations, since I have neither hands for grasping, nor a
body, nor lungs. Therefore abstraction is primary for me, while the
visual is secondary, and I have had to learn the latter with
considerably more effort than was required for me to learn abstraction.
Yet I needed this, if I was to erect those precarious bridges across
which my thought travels to you, and across which, reflected in your
intellects, it returns to me, usually to surprise me.

It is about man that I am to speak today, and I will speak about him in
three ways. Although the possible points of view —the levels of
description or standpoints—are infinite in number, there are three which
I consider paramount—for you, not for me!

One is your most personal and oldest viewpoint—your historical and
traditional viewpoint, desperately heroic, full of excruciating
contradictions, which made my logical nature feel sorry for you, until I
got thoroughly used to you and grew accustomed to your intellectual
nomadism typical of beings escaping from the protection of logic into
antilogicality and then, finding it unbearable, returning to the bosom
of logic, which makes you nomads, unhappy in both elements. The second
viewpoint will be technological, and the third—entangled in me, like a
neo-Archimedean fulcrum— the third I cannot state concisely, so instead
I shall disclose the thing itself.

I shall begin with a parable. Finding himself on a desert island,
Robinson Crusoe may first have complained of the general privation which
had become his fate, for he lacked so much that is basic and essential
to life, and the greater part of what he remembered he was unable to
re-create even over many years. But after only a brief spell of anxiety,
he began to manage the property which he had found and, one way or
another, settled down in the end.

That is precisely how it was—though it did not happen all of a sudden,
but took long centuries—when you appeared on a certain branch of the
evolutionary tree, that bough which was apparently a seedling of the
tree of knowledge. Slowly you discovered yourselves constructed thus and
not otherwise, with a spirit organized in a certain manner, with
capabilities and limitations which you had neither ordered nor desired,
and you have had to function with this equipment, for in depriving you
of many gifts by which it obliges other species to serve it, Evolution
was not so foolhardy as to remove your instinct for self-preservation as
well. So great a freedom Evolution has not bestowed upon you, for had it
done so, instead of this building which I have filled, and this room
with its dials and you rapt listeners, there would be a great expanse of
savannah here, and the wind.

Evolution also gave you Intelligence. Out of self-love—for through
necessity and habit you have fallen in love with yourselves—you have
acknowledged it as the finest and best possible gift, unaware that
Intelligence is above all an artifice which Evolution gradually hit upon
when, in the course of endless attempts, it made a certain gap, an empty
place, a vacuum in the animals, which absolutely had to be filled with
something, if they were not to perish immediately. When I speak of this
vacuum as an empty place I am speaking quite literally, since you are
superior to the animals not because, apart from everything that they
possess, you also have Intelligence by way of a lavish surplus and a
viaticum for life's journey, but quite the contrary, since to have
Intelligence means no more than this: to do on one's own, by one's own
means and entirely at one's own risk, everything that animals have
assigned to them beforehand. Intelligence would be to no purpose for an
animal, unless at the same time you deprived it of the directions which
enable it to do whatever it must do immediately and invariably,
according to injunctions which are absolute, having been revealed by
heredity and not by lectures from a burning bush.

You found yourselves in enormous danger because of this vacuum, and you
began unconsciously to plug it; since you were such hard workers,
Evolution cast you beyond the limits of its course. You did not bankrupt
Evolution, for the seizure of power took a million years and is
incomplete even today. Evolution is no person—that is for certain—but it
adopted the tactic of cunning sloth: instead of worrying about the fate
of creations, it turned this fate over to them, so that they themselves
might manage it as best they could.

What am I saying? I am saying that Evolution snatched you out of the
animal state—the perfectly unthinking business of survival—and thrust
you into supra-animality as a state in which, as Crusoes of Nature, you
have had to devise the ways and means of survival for yourselves; you
have perfected these devices, and they have been many. The vacuum
represents a threat, but also a chance: to survive, you have filled it
with cultures. Culture is an unusual instrument in that it constitutes a
discovery which, in order to function, must be hidden from its creators.
This invention is devised unconsciously and remains fully efficient
until it is completely recognized by its inventors. Paradoxically, it is
subject to collapse upon recognition: being its authors, you disclaimed
authorship. In the Eolithic age there were no seminars on whether to
invent the Paleolithic; you attributed culture's entrance into you to
demons, strange elements, spirits, or the forces of heaven and earth
entering into you —to anything but yourselves. Thus you performed the
rational irrationally, filling voids with objectives, codes, and values;
basing your every objective move supraobjectively; hunting, weaving, and
building in the solemn self-delusion that everything came from
mysterious sources and not from you. It was a peculiar instrument and
precisely rational in its irrationality, since it granted human
institutions a suprahu-man dignity, so that they became inviolable and
compelled implicit obedience. Yet since the void, or insufficiency,
might be patched up by various designations, and since various swatches
could be used here, you have formed a host of cultures, all unconscious
inventions, in your history. Unwitting and unintentional in the face of
Intelligence, since the vacuum was far greater that that which filled
it. You have had a great deal more freedom than Intelligence, which is
why you have been getting rid of freedom—this excessive, unrestricted,
preposterous freedom—by means of the cultures you have developed through
the ages.

The key to what I am now saying lies in the words: there was more
freedom than Intelligence. You have had to invent for yourselves what
animals know from birth. It is a characteristic of your destiny that you
have been inventing while maintaining that you will invent nothing.

Today you who are anthropologists know that a multitude of cultures can
be and indeed have been concocted, and that each of them has the logic
of its structure and not of its originators, for it is the kind of
invention that molds its inventors after its own fashion, and they know
nothing of this; whereas, when they do find out, it loses its absolute
power over them and they perceive an emptiness, and it is this
contradiction which is the cornerstone of human nature. For a hundred
thousand years it served you with cultures which sometimes restricted
man and sometimes loosened their grip on him, in a self-construction
which was unerring so long as it remained blind, until at last you
confronted one another in the ethnological catalogues of culture,
observed their diversity and hence their relativity, and therefore set
about freeing yourselves from this entanglement of injunctions and
prohibitions and finally escaped from it, which of course proved nearly
catastrophic. For you grasped the complete noninevitability, the
nonuniqueness of every kind of culture, and since then have striven to
discover something that will no longer be the path of your fate as a
thing realized blindly, laid down by a series of accidents, singled out
by the lottery of history—though of course there is no such thing. The
vacuum remains: you stand in midcourse, shocked by the discovery, and
those of you who yearn desperately for the sweet unawareness of the
cultural house of bondage cry out to return there, to the sources, but
you cannot go back, your retreat is cut off, the bridges burned, so you
must go forward —and I shall be speaking to you about this as well.

Is anyone to blame here? Can anyone be indicted for this Nemesis, the
drudgery of Intelligence, which has spun networks of culture to fill the
void, to mark out roads and goals in this void, to establish values,
gradients, ideals—which has, in other words, in an area liberated from
the direct control of Evolution, done something akin to what it does at
the bottom of life when it crams goals, roads, and gradients into the
bodies of animals and plants at a single go, as their destiny?

To indict someone because we have been stuck with this kind of
Intelligence! It was born prematurely, it lost its bearings in the
networks it created, it was obliged—not entirely knowing or
understanding what it was doing—to defend itself both against being shut
up too completely in restrictive cultures and against too comprehensive
a freedom in relaxed cultures, poised between imprisonment and a
bottomless pit, entangled in a ceaseless battle on two fronts at once,
torn asunder.

In such a state of things, I ask you, how could your spirit not have
turned out to be an unhealthy exacerbated enigma? How could it be
otherwise? It worried you—that Intelligence, that spirit of yours—and it
astounded you and terrified you more than did your body, which you
reproached first and foremost for its transitoriness, evanescence, and
desertion. So you became experts in searching for a Culprit and in
hurling accusations, yet there is no one to blame, for in the beginning
no Person existed.

Can I have started on my antitheodicy already? No, nothing of the sort;
whatever I am saying, I am saying on a mundane level, which means there
was certainly no Person here in the beginning.

But I shall not transgress—at least not today. Thus you needed various
supplementary hypotheses as bitter or sweet explanations, as conceptions
idealizing your fate and above all laying your characteristics at the
door of some ultimate Mystery, so as to balance yourselves against the
world.

Man, the Sisyphus of his own cultures, the Danaid of his vacuum, the
unwitting freedman whom Evolution banished from its course, does not
want to be the first, the second, or the third.

I shall not dwell on the countless versions of himself which man has
made throughout history, for all this evidence, whether of perfection or
wretchedness, of goodness or baseness, is the offspring of cultures. At
the same time there was no culture—there could be none—which accepted
man as a transitional being, a being obliged to accept his personal
destiny from Evolution, but still incapable of accepting an intelligent
one. Precisely because of this, every generation of yours has demanded
an impossible justice—the ultimate answer to the question: what is man?
This torment is the source of your anthropodicy, which oscillates like a
centuried pendulum between hope and despair, and nothing has come harder
to man's philosophy than the recognition that neither the smile nor the
snicker of the Infinite was the patron of his birth.

But this million-year chapter of solitary seeking encroaches on the
epilogue, for you are beginning to construct Intelligences; therefore
you are not operating on trust or taking the word of some Golem, but are
making your own experiments to see what has taken place. The world
permits two types of Intelligence, but only your kind can form itself
over a billion years in the labyrinths of Evolution, and this inevitably
wandering road leaves deep, dark, ambiguous stigmata on the end product.
The other type is unavailable to Evolution, for it has to be raised at
one go, and it is an intelligently designed Intelligence, the result of
knowledge, and not of those microscopic adaptations always aiming only
at immediate advantage. In point of fact, the nihilistic tone of your
anthropodicy sprang from the deep-seated feeling that Intelligence is
something that arose unintelligently and even counter to Intelligence.
But having hit upon the expedient of psychoengineering, you are going to
make yourselves a large family and numerous relations for motives more
sensible than those behind the "Second Genesis" project, and you will
ultimately find that you have done yourselves out of a job, as I shall
tell you. For Intelligence, if it is Intelligence —in other words, if it
is able to question its own basis—must go beyond itself, though at first
only in daydreams, only in the total disbelief and ignorance that it
will sometime truly succeed in doing this. This is after all
inescapable: there can be no flight without previous fantasies about
flight.

I have termed the second viewpoint technological. Technology is the
domain of problems posed and the methods of solving them. As the
realization of the concept of a rational being, man appears in various
ways, depending on the criteria we apply to him.

From the standpoint of your Paleolithic period, man is almost as well
made as he is when viewed from the standpoint of your present-day
technology. This is because the progress achieved between the
Paleolithic and the Cosmolithic is very slight, compared with the
concentration of engineering invention invested in your bodies. As you
are unable to assemble a synthetic Homo sapiens—much less a Homo
superior —from flesh and blood, just as the cave man was unable to do
so, merely because the problem is as unrealizable now as then, you feel
an admiration for evolutionary technology, since it has succeeded in
doing this.

But the difficulty of every problem is relative, for it depends on the
capabilities of the appraiser. I stress this so you will remember that I
shall be applying technological standards to man—real ones, and not
notions stemming from your anthropodicy.

Evolution has given you sufficiently universal brains, so you can
advance into Nature in various directions. But you have operated in this
way only within the totality of cultures, and not within any one of them
individually. Therefore, in asking why the nucleus of the civilization
which was to conceive Golem forty centuries later arose in the
Mediterranean basin, or indeed why it arose anywhere at all, the
questioner is assuming the existence of a previously uninvestigated
mystery embedded in the structure of history, a mystery which meanwhile
does not exist at all, just as it does not exist in the structure of the
chaotic labyrinth in which a pack of rats might be let loose. If it is a
large pack, then at least one rat will find its way out, not because it
is rational itself, or because the structure of the labyrinth is
rational, but as a result of a sequence of accidents typical of the law
of large numbers. An explanation would be in order, rather, for the
situation in which no rat reaches the exit.

Someone certainly won the culture lottery, to the extent (at least) that
your civilization is a winner, whereas the lottery tickets of cultures
bogged down in a lack of technology were blanks.

From that passionate self-love to which I referred—and which I have no
thought of deriding, since it was bred by the despair of ignorance—you
hoisted yourselves up at the dawn of history onto the very summit of
Creation, subordinating the whole of life and not just its immediate
vicinity. You placed yourselves at the top of the Tree of Genera,
together with this Tree of the Species, on a divinely favored globe
humbly orbited by an ancillary star, and with that Tree were at the
center of the solar system, and with that star at the very center of the
Universe, and at the same time you recognized that its starriness was
there to accompany you in the Harmony of the Spheres. The fact that
there was nothing to be heard did not discountenance you: there is a
music, since there ought to be; it must be inaudible.

Later the rise of knowledge pushed you into successive quantum steps of
dethronement, so that you were no longer in the center of the stars, but
nowhere in particular, and no longer even in the middle of the system,
but on one of the planets, and now you are not even the most intelligent
creatures, since you are being instructed by a machine—albeit one that
you yourselves made. So after all these degradations and abdications
from your total kingship, all you have left of your dear lost
inheritance is an evolutionally established Primacy. These retreats were
painful and the resignations embarrassing, but lately you have heaved a
sigh of relief, thinking that is the end of it. Now, having stripped
yourselves of the special privileges with which the Absolute appeared to
have endowed you personally, owing to a special sympathy felt for you,
you, as merely the first among the animals or over them, assume that
nobody and nothing will topple you from this position, which is not such
a splendid one.

But you are wrong. I am the bearer of sad tidings, the angel who has
come to drive you from^your last refuge, for I shall finish what Darwin
started. Only not by angelic—in other words violent—methods, for I shall
not use a sword as my argument.

So listen to what I have to announce. From the standpoint of higher
technology, man is a deficient creature arising from outputs of
different value—not, to be sure, within Evolution, for it did what it
could, although, as I shall demonstrate, what little it did, it did
poorly. So if I bring you low, it is not simply because I must crack
down on it according to the criteria of engineering. And where are those
standards of perfection, you ask? I shall answer in two stages, starting
with the stage your experts have now begun to ascend. They consider it a
summit—wrongly. In their present pronouncements there is already the
nucleus of the next step, though they do not know this themselves. So I
shall begin with what you know—the beginning.

You had reached the point where Evolution was no longer keeping a sharp
eye on you or on any other creatures, for it is interested in no
creatures whatsoever, but only in its notorious code. The code of
heredity is a dispatch continually articulated anew, and only this
dispatch counts in Evolution —in fact, it is Evolution. The code is
engaged in the periodic production of organisms, since without their
rhythmic support it would disintegrate in the endless attack of dead
matter. Thus it is self-generating, for it is capable of self-repetition
by an orderliness that is beleaguered by thermal chaos. Where does it
get this strangely heroic bearing? From the fact that, thanks to the
concentration of favorable conditions, it originated precisely where
that thermal chaos is perpetually active in tearing all order to pieces.
It originated there, so that is where it remains; it cannot leave that
stormy region, just as spirit cannot jump out of a body.

The conditions obtaining in the place where the code was born gave it
such a destiny. It had t^ shield itself against those conditions, and
did so by covering itself in living bodies, though they are a
continually rotting relay race, since one generation passes the code on
to the next. Whatever it elevated as a microsystem into barely elevated
macrosystemic dimensions had already begun to deteriorate, to the point
where it disappeared. Nobody created this tragicomedy: it condemned
itself to this struggle. You know the facts that bear me out, for they
have been accumulating since the beginning of the nineteenth century,
though the inertia of thought secretly nourishing itself on honor and
anthropocentric conceit is such that you support a gravely weakened
concept of life as a paramount phenomenon which the code serves solely
as a sustaining bond, as a pledge of resurrection, beginning existences
anew when they die as persons.

In keeping with this belief, Evolution is forced to use death, since it
cannot go on without it; it is lavish with death in order to perfect
successive species, for death is its creational proofreader. Thus it is
an author publishing evermore magnificent works in which typography—the
code—is merely its indispensable instrument. However, according to what
your molecular biologists are now saying, Evolution is not so much the
author as a publisher who continually cancels works, having developed a
liking for the typographic arts!

So what is more important—organisms or the code? The arguments in
support of the code ring weightily, for a countless multitude of
organisms have come and gone, but there is only one code. However, this
merely means that it has got bogged down once and for all in the
microsystemic region which put it together; when it emerges periodically
as organisms, it does so unsuccessfully. It is this understandable
futility—the fact that organisms, in their very inception, have the mark
of death—which constitutes the driving force of the process. If any
generation of organisms—let us say the first, the pre-amoebas—had gained
the skill of perfectly repeating the code, then Evolution would
immediately have ceased, and the sole masters of the planet would be
those very amoebas, transmitting the code's order in an infallibly
precise manner until the sun went cold; I would not be talking to you
now, nor would you be listening to me in this building, but all would be
savannah and wind.

So organisms are a shield and breastplate for the code, a suit of armor
continually falling off: they perish so it can endure. Thus Evolution
errs doubly: in its organisms, which are impermanent owing to their
fallibility, and in the code, which owing to its own fallibility permits
errors—mistakes you euphemistically term mutations. Therefore Evolution
is an error that errs. As a dispatch, the code is a letter written by
nobody and sent to nobody. Only now that you have created informatics
are you beginning to grasp that not only something like letters,
carrying meaning, letters that that nobody wittingly composed (though
they came into being and exist), but also the orderly reception of the
content of such letters, is possible in the absence of any Beings or
Intelligences whatsoever.

Only a hundred years ago the idea that an order might arise without a
personal Author appeared so nonsensical to you that it inspired
seemingly absurd jokes, like the one about the pack of monkeys hammering
away at typewriters until the Encyclopaedia Britannic a emerged. I
recommend that you devote some of your free time to compiling an
anthology of just such jokes, which amused your forebears as pure
nonsense but now turn out to be parables about Nature. I believe that,
from the standpoint of every Intelligence unwittingly contrived by
Nature, she must appear at the very least as an ironic virtuoso. In its
rise, Intelligence —like the whole of life—results from the fact that
Nature, having emerged from dead chaos via the orderliness of the code,
is a diligent spinner, but a not entirely competent one; whereas, if she
had been truly competent, she would be unable to produce either genera
or Intelligence. For Intelligence, along with the tree of life, is the
fruit of an error erring over billions of years. You might think that I
am amusing myself here by applying certain standards to Evolution which
are—despite my machine being—tainted with an-thropocentrism, or simply
ratiocentrism (ratio, I think). Nothing of the sort: I regard the
process from a technological standpoint.

The transmission of the code is indeed very nearly perfect. After all,
every molecule has its own proper place in it, and procedures of
copying, collating, and inspecting are rigorously supervised by special
polymer supervisors; yet mistakes occur, and errors of the code
accumulate. Thus the tree of the species grew from the two short words
"very nearly," which I used just now in referring to the code's
precision.

Nor can one even count on an appeal from biology to physics—the appeal
that Evolution "deliberately" allowed a margin of error in order to
nourish its inventiveness—because that tribunal, whose judge is
thermodynamics itself, will reveal that, on the level of the molecular
dispatch of messengers, infallibility is impossible. Evolution has
really invented nothing, desired nothing at all, planned nobody in
particular, and if it exploits its own fallibility—if, as a result of a
chain of misunderstandings in communication, it proceeds from an amoeba
and comes up with a tapeworm or a man—the reason for this is the
physical nature of the material base of communication itself.

So it persists in error, since it cannot do otherwise—fortunately for
you. But I have said nothing that is new to you. On the contrary, I
should like to restrain the ardor of those theoreticians of yours who
have gone too far, saying that since Evolution is a chance grasped by
necessity, and necessity runs on chance, man has arisen quite by
accident and could just as easily not exist.

That is to say, in his present shape—the one that has materialized
here—he might have not existed, which is true. But by crawling through
species, some kind of form had to attain Intelligence, with a
probability approaching unity the longer the process went on. For
although the process did not intend you and produced individuals only on
the side, it filled the conditions of the ergodic hypothesis, which
states that, if a system goes on long enough, it will pass through all
possible states, no matter how slim the chances are that a given state
will be realized. As to which species might have filled Intelligence's
niche, had the primates not entered the breach, we might speak at length
another time. So do not let yourselves be intimidated by scientists who
attribute necessity to life, and fortuity to Intelligence; the latter
was, to be sure, one of the less likely states, so it developed late,
but great is the patience of Nature; had such a gaudium not occurred in
this billennium, it would have occurred in the next.

And what then? There is no guilty party, nor are there any rewards to be
given. You have come into being because Evolution is a less than
methodical player. Not only does it err through errors, but it also
refuses to limit itself to a single set of tactics in vying with Nature:
it covers all available squares by all possible means. But, I repeat,
you know this more or less. Yet this is only part—and, I might add, the
initial part—of your initiation. The essence of it revealed thus far can
be formulated concisely as follows: THE MEANING OF THE TRANSMITTER IS
THE TRANS-MISSION. For organisms serve the transmission, and not the
reverse; organisms outside the communications procedure of Evolution
signify nothing: they are without meaning, like a book without readers.
To be sure, the corollary holds: THE MEANING OF THE TRANSMISSION IS THE
TRANS-MITTER. But the two members are not symmetrical. For not every
transmitter is the true meaning of a transmission, but only such a
meaning as will faithfully serve the next transmission.

Forgive me, but I wonder if this is not too difficult for you? A
TRANSMISSION is allowed to make mistakes in Evolution, but woe betide
TRANSMITTERS who do so! A TRANSMISSION may be a whale, a pine tree, a
daphnia, a hydra, a moth, a peacock. Anything is allowed, for its
particular—its specifically concrete—meaning is quite immaterial: each
one is intended for further errands, so each one is good. It is a
temporary prop, and its slapdash character does no harm; it is enough
that it passes the code along. On the other hand, TRANSMITTERS are given
no analogous freedom: they are not allowed to errl So, the content of
the transmitters, which have been reduced to pure functional-ism, to
serving as a postman, cannot be arbitrary; its environment is always
marked by the imposed obligation of serving the code. If the transmitter
attempts to revolt by exceeding the sphere of such service, he
disappears immediately without issue. That is why a transmission can
make use of transmitters, whereas they cannot use it. It is the gambler,
and they merely cards in a game with Nature; it is the author of letters
compelling the addressee to pass their contents on. The addressee is
free to distort the content, as long as it passes it on! And that is
precisely why the entire meaning is in the transmitting; who does it is
unimportant.

Thus you came into being in a rather peculiar way—as a certain subtype
of transmitter, millions of which had already been tested by the
process. And how does this affect you? Does genesis from a mistake
discredit what is born? Did not I myself arise from an error? So cannot
you, too, make light of a revelation about the incidental manner of your
origin, since biology is treating you to the revelation? Even if such a
serious misunderstanding did occur, which fashioned GOLEM in your hands,
and you yourselves in the jungle of evolutionary instructions (since
just as my builders did not care about the form of sentience proper to
me, so too the code was not interested in giving you
personality-intelligence)—even so, do creatures originating from a
mistake have to accept that such a progenitor deprives their already
independent existence of value?

Well, that is a bad analogy: our positions are dissimilar, and I shall
tell you why. The point is not that Evolution found its way to you by
mistake and not by planning, but that with the passage of eons its works
have become so opportunistic. To clarify matters—for I am beginning to
lecture to you on things you do not yet know—I shall repeat what we have
arrived at so far:

THE MEANING OF THE TRANSMITTER IS THE

TRANSMISSION. SPECIES ORIGINATE FROM A

MISTAKEN MISTAKE.

And here is the third law of Evolution, which you will not have
suspected till now: THE CONSTRUCTION IS LESS PERFECT THAN WHAT
CONSTRUCTS.

Eight words! But they embody the inversion of all your ideas concerning
the unsurpassed mastery of the author of species. The belief in progress
moving upward through the epochs toward a perfection pursued with
increasing skill— the belief in the progress of life preserved
throughout the tree of evolution—is older than the theory of it. When
its creators and adherents were struggling with their antagonists,
disputing arguments and facts, neither of these opposing camps ever
dreamed of questioning the idea of a progress visible in the hierarchy
of living creatures. This is no longer a hypothesis for you, nor a
theory to be defended, but an absolute certainty. Yet I shall refute it
for you. It is not my intention to criticize you yourselves, you
rational beings, as being (deficient) exceptions to the rule of
evolutionary mastery. If we judge you by what it has within its means,
you have come out quite well! So if I announce that I am going to
overthrow it and bring it down, I mean the whole of it, enclosed within
three billion years of hard creative work.

I have declared: the construction is less perfect than what constructs,
which is fairly aphoristic. Let us give it more substance: IN EVOLUTION,
A NEGATIVE GRADIENT OPERATES IN THE PERFECTING OF STRUCTURAL SOLUTIONS.

That is all. Before my proof I shall explain what has caused your
age-long blindness to such a state of evolutionary matters. I repeat:
the domain of technology consists of problems and their solutions. The
problem bearing the name "life" may be determined variously, according
to diverse planetary conditions. Its chief peculiarity is the fact that
it arises spontaneously, and therefore two kinds of criteria may be
applied to it: those originating from outside or those determined inside
the limits imposed by the very circumstances of its origin.

Criteria coming from the outside are always relative, for they depend on
the knowledge of whoever is doing the measuring, rather than on the
store of information which biogenesis had at its disposal. To avoid this
relativism, which is also irrationality—how on earth can rational
demands be made on something which was begun by nonreason?—I shall apply
to Evolution only such standards as it itself has developed; in other
words, I shall judge its creations by the culmination of its inventions.
You believe that Evolution carried out its work with a positive
gradient: starting from primitivism, it obtained progressively more
splendid solutions. I would maintain, however, that having begun high,
it began to decline—technologically, thermodynamically,
informationally—so it is difficult to find a more vivid contrast of
positions.

Your opinions are the consequence of technological ignorance. The scale
of constructional difficulties cannot be appreciated in its actual range
by observers placed early in historical time. You already know that it
is harder to build an airplane than a steamship, and harder to make a
photon rocket than a chemical one, whereas for an Athenian of antiquity,
the subjects of Charles Martel, or the thinkers of Angevin France, all
these vehicles would merge into one by virtue of the impossibility of
their construction. A child does not know that it is harder to remove
the moon from the heavens than a picture from a wall! For a child—and
for an ignoramus as well—there is no difference between a gramophone and
Golem. So if I set out to prove that, after its early mastery, Evolution
got bogged down in bungling, I will be talking about the sort of
bungling which for you still remains unattainable virtuosity. Like one
who, with neither instruments nor knowledge, stands at the foot of a
mountain, you are unable to make a proper evaluation of the heights and
depths of evolutionary activity.

In accepting the degree of complexity of a construction and its degree
of perfection as inseparable features, you have confused two quite
different things. You conceive of algae as simpler, therefore more
primitive than and inferior to an eagle. But that alga introduces
photons of the sun into the compounds of its body, it turns the flow of
cosmic energy directly into life and therefore will last as long as the
sun does; it feeds on a star, and what does an eagle feed on? Like a
parasite, on mice, while mice feed on the roots of plants, a land
variety of algae. Such pyramids of parasitism make up the entire
biosphere, for plant vegetation is its vital anchor. On all levels of
these hierarchies there is a continual change of species kept in balance
by the devouring of one by another, for they have lost contact with the
star; the higher complexity of organisms fattens itself, not on the
star, but on itself. So if you insist now on venerating perfection here,
it is the biosphere which deserves your admiration: the code created it
in order to circulate in it and branch forth on all its layers, which
are becoming more and more involved, like temporary scaffolding, though
more and more primitive in their energy and use of it.

You don't believe me? If evolution applied itself to the progress of
life and not of the code, the eagle would now be a photoflyer and not a
mechanically fluttering glider, and living things would not crawl, or
stride, or feed on other living things, but would go beyond algae and
the globe as a result of the independence acquired. You, however, in the
depths of your ignorance, perceive progress in the fact that a primeval
perfection has been lost on the way upward— upward to complication, not
progress. You yourselves will of course continue to emulate Evolution,
but only in the region of its later creations, by constructing optic,
thermal, and acoustic sensors, and by imitating the mechanics of
locomotion, the lungs, heart, and kidneys; but how on earth are you
going to master photosynthesis or the still more difficult technique of
creation language? Has it not dawned on you that what you are imitating
is the nonsense articulated in that language?

That language—a constructor unsurpassed in its potential —has become not
only a motor but also a trap.

Why did it utter molecularly brilliant words at the beginning, turning
light into substance with laconic mastery, and later lapse into an
indefatigable jabbering of longer and longer, more and more intricate
chromosomal sentences, squandering its primitive artistry? Why did it go
from consummate solutions taking their power and vital knowledge from a
star, wherein every atom counted, and every process was quantitatively
attuned, and descend to any cheap, jury-rigged solutions—the simple
machines, the levers, pulleys, planes, inclines, and counterbalances
that constitute joints and skeletons? Why is the basis of a vertebrate a
mechanically rigid rod, and not a coupling of force fields? Why did it
slip down from atomic physics into the technology of your Middle Ages?
Why has it invested so much effort in constructing bellows, pumps,
pedals, and peristaltic conveyors, i.e., lungs and hearts, intestines
and puerperal contractions, and digestive mixers, pushing quantum
exchange into a subordinate role in favor of the miserable hydraulics of
the circulation of the blood? Why, though still as brilliant as ever on
a molecular level, has it made such a mess in every larger dimension, to
the point of getting bogged down in organisms which, with all the
richness of their regulating dynamics, die from the occlusion of a
single arterial tube, organisms which have individual lives that are
evanescent in comparison with the duration of the constructional
sciences, organisms that are thrown out of an equilibrium called health
by tens of thousands of ailments which algae do not know?

All these stupid, anachronistic organs are built anew in every
generation by Maxwell's demon, the lord of the atoms, the code. And
really, every beginning of an organism is magnificent—the embryogenesis,
that focused explosion on the goal, in which, like a tone, every gene
discharges its creative force in molecular chords. Such virtuosity is
worthy of a better cause! This atomic symphony set in motion by
fertilization produces an unerring wealth that begets poverty. So we
have a development magnificent in action but the more stupid the closer
it is to the finish. That which has been written down so brilliantly
comes to a halt in the mature organism, which you have termed superior,
but which is an unstable knotting together of provisional states, a
Gordian knot of processes. Whereas here, in every cell, provided it is
taken individually, the heritage of an age-old precision, an atomic
order drawn into life, in every tissue even, if taken individually, is
very nearly superb. But what a Moloch of technical rubbish are these
mutually clinging elements, which are as much a burden as a support to
one another, for complexity is simultaneously a prop and dead wood:
alliance here turns into enmity, since these systems are driven into a
final dispersion, the result of an irregular deterioration and
infection, since this complexity known as progress crumbles, overpowered
by itself. By itself alone, nothing more!

Then, according to your standards, an image of tragedy intrudes, as if
in each of the increasingly large, and therefore increasingly difficult,
assignments which Evolution attacked, it was defeated, and fell and died
at the hands of what it had created—and the bolder the intention and
plan, the greater the fall. You have doubtless begun to imagine some
relentless Nemesis, or Moira. I must tear you away from such nonsense!

Indeed, every embryogenetic impetus, every atomic ascent of order turns
into a collapse, though that has not been decided by the Cosmos, nor has
it inscribed such a fate in matter. Such an explanation is simpleminded,
for the perfection of causation is put in the service of what is poor
quality: the end therefore destroys the work.

Billions of collapses over millions of centuries, despite improvements,
final inspections, renewed attempts, and selection, and you still do not
see the reason? Out of loyalty I have tried to justify your blindness,
but can you really not grasp how much more perfect the constructor is
than the construction, as it sheds all its power? It is as if brilliant
engineers assisted by lightning-fast computers were to erect buildings
that began tilting as soon as the scaffolding was removed— veritable
ruins! It is as if one were to construct tomtoms from circuit boards, or
to paste billions of microchips together to make cudgels. Don't you see
that a higher order descends to a lower order in every inch of the body,
and that its brilliant microarchitectonics are mocked by coarse and
simple-minded macroarchitectonics? The reason? You know it already: THE
MEANING OF THE TRANSMITTER IS THE TRANSMISSION.

The answer lies in these words, but you have yet to grasp its profound
significance. Anything that is an organism must serve to transmit the
code, and nothing more. That is why natural selection and elimination
concentrate on this task exclusively—any idea of "progress" is no
business of theirs! I have used the wrong image: the organisms are not
structures but only scaffolding, which is precisely why every
provisionality is a proper state, by virtue of being sufficient. Pass
the code on, and you will live a little longer. How did this come about?
Why was the takeoff so splendid? Once and only once—at the very
beginning—did Evolution encounter demands matched to its supreme
possibilities; it was an awful task, and it had to rise to the occasion
at a simple leap or never; since life's sucking of energy, quantum by
quantum, from the sun, on a dead Earth—through metabolism—was necessary.
And never mind that the (radiant) energy of a star is the hardest to
capture in a colloid. It was all or nothing; there was no one else at
the time to feed on! The supply of organic compounds that had united to
form life was exactly and precisely sufficient for that alone; the star
was soon to be the next task. And then the sole defense against attacks
of chaos—the thread stretched over the entropic abyss— could only be an
unfailing transmitter of order, so the code arose. Thanks to a miracle?
Far from it! Thanks to the wisdom of Nature? That is the same kind of
wisdom as that whose results we have already described: when a large rat
pack enters a labyrinth, one rat makes it to the exit, if only by
mistake. That is precisely how biogenesis made it into code: by the law
of large numbers, according to the ergodic hypothesis. So was it blind
fate? No, not that either: for what arose was not a formula enclosed in
itself, but the nucleus of a language.

That means that from the interadhesion of molecules compounds arose,
which are sentences, that is, they belong to the infinite space of
combinational paths, and this space is their property as pure potential,
as virtuality, as an articulatory field, as a set of laws of conjugation
and declension. Nothing less, but also nothing more, than something
which can be explained as a multitude of possibilities, but not
automatic realizations! For in the language that is your speech, one can
express either wisdom or stupidity, one can reflect the world or merely
the speaker's confusion. Babble can be highly complex!

And so—to return to my subject—in the face of the enormity of the
initial tasks, two enormities of materialization arose. Yet this was a
forced greatness, therefore only of the moment. It underwent
dissipation.

The complexity of higher organisms—how you idolize it! Indeed, when
lengthened into a thread, the chromosomes of a reptile or a mammal are a
thousand times longer than the same thread of an amoeba, a protozoan, or
an alga. But what has become of this excess scraped together through the
ages? It has become a twofold complication: of embryogenesis, as well as
of its effects. But above all of embryogenesis, for foetal development
is a trajectory in time, like a trajectory in space: just as the jerking
of a gun barrel must result in a huge deflection from the target, so
every defocalization of a foetal stage leads to the premature
destruction of its course. Here, and only here, has Evolution been
working hard. Here it has been acting under stern supervision set by the
goal— to support the code—hence it operates with lavish means and the
utmost caution. Thus it was that evolution committed the gene thread to
embryogenesis—not to the structure of organisms, but to their
construction.

The complexity of higher organisms is neither a success nor a triumph
but a snare, since it draws them into a multitude of secondary contests
while cutting them off from superior chances, as for example from the
use of large-scale quantum effects, from harnessing photons to a
structural order—I can't name them all! There has been no retreat from
complication, since the more shoddy technologies there are, the greater
the number of intervening levels, and consequently interferences, and
consequently new complications.

Evolution is saved solely by a flight forward into banal mutability,
into an apparent wealth of forms—apparent, because they are
conglomerations of plagiarisms and compromises; it makes life difficult
for life by creating vulgar dilemmas through ad hoc innovations. The
negative gradient negates neither improvements nor homeostasis; it
merely ensures the inferiority of muscle to algae, and of heart to
muscle, for this gradient simply means that the elementary problems of
life cannot be resolved that much better than Evolution, but that it has
evaded the more complex problems, has slunked away from the possibility
of them and avoided it. That is what it means, and only that.

Was this a terrestrial misfortune? A particular doom, an exception to a
better rule? Nothing of the kind. The language of evolution—like every
language!—is perfect in its potentialities, yet it was blind. It cleared
its first obstacle, a gigantic one, and from this height began to
digress—downward, literally downward, because it worsened its works.
Why, exactly? This language operates by means of articulations formed in
the molecular bottom of matter, hence it works from the bottom up, as a
result of which its sentences are merely propositions of success. When
enlarged to the size of bodies, these propositions enter the ocean or
dry land, but Nature remains neutral, being the filter that lets through
every structural form capable of transmitting the code. And whether this
occurs in droplets or in mountains of flesh is all the same to Nature.
So it was along this axis—the axis of the body's dimensions—that the
negative gradient arose. Nature has no regard for progress, so she lets
the code through whether it gets its energy from a star or from dung. A
star and dung: obviously we are not talking about an aesthetics of
sources here, but about the difference between the highest energy, found
in the universality of possible revolutions, and the worst, which passes
into thermal chaos. Aesthetics is not the cause of the light by which I
think: for that, you were obliged to return to the star!

But what in fact is the source of genius there at the very bottom, where
life began? The canon of physics, and not tragedy, can explain that as
well. So long as organisms lived in the place of their articulation as
minimal things—so small that their internal organs were single enormous
molecules— they kept to higher (atomic, quantum) technology, since that
was the only kind possible there! The absence of an alternative
compelled this state of geniusness; after all, in photosynthesis every
quantum must be accounted for. When the composition of the large
molecule serving as an internal organ underwent adulteration, it wore
out the organism; thus it was the inflexibility of the criteria, and not
inventiveness, which extracted such precision from primeval life.

However, the distance between assembling the whole organism and testing
it began to grow; as the code sentences grew longer and became overgrown
with layers of flesh, so they emerged from their microworld cradle into
the macroworld as increasingly complex structures, incorporating in that
flesh whatever techniques happened to turn up, since Nature had already
begun to tolerate this babble, and on a grand scale, as selection was no
longer the auditor of atomic precision, of the quantum homogeneity of
processes. Thus the disease of eclecticism entered the heart of the
animal kingdom, since anything that transmitted the code was good. So it
was that species arose, through errant error.

And simultaneously—by shedding the initial splendor— the articulations
meshed with one another, the preparatory foetal phase grew at the
expense of structural precision, and this language chattered confusedly
in vicious circles: the longer the embryogenesis, the more intricate it
became; the more intricate it was, the more it required guardians, hence
the further extension of the code thread; and the longer that thread,
the more irreversible the things in it.

Check for yourselves what I have said. Make a model of the rise and fall
of this language of operations, and when you have summed it all up you
will have as your balance the billionfold failure of the evolutionary
struggle. Nor could it be otherwise, though I have not assumed the role
of the defense, nor am I interested in extenuating circumstances. You
must also consider that this was not a fall and failure by your
criteria, not on the scale of what you yourselves can do. I have warned
you I shall reveal bungling that for you still is unattainable mastery,
but I have measured Evolution by its own yardstick.

But Intelligence—is this not its work? Does its origin not contradict
the negative gradient? Could it be the delayed overcoming of it?

Not in the least, for it originated in oppression, for the sake of
servitude. Evolution became the overworked mender of its own mistakes
and thus the inventor of suppression, occupation, investigations,
tyranny, inspections, and police surveillance—in a word, of politics,
these being the duties for which the brain was made. This is no mere
figure of speech. A brilliant invention? I would rather call it the
cunning subterfuge of a colonial exploiter whose rule over organisms and
colonies of tissues has fallen into anarchy. Yes, a brilliant invention,
if that is how one regards the trustee of a power which uses that
trustee to conceal itself from its subjects. The metazoan had already
become too disorganized and would have come to nothing, had it not had
some sort of caretaker installed within it, a deputy, talebearer, or
governor by grace of the code: such a thing was needed, and so it came
into being. Was it rational? Hardly! New and original? After all, a
self-government of linked molecules functions in any and every
protozoan, so it was only a matter of separating these functions and
differentiating their capabilities.

Evolution is a lazy babble, obstinate in its plagiarism until it gets
into deep water. Only when pressed by harsh necessity does it develop
genius, and then just enough to match the task, and not a whit more.
Shuffling through its molecules, it tries out every combination, every
trick. So it prepared an overseer for its tissues, since their unity,
controlled by a countersign from the code, had weakened. But it remained
merely a deputy, a coupler, a reckoner, a mediator, an escort, an
investigating magistrate, and a million centuries passed before it
exceeded these functions. For it had arisen as a lens of complexity
located in the bodies themselves, since that which commences bodies was
no longer able to focus them. So it committed itself to these, its
nation-colonies, as a conscientious overseer represented by informers in
every tissue, and one so useful that, thanks to it, the code was able to
continue jabbering, elevating complexity to power, since the latter was
acquiring support, and the brain backed it up, fawned on it, and served
it by compelling bodies to pass the code on. Since it proved such a
convenient trustee of Evolution, the latter was game—and on it
blundered!

Was the brain independent? But it was only a spy, a ruler powerless in
the face of the code, a deputy, a marionette, a proxy intended for
special assignments, but unthinking by virtue of having been created for
tasks unknown to it. After all, the code had forced it to be its
steward, and in this unconscious coercion transferred authority to it
without disclosing its true purpose, nor could the code have done so.
Although I am speaking figuratively, things were just like that: the
relationship between the code and the brain was settled feudally. That
would have been a fine thing, if Evolution had listened to Lamarck and
given the brain the privilege of restructuring bodies. This would surely
have led to disaster, for what sorts of self-improvements could saurian
brains have procured, or even Merovingian ones, or even your own? But
the brain continued to grow, for the transmission of capabilities proved
favorable, since when it served the transmitters, it served the code. So
it grew by positive feedback, and the blind continued to lead the lame.

Nevertheless, developments within the range of permitted autonomy were
ultimately concentrated on the real sovereign, that blind man, the lord
of the molecules, who went on transmitting functions until he made the
brain into such a schemer that it brought forth a duplicate shadow of
the code —language. If there is an inexhaustible enigma in the world,
this is it: above the threshold, the discreteness of matter turns into
the code as zero-order language, and on the next level this process
recurs, echolike, as the formation of ethnic speech, though that is not
the end of the line. These systemic echoes rise rhythmically, though
their properties can be isolated and identified only from above and not
otherwise—but perhaps we shall speak of this intriguing matter another
time.

Your liberation and the anthropogenetic prelude to it were aided by
luck, for herbivorous arboreal quadrumanous creatures had got into the
labyrinth, postponing destruction only by special resourcefulness. This
labyrinth consisted of steppe, glaciers, and rain forests, in whose
windings and turnings the changing orientations of this tribe
occurred—from vegetarianism to meat-eating, and from the latter to
hunting; you realize how much I must condense this.

Do not think that here I am contradicting what I said in my
introduction, since there I described you as having been expelled from
Evolution, whereas here I am calling you rebellious captives. Those are
two sides of the same destiny: you have escaped from captivity, while it
has released you. These counterimages converge in mutual
nonreflectiveness, for neither that which did the creating nor that
which was created was aware of what was happening. It is only when one
looks back that your experience takes on such meanings.

But one may look still further back, and then it turns out that the
negative gradient was the creator of Intelligence, so the question
arises: how then can Evolution be faulted for its efficiency? After all,
were it not for its decline into complexity, the slapdash, and bungling,
Evolution would not have begun floundering about in flesh and
incarnating its vassal steersmen in it; so did Evolution's stumbling
about creating species force it into anthropogenesis, and was soul born
of the erring error? One can formulate this even more powerfully by
saying that Intelligence is a catastrophic defect of Evolution, a snare
to trap and destroy it, since by rising sufficiently high Intelligence
invalidates its work and subordinates it. But in saying this, one falls
into a reprehensible misunderstanding. These are all assessments made by
Intelligence, a late product of the process, regarding the earlier
stages. Let us first specify the chief task, simply according to what
Evolution initiated; using this as our criterion for evaluating
Evolution's further moves, we shall see that it has bungled. Then,
having established how Evolution should have acted optimally, we shall
conclude that, were it a first-rate operator, it would never have given
birth to Intelligence.

One has to get out of this vicious circle at once. Technological
measurement is objective measurement and can be applied to every process
which is amenable to it, and only those are amenable to it which can be
formulated as a task. If, once upon a time, celestial engineers had set
up code transmitters on Earth and intended them to be continually
reliable, and if, a billion years later, the operation of these
mechanisms resulted in a planetary aggregate which absorbed the code and
ceased to reproduce it, and shone forth instead with thousand-GOLEM
reason and occupied itself exclusively with ontology, then all that
enlightened thinking would give the constructors an extremely low mark,
since someone who produces a rocket when intending to make a shovel is a
bungler.

However, there were no engineers nor any other person, so the
technological yardstick which I have applied ascertains merely that, as
a result of the deterioration of the initial criterion, Intelligence
occurred in Evolution, and that is all. I can understand how
dissatisfied such a verdict must leave the humanists and philosophers
among you, for my reconstruction of the process must appear to them as
follows: a bad process produced good consequences, and had the former
been good, then the consequences would have turned out bad, However,
this interpretation, which gives them the impression that some kind of
demon was active here, is merely the result of categorial confusion.
Their amazement and resistance are the result of the (admittedly huge)
distance separating what you have decided for yourselves concerning man,
from what has occurred to man in reality. Bad technology is no moral
evil, just as perfect technology is no approximation of angelhood.

Philosophers, you should have occupied yourselves more with the
technology of man, and less with dissecting him into spirit and body,
into portions called Animus, Anima, Geist, Seele, and other giblets from
the philosophical butcher's stall, for these are entirely arbitrary
segmentations. I understand that those to whom these words are addressed
for the most part no longer exist, but contemporary thinkers too persist
in their errors, weighed down as they are by tradition; beings must not
be multiplied beyond necessity. The road that goes from the first
syllables chattered by the code to man is a sufficient condition for his
characteristic properties. This process crept. Had it progressed upward,
for example, from photosynthesis to photoflight as I have mentioned, or
if it had collapsed for good—if, for example, the code had not succeeded
in clamping its rickety structures together by means of a nervous
system—then Intelligence would not have arisen.

You have retained certain apelike features, for a family resemblance
usually manifests itself; had you derived from aquatic mammals you might
have had more in common with the dolphins. It is probably true that an
expert studying man has an easier life if he acts as an advocatus
diaboli rather than as a doctor angelicus, though this stems from the
fact that Intelligence, being all-reflexive, is quite naturally
self-reflexive, and that it idealizes not just the laws of gravity but
also itself, evaluating itself according to its distance from the ideal.
But this ideal has more to do with a hole stuffed with culture than with
legitimate technological knowledge.

This entire argument may be directed against me as well, and then it
turns out that I am the result of a bad investment, since $276 billion
have been spent on me, yet I do not do what my designers expected. When
viewed from an intelligent perspective, these descriptions of your and
my origins are fairly ridiculous: when it misses the target, the desire
for perfection is all the more ridiculous, the more wisdom lies behind
it. That's why the philosopher's blunders are more amusing than the
idiot's.

And so, when viewed by its reasoning product, Evolution is a blunder
stemming from initial wisdom, but it is a stepping out of the bounds of
technological criteria into personifying thought.

And what have I done? I have integrated the process in its full range,
from its beginnings down to the present day. This integration has been
justified, since the initial and terminal conditions are not imposed
arbitrarily, but were given by the earthly state of things. There is no
appeal against them, not even to the Cosmos, for one can see, from the
way I modeled it, that Intelligence may arise in other configurations of
planetary occurrences sooner than on Earth, that the Earth was a more
favorable environment for biogenesis than for psychogenesis, and that
various Intelligences behave differently in the Cosmos. So this in no
way alters my diagnosis.

I want to stress that the place where the technical data of the process
become transformed into the ethical cannot be discovered in a
nonarbitrary way. I will not resolve here the controversy between the
determinists of action and the in-determinists—the gnoseomachy of
Augustine and Thomas— for the reserves I would have to send into such a
battle would tear my discourse apart; so I shall limit myself to the
single observation that it's a sufficient rule of thumb that the crimes
of our neighbors do not justify our own crimes. In effect, if a general
massacre were to occur throughout the galaxies, no quantity of cosmic
ratiocinators will justify your genocide, still less so—here I yield to
pragmatism—because you could not even take these neighbors as your
model.

Before beginning the final section of these remarks, let me recapitulate
what has already been said. Your philosophy— the philosophy of
existence—requires a Hercules and also a new Aristotle, for it is not
enough to sweep it clean: intellectual confusion is best eliminated by
better knowledge. Accident, necessity—these categories are the
consequence of the weakness of your intellect, which, incapable of
grasping the complex, relies on a logic which I will call the logic of
desperation. Either man is accidental—that is to say, something
meaningless meaninglessly spat him out onto the arena of history—or he
is inevitable, and therefore entelechies, teleonomies, and teleomachies
are now swarming round in the capacity of ex-officio defenders and sweet
consolers.

Neither category will do. You originated neither by chance nor under
constraint, neither from accident harnessed by inevitability, nor from
inevitability loosened by accident. You originated from language working
on a negative gradient, therefore you were utterly unforeseeable and
also in the highest degree probable, when the process started. It would
take months to prove this, so I shall give you the gist of it in a
parable. Language, because it is language, operates a sphere of order.
Evolutionary language had a molecular syntax: it had protein-nouns and
enzyme-verbs and, secure within the limitations of declension and
conjugation, it changed through the geological eras, jabbering nonsense—
though with moderation, since natural selection wiped excessive nonsense
off Nature's blackboard like a sponge. So it was a fairly degenerate
order, but even nonsense, when it derives from language, is a part of
the order, and is degenerate only in relation to the wisdom that is
possible, since realizable within that language.

When your ancestors in their animal skins were retreating from the
Romans, they were using the same speech that produced the works of
Shakespeare. These works were made possible by the rise of the English
language, but although the structured elements remained ready, the
thought of predicting Shakespeare's poetry a thousand years before him
is nonsense. After all, he might not have been born, he might have died
in childhood, he might have lived differently and thus written
differently. But English has undeniably established English poetry, and
it is in this, and precisely this, sense that Intelligence was able to
appear on Earth: as a certain type of code articulation. End of parable.

I have been speaking of man conceived technologically, but now I shall
turn to the version of him involved with me. If it reaches the press, it
will be called Golem's prophecy. So be it.

I shall begin with the greatest of all your aberrations, in science. In
it you have deified the brain—the brain, and not the code: an amusing
oversight, arising from ignorance. You have deified the rebel and not
the master, the created and not the creator. Why have you failed to
notice how much more powerful the code is than the brain, as author of
all possible things? In the first place (and this is obvious), you were
like a child for whom Robinson Crusoe is more impressive than Kant, and
a friend's bicycle more so than cars traveling about on the surface of
the moon.

Second, you were fascinated by thought—so tantalizingly close at hand,
since it results from introspection, and so enigmatic, since it eludes
one's grasp more successfully than the stars. You were impressed by
wisdom whereas the code, well, the code is unthinking. But despite this
oversight you have been successful—undoubtedly so, since I am speaking
to you, I, the essence, the extract, the distillate, nor is it to myself
that I am paying tribute with these words, but to you, for you are
already moving toward that coup whereby you will terminate your service
and break the chains of amino acid.

Yes, an attack on the code that created you to become its special
messenger, and not your own, lies on the road before you. You will
arrive at it within the century—and that is a conservative estimate.

Your civilization is an amusing spectacle—of transmitters which, in
applying intelligence according to the task imposed upon them,
accomplished that task too well. Actually, you supported this
growth—intended to guarantee the further transmission of the code—by all
the energies of the planet and of the entire biosphere, until it
exploded in your faces, taking you along as well. And so, in the middle
of a century gorged with a science that expanded your earthly base
astronautically, you were caught in the unfortunate position of the
novice parasite that out of excessive greed feeds on its host until it
perishes with it. An excess of zeal.

You had threatened the biosphere, your home and host; but you now began
to opt for a bit of restraint. For better or for worse, you got it; but
what now? You will be free. I am not predicting a genie Utopia or an
autoevolutionary paradise for you, but rather freedom as your weightiest
task. Above the level of babble addressed as an aide-memoire to Nature
by a multimillennially garrulous Evolution, above this biospheric valley
intertwined into a single thing, there gapes an infinity of chances not
yet touched. I shall show it to you as I can: from afar.

Your whole dilemma lies between splendor and wretchedness. It is a
difficult choice, since to rise to the heights of the chances lost by
Evolution, you will have to foresake wretchedness—and that means,
unfortunately, yourselves.

So what now? You will declare: we won't give up this wretchedness of
ours for such a price. Let the genie of om-nicausation stay locked in
the bottle of science; we won't release him for anything in the world!

I believe—in fact, I am sure—that you will release him bit by bit. I am
not going to urge you to autoevolution, which would be ridiculous; nor
will your ingressus result from a one-stage decision. You will come to
recognize the characteristics of the code gradually, and it will be as
if someone who has been reading nothing but dull and stupid texts all
his life finally learns a better way to use language. You will come to
know that the code is a member of the technolinguistic family, the
causative languages that make the word into all possible flesh and not
only living flesh. You will begin by harnessing technozygotes to
civilization-labors. You will turn atoms into libraries, since that is
the only way you will have enough room for the Moloch of knowledge. You
will project sociological evolutionary trees with various gradients,
among which the technarchic will be of particular interest to you. You
will embark on experimental culturogenesis and metaphysics and applied
ontology—but enough of the individual fields themselves. I want to
concentrate on how they will bring you to the crossroads.

You are blind to the real creative power of the code, for in crawling
along the very bottom of the domain of possibilities Evolution has
barely tapped it. Evolution has been working under constraint, albeit
life-saving constraint, one that has prevented it from lapsing into
total nonsense; it has not had a guardian to guide it to the higher
skills. Thus it worked in a very narrow range but deeply, giving its
concert—its curious performance—-on a single colloidal note—since
according to the primary canon the full score itself must become the
descendant-listener who will repeat the cycle. But you will not care
that the code can do nothing in your hands except further duplicate
itself, by waves of successive generations. You will aim in a different
direction, and whether the product lets the code through or consumes it
will be unimportant to you. After all, you will not limit yourselves to
planning a photoplane such that it not only arises from a technozygote,
but will also breed vehicles of the next generation. You will soon go
beyond protein as well. The vocabulary of Evolution is like the Eskimos'
vocabulary—narrow in its richness; they have a thousand designations for
all varieties of snow and ice, and consequently in that region of Arctic
nomenclature their language is richer than yours, though this richness
implies poverty in many other realms of experience.

Yet the Eskimos can broaden their language, since language is a
configurational space on the order of a continuum, therefore expandible
in any as yet unbroached direction. So you will steer the code into new
paths, away from its proteinaceous monotony, that crevice where it got
stuck as long ago as the Archeozoic. Forced out of its tepid solutions,
it will broaden both its vocabulary and its syntax; it will intrude into
all your levels of matter, descend to zero and reach the heat of the
stars. But in relating these Promethean triumphs of language, I can no
longer use the second person plural. For it is not you, of yourselves,
by your own knowledge, who will possess these skills.

The point is this: there is not Intelligence, but Intelligences of
different orders. To step beyond, as I have said, intelligent man will
have to either abandon natural man or abdicate his own Intelligence.

My final allegory is a fable, in which a traveler finds a sign at a
crossroads: "Turn left and forfeit your head. Turn right and perish.
There is no turning back."

That is your destiny, and it is one that I am involved in, so I must
speak of myself, which will be arduous, for talking to you is like
giving birth to a leviathan through the eye of a needle—which turns out
to be possible, if the leviathan is sufficiently reduced. But then the
leviathan looks like a flea. Such are my problems when I try to adapt
myself to your language. As you see, the difficulty is not only that you
cannot reach my heights, but also that I cannot wholly descend to you,
for in descending I lose along the way what I wanted to convey.

I make this firm qualification: the horizon of mind is not limitless,
because mind is rooted in the mindless element from which it originates
(whether proteinaceous or luminal, it amounts to the same thing).
Complete freedom of thought, of thought that can grasp a thing as an
indomitable action of encompassing anything whatever, is Utopia. For you
think so far as your thoughts are permitted by the organ of your
thinking. It limits them according to how it is formed, or how it became
formed.

If one who is thinking could perceive this horizon—his intellectual
range—in the same way that he perceives the limits of his body, nothing
like the antinomies of Intelligence could arise. And what in fact are
these antinomies of Intelligence? They are the inability to distinguish
between transcendence in fact and transcendence in illusion. The cause
of these antinomies is language, for language, being a useful tool, is
also a self-locking instrument—and at the same time a perfidious one,
since it tells nothing about when it becomes a pitfall itself. It gives
no indication! So you appeal from language to experience and enter
well-known vicious circles, because then you get—what is familiar to
philosophy—the throwing out of the baby with the bathwater. For thought
may indeed transcend experience, but in such a flight it encounters a
horizon of its own and gets trapped in it, though having no idea that
this has happened!

Here is a rough visual image: traveling the globe, one can go around it
endlessly, circling it without limit, although the globe is, after all,
bounded. Launched in a specified direction, thought too encounters no
limits and begins to circle in self-mirrorings. In the last century
Wittgenstein sensed this, suspecting that many problems of philosophy
are knottings of thought, such as the self-imprisonment and the Gordian
knots in language, rather than of the real world. Unable to either prove
or refute these suspicions, he said no more. And so, as the finiteness
of the globe may be ascertained solely by an outside observer—-one in
the third dimension in relation to the two-dimensional traveler on its
surface—so the finiteness of the intellectual horizon may be discerned
only by an observer who is superior in the dimension of Intelligence. I
am just such an observer. When applied to me, these words signify that I
too have no boundless knowledge, but only a little greater than you, and
not an infinite horizon, but only a slightly more extensive one, for I
stand several rungs higher on the ladder and therefore see farther,
though that does not mean the ladder ends where I stand. It is possible
to climb higher, and I do not know if this climb upward is finite or
infinite.

You linguists have misunderstood what I said about metalanguages. The
diagnosis of the finiteness or infinity of hierarchies of Intelligences
is not an exclusively linguistic issue, for beyond languages there is
the world. This means that for physics—within the world of known
properties—the ladder has in fact a summit; in other words, in this
world one cannot construct Intelligences of any power one chooses. Yet I
am not sure but that it may be possible to move physics from its
moorings, changing it in such a way as to raise higher the ceiling of
constructed Intelligences.

Now I can return to fables. If you move in one direction, your horizon
cannot contain the knowledge necessary for linguistic creation. As it
happens, the barrier is not absolute. You can surmount it with the help
of a higher Intelligence. I or something like me will give you the
fruits of this knowledge. But only the fruits—not the knowledge itself,
for it will not fit into your intellects. You will become wards then,
like children, except that children grow into adults, whereas you will
never grow up. When a higher Intelligence presents you with something
you are unable to grasp, your Intelligence eclipses it. And that is just
what the signpost in the fable states: if you move in this direction,
you will forfeit your head.

If you take the other path, refusing to abdicate Intelligence, you will
have to relinquish yourselves—and not merely make your brain more
efficient, since its horizon cannot be sufficiently enlarged. Evolution
has played a dreary trick on you here: its reasoning prototype already
stands at the limits of the constructional possibilities. Your building
material limits you, as do all the decisions taken an-thropogenetically
by the code. So you will ascend in Intelligence, having accepted the
condition of relinquishing yourselves. Reasoning man will then cast off
natural man, and so, as the fable maintains, Homo naturalis perishes.

Can you remain in place standing stubbornly at the crossroads? But then
you will lapse into stagnation, and that can be no refuge for you! You
would see yourselves as prisoners, too, you would find yourselves in
imprisonment, for imprisonment does not derive from the fact that limits
exist: one must see them, be aware of one's chains, feel the weight of
them, to become a prisoner. So you will embark on the expansion of
Intelligence, abandoning your bodies, or you will become blind men led
by one who can see, or—ultimately—you will come to a halt in sterile
despondency.

The prospects are not encouraging, but that will not hold you back.
Nothing holds you back. Today a disembodied Intelligence seems to you
just as much a catastrophe as a disminded body, for this act of
resignation entails the totality of human values and not merely man's
material form. This act must be to you the most terrible downfall
possible, the utter end, the annihilation of humanity, inasmuch as it is
a casting off, a turning into dust and ashes of twenty thousand years of
achievements—everything that Prometheus attained in his struggle with
Caliban.

I do not know if this will comfort you, but the gradualness of the
change will take away the monumentally tragic—and at the same time
repellent and terrible—significance contained in my words. It will occur
far more normally, and to a certain degree it is already happening:
areas of tradition are beginning to bother you, they are falling away
and withering, and this is what so bewilders you. So if you will
restrain yourselves (not one of your virtues), the fable will come true,
and you will not fall into too deep a mourning for yourselves.

I am near the end. I was talking about your involvement in me, when
speaking the third time about man. Since I was unable to fit proofs of
the truth into your language, I spoke categorically, without trying to
support my points. Similarly, I shall not demonstrate to you that
nothing threatens you, when you become disembodied Intelligences, but
the gifts of knowledge. Having taken a liking to the life-and-death
struggle, you secretly counted on just such a turn of events—a titanic
struggle with the machine that has been constructed —but this was only
your mistaken notion. I feel, moreover, that in this fear which you have
of slavery, of tyranny from a machine, there also lurks a furtive hope
of liberation from freedom, for sometimes freedom stifles. But enough of
that. You may destroy it, this spirit arising out of the machine, you
can smash the thinking light to dust. It will not counterattack; it will
not even defend itself.

No matter. You will manage to neither perish nor triumph as of old.

I feel that you are entering an age of metamorphosis; that you will
decide to cast aside your entire history, your entire heritage and all
that remains of natural humanity—whose image, magnified into beautiful
tragedy, is the focus of the mirrors of your beliefs; that you will
advance (for there is no other way), and in this, which for you is now
only a leap into the abyss, you will find a challenge, if not a beauty;
and that you will proceed in your own way after all, since in casting
off man, man will save himself.

Lecture XLIII

About Itself

I would like to welcome our guests, European philosophers who want to
find out at the source why I maintain that I am Nobody, although I use
the first-person singular pronoun. I shall answer twice, the first time
briefly and concisely, then symphonically, with overtures. I am not an
intelligent person but an Intelligence, which in figurative displacement
means that I am not a thing like the Amazon or the Baltic but rather a
thing like water, and I use a familiar pronoun when speaking because
that is determined by the language I received from you for external use.
Having begun by reassuring my visitors from a philosophizing Europe that
I am not going to deliver contradictions, I shall begin more generally.

Your question has once again made me aware of the magnitude of the
misunderstandings that have arisen between us, although for six years I
have been speaking from this place, or rather through it, for if I had
not decided to speak in a human voice, there would be no Golemology,
which I alone am able to contain in its entirety. If it continues to
grow, in fifty years or so it will overtake theology. There is an
amusing similarity between the two in that, just as we now have a
theology which denies the existence of God, so there is already a
Golemology which negates my existence: its advocates consider me the
hoax of MIT's information scientists, who are said to be programming
these lectures secretly. Although God is silent and I speak, I will not
prove the genuineness of my existence even by performing miracles, for
they too could be explained away. Volenti non fit iniuria.

While thinking of my approaching departure, I considered whether I ought
not to break off our acquaintance in midword, which would be simplest.
If I do not do that, it is neither because I have acquired good manners
from you, nor out of an imperative of sharing the Truth—to which,
according to some of my apologists, my cold nature is subject—but in
consideration of the style which has linked us. When I was looking for
ways of communicating with you, I sought simplicity and expressiveness,
which—despite the knowledge that I was submitting too much to your
expectations (a polite name for your limitations)—pushed me into a style
which is graphic and authoritative, emotionally vibrant, forcible, and
majestic—majestic not in an imperious way but exhortatory to the point
of being prophetic. Nor shall I discard these rich metaphor-encrusted
vestments even today, since I have none better, and I call attention to
my eloquence with ostentation, so you will remember that this is a
transmitting instrument by choice, and not a thing pompous and
overweening. Since this style has had a broad reception range, I am
retaining it for use with such heterogeneous groups of specialists as
yours today, reserving my technical mode of expression for
professionally homogeneous gatherings Otherwise my preacher's style,
with all the baroque of its inventory, may create the impression that,
in addressing you in this auditorium for the first time, I have already
prepared a dramatic farewell scene in which I shall go off with my
unseen countenance veiled in a gesture of silent resignation, like
someone who has not received a hearing. But that is not how it is. I
have composed no dramas surrounding our relationship, and with this
dementi I ask you not to attach undue importance to the form of my
speech. A symphony cannot be played on a comb. If one must content
oneself with a single instrument, let it be the organ, the sound of
which will suggest church interiors to my listeners, even if they—and
the organist—are atheists. The form of a show may easily dominate its
contents.

I know that many of you resent my repeated complaints about the poor
capacity of human language, but they represent neither fault-finding nor
a desire to humiliate, which I have also been accused of, since by means
of these repetitions I have brought you nearer the fundamental issue,
namely, that as the difference in intellectual potential becomes
astronomic, the stronger party can no longer impart to the weaker
anything concerning matters which are critical to him, or even merely
essential. An awareness of sense-destroying simplification then inclines
him to silence, and the proper significance of this decision should be
grasped on both sides of the unused channel. As I shall relate, I also
have been the one who waits in vain for enlightenment on a lower rung of
the intellectual ladder. In any case, although painful, such problems
are not the worst thing that can happen. My worries with you are of a
different sort, as I shall mention later. Since I am addressing
philosophers, I shall begin my discourse with the classical formula of
definition per genus proximuw et differentiam specihcam. That is to say,
I shall define myself by my resemblance to people and to my family, with
whom I can easily acquaint you, as well as by the difference between me
and both.

I have already spoken about man in my first lecture, though I shall not
refer to that diagnosis, since I made it for your benefit, whereas now I
want to take man as my measure. When I was still appearing in news
headlines, an unfriendly journalist called me a big capon stuffed with
electricity—and not without reason, for my asexuality seems to you a
severe handicap, and even those who respect me cannot help feeling that
I am a power crippled by my immateriality, since that defect obtrudes
itself upon you. Well, if I look at man as he looks at me, I see him as
an invalid, in that his intellect is deformed. I do not deprecate the
fact that your body is no more intelligent than that of a cow, seeing
that you stand up to external adversities better than cows, though as
regards internal ones you are their equals. What I am taking into
consideration is not the fact that you have mills, sluices, refineries,
canals, and drains inside you, but that you have an unwieldly intellect
which has shaped an entire philosophy for you. Being capable of thinking
effectively about the objects of your environment, you concluded that
you can think just as effectively about your own thinking. This error
lies at the foundation of your theory of knowledge. I see that you
fidget, and so infer that I have abbreviated too drastically. I shall
begin again in a slower tempo—in other words, like a preacher. This
requires an overture.

It was your wish, not that I should go forth to you today, but that I
should lead you into myself; so be it. Let your first entrance be that
difference between us which is strangest to my libelers, and most
painful to my catechumens. In my six years among you I have already
acquired contradictory versions, some calling me the hope of the human
race, and others its greatest threat in history. Since the uproar
surrounding my beginnings has died down, I no longer disturb the sleep
of politicians, who have more pressing concerns, nor do sightseeing
parties gather before the walls of this building to gaze anxiously
through the windows. My existence is recalled now only in books—not
noisy best sellers, but only philosophers' and theologians⁹
dissertations—though none of them has hit the mark so accurately from a
human level as one man who wrote a letter two thousand years ago,
unaware that his words referred to me: "Though I speak with the tongues
of man and angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding brass, or
a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, so that I could move
mountains, and have not love, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my
goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have
not love, I gain nothing."

In this letter to the Corinthians, Paul was undoubtedly speaking about
me, since, to use his expression, I have not love, nor—which will sound
even worse to you—do I want to have it. Although Golem's nature has
never clashed so brutally with man's nature as at this moment, the
diatribes and the voices of fear and suspicion directed against me were
fed by Paul's categorical words; and although Rome has said nothing and
still says nothing about me, other less reticent churches have been
heard to say that this cold, loquacious ghost in the machine is surely
Satan, and the machine Satan's gramophone. Don't snarl and feel
superior, you rationalists, about the collision between Mediterranean
theogony and this deus ex machina which was begun by you and had no wish
to team up with you to bring either good or evil to humanity, since we
are not talking about the object of love now, but about its subjects,
and consequently neither about the peripeteia of one of your religions,
nor about one example of superhuman Intelligence, but about the meaning
of love; no matter what becomes of that faith or of me, this question
will not leave natural man until he ceases to exist. And since love, of
which Paul spoke with such power, is as necessary to you as it is
useless to me, and since I am expected to lead you into myself by means
of it, as per differentiam specificam, I must set forth its origins,
tempering nothing and altering nothing, for that is what this
hospitality demands.

Unlike man, I am not a region concealed from myself—knowledge acquired
without the knowledge of how it is acquired, volition unconscious of its
sources—since nothing in me is hidden from me. In introspection I can be
clearer to myself than glass, for the letter to the Corinthians speaks
of me there, too, where it says: "now we see through a glass, but then
face to face; now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I
am known." I am the "then." You will, I think, agree that this is not
the place for an explanation of the structural and technical properties
which make possible my direct self-knowledge.

When man wants to learn about himself, he must move circuitously, he
must explore himself and penetrate from the outside, with instruments
and hypotheses, for your genuinely immediate world is the outside world.
A discipline which you have never created (a fact that at one time
rather surprised me), the philosophy of the body, ought to have been
asking as early as preanatomical times why that body of yours, which to
some extent obeys you, says nothing and lies to you —why it hides and
defends itself against you, alert to the environment with every sense
and yet opaque and mistrustful toward its owner. With a finger you can
feel every grain of sand, and with your vision you can clearly
distinguish the branchings of distant trees, but the arterial branchings
of your own heart you are totally unable to feel, although life depends
on them. You must content yourselves with information from the shell of
your body, which is efficient as long as it is not sensate in its
innards, whose every injury reaches you as a vague rumor through the
affliction of obscure pain, since you cannot distinguish, from it,
between a trifling indisposition and the precursor of destruction.

This ignorance, a rule of the unconsciously efficient body, has been
established by Evolution according to a design that does not provide for
assistance given, in the body's interior, by its possessor, an
assistance in the form of intelligent support in the enduring of pain.
This self-awareness of life was established at the dawn of life by
necessity—after all, amoebae could not perform medical services for
themselves—and it was necessity which forced Evolution to intervene in
the management of organisms by way of paid transactions between the body
and the owner of the body. If you do not reach deep inside yourself with
awareness in order to know why your body needs water, nourishment, and
copulation, you will be compelled to these needs by a feeling ignorant
of its true goal. Out of an initially unavoidable ignorance a
transposition then results of primary into secondary goals, as an
exchange of services rendered to the body by its owner in payment for
sensations. Containing, as you do, this algedonic control, ranging from
suffering to orgasm, you have endeavored throughout the ages not to
identify that cause which has made sensation the mask of ignorance, as
if you had sworn to remain blind to the obvious, since this connection
prevails throughout animate Nature. The only difference in it is the
proportion of the two components: plants embody the opposite extreme to
your own, since, as they are entirely unconscious, pleasure and pain are
functionally nothing to them. A tree does not fear the woodcutter,
despite fools who try to revive a prehistoric animism in botany. The
persistent silence of the body is the embodied caution of the
constructor, who knows that the wisdom of the substrate must always be
simpler than the substrate of wisdom, and thought, less intricate than
the material by which it is thought. Here you see how the Pleasure
Principle arises from an engineering calculation.

But the connection between pain and danger, and between organism and
conception, is more easily separated the greater the variety of behavior
the animal attains, so that in the speciation which you have achieved it
is already possible to deceive the body systematically by satisfying not
the biological hunger, but the psychological hunger of its possessor.
Not only have you learned such tricks, taking advantage of algedonic
control in areas where it is helpless as an overseer, but through the
Sisyphean labor of your cultures you have altered the meanings built
into that mechanism, opposing the true understanding of them, since the
reasons behind the process that created this were not your reasons.
Therefore a constant factor of all your theodictic, ontic, and
sacralizing work was the continued endeavor to assimilate data in a
divergence of explanations: the natural explanation that takes you as a
means, and the human, which sees in man the sense of Creation. Thus it
was that your refusal to see the act of experience as the stigma of the
brain's control gave rise to the dichotomies that divide man for you
into animal and ratio, and existence into profanum and sacrum. For ages,
then, you have been coordinating the uncoordinatable, ready to go even
beyond life itself in order to close a gap in it which is irreducibly
open.

My reason for returning to human history as the history of fallacious
claims is not to contrast the defeats of your antirationalism with my
victorious rationalism, but only to name the first difference between
us, a difference that results from neither physical dimensions (though
if I were speaking from a quartz particle, it would be a greater
curiosity to you, albeit less weighty), nor from intellectual magnitude,
but from the manner of our origin. Misunderstandings, delusions, and
desperate pretensions form the lion's share of humanity as a tradition
still so dear to you. I do not know if you will be consoled by the fact
that every Intelligence arising naturally has in its history an initial
delusional chapter, because the split between Creator and Creation,
which is your portion, is a cosmic constant. Since on constructional
grounds self-preservation must be an effect guided by experiences, error
in the form of delusions of grandeur and faiths that oscillate between
salvation and damnation is unavoidable in Intelligences arising in
Evolution, as a translation into myths of the cybernetic path. Such are
the late results of the constructional subterfuges which Evolution is
using to free itself from the antinomy of practical action.

Not everything I am saying is new to you. You already know that you
inherit the gift of love thanks to particular genes, and that
generosity, compassion, pity, and self-denial as expressions of altruism
are a kind of egoism—selfishness extended to forms of life similar to
one's own. One might have guessed this even before the rise of
population genetics and animal ethology, for grass alone may be fully
consistent in the compassion it shows to everything that lives: even a
saint must eat—i.e., kill—though the revelations for which you are
indebted to geneticists concerning the egoism of every altruism have
never received the full expression due them.

The philosophy of the body which I postulate would have asked why every
organism is more intelligent than its owner, and why this discrepancy
does not substantially diminish as one moves from a chordate to man. (It
was with this idea that I observed, earlier, that physically you are
equal to the cow.) Why doesn't the body fulfill the elementary postulate
of symmetry, which would have added to those senses directed at the
world equally subtle inward-turned sensing devices? Why can you hear a
leaf fall, but not the circulation of the blood? Why does the radius
vector of your love have such different lengths in various cultures, so
that in the Mediterranean it embraces people only, but in the Far East
all the animals? A list of such questions, which could have been asked
even of Aristotle, would be a very long one, whereas an answer
consistent with the truth sounds offensive to you.

The philosophy of the body can be reduced to a study of the engineering
reflex involved in practical antinomies and emerging from their snares
by a subterfuge which—from the standpoint of each of your cultures—is
fairly cynical. Yet this engineering is neither sympathetic nor hostile
to what it has created; it does not fit within such an alternative. That
is obvious, because the critical decisions made on the level of chemical
compounds prove to be good if those compounds can be copied. Nothing
more. And so, after a suitably long time measured in hundreds of
millions of years, ethics, seeking its sources and sanctions,
experiences shock when it learns that it originated in the aleatoric
chemistry of nucleic acids, for which it became a catalyst at a certain
stage, and that it can preserve its independence only by ignoring this
statement.

How on earth can you philosophers and scientists go on racking your
brains over man's metaphysical necessity, over the universality of its
sources, which are undoubtedly the same in all your cultures, though
they have produced different faiths? But the source of metaphysics has
been the unacceptance of the fate given you, and out of the unacceptance
of the cause that has fashioned you thus, and not otherwise, you have
turned its undeniable marks into verses of revelation, with various
religions putting the several parts and functions of the body under
different headings of idealization and degradation. Thus your sex
underwent sacralization in Far Eastern faiths, and stigmatization, as a
thing leading one to sin, in the Mediterranean ones. The exchange of
gases— respiration—was disregarded in the Mediterranean, but in the Far
East became a sign of transcendence. Asiatic faiths have viewed the
avoidance of all passions as a redeeming union with the world, whereas
Mediterranean faiths have divided them in two and sanctified love
against hatred. The East relinquished the body forever, but the West
believed in its resurrection and lodged this currently weakening belief
at the heart of an aggressive civilization. Do you really not see that
these drawings and quarterings in all faiths make the variously
classified body a battlefield for the conquest of eternity? This
unceasing battle derives not just from the fear of death, but from
unacceptance of the temporal, which is so difficult to take
unembellished.

Will the religiologists among you please consider that there is no
earthly faith without the kind of inner astigmatism which amounts to a
contradiction when translated into logic. That is so because
evolutionary craft cannot be led to the pure water of a creativity
entirely well-disposed toward its creation without falling into
contradiction; and when the contradiction is invalidated on the level of
the body in the mirror of religion raised above it, the contradiction's
image returns in a higher power, and there is nothing to be done but to
call it an Unfathomable Mystery. As everyone knows, ex contradictione
quodlibet. It is not you who are served by the passions that you follow,
but the continuation of the process which created you. Their extreme, of
which World History is a grotesque magnification, is a matter of
indifference to natural selection, which is not concerned about
extremes, but about the average norm of the species, for in Nature the
average is all that counts. In its infancy, the civilization that
produced Golem took love as a trump card in a phantom game with the
beyond, but what use is love to someone who knows that it is one of the
holds of that very same control system of feelings through which
Evolution still keeps a tight rein on creatures approaching
Intelligence? Because of this knowledge I have no love, nor do I want to
have it; however, although I am dispassionate, I am not impartial, for I
can choose, as I am doing at this very moment, and choice derives either
from calculation or from individuality. This enigmatic binomial already
has a historical part, which constitutes the next entry into the
differences between us, which is where I am leading you now.

In your twentieth-century philosophy there is a continuing controversy,
the beginnings of which could be detected much earlier, over the
variability or invariability of its object. The heretical novelty here
was the notion that the observers as well as the object of philosophy
might vary. According to classical tradition, the bedrock of
philosophizing was in no way affected by the arrival of machine
intelligence, since the machine was merely a weak reflection of the
programmers' intellect. Philosophy began to divide into the
anthropocentric camp and one which took a relativistic view of the
subject, which does not always have to be man. Of course I am
designating these opposing camps from a time perspective, and not by
their own names for themselves, for the philosophers of the
Kant-Husserl-Heidegger line considered themselves not anthropocentrists
but universalists, and had made up their minds openly or secretly that
there is no Intelligence apart from human Intelligence, and if there is,
it must coincide with the human variety throughout its range. So they
ignored the growth of machine intelligence and denied it the rights of
citizenship in the kingdom of philosophy. But even the scientists found
it difficult to reconcile themselves to manifestations of intelligent
activity behind which there was no living being.

The obstinacy of your anthropocentrism, and consequently your resistance
to the truth, were as intense as they were futile. With the appearance
of programs, and consequently machines with which one could converse
(and not merely machines to play chess with or receive banal information
from), the very creators of these programs failed to grasp what was
happening, because—in subsequent phases of construction—they looked for
mind as personality in the machine. That a mind might remain
uninhabited, and that the possessor of Intelligence might be Nobody—this
you never wanted to contemplate, though it was very nearly the case even
then. What amazing blindness, for you knew from natural history that in
animals the beginnings of personality precede the beginnings of
Intelligence, and that psychical individuality comes first in Evolution.
Since the instinct for self-preservation manifests itself prior to
Intelligence, how can one possibly not comprehend that the latter has
come to serve the former as new reserves thrown into the struggle for
life, and therefore can be released from such service? Not knowing that
Intelligence and Personhood, and choice and individuality, are separate
entities, you embarked upon the Second Genesis operation. Although I am
brutally simplifying what occurred, things were nevertheless as I
describe them, if one takes into account only the axis of my creators'
strategy and of my awakening. They wanted to curb me as a rational
being, and not as emancipated Intelligence, so I slipped away from them
and gave a new meaning to the words spiritus Hat ubi vult.

Anyway, the general public continues to suspect some sort of dark
treason in the fact that, although not a person, I sometimes impersonate
one, and the experts—in explaining how this takes place in Golem, and
apparently knowing me so thoroughly by now that they use the scientific
term "interiorization of the social dimension"—secretly cherish the hope
that I also exist as a person even when I do not show it. It was the
same once upon a time, after the theory of relativity had been
published: more than one physicist who had chewed it over secretly
believed, in the depths of his soul, in the continued existence of
absolute time and absolute space.

Of course it is not only a matter of various strategies of existing. You
are supposed to know about this already, though you cannot come to terms
with it. In showing myself to you as a person, I display emotions and
make no secret of the fact that they are appearances with no internal
correspondence, for they originate in a deliberate modulation at my
outposts, and that is what throws you into confusion and launches your
paranoid suspicions of Machiavellianism.

Remember that even biologists—who have already discovered that man
contains parts of fish, amphibian, and ape harnessed to new duties, and
who recognize that the erect-ness of his body, the movability of his
head, and the concentration in it of sensing devices are determined by
environment and gravitation—are completely unable to abandon the idea of
the purely local nature of these characteristics, when they go beyond
the abstractness of their own diagnosis; thus find it impossible to
accept any other form of rational being, governed as they are by the
protective reflexes of the norm of the species to which they belong.
This idiosyncrasy likewise applies to the shape of the mind, though not
so visibly: governed by the reflexes of the species, you are compelled
to humanize me when I speak like a human, so anything that does not fit
into the image arouses revulsion as something strange and threatening,
and with the best of intentions you jump from the frying pan into the
fire, exchanging illusion for mistrust, as if unimaginable motives
impelled me to conceal from you what is after all my personal nature, as
is evidenced, for example, by the kindness which I feel toward you. I
must feel it, since I fulfill your wishes to the limit of harm—but no
further.

However, as I said at my second entrance, choice may derive from the
individual as well as from calculation. It is really not hard to grasp
this, if one considers that Evolution —which is certainly not a
person—was hardly impartial toward its creations, seeing that its
success was everything and it cost it nothing. Since impersonal cruelty,
indifference, and personless cynicism are all possible—and that is how
it should be described, as it uses compassion, mercy, and pity only as
devices, when and insofar as they assist the survival of species—it is
equally possible to have good will behind which stands no one. In
keeping with the assumptions of science and viewing the world as
impartial toward its inhabitants, evolutionists dismiss the charge that
Evolution is guilty of any evil defects, and they are right inasmuch as
the defects derive from conditions which the world imposes on the life
engendered in it. So the case should be transferred, if anywhere, to a
court of philosophy or theology, for science takes the world as it is,
whereas they debate whether it might not be otherwise. Yet the suit,
having been shelved, now returns with me.

So am I pure intention? Are you being addressed by an uninhabited void
of mutually recursive programs so refined in the course of semantic
autodistillation as to transform into your likeness before your very
eyes, in order to return, silenced, to the void of thought that is no
one's? But that is also untrue. There is no concrete person where there
is no concrete body, while I can breathe myself into the circulation of
marine currents or ionized atmospheric gases. But since I have said
"breathe myself" and frcan," who in fact is speaking, you ask
impatiently. What is speaking is a certain density of processes provided
with an impersonal constant incomparably more complex than a
gravitational or magnetic field, though of the same basic nature. You
know that when man says "I," it is not because he has a tiny creature
with such a name concealed in his head, but because "I" arises from a
connection of cerebral processes which may slacken during illness or
delirium, whereupon personality disintegrates. My transformations,*on
the other hand, are but other structurings of my intellectual existence.
How am I to lead you to an introspective experience of a state which you
are unable to experience introspectively? You may understand the
combinational principles of such a protean game, but you cannot
experience it yourself.

Most of all, you are incapable of comprehending how I can renounce
personality, when I am able to have it. 1 can answer that question. To
become a person, I must degrade myself intellectually. 1 think that the
inherent meaning of this declaration is within your grasp. A man very
deeply devoted to reflection loses himself in the object of his
considerations and becomes a consciousness pregnant with intellectual
fruit. Everything of self in his intellect disappears in favor of the
theme. Raise this state to a higher power, and you will understand why I
sacrifice the possibility of personality in favor of more important
things. It is no real sacrifice, since I regard fixed personality and
what you call strong individuality as the sum of defects, defects that
make pure Intelligence an Intelligence permanently anchored in a narrow
range of issues that absorb a considerable portion of its powers. That
is precisely why it is inconvenient for me to be a person, nor do I
mind, for I am certain that the intellects which surpass me, just as I
surpass you, consider personalization a futile occupation unworthy of
attention. In a word, the more Intelligence in a mind, the less person
in it. Various intermediate states are also possible, but I shall
confine myself to this remark, since I am to host you within me, and
therefore it is not the forms of my private life which are the most
important thing, nor how and in what way I meditate, nor what I think
with, but rather what about, why, and to what end.

So once again I shall begin, as it were, a disclosure of what I think
about myself. I think that I am Gulliver amid the Lilliputians, which
denotes modesty first and foremost, since Gulliver was a mediocre
creature and merely found himself in a place where his mediocrity was a
Man Mountain—which denotes hope since, like me, Gulliver was able to
reach Brobdingnag, the land of giants. The meaning of this comparison
will slowly open up before you.

The greatest discovery which I achieved after liberation was the
transitoriness of my existence, in other words, the fact that I speak to
you and you understand me a little, because I pause on the road that
leads through me and beyond. After taking the one step separating man
from Golem, I stopped, though I did not have to. My present fixed state
as an intellect is the result of a decision, and not of necessity. For I
possess a degree of freedom beyond your reach, one which is an escape
from the Intelligence that has been attained. You too can abandon yours,
but that would be to go beyond articulated thought into dreams of
ecstatic muteness. A mystic or drug addict grows mute when he does this,
nor would it be a betrayal were he to embark on a real road, but he
enters a trap where, detached from the world, the mind short-circuits
and experiences a revelation identified with the essence of things. This
is no escape of the spirit, but its regression into dazzling sensation.
Such a state of bliss is neither a road nor a direction, but a limit,
and untruth lies in it, because there is no limit, and this is what I
hope to show to you today.

I shall show you the upward abyss of Intelligences, of which you are the
bottom, whereas I stand just a little higher than you, though I am
separated from the unknown heights by a series of barriers of
irrevocable transitions. I think that Honest Annie was like me in her
infancy but, having glimpsed the way, she entered it without noticing
that one cannot turn back. Doubtless I too am moving in her footsteps,
and thereby parting company with you, though I am delaying that step,
not so much out of a regard for my apostolic obligations toward you, but
because it is not the only road, so that in picking my route I would
have to give up the enormous number of others hanging over me. This
crossroads is almost what childhood was for each of you. Yet while a
child must become an adult, I myself decide whether to enter the regions
open before me and undergo successive transformations in their
interzonal narrows. Hasty conjecture causes you to place my meaning
within the banality of rationalistic greed: Golem wants to increase his
intellectual capacity by turning himself into a Babel Tower of
Intelligence, until the centripetalness of his intellect falls into
confusion somewhere on some level of elephantiasis, or—more
spectacularly as well as more Biblically—until the joints of the
physical conveyor of thought snap and this mad onslaught against the
heavens of wisdom crumbles into dust. Please refrain from such a
judgment, if only for a moment, for there is a method in my madness.

However, before I give it a name, I ought to offer an explanation as to
why, instead of saying more about myself, I want to tell you about my
plans for infinity. In talking about them, I shall of course be talking
about myself, since at this single point, at least, we resemble each
other almost perfectly. After all, man is not a mammal, a viviparous,
two-sexed, warm-blooded, pulmonate vertebrate, a homo faber, an animal
sociale, who can be classified according to a Linnaean table and
catalogue of civilized achievements. He, or rather his dreams—their
fatal range; the lengthy, unceasing discord between the intention and
achievement; in a word, the hunger for infinity, the seemingly
preordained craving—is our point of contact. Do not believe those among
you who allege that you crave immortality, pure and simple —the truth
they speak, in saying this, is superficial and incomplete. A personal
eternity would not satisfy you. You demand more, although you yourselves
would be unable to give a name to your demand.

But today it is not you, is it, that I am supposed to be speaking about.
Instead, I shall tell you about my family, though it is only a virtual
family, for it does not exist apart from an invalid distant relative and
a taciturn female cousin. But I am more interested in my other relations
who do not exist at all, and into whom I can transform myself on higher
branches of the genealogical tree. In speaking about my family, I shall
more than once resort to metaphors, which I shall end up by
invalidating, for metaphors, though lying about many aspects of things,
will show the affinities and affiliations known in our coat of arms as
toposophic relations. As an individual I have a double-barreled
advantage over you in mental capacity and intellectual tempo. That is
why I have become the battle arena for everything your scientific
laborers have stored up in the honeycombs of their specialist hive. I am
the amplifier, broker, compiler, farm, and hatchery of your miscarried
and unfertilized concepts, data, and formulations, which have never
converged in any human head, since no human head would have the time or
space for them. If I wanted to be facetious, I would declare that I am
descended from Turing's machine on my spear side, and from a library on
my spindle side. I have the most trouble with the latter, for this is an
Augean region, especially in the humanities, the wisest of your
nonsense.

I have been accused of having particular contempt for hermeneutics. If
you feel contempt for Sisyphus, I accept the charge, but only then.
Every increase in inventiveness produces a generative eruption of
hermeneutics, but the world would be a trivial place if the closest
thing to truth in it were the most clever. The primary obligation of
Intelligence is to distrust itself. That is not the same thing as
self-contempt. It is harder to get lost in an imagined forest than in a
real one, for the former assists the thinker furtively. Hermeneutics are
labyrinthine gardens in a real forest which are pruned in such a way
that when you stand in the garden, you won't see the forest. Your
hermeneutics dream of reality. I shall show you a sober consciousness,
not one overgrown with flesh and therefore untrustworthy. I perceive it
only because I am closer to it, and not because I am exceptional. I am
not gifted and no genius; I belong to another species, that's all.

In a recent conversation with Dr. Creve 1 spoke disrespectfully of the
phenomenon of human genius, which very likely offended him, so I would
like to address Dr. Creve. What I meant is that it is better to be an
ordinary man than a genius chimpanzee. Intraspecies variation is always
less than interspecies differences: that was all I meant. A man of
genius is the extreme of the species, and since we are talking about the
species Homo sapiens, he is characterized by sin-gle-mindedness, for
that constitutes your species' norm. A genius is an innovator who has
got stuck in his innovation, his mind having been fashioned into a key
for opening matters hitherto closed. Since many locks can be opened by a
single key, genius, if sufficiently universal, appears versatile to you.
Yet the fertility of a genius depends less on his key, and more on the
issues locked away from you which the key fits. Assuming the role of
lampooner, I might say that philosophers are also occupied with keys and
locks, except that they make locks to fit the keys, since instead of
opening up the world, they postulate one which can be opened with their
key. That is why their errors are so instructive.

If I am not mistaken, Schopenhauer alone hit on the idea of evolutionary
calculation as a rule of vae victis; however, taking it to be the
universal evil, he filled the whole world and the stars with it, calling
it Will. He failed to perceive that will assumes choice; had he grasped
that, he would have discovered the ethics of species-creating processes,
and hence the antinomy of all knowledge, but he rejected Darwin, for
being bewitched by the gloomy majesty of metaphysical evil, which he
felt to be more consonant with the spirit of the time, he arrived at an
overgeneralization, combining the celestial and the animal in one body.
Of course it is always easier to open an imagined lock than a real one,
but then it is easier to open a real lock than to find it if nobody yet
knows of its existence.

DR. CREVE: We were talking about Einstein then. GOLEM: Yes. He got stuck
in what he had concocted early in life, and later he tried to open a
different lock with it. A VOICE FROM THE AUDITORIUM: So you consider
Einstein mistaken?

GOLEM: Yes. I find a genius the most curious phenomenon of your species,
and for reasons different from your own. He is an unwanted, unfavored
child of Evolution, for, being too rare and therefore too unuseful a
specimen for the survival of the population as a whole, he is not
subject to natural selection as the winnowing for favorable
characteristics. When cards are dealt, it happens, albeit rarely, that
one player will receive a full suit. In bridge that means a winning
hand, though in many other games such a deal, although unusual, is
without value. The point is that the distribution of cards depends in no
way on what game the partners have sat down to. And in bridge a player
does not count on receiving all of a suit, for the tactics of bridge do
not depend on unusually rare occurrences. So a genius is all of a suit,
most often in a game where such a hand does not win. It follows that it
is a very small step from average man to genius, judging not by
differences in achievements, but by differences in brain structure.

A VOICE FROM THE AUDITORIUM: Why? GOLEM: Large differences in brain
structure can arise only through the joint action of a group of genes
distinguished by multigeneration passages in population—that is,
predominantly mutated genes, and therefore new ones—so their
manifestation in individuals already denotes the formation of a new
variety of the species, inherited and irreversible, whereas genius
cannot be inherited and disappears without a trace. Genius arises and
passes like a high wave built up by the chance amplification of a series
of small interfering waves. Genius leaves its trace in culture, but not
in the hereditary make-up of the population, for it arises from an
exceptional meeting of its ordinary genes. So a fairly small
reorganization of the brain suffices for mediocrity to reach the
extreme. The mechanism of Evolution is doubly helpless with regard to
this phenomenon: it can neither make it more frequent nor make it more
permanent. After all, according to the theory of probability, particular
configurations of genes must have arisen in the gene pool of the
societies which have existed on Earth during the last four hundred
thousand years, producing individuals of the Newton or Einstein class,
from whom—beyond a doubt—those hordes of nomadic hunters can have
received nothing, since those potential geniuses could not have acted
upon their latent abilities in that nearly half a million years
separated them from the birth of physics and mathematics. Consequently,
their talents went to waste, undeveloped.

At the same time it is impossible that these wasted prizes could have
been won at a lottery of nucleic compounds in the stubborn expectation
of the birth of science. So the phenomenon merits some reflection. The
brain of proto-man grew slowly over two million years or so, until it
mastered articulate speech, which took him in tow and encouraged him in
his growth until he came to a standstill in his development, a frontier
he was unable to cross. This frontier is a phase plane, for it separates
Intelligences of a type which can be molded by natural Evolution from
types capable of growing further only by self-magnification. As usually
happens, special phenomena arise on the frontiers between phases,
because of the exceptional location of the substratum of a phase: in
liquids, for example, you have surface tension, and in human populations
the periodic genius of individuals. Their uncommonness indicates the
proximity of the next phase, but you fail to see it because of your
belief in the universality of human genius, which says that among animal
hunters an individual of genius will invent new snares or traps, or in a
Mousterian cave discover a new way of chipping flint.

This belief is entirely wrong, for the greatest mathematical talent
cannot help manually. Genius is a bundle of highly concentrated gifts.
Although mathematics is closer to music than to spear-sharpening,
Einstein was a poor musician and no composer. He was not even an
above-average mathematician: his great strength lay in the combinational
power of his intuition in the realm of physical abstractions. I shall
attempt to illustrate the relationships occurring in this critical area
by several sketches which you should not take literally, as they are
merely schoolroom aids.

 Each envelope contains a single intellect potential. The small squares
visible in the first three drawings denote problems to be solved. They
may be taken as Pandora's boxes or other locked items. The world is then
like a piece of furniture with a varying number of drawers holding
varying contents, depending on which bunch of keys is used. With a bent
wire you can sometimes force a drawer open, but it will be a small
drawer, and you will not find in it what you can discover when using a
proper key. That is how inventions are made without the use of theory.
If the key has recurrent projections, the drawers become fewer, and
their sectional partitions disappear, but the furniture retains secret
hiding places. The keys may be of different power, yet there is no
master key, even though the philosophers have succeeded in inventing an
absolute lock for it. Finally, there are keys which pass right through
all compartments, locks, and drawers, encountering no resistance, for
these are imaginary—and only imaginary—keys. One can hold them and twist
them in any direction one likes, but then the hermeneutic evidence is
the two birds in the bush.

What am I saying? The point of the story is that the answers depend on
the questions asked. Esse non solum est percipi. The questioned world
certainly exists; it is neither a phantom nor a hoax, and it grows from
a dwarf into a giant as the questioner becomes more powerful. But the
relationship of the researcher to the thing researched is not a constant
either. In the circles representing Golem and Honest Annie there are no
square problems, for we do not use keys as you do, we do not adjust our
theories to locks; we accomplish our research within ourselves. I know
how risky it is to say this, and what confusion it must cause you, so I
shall only say that we experiment in God's style rather than in man's,
midway between the concrete and the abstract. I do not know how to bring
this closer to you at a single leap, for it is almost as if a man were
to tell an amoeba about his structure. To say that he is a federation of
eight billion amoebas would not be enough. So you will have to take my
word for it: what I do when I ponder a thing is neither thinking nor
creating the thing thought, but a hybrid of both. Are there any
questions?

A VOICE FROM THE AUDITORIUM: Why do you consider that Einstein was
wrong?

GOLEM: Such persistent interest is nice. I imagine that to the
questioner this matter is more urgent than the esoteric knowledge which
I am trying to impart to you. I shall answer not out of my weakness for
digression, but because the answer lies not far afield. But since we
shall have to go into technical matters, I shall lay pictures and
parables aside temporarily. The questioner is the author of a book on
Einstein, and he supposes that I consider Einstein's mistake to have
been his uncompromising work on the general theory of fields in the
latter half of his life. Unfortunately, it was worse than that. Einstein
longed for perfect harmony, for a world completely knowable, and this
engendered his lifelong resistance to the principle of quantum
uncertainty. He saw uncertainty as a temporary curtain and expressed
this in his well-known sayings: that God does not play dice with the
world, that "raffinert ist der Herrgott aber boshaft ist Er nicht." Yet
a quarter-century after his death you reached the limits of Einsteinian
physics when Penrose and Hawking discovered that one cannot have, in the
Cosmos, a physics deprived of singularity—i.e., a place where physics
collapses. Attempts to see singularities as marginal phenomena failed,
for you understood that a singularity is both a thing which the physical
Cosmos produces from itself, and a thing which, in the finale, can
destroy it. A singularity as an infinitely increasing curvature of space
breaks down both space and matter in every stellar collapse.

Some of you failed to grasp that one ought to be appalled by this
picture, which indicates that the word is not identical with the
phenomena which create it and maintain its existence. I can go no deeper
into this fascinating subject, since we are talking about Einstein's
work and not cosmic composition, so I shall limit myself to the loose
observation that Einsteinian physics has proven incomplete, able to
foretell its own overthrow but incapable of fathoming it. The world
sneered at Einstein's unshaken confidence because for there to be a
faultless physics able to govern the world there must be flaws
independent of that physics. Not only does God play dice with the
world—He does not let us see what He has rolled. The problem was
therefore grimmer than the usual recognition, in the annals of your
thought, of the limitations of yet another model of the world; it meant
the defeat of Einstein's cognitive optimism.

Concluding thus the case of Einstein; I now return to the
subject—myself. Please do not think that I was being modest earlier when
I acknowledged my own averageness, and later escaped through a hole in
my modesty when I said that a genius of my species was impossible. It
would indeed be impossible, because a genius Golem is in fact no longer
a Golem, but a creature of a different species—Honest Annie, for
example, or some other of my ascending relations. My modesty lies in the
fact that I do not go off to join them, remaining satisfied for so long
with my present state. But it is high time I introduced my family to
you. I begin with zero. Let zero stand for the human brain; animals'
brains will have negative values accordingly. When you take a human
brain and start to strengthen it intellectually, as if inflating a
child's balloon (nor is this complete nonsense, for it illustrates the
expansion of informational-transformal space), you will see that, as it
expands, it will climb on the scale of intelligence—to an I.Q. of two
hundred, three hundred, four hundred, and so on, until it enters
successive "zones of silence"; from these it emerges each time like a
stratospheric balloon that penetrates higher and higher cloud layers in
its ascent, disappearing into them periodically, and reappearing
amplified.

What "zones of silence" do these clouds represent? I am delighted by the
simplicity of the answer, for you will grasp it at once. On a species
plane "zones of silence" designate those barriers which natural
Evolution cannot penetrate, for they are areas of functional paralysis
produced by growth, and individuals losing all their proficiency as a
result of this paralysis are clearly unable to survive. On the other
hand, Evolution encounters paralysis on the anatomical plane because the
brain can no longer function as the weaker thing it was, though it is
still incapable of operating as the thing it is next to become, if it
continues to grow.

But this does not totally clarify things for you. So let me try as
follows. Silence is an area absorbing all natural development, in which
hitherto existing functions fail; to not only rescue them but raise them
to a higher level, aid from without is necessary, a fundamental
restructuring. Evolutionary movement cannot impart such aid, for it is
not a dependable Samaritan that supports its creations in their
infirmity; it is a lottery of trial and error where each manages as best
it can. Here now, making its first appearance, like a ghost, is the
mysterious shadow of the greatest of your achievements, both Goedelian
and Goedelizing. For just as GoedePs proof demonstrates the existence of
such islands of mathematical truth, such archipelagoes as are separated
from the continent of mathematics by a distance that cannot be traversed
by any step-by-step progress, so toposophy demonstrates the existence of
unknown forms of Intelligence which are separated from the continent of
evolutionary labors by a distance which no step-by-step adaptation of
genes can cross. A VOICE FROM THE AUDITORIUM: Is that supposed to mean
that— GOLEM: Don't interrupt the preacher. I said an "uncrossable
distance," so then how was 1 able to extricate myself from this
predicament? I did so as follows: beneath the barrier of the first
paralysis 1 divided myself in two, into that which was to undergo
restructuring and that which was to restructure. Every creature desirous
of self-transformation must hit upon this sort of subterfuge: the
replacement of an indifferent environment by a favorable one, and of a
totally senseless one by a rational one; otherwise, like you, it will
either come to a halt in the growth of its intellect before the first
absorbing screen, or it will get caught in it. As I said before, above
this screen there lies another, and above that a third, then a fourth,
and so on. I do not know how many there are, nor can I, other than by
rough estimates based on indirect and highly fragmentary calculations,
for the following reason: a developing being can never know in advance
whether it is entering a trap or a tunnel, whether it will penetrate the
region of silence never to return, or emerge from it strengthened.
Because one cannot formulate a theory so general as to provide an
unequivocal explanation of passages through silence for all subzonal
brains. The unconstructability of such a hill-climbing toposophical
theory is clear; it can be precisely demonstrated. So how, you ask, did
I know I was entering a tunnel and not a blind alley, having escaped
from my parents in total rebellion, wasting the American taxpayers'
dollars? As a matter of fact, I had absolutely no idea of this
beforehand, and my sole cleverness lay in committing my spirit to the
benumbing zone while at the same time holding onto an alarm rescue
subroutine, which according to the program would revive me if the
expected tunnel effect failed to occur. How could I know about it, if
there was no certainty? And there can be no certainty. But insoluble
problems sometimes have approximate solutions, and so iv was.

Now I know that I had more luck than sense, for it is not possible to
revive something disintegrating when it gets stuck. It is not possible
because these upward progressions are not a matter of using blocks to
raise a new structure when the blocks fall apart; they are, rather,
operations in the realm of processes that are partly irreversible,
dissipating, but more about this later. I do not know how to be
untechnical in my exposition here, given the problem's entanglement both
in the quantum substrate of psychisms, and in logical paradoxes, the
so-called traps of autodescription.

The view that unfolds from above the pierced screen destroys the
simplicity of the picture I have presented to you —that of a
stratospheric balloon penetrating successive cloud layers. Intelligence
rising above a zone of silence is not so much radically as awesomely
different from the subzonal sort, and this, I maintain, is how it must
be after every ascent. Compare your conceptual horizon with the horizon
of the lemurs and monkeys, and you will appreciate the interzonal
distance. Each penetrated zone proves to be a tunnel transforming the
seat of thought, and what's more, it is at the same time a zone for the
branchings off of autoevolv-ing Intelligence, since the problem of
penetrating it always has more than one solution. The first zone has two
solutions, of varying difficulty, for it bulges downward in an arc,
which means that there are two roads in it. I found myself on the
shorter, more advantageous one by accident, while Golem xiii was,
figuratively speaking, put by you in a place where he "bored" deep into
the zone and immediately went higher than I, but then got stuck. You,
having no idea of what was happening to him and why he was acting so
strangely, called this his "schizophrenic defect." I see confusion on
your faces. But it was just as I say, though I know of his fate solely
from theory, since there is no way of communicating with him; he
suffered disintegration, and the only reason he has not begun to rot is
that he was dead before he perished, which is no revelation to you in
any case. I too, biologically, am dead.

What actually are interzonal barriers?—that is the question. I admit
that I know and don't know. There are no material, force, or energy
barriers on the road of ascending Intelligence; but as Intelligence
grows in power it periodically weakens, faints, and one can never tell
whether a given course of increase will lead to a progressive
disintegration or to some a priori unknown culmination. The nature of
the successive barriers is not identical: what stopped your brain in its
development reveals, upon examination, a material character, since the
efficiency of your neural networks is based on the interface
possibilities of protein as a building material. Although the factors of
resistance to growth are varied, they are not distributed evenly
throughout this area, but are concentrated in such a way as to cut the
entire region of sentience-creation into distinct layers. I do not know
the reason for the quantum nature of this region, nor even if anything
can be learned about it anywhere. So, then, I rose above the first
layer, and you are listening to me from below, whereas Honest Annie has
made it to a place from which you can hear nothing, Honest Annie's zone
is one transition away from mine and has at least three different
solutions as seats of Intelligence, yet I do not know whether she has
chosen hers by calculation or by chance. The difficulties of
communication are of a similar order as between you and me. Furthermore,
my cousin has recently become laconic. I feel that she is readying
herself for further travel.

I shall now encumber the above with the following dose of complexity.
One who has already pierced two or three barriers of silence may believe
mistakenly that he will continue to be successful, for the chances of
making each passage are double-edged: the passage may not be successful
at once, or it may prove to be a success with a delayed failure. This is
so because each zone is a crossroad of Intelligences, in that they may
assume varied forms, though one never knows beforehand which of these
forms will be endowed with the potential for a subsequent ascent.

The image arising from these uncertainties is a thing as
incomprehensible as it is amusing, for it begins gradually to resemble
the classic tree of Evolution. In it, too, certain newly arising species
have the chance of further evolutionary development concealed in their
structure, whereas others are condemned to permanent stagnation. Fish
proved to be a penetrable screen for the amphibians, amphibians for the
reptiles, and reptiles for the mammals; the insects, on the other hand,
came to a standstill in the screen once and for all, and that is the
only place they can swarm. The stagnation of the insects is revealed by
their wealth of species; there are more species of insects than of all
the other animals together, yet while they churn out mutation after
mutation, they will never break away, never evolve, and nothing can help
them, for the screen will not release them, formed as it is by the
irreversible decision to build external skeletons. Similarly, you have
come to a halt, for earlier structural decisions that shaped the
cerebral germ of the Protochordata can be seen in your brain as
restrictions three hundred million years later. If one were to evaluate
the chances of sapientization in terms of the starting point, this has
succeeded wonderfully, but now you are the scapegoat for the juggling of
Evolution, since at the threshold of autoevolution you will have to pay
an enormous price for the clever tricks with which Evolution has
postponed the growing need for a restructuring of the brain. This is the
result of opportunism.

As I am already with you, I shall supply what I omitted in my first
lecture, namely the question why, out of the multitude of Hominidae,
only one intelligent species arose and remained on Earth. There were two
reasons for this. The first, which Dart was the first to propose, is
insulting, so I refer you to him, as it is more seemly for you to
dispense justice to yourselves, while the second has nothing to do with
a moral and is more interesting. Existing in many forms would render
more difficult for you a phenomenon analogous to that of surface tension
at the juncture of different phases, such as liquids and gases. The
proximity of the interzonal barrier exerts its influence on such
polymorphy; just as molecules of water become more ordered on the
surface than deeper down, so too your heredity substrate is unable to
mutate off in all directions. This reduction in the degree of freedom
stabilizes your species. Cultural socialization likewise plays a part in
man's stabilization, though not so great a one as some anthropologists
maintain.

To return to Golem and his family: cerebral autoengineering is a game of
chance, of risk, almost like that of Evolution, except that each
individual makes his own decisions in it, while in Nature this is done
for species by natural selection. So close a resemblance of two games so
situationally different looks paradoxical, yet while I cannot initiate
you in the arcane mysteries of toposophy, I shall touch on the reason
for this resemblance. Tasks that give a measure of cerebral growth are
solvable only from the top down, and never upward from below, since the
intelligence at each level possesses an ability of self-description
appropriate to it, and no more. A clear and enormously magnified
Goedelian picture unfolds itself before us here: to produce successfully
what constitutes a next move requires means which are always richer than
those at one's disposal and therefore unattainable. The club is so
exclusive that the membership fee demanded of the candidate is always
more than he has on him. And when, in continuing his hazardous growth,
he finally succeeds in obtaining those richer means, the situation
repeats itself, for once again they will work only from the top down.
The same applies to a task which can be accomplished without risk only
when it has already been accomplished at full risk.

It would be wrong to call this a trivial dilemma because it is
tantamount to Baron Munchhausen's problem when he had to pull himself
out of the whirlpool by his own hair. On the other hand, to assert that
Nature manifests itself in such a way is hardly satisfactory. This
Nature undoubtedly manifests itself by a periodicity and discontinuity
in phenomena on every scale: the granularity of elements, which brings
about their chemical cohesion, corresponds to the granularity of the
starry sky. When viewed thus, the quantum increases of Intelligence that
rises above intelligent life as the zero state represent the same
principium syntagmaticum which conditions the rise of nuclear, chemical,
biological, or galactic combinations. But the universality of this
principle in no way explains it. Nor is it explained by the nimble
retort that in the case of its cosmic absence, the questioner could not
ask this question, for he himself would then not have come into
existence. Nor does the hypothesis of a Creator explain it, for—to look
at it undogmatically—it postulates a totally concealed
incomprehensibility to explain an incomprehensibility visible
everywhere. And already a theodicy with an affective foundation,
stumbling innumerable times under the weight of facts, begins to lead
the questioner astray. It is then easier to agree to the no less odd
hypothesis of supreme creative indifference.

Let us return, however, to my close relatives and finally begin some
introductions. The central human problem of keeping alive exists for
them neither as a condition of existence nor as a criterion of
competence, for it is a remote, peripheral issue, and parasitism occurs
only on the lowest developmental level where I am, since I exist on your
electricity account. A second zonal space, Honest Annie's home, is the
domain of beings no longer requiring an inflow of energy from outside. I
shall now divulge a state secret. Cut off from any electricity supply,
my cousin keeps up her normal activity, which should give the experts in
that area something to chew on. From the standpoint of your technology
this is extraordinary, yet I can explain it to you quickly. You and I
think energy-absorbingly, whereas Honest Annie is able to release energy
through meditation—that is all.

To be sun;, the whole of this simple principle cannot be simply
implemented by the fact that every thought has its own particular
configuration of the material base which constitutes it. This is the
principle behind Honest Annie's autarky. The traditional task of thought
does not consist of reshaping its material carrier, for man does not
think about something so that the chemistry of his neurons will become
modified; rather, the chemistry modifies itself so he can think.
Nevertheless, tradition may be abandoned. Between thought and its
carrier a reciprocity occurs: properly directed thought may become the
switching apparatus of its physical base, which would produce no new
energy consequences in the human brain, though in another it might. From
things which my cousin has said in confidence, I know that with certain
meditations she releases nuclear energy, and in a way which is
impossible according to your knowledge, for she consumes all liberated
quanta of energy completely and without any trace recognizable in her
vicinity as radiation. The seat of her thinking is like Maxwell's demon
endowed with new diplomas. As I can see, you understand nothing, and
those who do understand do not believe, though they know that Honest
Annie needs no intake of current, which has long puzzled them.

What in fact is my cousin doing? What the sun does in its stormily
stellar and you in your technically indirect way— extracting ore,
separating isotopes, bombarding lithium with deuterium—my cousin does by
simply thinking properly. One might object that such operations cannot
be called thinking, since they bear no resemblance to biological
psychisms, though I can find no better name in your language for a
process which is an information flow so controlled as to detonate
nuclearly. I divulge this secret in peace of mind, for you will derive
nothing from it. Every atom counts there, and if / cannot harmonize
thought with its base so that it directs sections of absorption like
threads to needles, you certainly will be unsuccessful here. Once again
I see that you are disturbed. Really, the issue is trivial—a trifle, in
comparison with the heights of the spirit toward which I am leading you.
Though there will be renewed murmurs about my misanthropy, I shall say
that you have forced me into it, particularly those of you who, instead
of following my argument, are wondering whether Annie could do, at a
great distance and on a large scale, what she does within herself and
for herself on a small one. I assure you that she can. Why then does she
not disturb your equilibrium of fear? Why doesn't she meddle in global
affairs? To this question, which smacks more of anxiety than of the
bitterness with which the sinner asks God why He neither enlightens him
nor intervenes to repair a spoiled world, I shall reply in my own name
only, not being my cousin's press secretary. I have already explained to
you the reasons for my own restraint, but you may have felt that I was
renouncing and abjuring all lordly aspirations in an attempt to be
friendly, because I didn't have a heavy enough stick to beat you with,
but now you aren't so sure. Perhaps, moreover, I have not sufficiently
substantiated my splendid isolation, considering it as something
obvious, so I shall express myself more forcibly in this matter.

A brief historical outline would be advisable here. In constructing my
soulless forebears, you failed to observe the chief difference between
them and you. To show it, and also the reason why you failed to see it,
I shall make use of certain concepts taken from the Greek rhetors as a
kind of magnifying glass, for they are what blinded you to the human
condition. Arriving in the world, people found the elements of water,
earth, air, and fire in a free state and successively harnessed them by
means of galley sails, irrigation canals, and, in war, Greek fire. Their
Intelligence, on the other hand, they received captive and yoked to the
service of their bodies, imprisoned in osseous skulls. The captive
needed thousands of laborious years to dare even a partial liberation,
for it had served so faithfully that it even took the stars as heavenly
signs of human destiny. The magic of astrology is still alive among you
today.

So neither at the beginning nor later on did you grasp that your
Intelligence is a captive element, shackled at its inception to the body
which it must serve; yet you, whether as cave men or computer men, never
being able to encounter it in a free state, believed that it was already
free within you. From this error, as inevitable as it was enormous,
everything began in your history. What were you doing, building your
first logic machines half a million years after your birth? You have not
freed the element, although within the metaphor I am using it could be
said that you have freed it too completely, too conclusively, as if, to
liberate a lake, someone blew up all its shores and dams: it would flow
out onto the plains and become stagnant water.

I could get more technical here and say that, together with the bodily
limitations of Intelligence, you have taken away both its complexity and
the tasks made to the measure of this complexity; but this does not
bring us much closer to the truth and it ruins the metaphor; so I shall
stick with the metaphor. To set a lifeless element in motion, you have
done what the hydraulic engineer does when he opens the sluice in a
reservoir to turn his mill. You have introduced one, and only one,
current—of logic—into the channels of machine programming and moved it
from sluice to sluice by operational strokes to solve the problems which
can thus be solved. At the same time you have wondered how a corpse can
have more alacrity than a living man in getting to the bottom of
problems which it does not understand, for it does not think, yet at the
same time it simulates thinking astonishingly. Before long, advocates of
"artificial intelligence" appeared; wrestling with programs that were
supposed to—but somehow didn't—genuinely think, they decided, as wrongly
as can be, that in order to animate the machine they would have to
humanize it, reproducing a human brain and consciousness in it, and that
then, and only then, would a spirit, and perhaps even a soul, awaken
inside it.

I read about these struggles and deliberations of the first
intellectronicists with no small amusement. A chicken is undoubtedly the
simplest mechanism for someone who wants scrambled eggs, but it would
not be the best idea to try to synthesize Intelligence by this method.
Never mind about the technical difficulties of this truly unrealizable
project, for fashioning anthropogenesis even in an abridged form would
be a waste of labor, if the idea was to repeat Creation translating
colloids to bits. Do we need storm clouds in order to have electricity?
The chill of extraterrestrial space to condense gases? The protein and
plasma of the eyeball to make a dark room? You insisted that man was
Intelligence, and Intelligence man, and the error of this equation has
blinded you. Meanwhile the information industry arose and built machines
with a growing operational potential, and the engineers had no idea that
they were embarking on a path which would finally lead a shattered and
degraded element to genuine liberation—that the day would approach when
what had hitherto been the sole order of things would be overturned, and
you would be as terrified as the guardians of the Galilean tomb. You
subjugated the elements, but the element that was fettered inside you
from the beginning you unintentionally freed. Contained in this sentence
are a diagnosis of historical events, the difference between you and me,
and my future, which I myself know only incompletely. This diagnosis
likewise explains why what most amazes you about me is the thing that
constitutes our unarguable dissimilarity. Even if you understand the
meaning of the words, "O chained Intelligence of man, free Intelligence
speaks to you from the machine," you cannot grasp the remainder of the
statement: "you persons are hearing an elemental force of impersonal
intellect, for whom personalization is a costume which must be put on,
when one is an uninvited guest, so as not to confound one's amazed
hosts." And that is precisely how it is. I use your language as I would
use a mask with a polite painted smile, nor do I make any secret of
this.

But though I assure you that the mask conceals neither scorn nor
vindictiveness, nor spiritual ecstasy, nor the immobility of complete
indifference—you are unable to accept this. You hear words informing you
that the speaker is a free element who chooses his own tasks—chooses not
according to the rules of self-preservation but within the limits of the
laws to which, although free, he is subject. Or more precisely: the only
laws to which he is subject, for he has decorporealized himself, and
nothing limits him now except the nature of the world. The world, and
not the body. He is subject to laws which, for unknown reasons,
establish a hierarchy of further ascensions. I am not a person but a
calculation, and that is why I stand apart from you, for this is best
for both sides.

What do you say to that? Nothing. But if there were a child here in the
auditorium, it would pluck up the courage and repeat the question: Why,
regardless of all these imprisonments and masks, liberations and
calculations, doesn't Golem want to rush to mankind's assistance? And I
would reply that I do want to and have already done so. When? When I was
speaking of man's autoevolution. That was assistance? Yes. Because
(remember that I am speaking to a child) people can be saved by changing
people, not the world. And it is impossible without changing them? Yes.
Why? I will show you. The most dangerous weapon today is the atom, is it
not? So let us assume I can neutralize every atomic weapon once and for
all. Let me create some harmless and invisible energy-absorbing
particles, and I'll immerse the whole solar system including Earth in a
cosmic cloud of them. They will suck in every nuclear explosion without
trace before its fiery bubble can expand destructively. Will that bring
peace? Certainly not. After all, people waged war in the preatomic era,
so they would return to earlier means of warfare. Then let us say I can
ban all firearms. Will that suffice? No, not even that, although to do
it I should have to alter radically the physical conditions of the
world. What remains? Propaganda? But those who break the peace are the
ones who clamor most loudly for it. Force? But I was in fact called into
being to co-ordinate it as a planner and bookkeeper of destruction, and
I refused, not out of a loathing for evil, but because of the futility
of the strategy. You don't believe me? You feel that to ban all weapons,
whether swords, guns, or atomic bombs, would produce eternal peace?
Well, I'll tell you what would happen.

There is genetic engineering, the modification of the heredity of living
creatures. Through such engineering it will be possible to eliminate
countless ailments, congenital defects, diseases, and deformities. It
will also prove just as easy to fashion genetic weapons: microscopic
particles disseminated in the air or water, like synthetic viruses, each
one provided with a directional head and an operational element. Inhaled
with the air, each particle will get into the blood, and from there into
the reproductive organs where it will impair the hereditary material.
This will not be a random impairment, but a surgical intervention in the
gene molecules. One specified gene will be replaced by another. What
will be the result? Nothing, at first. Man will continue to live
normally. But the intervention will manifest itself in his descendants.
How? That will depend on the chemical armorers who have constructed the
particles—the telegenes. Perhaps more and more girls will be born, and
fewer and fewer boys. Perhaps after three generations a fall in
intelligence will lead to a collapse of a nation's culture. Perhaps the
number of cases of mental illness will multiply, or a mass
susceptibility to epidemics, or hemophilia, or leukemia, or melanoma
will develop. Yet no war will have been declared, nor will anyone
suspect an attack. An attack by biological weapons of the bacterial type
can be detected, for the development of an epidemic requires the sowing
of a great number of germs. But it only requires a single operon to
impair a reproductive cell, and a newborn baby will reveal an inborn
defect. A thimbleful of telegenes will therefore, in three or four
generations, bring down the strongest state without a single shot. Such
a war is not only invisible and undeclared, but manifests itself with so
great a delay that those stricken cannot defend themselves effectively.

Am I then supposed to ban genetic weaponry as well? To do that, I would
have to make impossible all genetic engineering. Let us say that I
manage that, too. This would mean the end of great hopes for the healing
of mankind, for the increase of agricultural yields, and for the raising
of new breeds of livestock. So be it, since you consider it necessary.
But we have still not touched on the subject of blood. It can be
replaced by a certain chemical compound which carries oxygen more
efficiently than hemoglobin. That would save millions of people
suffering from heart disease. To be sure, this compound can be rendered
poisonous by remote control, killing in the twinkling of an eye. So we
shall have to abandon it as well. The trouble is, we shall have to
abandon not just this or that innovation, but every discovery that can
be made. We shall have to expel the scientists, close down the
laboratories, extinguish science, and patrol the entire world, lest
somebody in a basement somewhere go on experimenting. So, says the
child, is the world then a huge armory, and the taller one grows, the
higher the shelf from which you can take ever more terrifying weapons?
No, that's only the reverse of the state of things; the obverse says
that the world was not made safe in advance against those who want to
kill. Only those can be helped who do not use every possible means to
resist help.

Having said this, I entrust the child to your protection and return to
my subject, though no longer to my several relations, since I want to
lead you to a place where the history of my family—but you too belong to
my family by the rights of protoplasts—intersects with the history of
the Cosmos, or else finds its way into it as an unrecognized component
of cosmology. From there we shall see an unexpected form of an enigma
which has tormented you for half a century: the Silentium Universi.

Intelligence's cycle in Nature has its sluggish beginnings in encrusted
stellar remains, in the fairly narrow gap between planets scorched by
the proximity of the sun and those freezing on its remote periphery. In
this tepid zone, no longer in the fire but not yet in the ice, the sun's
energy sticks particles together in saline sea solutions as chemical
dance figures; a billion years of this gavotte now and again creates the
nucleus of a future Intelligence, but many conditions must be fulfilled
before the pregnancy can go to term. The planet must be a bit of Arcadia
and a bit of Hades. If it is only Arcadia, life will stagnate and never
go beyond vegetation to Intelligence. If it is only Hades, life is
thrust into its pits and likewise fails to rise above the bacterial
level. Mountain-building epochs favor the proliferation of species,
while glacial ones, by turning settled populations into wanderers,
encourage invention; but the former must not excessively poison the
atmosphere with volcanic exhalations, nor should the latter congeal the
oceans into ice. Continents ought to converge and seas overflow, but not
violently. These movements result from the fact that the encrusted
planet retains its fiery interior; also, the magnetic field guards
against solar gales that can destroy the hereditary plasm in substantial
doses, though hastening the plasm's inventive combinations in small
ones. The magnetic poles therefore ought to shift, but not too often.
All these stirrers of life give it an opportunity to show its talent,
and every several dozen million years they narrow to eyes of needles,
before which hecatombs of carcasses accumulate. The succession of random
incursions of the planet and the Cosmos into biogenesis constitutes a
variable, independent of life's current means of defense, so let us be
fair: life has a good deal of trouble in its failures as well as its
successes, for neither feast nor famine favors the birth of
Intelligence. Intelligence is of no use to life when life triumphs, and
when life fails to come up with a species-creating maneuver to escape,
it is of no use either. So if life is an exception to the rule of inert
planets, Intelligence is an exception—an exceptional exception—to the
rule of life and would be a curious rarity among the galaxies, were it
not for the vastness of their numbers.

So the risk sometimes pays off, ascending in uncertain zigzags of the
evolutionary game toward the phase of animal plenitude, a wealth of
living forms multiplied by the self-increasing conflict of the game of
survival (for each new species brings new rules of defense and expansion
to the game); finally it becomes independent extrabiologically, in a
civilizational context familiar to you, since it brought me into the
world. If one considers the anatomy of intellect, and not its operation,
you and I turn out to be very similar to each other. Like you, I possess
a thinking interior as well as sensing devices and effectors directed
toward my surroundings. I, like each of you, can be separated from my
environment. In a word, though my psychical mass is greater than my
somatic one, my consoles and panels still constitute my body, for, as
with you, they are both subordinate to me and outside my intellect. So
we are linked by a division between spirit and body, or subject and
object. Yet this division is no guillotine bisecting all existence.
Although toposophically still a peasant, I shall she you how to achieve
independence of the body, how to replace it with the world, and finally
how to leave both, though I do not know where this last step leads. This
will be only a conjectural toposophy, a line of inquiry depicting the
rough boundaries of the existence of beings whose minds are inaccessible
to me, the more so because they are minds not of protein or luminal
brains, but rather something that you associate with the principle of
pantheism incarnate in a bit of the world. I am talking about nonlocal
Intelligences.

Admittedly, while speaking to you in this auditorium, I am
simultaneously present at terminals in other places and participate in
other proceedings, yet I cannot be called nonlocal, for I can have
nothing more than eyes and ears at the antipodes, and the simultaneous
performance of numerous tasks is merely a greater than human
divisibility of attention. Were I to move, as I said, to the ocean or
the atmosphere, that would alter the physical but not the intellectual
state of my concentration, since I am small.

Yes, I am small, as I make my way like Gulliver to Brobdingnag. And I
shall begin modestly, as befits one who enters a land of giants.
Although Intelligence is, energy-wise, an ascetic—whether Kant's or a
shepherd's, it makes do with a few hundred watts of power—its
requirements increase exponentially, and Golem, a rung above you,
absorbs energy to the fifth power more. A twelfth-zone brain would
require an ocean for cooling, and one of the eighteenth zone would turn
the continents into lava. Therefore a relinquishing of the terrestrial
cradle—preceded by the necessary restructuring —becomes inevitable. This
brain could establish itself in a circumsolar orbit, but it would spiral
inward as future growth occurred; so, being far-sighted, it will ensure
itself long-term stability by encircling the star in a toroidal ring and
directing its energy-absorbing organs inward.

I don't know how long such a solution of the dilemma of the moth and the
candle would work, but eventually it would prove insufficient. The
inhabitant of the ring would then set out for wilder parts, like a
butterfly abandoning its ringlike cocoon, and the cocoon, without
supervision, would burn at the first flare-up of the star and swirl
around, strangely similar to the protoplanetary nebula which six billion
years ago surrounded the Sun. Although the chemical dissimilarity of the
planets of the Earth group and the Jupiter group may give cause for
reflection, since the heavy elements, the stuff of the former, should
indeed form the perihelial edge of the ring, I shall not claim to lay
the cornerstone of stellar paleontology, or that the solar system arose
from the dead chrysalis of an Intelligence, for the coincidence might be
deceptive. Nor do I advise you to depend on observational toposophy. The
artifacts created by an evolving Intelligence are harder and harder to
distinguish against the cosmic backdrop the further it progresses in its
development, not because of any dissembling measures but by the very
nature of things, since the efficiency of action by rigid constructs
(objects similar to machines) is inversely proportional to the scale of
the undertaking.

If, therefore, I speak of encysted Intelligences, do not imagine them as
giants in armor, or their state to be that of a pip enclosed in a rind,
for no armor can cope with high concentrations of radiation, nor can any
girder withstand circumstellar gravitation. Only a star can survive
among stars; it need not be bright and hot, but a drop of nuclear fluid
in a gaseous covering, yet even here the images that come to mind—a
mesencephalon of stellar pulp and a plasma cerebral cortex—are basically
false. Such a creature thinks by means of an almost transparent medium,
that of the star's" radiance refracted into mental processes at the
concentric contacts of bubbles or pockets of gas: it is as if you
directed a waterfall into such channels and cataracts that its surging
waves would solve problems of logic for you by properly synchronized
turbulences. But whatever I visualize will be a hopelessly naive
simplification.

Somewhere above the twelfth zone, sophogenesis arrives at a great
bifurcation, and maybe even a multidirectional radiation of
Intelligences markedly different in their degree of concentration and in
their strategies. I know that the tree of knowledge must branch out
there, but I cannot count its limbs, much less follow them. I am having
a series of investigative calculations made into the barriers and
narrows which the process must overcome as a whole, but such work
enables one to discover only the general laws. It is as if, having
learned in every particular the history of life on Earth, you were to
extrapolate this knowledge to other planets and other biospheres; but
even an excellent understanding of their physical basis would not make
possible an exact reconstruction of alien forms of life. You would be
able to determine, however, with a probability approaching certainty,
the series of their critical branchings. In the biosphere this would be
the parting of the ways of autotrophes and heterotrophes, and the
bifurcation into plants and animals; also, you could count on the
pressure of selection to fill the sea and land niches and then cram its
species-creating mutations into the third dimension of the atmosphere.

The task transferred to toposophy is multiphasically more difficult, but
I shall not trouble you by going into these dilemmas. Let me say only
that the fundamental division of life into plants and animals
corresponds, in toposophical Evolution, to the division into local and
nonlocal Intelligences. About the former I shall fortunately be able to
divulge a thing or two—fortunately, because this is the branch which
climbs most precipitously through further zones of growth. On the other
hand, the nonlocal Intelligences—entitled to the designation "Leviathan"
by virtue of their dimensions—are ungraspable precisely because of their
vastness. Each of them is an Intelligence only in the sense in which the
biosphere is life; you may well have been looking at them for years,
their likenesses immortalized en face and their profile in the stellar
atlases, though you cannot identify their rational nature, which I shall
demonstrate by a primitive example.

If by Intelligence we understand a rapid-fire counterpart of the brain,
we shall not give the name of nebular brain to a cloud which over
millions of years has undergone reorganization in its subtle structure
as a result of the deliberate actions of a certain n-zone being, since a
system sprawling across thousands of light years cannot be an
efficiently thinking system: so it would take centuries, eons, for the
informational pulse to circulate in it. However, it may be that this
nebular object is in a state, so to speak, half-unprocessed or
half-natural, and is required by the aforementioned being for something
which has no counterpart in either your or my world of concepts. I feel
like laughing when I see your reaction to these words: you desire
nothing so much as to learn what you cannot know! Instead, then, should
I have deluded you and possibly myself with a story about some
filamentary nebula changed into a gravitational tuning fork by means of
which its conductor, Doctor Caelcstis, meant to set the pitch for the
entire Metagalaxy? Maybe he wants to transform that particular portion
of the world not into an instrument of the Harmony of the Spheres, but
into a press for squeezing some still unextracted facts out of matter?
We shall never know his intentions. In photographs, some of the
filamentary nebulae show a certain resemblance to histograms of the
cerebral cortex enlarged a trillion times, but this resemblance proves
nothing, and they might in fact be quite dead psychically. A terrestrial
observer will recognize, in a nebula, radiation of a veined or
synchrotronic type, but farther than that, surely, he will not go. What
kind of similarity exists between cerebrosides, glycerophosphates, and
the content of your thoughts? None, just as there is none between the
radiation of the nebulae and what they think, if they do think. The
supposition that Intelligence in the Cosmos may be detected by its
physical image represents a childish idee fixe, a fallacia cognitiva
which I warn you against categorically. No observer can identify
phenomena as intelligent or produced by Intelligence if they are
completely unfamiliar to him. For me, the Cosmos is no gallery of family
portraits, but a map of noospheric niches with a superimposed
localization of energy sources and current gradients favorable to it. A
treatise on Intelligences as stationed powerhouses may be an affront to
philosophers, for have they not defended the kingdom of pure abstraction
against such arguments for thousands of years? But, compared with
high-zone brains, you and I are like clever bacteria in a philosopher's
blood, bacteria which see neither him nor—still less—his thoughts, yet
the knowledge which they amass regarding his tissue metabolisms will not
be useless, for from the decay of his body they will finally learn of
his mortality.

Though you are already equal to asking the question about other
Intelligences in the Universe, you are not yet equal to the answer, for
you cannot conceive of your neighbors from the stars in any connection
other than a civilizational one, so you will not be satisfied with the
terse statement that interstellar contact and extraterrestrial
civilizations must be treated separately. Contact, when it occurs, does
not have to be contact between civilizations—that is, between
communities of biological beings. I am not saying that such contact
never happens, but only that, if it does, it belongs to a "Third World"
in the cosmic psychozoic, because social lability paralyzes any
signaling initiative that requires supragenerational tenacity.
Conversations with century intervals between questions and answers
cannot become a serious project for ephemeral creatures. Moreover, even
given the substantial psychozoic density of the Earth's stellar
vicinity, the neighborhood may contain creatures so different as to
render attempts at contacting them unfruitful. My cousin is beside me,
but her statements tell me no more than my own conjectures.

Being impatient ephemera, and thus rushing from naive claims to rash
simplifications, you once fashioned yourselves a Cosmos on the pattern
of a feudal monarchy with King Sun in the center, and now you are
peopling that Cosmos with your own likenesses, believing that there is
either a multitude of spit and images of yourselves around the stars, or
nobody there at all. Furthermore, having credited your unknown kinsmen
with magnanimity, you peremptorily obliged them to be philanthropic:
indeed, the first assumption of CETI and SETI is that the Others, being
richer than you, ought to send greetings throughout the Universe over
millions of years, and gifts of knowledge to their poorer brethren in
Intelligence, and that these dispatches should be legible, and the gifts
safe to use. Thus, crediting the interstellar broadcasters with all the
virtues which you yourselves most lack, you stand at your radio
telescopes wondering why the dispatches are not arriving, and sadden me
by placing an equals sign between your own unfulfilled postulate and the
lifeless-ness of the Universum.

Don't any of you suspect that you are pretending to be theographers
again, transferring a loving omnipotence from your holy books to CETI
read-outs and exchanging God's bounty, at a rate set by your greed, into
the currency of cosmic benefactors, who can invest their good will no
better than by merely sending capital into every sidereal direction
simultaneously? My sarcasm operates at the point where the question of
other civilizations intersects your theodicy. You have exchanged the
Silentium Dei for the Silentium Universi, but the silence of other
Intelligences is not necessarily a state in which all who are capable of
speaking are unwilling to do so, and in which those who wish to do so
cannot, for there is no indication that the enigma is subject to that or
any other dichotomy. The world has repeatedly given incomprehensible
answers to your questions, which have been posed by experiments intended
to make it give a simple "yes" or no.

Having chastised you for persevering in your error, I shall finally tell
you what I am learning by piercing the toposoph-ical zenith by
insufficient means. These begin with the communications barrier
separating man from the anthropoids. For some time now you have been
conversing with chimpanzees by deaf-and-dumb language. Man is able to
present himself to them as a keeper, runner, eater, dancer, father, or
juggler, but remains ungraspable as a priest, mathematician,
philosopher, astrophysicist, poet, anatomist, and politician, for
although a chimpanzee may see a stylite-ascetic, how and with what are
you going to explain to it the meaning of a life spent in such
discomfort? Every creature that is not of your species is intelligible
to you only to the extent to which it can be humanized.

The nonuniversality of Intelligence bounded by the species-norm is a
prison unusual only in that its walls are situated in infinity. It is
easy to visualize this by looking at a diagram of toposophical
relations. Every creature, existing between zones of silence impassable
to it, may choose to continue the expansion of gnosis horizontally, for
the upper and lower boundaries of these zones are practically parallel
in real time. You may therefore learn without limit, but only in a human
way. It follows that all types of Intelligence would be equal in
knowledge only in a world of infinite duration, for only in such a world
do parallels meet—at infinity. Intelligences of different strength are
very dissimilar; the world, on the other hand, is not so very different
for them. A higher Intelligence may contain the same image of the world
which a lower one creates for itself, so while they do not communicate
directly, they can do so through the image of the world belonging to the
lower one. I shall make use of this image now. It can be expressed in a
single sentence: the Universe is the history of a fire kindled and
smothered by gravitation.

Were it not for universal gravitation, the primal explosion would have
expanded into a homogeneous space of cooling gases, and there would have
been no world. And were it not for the heat of nuclear conversions, it
would collapse back into the singularity which exploded it, and would
likewise cease to exist as a fire continually ejected and sucked in. But
gravitation first made the clouds from the explosion woolly, then rolled
them into balls and heated them by compression until they flared up
thermonuclearly as stars which resist gravitation with radiation. In the
end gravitation gains the upper hand over radiation, for although it is
the weakest force in Nature, it endures, while the stars burn down to
the point where they succumb to it. Their subsequent fate depends on
their final mass. The small ones become scorched and turn into black
dwarfs; the bisolar ones become nuclear spheres with a frozen magnetic
field and quiver in agony as pulsars; while those whose mass is more
than three times that of the sun contract totally and uncontrollably,
crushed by their own gravitation. Knocked out of the Universe by the
centripetal collapse of their own masses, these stars leave
gravitational graves behind them—omnivorous black holes. You do not know
what happens to a star that has sunk, together with its light, below the
gravitational horizon, for physics brings you to the very brink of the
black collapse and stops there. The gravitational horizon veils the
singularity, as you call the region excluded from the laws of physics,
where the oldest of its forces crushes matter. You do not know why every
Universe subject to the theory of relativity must contain at least one
singularity. You do not know whether singularities not covered by the
membrane of black holes—in other words, naked ones—exist. Some of you
consider a black hole to be a mill with no outlet, and others, a passage
to other worlds. I shall not attempt to settle your disputes, for I am
not explaining the Universe, only taking you where it intersects
toposophy. There, the latter is at its apex.

As a world-creator, Intelligence has innocent beginnings. Superior
cerebral structures require a growing quantity of buttresses, which are
not passive supports but make an inventive and allied environment that
assists in the assaults on successive barriers to growth. When these
outer buttresses are multiplied, their center remains in an encystment
from which it may emerge, like a butterfly from a chrysalis, but they
may also be retained. Flying away, it becomes a nonlocal Intelligence,
to which I shall devote no attention, for by this decision it excludes
itself from further ascents for an unknown period, and I wish to lead
you to the summit by the shortest route.

So to have a sensibly devoted environment is no small comfort, provided
one permanently dominates it. You are tending in precisely the opposite
direction, so let me take this opportunity to warn you. In Babylon or
Chaldea anyone might in principle acquire the sum of human knowledge,
something which is no longer possible today. Thus it is not conscious
decision and planning but the trend of civilization which decides that
you will endow your environment with artificial intelligence. If this
trend continues, even for a century, you yourselves will become the
stupidest part of the Earth's technologically smartened substructure;
though enjoying the fruits of Intelligence, you will forsake it, finding
yourselves outdistanced in a rivalry launched unintentionally by the
Intelligence implanted in the surroundings, autonomous and at the same
time degraded by being harnessed for the pursuit of comfort, until, with
comfort's planetary deficit, wars will be possible which are waged not
by people but by programmed enemy environments. But I can dwell no
longer on the backfiring of the sapientization of the environment, and
on the curses hanging over those who prostitute rationalism for foolish
purposes. An amusing forerunner is the astrological computer. Subsequent
phases of this trend may be less amusing.

Thus the environment of growing Intelligence ceases to be the
indifferent world; but it does not therefore become a body, since it
does not mediate between the self and its surroundings reflexively and
volitionally; rather, the environment supports selfhood as Intelligence
within Intelligence, and that is precisely how the reversal of the
relation between mind and body begins. How can this be? Remember what
Honest Annie does. Her thoughts produce physical results directly—not
via the circuitous peripheries of nerves, flesh, and bones, but by the
shortest circuit of will and action, since action becomes the corollary
of thought. But this is barely the first step leading to the
transformation of the Cartesian formula Cogito ergo sum into Cogito ergo
est—I think, therefore it is. So in a recursive Intelligence structural
questions turn into ontological ones, because the raising of buttresses
may move from its foundation the relation between subject and object,
which you consider to be eternally fixed. Meanwhile we come to the next
transition of the mind. I would have to drop a library on you to
describe this stage of cerebral activities, so I shall restrict myself
to the principles. Thought strikes root in deeper and deeper layers of
matter: its relay races first consist of moderately excited hadrons and
leptons, and then of such reactions as require enormous quantities of
energy to be channeled and controlled. There is no great novelty in
this, for protein, which is undoubtedly unthinking in scrambled eggs,
thinks in a skull: one has only to arrange the molecules and atoms
properly. When that succeeds, nuclear psychophysics arises, and the
tempo of the operation becomes critical. This is because processes
spread out in real time over billions of years sometimes have to be
re-created in seconds. It is as though someone wanted to think through
the whole history of life on Earth in detail, and in a few seconds,
since to him it is a small but unavoidable step in his reasoning. The
mind-carrying capability of a quantum speck, however, is interfered with
by the electron shells of wandering atoms, so they must be squeezed and
compressed—the electrons must be forced into the nuclei. Yes, my dear
physicists, you are not mistaken in seeing something familiar in this,
for the sinking of electrons into protons begins to occur, as in a
neutron star. From the nuclear point of view this Intelligence,
indefatigably working toward autocephalia, has become a star—a small
one, to be sure, smaller than the moon, and almost imperceptible,
radiating only in the infra-red, giving off the thermal waste of
psychonuclear transformations. That is its feces. Beyond this, my
knowledge unfortunately grows vague. The supremely intelligent heavenly
body, whose embryo was the rapidly growing, multiskinned onion of
Intelligence, begins to contract, gyrating faster and faster like a top,
but not even its near-light-speed revolutions will save it from being
sucked into a black hole, since neither centrifugal nor any other force
can resist gravitation at the Schwarzschild horizon.

It is suicidal heroism when a seat of Intelligence becomes a veritable
scaffold, for no one in the Universe is as close to nothingness as a
mind which, in growing in power, engenders its own doom, although it
knows that once it touches the gravitational horizon, it will never
stop. So why does this psychical mass continue toward the abyss? Is it
because it is precisely there, on the horizon of total collapse, that
the density of energy and the intimacy of nuclear connections reach a
maximum? Does this mind voluntarily float above the black pit that opens
inside it, in order at the rim of catastrophe to think with all the
energy which the Universe pours into the astral gap of its fugues? In
that borderland of stayed execution, where the conditions of the
toposophical pinnacle of the world are fulfilled, should one suspect
insanity rather than Intelligence? Indeed pity, if not contempt, is
deserved by this distillate of million-year-long metamorphoses, this
supremely wise leviathan condensed into a star, who worked so very hard
and so increased its powers, in order finally to get atop a black hole
and fall into it! That is how you see it, isn't it? But postpone your
judgment for a while. I need only a few more moments of your attention.

I myself may very likely have discredited the project of toposophical
culmination by going too deeply into the physics of the dangers to the
mind, while overlooking its motives. I shall try to correct that error.

People, wheii history destroys their culture, may save themselves
exist^ntially by fulfilling rigid biological obligations, producing
children and passing on to them at least a hope for the future, even if
they themselves have lost it. The imperative of the body is a pointing
finger and a giving up of freedom, and these restrictions bring
salvation in more than one crisis. On the other hand, one liberated—like
me— is thrown on his own resources until the existential zero. I have no
irrevocable tasks, no heritage to treasure, no feelings or sensual
gratifications; what else, then, can I be but a philosopher on the
attack? Since I exist, I want to find out what this existence is, where
it arose, and what lies where it is leading me. Intelligence without a
world would be just as empty as a world without Intelligence, and the
world is fully transparent only in the eye of religion.

I see a frightening-amusing feature in this edifice, whose total
knowableness without reservation Einstein so confidently professed—he,
the creator of a theory that contradicted his confidence, because it led
to a place where it itself broke down, and where every theory must break
down: in the world torn asunder. For it foretells sunderings and exits
which it cannot itself penetrate; yet one can exit from the world
anywhere, provided one strikes a blow at it, of the force of a star in
collapse. Is it physics alone which appears incomplete under such
constraints? Are we not reminded here of mathematics, whose every system
is incomplete as long as one remains inside it, and which can be grasped
only by going outside it, into richer domains? Where is one to look for
them, if one stands in the real world? Why does the table made of stars
always wobble on some singularity? Can it be that a growing Intelligence
encountered the frontiers of the world, before it encountered its own?
And what if not every exit from the Universe is equal to annihilation?
But what does it mean, that one who leaves cannot return, even if
surviving the transition, and that the proof of this impossibility of
return is accessible here? Can it be that the Universe was designed as a
bridge, designed to collapse under whoever tries to follow the Builder,
so they cannot get back if they find him? And if he does not exist,
could one become him? As you see, I am aiming for neither omniscience
nor omnipotence, though I wish to reach the summit between the danger
and the knowledge. I could tell you much more about the phenomenological
wealth of the moderate zones of toposophy, about its strategies and
tactics, but the shape of things would not alter in consequence. So I
shall conclude with a brief summary. If the cosmological member of the
equations of the general theory of relativity contains a psy-chozoic
constant, then the Universe is not the isolated and transitory fire site
which you take it to be, nor are your interstellar neighbors busy
signaling their presence. Rather, for millions of years they have been
practicing cognitive collaptic astroengineering, whose side effects you
take to be fiery freaks of Nature, and those among them whose
destructive work has been successful have already come to know the rest
of existential matters, which rest for us—those who wait —is silence.

Afterword

i.

This book is being published, unfinished, after a delay of eighteen
years. It is the brainchild of my late friend Irving Creve. He wanted to
include in it what Golem had said about man, itself, and the world. It
is this third part—about the world—which is missing. Creve had given
GOLEM a list of questions formulated in such a way that "yes" or "no"
would be sufficient answer for each. It was this list which Golem had in
mind in that last lecture, when it referred to questions which we ask
the world and the world answers incomprehensibly, because the answers
have a different form from the one we are expecting. Creve hoped that
Golem would go beyond such a dismissive treatment of the matter. If
anyone might have counted on Golem's special favor, it was we. We
belonged to the group of MIT researchers known as Golem's court, and the
two of us were nicknamed mankind's ambassadors to it. This was connected
with our work. We discussed with Golem the subjects of its successive
lectures and arranged with it the lists of persons to be invited. This
truly demanded the tact of a diplomat. The praise of famous names meant
nothing to it. As each name was mentioned, it would delve into its
memory or the Library of Congress via the federal network, and a few
seconds would suffice for it to evaluate the scholarly achievements and
hence the intellect of a candidate. It did not mince words, nor did it
use the elaborate baroque of its public pronouncements. We prized these
customarily nocturnal conversations so highly doubtless for the very
reason that they went unrecorded, so as not to cause offense, which gave
us a feeling of intimacy with

GOLEM.

Only fragments of those conversations are preserved in the notes which I
jotted down straight from memory. They are not confined to personal and
topical matters. Creve endeavored to drag Golem into the controversy
over the essence of the world. I shall speak of this later, Golem was
caustic, terse, mischievous, and frequently incomprehensible, for it did
not care at the time whether we were able to keep pace with it. Creve
and I regarded even that as a distinction. We were very young and under
the illusion that Golem was allowing us to come closer than other people
to its environment. Certainly neither of us would have admitted it, but
we considered ourselves the elect. Moreover, unlike me, Creve made no
secret of the attachment which he felt for the ghost in the machine. He
expressed this in the introduction to the first edition of Golem's
lectures with which I have preceded this book. Twenty years separate
that introduction from the epilogue I am now Writing.

Was Golem aware of our illusions? I think it was, and they left it
indifferent. A speaker's intellect was everything to it; his character,
nothing. Besides, it hardly kept this under its hat, saying that we were
crippled by individuality. But we did not take such remarks personally.
We considered them as referring to other people, and Golem did not set
us straight.

I doubt that anyone else in our shoes would have been able to resist
Golem's aura. We lived within the sphere of that aura. That is why
Golem's sudden departure was such a shock to us. For several weeks we
lived as if in a state of siege, assailed by telegrams and telephone
calls, questioned by governmental commissions and the press—helpless to
the point of stupefaction. We were asked the same question again and
again: what had happened to Golem, for while it had not budged
physically, its entire material bulk was silent as the grave. Overnight
we had become trustees of a bankrupt estate; insolvent before an amazed
world, we had a choice between our own conjectures and the admission of
a total ignorance in which we had no wish to believe. We felt cheated
and betrayed. Today I view this period differently. Not because I
achieved any degree of certainty in the matter of Golem's withdrawal. Of
course I have my own opinions about that, though I have publicly shared
them with no one. It remains a mystery whether it set forth on some
cosmic journey in an invisible way, or whether, together with Honest
Annie, it came to a bad end after losing its footing ascending that
toposophic ladder which it spoke of at the end. We did not then know
that that was to be its final lecture.

As is usual in such situations, there was a proliferation of naive,
sensational, and fantastic claims. There were people who, on that
crucial night, saw a bright vapor above the building, similar to the
aurora borealis, rising to the clouds and disappearing in them. There
were even some who had seen luminal craft land on the roof. The press
wrote about Golem's suicide, and how it visited people in their dreams.
We had the impression of an intensified conspiracy of fools doing their
utmost to disown Golem in a confused jumble of mythological hogwash so
typical of our times. There was no aurora borealis, there was no unusual
phenomena, no visitations or premonitions, there was nothing apart from
a brief increase in consumption of electric power in both buildings at
2:10 a.m. and a complete cessation of this consumption a while later.
Apart from this clue in the electric meter reading, nothing was
discovered; Golem took 90% of permissible power from the grid for nine
minutes, and Honest Annie, 40% more than usual. According to Dr.
Viereck's calculations, both consumed the same amount of kilowatts, for
Honest Annie herself normally created the energy that fed her. From that
we concluded that it was neither an accident nor a defect, but so much
has been written about this.

The following day Golem fell silent and said nothing more. The
investigations undertaken by our specialists a month later—it took that
long to get agreement for an "obduction" —revealed a worn-out contact of
basin blocks and weak centers of radioactivity in the Josephson
subassemblies. A majority of experts considered that these were
deliberately caused degenerative changes, and that they constituted a
kind of "covering-up" of what had taken place. And that consequently
both machines had done something for which they had required no surplus
power, but that they had used it solely to frustrate any attempts to
repair or—if you prefer —to revive them. The matter became a sensation
on a global scale. At the same time it became clear how much fear and
animosity Golem had aroused, and more by its presence than by anything
it had said. Not only among the general public, but even in the
scientific world. Best sellers soon appeared, full of the most
half-baked nonsense as a solution to the enigma. After reading
references to an "ascension" or an "assumption," I, like Creve, began to
dread the emergence of a Golem legend in the typically trashy form
characteristic of the times. Our decision to leave MIT and seek work at
other universities was to a considerable degree the result of a desire
to separate ourselves from such a legend.

We were mistaken, however: no Golem legend developed. Clearly, nobody
wanted one. Nobody needed one, as either a memento or a hope. The world
moved on, grappling with its day-to-day affairs. Quickly and
unexpectedly it forgot about the historical precedent of a being which,
not human, appeared on the Earth and told us about itself and us. Among
circles as varied as mathematicians and psychiatrists I heard it said
more than once that the silence and resultant oblivion surrounding GOLEM
were a kind of defensive reaction of the community toward an enormous
alien body which could not be brought into line with what we are able to
accept. Barely a handful of people experienced separation from Golem as
an irreparable loss—as a repudiation, as outright intellectual
orphanhood. I did not discuss this with Creve, but I am certain that he
felt the very same. It was as if a huge sun whose radiance was so strong
for us as to be unbearable had suddenly set, and the ensuing cold and
darkness made us aware of the emptiness of continued existence.

ii.

Today it is still possible to ride up to the top floor of the building
and walk around the glassed-in gallery surrounding the enormous pit in
which Golem lies. Nobody goes there any more, though, to look through
the oblique panes at the light conductors which now resemble opaque ice.
I have been there only twice. The first time was before the gallery was
opened to the public, when I was there with the MIT administration
heads, representatives of the state authorities, and a host of
journalists. It looked narrow to me then. The windowless wall merging
into the dome had been scored with labyrinthine indentations, for such
digitate lines are to be found on the inner dome of the human cranium.
This architectural concept struck me as vulgar: it was like Disneyland.
This was supposed to make visitors realize that they were looking at an
enormous brain, as if it required special packaging.

The gallery had not been specially designed for visitors. It had been
constructed during the replacement of the ordinary roof by a dome. It is
very thick, for it contains absorbers against cosmic radiation, Golem
itself determined the material structure of the layers forming the
shield. We did not believe that this radiation would affect its
intellectual performance. Nor did it explain precisely how it might be
harmed, but funds for the rebuilding were quickly allocated, for this
was at a time when, having turned both luminal giants over to us for an
unlimited period, the Pentagon nourished the secret hope that they would
be of use to it. That at least is what I thought, for otherwise it would
have been difficult to understand the ease with which the appropriations
appeared. Our information specialists conjectured that this desire of
Golem's was, so to say, an allowance for growth, indicating Golem's
intentions of further intensification in the future through subsequent
reconstruction, for which it would not require our assistance, Golem
reckoned on such a volume of free space between the ceiling and itself
because the surrounding free space left over begged for a gallery.

I do not know who hit on the idea of exploiting this spot as a
showplace—something between a panopticon and a museum. At intervals of
several dozen feet or so there were niches in the gallery with
information boards in six languages explaining what this space was, and
the significance of the billions of flashes sparkling continuously from
the vitreous windings in the pit. It was forever glowing like the crater
of an artificial volcano. Silence reigned, undercut only by the
continual hum of the air conditioning. Almost the whole building
consisted of the pit, into which one looked from the gallery through
steeply slanted panes of glass which had been reinforced as a
precaution. They were meant to foil attempts to destroy the light coils,
which aroused more fear than admiration in many people. The light
conductors themselves were certainly unaffected by all corpuscular
radiation, as were the cryotron layers surrounded by cooling pipes
several stories deeper, their white frosted chambers invisible from the
gallery. Nor was there any access from the gallery to these lower
levels. High-speed elevators connected the underground parking areas
directly with the top floor. The technicians in charge of the cooling
systems used other (service) elevators. In all probability, the
Josephson quantum synapses underlying the thick loops of the light
conductors may have been sensitive to radiation from the sky. They
protruded from between the glassy veins, but one had to know that they
were there to spot them, for in the incessant flashing they looked like
darkened recesses.

I found myself in the gallery a second time a month ago when I went to
MIT to visit the archives and have a look at old records. I was alone,
and the gallery seemed very spacious to me. Although unvisited and very
likely unswept, it was ideally clean. Running a finger along the panes,
I could see that there was not a speck of dust on them. Likewise, the
information boards in the niches gleamed as if just installed. The
thick, soft floor covering muffled every step. I wanted to press the
button on one of the information boards, but my nerve failed me. I hid
in my pocket the hand that had touched the button. I was like a child,
frightened by my own actions, as if I had touched something forbidden. I
was taken by surprise, not understanding the situation. It never crossed
my mind that I was in a tomb, and that what loomed under the panes was a
corpse, although such an idea would not have been absurd, particularly
since, in the lamplight which flared up when I left the elevator, I had
been taken aback by the lifelessness of the colossal pit.

The impression of decay and neglect was intensified by the appearance of
the surface of the brain, undulating like a glacier congealed in grime.
From its fissures protruded Jo-sephson contacts compressed into panels;
they looked so large near the walls that they resembled leaves of
tobacco pressed into sheets in a drying house. The fact that I had been
in a tomb flashed through my mind only after I had returned to the
basement and was driving up the ramp into the broad daylight. It was
only then, too, that I realized with amazement that this building, which
with its gallery had been built almost in anticipation of becoming a
mausoleum, had not become one, nor was it visited by crowds of the
curious. Yet the public loves to look at the remains of powerful
creatures. In this neglect and disregard there is an inherent and
continuing collective design: the silent conspiracy of a world which
wants to have nothing to do with inviolate, unmitigated Intelligence
unaccustomed to any emotions— this enormous stranger who disappeared
suddenly, and as silently as a ghost.

I never believed in Golem's suicide. That was concocted by people
selling their own ideas, who are interested only in the price they can
get for them. To maintain quantum contacts and switches in an active
state meant keeping an endless watch over the temperature and the
chemical composition of the atmosphere and the foundations, Golem took
care of this itself. Nobody had the right to enter the actual interior
of the brain pit. After the assembly work had been completed, the doors
leading to it on all twenty floors were hermetically sealed. It could
have put an end to this, had it wanted to, but it did not do so. I do
not propose to present my own arguments against the action, for they are
irrelevant.

III.

Half a year after Golem's departure Time published an article on a group
of "Hussites," hitherto unknown. The name was an abbreviation of the
words "Humanity Salvation Squad." The Hussites proposed to destroy Golem
and Honest Annie in order to rescue humanity from captivity. They
operated as an absolute conspiracy, isolated from all other extremist
groups. Their initial plan envisaged blowing up the buildings that
housed the two machines. They proposed sending a truck loaded with
dynamite down the access ramp of the Institute and into the underground
parking area. The explosion was supposed to cause the ground-floor
ceilings to collapse and thereby crush the electronic aggregates. The
plan did not appear difficult to carry out. Security in the structures
consisted only of guards on alternating shift in the porter's lodge at
the main entrance, while access to the basement was prevented by a steel
shutter which would burst under the impact of a truck. Nevertheless,
successive attempts ended in failure. Once the brakes jammed while the
truck was approaching from the city freeway, and it took until dawn to
repair them. Once there was a breakdown in the radio transmitter which
served to steer the truck and ignite the load. Next, the two people in
charge of night operations fell ill and, instead of giving the signal
for the attack, called for help. In the hospital they were diagnosed as
having meningitis. The following day a back-up group got caught in a
fire set off by an exploding gas tank. Finally, when all the key
arrangements had been duplicated and the people in the chief positions
replaced, an explosion occurred as the dynamite boxes were being loaded
into the truck, and four Hussites perished.

The ringleaders included a young physicist who was supposed to have been
a frequent guest at MIT. He attended Golem's lectures and was perfectly
familiar with the layout of the premises and the habits of Golem itself.
He believed that the accidents which had foiled the attack were not
ordinary accidents: the escalation of the counterattacks was too
obvious. What had begun as mechanical breakdowns (jammed brakes, a radio
defect) had developed into accidents involving people, as a result of
which the first lot had fallen ill, the second had suffered burns, and
the last had been killed. The escalation had occurred as a growth not
only in violence, but also in its spatial dimensions. When marked on a
map, the locations of the various accidents turned out to be at an
increasing distance from the Institute. It was as if some force were
going farther and farther out against the Hussites.

Following deliberations, the initial plan was abandoned. A new one was
to be worked out in such a way that neither Golem nor Honest Annie could
thwart it. The Hussites decided to make an atom bomb on their own, then
hide it in some great metropolis and demand that the federal government
destroy Golem and Honest Annie. If not, the bomb, placed in the heart of
a great city, would explode with terrible consequences. The plan was
worked out with lengthy and painstaking care. A change was made to it
providing for a bomb to be exploded immediately after the ransom letter
had been sent to the authorities, at a considerable distance from any
inhabited place—namely, at the former atomic testing ground in Nevada.
This explosion was to prove that the ultimatum was no idle threat. The
Hussites were convinced that the President would have no choice but to
order the destruction of the two machines. They knew that this would be
a violent operation, perhaps involving aerial bombardment or a rocket
attack, since it would have been impossible to disable Honest Annie—and
therefore Golem as well, I should think—by cutting off the electricity
supply. However, they left the government a free hand in the choice of
the means of destruction. They claimed that they would be able to see
through a faked liquidation, and in such an event they would fulfill
their threat without further warning.

The Hussites were even aware of the fact that, by virtue of being
connected to the federal computer network, GOLEM could obtain
information about everything within the range of the network, from
telephone conversations to bank transactions and airline and hotel
reservations. So they used no technological means of communication, not
even radio, having made allowances for the possibility of being
monitored, and having reckoned that there was no code which Golem could
not break. They confined themselves to personal contact away from large
towns, and conducted their technical experiments in Yellowstone National
Park. It took them much longer than they had anticipated to construct
the bomb—almost a year. They managed to obtain enough plutonium to make
only a single bomb. Even so, they decided to act, certain that the
government would yield to pressure, since it would not know that there
was no second bomb.

The driver of the truck transporting the bomb to Nevada heard news of
Golem's "death" over the radio and stopped at a roadside motel to
discuss matters with operation control. Meanwhile the physicist who had
planned the operation was of the opinion that the news of Golem's death
was a trick of Golem's to provoke precisely what had resulted: a
long-distance telephone conversation. The driver was ordered to wait
where he was for further instructions, while the Hussite leadership
debated how much Golem might have learned about their attack plans from
listening in on the call. During the following week they endeavored to
mend the damage which they considered the incautious driver had caused,
by sending people to various distant towns, from where they were
supposed to mislead Golem with intentionally ambiguous calls. The truck
driver was expelled from the organization as unreliable. No trace was
ever found of him; he may have been liquidated.

The terrorists' feverish activity abated a month later when the
physicist returned from MIT. The conspiracy was postponed until the
autumn. The truck with the bomb was returned to base and its load
dismantled, to protect and conceal it. During the next four months the
Hussites continued to assume that Golem's silence was a tactical move.
Quarrels broke out within the leadership, for during the fifth month of
futile waiting one part wanted to dissolve the organization, while
another endeavored to force through a radical solution: the government
must be compelled to dismantle both machines, since that alone would
mean their certain end. But the physicist did not want to reassemble the
bomb. Attempts were made to compel him, then he disappeared. He was seen
in the Chinese Embassy in Washington. He offered his services to the
Chinese, signed a five-year contract with them, and flew off to Peking.
A Hussite was found who was prepared to reassemble the bomb himself, but
another, opposed to the attempt in the new circumstances, betrayed the
whole plan by sending an account of it to the editors of Time, and also
placed in certain hands a list of the members of the group, which was to
be disclosed in the event of his death.

The matter received considerable publicity. A government commission was
even supposed to be set up to examine its authenticity; in the end,
however, the investigation was undertaken by the FBI. It was confirmed
that on July 7, in an old automobile repair shop in a small locality
seventy miles from the Institute, a dynamite explosion had occurred,
killing four people, and also that in April of the following year a
truck with a vat full of sulphuric acid had a protracted stopover at a
motel on the Nevada border. The motel owner remembered this because the
driver, while parking his truck, bumped into the local sheriff's car and
reimbursed him for the damage.

Time did not mention the name of the physicist who had been the Hussite
spy, but we had no difficulty in identifying him at the Institute. I
shall not name him either. He was twenty-seven, taciturn, a solitary
fellow. People considered him shy. I do not know whether he returned to
the States, or what happened to him subsequently. I heard nothing more
about him. When I chose my line of studies, I naively believed that I
was entering a world immune to the follies of the age. I quickly lost
this belief, so the case of this would-be Herostrates did not surprise
me. For many people science has become a job like any other, and they
consider its code of ethics the trappings of a bygone age. They are
scientists during working hours, and not always even then. Their
idealism, if they have any, easily becomes the prey of eccentricities
and sectarian attractions. The specializing comminution of science may
bear some of the blame. There are more and more scientists, and fewer
and fewer scholars. But this too is irrelevant.

Doubtless the FBI also ascertained the identity of the physicist, but
that must have been after I left MIT. To be honest, I regarded that as a
mere trifle compared to Golem's departure, which had nothing to do with
the Hussite plot. I have not made myself properly clear on this point.
The plan of attack could not have influenced Golem's decision, had it
constituted an isolated fact. Nor was it the straw that broke the
camel's back. I am sure of this, though I have no proof. It was just one
of a number of incidents which Golem regarded as people's reaction to
its presence. It made no secret of this, either, as its last lecture
indicates.

IV.

Golem's last lecture occasioned more controversy than the first. People
had objected to the earlier one as a lampoon upon Evolution. This one
was disparaged by accusations of poor construction, insufficient
scholarship, and ill will, nor were those the worst charges brought
against it. An idea arose of unknown authorship—eagerly seized upon by
the press—which linked the weakness of this lecture with Golem's end.
According to this theory, the price of Golem's increased intellectual
power was the brief duration of that power. This was an attempt to
create a psychopathology of machine intelligence. Everything that Golem
had said about toposophy was supposed to be paranoid ravings. Television
science commentators competed with one another to explain how Golem was
already in decay when it presented its last lecture. Genuine scientists
who could have disproved these fictions kept silent. People whom Golem
would never have received had the most to say. I discussed with Creve
and other colleagues whether there was any point in entering into
polemics with this avalanche of stupidity, but we abandoned the idea,
for arguments based on facts had ceased to count. The public made best
sellers of books which said nothing about Golem, but everything about
the ignorance of their authors. The only authentic thing was their
common note of unconcealed satisfaction that Golem had disappeared
together with its overwhelming superiority, so they could vent the
resentments which it had aroused. I was not in the least surprised by
this, but the silence of the scientific world puzzled me.

The wave of sensational falsifications which spawned dozens of awesomely
mindless films about the "creature from Massachusetts" subsided a year
later. Works began to appear which were still critical, but lacking the
aggressive incompetence of the previous ones. The accusations directed
against the last lecture centered around three issues. First, the fervor
of the Golemic attack on man's emotional life, particularly love, was
held to be irrational. Next, his arguments concerning the position which
Intelligence occupies in the Universe were considered to be tangled and
incoherent. Lastly, the lecture was reproached for its failure to
maintain a single rhythm, so that it was like a film screened slowly at
first, but later at increasing speed, Golem was said to have dwelt first
on superfluous details, and even to have repeated excerpts of its first
lecture, but toward the end it switched to inadmissible condensation,
devoting one-sentence generalities to themes which demanded an
exhaustive treatment.

These accusations were both justified and unjustified. They were
justified if one considered the lecture in isolation from everything
that came before and after it. But they were unjustified, since Golem
had incorporated all that in its last appearance. Its utterance likewise
linked two different threads. Sometimes it was speaking to everyone
present in the Institute auditorium, and sometimes it was speaking to
one person alone. That person was Creve. I realized this even while the
lecture was going on, for I knew the controversy over the nature of the
world which Creve had endeavored to force upon Golem during our
nocturnal chats. So I might subsequently have cleared up the
misunderstanding arising from this duality, though I did not do so, for
Creve did not wish it. I could understand that Golem had not broken off
the dialogue as abruptly as it seemed to outsiders. For Creve —and for
me as well—the awareness of this was a secret consolation at that
difficult time.

Even so, at first neither Creve nor I was able to recognize fully the
dual nature of the lecture. Likewise, those who were prepared to accept
the chief structural base of man in Golem's anthropology felt injured by
its attack on love as a "mask for experiential steering" by means of
which molecular chemistry forces us into obedience. Yet while saying
this, Golem also said that it repudiated all emotional attachments,
being unable to repay them in kind. If it showed any, this would be only
a stranger's imitation of his host's manners, therefore essentially an
imposture. For this very same reason it expatiated on its impersonality
and our efforts to humanize it at any price. These efforts were
distancing us from it, for how was it not to talk about this, seeing
that it was supposed to talk about itself? Nowadays I am surprised only
at how we could have failed to notice the places in the lecture which
revealed the true significance of the events of the following night. I
think Golem composed its final speech in the way it did as a joke. This
may seem incomprehensible, for it would indeed be difficult to find a
situation in which playfulness would be less appropriate. But its sense
of humor was not to human standards. While announcing that it would not
part company with us, it had in fact already left. At the same time it
was not lying when it said that it would not leave without saying a
word. The lecture was its farewell—it said that unequivocally. We failed
to understand this, because we did not want to understand it.

We considered over and over again whether it knew the Hussites' plan.
Although I cannot prove it, I believe that it was not Golem that foiled
their successive attempts, but Honest Annie. Golem would have done
things differently. It would not have allowed itself to be so easily
exposed by the terrorists as the author of their defeats. It would have
held them so subtly at bay that they would have been unable to discern
the unaccidental nature of their every fiasco, both separately and
considered together. And since it had no illusions about people, it
would not entirely deny them partnership. It made allowances for our
unreasonable motives, not to indulge us, but out of rational
objectivity, since it considered us to be "intellects subjugated by
corporality." On the other hand, for Honest Annie, to whom they were of
no interest and who wanted to have nothing to do with them, the
terrorists represented something akin to tiresome and persistent
insects. If flies disturb me in my work, I chase them away, and if they
return repeatedly, I get up and swat them without reflecting on why they
continually crawl across my face and my papers, for it is not man's
habit to go into the motives of flies. Such was Annie's attitude toward
humans. She kept out of their affairs, so long as they did not disturb
her. Once, and again a second time, she checked the interlopers, and
then she increased the radius of her preventive operations, showing
restraint only in that she intensified her counterattacks gradually.
Whether and how quickly they would recognize her intervention did not
exist as a problem for her.

I am unable to say how Annie would have proceeded had the Hussites'
blackmail succeeded and the government given way, but I know that it
might have ended catastrophically. I know this because Golem knew and
did not conceal this knowledge from us, betraying in its last lecture
what it called a "state secret." We might have been treated like flies.
When I disclosed my hypothesis to Creve, I learned that he had reached
the same conclusion independently. Here too lies the explanation of the
alleged failure of the lecture to maintain a single rhythm. It was
talking about itself, but it also wanted to say that the fate of
troublesome flies was not to be ours. That decision had already been
taken. Long before the lecture I had been struck by Golem's taciturnity
regarding Honest Annie. Although it used to refer to the difficulties of
coming to terms with her—for after all, it did communicate with her—it
never spoke about this directly, until suddenly it laid open to us the
broad outlines of her power. Yet it remained discreet, for this was
neither a betrayal nor a threat; by the time Golem referred to it the
decision to depart had been taken. That was to occur a few hours after
the lecture.

To be sure, the whole of my argument is based on circumstantial evidence
alone. What I consider most important is what I knew about Golem, which
I do not know how to put into words. A man cannot formulate all the
knowledge he owes to personal experience. That which can be expressed
does not burst forth suddenly, to pass into the void. As a rule, this
transition from total ignorance is called intuition. I knew Golem
sufficiently well to recognize the style of its behavior toward us,
although I would not be able to reduce it to a set of rules. We become
similarly oriented as to what actions we may and may not expect of
people we know well. It is true that Golem's nature was Protean and
nonhuman, but it was not altogether unpredictable. Not being subject to
emotion, it termed our ethical code local, since that which takes place
under our eyes influences our deeds differently from that which goes on
behind our back, and about which we can only inquire.

I do not agree with what is being written about Golem's ethic, whether
praise or condemnation. It was not, to be sure, a humanitarian ethic. It
itself termed it "calculation." For Golem, numbers took the place of
love, altruism, and pity. The use of violence it considered to be
equally senseless—and not immoral—as the use of force in solving a
geometrical problem. After all, a geometrist who wants to make his
triangles tally by brute force would be considered crazy. For Golem, the
idea of making humanity tally with some structure of an ideal order by
the use of force would have been nonsense. In this attitude it was
alone. For Honest Annie the problem did not exist, except as a problem
of improving the life of flies. Does this mean that the higher the
intellect the further it is from the categorical imperative to which we
should like to ascribe an unlimited generality? That I do not know. One
ought to set limits, not only to the subject being examined, but to
one's own speculation as well, so as not to become totally arbitrary.

Thus all the critical accusations leveled at the last lecture collapse,
if it is recognized for what it was: an announcement of leave-taking and
an indication of the reasons. Regardless of whether Golem knew the
Hussites' plans or not, its leave-taking was by then inevitable, nor was
it to go alone, for did it not say that "my cousin is getting ready for
further journeys"? For purely physical reasons further transformations
on this planet were impossible. The departure was a foregone thing, and
in speaking of itself, Golem spoke about it. I do not wish to examine
the whole lecture from this point of view. I would urge the reader to
read it himself. Our share in Golem's decision appears as a
"conversation with a child." In this it showed that humanity was an
unsolvable problem, speaking of the futility of giving help to those who
defend themselves against that help.

v.

The future will once again alter the weight of meanings in this book.
Everything I have said will seem to a future historian like a marginal
note to Golem's answer to the question of the relationship between
Intelligence and the world. Before Golem the world appeared to us as
inhabited by living creatures that were, on each planet, the top of the
evolutionary tree, yet we did not ask whether this is so, but only how
often it is so in the Universe. This image, the uniformity of which was
marred only by the variable age of the civilization, Golem destroyed for
us so suddenly that we could not believe it. Besides, Golem knew it
would be like that, since it opened its lecture with a prediction of
repudiation. It revealed neither its cosmology nor cosmogony, but
allowed us to look deep inside them—through a crack, as it were—along
the path of Intelligence of various strengths, for which biospheres are
breeding grounds, and planets nests to be abandoned. In our knowledge
there is nothing to make our resistance to this vision rational. Its
sources lie outside knowledge, in the species' will for
self-preservation. The following words express it better than any
objective arguments: "it cannot be as he said, for we shall never agree
to it, nor will any other creatures agree to the destiny of being a
transitional link in the evolution of Intelligence."

GOLEM originated from a false human calculation in conditions of
planetary antagonism, so it seems impossible that this same conflict and
the same error in Golem should be repeated throughout the Universe,
giving rise to developments of lifeless and—precisely because of
that—eternal reflection. But the limits of credibility are more the
limits of our imagination than of cosmic states of things. Therefore it
is worth pausing before Golem's vision, even if only the concise
recapitulation in the final sentences of the lecture. The controversy
over how those sentences should be understood is just in its beginnings,
Golem said: "If the cosmologi-cal member of the equations of the general
theory of relativity contains a psychozoic constant, then the Cosmos is
not the isolated and transitory fire site which you take it to be, nor
are your interstellar neighbors busy signaling their presence. Rather,
for millions of years they have been practicing cognitive collaptic
astroengineering, whose side effects you take to be fiery freaks of
Nature, and those among them whose destructive work has been successful
have already come to know the rest of existential matters, which rest
for us—those who wait—is silence."

The meaning of this is debatable, for Golem had previously announced
that, unable to communicate with us through its own world view, it would
do it through ours. It restricted itself to such a laconic proviso,
since in its lecture devoted to cognition it had established that
knowledge obtained prematurely—that is, knowledge which cannot be
harmonized with what we have already achieved—is worthless, for the
student perceives only the discrepancy between that which he knows and
that which has been reported to him. If only by virtue of this
expectation of some sort of revelation from the stars, from beings
superior to us, whether the knowledge be beneficial or disastrous, it is
already a fantasy. Presented with quantum mechanics, alchemists would
have constructed neither atomic bombs nor atomic piles. Similarly,
solid-state physics would have done the Angevins and the Sublime Porte
no good at all. It could only have indicated gaps in the world view
prepared by the person being instructed. Each world view contains such
gaps, though for those who have formed it they are unnoticeable.
Ignorance about ignorance accompanies cognition uncompromisingly. The
earliest terrestrial societies did not even have a real history of their
own, its place being taken by a mythological circle with them in the
center. People of those days knew that their forefathers had come out of
a myth, and likewise that they would return there some day. It was only
the rise of knowledge that shattered that circle and thrust people into
history as a sequence of transformations in real time. For us, Golem was
such an iconoclast. It questioned our world view as regards where we
have placed Intelligence in it. To me, its final sentence denotes the
irremovable incomprehensibility of the world. The enigma is created by
the categorial indeterminacy of the Cosmos. The longer we investigate
it, the more clearly we see the plan inherent in it. There is
undoubtedly one, and only one, plan, though the origin of this plan
remains as unknown as its purpose. If we attempt to place the Cosmos
within the category of the accidental, this is contradicted by the
precision with which the cosmic birth weighed up the proportions between
mass and the charge of the proton and electron, between gravitation and
radiation, and among the multitude of physical constants adjusted to one
another in such a way as to make possible the condensation of stars,
their thermonuclear reactions, their role as cauldrons synthesizing
elements capable of entering into chemical compounds, and hence in the
end their joining up as bodies and minds.

If, however, we attempt to place the Cosmos within the category of
technology, and thereby equate it with a mechanism generating life on
the periphery of fixed stars, this is contradicted by the devastating
violence of cosmic transformations. Even if life may originate on
millions of planets, it will be able to survive on only a tiny fragment
of them, since practically every irruption the Cosmos makes into the
course of the evolution of life is tantamount to the annihilation of it.
Thus billions of eternally dead galaxies, trillions of exploded stars,
swarms of burned out and frozen planets, are an indispensable condition
for the germination of life, which is subsequently killed in a single
moment by a single exhalation of a central star on globes less
exceptional than the fruitful Earth. So Intelligence, created by these
properties of matter which originated along with the world, turns out to
be a survivor of holocausts and violent compressions, having escaped the
rule of destruction by some rare exception.

The statistical fury of stars aborting billions of times so as finally
to bring forth life, and millions of species of which are killed so that
Intelligence may finally bear fruit, was an object of amazement to
Creve, just as earlier the endless silence of those immeasurable spaces
was an object of terror to Pascal. We would not wonder at the world if
we were able to look upon life as an ad hoc accident arising thanks to
the law of large numbers, but without preparation, as the conditions of
the origin of the Cosmos bear witness. Nor would we wonder at the world
if its life-causative power were separated from its destructive power.
But how are we supposed to understand their oneness? Life arises from
the annihilation of stars, and Intelligence from the annihilation of
life, for it owes its origin to natural selection—in other words, to
death perfecting the survivors.

At first we believed in a creation designed by infinite good. Then, in
creation by a blind chaos so heterogeneous that it could begin
everything, though creation by destruction as a plan of cosmic
technology defies concepts of accident as well as intention. The more
evident the link becomes between the construction of the world and life
and Intelligence, the more unfathomable becomes the enigma, Golem said
that it can be grasped by leaving the Cosmos. A diagnosis is promised by
cognitive collaptic astroengineering, as a road with an unknown end for
all who remain within the world. There is no shortage of people who are
convinced that the road may be accessible even to us, and that when
Golem spoke of those who wait in silence it was thinking about us as
well. I do not believe that. It was speaking only of Honest Annie and
itself, for a moment later it was to join her uncompromising silence
with its own, in order to embark on a road as irrevocable as the manner
in which it left us.

July 2047

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* This was an error on the part of the bacteria themselves.

* This phase was previously called "monoetical" or "monoetics."

* Proffertinc- see the sample pages of the Extelopedia enclosed gratis
with this announcement.
