 The Investigation

by Stanislaw Lem

Translated from the Polish by Adele Milch

 

 

 

 

 

English translation copyright © 1974 by The Continuum Publishing
Corporation

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted

in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopy,

recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in

writing from the publisher. Requests for permission to make copies of
any part of

the work should be mailed to: The Continuum Publishing Corporation, 370

 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10017

 

 Original edition: Sledztwo, Wydawnictwo Literackie, Cracow, 1959,1969

 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Lem, Stanislaw.

The investigation.

Translation of: Sledztwo.

"AHarvest/HBJBook."

Reprint. Originally published: New York: Seabury Press, © 1974.

I. Title.

PG7158.L39S4513    1986     891.8'537      85-24841

ISBN 0-15-645158-1

 

Designed by Carol Basen

Printed in the United States of America

First Harvest/HBJ edition 1986

A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J

 

 

Contents

 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

 

 

 

 

1

 

Rattling rhythmically at each floor, the old-fashioned elevator moved
upward past glass doors decorated with etchings of flowers. It stopped.
Four men emerged and walked down the corridor toward a pair of
leather-covered doors.

The doors swung open.

"This way, gentlemen," gestured someone standing just inside.

Gregory was the last one in, right behind the doctor. Compared to the
brightly lit corridor, the room was almost dark. Through the window the
bare branches of a tree were visible in the fog outside.

The Chief Inspector sat down behind his high, dark desk, which was
enclosed by a low ornamental railing. Except for two telephones, an
intercom, his pipe, his eyeglasses, and a small piece of chamois cloth,
there was nothing on the polished wood surface.

Seating himself in an upholstered armchair on one side of the room,
Gregory noticed Queen Victoria eying them from a small portrait on the
wall behind the desk. The Chief Inspector looked at each of the men in
turn as if counting them or trying to memorize their faces. One of the
side walls was covered by a huge map of southern England; on the wall
opposite there was a dark shelf lined with books.

"Gentlemen," the Chief Inspector said at last, "I want you to go over
every aspect of this case. Since the official record has been my only
source of information, I think we should start with a brief summary.
Farquart, perhaps you can begin."

"Certainly, sir, but I don't know anything about the beginning of the
case except what's in the reports."

"There were no reports at the very beginning," commented Gregory
somewhat too loudly. Everyone turned to look at him. With exaggerated
casualness he began to rummage energetically in his pocket as if looking
for a cigarette.

Farquart straightened up in his chair.

"The affair began around the middle of last November, but there may have
been some earlier incidents that were ignored at the time. The first
report to the police was made three days before Christmas, but an
investigation in January showed that these corpse incidents began much
earlier. The report was made in the town of Engender, and it was,
strictly speaking, semiofficial in character. Plays, the local
undertaker, complained to the commander of the district police station,
who happens to be his brother-in-law, that someone was moving the bodies
around during the night."

"What exactly did this moving consist of?" The Chief Inspector was
methodically cleaning his glasses.

"The bodies were left in one position in the evening and found in
different positions the following morning. Strictly speaking, only one
body was involved -- apparently a certain drowned man who --"

"Apparently?" the Chief Inspector repeated in the same indifferent tone.

Farquart straightened himself even more in his chair.

"No one thought the incident was important at the time," he explained,
"and when we finally began collecting evidence it was hard to get the
exact details. The undertaker isn't completely sure anymore whether the
body involved was actually the drowned man's. In fact the whole report
is somewhat irregular. Gibson, the Engender police commander, decided
not to log any of this because he thought --"

"Do we have to go over all this again?" shouted a man who was sprawled
in a chair next to the bookshelf. His legs were crossed so high that a
line of bare skin was visible above his gold-colored socks.

"I'm sorry, but it's absolutely necessary," Farquart answered in a dull
voice without looking at him. The Chief Inspector put on his glasses,
and his face, until now a total blank, took on a kindly expression.

"We can do without the formal aspects of the investigation for the time
being," he said. "Please go on, Farquart."

"Whatever you say, Chief Inspector. The second report was made in
Planting, eight days after the first. Someone moving corpses at night in
the cemetery mortuary again. The dead man was a stevedore named Thicker
-- he died after a long illness that almost bankrupted his family."

Farquart glanced out of the corner of his eye at Gregory, who was
shifting around impatiently.

"The funeral was scheduled for the morning. When the family showed up at
the mortuary they noticed that the body was lying face downward -- that
is, the back was facing upward -- and that its hands were open, which
gave them the impression that Thicker. . . had come back to life. At
least that's what the family believed. Before long, rumors about some
kind of trance were circulating in the neighborhood; people said that
Thicker had only seemed to be dead, then woke up, found himself in a
coffin, and died of fright, this time for good.

"The whole story was nonsense," Farquart continued. "A local doctor had
certified Thicker's death beyond any shadow of a doubt. But as the
rumors spread through the surrounding area, attention was drawn to the
fact that people had been talking for some time about so-called moving
corpses that changed position during the night."

"What does 'for some time' mean?" asked the Chief Inspector.

"There's no way of knowing. The rumors referred to incidents in Shaltam
and Dipper. At the beginning of January the local forces made a cursory
investigation, but they didn't take the matter too seriously, so they
weren't very systematic. The evidence given by the local people was
partly prejudiced, partly inconsistent, and as a result the
investigation was worthless. In Shaltam it involved the body of one
Samuel Filthey, dead of a heart attack. According to the gravedigger,
who happens to be the town drunk, Filthey is supposed to have 'turned
over in the coffin' on Christmas night. No one can substantiate the
story. The incident in Dipper involved the body of an insane woman that
was found in the morning on the floor next to the coffin. According to
the neighbors, the woman's stepdaughter, who hated her, slipped into the
funeral home during the night and threw her out of her coffin. The truth
is, there are so many stories and rumors that it's impossible to get
your bearings. It all boils down to one person giving you the name of an
alleged eyewitness, and the 'witness' sending you to someone else, and
so on. . .

"The case would have been dropped as a sure ad acta," Farquart began
speaking faster, "but on January sixteenth the corpse of one James
Trayle disappeared from the mortuary in Treakhill. Sergeant Peel, on
detail from our C.I.D., investigated the incident. The corpse was
removed from the mortuary sometime between midnight and five in the
morning, when the undertaker discovered that it was missing. The
deceased was a male. . . maybe forty-five years old --"

"You're not sure?" the Chief Inspector interrupted. He was sitting with
his head bent as if peering at himself in a highly polished mirror.
Farquart cleared his throat.

"I am sure, but that's the way it was told to me. . . Anyway, the cause
of death was poisoning by illuminating gas. It was an unfortunate
accident."

"Autopsy?" said the Chief Inspector, raising his eyebrows. He leaned
over to the side and pulled a handle which opened the casement windows.
A whiff of damp air flowed into the warm, heavy atmosphere of the room.

"There was no autopsy, but we're convinced it was an accident. Six days
later, on January twenty-third, there was another incident, this time in
Spittoon. The missing body belonged to one John Stevens, a
twenty-eight-year-old laborer in a distillery. He died the day before,
after inhaling poisonous fumes while cleaning one of the vats. The body
was taken to the mortuary around three in the afternoon. The caretaker
saw it for the last time around nine in the evening. In the morning it
wasn't there. Sergeant Peel looked into this incident also, but nothing
came of this investigation either, mainly because at the time we still
hadn't thought of linking these two incidents with the earlier ones. .
."

"Please keep your comments to yourself for the time being. Right now I
want to concentrate on the facts," the Chief Inspector said, smiling
pleasantly at Farquart. He placed his shriveled hand on the desk.
Gregory couldn't help staring: the hand seemed to be completely
bloodless, not a vein was visible.

"The third incident took place within the limits of Greater London in
Lovering, where the Medical School has its new dissecting laboratory,"
Farquart continued in a dull voice, as if he had lost all interest in
going on with his lengthy story. "The body of one Stewart Aloney
disappeared; he was fifty years old, dead of a chronic tropical disease
contracted while he was a sailor on the Bangkok run. This incident took
place nine days after the other disappearances, on February second --
strictly speaking, the night of the second going on the third. After
this one the Yard took over. The investigation was conducted by
Lieutenant Gregory, who later took command of one more case: the
disappearance of a corpse from the mortuary of a subur     ban cemetery
in Bromley on February twelfth -- the incident involved the body of a
woman who died after a cancer operation."

"Thank you," said the Chief Inspector. "Why isn't Sergeant Peel here?"

"He's sick, Chief Inspector, he's in the hospital," Gregory answered.

"Is that so? What's wrong with him?"

The lieutenant hesitated.

"I'm not sure, but I think it has something to do with his kidneys."

"Lieutenant, tell us about your investigation."

Gregory cleared his throat, took a deep breath, and, flicking an ash
into the ashtray, spoke in an unexpectedly quiet voice.

"I don't have much to brag about. All the corpses disappeared at night,
there was no evidence on the scene, no signs of forcible entry. Besides,
forcible entry wouldn't have been necessary since mortuaries aren't
usually locked, and those that are could probably be opened with a bent
nail by a child. . ."

"The dissecting lab was locked," said Sorensen, the medical examiner,
speaking for the first time. He was sitting with his head bent backward
as if to avoid drawing attention to its unpleasant angular shape, and
with one finger he was massaging the swollen skin under his eyes.

It suddenly occurred to Gregory that Sorensen had done well in choosing
a profession in which he associated mainly with the dead. He nodded to
him with almost courtly courtesy.

"You took the words right out of my mouth, Doctor. There was an unlocked
window in the room from which the corpse disappeared -- in fact, it was
open, as if someone had gone out through it."

"He had to get in first," Sorensen interrupted impatiently.

"A brilliant observation," Gregory replied, then regretted his words and
peeked at the Chief, who remained silent, unmoving, as if he hadn't
heard anything.

"The laboratory is on the first floor," the lieutenant continued after
an awkward silence. "According to the janitor, the window was locked
along with all the others. He swears that all the windows were locked
that night -- says he's absolutely certain because he checked them
himself. The frost was setting in and he was afraid the radiators would
freeze if the windows were open. Like most dissecting labs, they hardly
give enough heat as it is. I talked to Professor Harvey -- he's in
charge of the place. He thinks very highly of the janitor, says he takes
his work a little too seriously but that he's honest and we can believe
anything he tells us."

"Are there any possible hiding places in the laboratory?" the Chief
Inspector asked. He looked around at the group as if he had suddenly
become aware of their presence again.

"Well, that. . . would be out of the question, Chief Inspector. No one
would be able to hide without the janitor's help. There's no furniture
except for the dissecting tables, no dark corners or alcoves. . . in
fact, nothing at all except a few closets for the students' coats and
equipment, and even a child couldn't fit into any of them."

"Do you mean that literally?"

"Sir?"

"That they're too small for a child," the Chief Inspector said quietly.

"Well. . ." The lieutenant wrinkled his brow. "A child might manage to
squeeze into one, but at best only a seven-or eight-year-old."

"Did you measure the closets?"

"Yes." The answer was uttered without hesitation. "I measured all of
them because I thought one might be bigger than the others. They all
turned out to be the same size. Aside from the closets, there are some
toilets, washrooms, and classrooms; a refrigerator and a storeroom in
the basement; the professor's office and some teachers' rooms upstairs.
Harvey says that the janitor checks each of the rooms every night,
sometimes more than once -- in my opinion, he tends to overdo it.
Anyway, no one could have managed to hide there."

"What about a child?" the Chief Inspector asked in a quiet voice. He
took off his eyeglasses as if to soften the sharpness of his gaze.
Gregory shook his head violently.

"No, it would have been impossible. A child couldn't have opened the
windows. They have locks at the top and bottom, released by levers set
in the window frames. Just like here." Gregory pointed to the window,
from which a cold draft was entering the room. "The levers are very
tight and it's hard to move them. Even the janitor complained about it.
Besides, I tried them myself."

"Did he call your attention to the fact that the levers are tight?"
Sorensen asked, smiling inscrutably in a way that irritated Gregory. He
would have preferred to let the question pass without an answer, but the
Chief Inspector was looking at him expectantly, so he replied without
much enthusiasm.

"The janitor didn't mention it until he saw me opening and closing them.
He's worse than an old maid. A terrible pain in the neck," Gregory added
emphatically, looking, as if by chance, at Sorensen. "He was very
pleased with himself too. Of course that's natural enough for someone
his age," he added in a conciliatory manner. "He's about sixty years
old, sclero --" Gregory stopped abruptly, embarrassed. The Chief
Inspector wasn't any younger than that. He searched desperately for a
way to get around the obvious meaning of his concluding words but
couldn't think of anything. The other men remained absolutely still,
their silence arousing Gregory's resentment. The Chief Inspector put on
his glasses.

"Are you finished?"

"Yes sir," Gregory faltered, "yes. At least as far as these three
incidents are concerned. In the last case, though, I looked over the
surrounding area very carefully -- I was particularly interested in any
unusual activity near the lab that night. The constables on duty in the
neighborhood hadn't noticed anything suspicious. Also, when I took over
the case I tried to find out as much as I could about the earlier
incidents; I talked to Sergeant Peel and I went to all the other places
but I didn't find a thing, not one piece of evidence of any kind.
Nothing, absolutely nothing. The woman who died of cancer and the
laborer both disappeared in similar circumstances. In the morning, when
someone from the family arrived at the mortuary, the coffin was empty."

"Yes," said the Chief Inspector. "That will be all for now. Mr.
Farquart, will you continue?"

"Of course, sir. Do you want to hear about the more recent cases, sir?
Right, whatever you say, sir."

"He should be in the Navy," Gregory thought, sighing to himself. "He
always acts like he's at the morning flag raising, and he'll never
change."

"The next disappearance took place in Lewes seven days later, on
February nineteenth. It involved a young stevedore who was run over by a
car -- ruptured liver with internal bleeding. The operation was a
success, as the doctors say, but the patient didn't survive. Anyway, the
body disappeared before dawn. We were able to pinpoint the time because
around three o'clock that morning a certain Burton died. His sister --
he lived with a sister -- was so afraid to stay alone with the deceased
in the same apartment that she woke up the local undertaker. The body
was delivered to the funeral home at exactly three in the morning. Two
employees put it next to the stevedore's body. . ."

"You were going to say something?" asked the Chief Inspector.

Farquart bit his mustache.

"No. . ." he said after a moment.

The steady drone of airplane engines could be heard outside the
building. Overhead, an unseen airplane flew past on its way southward.
The windowpanes rattled in quiet unison.

"That is," Farquart added with an air of decision, "in arranging the
newly delivered body, one of the employees moved the stevedore's body
because it was in his way. Well. . . he claims it wasn't cold."

"Hmm," the Chief Inspector murmured, as if commenting on the most
ordinary thing in the world. "It wasn't cold? And how did he explain it?
What were his exact words?"

"He said it wasn't cold," Farquart spoke reluctantly, pausing between
words. "I know it sounds idiotic. . . ridiculous, but he insists on it.
He claims he mentioned it at the time, but the other employee doesn't
remember a thing. Gregory questioned both of them separately, twice. .
."

The Chief Inspector, without saying a word, turned to the lieutenant.

"Well. . . uh. . . he talks too much. Not reliable at all," Gregory
explained quickly. "At least that's my impression. He's one of those
clowns who will do anything to get some attention, ready to give you his
version of the history of the world at the drop of a hat. He insisted it
was a trance or 'something worse' -- those are his words. Frankly, he
surprised me. People who work professionally with corpses usually don't
believe in trances -- it goes against their experience."

"What do the doctors say?"

Gregory was silent, yielding the floor to Farquart. Apparently unhappy
that such a minor matter was receiving so much attention, Farquart
shrugged his shoulders.

"The stevedore died the day before. Signs of rigor mortis were clearly
evident. . . He was as dead as a doornail."

"Anything else?"

"Yes. Like all the other missing bodies, he was dressed for burial. The
only body that wasn't dressed was Trayle's -- the one that disappeared
in Treakhill. The undertaker was supposed to dress him the following day
because the family didn't want to give him any clothing at first. That
is, they took the clothing away after the body was brought in. When they
came back with different clothing the body wasn't there anymore. . ."

"What about the other incidents?"

"The body of the woman with the cancer operation was dressed also."

"How?"

"Well. . . in a dress."

"What about shoes?" the Chief Inspector asked, his voice so soft that
Gregory had to lean forward to hear him.

"Yes, shoes also."

"And the last one?"

"The last one. . . Well, it wasn't dressed, but a black cloth
disappeared from the mortuary at the same time, or so it seems. The
cloth was used to close off a small alcove. It was attached to a curtain
rod by some small metal rings. There were still a few shreds of material
on the rings."

"Was it torn?"

"No, the rod is so thin that it would have snapped if anyone had given
it a good pull. The shreds --"

"Did you try to break the rod?"

"No."

"Then how do you know it would have snapped?"

"Well, by sight. . ."

The Chief Inspector asked these questions quietly, staring at the
reflection of the window in the glass door of a cabinet; he acted as if
distracted by something else, but he shot out his questions so rapidly
that Farquart could hardly keep up with him.

"Good," the Chief Inspector concluded. "Were the shreds examined?"

"Yes. Dr. Sorensen. . ."

The medical examiner stopped massaging his pointed chin. "The cloth was
torn off the rod. To be exact, it had been frayed to the breaking point
but it was definitely not cut. That's certain. It looked. . . as if
someone had bitten it off. I conducted several tests. Under the
microscope it looks the same way."

In the momentary silence that followed, a distant airplane engine was
heard, its sound muffled by the fog.

"Was anything else missing besides the curtain?" the Chief Inspector
asked at last.

The doctor glanced at Farquart, who nodded his head.

"Yes, a roll of adhesive tape, a very big roll that had been lying on a
table near the door."

"Adhesive tape?" The Chief Inspector raised an eyebrow.

"They use it to hold up the chins. . . to keep the mouth from opening,"
Sorensen explained. "Postmortem beauty treatment," he added with a
sardonic smile.

"That's all?"

"Yes."

"What about the corpse in the dissecting laboratory? Was it dressed?"

"No. But in this case. . . oh, Gregory's already told you the whole
story, hasn't he?"

"I forgot to mention it before. . ." the lieutenant cut in quickly,
experiencing an unpleasant sensation because his memory lapse had been
discovered. "The body wasn't dressed, but the janitor claims he was
short one doctor's coat and two pairs of white pants -- the kind the
students wear in the summertime. A few pairs of disposable slippers may
have been missing also, but the janitor says he never manages to keep an
accurate count on them -- he says the cleaning woman steals a few every
once in a while."

The Chief Inspector took a deep breath and tapped on the desk with his
eyeglasses.

"Thank you. Doctor Sciss, may I trouble you now?"

Without stirring from his casual position, Sciss muttered incoherently
and finished writing something in an open notebook which he was
supporting on his sharp, protruding knee.

Then, bending his balding, somewhat birdlike head, Sciss slammed the
book closed and slipped it under his chair, pursed his thin lips as if
he wanted to whistle, and stood up, rubbing his fingers against his
twisted, arthritic joints.

"I consider your invitation to be a useful novum," he said in a high,
almost falsetto voice. "It so happens that I generally tend to sound
like a lecturer. I hope none of you mind; in any event it's quite
unavoidable. Now then, I have made a thorough study of this series of
incidents. As we have seen, the classical methods of investigation --
the collection of evidence and the search for motives -- have failed
completely. Consequently, I have utilized the statistical method of
investigation. It offers obvious advantages. We can often define a crime
at the scene of its occurrence by the kinds of facts that are connected
with it and the kinds that are not. For example, the shape of the
bloodstains found near a murdered body may have a connection with the
crime, and if so they can say a good deal about the way it was
committed. Certain other facts, however -- for example, that a cumulus
or cirrostratus cloud floated over the scene of the crime on the day of
a particular homicide, or that the telephone wires in front of the house
where the crime took place are made of aluminum or copper -- can be
classified as nonessential. As far as our series of incidents is
concerned, it is altogether impossible to decide in advance which of the
facts accompanying the incidents were connected with the crime and which
were not.

"If it were only a matter of one incident," Sciss continued, "we would
be at an impasse. Fortunately, however, there were several incidents.
Now it stands to reason that a virtually unlimited number of objects and
phenomena could have been found or observed in the vicinity of the
incidents during the critical period. Therefore, to prepare a useful
statistical series, we must rely only on those facts that are common to
all the incidents, or at any rate, to a substantial majority of the
incidents. Thus, we proceed by preparing a statistical breakdown of all
the phenomena. Until now this method has almost never been used in a
criminal investigation, and I am very pleased that I now have an
opportunity to introduce it to you gentlemen, together with my
preliminary findings. . ."

Dr. Sciss, who until now had been standing behind his armchair as if it
were a lecturn, took a few steps in the direction of the door, turned
unexpectedly, inclined his head, and continued, looking into the room at
the seated men.

"Now, let us begin. First, you will recall that before any of these
phenomena occurred there was a temporary phase which we can label
conventionally as the 'forerunner stage.' During this stage bodies
changed positions. Some turned upside down. Others were found on their
sides. Still others were found on the floor next to their coffins.

"Second, with only one exception, each corpse belonged to someone who
had died in his prime.

"Third, in each incident, again with one exception, some kind of
covering was provided for the body. Twice this was ordinary clothing.
Once it was most likely a doctor's coat and white trousers, and once --
a black cloth curtain.

"Fourth, none of the corpses involved had been autopsied; all were
undamaged; all were well preserved. Furthermore, every incident took
place within thirty hours of the time of death, a fact particularly
worthy of your attention.

"Finally, all the incidents, again with one exception, took place in
small town mortuaries to which entrance is usually quite easy. The only
disappearance that doesn't fit this pattern is the one at the Medical
School."

Sciss turned to the Chief Inspector.

"I need a powerful spotlight. Can you get something for me?"

The Chief Inspector said a few quiet words into the intercom. During the
ensuing silence, Sciss opened his spacious, bellowslike leather
briefcase and slowly drew out a sheet of tracing paper, folded several
times and covered with colored markings. Gregory looked at it with a
mixture of aversion and curiosity. The scientist's patronizing attitude
irritated him. Stubbing out his cigarette, he tried unsuccessfully to
guess what was written on the paper rustling in Sciss's awkward hands.

Meanwhile, tearing one side of the paper slightly as he worked, Sciss
unfolded it and spread it out on the desk in front of the Chief
Inspector, whom he hardly seemed to notice, then walked over to the
window and looked out at the street, holding one wrist with the fingers
of the other hand as if checking his own pulse rate.

The door opened; a policeman came in with an aluminum spotlight on a
high tripod and connected it to an outlet. Sciss switched it on. Waiting
until the door had closed behind the policeman, he focused a bright
circle of light on the huge wall map of England, then placed the sheet
of tracing paper over it. Unfortunately, it was impossible to see the
map through the translucent paper, so he moved the spotlight away, took
the map down from the wall (swaying precariously on a chair to do so),
and clumsily hung it on a stand which he pulled from a corner to the
middle of the room. The spotlight was set up again where it could shine
through the map from behind, while Sciss, with his arms spread wide to
hold the sheet of tracing paper open, moved in front of it. This
position -- with outstretched, raised arms -- was obviously
uncomfortable beyond description.

Sciss finally managed to steady the stand with his leg. Holding the
tracing paper from the top, he turned his head sideways.

"Please direct your attention to the area in which our incidents have
occurred," he said.

Sciss's voice was more high-pitched than before, possibly because he was
trying not to show how much he was exerting himself.

"The first disappearance took place in Treakhill on January sixteenth.
Please remember the places and dates. The second -- January
twenty-third, in Spittoon. The third -- February second, in Levering.
The fourth, February twelfth, in Bromley. The most recent incident took
place on March eighth in Lewes. If we treat the location of the first
incident as the starting point, and enclose it in a circle with an
expanding radius, the results are as shown by the notations on my
tracing paper."

A section of southern England along the Channel coast was clearly
demarcated by the powerful beam of light. Five concentric circles
encompassed five towns, each marked by a red cross. The first cross
appeared in the center, the others were much closer to the perimeter of
the largest circle.

Watching for signs of fatigue in Sciss, whose arms, still outstretched
to hold the tracing paper, were not even trembling, Gregory began to
feel tired.

"If you want me to," Sciss said in a shrill voice, "I will explain my
calculations later on. Right now I shall only give you the results. The
incidents occurred in a particular sequence: the more recently each
incident took place, the farther it is located from the center -- that
is, from the site of the first disappearance. In addition, there is
another significant item: the time between the respective incidents,
counting from the first one, gets longer and longer, although not as if
they were in proportion to each other in some specific ratio. But if
temperature is also taken into account, it becomes evident that there is
a certain regularity. More specifically, the product obtained by
multiplying the time elapsed between any two incidents, and the distance
separating any two consecutive disappearing-body sites from the center,
when multiplied by the differential between the prevailing temperatures
at both sites. . .

"This gives us," Sciss continued after a moment, "a constant of five to
nine centimeters per second and degree. I say five to nine because the
exact time of disappearance was not ascertained in any of the incidents.
Therefore, in each case we have to deal with a broad, multi-houred time
block during the night, or, more precisely, during the latter half of
the night. If we take a mean of seven centimeters as the true quantity
of the constant, and then do certain calculations, which I have already
completed, we get a rather curious result. The causal factor of these
phenomena, which have been moving steadily from the center toward the
perimeter, does not lie in Treakhill at all, but has shifted westward to
the towns of Tunbridge Wells, Engender, and Dipper. . . that is, the
very places where there were rumors circulating about moving corpses.
If, on the other hand, we attempt an experiment based on a completely
accurate location point to determine the geometric center of the
phenomena, we find that it is not located in any of the mortuaries, but
about eighteen miles southwest of Shaltam -- in the moors and wastelands
of Chinchess. . ."

Inspector Farquart, whose neck had been turning progressively more red
as he listened to all this, was finally unable to contain himself.

"Are you trying to tell us," he exploded, "that an invisible spirit of
some kind came up out of those damned moors, flew through the air, and
snatched the bodies?"

Sciss began to roll up his paper. Standing in the glow of the hidden
spotlight, thin and dark against the bright greenish map behind him, he
resembled a bird more than ever (a swamp bird, Gregory thought to
himself). Sciss carefully hid the tracing paper in his battered old
briefcase and straightened up. He looked coldly at Farquart, his face
covered with red blotches.

"I have nothing to add beyond the results of my statistical analysis,"
he declared. "A close relationship can easily be demonstrated between
eggs, bacon, and the stomach, to name only one example, or a distant
relationship, with somewhat more difficulty, between, for example, a
country's political system and its average marital age. But regardless
of the degree of difficulty, there is always a definite correlation, a
valid basis for a discussion of causes and effects."

With a big, carefully folded handkerchief, Sciss wiped several droplets
of sweat from his upper lip. Replacing it in his pocket, he continued.

"This series of incidents is hard enough to explain, and preconceived
notions of any kind must be avoided. If you insist on displaying your
prejudices to make things difficult for me, I will be forced to give up
the case, as well as my cooperation with the Yard."

Sciss waited a minute, as if hoping someone would pick up the challenge,
then walked over to the wall and turned off the portable spotlight. The
room became almost completely dark. Searching for the light switch,
Sciss momentarily moved his hand along the wall.

In the brightness of the ceiling light the room's appearance changed. It
seemed to become smaller, and for a second the Chief Inspector, with his
dazed, blinking eyes, reminded Gregory of his old uncle.

Sciss returned to the map.

"When I began my study," he continued, "so much time had already elapsed
since the first two incidents, or rather, to be completely accurate, so
little attention had been given to the incidents in the local police
blotters and so few facts recorded, that it was impossible to
reconstruct a detailed, hour-by-hour record of what happened. Because of
this I limited myself to the remaining three incidents. In all three
cases, I discovered, it was foggy -- thick fog in two instances,
extremely thick fog in the other. Moreover, several vehicles are known
to have passed within a radius of several hundred yards of the site of
each incident. Granted, none of the reports mentioned any 'suspicious'
vehicles, but it's hard to say what the criteria for suspiciousness
could possibly have been. Certainly no one would have driven to the
scene of the crime in a truck marked 'Body Snatchers Ltd.,' but a
vehicle could have been parked not too far from the scene, if necessary.
Finally, I learned that around twilight of the evening preceding the
night of each of the disappearances. . ." Sciss paused, then went on in
a quiet but distinct voice, "some kind of domestic animal was observed
close to the scene -- and was reported either as a type of animal not
usually found in a mortuary, or as one which my informants didn't
recognize or had never seen before. In two cases it was a cat and once
it was a dog."

A short laugh, transformed immediately into a poor imitation of a cough,
resounded through the room. It came from Sorensen. Farquart sat
absolutely still, not responding even to Sciss's rather questionable
joke about "suspicious" vehicles.

Gregory noticed the Chief Inspector glaring in Sorensen's direction and
immediately understood its significance: not a reprimand, not even
anger, but a clear-cut and inescapable expression of authority.

The doctor coughed again to save face. Complete silence followed. Sciss
stared through the window over their heads at the increasing darkness
outside.

"To all appearances, the statistical significance of the last fact is
not very great," he finally continued, lapsing more and more frequently
into a falsetto. "I ascertained, however, that stray dogs and cats are
almost never found roaming around the mortuaries in which the incidents
took place. Furthermore, one of the reported animals -- the dog, to be
specific -- was found dead four days after one of the disappearances.
Taking all this into account, I decided to offer a reward for anyone
uncovering the corpse of the cat that was seen in connection with the
last incident. This morning I received some news which cost me fifteen
shillings. Some schoolchildren found the cat buried in the snow near a
clump of bushes less than two hundred paces from the mortuary."

With his back to the others, Sciss walked over to the window as if he
wanted to go outside. It was already too dark to see anything except for
the street lights wobbling in the wind and glimmering in the swaying
shadow of an overhanging branch.

He stood silently, stroking the lapel of his baggy gray jacket with the
tips of his fingers.

"Are you finished, Doctor?"

Sciss turned around at the sound of Chief Inspector Sheppard's voice. A
slight, almost boyish smile unexpectedly changed his small face, in
which all the features were completely out of proportion, with its gray
eyes, somewhat puffy cheeks, and a jaw so recessive that he was
practically chinless.

Why he's only a boy at heart. . . a perpetual adolescent, really quite
pleasant in his way, Gregory thought in amazement.

"I'd like to say a few more words, but not until the end of the
meeting," Sciss replied, returning to his seat.

The Chief Inspector removed his eyeglasses. His eyes were tired.

"Good. Farquart, please, if you have anything else to say."

Farquart answered without much enthusiasm.

"Truthfully, not very much. I've gone over this whole 'series,' as Dr.
Sciss calls it, in the usual way, and I think at least some of the
rumors must have been true. It seems to me that the case is fairly
simple -- the perpetrator wanted to steal a corpse but was frightened
away in Shaltam and the other places. He finally succeeded in Treakhill,
but since he was still an amateur he took a naked body. It looks like he
didn't realize how hard it would be to transport a body in that
condition, as opposed to a fully clothed body, which is much less
conspicuous. He must finally have realized this because he changed his
tactics, making a definite effort to get clothing for the bodies. Also,
the bodies he took the first few times weren't exactly the best
available -- I'm thinking about what Dr. Sciss called the search for
bodies 'in good condition.' For example, there was another body in the
mortuary at Treakhill -- a young man's body -- in much better condition
than the one that disappeared. That's about all. . .

"Of course there's still the question of motive," Farquart continued
after a moment. "I see the following possibilities: necrophilia, some
other kind of insanity, or some kind of. . . scientist. I think we
should find out what Dr. Sorensen has to say about it."

"I'm not a psychologist or a psychiatrist," the doctor sputtered in a
gruff voice, "but you can absolutely rule out the possibility of
necrophilia. Necrophiliacs are always feebleminded, retarded cretins who
couldn't possibly plan anything as complicated as this. In my opinion
you can also rule out any other kind of insanity. Nothing was left to
chance in any of these incidents. There's too much precision, not a
single slipup of any kind. Madmen don't operate so methodically."

"Paranoia?" Gregory suggested in a low voice. The doctor glanced at him
indifferently. For a moment he seemed to be trying the feel of the word
on his tongue, then he pursed his thin, froglike lips.

"No! At least," he added, weakening the categorical character of his
objection, "I don't think it's very likely. Insanity, gentlemen, is not
a catchall for every human action that involves motives we don't
understand. Insanity has its own structure, its own internal logic. Of
course in the final analysis it's possible that the culprit could be a
psychopath -- yes, it's possible, I suppose -- but it's only one of many
possibilities."

"A psychopath with a talent for mathematics," Sciss commented almost
involuntarily.

"How do you meant that?"

Sorensen turned to Sciss with a foolish but distinctly offensive sneer.

"I mean a psychopath who decided to have his fun by making sure that the
product of the distance and the time between consecutive incidents,
multiplied by the temperature differential, would be a constant."

Sorensen stroked his knee nervously, then began drumming on it with his
fingers.

"Yes, yes I know. . . you can multiply and divide almost anything by
something else -- the length of canes by the width of hats -- and come
up with all kinds of constants and variables."

"Are you trying to make fun of mathematics?" Sciss began. It was clear
that he was about to say something nasty.

"Excuse me, Doctor, but I would very much like to hear your opinion
about the third possible motive." Sheppard was glaring at Sorensen
again.

"That the culprit is a scientist who steals bodies? No, absolutely not!
Never in the world! The whole idea is ridiculous. The only scientists
who steal cadavers for their experiments are in third-rate movies. Why
steal a cadaver when it's easy enough to get one from any morgue, or
even to buy one from the next of kin. Besides, scientists don't work
alone anymore, and even if one had stolen a cadaver, although God alone
knows why he would, he wouldn't be able to hide it from his colleagues
and co-workers. You can safely eliminate that as a motive."

"In your opinion then," Sheppard said, "do we have anything to go on?"
The Chief Inspector's ascetic face was expressionless. Gregory caught
himself staring almost impertinently at his superior, as if studying a
painting. Is he really like that, he wondered, is all this no more than
a dull routine for him?

Gregory mused in this vein during the oppressive, unpleasant silence
that followed the Chief Inspector's question. Again a far-off engine
resounded in the darkness beyond the window: the deep rumble moved
upward, then grew silent. The panes shook.

"A psychopath or nothing," said Dr. Sciss all of a sudden. He smiled
and, indeed, seemed to be in a good mood. "As Dr. Sorensen so
intelligently pointed out, psychopathic behavior is usually very
distinctive -- it is characterized by impulsiveness, stupidity, and
errors due to an attention span limited by emotional disorder. Thus, we
are left with nothing. Ergo, gentlemen, it is quite obvious that these
incidents couldn't possibly have taken place."

"You're joking, I suppose," Sorensen growled.

"Gentlemen," Sheppard interrupted. "The amazing thing is that the press
has been very easy on us so far, probably because of the war in the Near
East. For the time being we haven't had to worry about public opinion,
but we're going to hear plenty of criticism of the Yard before long. And
so, at least as far as its formal aspects are concerned, the
investigation must be expedited. I want to know exactly what has been
done already and, in particular, what steps have been taken to recover
the bodies."

"That's all the lieutenant's responsibility," said Farquart. "We gave
him full powers two weeks ago, and since then he's been completely on
his own."

Gregory nodded his assent, pretending not to have heard the criticism
implicit in Farquart's words.

"Starting with the third incident," he said, "we began to take extreme
measures. Immediately after a missing body was reported, we closed off
the whole area within a radius of fifty miles, using all the local
forces, highway and airport patrols, plus two squads of radio cars from
the London tactical headquarters at Chichester. We set up roadblocks at
every intersection, railroad grade crossing, tollgate, highway exit, and
dead-end street. . . but nothing came of it. By coincidence we happened
to pick up five people who were wanted on various other charges, but as
far as our own problem is concerned we didn't accomplish anything. Of
course it's not easy to close off an area that big, and from the
practical standpoint you can never set up a net that's one hundred
percent tight -- it's always possible for someone to slip through. After
the second and third incidents the perpetrator probably left the area
before our roadblocks were even set up, since he had six hours the first
time and about five hours the next. I'm assuming, of course, that he
also managed to dispose of his car. In the most recent incident,
however, the disappearance took place between 3:00 and 4:50 in the
morning, so he didn't have more than an hour and three quarters for his
escape. It was a typical March night. . . gale winds and snow after an
evening of thick fog, and all the roads were impassable until noon of
the next day. Of course the perpetrator might have used a tractor or a
snowplow to make his getaway, but it would have been hard, and I know
this from my own experience because we had an awful time getting our
patrol cars out of the snow, both the ones from the local stations and
the ones from the Greater London C.I.D. reserve that responded to our
alert."

"So you maintain that no car could have left the Lewes vicinity until
noon of the next day?"

"Right."

"What about sledges?"

"Technically it would have been possible, but not in the amount of time
he had to work with. After all, a sledge can't travel at more than a
mile or two an hour, especially in a storm like the one they had that
night. Even with the best horses he wouldn't have been able to get out
of the closed-off area by noon."

"If you say so, Lieutenant, but a moment ago you told us that this kind
of net isn't completely secure," Sheppard said gently. "In fact, an
absolutely secure cordon is only an ideal we aspire to."

"Besides," Farquart commented, "he could have put the corpse in a bag
and carried it through the fields on foot."

"Impossible," said Gregory. He wanted to remain silent but his cheeks
were burning. He could hardly keep himself from jumping to his feet.

"No vehicles left the closed-off zone after six in the morning. I can
vouch for that," he declared. "Maybe an infantryman could have gotten
through the snow but not with a load as heavy as an adult body. He would
have dumped it. . ."

"Maybe he did dump it," Sorensen observed.

"I thought of that, but we combed the whole area -- there was a thaw the
next day which made the job easier -- and we didn't find a thing."

"Your reasoning is hardly as faultless as you think," Sciss unexpectedly
broke into the conversation. "First of all, you didn't find the dead
cat, but if you had really conducted a careful search you would have --"

"Excuse me," said Gregory, "but we were looking for a human corpse, not
for a dead cat."

"Exactly! But there are so many places to hide a corpse in such a large
area that you might just as well conclude that it isn't there."

"The perpetrator could have buried the body," Farquart added.

"He snatched it just to bury it?" Gregory asked with an innocent air.
Farquart snorted.

"Maybe he buried it when he saw he couldn't get away."

"But how did he know he couldn't get away? After all, we weren't
announcing the roadblocks on the radio," Gregory retorted. "That is. . .
unless he has a contact in the department, or unless he's a police
officer. . ."

"That's not a bad thought," Sciss smiled. "But in any case, gentlemen,
you haven't exhausted all the possibilities. What about a helicopter?"

"What nonsense!" said Dr. Sorensen contemptuously.

"Why? There aren't any helicopters in England?"

"The doctor apparently believes that it's easier to suspect a psychopath
than a helicopter," said Gregory, smiling complacently.

"What about all the carcasses?" Sorensen added.

There wasn't a sound from Sciss, who seemed to be absorbed in his
lecture notes.

"The search for the bodies must be continued," Sheppard went on. "We
have to plan a much more comprehensive operation, including ports and
dockyards. Some kind of surveillance of ships and cargoes. Do any of you
have anything else to say? Any new ideas? Any theories? Anything at all?
Please don't be afraid to be outspoken, even too outspoken."

"In my opinion, it's not possible --" Gregory and Farquart began at the
same time. They looked at each other and stopped.

"I'm listening."

No one spoke. The telephone jangled. The Chief Inspector disconnected it
and watched the men seated before him. A cloud of bluish tobacco smoke
rose around the lamp. For a moment, silence reigned.

"In that case, I. . ." Sciss said. He was meticulously folding his
manuscript and putting it into the briefcase. ". . . I have applied the
constant which I explained to you earlier in order to determine the
sequence and location of these phenomena in advance."

He stood up, moved over to the map, and, using a red pencil, marked off
an area encompassing part of the counties of Sussex and Kent.

"If the next incident takes place between tomorrow morning and the end
of next week, it will occur in this sector, which is bounded on the
north by the suburbs of East Wickham, Croydon, and Surbiton, on the west
by Horsham, on the south by a strip of the Channel coast, and on the
east by Ashford."

"A pretty big area," Farquart said dubiously.

"Not really, since we can exclude an interior sector in which incidents
have already taken place. The phenomenon is characterized by its
movement outward, so the only area actually involved is a circular strip
no more than twenty-one miles wide. It includes eighteen hospitals and
about one hundred sixty small cemeteries. That's all."

"And you. . . you're sure there will be an incident in this area?" asked
Sorensen.

"No," Sciss replied, after hesitating for a rather long moment, "I'm not
sure. But supposing it doesn't take place. . . or, rather, that if it
doesn't take place. . ."

Something curious was happening to the scientist. Everyone watched in
amazement as he began shaking and his voice started to crack like an
adolescent boy's. Suddenly Sciss burst out laughing. He roared with
laughter as if delighted by some private thought, totally oblivious to
the deadly silence with which his uncontrollable hilarity was greeted.

Sciss picked up his briefcase from under the armchair, nodded his head
in a slight bow, and, his shoulders still heaving spasmodically, walked
out of the office, taking quick, inordinately long steps.

 

 

 

2

 

A strong wind scattered the clouds, and the yellowish glow of the
setting sun became visible above the rooftops. The street lights dimmed,
the snow darkened and blended into the sidewalks and gutters. His hands
in his coat pockets, Gregory walked quickly, not looking into any of the
doorways he passed.

Hesitating for a moment at an intersection, he shifted his weight from
one foot to the other, shivering in the cold, damp air. Finally, angered
by his own indecisiveness, he turned to the left.

The meeting had ended -- in fact, dissolved -- immediately after Sciss's
dramatic exit. Nothing had been accomplished. Sheppard hadn't even
decided who was going to take over the case. Since he had only seen him
five or six times before, Gregory hardly knew the Chief Inspector. Of
course he was aware of all the usual methods for bringing oneself to the
attention of a superior officer, but he had never resorted to such
tactics during his short career as a detective; now, though, he was
beginning to regret this, because his relatively low rank reduced his
chances of being put in charge of the investigation.

Sheppard had stopped Gregory just as he was leaving the conference room
and asked him how he would conduct the investigation. Gregory had
answered that he didn't know. The truth, of course, but honest answers
usually don't pay. Sheppard would probably regard Gregory's response as
a sign that he wasn't too smart, or that he had a poor attitude.

And what had Farquart told the Chief about him, he wondered. Surely
nothing very impressive. Gregory tried to reassure himself with the
thought that he was just overrating Farquart by worrying this way, since
Farquart's opinion really wasn't worth anything.

His thoughts wandered from Farquart's rather dull personality to Sciss.
Now there was a character! Gregory had heard a lot about him.

During the war Sciss had been in the Operations Section, working close
to the chief of staff, and from all accounts he had some pretty solid
achievements to his credit. About a year after the war, though, he'd
been fired. The story was that he'd insulted some VIP -- it might have
been Field Marshal Alexander -- and the story was certainly believable.
Sciss was well-known for his ability to antagonize everyone around him.
It was also said that Sciss was standoffish, nasty, absolutely devoid of
tact, and as unmercifully frank as a child in telling other people his
opinions of them.

Remembering his own dismay at the meeting because he hadn't been able to
counter Sciss's seemingly perfect logic, Gregory could well understand
the animosity which the scientist seemed to inspire wherever he went. At
the same time, though, he respected the intellectual powers of this
strange man, whose tiny head made him resemble a bird. "I'll have to get
busy on this," he said to himself, bringing his deliberations to an end,
but without any clear sense of what "get busy" actually meant.

The day faded quickly, so quickly that the displays in the shop windows
were soon being lit up for the evening. The street narrowed. Gregory
found himself in a district of the city which hadn't been rebuilt since
the Middle Ages. It was jammed with dark, clumsy old buildings, most of
them sheltering brand-new modern shops that sparkled unnaturally like
transparent glass boxes.

Gregory turned into an arcade, amazed that the thin layer of windswept
snow at its entrance still hadn't been trampled. A woman in a red hat
stood nearby looking at some smiling wax manikins dressed in evening
gowns. Beyond her, where some square white floodlights brightened the
concrete walk, the arcade curved slightly.

Walking slowly, hardly conscious of his surroundings and whereabouts,
Gregory brooded about Sciss's laugh. What exactly had it meant, he
wondered. It had to be significant. Despite appearances, Sciss didn't
just do things for effect, although he was certainly arrogant enough,
and consequently it followed that Sciss must have had a good reason for
laughing, even if he was the only one who knew it.

Farther up the deserted arcade a man was walking toward Gregory -- a
tall, lean man, whose head was nodding as if he were talking to himself.
Gregory was too busy with his own thoughts to pay much attention to him,
but he kept him in sight out of the corner of his eye. The man drew
nearer. Three shops turned off their lights for the night and the arcade
suddenly became darker. The windows of a fourth shop were covered with
whitewash because of a renovation in progress, and the only lights still
visible were a few glittering displays in the direction from which the
man was approaching.

Gregory looked up. The man's pace slowed, but he kept coming, albeit
hesitantly. Suddenly they stood facing each other, no more than a few
paces apart. Still engrossed in his thoughts, Gregory stared at the tall
male figure before him without really seeing his face. He took a step;
the man did the same.

"What does he want?" Gregory wondered. The two men scowled at each
other. In the shadows the man's broad face was hidden; he was wearing
his hat pushed down on his forehead, his coat was somewhat too short,
and his belt was all askew, with its end twisted loosely around the
buckle. There was certainly something wrong with the buckle, Gregory
thought, but he had enough problems without worrying about that too. He
moved as if to walk past the stranger but found his path blocked.

"Hey," Gregory began angrily, "what the. . ." his words faltering into
silence.

The stranger. . . was himself. He was standing in front of a huge
mirrored wall marking the end of the arcade. He had mistakenly walked
into a glass-roofed dead end.

Unable to escape the disconcerting feeling that he was really looking at
someone else, Gregory stared at his own reflection for a moment. The
face that looked back at him was swarthy, not very intelligent, perhaps,
but with a strong, square jaw that showed firmness, or at least so he
liked to think, although more than once he had decided it was only
pigheadedness.

"Had a good look?" he muttered to himself, then turned on his heels in
embarrassment and headed in the direction he had come from.

Halfway up the arcade, Gregory couldn't resist an irrational impulse to
turn and look back. The "stranger" stopped also. He was far away now
among some brightly lit, empty shops, heading down the arcade, busy with
his own affairs in his mirror world. Gregory angrily adjusted his belt
in its buckle, pushed his hat farther back on his head, and went out
into the street.

The next arcade led him straight to the Europa. The doorman opened the
glass door for him, and Gregory strode past the tables toward the purple
glare of the bar. He was so tall that he had no trouble seating himself
on one of the high stools.

"White Horse?" asked the bartender. Gregory nodded.

The bottle tinkled as if there were a glass bell hidden inside it.
Gregory drank quickly. The White Horse was acrid; it tasted something
like fuel oil and burned his throat. . . he hated it. It so happened,
however, that several times in a row he had stopped at the Europa with
Kinsey, a young colleague at the Yard, and each time he'd had a drink of
White Horse with him; from then on the bartender had considered Gregory
a regular customer and made a point of remembering his preferences.
Actually, Gregory had only been meeting with Kinsey in order to put the
finishing touches on an apartment exchange. He really preferred warm
beer to whiskey, but was ashamed to order it in such a fashionable
place.

Gregory had ended up at the Europa now simply because he didn't feel
like going home. Meditating over the shot glass, he decided to see if he
could organize all the facts of the "series" in some kind of systematic
pattern, but found that he couldn't remember a single name or date.

He downed his drink, tilting his head back with an exaggerated gesture.

He flinched. The bartender was saying something to him.

"What? What did you say?"

"Do you want supper? We have venison today, it's in season."

"Venison?"

He couldn't understand a word the bartender was saying.

"Oh, supper," it finally dawned on him. "No. Please pour me another."

The bartender nodded. He rinsed out the glass at a silver-colored tap,
rattling the faucets as if he wanted to smash them into little pieces,
then raised his reddened, hard, muscular face to Gregory, and, watching
through beady eyes, whispered.

"Are you looking for a --?"

There was no one else near the bar.

"No. What the hell are you talking about?" Gregory added indignantly, as
if that had been his real purpose and he'd been caught in the act.

"No, nothing. I thought that you. . . for service," the bartender
mumbled, withdrawing to the other end of the bar. Someone touched
Gregory's arm lightly. He whirled around in a flash and was unable to
hide his disappointment: it was a waiter.

"Pardon me. . . Lieutenant Gregory? Telephone for you, sir."

Walking as quickly as possible to avoid being jostled, Gregory made his
way through the crowd on the dance floor. The light in the telephone
booth was burned out, so he stood in darkness, except when an occasional
flash from the revolving light over the bar streamed through the booth's
little round window.

"Hello, Gregory speaking."

"This is Sheppard."

At the sound of the Chief's far-off voice, Gregory's heart began to beat
faster.

"Lieutenant, I want to see you."

"Of course, Chief Inspector. When should I. . ."

"I'd rather not put it off. Do you have time?"

"Naturally, yes sir. Tomorrow?"

"No. Today, if you can. Can you make it?"

"Yes sir, of course."

"That's fine. Do you know where I live?"

"No, but I can --"

"Eighty-five Walham Street, in Paddington. Can you come over now?"

"Yes."

"Perhaps you'd rather come in an hour or two."

"No, I can come now."

"All right, I'm expecting you."

The receiver jangled when Gregory hung up. He stared at the telephone in
confusion. How in God's name did Sheppard know he was at the Europa, a
place he only went to occasionally to find an outlet for his penny-ante
snobbism. Had the Chief been so eager to find him that he'd
systematically phoned around from bar to bar? The very thought made
Gregory turn red. He walked out into the street and ran to catch a
passing bus. From the bus stop it was a long walk. He chose a roundabout
route through back streets where there weren't too many people. Finally
he found himself on a deserted side street lined by small old houses.
Here and there a puddle shimmered in the light of the antiquated gas
lamps illuminating the street. Gregory had never imagined there was such
a seedy little neighborhood buried in the middle of this part of the
city.

He was surprised again at number 85. In a garden behind a low brick
wall, at a considerable distance from any of the other houses, there
stood a massive building. It was completely dark, as if dead. Taking a
good look around, Gregory finally spotted a weak glow coming from one of
the upstairs windows.

The spiked gate made a creaking sound when he swung it open. Forced to
grope in the darkness to get his bearings because the brick wall cut off
the light from the street, Gregory used the tip of his foot to feel his
way along a flagstone walk to the solid black door of the house. Instead
of a bell there was a knocker. He pulled it gently as if afraid to make
too much noise.

He had a long wait, occasionally hearing the dripping of an unseen
rainspout or the sound of a car whizzing by on the wet pavement at the
intersection. Finally, and soundlessly, the door opened. Sheppard was
standing in the doorway.

"You're here already? That's fine. Please follow me."

The hall was completely dark. Farther inside the house, a weak glow
streaked the stairs in a trail of light, beckoning upward. An open door
on the second floor landing led into a small foyer. Gregory noticed
something staring at him from overhead -- it was the skull of some kind
of animal, its looming, empty eye sockets clearly standing out from the
yellowed bone.

He took off his coat and entered the room. The long walk in the fog had
irritated his eyes and they still burned a little.

"Please sit down."

The room was almost dark. There was a lamp on the desk, but it was
pointed downward toward an open book, its light reflected onto the wall
and ceiling from the flattened pages. Gregory remained on his feet.
There was only one chair.

"Please sit down," the Chief Inspector said a second time. It sounded
like an order. The lieutenant sat down reluctantly. He was now so close
to the source of the light that he was almost unable to see. A few
blurred spots that were actually pictures were barely visible on the
walls; under his feet he felt a deep rug. Opposite him was a long
bookshelf. A television set glistened in the middle of a dull whitish
area.

Sheppard walked over to the desk, pulled a black metal cigarette box out
from under some books, and slid it over to his guest. He lit one himself
and began pacing back and forth between the door and the window, which
was screened by a heavy brown drape. The silence lasted so long that
Gregory, who had nothing to do but watch the pacing figure, soon began
to feel bored.

"I've decided to give you the case," Sheppard said all of a sudden, not
losing a step.

Gregory didn't know what to say. He could feel the alcohol in him and
took a deep drag on the cigarette as if tobacco smoke would restore his
sobriety.

"You'll be on your own," Sheppard continued in a decisive tone of voice.
Still pacing back and forth, he glanced obliquely at the figure seated
in the circle of light next to the lamp.

"Don't think I picked you because you have any special ability as an
investigator, because you don't. Furthermore, your methods are
completely unsystematic. But it doesn't make any difference. You have a
great personal interest in this case, don't you?"

"Yes," Gregory answered. He sensed that an uncomplicated affirmative
reply would be best.

"Do you have any theories of your own about it? Something personal that
you didn't want to mention in my office today?"

"No. That is. . ." Gregory hesitated.

"Go on."

"This is just an impression. It's not based on anything," said Gregory.
He spoke with some reluctance. "But it seems to me that this case really
isn't about bodies. I mean, they play a definite role, but not in this
thing."

"In what thing?"

"I'm not sure."

"Really?"

The Chief Inspector sounded almost cheerful. Gregory wished he could see
his face. This was a completely different Sheppard from the one he'd
occasionally met at the Yard.

"In my opinion this is a lousy case," Gregory suddenly blurted out as if
talking to a friend. "There's something about it. . . something
peculiar. It's not that it's difficult, but there are details that don't
fit. . . not for material reasons but because the only connecting links
are all psychological nonsense. It all builds up to nothing and leads to
a dead end. . ."

"Yes, go on," Sheppard chimed in attentively, still pacing back and
forth. Gregory was no longer watching him. Unable to tear his eyes from
the papers on the desk, he began speaking excitedly.

"The idea that this whole case is based on some kind of insanity, mania,
or psychopathology is almost irresistible. No matter where you start, no
matter how anxious you are to avoid it, everything leads you back to it.
But as a matter of fact that's our out, because it only seems that way.
All right, let's say it was a maniac. But everything was so carefully
planned and methodical. . . I don't know, do you see what I mean? If you
went into a house and found that all the tables and chairs had only one
leg, you'd probably tell yourself that it was the work of a madman, that
some maniac had decided to furnish his house that way. But if you went
from house to house and found the same thing all over town? I don't know
what any of this means, but it just couldn't be. . . this is not the
work of a madman. I think we have to go to the other extreme. Someone
very intelligent who is using his intellect for a purpose we don't
understand yet."

"What else?" Sheppard asked quietly, as if he didn't want to do anything
to intrude on the fervor which had quite obviously seized Gregory.
Sitting behind the desk, still staring blindly at the papers, the
younger man was silent for a moment, then answered.

"What else?. . . Nothing very good. Nothing very good at all. A series
of acts without a single slipup, that's pretty bad. . . In fact it
appalls me, it's absolutely inhuman. Human beings don't work that way.
Human beings make mistakes, it's in the nature of things that they
miscalculate from time to time, make mistakes, leave clues behind,
change their plans in the middle of everything. But from the very
beginning these bodies. . . the ones that were moved. . . if that's the
right word for it. . . I don't agree with Farquart that the perpetrator
ran away because he was frightened. It wasn't anything like that. At the
time all he wanted was to move them. Just a little at first. Then a
little more. Then, still more. . . until finally a body disappeared
altogether. That's the way it had to be, that's the way he wanted to do
it. I thought. . . I'm always thinking about it, why he. . . but I don't
know. Nothing."

"Are you familiar with the Lapeyrot case?" Sheppard asked. Standing in
the back of the room he was almost invisible.

"Lapeyrot? The Frenchman who --"

"Yes. In 1909. Do you know the case?"

"It sounds familiar, but I can't remember. What was it about?"

"About too much evidence. At least that's what they said at the time,
unfortunately. On a beach along the Seine River, for a certain period,
they kept finding buttons of various kinds arranged in geometric
patterns, as well as belt buckles, suspender clasps, and small coins.
Always arranged in polygons, circles, or other shapes. There were also
handkerchiefs knotted together."

"Wait a minute. I remember something now. I must have read about it
somewhere. Two old guys in a garret who. . . right?"

"Right. That's the very case I'm talking about. . ."

"They used to search out young people who were trying to kill themselves
-- they'd bring them home, revive them, cheer them up, and have them
tell what it was that had driven them to attempt suicide. That's the way
it was, right? And after all that. . . they strangled them to death.
Right?"

"More or less. One of the pair was a pharmacist. After the murders they
got rid of their victims with the aid of some acid and a fireplace; then
they'd amuse themselves by playing a little game with the police with
the buttons, buckles, coins, and other odds and ends that were left
over."

"I don't see the connection. One of the Lapeyrot murderers was insane.
He completely dominated his accomplice, who was regarded as a victim of
folie à deux. The two of them devoted most of their energy to the button
puzzles because that's what really excited them. The case may have been
hard to crack, but basically it was quite commonplace: there were
murderers and victims, there were clues. What difference does it make if
the crime was committed with a few theatrical flourishes --"

Gregory stopped short, an incomprehensible smile suddenly appearing on
his lips. He looked at the Chief Inspector, trying to get a glimpse of
him in the dim light.

"Wait, I think I see. . ." he said, his tone indicating that he had just
made a startling discovery. "So that's it."

"Yes, that's it exactly," Sheppard answered, resuming his pacing.

Gregory bowed his head, tapping on the edge of the desk with his
fingers.

"Theatrical," he whispered. "An imitation. . . but an imitation of
what?" he said, raising his voice. "A sham, but to cover what? Insanity?
No, it can't be anything like that. The circle is closing again."

"It's closing because you're going in the wrong direction. When you talk
about shammed insanity you're looking for a close analogy to the
Lapeyrot case, in which the murderers, if I may put it this way, had a
particular audience in mind all along: they purposely left clues to give
the police a puzzle to solve. In our case there's nothing to indicate
that any of this is aimed at the police. In fact, I doubt it very much."

"Yes, well in that. . ." said Gregory. He felt downhearted and stifled.
"So we're back where we started. The motive."

"No, not at all. Look over here, please."

Sheppard pointed to the wall, at a small circle of light that Gregory
hadn't noticed before. Where was it coming from, he wondered. Glancing
at the desk, he saw a cut-glass paperweight standing next to the
reflector of the desk lamp; a narrow beam of light, refracted in its
crystalline depths, was escaping into the room's dark interior to shine
on the wall.

"What do you see here?" asked Sheppard, moving to the side.

Gregory leaned over to escape the lamp's blinding glare. There was a
picture hanging on the wall, almost invisible in the darkness expept for
one of its corners, which was lit by the single beam of light. Within
this tiny space, not much larger than two coins placed side by side, he
saw a dark spot enclosed by a pale gray, slightly curved border.

"That spot?" he asked. "A profile of some kind? No, I can't make it out.
. . wait a minute. . ."

Intrigued by the shape, Gregory studied it more and more carefully, his
eyes squinting. The more he studied it the more anxious he became.
Although he hadn't the slightest idea what he was looking at, his
anxiety began to increase.

"It looks as if it's alive. . ." he said involuntarily in a low voice.
"Is it a burned-out window in a gutted house?"

Sheppard moved closer to the wall and blocked the area with his body.
The irregular spot of light now shined on his chest.

"You can't figure it out because all you can see is a tiny part of the
whole," he said, "right?"

"So that's it! You think these disappearing body incidents are only a
part -- let's say the beginning -- of something bigger."

"That's it exactly."

Sheppard was pacing again. Gregory returned his gaze to the spot on the
wall.

"It may even be the beginning of something with criminal and political
implications that go beyond the boundaries of this country. What comes
next, of course, will depend on what has already taken place, and
naturally it could all work out differently. Maybe everything that's
happened so far is only a diversion, or camouflage for some other
operation. . ."

Deeply engrossed in the dark, nerve-wracking shape, Gregory hardly heard
him.

"Excuse me, Chief Inspector," he interrupted. "What is that thing?"

"What? Oh, that."

Sheppard switched on the ceiling light and the room was filled with
brightness. A second or so later he switched it off again, but during
the few instants of light Gregory finally managed to catch a glimpse of
what he had been staring at so fruitlessly: it was a woman's head thrown
backward at an angle, the whites of her eyes staring straight ahead, her
neck scarred by the mark of a noose. There wasn't enough time for him to
see all the details, but even so, with a peculiar kind of delayed
action, the expression of horror in the dead face got to him, and he
turned to Sheppard, who was still pacing back and forth.

"Maybe you're right," said Gregory, blinking his eyes, "but I don't know
if that's the most important thing about it. Do you really believe that
a man alone in a darkened mortuary in the middle of the night would tear
apart a cloth curtain with his teeth?"

"Don't you?" Sheppard interrupted.

"Yes, of course, if he did it because he was nervous or afraid, or if
there weren't any other tools available. . . but you know as well as I
do why he did it. That damned ironclad consistency that we've seen
throughout this whole series. After all, he did everything to make it
look like the bodies had come back to life. He planned everything to
achieve that effect, even studied the weather reports. But how could he
possibly predict that the police would be ready to believe in miracles?
And that's exactly what makes the whole thing so insane!"

"The kind of criminal you're talking about doesn't exist and couldn't
possibly exist," Sheppard observed indifferently. He pushed the drapes
to the side and looked out a dark window.

After a long interval Gregory asked, "Why did you bring up the Lapeyrot
case?"

"Because it began childishly, with buttons arranged in patterns. But
that isn't the only reason. Tell me something: exactly what is contrary
to human nature?"

"I don't understand. . ." Gregory mumbled. He was beginning to get a
splitting headache.

"A person manifests his individuality by his actions," the Chief
Inspector explained quietly. "Naturally this holds true for criminal
acts also. But the pattern that emerges from our series of incidents is
impersonal. Impersonal, like a natural law of some kind. Do you see what
I mean?"

"I think so," said Gregory. His voice was hoarse. He leaned over to one
side, very slowly, until he was completely out of the blinding glare of
the desk lamp. Thanks to this movement his eyes were soon able to see
better in the darkness. There were several other pictures hanging next
to the photograph of the woman, all showing the faces of dead people.
Meanwhile, Sheppard had resumed his pacing across the room, moving back
and forth against a background of nightmarish faces as if he were in the
middle of some kind of weird stage setting; no. . . more as if he were
among very ordinary, familiar things. He paused opposite the desk.

"The mathematical perfection of this series suggests that there is no
culprit. That may astound you, Gregory, but it's true. . ."

"What. . . what are you. . ." the lieutenant gasped in a barely audible
voice, recoiling involuntarily.

Sheppard stood absolutely still, his face unseen. Suddenly Gregory heard
a short, quavering sound. The Chief Inspector was laughing.

"Did I shock you?" the Chief Inspector asked in a more serious tone. "Do
you think I'm talking nonsense?

"Who makes day and night?" he continued. There was derision in his
voice.

Suddenly Gregory stood up, pushing his chair backward.

"I understand," he said. "Of course. The series has something to do with
the creation of a new myth. An imitation of one of the laws of nature. A
synthetic, impersonal, invisible, obviously all-powerful criminal. Oh,
it's perfect! An imitation of infinity. . ."

Gregory laughed, but not very happily. Then, breathing deeply, he became
quiet.

"Why are you laughing?" the Chief Inspector asked gravely, perhaps even
a bit sadly. "Isn't it because you were already thinking along the same
lines but rejected the idea? Imitation? Of course. But a perfect
imitation, Gregory, so perfect that you'll come back to me with your
hands empty."

"Maybe," Gregory said coldly. "And in that case I'll be replaced by
someone else. If necessary I could manage to explain every detail right
now. Even the dissecting laboratory. The window can be opened from the
outside with the aid of a nylon thread looped around the lock
beforehand. I tried it, and it works. But to think that the creator of a
new religion of some kind, an imitator of miracles, had to begin this
way. . ."

Gregory shrugged his shoulders.

"No, it can't be that simple," the Chief Inspector said. "You keep
repeating the word 'imitation.' A wax doll is an imitation of a human
being, isn't it? What if someone made a doll that could walk and talk,
wouldn't that be an excellent imitation? And if he made a doll that
could bleed? A doll that could experience unhappiness and death, what
then?"

"And what does any of this have to. . . after all, even the most perfect
imitation -- even the doll you were just talking about -- has to have a
creator, and the creator can be held responsible!" Gregory shouted,
overcome with anger. "He's only playing with me" suddenly flashed
through his mind, and he said, "Chief Inspector, please answer one
question for me."

Sheppard looked at him.

"You don't really think this case can be solved, do you?"

"Certainly not. I don't want to hear that kind of talk anymore. Of
course there is a possibility that the solution --" The Chief Inspector
broke off in mid-sentence.

"Please, sir, tell me everything."

"I don't know if I have the right," Sheppard said dryly, as if
displeased by Gregory's insistence. "You might not like the solution."

"Why? Please, explain it to me a little more clearly."

Sheppard shook his head.

"I can't."

He walked over to the desk, opened the drawer, and removed a small
package.

"Let's work on the part that pertains to us," he said, handing it to
Gregory.

The package contained photographs of three men and one woman.
Commonplace, banal faces, indifferent to everything, stared at Gregory
from the shiny little cardboards.

"That's them," he said, recognizing two of the photos.

"Yes."

"Don't you have any pictures taken after death?"

"I managed to get two." Sheppard reached into the drawer. They had been
taken at the hospital at the request of the families.

Both photographs were pictures of men. And it was a strange thing: death
seemed to give a new dignity to their rather ordinary features,
bestowing a kind of motionless gravity upon them. Dead they looked more
expressive than they had while living, as if they finally had something
to hide!

Gregory looked up at Sheppard. To his surprise, the Chief Inspector was
hunched over, suddenly looking much older than before. He was clenching
his lips as if in pain.

"Chief Inspector?" he said softly, with unexpected timidity.

"I would prefer not to give this case to you. . . but I have no one
else," said Sheppard in a quiet voice. He placed his hand on Gregory's
shoulder. "Please keep in touch with me. I'd like to help you, although
I have no idea whether my experience will have much value in a case like
this."

Gregory drew back and the Chief Inspector's hand dropped. Both men were
now standing outside the circle of light made by the lamp, and in the
darkness the faces on the wall stared down at them. The lieutenant felt
more drunk than he had all evening.

"Please sir. . ." he said, "you know more than you're willing to tell
me, don't you?" He was a bit breathless, as if he'd been exerting
himself strenuously.

"Sir. . . are you unwilling to tell me, or unable?" Gregory asked. He
wasn't even shocked at his own audacity.

Sheppard shook his head in denial, watching Gregory with a look of
immeasurable patience. Or was it irony?

Gregory glanced down at his hands and noticed that he was still holding
the photographs, the ones of the live subjects in his left hands, the
dead ones in his right. And again he was inspired by the same mysterious
compulsion that had made him direct such an odd question to the Chief
Inspector. It was as if an invisible hand was touching him.

"Which of these are. . . more important?" he asked in a barely audible
voice. It was only possible to hear him because the room was absolutely
still.

A tight-lipped expression on his face, Sheppard made a discouraging
gesture and went over to the light switch. The room was flooded with
brightness, everything became ordinary and natural. Gregory slowly hid
the photographs in his pocket.

The visit was obviously coming to an end. During the remainder of their
conversation, which concentrated on such concrete matters as the number
and posting of the constables guarding the mortuaries, the organization
of a cordon around the areas mentioned by Sciss, and the details of the
lieutenant's actual powers, there remained the shadow of something left
unsaid.

Again and again the Chief Inspector would fall silent and look at
Gregory anxiously, as if uncertain whether to leave these businesslike
considerations and resume the previous conversation. But he left well
enough alone and didn't say anything.

Gregory was halfway down the stairs when the lights went out. He managed
to feel his way to the door. Suddenly he heard his name.

"Good luck!" the Chief Inspector shouted after him.

The lieutenant walked out into the wind and closed the door.

It was terribly cold. The puddles had all solidified; frozen mud
crunched underfoot; in the onrushing wind the drizzling rain was being
changed into a blizzard of icy needles that pricked Gregory's face
painfully and made a sharp, paperlike rustle as they bounced off the
stiff fabric of his coat.

Gregory tried to review the details of the evening, but he might just as
well have tried to classify the invisible clouds that the wind was
driving around over his head. Remembered snatches of this and that
struggled in his mind, spilling over into images unconnected with
anything except a poignant feeling of depression and being lost. The
walls of the room had been covered with posthumous photographs, the desk
with open books, and he vehemently regretted now that he hadn't taken a
good look at any of them, or at the papers spread out next to the books.
It never even occurred to him that such actions would have been
indiscreet. Gregory began to feel that he was standing on the boundary
between the definite and the indefinite. Each of his thoughts seemed
about to reveal one of many possible meanings, then vanished, melting
away with every desperate effort he made to grasp it fully. And he,
pursuing understanding, seemed about to plunge into a sea of ambiguous
details in which he would drown, comprehending nothing even at the end.

Whom was he supposed to catch for Sheppard -- the creator of some new
religion? Although able to function smoothly and efficiently in routine
cases, the machinery of investigation was now beginning to turn against
itself. The more meticulously the facts were measured, photographed,
recorded, and assembled, the more the whole structure seemed to be
nonsensical.

If he'd been asked to track down a completely obscure and unknown
murderer, Gregory wouldn't have felt so helpless. What, he wondered, was
that confused anxiety he had seen in the eyes of the old Chief
Inspector, who wanted to help him but couldn't?

Furthermore, why had the Chief, who seemed to think the case was
unsolvable, picked him, a beginner, to take it over? And was that really
the reason Sheppard had invited him to his house in the middle of the
night?

With his fists clenched in his pockets, Gregory walked along the
deserted street, not seeing anything in the darkness, not feeling the
raindrops trickling down his face, not remembering where he was headed
for. He gulped in some of the cold, damp air and again saw Sheppard's
face before him, the little shadows at the corner of his mouth
twitching.

How long was it since he had left the Europa? He began to calculate. It
was now 10:30, so nearly three hours had gone by. "I'm not drunk
anymore," he said to himself. Stopping in the circle of light around a
lamp post, he read the street sign to get his bearings, figured out the
location of the nearest subway station, and headed toward it.

The streets became more crowded, brightened now by neon signs and by
blinking red and green traffic signals. Once inside the revolving doors
at the subway entrance, Gregory was met by a blast of warm, dry air from
the heating ducts. He rode downward on the escalator, slowly sinking
into the noisy rumbling below.

It was even warmer on the station platform than it had been upstairs.
Gregory let the Islington train pass, watching the triangular red light
on the last car until it disappeared in the distance. Circling around a
newsstand, he leaned against an iron support beam and lit a cigarette.

After a while his train arrived. The doors opened with a pneumatic hiss.
Gregory took a corner seat. The car jerked and pulled out, the station
lights flicking by more and more quickly, then disappearing; the train
was soon moving so fast that the lights in the tunnel couldn't be
distinguished from each other as they shot past.

Staring blankly at the row of accidental faces sitting opposite him,
Gregory again reviewed the meeting with Sheppard. There was more to it
than he yet understood, he felt, but he'd only be able to figure out its
real meaning if he concentrated.

Gradually he became aware of an uneasy feeling circulating in his
consciousness, and finally it formed itself into words: "There's
trouble. Something terrible and irreversible happened this evening. . .
or was it today?" As if cut off by some outside force, this line of
thought suddenly came to a dead end.

Gregory closed his eyes for a moment. Suddenly it occurred to him that
he had recognized a man sitting at the opposite end of the car, near the
door. He took another look. Yes, the face was familiar all right. It
seemed eager to tell him something. Gregory tried to concentrate. It was
an old man's face: flabby, with vague, spongy features.

The man was fast asleep, his head propped up against a partition, his
hat slowly slipping downward and casting a deep shadow across his face.
His body rocked back and forth with the movements of the speeding train,
the rhythm intensifying on the curves. After one particularly sharp
jolt, the man's big, pale, swollen hand slipped out of his lap, as if it
were a bundle, and dangled lifelessly at his side.

Gregory was sure he knew the sleeping man, but as much as he tried he
couldn't place him. The train moved faster and faster, the jolting
increased, and finally the man's lower jaw dropped open. The lips fell
apart. . .

"He's sleeping as soundly as a corpse," flashed through Gregory's mind.
At the same moment he was overcome by a cold, terrifying sensation. For
an instant he couldn't catch his breath. He knew. The sleeping man was
the subject of one of the posthumous photographs in his coat pocket.

The train came to a stop. Cross Row. A few people got on. The platform
lights started to flicker, seemed to move, then whisked away backward.
The train sped on.

Brilliantly lit signs and advertising posters were soon flashing by
again. Although it was nearly time for him to get off, Gregory didn't
even bother to glance at the station sign. He sat absolutely still, as
if concentrating deeply, his eyes focused on the sleeping man. The doors
closed with a hiss; outside the windows a horizontal row of shining
fluorescent lights flowed smoothly backward, suddenly disappearing as if
slashed away. Steadily picking up speed, the train raced into the dark
tunnel.

Gregory's head began to throb. Oblivious to the noisy clatter of the
wheels, he began to feel as if he was looking at the sleeping man's head
through a long, gray funnel filled with flashing sparks. The dark,
gaping mouth hypnotized him; he stared so steadily, so unmovingly, so
fixedly, that the swollen gray face seemed to transform itself into a
circle of iridescent light. Keeping his eyes fixed on the old man,
Gregory reached into his coat, unbuttoning it to pull out the
photograph. The train hissed to a stop. Where were they? Camberwell
already?

Several people rose to get off. A soldier, making his way to the door of
the car, tripped over the extended leg of the sleeping man, who suddenly
woke up and, without a word, adjusted his hat, arose from his seat, and
joined the exiting crowd.

Gregory jumped up, attracting attention by his haste. Several faces
turned in his direction. The doors began to close. Forcibly holding them
open, Gregory leaped onto the platform from the moving train. Running
along the platform, he caught a glimpse of an angry face against the
background of the moving cars. "Hey you!" the train dispatcher shouted
after him.

A cool breeze met Gregory's nostrils. He stopped abruptly, his heart
beating with excitement. Along with the rest of the crowd, the man was
making his way toward a tall iron exit gate. Gregory drew back and
waited. Behind him was a newsstand lit by the strong light of a single
naked bulb.

The old man had a game leg. He was limping along slightly behind the
crowd of passengers. With the brim of his hat soaking wet and flopping
about soggily, his creased coat frayed around the pockets, he looked
like the last of the old-time panhandlers. Gregory glanced at the
photograph hidden in his palm. There was no resemblance.

He lost his head completely. Was this just an accidental case of
mistaken identity, or was it due to his confused state of mind? The dead
man was much too young; he couldn't possibly be the person he'd followed
off the train.

Confused and feeling somewhat nearsighted, his cheeks twitching, Gregory
looked alternately at the photo and at the old man, whose unshaven gray
face sagged over his collar. Finally sensing that he was being watched,
the old man turned toward the detective. Having no idea why the latter
was so interested in him, his face took on an empty-headed, listless
expression, his slack jaw dropped slightly, his slobbering lips parted,
and as a result he suddenly seemed to resemble the man in the photograph
again.

Gregory extended his hand as if to touch the old man's shoulder. The old
man, terrified, cried out -- or, more accurately, uttered a hoarse,
frightened sound -- and hurried onto the escalator.

Just as Gregory set off in pursuit, a family with two children stepped
between him and the old man, blocking his way. Seeing this, the old man
slipped through the other passengers and was carried farther and farther
upward.

Gregory shoved his way through the crowd of people blocking his path,
paying no attention when an indignant woman said something nasty and a
few other angry remarks were directed his way. On the street-exit level
the crowd was so thick that he couldn't get through and finally had to
give up, letting himself be carried along at the slow pace imposed by
the others. There wasn't a sign of the old man when he finally reached
the street. Looking helplessly in all directions, Gregory berated
himself for that split second of hesitation -- due either to surprise or
to fear -- in which the old man had made his escape.

The traffic was heavy on both sides of the safety island where he had
emerged from the subway. Blinded by the headlights every time he tried
to cross, Gregory stood helplessly at the curb. Before long a taxi
pulled up, the driver assuming that he was waiting for a cab. The door
opened. Gregory got in and mechanically uttered his address. When the
taxi began moving he noticed that he was still clutching the photograph
in his hand.

About ten minutes later the taxi came to a stop at the corner of a small
street just off Odd Square. Gregory got out, already half-convinced that
he had experienced a hallucination of some kind. Sighing, he stuck a
hand in his pocket and fumbled for his keys.

The house in which he lived was owned by the Fenshawes. It was an old,
two-story building, with an entrance portal almost monumental enough for
a cathedral; a steep, gabled roof; thick, dark walls; long hallways
abounding in sudden turns and hidden alcoves; and rooms so high they
seemed to have been designed for some kind of flying creature. This
suggestion was reinforced by the extraordinary wealth of ornamentation
on the ceilings. With its high gilded vaults in a constant state of
semidarkness due to an effort to save electricity, its broad marble
staircases, wide-columned terrace, mirrored drawing room with
chandeliers copied from those of Versailles, and its huge bathroom
(which was probably once a parlor) -- the house had a strange splendor,
and it was this that had fired Gregory's imagination when, accompanied
by his new colleague, Kinsey, he had first seen it.

And since the Fenshawes had made a good impression on him, he decided to
take his colleague's advice and rent the room, which Kinsey was giving
up, or so he said, for personal reasons.

Unfortunately, the Victorian architects who designed the house hadn't
known anything about modern home appliances, and as a result the place
presented a number of inconveniences. To get to the bathroom Gregory had
to walk the length of a long hallway and through a glassed-in gallery;
to get to his room from the stairs he had to pass through a six-doored
drawing room which was almost unfurnished, not counting a few blackening
bas-reliefs on the peeling walls, a crystal chandelier, and the mirrors
in each of its six corners. After a while, though, the house's defects
didn't seem too serious.

Since he led a very busy life, returning home late at night and spending
the whole day at work, it was a long time before Gregory noticed how
peculiar his new residence was; nor did he realize, at first, how much
he was being drawn into its orbit.

The Fenshawes were well on in years, but growing old gracefully. Pale
and thin, with colorless, slightly graying hair, Mr. Fenshawe was a
melancholy man who, because his nose looked as if it had been borrowed
from a different, considerably more fleshy face, gave the impression of
being in disguise. He favored old-fashioned clothing, usually wore
brilliantly polished shoes and a gray frock coat, and, even at home,
always carried a long cane. His wife was a dumpy woman with small, dark,
shining eyes. She walked around in dark dresses that bulged strangely
(after a while Gregory began to suspect that she was puffing herself out
on purpose), and she was so taciturn that it was difficult to remember
the sound of her voice. When Gregory asked Kinsey about the owners, the
answer had been, "Don't worry, you'll get along with them," followed, a
moment later, by, "They're such riffraff." At the time Gregory had only
wanted some support for his decision to move into the big, old house, so
he didn't pay much attention to this mysterious remark, the more so
because he was accustomed to Kinsey's penchant for bizarre expressions.

The morning after he moved in Gregory encountered Mrs. Fenshawe for the
first time. It was quite early. Striding along on his way to the
bathroom, he came upon her in the drawing room. She was sitting on a low
stool that looked as if it had been made for a child, a rag clutched in
one hand, some kind of sharpened metal implement in the other. Using her
feet to hold back a section of carpet, she was buffing the parquet
flooring, working her way along the length of the room, but making such
slow progress that she had moved less than two feet by the time Gregory
came back from the bathroom, finding her as busy and preoccupied as
before. In the middle of the huge drawing room, she looked like the
black head of a slowly contracting caterpillar whose body was formed by
the patterned rug. When Gregory asked if he could help with anything,
Mrs. Fenshawe turned her leathery face in his direction for a moment but
didn't say a word. That afternoon, on his way out of the house, Gregory
tripped over her as she was moving from step to step on her little stool
(the lights were off), nearly knocking her down the stairs. From time to
time thereafter he ran into her in the most unlikely and unexpected
places, and when he was working in his room he sometimes heard the slow,
measured creaking of her stool as she made her way along the hall. Once,
when the creaking stopped just opposite his door, he assumed, with some
distaste, that his landlady was spying on him through the keyhole. He
quickly stepped into the hall, but Mrs. Fenshawe, who was fastidiously
polishing the parquet under the window, ignored him completely.

Gregory concluded from all this that Mrs. Fenshawe was trying to save
money by cutting down on domestic help; she used the stool because it
was uncomfortable for her to bend over. This explanation, though
presumably correct, did not eliminate the problem, however, because the
constant sight of Mrs. Fenshawe creeping along on her stool, and the
perpetual creaking from dawn to dusk, soon took on a demonic character
in Gregory's mind. He began to yearn for the moment when the creaking
would stop; sometimes he had to wait an hour or two to get some peace.
Moreover, Mrs. Fenshawe was usually accompanied by two black cats, which
to all appearances she took care of, and Gregory, for no apparent
reason, couldn't stand either of them. At least a dozen times he told
himself that none of this was any of his business, and in fact if it
hadn't been for Mr. Fenshawe he would have been able to ignore
everything that went on outside his room.

Although the old man's room was right next door to his and shared the
same beautiful terrace, Gregory never heard a sound from Mr. Fenshawe in
the daytime. The nights were a different story. Well after ten o'clock,
sometimes not until after eleven, Gregory would hear a rhythmic knocking
from behind the wall separating the two rooms. Sometimes it was a rich,
sonorous sound; sometimes hollow and dull, like someone tapping on a
wooden wall with a hammer. This was usually followed by several other
acoustical phenomena. At first it seemed to Gregory as if these came in
an infinite number of variations, but he was wrong, and within a month
he was able to recognize the eight most frequent sounds.

The initial knocking behind the wall was usually followed by a dull,
empty noise, rather like the sound of a small barrel or a piece of
wooden pipe being rolled along a bare floor. Sometimes there were some
quick vigorous thumps on the floor, as if someone were walking barefoot
with his full weight on his heels. Other times there was clapping --
heavy, mean-sounding slaps like those an empty hand might make against a
moist balloon-like surface filled with air. There was an intermittent
hissing sound also and, finally, some faint noises that were difficult
to describe. A persistent scraping, interrupted by a metallic rapping,
then by a sharp flat whack like the sound of a fly swatter, or like the
tightly wound string of a musical instrument being snapped.

These sounds followed each other in no particular order, and, with the
exception of the soft thumps, which Gregory characterized to himself as
barefoot stomping, some of them might even be missing for several
evenings in a row. Always performed with a certain amount of technical
finesse, the sounds increased steadily in tempo, and once they began one
could always look forward to a serenade of the most unusual richness and
pitch. The sounds and murmurs were usually not very powerful, but to
Gregory, lying under his cover in a dark room and staring at a high,
invisible ceiling, it sometimes seemed as if they were loud enough to
shatter his brain, and in time his interest in the sounds changed from
simple curiosity to an almost pathological obsession, although, since he
didn't go in for self-analysis, he would have been hard put to say just
when this change took place. It may be that Mrs. Fenshawe's peculiar
behavior during the daytime made him oversensitive to the miseries he
had to endure every night. At the beginning, though, he was so busy with
a case that he couldn't worry very much about all this, and in any
event, because he was so busy he slept well and hardly heard anything.
After several nights of the noises, however, his dark room began to feel
like an echo chamber. Gregory tried to convince himself that Mr.
Fenshawe's nocturnal activities were none of his business, but by then
it was too late.

Next Gregory tried rationalizing. Faced with a collection of weird,
incomprehensible sounds that no one ever mentioned, he attempted to work
out a logical explanation of some kind that would cover everything.
This, he soon discovered, was impossible.

Where once he had always slept like a log, dropping off as soon as he
hit the sheets, and listening to the complaints of insomniacs with a
polite attitude that verged on disbelief, now, in the Fenshawe house, he
began to take sleeping pills.

Every week, Gregory had Sunday dinner with his landlords. The invitation
was always extended to him on the preceding Saturday. On one of these
occasions he managed to sneak a look into Mr. Fenshawe's bedroom, but he
regretted this immediately because what he saw exploded his elaborately
constructed theory that his landlord was conducting a complicated
scientific experiment. Except for a huge bed, a chest of drawers, a
night table, a sink, and two chairs, the bright triangular room was
empty. There wasn't a sign of tools, wooden boards, balloons, metal
containers, or kegs. There weren't even any books.

The Sunday dinners were usually quite dull. The Fenshawes were
conventional people who lifted their convictions and opinions from the
pages of the Daily Chronicle; they rarely had anything original to say,
and their conversation generally centered on repairs the old house
needed and the difficulty of raising money to pay for these, along with
a few anecdotes about some distant relatives in India who apparently
comprised the more exciting branch of the family. All this was so trite
and commonplace that any mention of the night sounds, or of Mrs.
Fenshawe's processions around the house on her stool, would have been
out of place; in any event, whether or not this was actually so, Gregory
could never quite manage to say anything about these matters.

Afterward, Gregory would tell himself that it was a waste of time to
worry about any of this: if he could only think the matter through, or
at least formulate a reasonable theory about what his neighbor was doing
behind their mutual wall in the middle of the night, he told himself, he
would finally be free from the agonizing hours of tossing sleeplessly in
a dark, lonely room.

But the idea of making sense out of a series of weird, disjointed sounds
floated around in Gregory's head as if in a void. Once, somewhat groggy
from a sleeping pill which had made him drowsy without bringing rest, he
quietly slipped out of bed and went out on the terrace, but the glass
doors to Mr. Fenshawe's room were covered from the inside with a heavy,
nontransparent curtain. Gregory returned to his room shivering from the
cold and, feeling like a whipped dog, he slipped under the covers,
overcome with gloom because he had tried to do something for which he
would always be ashamed.

Gregory's work kept him so busy that he rarely thought about the noises
during the daytime. At most, he was reminded of them once or twice when
he bumped into Kinsey at Headquarters. On these occasions Kinsey always
eyed him expectantly, with an air of cautious curiosity, but Gregory
decided not to bother him about it. After all, in the long run the
problem was trivial. In time, perhaps without even realizing it, Gregory
gradually began to change his routine: he brought official reports home
and brooded over them until midnight, sometimes even later. This enabled
him to lie to himself about the ultimate disgrace that was already so
close, for during his long hours of sleeplessness, the most
extraordinary ideas were coming into his head, and several times he had
conceived a desperate desire to just give up and take refuge in a hotel
or a boardinghouse.

This evening more than ever, returning from Sheppard's, Gregory needed
peace and quiet. The alcohol had worked its way out of his system long
before, although he still felt angry and had a pungent taste in his
mouth, and his eyes smarted painfully as if there were sand beneath the
lids. The staircase, immersed in darkness, was deserted. Gregory passed
quickly through the drawing room, where the dark mirrors glistened
coldly in the corners, and closed the door of his room with a sigh of
relief. Out of habit -- it had already become almost a reflex -- he
stood perfectly still for a moment, listening. At such times he didn't
think; his behavior was instinctive. The house was as still as death.
Gregory turned on a lamp, noticed that the air in the room was heavy and
stuffy and flung open the door to the terrace, then set about making
coffee in his little electric pot. He had a splitting headache. Earlier
in the evening other things had distracted him, but now the pain came up
to the surface of his consciousness and demanded his full attention. He
sat down on a chair next to the bubbling pot, but the feeling that he
had just gone through a lousy, unlucky day was so inescapable that he
had to stand up. Relax, he told himself, nothing really awful had
happened. He'd been given the slip by a man on the subway who vaguely
resembled one of the missing corpses. Sheppard had put him in charge of
the very investigation he wanted to command. True, the Chief had babbled
strangely for a while, but in the end it was all only words, and
Sheppard was certainly entitled to carry on if he wanted to. Maybe he
was getting religious in his old age. What else had happened? Gregory
reminded himself of the incident in the dead-end arcade -- the meeting
with himself -- and laughed involuntarily. "That's the detective in me.
. . Ultimately, even if I bungle this case, nothing will happen," he
thought. He took a thick notebook out of his drawer, turned to a blank
page, and began writing: "MOTIVES: Greed. Religious Fervor. Sex.
Politics. Insanity."

Glancing back at what he had written, Gregory crossed out each item on
the list except "Religious Fervor." What a ridiculous idea! He threw the
notebook aside and leaned forward, resting his head in his hands. The
pot was bubbling viciously now. Maybe his silly little list of motives
wasn't so stupid after all, he reflected. A frightening idea began to
work its way to the surface. Gregory waited passively, gloomily
beginning to feel like a struggling, helpless insect trapped in an
incomprehensible darkness.

Shivering, he got up, walked over to his desk, and opened a bulky volume
entitled Forensic Medicine to a place indicated by a bookmark stuck
between the pages. The chapter heading read, "The Decomposition and
Decay of the Corpse."

He began reading, but after a while, although his eyes obediently
continued to follow the text, his mind began to visualize Sheppard's
room with its gallery of dead faces. He pictured the scene: Sheppard
pacing back and forth in an empty house, stopping occasionally to take a
look at the pictures on the wall. Shivering again, Gregory made a
decision: Sheppard was a prime suspect. Suddenly he heard a shrill
whistle and realized that the coffee was ready.

Closing the book, Gregory got up, poured himself a cup, and gulped it
down while standing at the open door of the terrace, not even noticing
that the hot coffee was burning his throat. A hazy glow hung over the
city. He could see far-off cars shooting along the nighttime streets,
looking, in the distance, like white flashes disappearing into a black
abyss. From inside the house there was a faint rustling. It sounded a
little like a mouse eating its way through the wall, but Gregory knew it
wasn't. Feeling as if he had lost even before the game really started,
Gregory ran out on the terrace. Supporting himself on the stone
balustrade, he raised his eyes upward. The sky was full of stars.

 

 

 

3

 

That night Gregory had a dream in which everything became crystal clear
and he cracked the case, but in the morning he couldn't remember a
single detail. Part of it came back to him while he was shaving. He was
at a shooting gallery in Luna Park firing a big red pistol at a bear.
He'd just scored a bull's-eye when the bear growled and reared up on its
hind legs; suddenly it wasn't a bear at all but Doctor Sciss, very pale
and wrapped in a dark cloak. When Gregory took aim, the pistol became as
soft as a piece of rubber. He kept pressing his finger against the place
where there should have been a trigger even though it didn't do any
good. That was all he could remember. When he finished shaving, he
decided to phone Sciss and arrange a meeting. On his way out of the
house he saw Mrs. Fenshawe in the hall, rolling up a long carpet runner.
One of the cats was curled up under her stool. Gregory could never tell
the cats apart, although he could see the differences between them when
they were together. After a quick breakfast in a cafeteria on the other
side of the square, he telephoned Sciss. A woman's voice at the other
end told him that Sciss had left London for the day. This ruined
Gregory's plan. Uncertain what to do next, he went out into the street,
strolled around for a while gazing at the store windows, and then, for
no reason at all, spent an hour wandering through Woolworth's. Around
twelve o'clock he left Woolworth's and finally checked in at Scotland
Yard.

It was Tuesday. Making a mental note of the number of days still
remaining in the period Sciss had specified, Gregory skimmed through a
sheaf of reports from the outlying suburbs, carefully went over the
latest weather information and the long-range forecasts for southern
England, chatted for a while with the typists, and arranged to see a
film that evening with Kinsey.

After the film he was still at a loss for something to do. He most
definitely did not want to spend any more time in his room studying
Forensic Medicine, not from laziness but because the pictures always
upset him, although naturally he'd never admit that to anyone. There was
a long wait ahead; he knew it would pass more quickly if he could find
an interesting diversion, but it wasn't easy. After killing some time by
compiling a long list of books and old issues of Archives of Criminology
to borrow from the department library someday, he went to his club to
watch a soccer game on television, then read for a few hours at home,
finally falling asleep with the feeling that the day had been a total
waste.

The next morning Gregory made a resolution to learn something about
statistics, and on his way to the Yard he picked up a few books on the
subject. He hung around the Yard until dinner time. After eating, he
found himself in the subway station at Kensington Gardens. Deciding to
try amusing himself with a game he'd invented when he was a student, he
got on the first train that came along, got off just as randomly when he
felt like it, and for a whole hour rode haphazardly around the city.

This little game had always fascinated Gregory when he was nineteen. He
used to stand in the middle of a crowd without knowing until the last
minute whether or not he'd board an approaching train, waiting for some
kind of internal sign or act of the will to tell him what to do. "No
matter what I won't move from this spot," he would sometimes swear to
himself, then would jump on just as the doors were shutting. Other times
he would tell himself severely, "I'll take the next train," and instead
would find himself entering the one standing right before him. The very
concept of chance had fascinated Gregory when he was younger, and
through self-analysis and research he had tried to study its workings in
his own personality, though without any results, to be sure. Apparently
such efforts to uncover the mysteries of the personality were somewhat
more interesting when one was nineteen years old. Now, however, Gregory
was forced to conclude that he had already become a completely different
and much less imaginative person: at the end of an hour (having finally
forced himself to change to the right train, even though he was quite
aware that he had nothing else to do) he was bored again. Around six
o'clock he stopped in at the Europa; seeing Farquart at the bar,
however, he left at once before his colleague caught sight of him. He
went to the movies again that evening and was bored stiff by the film.
Later, he studied statistics texts in his room until he fell asleep
while trying to work out an equation.

It was still dark when the ringing of the telephone awakened him and
forced him out of bed.

Running barefoot along the cold parquet floor, Gregory realized that the
ringing had begun as part of a dream. Half-asleep, unable to find the
light switch, he groped for the receiver while the phone kept ringing
insistently.

"Gregory speaking."

"It's about time! I was beginning to think you were spending the night
with someone. Well, at least you can get a good night's sleep -- we're
not all that lucky. Listen! A report just came in. There was an
attempted body snatching in

 Pickering."

Gregory recognized the voice as soon as he heard the first word: it was
Allis, the duty officer at the Yard.

"Pickering? Pickering?" he tried to remember. He stood up, still a
little unsteady on his feet from sleepiness, while the duty officer's
shouting continued.

"The constable detailed to the mortuary wound up under a car. There's
probably an ambulance there by now, but the story's all confused. The
car that ran over the constable smashed into a tree. You'll find out the
rest for yourself."

"When did all this happen? What time?"

"Oh, maybe half an hour ago. The report just came in. Do you want anyone
special? Tell me now, because I'm sending a car out to pick you up."

"Is Dudley around?"

"No. He was on duty yesterday. Take Wilson. He's not any worse. You can
pick him up on the way. I'll call him and get him out of bed."

"All right, let it be Wilson. And get me someone from the lab also.
Thomas would be best of all, do you hear? Oh, what the hell, let's take
the whole crew. And a doctor too. What about a doctor?"

"I already told you that they sent an ambulance. There's probably a
doctor there by now."

"But I want one from the Yard, man, from the Yard! Not a healing doctor
-- just the opposite!"

"Right! I'll take care of it. But you'd better hurry. As soon as I hang
up I'm going to send the car."

"Give me ten minutes."

Gregory switched on the lamp. In the darkness, when the phone began
ringing, he felt a tingling excitement, but the feeling had disappeared
without a trace when he heard the duty officer's first words. He ran to
the window. It was still almost pitch-dark, but it had snowed during the
night and the streets were covered with a layer of white. "Perfect," he
said to himself. He ran on tiptoe to the bathroom, guessing there'd be
enough time for a shower before Thomas managed to pack up all his junk,
and he wasn't mistaken. When he walked out to the gate, wrapped in his
raincoat with the collar pulled up around his neck, the car still hadn't
arrived. He glanced at his watch: nearly six o'clock. A moment or so
later he heard the sound of a motor. It was a big, black Oldsmobile.
Sergeant Calls was sitting behind the wheel, next to him Wilson, the
photographer, and in the back seat two other men. The car was still
moving when Gregory jumped in, slamming the door behind him, and with a
jerk it accelerated to full speed, its headlights glimmering brightly.

Gregory was jammed into the back seat with Sorensen and Thomas.

"Do you have anything to drink?" he asked.

"There's some coffee in a thermos next to the doctor," said Calls from
behind the wheel. He was speeding through the deserted streets at nearly
seventy miles per hour, his siren howling. Gregory found the thermos,
drained a full cup in one gulp, and passed it on to the others. The
siren wailed in the night. This was the kind of ride Gregory loved. The
headlights swept around the turns. It was gray everywhere, except for
the white snow in the street.

"What happened out there?" Gregory asked. No one answered.

"The report came in from the local station," said Calls after a moment.

"It seems that the guy on duty at the cemetery was pulled out from under
a car by one of our motorcycle patrols. He had a broken head or
something like that."

"I see. What about the bodies?"

"The bodies?" Calls repeated slowly. "I guess they stayed there."

"What do you mean 'stayed there'?" Gregory asked, a little taken aback.

From the other side of the back seat, Thomas, the technical man, added a
comment. "It looks like they scared the guy and he ran away."

"We'll see about that," Gregory snarled. The Olds gave a loud roar as if
it needed a new muffler. They were leaving the crowded buildings behind
and approaching the suburbs. Near a big park they ran into a patch of
fog. Calls slowed down, then stepped on the gas again when the fog
cleared up. By the time they reached the outskirts of the city the
traffic was beginning to get heavier: huge trailer trucks, brightly lit
double-decker buses already crowded with commuters. Calls kept the siren
blaring to clear the way.

"You didn't get any sleep tonight, did you?" Gregory said to the doctor.
Sorensen had dark circles under his eyes. He was slumped forward like a
cripple.

"I went to bed around two o'clock. It's always like this. And you can
bet there won't be anything for me to do when we get there."

"We'd all rather be asleep," said Gregory philosophically.

They raced through Fulham, slowed down just before the bridge, and
crossed the Thames in a light fog. Below them the river was the color of
lead. Some kind of small boat was passing by and they could hear the
sound of a foghorn in the distance. A moment later a clump of trees on
the bridge abutment was flashing by. Calls drove with great care. In
fact, in Gregory's opinion he was the Yard's best driver.

"Does the Chief know yet?" Gregory didn't direct the question to anyone
in particular.

The answer came from Thomas, a short, vigorous man like the sergeant,
but with a little mustache that made him look like a suburban
hairdresser. "Yes, Allis was in touch with him. In fact, he gave all the
orders."

Gregory leaned forward. He was more comfortable that way, and he enjoyed
watching the road through the space between the shoulders of the two men
in the front seat. Passing trucks had tamped the wet snow on the
pavement into a smooth crust, and he loved the way Calls took the
curves, braking at the last minute as he raced into the turn, then,
halfway around, stepping down on the gas and barreling ahead at full
speed. Of course Calls never took a turn on two wheels -- that would
have been bad form for a police driver, except, perhaps, in unusual
circumstances -- but in any case, in snow like this you could end up in
a ditch that way.

They were past Wimbledon already; the speedometer, oscillating gently,
reached ninety, inched on toward one hundred, moved slightly backward,
and, with a jiggle, again advanced, the needle making small jumps
between the graduated points on the face of the gauge. Suddenly there
was a big Buick in front of them. Calls honked his horn, but the other
driver didn't seem to hear. As they drew closer they could see a teddy
bear dangling in the back window of the bright red sedan, and Gregory
was reminded of the dream he'd had two days before. He smiled,
experiencing a pleasant sense of strength and confidence.

Meanwhile, Calls caught up with the other car. When he was no more than
fifteen feet behind it, he hit the switch and the siren emitted an
earsplitting scream. The Buick braked violently, its rear wheels
struggling for traction and splattering snow on their windshield; as it
began to pull over the Buick skidded slightly in the deeper snow on the
side of the road and its rear swung around toward the hood of the police
car: a crash seemed inevitable, but Calls, giving the steering wheel a
sharp, fast turn which threw them all to the right, speeded past. The
shocked expression on the face of the young woman in the Buick remained
with them even after they'd left the scene far behind. By the time it
occurred to Gregory to look out the back window, she had managed to get
back on the road again.

The fog began to lift and they found themselves in the middle of a
snow-whitened plain. Here and there, almost vertical columns of smoke
rose from the houses; the sky was so flat and still, so nondescript in
color, that it was difficult to tell whether or not it was cloudy.
Speeding through an interchange, their tires thumping nervously, they
shot onto the expressway. Calls seemed to be drunk with power: crouching
over the wheel, he pressed down even harder on the foot pedal; its
engine roaring, the black sedan leaped forward at a hundred and ten
miles per hour.

A town came into view in the distance, and Calls pulled over next to a
road sign. Running off to the left of the expressway was a narrow road
lined by a double row of old trees. About two hundred yards straight
ahead, the expressway turned in the other direction. As soon as they
stopped Gregory stood up -- at least to the extent that standing was
possible inside the car -- and leaned forward to get a look at the map
which the sergeant was spreading out on the wheel. They had to turn off
to the left.

"Are we in Pickering yet?" asked Gregory. Calls was fiddling with the
gearshift lever as if it were a toy.

"Another five miles."

They followed the side road up a gently sloping hill, passing two or
three long, barracks-style wooden buildings. As they reached the top of
the incline the sun came out; the air, washed by the fog, was clean and
sparkling, and it began to feel warmer. The whole town was spread out
below them, the smoke from its chimneys turning pink in the bright
sunlight. A narrow stream cut through the snow, leaving a twisting dark
trail.

They drove on, crossing a small concrete bridge. On the other side, the
figure of a helmeted constable, his overcoat reaching almost to his
ankles, loomed before them, a red stop-disk in his hand. Calls stopped
the car and rolled down his window.

"From here on you have to walk," he informed his passengers, after
exchanging a few words with the constable, then threw the car into gear
and pulled over to the side of the road. They all got out. Everything
seemed different now: white, quiet, peaceful; the first sign of the
morning sun over the distant forest; the air crisp yet springlike. Globs
of snow dropped onto the pavement from the overhanging branches of the
chestnut trees along the road.

"Over there," the constable said, pointing to where the road, curving
gently, swung around the next hill. They stepped off the road onto a
narrow footpath lined by white bushes, at the end of which they could
see a brick roof. About three hundred paces straight ahead, a wrecked
car was barely visible in the dark shadow cast by the trees. With
Gregory in the lead, they followed the roadside path as directed by the
constable, the wet snow squishing unpleasantly under their feet and
sticking to their shoes, and soon reached a section of road blocked off
by ropes; behind the barrier some tire tracks stretched from the road to
the shoulder, then swung across to the scene of the accident.

There, half on the road, half off, stood a long, gray Bentley, its front
end rammed into a tree trunk, its headlights smashed to bits, its front
windshield cracked. The doors were hanging open and, as much as Gregory
could see, the inside of the car was empty. One of the local policemen
walked over. Gregory continued studying the position of the Bentley and,
without turning around, asked:

"Well, what happened?"

"The ambulance left already, Inspector. They took Williams," the
constable answered.

"Williams -- was he the one on duty at the mortuary?" Gregory turned to
the constable.

"That's right, Inspector."

"I'm a lieutenant. Where is this mortuary?"

"Over there, sir."

Gregory glanced in the direction indicated. The cemetery was unwalled;
its long, regular lines of graves were covered with snow. He hadn't
noticed it before because it was located off to the east, and to see it
he would have had to look right into the rising sun, which was still
fairly low on the horizon. Nearby, hidden by a few bushes, a footpath
branched off from the road and led up to a building surrounded by a
thicket.

"Is that the mortuary? The building with the tar-paper roof?"

"Yes, Lieutenant. I was on duty there until three this morning, then
Williams relieved me. The way it was, our commanding officer got us all
together, because --"

"Slow down and tell me the whole story. Williams had the duty after you.
What happened next?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Well, who does?"

Gregory was experienced with this kind of conversation, so he remained
patient.

Meanwhile, after getting the lay of the land, the men from the Yard
settled down to their work. The photographer and the lab technician
dumped their gear in the snow near where the highway patrolman's
motorcycle was leaning against the mile post. Sorensen tried to light a
cigarette but his matches kept going out in the wind. The constable, a
blonde, friendly-looking fellow with big eyes, cleared his throat.

"No one, Lieutenant. It was like this. Williams had the duty from three
o'clock. Parrings was supposed to relieve him around six, but around
half past five a driver called the station house to report that he'd
just hit a constable who ran in front of his car, and that he smashed
into a tree while trying to swerve out of the way. So then --"

"No," said Gregory, "not yet. Now, tell me slowly, very slowly. First,
exactly what was the man on duty at the mortuary supposed to do?"

"Well. . . we were supposed to walk around the place and check the door
and windows."

"All around the building?"

"Not exactly, sir, because there are bushes right up to the wall in the
back, so we made a wide circle up to the graves and back."

"How long did it take to make one circuit?"

"It depends. Tonight it took about ten minutes, because it was hard to
get around in the snow and there was all that fog, and of course we had
to check the door every time. . ."

"Good. Now tell me, what about the driver who phoned the station?"

"Sir?"

"Where is he now?"

"The driver? At the station, sir. He had a slight cut on his head and
Dr. Adams wanted to look him over."

"I see. Dr. Adams is the local doctor?"

"That's right, sir."

Still standing at the side of the road, Gregory suddenly snapped at the
constable in an unexpectedly severe voice.

"What idiot was walking around in here and crushed all this snow? Was
there anyone here you didn't tell me about?"

Surprised but unperturbed, the constable winced.

"No one, sir. The C.O. told us to rope off the whole area to make sure."

"What do you mean, no one? What about the ambulance crew? How did they
get to Williams?"

"Oh, Williams was a little ways from here -- we found him under that
tree over there." The constable pointed across the road at a depression
in the snow perhaps ten or twelve paces behind the Bentley.

Without another word, Gregory stepped over the rope and, keeping as much
to the side as possible, walked across the closed-off area. Like their
car, he noticed, the Bentley had come from the direction of London.
Stepping carefully, he walked back and forth a few times following the
tracks. The impression of the tires was clear and even up to a certain
point; from there on the snow was scattered in small lumps and bare
pavement was visible. Apparently the driver had braked violently and his
wheels, skidding sideways, had acted something like a snowplow. Farther
on, still visible in the snow, were some long curving tracks leading
right up to the rear tires of the Bentley, showing that it had swung
sideways and driven straight into the tree. The tracks of a few other
cars were also still preserved in the wet, plastic snow, especially
along the side of the road. Among these were some deep ruts apparently
left by the thick tires of a heavy truck; the treads were arranged in a
characteristic prewar style. Gregory walked back in the direction of
London for a while, and without any difficulty ascertained that the
Bentley was the last car to have driven along this section of road,
since in a few places its tire tracks had obliterated the marks left by
the other vehicles. Now he began to look for human footprints: he headed
in the opposite direction, moving away from the men and cars; the
footpath, he found, was covered with footprints: enough for there to
have been a parade. It must have been the ambulance attendants carrying
the injured constable, he realized, making a mental note to compliment
the Pickering police commander for having kept them off the road. The
only footprints on the road itself had been made by a pair of heavy
boots. It was evident that they were the tracks of a running man;
someone who was probably not too good at running, though, because he had
taken very short steps, apparently in an amateurish effort to increase
his speed.

"He ran from the direction of the cemetery out into the middle of the
road," Gregory oriented himself, "and then headed toward the town. A
constable running like that? Who was chasing him?"

He looked around for signs of the pursuer but there wasn't a thing: the
snow was untouched. Walking farther on, Gregory came to the place where
a narrow lane, surrounded by dense bushes, branched off from the road
and went up to the cemetery. About twenty paces farther along the road
beyond that point, he saw some tire tracks and footprints in the snow,
untouched and preserved perfectly. A vehicle had driven up from the
opposite direction, turned around, and stopped (the tire tracks at this
point were more deeply grooved); two men had gotten out; a third had
approached them from the side, and led them over to the Bentley. They
had walked toward it along the shoulder and had come back the same way.
The man they were carrying had probably given them a little trouble,
because there were a few round marks in the snow to indicate where they
had set the stretcher down before sliding it into the ambulance. The
spot where he found all these prints was just past the beginning of the
lane, so Gregory took a look at the lane next, returning to the road
after a moment or two because he had seen what he wanted: the running
man's tracks showed clearly how he had charged down the lane from the
direction of the mortuary, the recently whitewashed wall of which
blocked the view for about a hundred yards.

Carefully examining the running man's footprints, Gregory walked back to
the Bentley. Eight paces from the wrecked car, the prints showed, he had
whirled around, as if suddenly trying to turn; a bit farther on the snow
was so churned up that there wasn't much to see. Standing with his hands
in his pockets, Gregory bit his lip.

"He missed him in front, then went into a skid and hit him. . . probably
with his rear end." Gregory lifted his head.

"How badly is Williams hurt?"

"He's still unconscious, sir. The doctor -- the one from the ambulance
-- was very surprised that he managed to keep walking afterwards -- he
didn't fall down until he got over. . . oh, over here."

"How do you know that's where he collapsed?"

"Because there's some blood. . ."

Gregory bent down and took a good look. Three, no four, coagulated brown
spots had seeped so deeply into the snow that it was difficult to see
them.

"Were you here when the ambulance took him away? Was he conscious?"

"Oh no, sir, definitely not!"

"Was he bleeding?"

"No sir, I mean, only a little, from the head. . . the ears, I think."

"Gregory, will you please take pity on us," said Sorensen, making no
effort to hide a yawn. He flicked his lit cigarette into the snow.

"The regulations don't say anything about pity," Gregory snapped,
looking around again. Wilson was angrily slamming his tripod into
position; Thomas was cursing quietly to himself because the powdered
plaster in his bag had spilled, and all his instruments were covered
with it.

"Well, let's get our jobs done, men," Gregory went on, "prints,
measurements, everything, and the more the better; when you finish here
go down to the mortuary, but we'd better keep the rope up until later
on. Doctor, there may still be something for you. . . wait a minute," he
said, turning to the constable. "Where's your commanding officer?"

"In town, sir."

"Well then. Let's go see him."

Gregory unbuttoned his coat; it was getting warm. The constable shifted
uncertainly from one foot to the other.

"Do you want me to come along, sir?"

"All right."

Sorensen followed them, fanning himself with his hat. The sun had come
up in earnest now, and in its warmth the snow was quickly disappearing
from the branches, which now appeared black and wet against the deep
blue of the sky. As they walked, Gregory counted the number of paces
from the wreck to the point where the cemetery lane joined the road:
there were 160. The lane, and the cemetery at its end, lay in the
shadows between two hills. It was cool here, and the snow was still wet
and heavy; because of the hills nothing could be seen of the town except
its smoke. The mortuary itself, a whitewashed little shed, was enclosed
by thick underbrush in the rear; there were two small windows on the
northern side, and a half-opened door in one wall. Carelessly slapped
together with a few odd pieces of wood, the door had a simple latch but
no lock. There were footprints all around the area, and just in front of
the doorstep they saw a flat canvas-covered shape.

"Is that the body?"

"Yes, Lieutenant."

"Has anyone touched it, or is that the way it was found?"

"Exactly the same, sir. No one touched it. The C.O. took a look at it
when he got here with the doctor, but no one touched it."

"What about the canvas?"

"The C.O. told us to cover it."

"Tell me, could anyone have gotten to it while you were on the road?"

"No sir, impossible, the road is closed off."

"On this side. But what about from Hackey?"

"We have a man on guard down there too, but you can't see him from here
because of the hill."

"What about the fields?"

"It might be possible," the policeman agreed, "but in that case he'd
have to get across the water."

"Water? What water?"

"There's a stream on the other side of the road."

Gregory still hadn't gone near the canvas. Moving carefully to the side,
he looked for Williams's footprints. He found a few on the narrow,
well-trodden pathway encircling the nearest gravestones; they continued
around the long shed, then went back into the shrubbery. Some big
footprints like the ones he had seen on the road were clearly impressed
in the snow at the spot where the constable had abandoned his post,
suggesting that he had lost his way in the dark.

Watch in hand, Gregory timed himself while making a complete circuit
around the shed: four minutes. "At night, during the snow storm, it
might have been twice as much," he thought, "and maybe two minutes more,
give or take, for the fog." Venturing deeper into the thick shrubbery,
Gregory found himself walking down a slope. Suddenly, the snow slid out
from under him. Grabbing some hazelwood branches he managed to stop
himself just before he fell into the stream. The area in which he
regained his footing was the lowest point in the syncline in which the
cemetery was situated. Even close up it was hard to see the stream
because of the high snow drifts along its banks. Here and there he noted
the water fretting steadily at the eroded roots of nearby shrubs;
embedded in the soft loam at the bottom of the stream he could see stone
fragments, some of them similiar in size and shape to paving blocks.
Turning around, Gregory had a better view than before of the mortuary's
rear wall, but only of the windowless upper portion which loomed over
the bushes a few yards away. He took a good look; then, pushing the
resilient hazel branches out of his way, began to climb back.

"Where can I find the local stonemason?" he asked the constable. The
officer understood immediately.

"He lives near the road, a little way past the bridge. The first house
over there, it's a kind of yellowish color. He only does stone work in
the summertime; winters he takes on carpentry to make a little extra."

"How does he get his stones over here? By the road?"

"He brings them in on the road when the water is low, but when it's high
enough, which only happens once in a while, he floats them over from the
station by raft. He enjoys doing that kind of thing."

"Once he gets them here, where does he work on them -- over there near
the stream?"

"Sometimes, but not always. He works in a lot of different places."

"If you follow the stream from here, does it lead up to the station?"

"Yes, but you can't really go that way because the whole area is tangled
with underbrush right up to the edge of the water."

Gregory walked over to the side wall of the mortuary. One of the windows
was open -- in fact, it was broken, and a jagged piece of the glass pane
was half-buried in the snow just beneath it. He peeked inside, but it
was so dark that he couldn't see anything.

"Did anyone go inside?"

"Only the C.O., sir."

"Not the doctor?"

"No, the doctor didn't go in."

"What's his name?"

"Adams, sir. We didn't know when the ambulance from London would get
here. The one from Hackey got here first, and Dr. Adams came along with
it. He happened to be on night duty when the call came in."

"Is that so?" said Gregory, but he was only half-listening to the
constable, his attention attracted by a small, light-colored bit of wood
shaving stuck to the frame of the broken window and by the deep though
not very clear impression of a bare foot in the snow next to the wall.
He bent down to get a better look. The snow was all churned up, as if
something very heavy had been dragged through it. Here and there he
could make out some flat-bottomed oblong depressions; they looked as if
they had been made by pressing a large-sized loaf of bread into the
snow. Noticing something yellowish in one of them, Gregory bent over
still more and picked up a few more curled shavings. Twisting his head
around, he looked at the second window for a moment. It was closed and
painted over with whitewash. Then, stepping backward a little, he knelt
on one knee to brush some of the snow aside, stood up again, and with
his eyes followed the course of the strange signs. He took a deep
breath. Standing erect, with his hands in his pockets, he glanced at the
white space between the bushes, the mortuary, and the first gravestone.
The deep, misshapen prints began under the broken window, looped around
in an arc to the door, then zigzagged right and left as if a drunk had
been pushing a heavy bag. Sorensen stood off to the side, watching all
this without much interest.

"Why isn't there a padlock on the door?" Gregory asked the constable.
"Was there one before?"

"There was, Lieutenant, but it broke. The gravedigger was supposed to
take it to the blacksmith but he forgot, and when he finally remembered
it was Sunday, and so on. You know how it is," the constable shrugged.

Gregory, not saying a word, moved closer to the unshapely canvas mound,
carefully lifted the edge of the stiff sheet, then pulled the whole
thing off and threw it to the side.

This revealed a naked body. It was resting on its side with its arms and
legs bent, as if it were kneeling on something invisible or pushing
against something. A wide furrow in the snow extended from the lower
part of the body to directly under the window. About two paces beyond
the body's head was the doorstep. The snow in that space was smooth.

"Why don't you examine him," Gregory suggested, getting up again. The
blood rushed to his face. "Who is he?" he asked the constable, who was
in the process of pulling his cap down over his eyes to protect them
from the sun.

"Hansel, sir. John Hansel. He owned a small dyeing plant near here."

Gregory watched while Sorensen, wearing a pair of rubber gloves he had
taken out of an ordinary briefcase, felt the corpse's legs and hands,
drew back the eyelids, and examined the spinal curvature.

"Was he a German?"

"I don't know, sir. Maybe by ancestry, but I never heard anything about
it. His parents always lived around here."

"When did he die?"

"Yesterday morning, sir. The doctor said it was a heart attack. He had a
heart condition for a long time and wasn't supposed to work anymore but
he didn't care. He didn't care about anything after his wife left him
for another guy."

"Were there any other bodies in the mortuary?"

Sorensen stood up, brushed his knee with a handkerchief, rubbed an
invisible spot off his sleeve, and carefully slipped the rubber gloves
back into his briefcase.

"There was one the day before yesterday, sir, but it's already been
buried. The funeral was yesterday, at noon."

"So this is the only body that's been here since noon yesterday?"

"That's right sir, only this one."

"Well, Doctor?"

Gregory walked over to Sorensen. They stood together under a willow bush
for a moment, but the melting snow on its branches soon began to drip on
them.

"What can I tell you?"

Sorensen sounded annoyed.

"Death took place about twenty-four hours ago. The stains on the jaw, as
you can see, indicate rigor mortis."

"What about the extremities? Well, speak up -- don't you have anything
to tell me?"

Both men lowered their voices but they spoke angrily.

"You saw it yourself."

"I'm not a doctor."

"All right -- there's no rigor mortis. Not a sign; someone must have
interrupted it. Someone interrupted it -- let's leave it at that and
call it quits."

"It won't come back?"

"Sometimes it does, at least to a certain degree, but not always. Is
this very important?"

"Are you sure there was any to begin with?"

"There's always rigor mortis. You should know that. And please don't ask
me any more questions because I've already told you all I know."

"Thanks a lot," Gregory said, not bothering to hide his irritation. He
walked over to the door. It was still open, but in order to go in he had
to step over the body -- actually, to jump over it, since the whole area
had already been trampled enough and he didn't want to leave any
unnecessary footprints. Gregory took hold of the latch from the side and
pulled. The door, stuck in the snow, didn't budge. He tugged harder;
this time, the door, with a shrill creak, slammed into the wall. It was
pitch dark inside, and there was a wide puddle of melted snow on the
doorsill. Closing his eyes and waiting patiently until they were
accustomed to the darkness, Gregory stood for a moment in the unpleasant
cold draft from the walls.

The mortuary was lit slightly by some light from the small northern
window -- the broken one; the other window, covered with whitewash, was
barely translucent. Looking around, Gregory saw a coffin strewn with
shavings standing in the center of the beaten earth floor. Leaning
against it was a fir and spruce mourning wreath wrapped in a black
ribbon with the letters "R.I.P." in gold. The coffin lid stood in a
corner against the wall. There were more wood shavings scattered beneath
the window; alongside the other wall Gregory saw a pickaxe, a shovel,
and several coils of dirty, clay-encrusted rope. There were also a few
wooden boards.

Gregory went outside again, closing his eyes for a second in the painful
brightness. The constable was covering the corpse with the canvas,
trying very hard not to touch it.

"You had the duty until three this morning, right?" asked Gregory,
walking over to him.

"That's right, sir." The constable straightened up.

"Where was the body?"

"When I was on duty, sir? In the coffin."

"How do you know? Did you check it?"

"Yes sir."

"How, by opening the door?"

"No sir, but I shined my flashlight through the window."

"Was the windowpane broken?"

"No."

"What about the coffin?"

"I don't understand, sir."

"Was the coffin open?"

"Yes sir."

"What position was the corpse in?"

"The usual one, sir."

"Why wasn't it dressed?"

The constable livened up a little.

"The funeral was supposed to be today, sir. About the clothing -- it's a
long story, it is. When Hansel's wife walked out on him -- that was two
years ago -- his sister moved in. She's a pretty difficult woman, hard
to get along with. Well, he died in the middle of breakfast and she
didn't want to give up the suit he was wearing because it was too new.
She was supposed to give an old suit to the undertaker, but when he came
to pick up the body she told him she'd decided to take an even older
suit and dye it black. The undertaker didn't want to make another trip,
so he took the body the way it was. She was supposed to bring the suit
this morning --"

"Gregory, I want to go back to London. You don't need me here anymore,"
Sorensen interrupted. "Let me take the car. You can get another one at
the station house."

"We'll talk about that in a minute," Gregory snapped. Sorensen was
beginning to get on his nerves. A moment later, though, he added, "I'll
try to work something out for you." Gregory was staring at the wrinkled
canvas. Though he'd only seen the corpse for a few moments, he
remembered it vividly. The dead man was a little under sixty years old.
He had tired, work-stained palms. His head was almost bald, and there
was a gray stubble covering his neck and cheeks. Most distinctly etched
in Gregory's memory, however, was the expression of surprise in the
half-closed, clouded eyes. It was beginning to get warmer, and Gregory
wanted to throw off his coat. He tried impatiently to calculate how long
it would be before the sun reached the areas that were still in the
shade. It was absolutely necessary to get casts of all the footprints
and other markings before the snow melted.

He was about to send the constable up the road when he saw his crew
approaching. Gregory walked over to meet them.

"It's about time. Now listen, the snow is beginning to melt so don't
waste any time. Thomas, I'm particularly interested in the prints
between the window and the door, but the snow is wet, so be careful or
everything will fall apart! I'm going into town now. When you finish
with the prints, measure everything that looks important, and get the
distance from here to the water -- there's a stream over there behind
the bushes. Take a few pictures of the whole area and search the bank of
the stream. I may have missed something."

"Don't worry about it, Gregory," said Wilson. His equipment, slung over
his shoulder in a flat bag, kept slapping him on the hip as he walked,
making him limp slightly. "And don't forget to send the car to pick us
up," he added casually.

"Of course."

Gregory walked back toward the road, completely forgetting about
Sorensen. Turning around for a moment, he saw the doctor following him.
The ropes blocking off the scene of the accident had already been taken
down, and two men in a wrecker were pulling the Bentley out of the ditch
alongside the road. His car was standing next to the bridge, turned in
the direction of London. Without a word, Gregory slid into the front
seat next to Calls. The doctor, noting that the car's motor was already
turning over, speeded up his pace. A moment later they drove past the
policeman from the highway patrol and headed back toward Pickering.

The police station was located in a two-story building on the market
square. With a constable to show him the way, Gregory went upstairs and
passed through a long corridor lined with doors. Through the window at
one end he could see the roofs of the one-story houses on the other side
of the square.

The district commander rose to greet him. He was a long-headed,
red-haired man, with a reddish mark from his hatband about halfway down
his forehead. His cap lay on the desk beside him.

Smiling nervously, not showing any signs of friendliness or good humor,
the commander rubbed his hands together.

"Well, let's get to work," Gregory sighed, settling into a chair. "Do
you know how Williams is? Can I speak to him?"

The commander shook his head.

"It's out of the question. He has a skull fracture. I phoned the
hospital at Hackey just a minute or two ago. They say he's still
unconscious, and according to the doctors it'll be a long time before he
comes to -- if he ever does."

"I see. Tell me, you know your own men, is Williams a good policeman?
How long has he been on the force? In fact, tell me everything you know
about him."

Gregory spoke somewhat distractedly. In his mind he was back at the
mortuary, still looking at the prints in the snow.

"Williams? What can I tell you? He's been with me for four years. Before
that he was up north. He served in the army, was wounded, got a medal.
He got married after he came here and has two children. Nothing special
to distinguish him. He likes to go fishing. He's even-tempered,
reasonably intelligent. No major offenses on his record."

"What about minor ones?"

"Well. . . maybe he was a little too. . . easygoing. But in a
good-hearted way, you know what I mean. He had a tendency to interpret
the regulations independently. Of course in a town like this everyone
knows everybody else. . . but it never involved anything important. He
didn't write enough tickets. . . that kind of thing. He was quiet, maybe
even too quiet, I would say. . . uh, I mean he is," the commander
corrected himself with a wince.

"Did he believe in ghosts?" Gregory asked very seriously. The commander
looked at him.

"In ghosts?" he repeated involuntarily. He seemed confused. "In ghosts?
No. . . I don't think so. I don't know, really. Are you suggesting that
he. . ." He didn't finish. Both men were silent for a moment.

"Have you any idea what he was running away from?" Gregory asked
quietly, leaning forward and looking the commander straight in the eye.
The commander didn't answer. He lowered his head slightly, then raised
it.

"I haven't the slightest idea, but. . ."

"But?"

The commander studied Gregory's face. At last, as if alienated by it, he
shrugged his shoulders.

"All right. In that case we'll stick to the facts. Do you have
Williams's pistol?"

"I do."

"And?"

"He was holding it in his hand," the commander said in a quiet voice.

"Go on. Did he fire it?"

"No. The safety was still on. But. . . there was a cartridge in the
chamber."

"Loaded? What of it? Don't tell me your men go on patrol with their guns
unloaded?"

"Why not? This is a quiet town. There's always time to load. . ."

"How do you think Williams managed to get from the place where the car
hit him to where the ambulance crew picked him up?"

A surprised expression came over the commander's face.

"He wasn't able to go anywhere after the accident, Lieutenant. Smithers,
the man who hit Williams, says he moved him. . ."

"I see. Well, that certainly simplifies things. Let's say that. . .
well, it simplifies things," said Gregory. "Do you have Smithers here?"

"Yes."

"I'd like to question him, if that's all right with you."

"Of course."

The commander opened the door and said a few words to someone, then
walked over to the window. A minute or so later a slim, good-looking
young man in tight-fitting flannel trousers and a bulky-knit sweater
walked in. He had narrow hips and the face of a B-movie leading man;
pausing in the doorway he glanced nervously at Gregory, who was leaning
back in his chair and watching him with a searching look. After a moment
Gregory spoke.

"I'm down from the Yard to handle the investigation here. You may be
able to help me clear up a few things."

Smithers nodded his head slowly.

"I. . . actually, I've already told the whole story. . . I'm innocent --
believe me, it wasn't my fault."

"If you're innocent, you have nothing to worry about. Now then, the
charge against you is causing an accident and endangering human life.
The law does not require you to provide any information that could form
the basis of a criminal indictment against you. Are you willing to
answer my questions?"

"Yes, yes. . . of course. . . I. . . don't have anything to hide,"
stammered the young man, obviously quite frightened by the formal
statement Gregory had just recited to him. "Please sir," he continued,
"there wasn't a thing I could do. . . he just threw himself in front of
the car. It was nighttime and there was all that fog -- by the time I
saw him it was too late. I was driving very slowly, I swear it, and I
did everything I could to avoid hitting him. . . I even smashed the car
up because of him. But it was all his fault, and to make matters worse
it isn't even my car. . . I don't know what I'm going to do."

"Please, Mr. Smithers," Gregory said. "Tell me the whole story as
accurately as you can. How fast were you going?"

"No more than thirty miles an hour, so help me God. Because of all the
fog, and it was snowing too. I could hardly see. In fact, I couldn't
even put my headlights on because that would have made it worse."

"You mean you were driving with your lights off?"

"No, never in the world. My foglights were on, but even so I couldn't
see more than ten or fifteen feet ahead. All of a sudden he was right in
front of the car -- believe me, please, he must have been blind, or
crazy -- he ran straight at me and simply threw himself under the car."

"Did he have anything in his hands?"

"Excuse me, sir?"

"I asked if he was holding anything in his hand?"

"I didn't notice at the time. Afterward, when I picked him up, I saw
that he was holding a pistol, but during the accident I didn't notice a
thing. I just stepped on the brake as hard as I could, the car went into
a spin and turned completely around, and I smashed into the tree. I got
pretty badly cut," he said, pointing to his forehead.

There was a thick red line of clotted blood running across Smithers's
forehead and disappearing beneath his hair.

"I didn't even feel it at the time, I was so scared," he continued. "For
a minute I thought I had managed to miss him. I mean, I really did miss
him and I still don't know how he got hit when I skidded -- maybe it was
the bumper. He was lying in the snow. I began rubbing him with snow -- I
wasn't even thinking about myself, although the blood was running down
into my eyes. He was out cold and my first thought was to get him to the
hospital, but I couldn't get my car started -- something was knocked out
of kilter, I don't know what -- so I ran up the road and made a phone
call from the first house."

"Why did you carry him to the side of the road instead of to the car?"

"Well. . ." the young man hesitated, "because. . . because, uh, they say
you should always keep an unconscious person flat on his back and there
wasn't enough room in the car. And I thought that if I left him in the
middle of the road someone else might run over him. . ."

"Good. What time did all this happen?"

"A little after five. Maybe ten or fifteen minutes after."

"Did you see anyone on the road when you were going to the telephone?"

"No, not a soul."

"What about earlier, when you were driving? Did you see anyone?
Pedestrians? Cars?"

"Pedestrians, no. Cars? No, no cars either; I did pass two trucks, but
that was while I was still on the expressway."

"Where were you coming from?"

"London."

The room was silent. Smithers walked over to Gregory.

"Inspector, please. . . am I free to go now? And what about the car?"

"Don't worry about the car," said the commander, who was still standing
near the window. "If you want, my men can take it to a garage for you,
we'll tow it over ourselves. There's a good one not far from here --
we'll take the car over and you can get it repaired."

"Thank you. That'll be perfect. Only I'll have to wire home for some
money. May. . . May I go now?"

Gregory and the commander glanced at each other and came to a silent
understanding. With an affirmative nod, Gregory turned to Smithers.
"Please leave your name and address," he said. "An address where we can
reach you if necessary."

Smithers turned to leave, then stood for a moment with his hand on the
doorknob.

"Uh. . . the constable. . . how is he?" he asked quietly.

"He may come out of it. We don't know yet," said the commander. Smithers
opened his mouth as if to speak, then walked out of the room without
another word.

Overcome by an incomprehensible feeling of fatigue, Gregory turned to
the desk and rested his head in his hands. More than anything he would
have liked to sit quietly for a while, not talking, not thinking.

"What was he running away from?" he suddenly blurted out, surprising
even himself. "What the hell was he running away from?"

"You mean 'who,' don't you?" said the commander, taking his seat behind
the desk again.

"No. If he had trouble with a human being he would have used his gun,
wouldn't he? As sure as two and two make four he would have, don't you
agree?"

"Did you look over those prints yourself?" asked the commander. He was
busily trying to push the strap of his cap through its buckle. Gregory
took a good look at him. The commander of the Pickering police station
had wrinkled cheeks, bloodshot eyes, crow's feet; there were already a
few gray strands scattered through his red hair.

"What was the situation when you got there?" Gregory parried the
commander's question with a question of his own. The commander, with
great concentration, was working on his buckle.

"The man on duty in the station was Parrings. That kid, Smithers, called
at about half past five. Parrings woke me up right away -- I live in the
house next door. I told him to contact the Yard, then started out as
fast as I could."

"Was it still dark when you got there?"

"It was brightening up a little, but there was a thick fog."

"Was it snowing?"

"No, not anymore."

The commander put his cap down; the dangling chin strap slapped against
the desk.

"The doctor was busy with Williams when I got there. Williams is a big
man, so I helped the doctor and the driver lift him into the ambulance.
Meanwhile, two men from the highway patrol arrived on the scene. I
posted them on the road to keep the accident area clear, and then I went
down to the cemetery by myself."

"Did you have a flashlight?"

"No, but I took Hardley's -- he's the highway patrol sergeant. I found
the body lying on the ground just outside the door, its head facing the
door sill. The door was open."

"What position was the body in?"

"Arms and legs bent. I think they call it a geniculate position."

"Where did you get the canvas?"

"I found it inside the mortuary."

"You mean you went inside?"

"Yes. Sideways. You know, I jumped over the door sill. Maybe I missed
something in the dark, but the only prints I saw around the mortuary
were Williams's, and I thought there might still be someone inside --"
He stopped abruptly.

"You mean you thought the perpetrator was still there?"

"Right."

The decisive tone of the answer took Gregory by surprise.

"What made you think so?"

"Something moved when I shined my light inside. . ."

Hunched over and twisted around in his chair, Gregory studied the
commander's face. They were no more than two feet apart, maybe a little
less. Clearly in no hurry to continue, the commander raised his eyes. A
vague smile crossed his lips, as if he was a little ashamed of what he
was going to say.

"It was a cat. . ."

He tapped a finger against the surface of his desk and added, "I have
him here."

"Where?"

Gregory took a quick look around the room, but the commander shook his
head. "Here. . ."

He opened a drawer, revealing a small package wrapped in newspaper.
After a moment's hesitation he put it on the desk. Gregory carefully
pulled back the folded edge of the paper and saw a skinny white kitten
with a black tuft at the end of its tail. Its fur was wet and tangled,
its paws unnaturally stiff, and the narrow, dull pupil of one eye was
staring at him.

"He's dead?" Gregory turned to the commander in bewilderment.

"He was still alive when I first entered the mortuary."

"Huh?"

Gregory's cry was involuntary.

"When did he die?"

"He was yowling in agony. When I picked him up he was already beginning
to get stiff."

"Where did you find him?"

"Near the coffin. He was sitting. . . on the wreath."

Gregory closed his eyes for a moment, then opened them and looked at the
cat, covered him with the newspaper again, and placed the package on the
windowsill.

"I'll have to take this for an autopsy or something," he muttered,
wiping his forehead.

"What made you bring the cat back to the station?" he continued.

"The prints. You didn't see any paw prints, did you?"

"No."

"Because there were none," the commander explained. "All I had with me
was a flashlight, but I looked around very carefully. The cat didn't
leave any prints in the snow."

"In that case how did he get into the mortuary?"

"I don't know. He must have been there before it started snowing."

"When was that?"

"Sometime after eleven. Maybe a little later. I can get the exact time
for you."

"Good, but how did he get in? Maybe he was there the whole time."

"He wasn't there earlier in the evening. Constable Sticks had the duty
till three o'clock. From eleven till three. The cat must have slipped in
sometime during his tour."

"Did Sticks. . . did he open the door?"

"Yes, when he first came on duty. He's very conscientious -- wanted to
make sure everything was in order when he began his tour. I checked this
with him myself."

"I see. So that's when the cat slipped in."

"I suppose so."

Thomas and Wilson came into the room.

"All ready, Lieutenant. Everything's finished. Calls is driving the
doctor to the train station but he'll be back in a few minutes. Are we
going now?"

"Yes. Put this in the trunk of the car. Sorensen is going to get a
little extra work," said Gregory, not without a certain amount of
malice. He shook hands with the commander.

"Thank you very much for all your help. If it's at all possible I'd like
to have Williams transferred to a hospital in London. Meanwhile, please
get in touch with me if anything else comes up, all right?"

They went downstairs. Gregory glanced at his watch and was surprised to
see that it was already past noon. He began to feel hungry.

"Let's have something to eat," he said to the others. There was a small
restaurant nearby, a little place with tables and a lunch counter. Calls
drove past just as they were sitting down. Wilson ran out to get him,
and, after parking outside the restaurant, the sergeant came in and
joined them. The four men ate in silence. Wiping his dark, slightly too
elegant mustache, the photographer ordered some beer for himself and
turned to Gregory.

"Can I buy you a drink, Lieutenant?"

"No thank you," said Gregory.

The sergeant joined in declining the offer. "I'm driving," he explained.

By the time they finished eating it was nearly two o'clock. The snow had
melted, except for some grayish ice sparkling on the rooftops, and there
were puddles of dirty slush all over the street. Gregory suddenly felt
like driving. The men piled into the car, Calls next to him in the front
seat, the other two in the back, and he pulled away from the curb,
kicking up a fountain of muddy water. As he accelerated, Gregory peeked
out of the corner of his eye to see whether the sergeant thought he was
driving too fast, but Calls was staring out the window with a glazed,
sleepy expression on his face. Gregory drove well, although, in his own
opinion, a little too stiffly; this had always been a matter of some
concern to him because he very much wanted to achieve the indifferent
nonchalance, the automatic composure that marked the experienced driver,
and he was able to maintain this pose only as long as he could keep his
mind on something else. The tires hissed shrilly as he drove up the
street and within a few minutes the windshield was covered with
thousands of dark exclamation points. Past Wimbledon the traffic got
heavier. Gregory was tempted to turn on the siren to clear the way, but
since they weren't really on an emergency call his scruples wouldn't
permit him to satisfy this desire. They reached London about an hour
later. Wilson and Thomas had work to do in the lab. Gregory asked the
sergeant to drop him off at home. The two of them were alone in the car,
and when they reached his house Gregory didn't get out. Instead, he
offered Calls a cigarette, lit one himself, and then spoke:

"Did you see. . . out there?"

Calls nodded his head slowly, then rolled his window down.

"Sergeant, we've known each other for a long time. Tell me what you
really think about all this. Is there anything you would run away from,
even if you had a loaded pistol in your hand?"

Raising his eyebrows slightly, Calls glanced quickly at Gregory; then,
with great deliberateness, flicked his ash. It looked as if he wasn't
going to say anything, but suddenly he blurted out:

"A tank."

"Come on, you know what I'm talking about."

The sergeant took a deep drag on his cigarette.

"I looked around pretty good myself, sir. The way I see it, this
Williams is circling the place the way he's supposed to; somewhere
around five, or a little after, he sees something he don't like too
much. He don't clear out right away, though. That's important. He stands
his ground. . . draws his pistol, only he don't have time to release the
safety."

"Couldn't he have drawn his pistol after he started running?" Gregory
asked. His eyes sparkled as he studied the sergeant's face. Calls smiled
unexpectedly.

"You know yourself it can't be done. These holsters of ours are pretty
tight. You saw those footprints, didn't you? This guy took off like a
bat out of hell. A man who's running like that can't wrestle with a
holster flap. He had to get it open first. Even in the worst fog you can
see a pair of headlights at thirty feet, especially if they're shining
right in your face. But Williams didn't see them, he didn't see nothing.
Whatever it was, it really got him."

"Who would an armed constable run away from?" Gregory repeated, a blank
expression on his face. He didn't expect an answer, and he didn't get
one.

 

 

 

4

 

"Well?" said Sheppard. Gregory handed him the written report.

"This is a complete summary, sir."

Sheppard opened the folder and began reading:

"9:40

 a.m. J. Hansel dies at breakfast of heart attack. Dr. Adams certifies
death.

"2:00 p.m. Undertaker arrives. Hansel's sister doesn't want to give
clothing. Undertaker puts naked body in coffin, takes it to mortuary.

"5:00 p.m.

 Constable Atkins begins tour at mortuary. Body in open coffin. Door
held shut by piece of lath stuck through latch.

"11:00 p.m. Constable Sticks begins tour. Checks mortuary by opening
door. No changes. Begins to snow. N.B. Cat may have slipped into
mortuary around this time while Sticks not looking.

"3:00 a.m. Williams relieves Sticks. Doesn't open door, shines
flashlight through window in presence of Sticks, who ascertains nothing
is changed, then returns to town.

"5:25-5:35 a.m. Smithers telephones Pickering police station, reports
running over policeman.

"5:50-6:00 a.m. Ambulance from Hackey arrives on scene with Dr. Adams.
Pickering police commander arrives on scene. Williams, still
unconscious, taken to hospital. He has fractured skull and three broken
ribs. Bentley sedan smashed into tree about 183 yards from mortuary;
either trunk or rear bumper hit Williams. Commander proceeds to
mortuary, ascertains that door is half-open; finds corpse, contractile,
lying on side, about three feet in front of door; one window of mortuary
broken, pane smashed from inside, pieces of glass embedded in snow.
Commander finds cat inside mortuary. Takes it with him. Cat goes into
convulsions, dies on way to town.

"Prints discovered around mortuary:

"1. Footprints of Constable Williams, corresponding to impression of his
boots; in circular path around mortuary, then veer away from mortuary,
head toward broken window, then toward road, ending up at scene of
accident.

"2. Footprints of Pickering police commander. Difficult to distinguish
since they follow directly on Williams's prints, obliterating part of
outline left by instep.

"3. One very clear print of bare foot, identified as left foot of dead
man, found just outside broken window of mortuary; facing toward wall,
toes turned slightly inward; print very deep, as if impressed by
substantial weight.

"4. Prints leading from window around corner of building to door; may
have been made by someone crawling on all fours or creeping. Marked
depression of prints suggests indentations made by pressure of knees.
Prints well preserved in two places where snow very compressed: features
indicate prints made by bare skin.

"5. Paw prints of cat, corresponding in size and shape to paws of dead
cat. Found about 30 yards from mortuary in direction of stream in deep
snow among bushes; prints disappear near mortuary as if cat climbed up
on bush.

"6. Human footprints found on soft bottom of stream (deepest part, near
mortuary, about 16 inches), at distances of 139, 133, and 123 feet
respectively from mortuary. Prints probably formed by boots but washed
out, not very clear, providing insufficient basis for identification;
time of formation impossible to determine; according to lab, possibly
two to six days ago.

"Observation (a). Wood shavings found in indentations mentioned in item
4 and under window were identical to shavings in coffin.

"Observation (b). Indentations mentioned in item 4 led to place where
body was found but not as far as door (distance measured in feet).

"Observation (c). Distance from path where Constable Williams's
footprints were found to bank of stream, measured in straight line at
shortest point, was 42 feet; area concerned is covered by dense thicket
consisting mainly of hazel bushes. Measuring from behind mortuary, where
slope is fairly gradual, to stream bank (which is some 19 inches higher
than bottom of stream), vertical differential is about 5 feet. All along
bottom of stream and throughout thicket, even at densest point, we found
stone fragments, ranging in size from smaller than a potato to larger
than a human head; these were apparently left in area at various times
by mason who makes grave markers for cemetery.

"Condition of corpse: In addition to what is already noted in detailed
report of postmortem examination (attached), N.B. Observation of
extremities revealed no signs of rigor mortis although its presence was
ascertained by undertaker the day before yesterday. Since reversal could
not have been effected normally in such a short time (ordinarily rigor
mortis does not set in until 15-16 hours after death), someone must have
impeded its development."

Sheppard looked up at Gregory.

"Do you know anything about rigor mortis, Lieutenant?"

"Yes, of course, sir. I made a special point of checking all this with
the experts. Rigor mortis can be interrupted by the application of
force, after which it either does not return or returns in a much weaker
form."

Sheppard put the report down.

"Have you arrived at any conclusions?" he asked.

"You mean about how the crime was committed?"

"What else?"

"The perpetrator must have sneaked into the mortuary even before Atkins
went on duty," said Gregory. "He hid there, either in a corner, behind
the coffin, or in among the boards and ropes piled along the wall in the
back. Around five o'clock he took the body out of the coffin, moved it
to the window, and pushed out the windowpane. Williams heard the noise
of the breaking glass, came over to take a look, and drew his pistol
when he saw the broken glass and the open window. Meanwhile, the
perpetrator had started pushing the corpse through the window. To
Williams it looked as if the corpse was moving by itself. He panicked
and started running. After Williams disappeared, the perpetrator climbed
through the window and started dragging the corpse toward the door;
apparently he then heard or saw something which frightened him, so he
dropped the body and ran."

"Which way?"

"It was around five-thirty, give or take a few minutes, just a little
before daybreak. He followed the footpath to the edge of the thicket,
made his way through the thicket without leaving footprints by stepping
from stone to stone and along the Heavier branches, then lowered himself
into the stream from an overhanging branch and, keeping to the water and
stepping on stones wherever possible, headed in the direction of the
railroad station."

"Is that the whole thing?" Sheppard asked.

"No," said Gregory. "There's a variant. The perpetrator arrived on the
scene by way of the stream at around four or a little after. Watching
from the stream he waited until Williams was on the other side of the
mortuary, then climbed up the slope through the thicket. Since the storm
didn't stop for another hour and a half, any footprints were soon
covered by fresh snow. The perpetrator followed Williams along the
footpath at a safe distance, then unhooked the door of the mortuary,
went inside, and closed the door again. From then on he proceeded as in
the first variant: took the body out of the coffin, pushed out the pane,
attracted Williams's attention, shoved the corpse through the window,
and, when Williams ran away, dragged the corpse to the door, refastened
the latch, and returned to the stream. But instead of going to the
station, he followed the stream to the point where it passes under the
expressway. His car was waiting there and he drove away."

"Did you find anything on the expressway?"

"A few tire tracks, but nothing definite. Don't forget that everything
I've told you is still only conjectural -- we can't be sure of anything
until we talk to Williams. If he remembers the door being closed, but
without the lath in the latch, we'll accept the second variant."

"How is Williams doing?"

"Still unconscious. The doctors say his case will be settled in two or
three more days, one way or the other."

"Yes. . ." said Sheppard. "You'll have to come up with a better
reconstruction, otherwise we have only one alternative: '. . . and for
fear of Him the keepers did shake. . .' "

Gregory's eyes wandered from the Chief Inspector's face to his hands,
which were resting motionlessly on the desk.

"Do you really think so?" he asked slowly.

"Gregory, I really wish you would think of me as your ally rather than
your adversary. Try to put yourself in my place for a moment. Is my
request really so funny?" Sheppard asked quietly, noticing that the
lieutenant had begun to smile.

"No. I just remembered something. I also. . . anyway, it doesn't really
matter. If I were you, I'd still think the same way I do now. You can't
go through the wall if there's no door."

"Good. Let's go over the first variant. The perpetrator, you said,
sneaked into the mortuary sometime before the first constable went on
duty at eleven o'clock. Here's a floor plan of the mortuary. Show me
where he could have hidden."

"Here in the corner behind the big coffin, or in the opposite corner
behind the boards."

"Did you try any of these places yourself?"

"Well, more or less. . . You can get behind the big coffin, but it
wouldn't be much good as a hiding place if anyone shined a light in from
the side. That's why I say it must have been the boards. None of the
guards made a systematic search of the mortuary; at best they only
looked in through the door."

"Good. Now, the corpse was stiff, so to get it through the window the
perpetrator had to change its position, right?"

"Yes. And in the dark too. Then he had to break the window and drop the
body out."

"How did he manage to get the corpse's footprint into the snow next to
the wall?"

"I don't think that would have been too hard for him."

"You're wrong, Gregory, it would have been extremely difficult. He had
to do it without attracting Williams's attention, but Williams had
already been drawn to the scene by the sound of the breaking glass. From
the perpetrator's point of view, this must have been a damned critical
moment. We can be certain that Williams wouldn't have run away if he'd
seen the perpetrator. Someone moving a corpse around wouldn't have
frightened him -- after all, he knew very well that he'd been assigned
to the mortuary to watch out for just that kind of thing. Maybe he would
have used his pistol, maybe he would have tried to apprehend him without
weapons, but he certainly wouldn't have just run away. Do you see what I
mean?"

Gregory was looking the Chief Inspector straight in the eye. Finally,
with a brief gesture, he nodded his assent.

Sheppard continued.

"Now, if the corpse had fallen into the snow and the perpetrator was
nowhere near the body -- let's say he was squatting behind the window
and couldn't be seen from outside -- even then Williams wouldn't have
run away. He would have drawn his pistol and waited to see what happened
next. He might have decided not to go inside, but he would have kept his
eye on the door and the window. Whatever he did, though, he wouldn't
have run away. Do you go along with this also?"

Gregory nodded his head again, staring at the floor plan on the desk.

"We have the same problem with the second variant. None of it is very
probable except the part about how the perpetrator got inside, since it
doesn't depend on him hiding behind the boards as suggested in variant
one. The snow could certainly have covered his footprints as you said.
Let's continue. From this point on, according to both variants, the
incident took the same course. After Williams ran away, the perpetrator
left the mortuary, pulled the corpse over to the door, and then escaped
by way of the bushes and the stream. But what was the purpose of
dragging the body through the snow -- and in point of fact he didn't
drag it at all, as we both know very well, but did something quite
peculiar: he made it look as if a naked man had been crawling around on
his hands and knees. Right?"

"Yes."

"Why would he do something like that?"

"The situation is much worse than after our first conversation. . ."
Gregory said, his tone quite different from what it had been until now,
as if he had an unexpected secret to tell. "It was easy enough to get
inside the mortuary if all the factors were taken into account. He could
easily have followed the constable -- it was a dark, windy night and it
was snowing -- once inside the mortuary he could have waited, let's say,
forty-five minutes or an hour, in order to let the snow cover his
footprints. But as for the rest. . . I couldn't help thinking for a
while that he wanted to produce the very effect you mentioned; in fact,
once I accepted the idea of someone trying to set up a situation that
would force the police to believe there had been some kind of
resurrection, I thought our investigation had come to the end of the
line. But now we can't even consider that theory anymore. The
perpetrator moved the corpse but then left it at the scene. Maybe
something frightened him away, but why did he leave the corpse in the
snow? One look at the corpse is enough to prove that it didn't come back
to life. He must have known that, but even so he moved it, and in a way
that made it appear as if it had moved itself. None of it makes any
sense -- not in criminal terms and not in terms of insanity."

"Maybe he did get frightened away, as you said just a minute ago. Maybe
he heard the approaching car."

"Yes, he could even have seen it, but --"

"Seen it? How?"

"When you turn off the expressway for Pickering, your headlights -- the
expressway is on somewhat higher ground, you see -- shine into the
cemetery and light up the roof of the mortuary. I checked it last
night."

"Gregory, that's important! If the perpetrator was frightened by the
lights of a car, and if that's what caused him to abandon the corpse, we
may have our explanation. Furthermore, it would be his first blunder,
his first failure to carry out a well-planned act. He panicked and
dropped the corpse. Maybe he thought the police were coming. That should
be the basis of your reconstruction. . . At any rate, it's an out!"

"Yes, it's an out," Gregory admitted, "but. . . I can't take a chance on
it. We're dealing with a man who studies weather reports and plans his
actions in accordance with a complicated mathematical formula. He would
certainly have known that the lights of a car coming around the turn
from the expressway would light up the whole area for a moment,
including the cemetery."

"You seem to have a great deal of respect for him."

"I do. And I absolutely refuse to believe that anything frightened him
away. An armed constable standing right there didn't scare him. Would he
have been afraid of a couple of headlights off in the distance?"

"Things like that happen. The straw that breaks the camel's back. . .
Maybe it took him by surprise. Maybe it confused him. You don't think
it's possible? You're smiling again? Gregory, you seem to be absolutely
fascinated by this person. If you're not careful, you'll end up being. .
. a disciple!"

"I suppose that's a possibility," said the lieutenant in a caustic tone
of voice. He reached for the report but, discovering that his fingers
were trembling, hid his hand under the table. "Maybe you're right. . ."
he said after a moment's reflection. "I can't help feeling that
everything I found out there was exactly the way he wanted it to be; I
don't know -- maybe I'm beginning to go crazy. Only. . . Williams wasn't
frightened by the corpse but by what was happening to it. Something
happened to that body that made him panic. We may find out what it was,
but will we ever know why. . ."

"There's still the matter of the cat," Sheppard mumbled as if talking to
himself. Gregory lifted his head.

"Yes. And, to tell the truth, that's a lucky break for me."

"How do you mean that?"

"Right from the beginning this case has been characterized by a
fantastic consistency -- every incident has certain features in common
with all the others -- incomprehensible, perhaps, but definitely all
following the same pattern. In other words, no matter how it looks, this
business isn't chaotic. It has to do with something real, although we
haven't the slightest idea of its purpose. Chief Inspector. . . I. . .
even though, as you said, I myself. . ."

Uncertain whether he was making himself clear, Gregory began to feel
nervous.

"I realize we can't do anything except increase the surveillance. That
is, we can't do anything right now, but this case will come to a head
once he uses up all his alternatives. . . He's been relentlessly
consistent so far, and one day we'll turn that consistency against him.
Sciss will help by telling us where to expect the next incident."

"Sciss?" repeated Sheppard. "I just received a letter from him."

He opened his drawer.

"He says there won't be any more incidents."

"What?" Completely flabbergasted, Gregory stared at Sheppard, who nodded
his head quietly.

"According to him, the series is over, either indefinitely or. . .
forever."

"Sciss said that? On what basis?"

"His letter says he's working on the documentation now, and would rather
not explain anything until he's finished. That's all."

"I see."

Trying hard to regain his composure, Gregory took a deep breath,
straightened his lanky torso, and studied his hands for a moment.

"I suppose he knows more than we do. Did he see the results of my
investigation?"

"Yes. I turned them over to him at his own request. We certainly were
obligated at least to that extent, since he enabled us to pinpoint the
places where the incidents would take place.. . ."

"Yes, yes. Of course," Gregory repeated. "This. . . this changes
everything. There's nothing else we can do, if. . ."

He stood up.

"Would you like to talk to Sciss?" asked Sheppard.

Gregory made a vague gesture: more than anything, now, he wanted to
leave the Yard, to be by himself, to end this conversation as quickly as
possible. Sheppard rose from his chair.

"I wish you wouldn't be so impatient," he said in a low voice. "In any
case, please don't take offense. So far as that goes, please. . ."

Gregory retreated toward the door. Somewhat disconcerted by the look of
expectation on Sheppard's face, he swallowed and said with some effort:

"I'll try, Chief Inspector, but I don't think I'm ready to talk to him
yet. I don't know. I still have to. . ."

He left without finishing. In the corridor the lights had already been
turned on for the evening. The day seemed to be so indescribably long,
Gregory thought; he felt as if the incident yesterday had taken place
weeks before. He rode down in the elevator; then, surprising himself by
his impulsiveness, he got off on the second floor, and headed for the
laboratories, his steps muffled by a deep carpet. Here and there
old-fashioned brass doorknobs glowed dimly, polished by the touch of
thousands of hands. Gregory walked slowly, his mind a blank. Through an
open door he saw some spectrographs mounted on stands; near them, a man
in a white lab coat doing something with a bunsen burner. A few more
steps and he reached another open door. Inside, covered from head to toe
with white powder and looking more like a baker than a technician, he
found Thomas. The room, jammed with long, even rows of strange-looking
twisted blocks of hardened plaster, looked like the studio of an
abstract sculptor. Thomas was bending over a long table with a wooden
mallet in his hand, apparently about to release his latest creation from
its mold. A basin of soft plaster stood on the floor beside him. Gregory
leaned against the door and watched him for a few moments.

"Oh, hello," Thomas said, looking up. "I'm just about finished. Do you
want to take it with you?" He began shifting the casts around, eying
them with professional satisfaction.

"A nice clean job," he muttered to himself. Gregory nodded, picked up a
white, surprisingly light block of plaster which was standing near the
edge of the table, and, glancing at its bottom, saw the impression of a
naked foot with big, thin, widely spaced toes. Along the edges the
plaster had risen slightly to form a mushroom-like rim.

"No thank you, not now," said Gregory, putting the cast down and
hurriedly walking out of the room. Thomas watched in surprise, then
began to remove his splattered rubber apron. Gregory, already in the
corridor, stopped and asked over his shoulder:

"Is the doctor in?"

"He was a few minutes ago, but he may have left already. I don't know."

Gregory walked to the end of the corridor. Without knocking, he opened
the door and went into the medical examiner's lab. The window was
shaded, but a small lamp next to a nearby microscope stand provided some
light. Here and there, he could see racks of test tubes, beakers and
other instruments, and some glistening bottles of colored liquid. There
wasn't a sign of Sorensen, but Dr. King, his young assistant, was
sitting at his desk, writing.

"Good evening. Is Sorensen around?" Gregory asked; without waiting for
an answer he began to bombard King with questions.

"Do you know anything about the cat? Did Sorensen examine -- "

"Cat? Oh, the cat!"

King stood up.

"I ought to know -- I did the autopsy. Sorensen isn't here. He said he
was too busy." King's emphasis suggested that he was not especially
loyal to his boss. "I still have the cat," he continued. "Do you want to
take a look?"

He opened a small door in the corner of the room and turned on the
ceiling light. The only article of furniture in the narrow cubicle was a
dirty wooden table; it was splattered with reagents and rust-colored
stains. Gregory glanced in at the reddish sliced-up thing pinned to the
table and backed away.

"Why should I look?" he said. "You're the doctor. Tell me what you
found."

"Well, in essence. . . mind you, I'm not a veterinarian," King began,
straightening up slightly. With a mechanical gesture he touched the row
of pens and pencils in the breast pocket of his jacket.

"Yes, yes, I know that, but I wanted the autopsy done right away and
there wasn't time to get a vet. Now how about it, Doctor, what did the
cat die of?"

"Starvation, cold, exposure. He was such a pathetic, skinny little
creature."

"How's that?"

King, without knowing why, was annoyed by Gregory's astonishment.

"What did you expect? Poison? Believe me, there was none. I made all the
usual tests, but it was hardly worth the trouble. There was absolutely
nothing in the cat's intestines. You look disappointed."

"No, no, you're right, of course. Nothing else?" Gregory asked, staring
at some instruments spread out in the sink. Lying next to a pair of
forceps was a scalpel; some scraps of fur still adhered to its blade.

"I'm sorry," said Gregory. "Uh, thank you for your trouble, Doctor. Good
night."

Gregory turned and walked into the corridor. A few seconds later he was
back. Dr. King, busy with his papers again, raised his head.

"Excuse me, Doctor. . . was the cat very young?"

"No, not at all. In fact, it was rather old. Don't let the small size
fool you -- it's a characteristic of the breed."

Though he sensed that he wouldn't get anything more from King, Gregory,
resting his hand on the doorknob, continued to ask questions.

"Uh. . . is there any chance that the cat died from something unusual?"

"What do you mean by 'something unusual'?"

"Uh, maybe some kind of rare disease. . . oh, never mind, you already
told me the cause of death, I'm just talking nonsense. Excuse me. . ."
Noting the derisive expression on King's face, Gregory was genuinely
relieved to get back to the corridor. He closed the door and stood next
to it. Before long he heard the sound of King whistling.

"Well, maybe I put him in a good mood," he thought, "but I've had it."

Gregory ran down the stairs and into the street. The lights in the
building were already on for the night, but outside it was still only
early evening. A strong southerly wind was drying the sidewalks. Gregory
strolled along whistling, but stopped as soon as he realized he had
picked up the tune from King. There was a slender woman walking a few
steps in front of him. Gregory noticed a stain of some kind on the back
of her coat. No, it was a feather, or maybe a shred of cotton. Catching
up with the woman to tell her about it, Gregory opened his mouth and
began to raise his hand to his hat in greeting; inexplicably he returned
his hand to his pocket and quickened his pace. It was only a little
while later, when he had given some thought to the incident, that he
realized why he hadn't said anything. The woman had a pointed nose.

"I shouldn't worry about such stupid things!" he told himself angrily.

Entering a subway station, Gregory boarded the first northbound train.
He leaned against the side of the car, glancing through a newspaper and
mechanically peeking over it from time to time to check the names of the
stations rushing past outside the windows. He got off at Wooden Hills.
The train pulled away noisily and sped into the tunnel. Gregory stepped
into an unoccupied telephone booth and opened the directory. Carefully
sliding his finger along the column of names, he found what he was
looking for: "Sciss, Harvey, Ph.D., M.A. Bridgewater 876-951." He picked
up the receiver and dialed the number carefully, closing the booth door
in anticipation. No more than a minute later he heard the even buzz of
the ringing signal, then a short clicking and a woman's voice:

"Hello?"

"Is Dr. Sciss in?"

"No he isn't. Who's calling?"

"Gregory, of Scotland Yard."

The woman hesitated for a moment, as if uncertain what to do. Gregory
could hear the sound of her breathing.

"The Doctor will be back in fifteen minutes," she said at last, a note
of reluctance clearly discernible in her voice.

"In fifteen minutes?" he repeated.

"Probably. Shall I tell him you called?"

"No, thanks anyway. Maybe I. . ."

Gregory hung up without finishing and stared glumly at his hand, which
was pressed against the telephone book. Noticing the flickering lights
of an approaching train, he left the booth without further thought,
glanced quickly at the illuminated platform sign to find out the
destination of the waiting train, and got into the last car.

During the twenty-minute trip to Bridgewater, Gregory kept thinking
about the woman who had answered Sciss's phone. He knew Sciss wasn't
married. Could it have been his mother? No, the voice was too young.
Housekeeper? He tried desperately to remember its sound, flat yet
melodious at the same time, as if it were a matter of extreme
importance, but he was well aware that he was only trying to keep from
worrying about what to say to Sciss. Their conversation, he was afraid,
might eliminate his only remaining lead.

In Sciss's neighborhood the subway line ran outdoors on an elevated
structure. Gregory descended from the station and, with the noise of
passing trains rattling overhead, walked along a broad avenue lined by
stores. Sciss lived nearby on a dimly lit, deserted street; a bright
green sign advertising a peep show glowed in the ground-floor window of
the house next to his.

It was hard to see much of Sciss's building in the darkness. Gregory
noticed some masses of concrete protruding over the sidewalk from the
upper stories; they could have been ledges or balconies. The building's
entrance lobby was completely dark, except for some light reflected from
a neon sign across the street; the stairway was dark also. Gregory
pushed an illuminated button for the self-service elevator and rode
upstairs. Sciss would probably use that damned logic of his to make fun
of him, he brooded; Sciss never lost a chance to demonstrate his
superiority to everyone else, and he'd probably leave Sciss's apartment
feeling defeated and convinced of his own stupidity.

The hallway on Sciss's floor was almost totally dark, but a thin crack
of light revealed that his door was open slightly. "I should ring the
doorbell anyway," Gregory said to himself, gently pressing his finger
against the button. The door swung open without a sound. Gregory walked
in; the air in the apartment was warm, dusty, and very dry, and there
was a peculiar odor, a cool subterranean odor of decay, something like
the stench of a tomb, he thought. The odor was so out of place that it
startled him. Wrinkling his nose slightly, Gregory stood in the foyer
for a few moments to get accustomed to the darkness, then began feeling
his way toward a line of light visible some distance in front of him.

Before long he came upon a slightly opened door which led into a larger
room. Near the wall, and partly blocked from his view by the open door
of a closet, a desk lamp stood on the floor. A huge triangular shadow
was moving on the ceiling, looking something like a gigantic bird
flapping its wings one at a time.

At the other end of the foyer, behind him, Gregory heard the hissing
whistle of a gas burner and the dripping of a water faucet. Except for
these two sounds, the apartment was absolutely silent -- no, not quite,
for he could hear someone breathing laboriously.

The room was large and square. At one end a dark curtain partly covered
a window. The walls were lined with books. Gregory stepped inside and
spotted Sciss; the scientist was sitting on the floor next to the desk,
surrounded by bulging folders which he was apparently trying to put into
some kind of order by the light of the desk lamp beside him. The room
felt even warmer than the foyer, the air exuded the dryness
characteristic of apartments with central heating; the unpleasant musty
odor became even more discernible.

The situation was peculiar, and Gregory stood at the door not knowing
what to do. While he waited, the minutes dragged on. . . and on. Sciss,
sitting with his back to Gregory, continued to work on his folders,
which apparently had been removed from the open drawers of his desk. He
carefully brushed the dust off some, blew it off others with a disgusted
snort, waving them back and forth. Somewhere behind Gregory, probably in
the kitchen, the gas hissed continually. He thought he could hear
someone moving around, probably the woman he had spoken to on the phone.
Gregory took another step into the room; the floor creaked, but Sciss
didn't notice. Finally, yielding to an admittedly senseless impulse,
Gregory knocked loudly on the open door of the closet.

"What's that?" Sciss said, turning his triangular head with its
disheveled hair in the detective's direction.

"Good evening and. . . please excuse me," said Gregory a little too
loudly. "I don't know if you remember me, I'm Gregory of Scotland Yard.
We met each other at Headquarters, at Chief Inspector Sheppard's. . .
Your outer door was open, and --"

"Yes, I remember. What can I do for you?"

Sciss rose to his feet, accidentally kicking over the nearest pile of
folders, and sat down on his desk, wiping his fingers with a
handkerchief.

"I'm in charge of the investigation in this. . . case," Gregory said,
finding it difficult to choose the right words. "Chief Inspector
Sheppard told me about your letter. You said you don't foresee the
possibility of further. . . further incidents. That's what I came over
to ask you about. . ."

"Indeed. But I said in my letter that I can't provide an explanation
right now. I'm working alone and I don't know if. . ."

He cut himself off in mid-sentence, revealing an uncertainty that was
not at all typical of him. Shoving his hands in his pockets and taking
long, stiff steps, Sciss walked across the room, passing in front of the
detective, who was still standing in the same spot. Near the window, he
swung around, sat down on the radiator with his arms clasping his knees,
and stared into the light of the lamp on the floor.

Sciss remained silent for several minutes; then, without any
preliminaries, began speaking. "Anyway, maybe even that's not so
important. There's been a change in my plans. . . quite a radical
change."

Gregory stood with his coat on, listening, but realizing at the same
time that Sciss was thinking out loud, hardly aware of his presence.

"I went to the doctor. I haven't been feeling well for a long time, and
there has been a significant drop in my productivity. On the basis of
averages determined from the ages of my parents, I calculated that I had
thirty-five years more. I forgot to consider the effect of intensive
intellectual work on my blood circulation. It seems that I have. . . a
lot less time. It puts a new complexion on things. I still don't know if
--"

Sciss stood up so abruptly and with such decisiveness that it looked as
if he intended to terminate the visit by abandoning Gregory and leaving
the room. Such behavior from Sciss wouldn't have surprised Gregory at
all. He didn't doubt the truth of what Sciss had told him, but he hardly
knew what to make of it. The peaceful, lifeless composure in Sciss's
voice was completely at odds with his impulsive movements: he jumped to
his feet, took a few steps, sat down here and there like an irritated,
exhausted insect -- there was something poignant about him, and it was
reflected in his tired, almost despairing tone of voice. In the end,
Sciss didn't leave the room after all. Instead, he sat down on a couch
along the wall opposite the window. Just over his birdlike head, casting
a slight shadow on the ragged gray hair around his temples, there hung a
picture, a print of Klee's "The Madwoman."

"I had made plans for the next twenty years. The ten years after that I
was holding in reserve. Now I have to change everything, I have to go
over all my plans and drop everything secondary, everything that isn't
original research. What isn't secondary -- when you have to carry a
bottle of nitroglycerin around! I don't want to leave any of my work
unfinished."

Gregory remained silent.

"I don't know whether I can continue on this case. In the long run the
problem is trivial -- the hypothesis needs a few minor adjustments,
that's all, but I don't like that kind of work, it doesn't interest me.
Furthermore, a complete analysis of all the relevant statistical data
would take weeks -- maybe even months if the right computers aren't
available."

"Our people --" Gregory began.

"Your people would be useless," Sciss interrupted. "This isn't a
criminal investigation, it's a scientific study." He stood up and
continued, "What do you want -- an explanation? You'll get it, don't
worry."

He glanced at his watch for a moment.

"And I was about to take a rest," he said. "This case has nothing at all
in common with criminology. No offense of any kind was committed, no
more than when someone is killed by a meteor."

"You mean that the operative causes are. . . forces of nature," Gregory
asked, immediately regretting it because he had resolved to keep his
mouth shut and let Sciss do all the talking.

"I don't have time for discussions, so please don't interrupt me. Can
you define those 'forces of nature' you mention so glibly? I can't. The
problem in this case is strictly methodological. Its aspects from the
criminal point of view don't interest me at all, they never did."

Without interrupting himself, Sciss went over to the wall, turned on the
ceiling light, and glanced at the lieutenant. A smile appeared on his
thin lips.

"Please look over here." He pointed toward the open closet. Gregory
moved closer. There was a map of England hanging on the door, its
surface covered with what looked like a fine red rash, but the blood-red
speckling wasn't uniform in intensity: in some places it was denser;
here and there towns were completely encircled; the lightest areas were
on the right-hand side of the map, along the Channel coast.

"Since this isn't really a problem for you or your department, you'll
probably find my explanation useless, but I assure you it's the only
answer," Sciss said, smiling faintly but coldly. "Do you recognize the
lightest area over here?"

"Yes. That's the area of Norfolk where the bodies were stolen."

"Wrong. This map shows the distribution of deaths from cancer in England
for the past nineteen years. The region with the lowest death rate --
that is, less than thirty percent, using an average based on a
half-century -- falls within the boundaries of the area in which the
corpses disappeared. In other words, there is an inverse proportion; I
have formulated an equation to express it, but I won't go into that now
because you wouldn't understand it." Sciss's almost imperceptible smile
was beginning to take on an abusive quality.

"It is your primary duty to respect the facts," Sciss continued. "I, my
dear sir, went beyond the facts. Some corpses disappeared. How? The
evidence suggests they walked away by themselves. Of course, you, as a
policeman, want to know if anyone helped them. The answer is yes: they
were helped by whatever causes snail shells to be dextrorotatory. But
one in every ten million snail shells is sinistrorsal. This is a fact
that can be verified statistically. I was assigned to determine the
connection between one phenomenon and other phenomena. That's all that
science ever does, and all that it ever will do -- until the end.
Resurrection? By no means. Don't be ridiculous. The term is used much
too loosely. I'm not claiming that the corpses came back to life, with
their hearts beating, their brains thinking, the coagulated blood in
their veins flowing again. The changes which take place in a dead body
are not reversible in that sense. What other sense is there, you ask --
the corpses moved around, changed their positions in space. I agree, but
the things you're talking about are nothing but facts -- I have
explanations!"

Sciss moved closer to the map and raised his arm. No longer smiling, he
spoke quickly and energetically, his high-pitched voice taking on a
triumphant note.

"A phenomenon is subject to analysis only if the structure of its
events, as in this case, conforms to a regular pattern. Science
progresses by discovering the connection between one phenomenon and
other phenomena, and this is exactly what I succeeded in doing. If I
were to ask why a rock falls when dropped, you would reply that it is
due to the action of gravity. Yet if I asked what gravity is, there
would be no answer. But even though we don't know what gravity is, we
can determine its regular pattern of action. People become accustomed to
rocks always falling. Any phenomenon which continues to exist within
everyday comprehension, even if incomprehensible in itself, ends up
being commonplace. For example, if human or animal corpses usually got
up and walked around, if that was the norm, the police wouldn't be
interested in the incidents in Norfolk. I was assigned to determine the
cause of this seemingly abnormal series of phenomena, and, its
uniqueness notwithstanding, to connect it with some other series of
phenomena that was already familiar, documented, and of such long
standing that its occurrences no longer shock the public or arouse the
curiosity of the police. Death by cancer is a perfect example of this
kind of phenomenon. I examined parish registries from the whole Norfolk
region as well as hospital death records for the past fifty years. Of
course I encountered a certain amount of difficulty. During the early
part of this fifty-year period doctors were not able to differentiate
cancer, or to treat it as a separate disease as they do nowadays.
However, to the extent that it was possible, I collected the facts
regarding the number of cancer-related deaths, translated them into
statistics, and transferred them to this map. You can see the results."

Sciss turned off the light and went back to his desk, and as he did so
Gregory finally discovered the source of the unpleasant odor: it was
emanating from the corner just beyond the closet, where he could see
some long, low boxes crammed with moldy, stained, old books.

"To make a long story short, Mr. Gregory, mortality due to cancer
follows a regular cycle and is in turn governed by it. Around the end of
the nineteenth century we begin to see an irregular but steady increase
in incidences of cancer, and nowadays, as a result, more people than
ever contract cancer and die from cancer. Norfolk and its surrounding
region, however, constitutes an enclave with a relatively low cancer
mortality. In other words, the rate of death from cancer has remained
more or less the same for the past thirty years, although it has
continued to increase in adjacent regions. When the difference between
the mortality rates of this enclave and the adjacent localities exceeded
a certain level, corpses began to disappear. The center, that is, the
place where the first disappearance occurred, is not the geometric,
spatial center of the enclave, but the place in which cancer mortality
reached the lowest level. The phenomenon spread from that point in a
definite pattern: it moved rapidly because of such factors as
temperature, etc. As you should remember, I've already explained that.
In the last incident, the phenomenon reached the boundaries of the
enclave. The formula which I have derived from the statistics on cancer
deaths excludes the possibility of any corpse disappearances outside the
enclave. It was on this basis that I wrote to Sheppard."

Sciss fell silent, turned around, and picked up the lamp. He held it in
his hand for a moment, as if uncertain what to do with it, then placed
it on his desk.

"You made up your mind on the basis of this?" Gregory whispered, warning
himself to proceed cautiously.

"No. There was more."

Sciss folded his arms across his chest.

"In the earlier incidents, the corpses disappeared, so to speak,
'permanently'; that is, they were moved for an unknown distance in an
unknown direction. In the last incident, however, there was
comparatively little displacement of the corpse. Why? Because the last
incident occurred very close to the boundary of the enclave. This helped
me to define the coefficient of my formula with great precision,
inasmuch as the rate of cancer mortality increases by an arithmetic
rather than a geometric progression as we trace its passage from the
enclave into the adjacent regions."

The room was silent. Gregory could hear the far-off hissing of the gas
burner.

"All right," he said at last. "In your opinion, then, what caused the
disappearances? The movements, if you prefer."

Sciss smiled faintly, looking at the detective with an amused
expression.

"I beg your pardon," he said, "but I've already answered your questions.
You're acting like a child who is shown Maxwell's theorem and a diagram
of a radio receiver and then asks, 'How does this box talk?' It has
never occurred to you or your Chief to institute an investigation
against whatever causes people to contract cancer, has it? Similarly, at
least as far as I know, you've never made inquiries about the
perpetrator of Asiatic flu."

Gregory clenched his teeth, warning himself not to respond to Sciss's
sarcasm.

"All right," he said. "The way you see things you're right. Since it's
only a simple case of resurrection, rather than a matter of corpses
moving, standing, and walking after death, you consider everything to be
perfectly clear-cut and understandable and therefore not worth any
further investigation."

"Do you think I'm an idiot?" Sciss said, sitting down on the radiator
again. His voice was suprisingly gentle. "Obviously there's a good deal
here for biochemists, physiologists, and biologists to look into, but
there's nothing for the police. Futhermore, the study of something like
this could go on and on without any definitive results, even after fifty
years -- just like the study of cancer. Only my field -- statistics --
can give immediate results. The same applies in the study of cancer. So
far as this case is concerned, there will probably be quite a few
conflicting theories in time, and I imagine that the ones the public
finds most appealing will help to build up the circulation of the more
sensational newspapers. The phenomenon will be connected with flying
saucers, with astrology, with God only knows what. But all that is none
of my business."

"What about the dead animals we found at the scene of the
disappearances?" Gregory asked, pretending not to have heard the note of
anger that was beginning to appear in Sciss's voice.

"That interests you? Yes, of course. . ." Sciss said. Suddenly calm
again, he clasped his knees with his thin, twisted arms.

"I didn't analyze that particular point mathematically, but the simplest
and most fundamental explanation would be to regard the animal as a
vehiculum, that is to say, as the carrier or medium which conveys the
movement factor to the corpse. This factor is specific to a particular
biological agens; it is similar in nature to whatever causes cancer, and
in certain circumstances, we must assume, the 'something' that produces
cancer is transmuted into our factor; that is, it employs small domestic
animals as a means of moving from one place to another. Rats, to cite a
well-known example, played the same role in bubonic plague."

"Is it some kind of bacteria?" Gregory asked. He was leaning against the
open door of the closet, studying Sciss's shadow on the floor in front
of him but listening carefully.

"I didn't say that. I don't know. I don't know a thing. The theory is
full of holes. Hypotheses non fingo. I won't stand for it. It isn't my
job to formulate hypotheses. I can't afford to worry about the problem,
I haven't got the time."

"If it's not a bacteria, but, as you say, a biological factor, maybe
it's a microbe," Gregory said. "An intelligent microbe, in fact a very
intelligent microbe, a microbe with the ability to think ahead the way a
human being does."

"I get the impression that you're looking for a way to make a profit on
this story -- what are you planning, a magazine article about
intelligent microbes?" Sciss's voice shook with anger. Gregory, as if he
hadn't heard, walked slowly toward Sciss, very slowly, speaking more and
more distinctly, yet faster and faster, as if he were being consumed by
the fire of a brilliant idea.

"This factor," Gregory said, "suddenly turns up in the middle of the
area that has the low death rate. It carries out all its activities with
as much foresight as a conscious being, except that at the beginning
it's still inexperienced. It doesn't know, for instance, that most
people would consider a naked corpse a little -- let's say -- peculiar,
and that carrying one around can get a bit complicated. Then the factor
learns that nudity is considered improper dress, even on dead people.
The next time he moves a body he makes a point of providing suitable
clothing -- and how does he do it? -- by tearing down a curtain with his
bare teeth! Later on he learns to read; how else is he going to study
the weather forecasts? Then this brilliant intelligence of his fogs up
when he gets too close to the boundary of the low cancer mortality
region. He can only manage to set some stiffened limbs in motion --
poorly coordinated motion at that -- and run them through some graveyard
gymnastics: standing the body up, making it peer through the window of
the mortuary, and so forth."

"You seem to know exactly what happened. Were you there?" Sciss asked,
not showing his face.

"No, I wasn't there, but I know what can frighten an English constable.
Dancing corpses. Evidently just as he was losing consciousness he
remembered Holbein and the pranks skeletons used to play in the Middle
Ages."

"Who?"

The scientist's voice was almost unrecognizable.

"What did you say?" Gregory asked in surprise. "What's this 'who?' We're
talking about a statistically documented biological factor. I'm just
repeating what you told me."

Gregory drew so close to Sciss that he was almost able to touch his
knee. The scientist stood up, thrusting his pale, motionless face
directly in front of the detective's. Gregory could see his pupils
contracting. The two men stood that way for a few moments, then Gregory
stepped backward and began laughing. The laugh was feigned, but it
sounded almost spontaneous and its naturalness would have fooled anyone.
Sciss stared at him for a moment, then his face began to quiver
spasmodically and he started to laugh also. An instant later the room
fell into silence. Sciss returned to his desk, sat down in the armchair
behind it and, leaning backward, drummed his fingers on his leg for a
moment.

"You think I did it, don't you?" he said. Gregory had not expected such
directness. Uncertain how to reply, he stood quietly, tall and clumsy,
desperately trying to decide how to handle things now that their
encounter had taken this new course.

"A few moments ago," Sciss continued, "I thought you considered me an
idiot. I can see now, though, that you think I'm insane. And so. . . I
am threatened with arrest or with detention for psychiatric observation.
Considering my state of health, I must say that both eventualities come
at a bad moment; in addition I really can't afford to waste the time. I
was wrong to let Sheppard talk me into cooperating, but it's too late
now. What can I do to convince you that your theory is wrong?"

"Did you go to the doctor today?" Gregory asked in a quiet voice,
drawing closer to the desk.

"Yes. I saw Dr. Vaugham. His office hours are from four to six. I made
an appointment with him by telephone last week."

"The results of his examination. . . are they medically confidential?"

"I'll phone him and ask him to tell you everything he told me. Is there
anything else?"

"Is that your car parked in the courtyard downstairs?"

"There are always several cars in the courtyard so I don't know which
one you're talking about. I have a gray Chrysler."

"I'd like --" Gregory began. He was interrupted by the telephone. Sciss
bent over and picked up the receiver.

"Sciss speaking," he said. The drone of a loud voice could be heard in
response.

"What?" said Sciss. Then, a little louder: "Where? Where?"

For the next few moments he listened without saying a word. Gregory
moved closer to the desk. He looked at his watch. It was almost nine.

"Good. Yes. . ." Sciss said at last. Just before hanging up he added:
"Yes, yes, Gregory is here, yes, I'll tell him." He slammed the receiver
into its cradle, stood up, and walked over to the map inside the open
closet door. Gregory followed him.

"One of the missing bodies has been found," Sciss said, his voice so low
that he appeared to be thinking about something else. He peered
nearsightedly at the map and, taking a pen from his pocket, made a small
mark near the edge of the enclave.

"In Beverly Court, at the bottom of a water tank. It was discovered when
the tank was drained. The body of a male."

"Who telephoned?" asked Gregory.

"What? Uh, I don't know. I didn't ask. He told me his name but I wasn't
paying attention. It was someone from Scotland Yard. Sergeant
something-or-other. Yes, it fits. They'll all start turning up now. . .
in sequence, like shells fired from a gun, although. . ."

He became silent. Standing slightly to Sciss's side, Gregory watched him
through slitted eyes, listening intently to the rhythm of his breathing.

"You think they'll come back. . . all of them?" he said at last. Sciss
raised his eyes to Gregory and quickly straightened up. His face was
flushed, his breathing even louder than before.

"I don't know. It's possible, it's even probable. If they do, the whole
series will be concluded. . . and everything else with it! Maybe I
figured it out too late. Suitable camera equipment with infrared film
would have provided photographs explicit enough to protect me from this.
. . this fooling around."

"Does Beverly Court fit into your pattern? What I mean is, does its
location go along with your theory?" Gregory asked somewhat
perfunctorily.

"The question is poorly phrased," Sciss replied. "I have no way of
determining where the bodies will be found; that is, where they will
ultimately stop moving. The only thing I can calculate is the amount of
time that elapses between a disappearance and the cessation of the
phenomenon, and this I can do only approximately. In my estimate, the
bodies which disappeared first will be found last. You should be able to
understand why. At the beginning, for some reason, the factor conveyed
the greatest amount of motor energy to the corpses; by the time it
reached the boundary of the region it was only able to transmit a
minimal charge, barely sufficient for a series of uncoordinated body
movements. You probably think I'm raving. Or lying, perhaps. It's all
the same thing in the end. Now leave me alone, will you? I still have a
lot to do." Sciss pointed to one of the boxes of moldy books. Gregory
nodded his head.

"I'm going. Just one question first. Did you go to the doctor by car?"

"No. I went by subway and I came home the same way. I have a question
too: what do you intend to do with me? I only ask because I want to be
able to work as long as possible without interference. Is that
understood?"

Gregory buttoned his coat, which was beginning to hang on his shoulders
like a lead weight. Taking a deep breath, and again inhaling the faint
musty odor, he answered:

"What do I intend to do? Nothing, for the time being. Let me remind you
that I haven't expressed any suspicions or made any charges -- not even
one word!"

With his head bent, Gregory walked into the foyer. In the dimness he
caught a glimpse of a woman's face, a pale blot which disappeared almost
instantly; he heard the sound of a door slamming. He found his way out
of the apartment, checked the time again on the luminous face of his
watch, and went downstairs. In the lobby, instead of heading for the
street, he turned in the opposite direction and went into the courtyard
toward a long, gray automobile. He circled it slowly but couldn't see
very much in the faint light from the windows of the surrounding
buildings. The car was locked, completely dark, except where reflections
of the apartment house lights danced rhythmically on its shiny fender in
time with Gregory's movements. He touched the hood: it was cool. That
didn't mean anything, though. It was a little harder to reach the
radiator. He had to bend down and stretch his hand through a wide
chrome-enclosed gap that looked like the thicklipped mouth of a sea
monster. Hearing a slight noise, Gregory winced and straightened up. He
saw Sciss at the second-floor window. Now he wouldn't have to continue
his examination of the car, Gregory thought; Sciss's behavior confirmed
his suspicions. At the same time, though, he felt a bit uncomfortable,
as if he had been caught doing something underhanded, and this feeling
became stronger when, observing Sciss more closely, he realized that the
scientist wasn't watching him at all. After standing next to the open
window for a few moments, Sciss sat down awkwardly on the window sill,
drawing his knees up and wearily resting his head in his hands. This
gesture was so incompatible with Gregory's image of Sciss that he
stepped back to get a better look, and as he did so he stumbled over a
piece of metal, crushing it underfoot with a piercing noise. Sciss
looked down into the courtyard. Gregory stood absolutely still, flushed
with embarrassment and anger, uncertain what to do next. He didn't know
for sure if he'd been seen, but Sciss continued looking downward, and
although Gregory couldn't make out his eyes or face, he could feel his
disdainful gaze.

Completely crestfallen and not daring to continue with his examination
of the car, Gregory walked away, his head lowered and his back hunched.

Before he reached the subway he had regained his composure, at least to
the extent that he was able to go over the ridiculous incident in the
courtyard -- ridiculous, he thought, to have allowed it to upset him.
Gregory was almost certain he had seen Sciss's car in downtown London
that afternoon. He hadn't noticed the driver, but it was the same car
all right -- there was a distinctive dent in the rear bumper. At the
time Gregory hadn't paid much attention to the car. The chance incident
did not begin to take on significance until later, when Sciss claimed to
have gone to the doctor by subway rather than by car. The discovery that
Sciss was lying wasn't too important in itself, but, Gregory felt, if he
had known earlier in the evening he would have been somewhat less
scrupulous and cautious in his behavior toward the scientist;
furthermore, it would have counteracted the feeling of compassion which
had overcome him during the unfortunate visit. Gregory still didn't know
anything definite, however, and whatever certainty he could derive from
his afternoon observation of the car was based on a wretched "maybe" and
thus didn't count for much. His only satisfaction came from knowing he
had discovered an inconsistency in what Sciss had told him. Sciss had
gotten rid of him by claiming he had work to do, but instead of working
he had done nothing but lounge around the window. Gregory remembered
Sciss's state during the visit: his listless body, the inclination of
his head, his exhausted leaning against the window frame. But if Sciss's
fatigue was the ultimate cause of their disagreement, Gregory had not
taken advantage of it, ultimately, because of a stupid gallantry which
prevented him from exploiting his opponent's moment of weakness and made
him leave the apartment perhaps no more than a minute before the
decisive words were uttered.

Drawn into a labyrinth of possibilities by these thoughts, Gregory,
impotently angry, wanted only to return home and study the facts in his
thick notebook.

It was almost eleven o'clock when he got off the subway. Just before
turning the corner to the Fenshawe house, he passed a blind beggar
stilting in a niche in the wall of a building, a bald, ugly mongrel at
his feet. The beggar had a harmonica, but blew into it only when someone
was approaching, using it as a signal without any pretence of making
music. It was impossible to determine his age, his clothing providing
more clues than his face, which was hidden by a nondescript beard.
Returning home late at night or leaving before daybreak, Gregory always
met the same beggar in the same place, like an inescapable pang of
conscience. The Beggar was as much a part of the neighborhood landscape
as the big bay windows of the house in front of which he sat, and
although Gregory was a policeman and the police regulations prohibited
begging, it never occurred to him that he was tacitly consenting to his
presence and thus was a party to a misdemeanor.

Gregory never gave much thought to the beggar -- in fact, the old man's
clothing was so filthy that the very sight of him aroused disgust -- but
the beggar, nonetheless, must have stirred something in his memory;
indeed, awakened feelings deep in his subconscious, for Gregory always
quickened his pace almost involuntarily when passing him. Gregory never
gave anything to beggars: it had nothing to do with his profession, nor
was he an unkind person; perhaps the cause was some indefinable shame.
This evening, though, having already passed the old man's post, spotting
the dog crouching at his side (sometimes he felt sorry for the dog),
Gregory surprised himself by turning and walking over to the dark wall,
taking some money out of his pocket as he did so. There followed one of
those insignificant little incidents that one never mentions to others
and remembers ever afterward with an indescribable feeling of distress.
Assuming the beggar would reach out to accept it, Gregory extended the
hand with the money into the vague darkness of the niche. When he did,
however, his fingers brushed against those disgusting, filthy rags. The
same thing happened again and again; the beggar grotesquely lifted his
harmonica to his lips and began blowing. Overcome by a feeling of
revulsion, and unable to find a pocket in the torn material covering the
huddled body, Gregory blindly threw the money down and backed away.
Something clattered at his feet -- in the weak light of the street lamp
he saw that it was his own coin rolling after him. Gregory picked it up
and impulsively pressed it into the darkened indentation in the wall. He
was answered by a hoarse, stifled groan. Desperate now, Gregory rushed
home, taking such long strides that he seemed to be running. He didn't
recover from his agitation until he had reached the front of his house.
Then, seeing a light in the window of his room, he ran upstairs without
any of his usual caution, reaching the door slightly out of breath. He
stood in front of the door for a moment, listening carefully. Not a
sound. Glancing at his watch again -- it was 11:15 -- he opened the
door. Sitting and reading at Gregory's desk, just in front of the glass
doors opening on the terrace, was Sheppard. He raised his head from the
book:

"Good evening, Lieutenant," said the Chief Inspector. "It's about time
you got here."

 

 

 

5

 

Gregory was so taken aback that he couldn't answer for a moment. He
stood in the doorway without removing his hat, a foolish expression on
his face. Sheppard smiled faintly.

"Why don't you close the door?" he said at last, when the tongue-tied
scene had dragged on a little too long. Pulling himself together,
Gregory hung up his coat and shook hands with the Chief Inspector,
watching him expectantly.

"I came over to find out what you accomplished at Sciss's place," said
Sheppard, sitting down at the desk again and resting his elbow on the
book he had been reading. The Chief Inspector spoke calmly, as usual;
detecting a note of irony in the word accomplished, however, Gregory
adopted a tone of naive sincerity in his reply.

"But Chief Inspector," he babbled, "all you had to do was tell me you
were interested, and I would have phoned you. That doesn't mean I'm not
glad to see you, of course, but why did you bother to go out of your way
--" Sheppard, however, made no effort to carry his end; it was clear
that he saw through Gregory's act and, with a slight gesture, he cut off
the flow of words.

"Let's not play cat and mouse, Lieutenant," he said. "It was very clever
of you to figure out that I'm not here to listen to one of your stories.
You made a blunder tonight, a very big blunder, when you set up that
telephone call. Yes, the phone call to Sciss while you were at his
house. You had Gregson phone him about an allegedly recovered body so
you could observe his reaction. And before you start explaining, let me
venture a guess that you didn't accomplish anything with your little
trick. I'm right, aren't I?"

The Chief Inspector's last words were angry. Rubbing his cold hands
gloomily, Gregory straddled a chair and muttered:

"Yes."

All his garrulousness seemed to have disappeared. Sheppard pushed a box
of Player's toward him and, taking a cigarette himself, continued:

"It was a cheap trick par excellence, Gregory, a classic. You didn't
learn a thing, or almost nothing. Sciss, on the other hand, knows that
you suspect him or will know it by tomorrow, which comes to the same
thing; furthermore, he'll also know that you set up the call to trap
him. All the same, assuming you're right -- that he is either the
perpetrator or an accomplice -- then you did him a favor by warning him.
And so far as that goes, didn't it occur to you that someone as cautious
as the perpetrator seems to be, now that he's gotten such a clear-cut
warning, will become ten times more cautious?"

Gregory was silent, chewing almost furiously on his fingernails.
Sheppard, the calmness in his voice contradicted only by a deep furrow
between his eyebrows, went on:

"Whether or not you tell me the details of your plan of operations is
your business, because I always try, as much as possible, to respect the
autonomy of the officers conducting investigations for me. But it was
downright stupidity not to tell me you suspected Sciss! I could have
told you quite a few things about him, not as his boss but as someone
who has known him for a long time. I suppose you've already eliminated
any doubts you have about my innocence in this case?"

Gregory's cheeks turned red.

"You're right, sir," he said, raising his eyes to the Chief Inspector.
"I acted like an idiot. And I have no excuse at all, except that I
absolutely refuse to believe in miracles, and nothing is going to make
me, even if I go crazy."

"We all have to be doubting Thomases in this case -- it's one of the
unfortunate requirements of our profession," said Sheppard, cheerful now
that Gregory's embarrassment had provided him with a degree of honorable
satisfaction. "In any event, I didn't come over to reprimand you but to
offer you some help. Let's get back on the subject. How did it go at
Sciss's?"

Emotionally uplifted by this unexpected reprieve, Gregory described his
visit to Sciss with great gusto, not omitting even those points which
put him in a bad light. Around the middle of the story, when he came to
the part about how he and Sciss burst into laughter after a tense
silence, Gregory heard a muffled sound from behind the wall. He bristled
internally.

Mr. Fenshawe was beginning the nightly acoustical mystery.

Gregory began to speak faster and with more glibness. He became flushed
with excitement. Sooner or later the Chief Inspector was going to notice
the noises, whatever they were, and then he'd be mixed up in this weird
business too. Barely able to think coherently or to imagine what might
happen next, Gregory listened as the sounds increased in volume,
reacting to Mr. Fenshawe's wall with the same obstinacy he would have
exhibited in response to the pain caused by the extraction of a tooth. A
series of rattling noises was followed by several soft, moist slaps.
Raising his voice, Gregory talked faster and still faster with a kind of
strained eloquence, hoping the Chief Inspector would be too distracted
to notice the noises. And for this same reason, undoubtedly, he didn't
stop talking when he reached the end of the story. Instead, overwhelmed
by the desire to drown out Mr. Fenshawe, he undertook something which in
other circumstances he would have kept to himself: an elaborate analysis
of Sciss's "statistical hypothesis."

"I don't know where he got the cancer story," Gregory said, "but I'm
sure there really is an enclave with a low death rate. Of course we
ought to make a large-scale comparative study of all Europe to find out
if there are any other enclaves like the one in Norfolk. If there are,
it would knock the bottom out of his theory. I didn't discuss any of
this with him, but he's right about one thing: if his theory is valid,
this really isn't a job for us. The idea of the police checking out a
scientific hypothesis is too funny for words. Still, so far as the
theory's long-range consequences are concerned, Sciss was very clever.
Instead of trying to confuse me with fantastic possibilities, he made it
into a joke. But there aren't any alternatives. I've been giving this
theory a lot of thought. This is what I've come up with. I'll give you
the more conservative variant first. The assumption is that we're facing
some kind of peculiar mutation that causes cancer; an unknown virus of
some kind, let's say. The reasoning goes this way: cancer manifests
itself in an organism as chaos; the organism itself, representing order
as it is found in the life processes of a living body, is the antithesis
of chaos. Under certain conditions, this chaos factor -- that is,
cancer, or, more accurately, the cancer virus -- is mutated, but it
remains alive, vegetating in whatever medium is its host. When the
victim stops being sick, the virus goes on living in his corpse.
Ultimately, it undergoes such a complete transformation that it develops
entirely new powers; it changes from a factor that causes chaos to one
that tries to create a new kind of order -- a kind of posthumous order.
In other words, for a specific period of time it fights against the
chaos represented by death and the decomposition of the body that
follows death. To do this, the new factor tries to restore the life
process in an organism whose body is already dead. When a dead body
begins moving around, it's a sign that this process is going on. The
moving corpses, in other words, are produced by a weird symbiotic
relationship between the living -- that is, the mutated virus -- and the
dead -- the corpse itself. Since human reason isn't capable of
understanding everything, it's irrelevant whether or not this
explanation makes sense. It is important, however, that the order factor
is able to initiate highly sophisticated, well-coordinated movements: an
ordinary virus wouldn't be able to make a corpse get up, find some
clothing for it, and then sneak it away so skillfully that we can't find
it again."

Gregory paused, seemingly awaiting Sheppard's reaction; in reality the
wall had distracted him with a gentle, repetitive pattering -- it
sounded as if a light rain was falling on Mr. Fenshawe's side.

"A cancer virus is within the realm of probability," Gregory continued,
"but since the improbable can't be explained in terms of the probable,
we may have to find an improbable explanation for this case. That's why
Sciss mentioned flying saucers, although he tried to be casual about it.
He wanted me to know that we may have to look for the answer in outer
space. The second variant involves cosmic forces. We're faced with
something along the lines of a 'first contact' between Earth and a race
of people from the stars. It goes this way: there are beings of some
kind out there, intelligent but functioning in a manner completely
beyond our comprehension. They want to study human beings at close
range, so they send some kind of -- information-gathering instruments,
let's call them -- to Earth, using a method of transportation that we
can't understand yet. Maybe the saucers deliver them. The
information-collectors are microscopic -- invisible for all practical
purposes. Once on Earth they ignore living organisms and are directed --
programmed would be a better word -- only to the dead. Why? First, so
they won't hurt anyone -- this proves that the star people are humane.
Second, ask yourself this. How does a mechanic learn about a machine? He
starts it up and watches it in operation. The information-collectors do
exactly the same thing. They start up some human corpses, getting
everything they want to know in the process. If this variant is correct,
there are several good reasons why we can't understand the phenomenon.
First of all, the information-collector seems to act rationally;
therefore, it isn't a device or tool in our sense of the word. It's
probably more comparable to a hunting dog: in other words, some kind of
trained bacteria. Second, there's the problem of the connection between
the information-collector and cancer. If I was forced to figure out a
theoretical basis for linking the second variant with the cancer
phenomenon, I'd do it this way: there are just as many cancer viruses in
the low-mortality enclave as anywhere else. So if most people in the
enclave don't get cancer, it's because they're immune to it. Therefore,
human immunity to cancer is inversely proportional to immunity to the
something from outer space. This theory explains everything, and we
don't have to abandon our statistics. . ."

Gregory paused. His room, like Mr. Fenshawe's next door, was silent.
During this whole presentation Sheppard had listened quietly,
occasionally looking as if Gregory's fervor surprised him more than his
ideas.

"Obviously you don't believe any of this. . ." the Chief Inspector
commented.

"Not a bit," Gregory answered in a weak voice. He suddenly felt
indifferent to everything. He didn't care whether or not the other side
of the wall was quiet. All he wanted, just as when he left Sciss's
place, was to be alone. The Chief Inspector continued:

"You've done so much research that you hardly sound like a policeman
anymore. Well, I suppose it's a good idea to master the enemy's
language. . . Sciss would probably consider you a good pupil. You still
suspect him, don't you? What do you think his motive is?"

"It's not that I suspect him," Gregory answered. "If I did I'd make a
formal accusation. Actually, I'm more on the defensive, and my position
is quite hopeless. I feel like a cornered rat. I only want to defend
myself against the allegedly miraculous character of this case. After
all, sir, to develop this kind of theory to its full extent, you have to
include everything. Let's say, for example, that there are periodic
interventions of factor X separated by long time intervals; that the
last drop in cancer mortality took place about two thousand years ago --
not in England but in the Near East; that there was a series of alleged
resurrections then also -- you know, Lazarus, and. . . the other one. .
. If we take this story seriously even for one moment, the ground opens
up beneath our feet, our whole civilization turns into jelly, people can
appear and disappear, everything is possible, and the police should just
take off their uniforms, disperse, and disappear. . . and not just the
police. We must have a culprit. If this series has really stopped, then
it will soon be nothing but past history and we won't have anything to
show for it but a couple of plaster casts, a few contradictory stories
told by some not too bright mortuary workers and gravediggers -- and
what kind of investigation can we conduct with that? Finally, the rest
of our investigation will probably concentrate on getting the bodies
back. You're absolutely right: my trick didn't accomplish anything, the
phone call didn't surprise Sciss at all, and yet, wait a minute --"

Gregory leaped from his chair, his eyes blazing.

"Sciss told me something concrete after the phone call. He said he
expects the corpses to be recovered, and he claims he can use his
formula to figure out exactly where they will reappear, that is, when
their energy of movement, as he calls it, will be used up. . . Now it's
up to us to do everything possible to make sure that the reappearances
take place in front of witnesses, at least once."

"Just a minute," interrupted Sheppard, who had been trying for some time
to get Gregory's attention. The detective, almost running around the
room in excitement, seemed for a few moments to have forgotten that the
Chief Inspector was there.

"You've set up an either-or proposition: Sciss -- or the factor. Now
you've practically eliminated the factor, leaving us with nothing but
some kind of crude fraud, a gruesome little game being played out in the
mortuaries. But what if neither alternative is valid? What if the
perpetrator isn't Sciss or the factor? Or what if the perpetrator
invented the factor, then injected it into the corpses as an
experiment?"

"Do you really believe that?" Gregory screamed, running up to the desk.
Panting breathlessly, he stood there, staring at the calm, almost
complacent Chief Inspector. "Do you really believe that. . . that. . .
nonsense? No one invented anything! A discovery like that would be worth
a Nobel Prize! Believe me, the whole world would know about it. That's
one reason. And furthermore, Sciss --"

Gregory stopped short. During the acute silence that followed, a slow,
measured, creaking sound could be heard, not from behind the wall but in
the very room where he was sitting with the Chief Inspector. Gregory had
heard this sound a few times before. The incidents had been several
weeks apart, but each had occurred while he was lying in his bed in the
dark. The first time the creaking had awakened him from a deep sleep.
Absolutely certain that someone was approaching him on bare feet,
Gregory had switched on the light. There was no one in the room. The
second incident had occurred very late -- in fact, just before dawn.
Gregory, exhausted by a sleepless night of listening to Mr. Fenshawe's
acoustical gymnastics, was lying in a state of torpor, neither asleep
nor awake. He'd turned on the light again; like the first time, the room
was empty. The third time, having convinced himself that the wooden
floors in old houses dry unevenly, and that the process can only be
heard during the still hours of the night, Gregory ignored the creaking.
Now, however, the room was well lit by the lamp on the desk and the
furniture, undoubtedly as old as the floor, wasn't making a sound. The
parquet near the stove creaked faintly but distinctly. Soon after,
somewhat closer to the middle of the room, two more creaks followed in
quick succession, one in front of Gregory, the other behind him. After a
minute of quiet during which Gregory remained hunched over without
moving, a weak sound could be heard from Mr. Fenshawe's room, a kind of
giggling -- or was it crying? -- weak, senile, muffled, perhaps by a
quilt -- followed by weak coughing. And then it was quiet again.

"And furthermore, Sciss partially contradicted himself. . ."

Gregory tried to pick up the thread, but the interval had been too long
and he couldn't pretend that nothing had happened. He was at his wits'
end. Shaking his head a few times as if trying to knock some water out
of his ears, he sat down.

"I'm beginning to understand," said Sheppard, leaning back in his chair.
There was a serious expression on his face. "You suspect Sciss because
you think he has a compulsion to do these things. I suppose you've tried
to determine his whereabouts during each of the nights in question. If
he has a good alibi for even one of them, your suspicion collapses --
unless you accept the idea of an accomplice, a miracle-worker per
procuram. Well?"

"Is it possible that he didn't notice anything?" flashed through
Gregory's mind. "It can't be. Maybe. . . maybe he didn't hear it. Maybe
it's old age." He struggled to concentrate. Sheppard's words were still
ringing in his ears but he couldn't grasp their meaning.

"Well yes. . . of course. . ." he muttered. Then, regaining control of
himself: "Sciss is such a loner that it's hard to talk about a tight
alibi. I should have questioned him, but I didn't. I admit I bungled
things. I bungled. . . I didn't even question that woman who runs his
house. . ."

"Woman?" Sheppard said, unable to hide his surprise. He looked at
Gregory, somewhat obviously trying to restrain a smile. "That's his
sister! No, Gregory, the truth is, you haven't accomplished very much.
If you didn't want to question her, you should at least have talked to
me! The day the body disappeared in Lewes -- remember, it was between
three and five in the morning -- Sciss was at my house."

"At your house?" Gregory whispered.

"Yes. I was trying to talk him into helping us -- in a private capacity,
of course -- and I wanted to show him some of the reports. He left just
after

 midnight -- I can't say whether it was five after or twelve-thirty, but
even assuming that it was midnight, I doubt whether he could have driven
fast enough to get to Lewes before three in the morning. It would have
been closer to four. But that's not the most important point. You know,
Lieutenant, there are many kinds of improbabilities -- material ones,
for instance, like the improbability of tossing a coin a hundred times
and having it come up heads ninety-nine times. And certain kinds of
psychological improbability verge just as closely on the impossible.
I've known Sciss for many years. He's an exasperating man, an egomaniac
made of razor blades and glass, arrogant in every possible way,
absolutely devoid of tact, or perhaps completely unaware that civilized
people use good manners not so much out of politeness but for the sake
of simple, comfortable coexistence. I have no illusions about him. But
the insinuation that he could hide on all fours under some old coffins
in a mortuary, or reinforce the jaws of a corpse with adhesive tape, or
stamp footprints into the snow, or wrack his brains to figure out how to
interrupt rigor mortis, or shake a dead body like a scarecrow to
frighten a constable -- this is all absolutely incompatible with
everything I know about him. Now please try to understand. I don't claim
that Sciss couldn't commit a misdemeanor or even a felony. But I'm sure
he could never manage a crime that involves such gruesomely crude
elements. There can only be one Sciss. Either he's the man who
perpetrated that tragic little farce at the cemetery, or he's the man I
know. In other words, if Sciss wanted to get away with staging the
affair at the cemetery, he'd have to pretend to be completely different
in his daily life from the person he really is, or, speaking more
cautiously, than the one he may prove to be, if he did everything you
accuse him of. Do you think that such consistent role-playing is
possible?"

"I've already told you that as far as I'm concerned anything is possible
if it frees me from the necessity of believing in miracles," Gregory
said in a dull voice, rubbing his palms together as if he suddenly felt
cold. "I can't allow myself the luxury of psychologizing. I must have a
perpetrator, and I'll get him no matter what the cost. Maybe Sciss is
insane -- in the full sense of the word -- maybe he's a monomaniac,
maybe he has a split personality or a divided ego, maybe he has an
accomplice, maybe he's using his theory to protect the real culprit --
there are more than enough possibilities."

"Answer one question for me," Sheppard said very gently. "But first I
want you to understand something: I'm not trying to make suggestions,
I'm not initiating anything from the top, and I admit that in this case
I don't know anything -- not a thing."

"What's the question?" Gregory replied sharply, almost brutally, feeling
himself turn pale.

"Why don't you admit that the explanation may not involve criminals?"

"But I've already told you! I've told you several times! Because the
only alternative is a miracle!"

"Do you really mean that?" Sheppard asked, his voice suddenly
solicitous. "All right, let's leave it for now. The alibi I just gave
you for Sciss -- you'll check it out, right? I mean the incident at
Lewes, because I can only vouch for him up till midnight. My coat is
over here, isn't it? Thank you. I think there's going to be a change in
the weather; my rheumatism is beginning to act up and it's a bit hard
for me to raise my arms. Thank you again. It's after midnight already. I
must have lost track of the time. Good night, now. Oh, one more thing.
If you have a free moment -- for training, so to speak -- maybe you
ought to do a little detective work around here and let me know who was
responsible for that creaking during our conversation. After all, it
wasn't a miracle, was it? Please, please, don't look so surprised. You
know very well what I'm talking about. Maybe a little too well. Now, if
I'm not mistaken, I go out by the staircase on the other side of the
drawing room with the mirrors. No, you don't have to show me the way.
The door downstairs is locked, but I noticed that the key was still in
the lock. You can lock it again later when you get a chance -- there
aren't any thieves in this neighborhood. Good night again, and above
all, Lieutenant, remember -- deliberation and discretion."

He went out. Gregory followed him, hardly conscious of what he was
doing. The Chief Inspector, not hesitating for a moment, tramped through
one room after another and quickly descended the stairs to the front
door. The detective followed slowly, hanging on to the bannister like a
drunken man. The front door closed quietly. Gregory reached it, locked
it, mechanically giving the key two turns, then returned upstairs, his
head roaring, his eyes burning as if on fire. Just the way he was, fully
dressed, he threw himself down on his bed. The house was still. Through
the window some far-off lights were dimly visible. The clock ticked
quietly. It would be difficult to say how long Gregory remained in the
same position without moving.

After a while the lamp on the desk seemed less bright than before. "I
must be very tired," Gregory thought. "I have to get to sleep or I won't
be good for anything tomorrow." But he didn't make a move. Something --
a tiny cloud or a puff of smoke -- floated over the empty armchair in
which Sheppard had been sitting. Gregory ignored it and lay there
listlessly, listening to his own breathing. Suddenly, the room
reverberated with the sound of knocking.

Three separate and quite distinct knocks followed. Gregory turned his
head toward the door but still did not get up. Three more knocks. He
wanted to say "come in" but couldn't; his mouth hadn't been so dry since
his last hangover. Standing up, he made for the door.

Gregory put his hand on the doorknob but was unable to move, suddenly
overcome by fear of whoever might be on the other side. Finally, he
yanked the door open and, his heart sinking, peered into the darkness.
There was no one there. He ran out into the long band of light emanating
from the lamp behind him, then made his way past a line of opened doors,
his arms extended frontward so he wouldn't bump into whoever it was.

Not encountering anything, Gregory moved farther down the hallway,
increasingly enveloped in the resonating sounds. "I never realized this
house was so big," he thought; at almost the same moment he saw a tall
shadow backing into a side hall. He took off in pursuit; but the light,
pattering sound of hurrying feet told him that his quarry was running
too. An instant later a door loomed up in front of Gregory. He managed
to jump inside just as it slammed shut, nearly crashing into a
blue-sheeted bed but stopping himself in time. It was Mr. Fenshawe's
room. More confused than ever, he wanted to get away. A bowl-shaped
alabaster lamp was hanging so low over the table that it practically
touched him. The table itself had been pushed alongside the bed. Farther
inside, next to the wall adjacent to his room, he saw two female
manikins -- the kind used in high-fashion salons -- good figures,
beautiful features, real hair. They were both naked, their cream-colored
limbs glistening in the light of the lamp, and one, gazing at Gregory
with an affable fixed smile, was tapping rhythmically on the wall. He
was stunned by the sight.

At almost the same instant he saw Mr. Fenshawe sitting on the floor
behind the manikin, cackling quietly to himself as if he had a hacking
cough. A complicated set of strings ran from his hands to the arms and
bodies of both manikins, and the old man, aided by some levers of the
kind found backstage at a puppet theater, was manipulating them
skillfully.

"No, no," he said, "please don't be frightened. I apologize if the noise
keeps you awake, but I can only do this at night. I contact the spirit
world, you know."

"But you need a table for that," Gregory said absently, glancing around
the room without knowing what he was looking for.

"Tables are old-fashioned. It's done this way now," replied Mr.
Fenshawe, not interrupting his manipulation of the strings.

Gregory didn't answer. There was a floor-length, yellow-fringed window
drape hanging behind Mr. Fenshawe; it was protruding slightly on one
side, as if carefully pulled over a big vertical object of some kind.

Addressing an idiotic question to Mr. Fenshawe -- something or other
about the manufacture of manikins -- then praising the old man's skill
in manipulating them, Gregory gradually moved sideways along the wall
until he was within touching distance of the drape. He extended his arm
and touched a broad, full fold: it gave a little under the pressure,
then resisted it. Gregory knew now: someone was hiding behind the drape!
He took a deep breath, stood for a second with his muscles tensed, then
began walking around the room, keeping up a steady chatter. He confessed
to Mr. Fenshawe about his nightly fears; then, uncertain whether he had
managed to allay the old man's suspicions, he told him about the
investigation, pausing once in front of the manikins and once in front
of the drape, addressing himself first to them and then directly to it,
as if he was no longer paying any attention to Mr. Fenshawe. These
maneuvers made him feel that he was beginning to gain the advantage;
well aware of the risks, he began to space his words with double
meanings, simultaneously poking at the protruding part of the motionless
yellow drape with a feeling of mingled triumph and fear. Laughing out
loud, Gregory swept the room with a flashing glance, looking something
like a second-rate actor's version of a detective. The cry "Come out!
I've got you!" pounded steadily in his head. His speech became blurred
and incoherent; in his excitement he blurted out sentences without
bothering to complete them. Standing with his back to the drape, Gregory
was so close to whoever was hiding behind it that he could feel the
warmth of his body. All at once old Mr. Fenshawe jumped up from the
floor, an expression of terror and compassion in his eyes, and in the
same instant something grabbed hold of Gregory. Unable to tear loose or
to breathe, he flapped his arms helplessly; an icy cold sharpness
pierced his chest; everything around him stopped, the room became as
motionless as a photograph. Gregory fell gently, thinking with
extraordinary acuity, "Well, it's over, but why don't I feel anything?
-- with his last bit of consciousness he prepared himself for the pain,
struggling to keep his eyes open. Looking up from the floor, he saw a
grayish figure framed by the yellow drape. The man bent over Gregory
with uncommon interest. "I can't see," the lieutenant thought in
despair. "Now I'll never find out which of the two. . ." Just as Gregory
began to understand that the man had killed him, that the contest had
ended with his adversary the victor, the room around him became a
gigantic noisy bell. And then he woke up. . . in a dark room, with the
cold, acrid aroma of tobacco smoke hanging in the air. The telephone was
ringing. It stopped for a while, then began again. Only half awake, with
a head as heavy as the nightmare itself, Gregory gradually realized that
the monotonous ringing had been going on for quite some time.

"Gregory," he stammered into the receiver, leaning with his full weight
on an outstretched hand; the room was whirling around.

"This is Gregson. I've been calling you for half an hour. Guess what,
pal, a report just came in from Beavers Home. They found that guy's
corpse -- the one that disappeared about three weeks ago."

"What?" said Gregory in terror. "Where? What corpse?"

"Hey, come on, are you still sleeping? The body of that sailor -- Aloney
-- the one that disappeared from the dissecting lab. They found it in an
old iron foundry. In pretty lousy condition too. It must have been there
a long time."

"In Beverley?" Gregory asked quietly. His head was throbbing -- he felt
as if he'd been out on an all-night drunk.

"No, in Beavers Home. Hey, pull yourself together. It's about six miles
farther north, where Lord Altringham has his stables. You know where I
mean?"

"Who found it?"

"Some workmen; the report just came in but it was last night. In the
middle of some junk in front of an old quonset hut. Piles of rusted
sheet metal all over the place. You going?"

"No. I can't," Gregory blurted out belligerently, and immediately added
in a quiet voice, "I don't feel too well. It may be the flu. Send Calls
-- you get in touch with him, all right? And a doctor too. Sorensen
won't be able to go; that is, he won't want to. Try King. Please take
care of it for me, Gregson. Calls will be able to manage everything. Oh,
have them take a photographer along. Why am I bothering with all this --
you know what to do. I really can't go."

He stopped short, afraid that he was talking too much. For a moment
there was silence on the other end.

"Whatever you say," Gregson said at last. "If you're sick, you can't go.
I thought you'd be interested."

"I am, of course! I want to know whatever they find out. I'm going to
take good care of myself -- aspirin, the whole works -- I'll be back on
my feet soon, and I'll try to get to the Yard around. . . around one.
Tell Calls I'll be waiting for him."

Gregory hung up and walked over to the window. It was daybreak; he knew
he'd never be able to fall asleep again. He swung open the terrace door
and stood in the penetrating damp air. The curtain stirred gently. He
stared at the colorless sky of the new day.

 

 

 

6

 

It was a few minutes to four when Gregory arrived at the Ritz. Glancing
at a clock built into a column marking a streetcar stop, he paused in
front of a display of still photographs from a new film and casually
studied the glass-covered pictures of a long-legged woman in torn
underwear, some masked gangsters, and two cars colliding in a cloud of
dust. One after another, big American cars pulled up in front of the
restaurant. A pair of tourists from across the ocean emerged from a long
black Packard: the woman, old and hideously made up, was wearing
diamonds and a sable cape; her escort, a slim young man discreetly
dressed in gray, held her handbag and waited patiently until she got out
of the car. On the other side of the street the neon marquee of a
theater flashed on in a burst of light and movement, its bluish
reflection glittering in the windows of nearby stores. When the hands of
the clock indicated 4:20, Gregory began moving toward the Ritz. The
earlier part of the afternoon had gone as he expected. Calls finally
came back with a medical report on the body and an account of the
circumstances in which it was found, both absolutely worthless, and
Gregory was forced to admit that his idea of setting up stake-outs to
watch for the returning bodies was fantasy, plain and simple. He
couldn't possibly get enough policemen to cover an area of more than
eighty square miles.

A doorman in gold braid opened the door for him. His gloves were more
respectable-looking than Gregory's. Uncertain how the meeting would go,
the lieutenant was worried and ill at ease. Sciss had phoned him around
noon to suggest having dinner together, trying so hard to be gracious
that he gave the impression of having forgotten the events of the
previous evening. He hadn't even mentioned the unfortunate phone call.
"The second act," Gregory mused, looking around the large dining room.
He saw Sciss and headed for his table, thus managing to escape from the
approaching headwaiter. As he drew closer he saw that there were two
other men with Sciss. He didn't recognize either one. When the
introductions were over, Gregory leaned uncomfortably against the red
velvet upholstered back of his chair; he was flanked on both sides by
majolica potted palms, and from the table, which was situated on a
raised platform, he had a fine view of the whole interior of the Ritz:
elegant women; brilliantly colored, brightly lit fountains;
pseudo-Moorish columns. Sciss handed him the menu. Gregory wrinkled his
forehead, pretending to study it. He was beginning to feel that Sciss
was out to make a fool of him.

His earlier assumption -- that Sciss wanted to have a candid private
talk -- was clearly wrong. "The ass is using his friends to impress me,"
Gregory thought, looking with affected indifference at his table
companions, Armour Black and Doctor McCatt. Gregory knew Black from his
books and from pictures in the newspapers. About fifty years old, Black
was at the height of his popularity. A long series of best-selling
novels, written after years of silence, had finally made him famous. The
writer kept himself in excellent shape, and in person it was easy to see
that the news pictures showing him on the tennis court or with fishing
rod in hand were genuine. Black had big, neatly manicured hands; his
head was large, with a thick crop of dark hair, a fleshy nose, and thick
eyebrows that overshadowed his face; sometimes, when he closed his eyes
for a while in the middle of a conversation, his age showed. The other
man seemed much younger but probably wasn't; boyish-looking and very
thin, he had close-set blue eyes and a protruding Adams apple that
seemed to stretch the skin of his neck. His behavior was eccentric, to
say the least. Sometimes he hunched over and stared with glazed eyes at
the whiskey glass in front of him; then, seeming to regain his senses,
he'd straighten up and sit rigidly for a minute or so. A moment later he
would stare around the dining room with his mouth gaping open or would
turn, stare persistently at Gregory, then break out laughing like a
mischievous child. He seemed the same type as Sciss, and because of this
Gregory assumed he was one of Sciss's students. But while Sciss reminded
him of a long-legged bird, there was something reminiscent of a rodent
in McCatt.

The drift of Gregory's zoological associations was interrupted by a
slight dispute between Black and Sciss.

"No, anything but Chateau Margot," the writer stated categorically,
shaking the wine list. "That sorry excuse for a wine would kill even the
best appetite. It destroys the taste buds and curdles the stomach
juices. And in general," he said, glancing at the wine list with an air
of aversion, "there's nothing here. Not a thing! Of course it isn't my
problem. I'm used to making sacrifices."

"Oh, please." Sciss seemed genuinely embarrassed. The headwaiter
appeared, his dignified bearing and long, black tails reminding Gregory
of a well-known symphony orchestra conductor. Black was still grumbling
when the hors d'oeuvres were served. Sciss tried to make conversation,
bringing up a recent news item, but his effort was received in silence.
Without making the slightest effort to answer, Black turned to Sciss
with his mouth full, his eyes blazing in outrage as if the scientist was
guilty of some terrible indiscretion. "This famous friend of his
certainly doesn't let him get away with anything," Gregory thought to
himself with satisfaction. The men ate silently against the increasingly
noisy background of the other diners. Between the soup and the main
course, McCatt lit a cigarette, unwittingly threw the burned-out match
into his wine, then had some trouble fishing it out. Gregory, for want
of anything better to do, watched him listlessly. The meal was nearly
over when Black finally spoke.

"All right, I forgive you. But if I were in your place, Harvey, my
conscience would be bothering me. That duck -- what did they do to her
before she died? There's something about long-drawn-out funerals that
always ruins the appetite."

"But Armour. . ." Sciss mumbled, uncertain what to say. He tried to
laugh but without much success.

Black shook his head slowly. "I didn't say anything. Here we are --
vultures gathered from the four corners of the earth. . . and those
apples! What an atrocity! To stone a defenseless animal to death with
apples! Don't you agree: oh, and à propos, you're compiling statistics
on supernatural occurrences in cemeteries, if I remember correctly,
aren't you?"

"Yes. I can show them to you if you want. There's nothing supernatural
involved. You'll see for yourself."

"Nothing supernatural? How dull! My dear fellow, if there's no element
of the supernatural, I'm not at all interested in your statistics. What
good are they?"

Observing Sciss's agony and his complete inability to defend himself
against Black, Gregory finally began to enjoy himself.

"But it's really a very interesting problem," McCatt observed
good-heartedly.

"What problem? Nothing but some plagiarism from the Gospels, that's all!
Or is there something I don't know about?"

"Please try to be serious for a minute," Sciss said, making no effort to
disguise his impatience.

"But I'm never more serious than when I'm joking," said Black.

"You know," McCatt turned to Sciss, "I'm reminded of a story. You've
heard of the Elberfeld horses, haven't you -- the ones that were
supposed to be able to read and count. The case was very much like the
one you're working on -- the only alternatives seemed to be fraud or a
miracle."

"And in the end it turned out that it wasn't a fraud, right?" Black
interrupted.

"No, it wasn't. The man who trained the horses -- I can't remember his
name -- wasn't trying to deceive anyone. He really believed that the
horses could talk and count. They tapped out numbers and the letters of
the alphabet with their hooves, and they were usually able to hit on the
right answer by watching him -- not by lip reading or anything like
that, but by interpreting various aspects of his outward appearance --
changes in his facial expression, unconscious gestures, changes in his
posture, movements so slight that human observers didn't notice them.
But of course these performances all took place under strict scientific
supervision."

"And that explanation satisfied the scientists?"

"Yes, by and large. Because in this case the traditional position that
you must choose between two possibilities -- either a miracle or a bluff
-- didn't work. There was a third answer."

"I have a better analogy," Sciss said, leaning forward on his elbows.
"Table tipping. As you know, even people who don't believe in
spiritualism can lift tables into the air and move them around. From the
traditional point of view, you have either another case of fraud or a
genuine manifestation from the spirit world. But in actual fact it isn't
a fraud or a spirit that tips the table. The movement results from the
combined action of all the microscopic muscle vibrations of each
individual in the group of people whose hands are joined above the
table. Since each of these individuals is an organism of the same kind,
their neuromuscular structures are closely related; thus we see a
specific collective process, a definite oscillation of tonus, muscle
tension, and nervous impulse rhythm. The people in the circle are
completely unaware of the phenomenon, and in effect a combination of
forces occurs which brings pressure to bear on the tabletop."

"Oh, come on," said the writer, considerably quieter now and showing
real interest. "Exactly what are you trying to say? That the corpses
disappeared because of an oscillation in the afterworld? That dead
bodies rise from time to time to satisfy a complicated statistical
procedure? My dear fellow, I much prefer a miracle without the
statistical trimmings."

"Armour, must you make fun of everything?" Sciss flared up angrily, his
forehead turning red. "My analogy was elementary and therefore
incomplete. This series of so-called resurrections, which really aren't
resurrections at all, presents a specific curve. It isn't as if all the
corpses disappeared on the same day. The incidents began with very
slight body movements, then the phenomenon increased, reached a maximum,
and began to drop. So far as the coefficient of correlation with cancer
is concerned, it is considerably higher than the coefficient of
correlation between sudden deaths and sunspots. I already told you that
--"

"I know! I know! I remember! It's a simple case of cancer à rebours:
instead of killing things it does the opposite -- it brings them back to
life. A brilliant scheme, symmetrical, positively Hegelian!" said Black.
His left eyelid was fluttering impatiently, making it look as if a black
butterfly was sitting just under his eyebrow. This impression was
heightened by the writer's angry efforts to stop the movements of the
tic with his finger.

"Nowadays rationalism is the fashion, not the method, and superficiality
is always one of the characteristic features of fashion," Sciss said
coldly, ignoring the writer's sarcasm. "At the end of the nineteenth
century it was universally believed that we knew almost everything there
was to know about the material world, that there was nothing left to do,
except keep our eyes open and establish priorities. The stars moved in
accordance with calculations not very different from those needed to run
a steam engine; the atoms too, and so forth. A perfect society was
attainable, and it could be constructed bit by bit according to a
clear-cut plan. In the exact sciences these naively optimistic theories
were abandoned long ago, but they are still alive in the thought
processes of everyday life. So-called common sense relies on programmed
nonperception, concealment, or ridicule of everything that doesn't fit
into the conventional nineteenth century vision of a world that can be
explained down to the last detail. Meanwhile, in actuality you can't
take a step without encountering some phenomenon that you cannot
understand and will never understand without the use of statistics. And
thus we have, for example, the famous duplicitas causum of the doctors,
the behavior of crowds, and the cyclical fluctuations of the content of
dreams, or such phenomena as table tipping."

"Fine, fine. You're right as usual. But what about the cemetery
incidents?" Black asked gently. "I've heard you out and table tipping
will never be a problem for me again, but unfortunately I can't say the
same thing about your resurrections."

Gregory twisted around in his chair, delighted by the writer's comments.
He glanced eagerly at Sciss. The scientist, having calmed down a bit,
was watching the other men with a slight, almost phony smile; the
corners of his small mouth turned downward: as always when he was about
to say something momentous, his expression combined helplessness with
triumph.

"Not long ago McCatt showed me a new electronic computer that uses human
language. When he plugged it in, the speaker gave a few grunts and
started babbling incoherently. It sounded like a phonograph record being
played at the wrong speed, but with a record you can sometimes recognize
snatches of music or words; the sounds the computer produced were all
gibberish. It took me completely by surprise -- I still remember the
experience vividly. Incidentals like that sometimes prevent you from
seeing the whole picture. In the case of the mortuaries, the corpses are
only accessories, shocking perhaps, but. . ."

"So you still maintain that according to your formula the thing has been
solved," said Black slowly, watching through drooping eyes as Sciss
emphatically denied the statement with his head.

"Let me finish. My mass-statistical approach concentrates on the
phenomenon as a whole. I admit that we still need an analysis of the
individual instances, and a study of the processes which generate the
actual movements of the dead bodies, but such a particularized, specific
treatment of the problem is outside my field of competence."

"Now I understand. You're saying that your theory explains the movement
of a large number of bodies taken as a group, but that we still don't
know what makes any particular corpse move?"

Sciss compressed his lips, then pouted again. He answered in a quiet
voice, but a slight grimace testified to the feeling of contempt behind
his words.

"Any event can be understood on two levels, and this is a fact that you
won't change by ridiculing me. According to statistics, let's say, a gun
is fired once every five days in a big city. But if you're sitting next
to a window and a bullet smashes the pane over your head, you don't
reason this way: 'A shot has just been fired, there won't be another for
five more days, therefore I'm safe.' Instead, you assume that someone is
after you with a gun, maybe a madman, and that it's a good idea to take
cover under the table. I have just given you an example of the
difference between a prediction based on mass-statistics and an
individual reaction to a single event; the individual reaction is
relatively subordinate to the mass-statistical calculation."

"What do you think about all this?" Black asked, turning to Gregory.

"Me? I'm looking for a human criminal," the lieutenant replied quietly.

"Is that so? Yes, of course. . . naturally, as a specialist in
individual occurrences, you wouldn't believe in a virus."

"But I do believe in it. It's a remarkable virus. And fortunately it has
many identifiable traits. For example, it likes darkness and solitude,
that's why it only operates at night in godforsaken out-of-the-way
holes. It avoids policemen like the plague -- evidently because they
have some special immunity. Furthermore, it likes dead animals,
especially cats. And it has literary interests also, although it limits
itself to weather forecasts."

The writer listened to Gregory with increasing amusement. His face
changed, taking on a cheerful expression, and he began speaking quickly.

"You could get a warrant to arrest almost anyone with that description,
Inspector. Whoever throws rocks at the Earth, for instance. After all,
meteors usually strike the Earth at night, they come down in solitary
places where there are no people or policemen to see them -- in fact,
they almost always hit a little before daybreak, which shows how tricky
they are, since night watchmen usually fall asleep just before dawn. If
you asked Sciss about this, he'd tell you that the areas most frequently
bombarded by meteors lie in a zone of retreating night and thus
constitute the forepart of Earth during its cosmic voyage through space
-- and, since it is a well-known fact that more falling leaves hit the
front window of a moving car than the rear window, we have an analogy. .
. et cetera. But you have to find a perpetrator soon, don't you?"

"Falling meteors and viruses acting up don't interest me -- I'm
concerned about the real person behind all this; I may be unimaginative
but he's the only perpetrator I want. I'm not worried about whoever's
responsible for meteors and stars. . ." Gregory answered, his tone
sharper than he intended.

The writer watched him for a moment. "Oh, you'll get your man all right.
I guarantee it. Besides. . . you already have him."

"Really?" The lieutenant raised his eyebrows.

"It may be that you aren't going after him the right way -- maybe you
haven't collected enough evidence to put the finger on him yet -- but
that's not the real point. A culprit who isn't caught is a defeat for
you -- it means still another folder in the unsolved cases file. But a
culprit who doesn't exist, who never existed, that's something
completely different, worse than all your records burning up, worse even
than confused language in your official reports, it's the end of the
world! For you the existence of the perpetrator of a crime has nothing
to do with victory or defeat -- it's a matter of the sense or absurdity
of your profession and your daily activities. And because catching him
means peace of mind, salvation, and relief, you'll get him by hook or by
crook, you'll get the bastard even if he doesn't exist!"

"In other words, I have a persecution mania, I'm obsessed, I'm
proceeding in spite of the facts?" said Gregory, closing his eyes. The
conversation had gone on long enough -- he was ready to end it even if
he had to be arrogant.

"The reporters are all eager to talk to that constable who ran away from
the mortuary," said Black. "Are you? Do you expect much from his story?"

"No."

"I knew it," the writer said coldly. "If he recovers and says he saw a
resurrection with his own eyes, you'll think he imagined it, you'll tell
yourself that you can't depend on the testimony of a man who has a
serious brain concussion, and all the doctors will say the same thing.
Or maybe you'll say that your perpetrator was even more clever than you
assumed -- that the constable couldn't see him because he used some kind
of invisible nylon thread or covered himself with a black substance. For
you, Inspector, only Barabbas exists; if you had been a witness at that
famous scene, and heard a voice saying 'Lazarus, arise!' -- you'd remain
yourself, you wouldn't change at all. By yourself I mean a victim of
hallucination or illusion, or a clever fraud. I say that you will never,
never give up the idea that there is a perpetrator because your
existence depends on his!"

Although he had told himself not to let Black's remarks affect him,
Gregory could feel his face turning pale. He tried to smile but
couldn't.

"In other words, I'm the kind of policeman who was assigned to guard the
Holy Sepulcher," he said. "Or I'm like Paul -- before his conversion.
You're not going to give me a single break, are you?"

"No!" said the writer. "But it's not me. You yourself won't. This isn't
a question of methodology or statistics or even of systematic
investigation -- it's a matter of faith. You believe in a perpetrator
because you have to. We need policemen like you, but we also need Holy
Sepulchers."

"I'll go you one better," said Gregory, laughing unnaturally. "You could
say that I'm not even doing what I want to do, just acting out a role in
a tragedy, or a tragicomedy. Or something, you tell me, since you're so
eager to be the chorus. . ."

"Why not? That's my job," the writer declared.

Sciss had been listening to this conversation with growing impatience.
Finally, he could no longer contain himself.

"Armour, my dear friend," he said in a persuasive voice, "paradoxes are
as necessary to you as water is to a fish. I know you enjoy doing it,
but don't reduce things to absurdities."

"A fish doesn't create the water," Black responded, but Sciss wasn't
listening.

"This case has to do with facts, not with drama or lyric poetry. As you
know very well, Entia non sunt multiplicanda. Faith is not involved in
the analysis of a series of facts. A working hypothesis may sometimes be
invalid, but even an invalid hypothesis, if nothing else, affirms that
there is a human perpetrator. . ."

"As long as there are human beings facts don't exist in a void," said
the writer. "Once a fact emerges into consciousness it is already an
interpretation. Facts? A thousand years ago a similar event gave rise to
a new religion. And even if it had turned out to be an anti-religion,
there would still be the same crowds of believers and priests, the mass
hallucinations, the empty coffins pulled apart for relics, the blind
seeing, the deaf beginning to hear. . . I admit that action in this
sphere is more limited and less mythologized nowadays, the Inquisitor
doesn't threaten to torture anyone for statistical heresies -- that's
why the tabloid papers make such big profits. Facts, my dear friend, are
your business as well as the Inspector's. You're both the kind of
disciples on which our era is founded. Inspector, I hope you aren't
angry at me because of our little disagreement. I don't know you so I
can't possibly predict whether or not you'll end up another Paul. But
even if you do, Scotland Yard will remain the same. The police are never
converted. I don't know if you ever noticed that."

"You turn everything into a joke," Sciss grunted indifferently. McCatt
whispered to him for a moment, then they both got up. Outside the
checkroom Gregory found himself standing next to Sciss, who suddenly
turned to him and said in a lowered voice:

"Do you have anything to say to me?"

Gregory hesitated, then, acting on an impulse, took Sciss's hand and
shook it.

"Please don't think about me, just go about your work in peace," he
replied.

"Thank you," said Sciss. His voice was so shaky that even Gregory was
surprised and confused. Armour Black's car was parked in front of the
Ritz. Sciss got in with him, leaving Gregory alone with McCatt. Although
Gregory would have preferred to say good-bye, McCatt proposed that they
walk together for a while.

Both men were the same height; walking side by side, they reluctantly
became aware of this fact on several different occasions when each
discovered the other peering at him curiously out of the corner of his
eye. These unexpected encounters called for a smile, but neither one was
willing to make the gesture. After a while McCatt stopped at a vegetable
stand and bought a banana. Peeling it, he glanced at Gregory.

"Do you like bananas?"

"Not too much."

"Are you in a rush?"

"No."

"Why don't we try our luck," McCatt suggested, pointing at the brightly
lit entrance of a penny arcade.

Cheered by the thought, Gregory nodded and followed him inside. Several
greasy-haired teenagers were watching sullenly as one of their number
fired a line of blue sparks at a small airplane revolving behind the
window of a glass case. McCatt walked straight to the back of the
arcade, passing a row of pinball machines and automatic roulette games.
He stopped in front of a glass-topped metal case. Underneath the glass
cover there was a green landscape, complete with bushes and trees. He
deftly threw a coin into the slot, pulled a lever, and turned to
Gregory.

"Do you know this game?"

"No."

"It's called 'Hottentots and Kangaroo.' There aren't any Hottentots in
Australia, but what difference does it make? I'll be the kangaroo.
Ready?"

He pressed a button. A little kangaroo jumped out of a black slot and
fell into a clump of bushes. Gregory pulled his lever -- and three
funny-looking little black figures slid out on his side. He manipulated
the handgrip, moving his Hottentots closer to the place where he thought
the kangaroo was hiding. At the last minute the kangaroo jumped out,
broke through Gregory's skirmish line, and again took refuge in the
jungle. They wandered that way across the whole plastic map; every time
Gregory got too close the kangaroo managed to escape. Finally Gregory
worked out a tactical plan: positioning one Hottentot at the place where
the kangaroo had disappeared, he held the other two in reserve, aligning
them in such a way that McCatt couldn't possibly escape. He caught the
kangaroo on his next move.

"For a beginner you're very good," McCatt said. His eyes were sparkling,
he was chuckling like a boy. Gregory shrugged his shoulders, feeling
somewhat foolish.

"Maybe because I'm a hunter by profession."

"No, it's not that. You have to use your mind in this game. There's no
other way to play it. You understood the principle right off. This game
lends itself to mathematical analysis, you know. Sciss hates this kind
of fun -- it's a defect, a fundamental defect in his personality. . ."

That said, he walked slowly down the row of slot machines, threw a coin
into one of them and jerked the lever, setting the colorful disks into
motion: a flood of coins streamed out of the machine into his
outstretched hand. The kids up front, noticing this, began to move
slowly in his direction, watching as McCatt nonchalantly threw the money
into his pocket. But McCatt didn't try his luck again and the two men
left, passing the stubborn dull-witted fellow near the entrance who was
still shoving coin after coin into the machine in a desperate effort to
shoot down the airplane.

An arcade lined by shops came into view a few steps farther on. Gregory
recognized it at once: it was the same one he had wandered into not long
before; inside, toward the back, he saw a huge mirror closing off the
far end.

"There's no exit here," he said, coming to a stop.

"I know. You suspect Sciss, don't you?"

Gregory paused for a moment before answering.

"Is he a friend of yours?"

"You could say that. But. . . he really doesn't have any friends."

"I know, it's not very easy to like him," Gregory said with surprising
emphasis. "Only. . . you shouldn't ask me questions like that."

"I only meant it rhetorically. After all, it's obvious that you suspect
him. Maybe not of engineering the disappearances, but, let's say. . . of
being an accomplice. However, and I don't mean to sound facetious, only
time will tell. I just want to know one thing: would you close the
investigation if you witnessed, with your own eyes, something that looks
like a resurrection? That is, a dead man sitting, moving around. . ."

"Did Sciss tell you to ask me that?" Gregory asked in a sarcastic tone
of voice. Without realizing it, the two men had walked as far as the
center of the arcade, stopping in front of a shop window. Inside it a
barefoot window decorator was undressing a willowy blonde manikin.
Gregory was suddenly reminded of his dream. He watched attentively as
the manikin's slender, pink body emerged from under the gold lame.

"It's too bad you understood it that way," McCatt answered slowly.
Bowing his head slightly, he turned on his heel and walked away, leaving
Gregory in front of the shop window.

The lieutenant took a few steps farther into the arcade, but turned back
after seeing his reflection in the mirror. On the street outside more
and more window displays were lit up, and the noise and bustling had
intensified as it usually does in the early evening. Continually jostled
as he walked along deep in thought, he finally turned into a side
street. After a minute or two he found himself standing at the entrance
to a courtyard. The display cases on both sides of the gate belonged to
a photographer, and his eyes swept over the rows of wedding pictures,
quickly taking in the conventionally retouched happy couples -- the
brides all smiling shyly behind their veils, the tuxedoed men affecting
virile poses. He walked into the courtyard. An old man in a slovenly,
unbuttoned leather smock was kneeling beside the open hood of an old
car, listening to the purring of its motor with his eyes closed. Behind
him there was a garage, its doors open. Gregory could see several other
cars inside, as well as empty gasoline cans and piles of spare parts
scattered along the walls. The man in the smock, seeming to sense
Gregory's presence, opened his eyes and jumped to his feet. The
expression of ecstasy left his face.

"What can I do for you, mister? You want to rent a car?"

"What? Uh. . . you rent cars?" Gregory asked.

"Of course. Allow me, sir. Would you like a new one? I have this year's
Buick, automatic transmission, the smoothest ride you ever had. How long
do you want it?"

"No. . . uh, yes. Just for tonight. Yes, I'll take the Buick," Gregory
decided. "Do you want a deposit?"

"That depends."

Gregory showed him his identity card. The man smiled and bowed.

"You don't have to leave no deposit, Inspector, it goes without saying.
You can pay me the fifteen shillings later. The Buick, right? Should I
gas her up?"

"Yes. Will it take long?"

"No. . . only a minute."

The man disappeared into the garage. One of the dark cars gave a start
and quietly pulled out onto the concrete drive. Gregory paid, placing
the money in the proprietor's chubby, greasy palm. He slammed the door,
adjusted the seat, tested the brake, worked the pedals for a moment to
get accustomed to them, threw the car into gear, and drove carefully
into the street. It was still fairly light outside.

The car was really new and it handled easily. At the first red light
Gregory turned around and studied its length through the panoramic rear
window. He wasn't used to such a big car, but he enjoyed the rhythmic
throbbing of its powerful engine. The traffic was heavy for a while, but
Gregory put on more speed after it thinned out. There were fewer private
cars in the street now, and more brightly painted vans, panel trucks,
and motorcycles delivering merchandise. He had reached the East End when
he realized that he didn't have any cigarettes.

Gregory drove along several narrow streets posted with no parking signs,
finally finding a spot next to a cluster of dry trees enclosed by an old
iron grating that looked like a huge bird cage. He backed the Buick in
until he could feel the tires bumping gently against the curb, then got
out and began looking for a tobacco shop he had seen from the car. He
had never been in this neighborhood before, however, and as a result he
couldn't find it. He walked up the next side street. It was beginning to
get darker. He saw two or three long-haired youths loitering in the
glare outside a small movie house. Their hands crammed into the pockets
of their wrinkled tight pants, they were patiently watching the still
photographs in a revolving drum that advertised coming attractions. Just
past the movie theater Gregory was caught in a blast of hot air from the
open door of a cafeteria. Inside he could see some sausages sizzling on
an open grill, and through the smoke he made out several more
long-haired characters like the ones outside the theater. Finally he
found the tobacco shop. The proprietor, a short hunchback with a face as
flat as a pancake and almost no neck, handed him a package of American
cigarettes. On the way out Gregory encountered another dwarf; this one,
unusually fat, with short arms and legs, was removing a tray of
sugar-covered pastries from a delivery wagon. Gregory tore the
cellophane off the package, lit a cigarette, and inhaled deeply.
Deciding to return to the car by a different route, he crossed the
street and walked straight ahead, looking for a cross street leading to
the right. He passed another cafeteria, its door open also, with a
narrow, sausage-shaped red, green, and white flag drooping over its
entrance like a rag. Down the street there was a penny arcade full of
people, a grocery, and a hardware store. Most of the sidewalk outside
the hardware store was blocked by piles of merchandise. The proprietor,
dressed in a black sweater and smoking a pipe, was sitting under a tree,
watching a little cart on the other side of the street. Hearing a catchy
tune from that direction, Gregory paused and took a close look. Although
the occupant of the cart was standing, only the upper part of his chest
was visible; actually, it was an armless torso; the head, swinging to
left and right in quick half turns was playing a brisk march on a
harmonica mounted on a wire frame. Gregory put his hand in his pocket
and toyed nervously with a coin; then, by an effort of sheer willpower,
forced himself to walk away. The high-pitched sound of the harmonica
followed him for a while. Shuddering as the image of the street musician
flashed into his mind, Gregory realized, almost as an afterthought, that
he was beginning to feel a little like a dwarf. The idea fascinated him.
"A street of dwarfs," he thought. It suddenly occurred to him that the
series of disappearances had to have a clear-cut meaning, even if it was
hidden. It would be difficult to discard everything at this point and
start all over again on a hunch, he mused. There were no street lamps
and it was getting darker and darker -- the street was lit only by faint
streaks of light from the shop windows. Up ahead Gregory saw a gap in
the streaks -- the street he was looking for.

The cross street was almost empty, lit more or less by an old-fashioned
gas lamp hanging from a spiral iron arm attached to a wall. Gregory
walked slowly, smoking his cigarette until the wet tobacco at the end
began burning and singed his lips. Just past the corner there was an
antique shop, or so the sign claimed, but there was nothing in the
window except a dusty pile of cardboard boxes and some old photographs
of movie stars scattered about like an abandoned deck of playing cards.
At the end of the street he found the little square where he had parked
the car.

Some children were playing hide-and-seek near the iron grating, popping
out from behind the cagelike structure, which enclosed a statue of
someone in a bishop's miter, to throw pieces of wood at his Buick.

"That's enough fooling around, you hear me!" he shouted, emerging from
the shadows. The children scattered noisily, more exuberant than
frightened. He got in and started the motor. Cut off from his
surroundings by the car windows, he had a premonition that he was about
to unleash something he'd be sorry for later on. The premonition urged
him not to go ahead with whatever it was he had just started. He
hesitated for a second, but his fingers tightened automatically on the
gearshift, and the car began coasting down the slope. Reducing speed
gradually, he turned into a broad avenue, passing a street sign but not
managing to read it.

The dashboard clock radiated a pinkish color; its hands stood at seven
o'clock. Time was really flying today. Various events connected with the
case came to mind, but Gregory rejected them -- he wanted to push them
out of his consciousness, trying hard not to think about the case, as if
it was important not to think about it, as if everything would turn out
all right if he left it alone; somehow, he felt, all the details would
fall into place when he came back to them later on.

He was leaving the East End when the flashing directional signal of a
dark car in front of him caught his eye. Recognizing the dented rear
bumper, he slowed down and stayed at a safe distance behind the car. He
managed without any trouble.

The dark gray sedan turned again into a deserted tree-lined street.
Gregory allowed it to get a few more yards ahead; then, to keep from
attracting attention, he turned off his lights, following the other car
like this for a long time. Once or twice, at intersections, he had to
speed up to make sure he wouldn't lose it but he preferred not to get
too close. There weren't many other cars on the street though, and Sciss
was a careful driver, who used his directional signals often. The orange
flashes were a big help, but Gregory was a little annoyed because he
didn't always know where he was. Suddenly he recognized the bluish
letters of an advertising sign and immediately everything fell into
place. There was a branch of the City Bank, next door to it a small cafe
he had frequented in his youth. The dark sedan pulled up to the curb.
Gregory made a quick decision: at the risk of losing Sciss, who was
already getting out of his car, Gregory drove up to the next block. He
stopped in front of a big chestnut tree which protected the Buick from
the light of the street lamps, slammed the doors, and hurried back, but
Sciss was nowhere to be seen. Gregory stopped in front of the cafe and
tried to peek through the windows. Some posters pasted on the glass
blocked his view, so he raised his collar and went inside, unable to
resist the unpleasant feeling that he was doing something ridiculous.

The cafe had several rooms; three or four, he'd never known quite how
many. They were spacious, furnished with marble-topped tables; each room
was separated from the others by a partition padded with worn-out red
velvet, the kind of material used to upholster settees.

Gregory spotted Sciss's reflection in a narrow mirror on the wall of the
passageway between the first and second rooms. He was seated at a table,
saying something to a waiter. Gregory backed up, looking for a corner
from which he could watch Sciss without being seen. It wasn't easy. When
he finally selected a spot and sat down, he discovered that the
partitions blocked his view of Sciss's table, but he couldn't move
because the waiter was already headed toward him. Ordering a hot toddy,
Gregory spread out the Sunday Times, annoyed that he couldn't see Sciss
and that he was sitting like a dog outside a fox's lair. He forced
himself to work on the crossword puzzle, watching the empty space
between the partitions and the opposite wall. About ten minutes later,
while he was still sipping the sickeningly sweet drink, Sciss suddenly
stood up and walked quickly from room to room as if looking for someone.
Gregory barely managed to hide himself behind the outspread Times, but
Sciss didn't notice the lieutenant and returned to his "box," now
sitting in such a way that Gregory could see his long legs and his
bluish yellow shoes. Another ten minutes went by. In the back, near the
billiard table, some students were arguing noisily with each other.
Sciss leaned out of his hiding place every time the door creaked.
Finally, he stood up, smiling heartily at a girl standing in the
doorway. She hesitated, then walked toward him, her flat handbag,
hanging on a strap from her shoulder, bouncing against her hips. She was
wearing a purple coat, with a hood that covered all but a few wisps of
her light-colored hair. Gregory couldn't see her face. The girl stood in
front of Sciss, who began talking very rapidly. He touched the sleeve of
her coat. She shook her head as if saying no, then slid in between the
partition and the table. Both disappeared from view. Taking advantage of
a temporary commotion among the students in the back room, Gregory
reluctantly circled the inside of the cafe, and headed back to his table
from the other direction, attempting all the while to watch Sciss and
the girl through a mirror hanging high on the wall. Pretending to be
looking for a particular newspaper, he moved from table to table until
he found a good vantage point, then fell into a red settee with
protruding springs. It was hard to see the mirror, but at least the dim
lighting and the location gave some assurance that Sciss wouldn't be
able to spot him. The mirror enabled Gregory to see Sciss slightly from
above. Sciss had moved from his chair to the sofa next to the girl;
talking rapidly, without even looking at her, he almost seemed to be
directing his words at the table, an impression heightened by Gregory's
foreshortened view of the scene. The girl, full-lipped with a childlike
face, was no more than seventeen years old. She still had her coat on,
but she had opened it and pushed the hood back, letting her hair spill
out over her shoulders. Sitting straight up with her shoulders pressed
against the red upholstery, and staring frontward instead of at Sciss,
she looked unnaturally stiff and still, conveying the unmistakable
impression that she was uncomfortable and perhaps a little tired. Sciss
kept talking and talking; at one point he leaned toward the girl,
reluctantly pulled back as if his advance had been rejected, then
brought his restless thin lips close to her face without looking at her.
At the same time, his bony hand moved up and down on the table top in
rhythm with what he was saying; clenching and unclenching his fingers,
he almost furtively caressed the table. The whole scene was so stupid,
so pathetic that Gregory wanted to turn away, but he kept watching. The
girl smiled once, but only with her lips, not with her eyes, then
continued sitting as before, her head bowed, listening but not saying
anything. Gregory could see her in the mirror; her cheeks were cast in
shadow by her hair, she had a small, snub nose. For an instant, but only
that once, Gregory noticed a sparkle in her eyes. Sciss finally became
silent. With his shoulders hunched over and a strained expression on his
face, he seemed to be alone even though the girl was still sitting at
his side. Staring at the marble table top, he reached for a paper
napkin, quickly jotted a few words on it, folded the paper in four
parts, and slid it across the table. The girl didn't want to take it.
Sciss quite visibly begged and pestered her. She finally picked it up,
then put it down again, unopened, touching him with her fingertips.
Sciss grabbed her by the hand. She stiffened, glancing at him with
wide-open eyes. It seemed to Gregory that her face had darkened. Sciss
listened to whatever she was saying, nodded his head, then leaned toward
her and began talking slowly, emphatically, underlining words with
gestures of his hand, pressing strongly, urgently on the table as if
trying to smash something into the slab of marble with his palm. When he
finished, he took hold of the edge of the table with both hands as if he
wanted to push it away. The girl's lips moved. Gregory read them: "No."
Sciss swung around in his chair, turning his face toward the room.
Gregory tried to see what had happened to the napkin; it was under the
table next to the girl's foot. Meanwhile, Sciss got up. He put a few
coins on the table and slowly made his way to the door. He stopped
there. The girl followed, pulling the hood over her head without
bothering to arrange her hair. She was slender, in a childlike way, with
a teenager's long legs. The door hadn't even closed behind them when
Gregory was up on his feet; he moved quickly to their table, bent down
to pick up the napkin, shoved it into his pocket, and rushed out into
the street. The sedan was just beginning to pull away from the curb. The
girl was sitting next to Sciss. Without trying to hide, Gregory hurried
up the block to his Buick. While struggling with the door lock, he
turned around and saw the bright wink of the Chrysler's directional
signals disappearing around a corner -- Sciss had made a turn. Gregory
jumped into his car, stepped on the gas, and pulled away in pursuit --
for a while it looked as if he had lost the Chrysler, and he was
beginning to feel a sense of relief and satisfaction, but suddenly he
caught sight of the gray sedan in the heavy traffic in front of him.
Sciss drove onto the upper level of the northbound highway, but at the
third exit turned off onto a winding overpass. Gregory followed close
behind -- the traffic was so heavy that he could allow himself this
luxury without being noticed. He attempted to see through the sedan's
rear window but couldn't make out much more than two human figures.
Before long they arrived in a neighborhood occupied almost entirely by
brand-new multistoried housing projects. Sciss came to a sudden stop
without pulling over to the curb. Gregory, not wanting to lose him,
drove slowly past, then turned around in his seat to watch through his
rear window. Sciss unexpectedly accelerated, overtook and passed
Gregory's car, made a U-turn, and drove back in the direction he'd come
from, leaving Gregory behind. The street ran alongside the project,
following a line of six-story buildings and smaller houses set in a
sprawling grassy area surrounded by hedges and wire fences. With Gregory
some distance behind him again, Sciss drove into a broad parking lot and
got out of the car after the girl. Gregory followed them with his eyes
until they disappeared in the semidarkness, trying unsuccessfully to
locate them in the faint light of the whitish globes over the building
entrances. Meanwhile, a passing constable, noticing that its parking
lights were on, stopped next to Sciss's car, looked it over carefully
with a disapproving expression, then continued on his rounds. Although
more than five minutes had gone by, Gregory waited patiently, feeling
sure, without knowing why, that Sciss would be back soon enough after
failing to achieve his purpose. He got out of the car and strolled along
the sidewalk at a leisurely pace until he heard footsteps approaching.
It was Sciss coming back: his coat was unbuttoned and he was bareheaded;
his hair, standing up around his ears in the strong wind, looked like a
pair of bat's wings. Gregory got back into the car, leaving the door
slightly open because he didn't want to attract Sciss's attention by
slamming it. Overwhelmed by an urgent desire to smoke, he watched Sciss
while searching in his pockets for a package of cigarettes. Sciss stood
next to his car for a long time, his arms dangling limply at his sides,
then traced a pattern on the hood with his fingers as if checking to see
if it was dusty. He finally got in and turned off the lights. Gregory
immediately started his motor and waited. Sciss didn't move. Gregory put
the car in neutral; suddenly reminded of the napkin, he pulled it out of
his pocket, unfolded it, and, not wanting to turn his lights on, held it
close to the dashboard, barely able to make the words out in the soft
glow of the dials and gauges. It was Sciss's address, phone number, and
name. It occurred to Gregory that Sciss might be waiting while the girl
changed her clothes, but he rejected the thought at once: he was quite
certain that Sciss wasn't waiting for anything and didn't expect
anything. The dashboard clock showed nine. They'd been sitting this way
for a half hour already. Gregory smoked two cigarettes, throwing the
butts out the window. He fiddled around with the radio for a while,
then, his patience exhausted, got out, slammed the door ostentatiously,
and walked over to Sciss's car. Just before reaching it, however, he
hesitated, and walked on past.

Sciss was slumped against the steering wheel with his face cradled in
his arms. A beam of light from a street lamp, partly cut off by the roof
of the car, shined on his silvery hair, making a bat's wing pattern on
his temple. Gregory stood watching him, not certain what to do. Suddenly
he backed away, returned to the Buick as quietly as possible, and,
taking a careful look to make sure nothing was moving in Sciss's car,
got in and quickly drove away. He made a left turn, went around in a
wide circle, and headed back to the same place at high speed. The dark
mass of the Chrysler suddenly loomed before him; just as a collision
seemed unavoidable he stepped hard on the brake and squealed to a short
jerky stop, ramming solidly into Sciss's rear bumper with a metallic
grating sound. He jumped out and ran over to the Chrysler.

"I'm terribly sorry," he called out. "My brakes didn't hold. I hope I
didn't do too much damage. Oh, it's you," he said quietly.

Sciss, who had been thrown forward by the impact, opened his door,
extended one leg as if about to get out but didn't, and instead stared
at Gregory, who was affecting a stupid expression.

"You? How did you. . . Gregory, huh? What is this -- the police making
trouble for law-abiding citizens?" he said.

They walked around to inspect the rear of the car; it was undamaged; as
Gregory had planned, the impact had been absorbed by the bumpers.

"Exactly how did you manage to do this?" Sciss asked, straightening
himself up.

"I'm driving a rented car and I'm not used to the brakes," Gregory
explained. "To tell the truth, I always drive that way -- it's a
weakness of mine, probably because I'm unfulfilled in some way. You see,
I don't have a car of my own."

Deciding that he was probably talking too much, Gregory abruptly became
silent.

"You don't have a car?" Sciss repeated. He spoke mechanically, his mind
on something else. He pulled on his right glove, buttoned it, and slowly
rolled up his left glove. The two men stood side by side next to the
cars.

"I'll invite him now," Gregory decided.

"No, I don't," he said. "Poverty is a virtue, so we make a point of
being diligent about it in the police department. Look, this was all my
fault. Maybe it's in the stars for us to spend the evening with each
other since we started it by having dinner together. It's supper time,
why don't we have something to eat?"

"Maybe in a cafeteria, considering the poverty," Sciss mumbled. He
looked up and down the street as if searching for someone.

"I'm not that poor. How about a moonlight drive to the Savoy? What do
you say? They have a few quiet tables up on the balcony, and the wine
there is very good."

"No, thank you. I don't drink. I can't. I don't know." Sciss got back in
the Chrysler and said quite calmly, "It's all the same to me."

"So you'll come. Wonderful. You go first, I'll follow, all right?"
Gregory spoke quickly, pretending to think the scientist had accepted
his invitation. Sciss scrutinized him carefully, leaned out of the car
as if to get a better look at his face, then slammed the door without
warning and pushed the starter. Sitting behind the wheel of his own car,
Gregory had no idea whether Sciss was going to head for the Savoy and,
pulling out after the Chrysler, he began to hope that he wouldn't. But
at the first intersection he realized that Sciss was indeed going to
have supper with him.

The drive to the Savoy took less than ten minutes. They left both cars
in the parking lot and went inside; it was about nine-thirty. An
orchestra was playing on the mezzanine; the dance floor, on a rotating
platform in the center of the room, was illuminated from underneath by
colored lights. Passing through a row of columns, the two men made their
way upstairs. The balcony afforded an excellent view of the whole
nightclub, except where the line of sight was impeded by chandeliers
hanging from the ceiling. Gregory ignored the waiter, who was trying to
lead them to a back table already occupied by a group of noisy people,
and, with Sciss behind him, headed for the far end of the balcony, where
he found a small table standing by itself between two columns. Two
waiters in full dress immediately stepped over to them, one holding the
menu, the other the wine list; the list was very thick.

"Do you know wines?" Sciss asked, closing the leather-bound menu.
Gregory smiled.

"A little. How about some Vermouth for a start? Do you take it with
lemon?"

"Vermouth? Vermouth is too bitter. Oh, never mind. I'll try the lemon."

Gregory nodded to the waiter -- it wasn't necessary to say a word. The
second waiter stood patiently a short distance away. Gregory deliberated
carefully before ordering, making sure to ask Sciss if he liked salads
and if fried foods agreed with him.

Leaning toward the railing, Sciss stared without much interest at the
whirling heads below. The orchestra was playing a slow fox-trot.

Gregory watched the dancing for a while, then held his glass of Vermouth
up to the light.

"There's something I have to tell you," he said, speaking with
difficulty. "I. . . owe you an apology."

"What?" Sciss looked up with a distracted expression. "Oh," he said,
thinking he understood what Gregory meant. "No, no. Don't mention it.
It's not worth making a fuss."

"I know now why you left your post with the General Staff."

"So you know," Sciss said indifferently. He downed his Vermouth in three
gulps as if it was tea. The piece of lemon ended up in his mouth; he
removed it, held it in his fingers for a moment, then put it back into
the empty glass.

"Yes."

"It's no secret. I'm surprised you didn't know all along since you did
everything but put me under a microscope. . ."

"The stories that circulate about someone like you are always
contradictory," Gregory continued, as if he hadn't heard Sciss's last
remark. "And it's all either hot or cold, there's no in-between.
Everything depends on the informant. Maybe you'd like to tell me. Why
did they take the Operations command away from you?"

"And label me red," Sciss added. Despite Gregory's eager interest, he
didn't seem any more lively. Hunched over in his chair, he leaned an arm
on the railing. "Why do you want to know?" he asked at last. "It doesn't
make any sense to dig all this up."

"Did you really predict some kind of holocaust?" Gregory asked in a
lowered voice. "Please, this is very important to me. You know how
people distort and twist everything. Tell me what really happened."

"What difference does it make to you?"

"Frankly, I want to find out exactly who you are."

"That's an old story," Sciss said despondently, still squinting at the
dancers downstairs. The naked shoulders of the women on the dance floor
were bathed in red light. "No, it has nothing to do with a holocaust. Do
you really want to know?"

"Very much so."

"You're that curious? It was sometime around 1946. The nuclear race was
just beginning. I knew that sooner or later a saturation point would be
reached -- I mean the achievement of maximum destructive force. Then a
means of delivering the bombs would be developed. . . that is, missiles.
This had to reach the saturation point also. . . both sides armed with
thermonuclear missiles, the control panels on both sides safely hidden,
each one with its infamous button ready. Push the button and the
missiles move. Twenty minutes later, the end of the world, both sides --
finis mundi ambilateralis. . ."

Sciss smiled. The waiter brought a bottle of wine, uncorked it, and
poured a few drops into Gregory's glass. Gregory tasted it, wet his
lips, and nodded his head.

The waiter filled both glasses and walked away.

"That was your opinion in '46?" Gregory asked, toasting Sciss. The
latter tasted the ruby liquid with the tip of his tongue, sipped it
carefully, then emptied the glass in one gulp, took a deep breath, and,
with a look that was either surprise or embarrassment, put his glass
back on the table.

"No, those were only premises. Don't you understand? Once the race
begins, it can't stop. It has to go on. If one side invents a big gun,
the other retaliates with a bigger one. The sequence concludes only when
there is a confrontation; that is, war. In this situation, however,
confrontation would mean the end of the world; therefore, the race must
be kept going. Once they begin to escalate their efforts, both sides are
trapped in an arms race. There must be more and more improvements in
weaponry, but after a certain point weapons reach their limit. What can
be improved next? Brains. The brains that issue the commands. It isn't
possible to make the human brain perfect, so the only alternative is a
transition to mechanization. The next stage will be a fully automated
headquarters equipped with electronic strategy machines. And then a very
interesting problem arises, actually two problems. McCatt called this to
my attention. First, is there any limit on the development of these
brains? Fundamentally they're similar to computers that can play chess.
A computer that anticipates an opponent's strategy ten moves in advance
will always defeat a computer that can think only eight or nine moves in
advance. The more far-reaching a brain's ability to think ahead, the
bigger the brain must be. That's one."

Sciss spoke faster and faster. Gregory sensed that he had already
forgotten everything, including to whom he was speaking. He poured some
wine. Sciss played with his glass for a while, moving it back and forth
along the tablecloth and tipping it over precariously. Suddenly, he
picked it up and drained it in one gulp. Downstairs, the dance floor was
immersed in yellow light and mandolins were crooning a Hawaiian melody.

"Strategic considerations dictate the construction of bigger and bigger
machines, and, whether we like it or not, this inevitably means an
increase in the amount of information stored in the brains. This in turn
means that the brain will steadily increase its control over all of
society's collective processes. The brain will decide where to locate
the infamous button. Or whether to change the style of infantry
uniforms. Or whether to increase production of a certain kind of steel,
demanding appropriations to carry out its purposes. Once you create this
kind of brain you have to listen to it. If a Parliament wastes time
debating whether or not to grant the appropriations it demands, the
other side may gain a lead, so after a while the abolition of
parliamentary decisions becomes unavoidable. Human control over the
brain's decisions will decrease in proportion to the increase in its
accumulated knowledge. Am I making myself clear? There will be two
growing brains, one on each side of the ocean. What do you think a brain
like this will demand first when it's ready to take the next step in the
perpetual race?"

"An increase in its capability," Gregory said in a low voice, watching
the scientist through half-closed eyelids. An unexpected silence
prevailed downstairs for a moment, followed by an outburst of applause.
A woman's voice began singing. A young man in tails set up a small side
table on which the waiters placed a tray full of silver serving dishes:
carefully heated plates, napkins, and silverware followed.

"No," Sciss answered. "First it demands its own expansion -- that is to
say, the brain becomes even bigger! Increased capability comes next."

"In other words, you predict that the world is going to end up a
chessboard, and all of us will be pawns manipulated in an eternal game
by two mechanical players."

Sciss's facial expression was arrogant. "Yes. Only I'm not predicting,
I'm drawing conclusions. We are already at the end of the first stage
and the rate of escalation is beginning to increase. All this smacks of
the improbable, I admit. But it's happening, believe me. It is."

"Yes. . ." Gregory murmured. He leaned across his plate. "Uh. . . what
would you suggest. . . about all this?"

"Peace at any price. You may find this odd, but all things considered it
seems to me that even extermination would be a lesser evil then the
chess game. I'm only drawing conclusions. I don't have any illusions.
That's pretty awful, you know. . . not to have illusions." Sciss poured
himself some more wine. Reluctantly, almost compulsively, he kept
drinking. Gregory didn't have to worry about keeping his glass filled.
Downstairs, the orchestra started playing again. A couple walked past
their table: the man was swarthy with a thin mustache, the paleness of
his face emphasized by the bluish streaks of his beard. The girl, very
young, had a white stole over her bare shoulders; it was embroidered
with gold threads the same color as her hair. Sciss watched as they went
by, staring at the girl with his lips contorted in a pained expression.
He pushed his plate away, closed his eyes, and hid his hands under the
tablecloth. It looked to Gregory as if he was checking his own pulse
rate.

"And what shall we do next on this lovely evening that began so
splendidly?" Sciss said after a while, raising his eyelids. Smoothing
down his gray hair around his ears, he straightened up in his chair.
Gregory crossed the silverware on his plate. The waiter came over at
once.

"Would you like some coffee?" Gregory asked.

"Yes, good idea," Sciss agreed. He kept his hands hidden under the
tablecloth.

"I think I'm drunk. . ." he smiled in embarrassment, looking around with
a surprised, uncertain expression.

"It does you good every once in a while," Gregory said, pouring only for
himself.

The coffee was hot and strong. They drank it in silence. It was stuffy
and getting stuffier. Gregory looked around for the waiter and, not
seeing him, stood up. He found him behind a column near the bar and
asked to have the windows opened. By the time he got back to the table a
cool, delicate whiff of air was already moving the steam rising above
their coffee cups. Sciss was still in his chair, leaning against the
railing, his red eyes drooping. He was breathing heavily and the small
hard veins of his temple were protruding.

"Do you feel all right?" Gregory asked.

"I can't take alcohol," Sciss said with his eyes closed. "That is, my
organism can't. My insides are all muddled, simply muddled, that's all."

"I'm sorry," said Gregory.

"Oh, it's nothing," Sciss kept his eyes closed. "Let's not talk about
it."

"Were you against a preventive war? I mean back in '46."

"Yes. But no one really believed it would work, even the people who were
advocating it. There wasn't any psychological readiness at the time. We
were all under the spell of a universal peace euphoria. You know, if you
proceeded gradually, you could lead anyone -- even the College of
Cardinals -- into the practice of cannibalism. But you must move slowly,
step by step. Exactly like now."

"What did you do then?"

"Various things. I started many things but actually wasn't able to
finish any of them. I was the proverbial stone on which the scythes were
sharpened, you see, and nothing much ever comes from that. I won't
finish this last case either. I always run into a dead end. Bah, if only
I believed in determinism. . . but with me it's all due to a character
defect -- I can't compromise."

"You're not married, are you?"

"No."

Sciss gave Gregory a suspicious look.

"Why do you ask?"

Gregory shrugged his shoulders.

"Simply. . . I wanted to know. Excuse me if --"

"Outmoded institution. . ." Sciss muttered. "I don't have any children
either, if you want all the details. Well, maybe if they could be
created intellectually. . . I don't care too much for this genetic
lottery, you see. It looks like I'm your guest -- shall we leave now?"

Gregory paid. As they were going down the stairs the orchestra bid them
farewell with some ear-piercing jazz. They had to slip around the edge
of the dance floor, jostled by the dancing couples. Once through the
revolving doors, Sciss, with a sigh of relief, took a deep breath of
cool air.

"Thank you. . . for everything," he said languidly. Gregory followed him
to the cars. Sciss had some trouble finding the key in his pocket. He
opened the door, unbuttoned his coat, then took it off and threw it onto
the back seat. He sat down behind the steering wheel. Gregory stood
beside the car.

Sciss didn't close the door and didn't move.

"I can't drive. . ." he said.

"Move over, I'll drive you," Gregory offered.

He bent down to get in.

"But what about your car?"

"Don't be ridiculous. I can come back for it."

Gregory got in, slammed the door, and quickly pulled away from the
parking spot.

 

 

 

7

 

Leaving the empty car in the courtyard, Gregory returned to the lobby.
Sciss was leaning on the bannister of the staircase with his eyes
half-closed, a vague, pained smile playing about his lips. Gregory
waited without saying good night. Breathing deeply -- it sounded like a
sigh -- Sciss suddenly opened his eyes. The two men stared at each
other.

"I don't know," Sciss said at last. "Do you have. . . time?"

Gregory nodded his head and quietly followed him up the stairs. Neither
spoke. Outside his apartment Sciss stopped with his hand on the doorknob
as if he wanted to say something; finally he swung the door open.

"It's dark inside, let me go first," he said.

There was a light on in the foyer. The kitchen door was open but there
was no one there, only a tea kettle whistling quietly on a low flame.
They hung up their coats.

The living room, bathed in light from a white globe on the ceiling, had
a neat, festive look. The wall behind the desk was lined with
bookshelves; pens and pencils were arranged symmetrically on the desk; a
glass table stood just below the bookshelves, with two low green club
chairs, their bluish cushions decorated in a geometric pattern, pushed
next to it. The table was set with cups, whiskey glasses, trays of fruit
and pastries. Spoons, forks -- everything was arranged for two people.
Sciss rubbed his bony, arthritic hands.

"Why don't you sit down next to the shelves where it's more
comfortable," he said with perhaps a little too much liveliness. "I had
a guest this afternoon -- let me offer you some of the leftovers."

Gregory wanted to say something lighthearted to help Sciss out, but
nothing came to mind. He moved one of the chairs and sat down on the
arm, turning toward the books.

He found himself facing an impressive multilingual collection of
scientific literature -- one shelf was filled with works on
anthropology, a plastic card attached to the next shelf had the word
"Mathematics" written on it. Out of the corner of his eye he noticed
some photographs in an open drawer of the desk, but when he turned in
their direction, Sciss moved -- or, rather, practically hurled himself
across the room on his long legs -- hitting the drawer with his knee and
noisily slamming it.

"A mess, it's a mess," he explained with a tense look. He rubbed his
hands again and seated himself on the radiator next to the window.

"Your new attempt to find me guilty is just as half-baked as your last
one," he said. "You try too hard. . ."

"You've had several bad experiences," Gregory commented. He picked a
thick volume at random and flipped the pages; algebraic formulas leaped
past his eyes.

"Quite true. Do you prefer coffee or tea?" Sciss remembered his
responsibilities as a host.

"I'll take whatever you're having."

"Good."

Sciss went into the kitchen. Gregory put back the book, which was
entitled Principia Mathematica, and stared at the closed desk drawer for
a moment. He was tempted to take a look inside but didn't dare. The
sound of Sciss bustling about in the kitchen could be heard through the
open door. After a few minutes the scientist came back with the tea,
poured it into the cups in a high, narrow stream, and sat down opposite
Gregory.

"Be careful, it's hot," he cautioned. "Are you saying that I'm no longer
under suspicion?" he asked Gregory after a moment. "You know something?
I could have had motives you never even considered. Let's say I was
trying to get rid of a body -- someone I killed, just for the sake of
argument. In order to bring about a situation in which it was easy to
dispose of it, I got hold of a whole batch of bodies, began moving them
around, and created a general confusion in which my victim was lost
completely. What do you say to that?"

"Too literary," Gregory replied. He was browsing through a thick,
glossy-paged volume on psychometrics. "One of Chesterton's stories has
the same plot."

"I never read it. I don't like Chesterton. In your opinion, then, what
made me do all this?"

"I don't know. I can't think of any possible motive. That's why I don't
suspect you anymore."

"Did you dig into my past? Did you draw up a chronology and a map
showing all my movements? Did you look for clues and fingerprints? With
only one exception, I wasn't at all inconvenienced by your investigation
-- I didn't even notice it."

"The overall picture didn't fall into place so I skipped the usual
routine. Besides, I'm not a very systematic investigator. I improvise,
or, you might say, I tend to be disorderly," Gregory admitted. There was
something stiff in among the pages of the book; he began turning them
carefully. "I even have a theory to justify my careless work habits:
until you have a specific theoretical structure to fit the facts into,
there's no point in collecting evidence."

"Are you an intuitionist? Have you ever read Bergson?"

"Yes."

The pages opened. Between them there was a large photographic negative.
It was transparent, but by pressing it against the white paper Gregory
was able to make out the silhouette of a human figure bent backward.
Very slowly he raised the book closer to his eyes, peeping over it at
Sciss. With one finger he moved the negative along the blank area
between two columns of print, continuing the conversation at the same
time:

"Sheppard told me you were at his place when the body in Lewes
disappeared. So you have an alibi. I was acting like a dog looking for a
buried bone -- running from tree to tree and digging, even though there
was nothing there. I was fooling myself. There was nothing for me to dig
in, no grounds, nothing. . ."

Gregory systematically moved the photo along the white strip between the
columns until he could make out the image on the negative. It was a
picture of a naked woman leaning back against a table. One arm, resting
against a stack of black bricks that reached almost to her nipple, was
partly covered by her dark, flowing hair -- light-colored, in reality.
Her long legs stretched down from the table, entwined in a string of
white beads. In her other hand she was holding a blurred object of some
kind, pressing it against her black, tightly closed thighs. Her lips
were open in an indescribable grimace that exposed her dark pointed
teeth.

"I think I've already made myself enough of a fool in front of you,"
Gregory continued.

He glanced suddenly at Sciss. The latter, smiling faintly, nodded his
head.

"I don't know. You present another point of view. If we were living at
the time of the Inquisition you might have gotten what you wanted."

"What does that mean?" Gregory asked. He took another quick look at the
negative and suddenly realized that the beads were really a small chain.
The girl's ankles were shackled. Frowning, he slammed the book shut, put
it back in its place, and eased himself gently from the arm into the
chair.

"I have very little resistance to pain, you know," Sciss continued.
"Torture would squeeze every bit of evidence out of me. You would
probably have broken every bone in my body to save your peace of mind --
or, I should say, to maintain your mental equilibrium."

"I understand Sheppard about as much as I do this case," Gregory said
slowly. "He assigned me to a hopeless job, and at the same time, right
from the beginning, he didn't give me a chance. But you're probably not
interested in any of this."

"As a matter of fact, I'm not." Sciss put his empty cup down on the
table. "I did what I could."

Gregory stood up and began to walk around the room. On the opposite wall
there was a framed photograph, a large-sized picture of a work of
sculpture, a good amateur study of light and shadow effects.

"Did you do this?"

"Yes."

Sciss didn't turn his head.

"It's very good."

Sweeping his eyes around the room, Gregory recognized the desk as the
table in the negative. Those bricks -- they were books, he thought. He
checked the windows; quite ordinary, except that they were provided with
black shades, now raised and tightly rolled.

"I didn't think you had any artistic interests," he said, returning to
the small table. Sciss blinked and got to his feet with a certain amount
of difficulty.

"I used to amuse myself with that kind of thing a long time ago. I have
quite a few pictures like that one; would you like to see some of them?"

"Very much so."

"Just a minute." He looked through his pockets. "What did I do with my
keys? Probably still in my coat."

He went out, leaving the door open, and turned on the light in the
foyer. He was gone for the longest time. In his absence Gregory was
tempted to look at the volume on psychometrics again, but he decided not
to take the risk. All of a sudden, he heard a scuffling noise -- it
sounded like something ripping, a piece of material being torn; Sciss
appeared in the doorway. He was completely transformed. Straightened up,
taking unnaturally long steps, he rushed toward Gregory as if he wanted
to attack him. He was breathing noisily. Two steps before he reached
Gregory he opened his hand. Something white fell out of it -- a crumpled
scrap of paper. Gregory recognized the napkin. Floating gently downward,
it fell onto the floor. The corners of Sciss's narrow lips were
contracted in an expression of unspeakable loathing. Gregory's cheeks
and face began to burn as if they had been scalded.

"What do you want from me, you worm?" Sciss screamed in a falsetto
voice, almost choking on the words. "A confession? Here's your
confession: it was me. Do you hear? It was me! All me! I planned it, set
it up, and got rid of the bodies. I played with the corpses as if they
were dolls -- I felt like doing it, do you understand? Only don't come
near me, you worm, because I might vomit!!!" His face was livid. Backing
up to the desk and supporting himself on it, he fell into a chair; with
trembling hands he plucked a glass vial out of his watch pocket, pulled
the cork out with his teeth, panting, and sucked in a few drops of the
oily liquid. His breathing slowly eased and became deeper. Propping his
head against a row of books on the shelf and spreading his legs apart,
he forced himself to breathe more regularly. His eyes were closed.
Finally he came to himself and sat up. Gregory's face was burning; he
watched without moving from his place.

"Go away. Please go away," Sciss said in a hoarse voice, not opening his
eyes. Gregory couldn't move -- it was as if he had taken root in the
floor. He stood silently, wailing for God knows what.

"You won't go? All right then!" Sciss stood up, coughing and gasping
violently. He stretched himself, touched his shirt collar, which he had
unbuttoned just a moment before, smoothed out his suit, and walked into
the foyer. A moment later the outside door slammed.

Gregory was alone in the apartment, free to look through the drawers,
the whole desk; he walked over to it, but even as he did so he knew he
wasn't going to search it. Lighting a cigarette he paced from wall to
wall, trying unsuccessfully to think. He crushed the cigarette, looked
around, shook his head, and went into the foyer. His coat was lying on
the floor; when he picked it up he saw that it had been torn almost in
half by a strong pull along the back; the loop and a small fragment of
material were still on the hanger. He was standing with the coat in his
hand when the telephone began to ring. He listened intently. The
telephone kept ringing. He went back into the room and waited for it to
stop, but the ringing continued. "Too few scruples and not enough
results," he thought. "I'm a snake. No, what was it? A worm." He picked
up the receiver.

"Hello."

"You? How is it that. . ." He recognized Sheppard's voice.

"Yes, it's me. How. . . how did you know I was here?" Gregory asked. He
suddenly became aware that his knees felt like rubber.

"Where else would you be in the middle of the night if you weren't at
home," Sheppard answered. "Will you be there long? Is Sciss around?"

"No, Sciss isn't here. He's not in the apartment at all."

"Well, who is? His sister?" Sheppard's tone was severe.

"No, no one at all. . ."

"What did you say? You're there alone? How did you get in?" Suspicion
and distaste were evident in the Chief Inspector's voice.

"We came here together, but he. . . walked out. We had. . . there was an
argument," Gregory said with great difficulty. "I. . . then, that is,
tomorrow, I'll be able. . . oh, the hell with it. What's wrong? Why did
you call?"

"Well, it happened. Williams is dead. You know who I mean."

"I know."

"He regained consciousness before he died and wanted to make a
statement. I tried everything to get hold of you -- I even sent out a
radio call."

"I. . . I'm sorry, I didn't know. . ."

"There's nothing to apologize for. We taped the statement. I want you to
hear it."

"Today?"

"Why not? Are you waiting for Sciss?"

"No, no. . . I was just going to leave. . ."

"Good. If you feel up to it, I want you to come over to my house right
now. I'd rather not put this off until tomorrow."

"I'll be right over," said Gregory in a dull voice. Then, remembering
his coat, he added quickly:

"I have to stop at my place first. It'll only take half an hour."

Sheppard hung up. Gregory returned to the foyer, picked up his coat,
threw it over his arm, and ran down the stairs. A quick look into the
courtyard showed that the gray Chrysler was gone. He caught a taxi
around the corner and went to the Savoy, where he transferred to the
Buick. The motor was cold; listening intently to its rumbling while
trying to get it started, he could only think about one thing: what
would Sheppard say.

There was a no-parking sign on the street outside the Fenshawe house,
but he ignored it, running up to the front door along a wet sidewalk
that glistened like a mirror in the reflected light of the street lamps.
He tried unsuccessfully to unlock the front door with his key, realizing
with surprise that it was open. That had never happened before. The big
entrance hall, usually completely dark, was faintly lit by a
slow-moving, flickering reflection that rhythmically dimmed and
intensified on the vaulted ceiling high above the stairs. Walking on
tiptoe, Gregory went upstairs, coming to a stop at the door to the
mirrored drawing room.

Where there had been a table before, now there was a platform covered
with rugs, a row of lit candles along each side of it. In the corner
mirrors, the reflected glow of the candles was heightened by the
glimmering of the street lights outside. The air was filled with the
odor of melted tallow; blue and yellow flames fluttered restlessly. The
whole sight was so unexpected that Gregory stood immobilized for a long
while, staring at the empty, oblong space between the double row of
candles. He looked up slowly, seemingly counting the rainbow-colored
sparks flaring up and waning in the low-hanging chandelier, then looked
around -- the room was deserted. He had to pass through it; sneaking
along the wall, he moved on tiptoe like a burglar, his foot brushing
against an indistinct, coiled, thin, twisted, whitish-colored wood
shaving. Just as he reached the open door he heard the sound of
footsteps approaching. Quickening his pace in the hope of reaching his
room without a meeting, he saw some yellow sparks flickering in the
dimness in front of him; an instant later Mrs. Fenshawe appeared in the
room. She was walking slowly, a purple shawl embroidered with shimmering
gold sequins flung over her black dress. Gregory didn't know what to do;
he wanted to avoid her but there was no way to get past. She seemed to
be in a trance; he backed up to get out of her way and kept walking
backward, with Mrs. Fenshawe striding along beside him, apparently
unaware of his presence. Stumbling against the edge of a rug, Gregory
came to a stop. They were back among the mirrors.

"My life!" Mrs. Fenshawe burst into tears. "My life! Too soon! Too soon!
They took him away!" She drew so close to him that he could feel her
breath on his face. "He knew he couldn't hold out much longer; he knew,
he knew, and even today he told me so! Today started like every other
day, why couldn't it have gone on that way? Why?!" She repeated this
over and over, burning his face with her breath, until finally the
words, though they were uttered from deep pain, stopped having any
meaning for him.

"Oh. . . I didn't know. . . I'm very sorry," Gregory mumbled, completely
at a loss, feeling that he had gotten stuck in an absurdity of some
kind, an incomprehensible misfortune, a theater of unreal events and
real despair. Mrs. Fenshawe stretched out her dark, tendinous hand from
under the shawl and grabbed him violently by the wrist.

"What happened? Did Mr. . . Mr. . ." He didn't finish -- her voiceless
sobbing and the spasmodic movements of her head were answer enough. "It
was so sudden," he mumbled. The word brought her around. She stared at
him with a strained, insistent, almost hate-filled look.

"No! Not sudden! Not sudden! No! Years, sir, years, and he always
managed to avert it, we postponed it together; he had the best care a
human being could have. I massaged him every night, and when it was very
bad I held his hand until dawn, I sat with him. He wasn't able to stay
by himself except in the daytime; he didn't need me during the day, but
now of course it's nighttime, it's night!!!" She began screaming
horribly again, her voice prolonged in an unnatural ringing echo.
"Night. . ." The cry was audibly interrupted and distorted somewhere in
the depths of the house, somewhere in the darkness of the rooms that
opened on the staircase, somewhere above the head of the woman, who was
digging into Gregory's wrist convulsively and pounding his chest with
her other hand. Astounded, choked by such frankness, such outspokenness,
and such deep despair, Gregory was beginning to understand everything.
He stared at the moving flames that lit up the empty, rug-covered place
in the middle of the room.

"Help me, oh please help me!" Mrs. Fenshawe called out, whether to God
or to him Gregory didn't know, and suddenly her cries were drowned in
sobs. One of her tears, shining in the candlelight, fell on the lapel of
his suit. Her weeping brought relief for both of them. In a moment Mrs.
Fenshawe calmed down, and in an amazingly peaceful although shaky voice,
she said:

"Thank you. I'm very sorry. Please. . . please go. No one will bother
you. No one! Oh. . . there's no one. . ."

With these words her voice came dangerously close to the crazy screaming
again. Gregory was terrified, but Mrs. Fenshawe, gathering up the folds
of her purple shawl, went toward the opposite door. He reached the
hallway and, almost breaking into a run, rushed to his room, closing the
door carefully and firmly behind him.

Safe inside, Gregory turned on the small lamp and sat at his desk,
staring at it until his eyes were dazzled by the light.

So he was sick and had died. Some kind of prolonged, peculiar, chronic
illness. She'd been nursing him. Only at night -- in the daytime he
wanted to be by himself. What was wrong with him? Maybe asthma or some
other kind of breathing disorder. She mentioned massages. Something to
do with the nerves? Insomnia too, or maybe he had heart trouble. He
looked so healthy though -- that is, he didn't seem to be sick. How old
could he have been? Around seventy, at least. It must have happened
today -- that is, yesterday. Gregory hadn't been home for almost
twenty-four hours; the death must have occurred that morning or
afternoon, and the body had been taken away in the evening. Otherwise,
why the candles?

Gregory's legs were beginning to fall asleep. "It's all clear now," he
thought. "He was sick and she was nursing him, some kind of complicated,
all-night treatment, but when did she sleep?"

Suddenly remembering that Sheppard was still waiting, he sprang to his
feet. He grabbed an old coat from his closet, threw it on, and walked
out on tiptoe. The house was still. The candles in the drawing room were
beginning to burn out; he made his way downstairs in the remnants of
their light. When he got into the car he was amazed to discover that the
whole commotion had lasted less than a half hour. He passed Westminster
at one o'clock.

Sheppard himself opened the door, same as last time. They walked
upstairs in silence.

"I'm sorry you had to wait so long," Gregory said while hanging up his
coat, "but my landlord died and I had to. . . uh. . . pay my respects."

Sheppard nodded his head coldly and pointed toward an open door. The
room hadn't changed -- but with the lights on the collection of
photographs looked different, and it occurred to Gregory that there was
something pretentious about them. Still not saying anything, Sheppard
sat down behind his desk; it was covered with papers and folders. For
the moment Gregory remained under the spell of the dark, funereal
atmosphere of the Fenshawe house, the unexpectedly silent wall opposite
his bed, and the dying candles. He rubbed his wrist involuntarily, as if
trying to wipe away the remaining traces of Mrs. Fenshawe's touch.
Sitting down opposite the Chief Inspector, he realized for the first
time that night how tired he was. All at once it occurred to him that
Sheppard was waiting for an account of his visit with Sciss. He
responded to the thought as reluctantly as he would have to a demand
that he betray someone very dear to him.

"I spent the evening tailing Sciss," he began slowly, then stopped
abruptly and studied the Chief Inspector's face. "Should I go on?" he
asked.

"I think it would be useful."

Gregory nodded his head. It was hard for him to describe the evening's
events, so he dispensed with commentary and kept to the details.
Sheppard leaned back in his chair and listened; only once, when he heard
about the photograph, was there any sign of a reaction.

Gregory paused, but the Chief Inspector remained silent. When he
finished, he looked up and saw a smile disappearing from Sheppard's
face.

"Well, did you finally get him to confess?" the Chief Inspector asked.
"As far as I can tell, you stopped suspecting Sciss at the very moment
that he left you alone in his apartment. I'm right, aren't I?"

Gregory was stunned. He wrinkled his brow, not certain how to reply. The
Chief Inspector was right, but until now he himself hadn't been aware of
the change in his thinking about Sciss.

"Yes," he muttered. "I guess so. Anyway, even before then I didn't have
much hope of accomplishing anything. I was following the path of least
resistance, that's all. I latched on to poor Sciss because there was no
one else and I needed a suspect; who knows? -- maybe I deliberately
tried to compromise him. It's possible -- I don't know why, maybe to get
the upper hand in my own mind." Gregory became more and more confused.
"I know that none of this makes any sense," he finished. "In the long
run I don't know a thing about Sciss, not even what he's capable of
doing."

"Would you like to know?" the Chief Inspector asked in a sarcastic
voice. "You might find him visiting his mother's grave, or trying to
pick up a prostitute near Picadilly. That's more or less his range. I
don't want to sound like your police auntie, but in this line of work
you really should be prepared for an occasional moral hangover. Now,
what do you want to do next?"

Gregory shrugged his shoulders.

"A few weeks ago I was pushing all of you, warning about trouble from
the press and the public," Sheppard continued, playing with a small
metal ruler. "But this time none of what I expected came to pass, in
fact nothing came of it at all. There were a couple of articles
connecting the case to flying saucers and -- paradoxically -- that was
the end of the publicity. A few letters to the editor -- and it was
over. I hadn't realized how indifferent we've become to the
extraordinary nowadays. If a moon walk is possible, so is everything
else. So we're on our own with this case, Lieutenant, and we might as
well just shelve it quietly. . ."

"Is that what you called to tell me?"

The Chief Inspector didn't say anything.

After a moment or so Gregory answered his own question.

"You wanted me to hear what Williams said, right? Maybe. . . I should go
now. It's very late and I don't want to take up any more of your time."

Sheppard rose to his feet, opened a flat case containing a tape
recorder, and connected the speaker.

"The recording was made at his request," he said to Gregory. "The
technicians were in a rush and the recorder wasn't working too well, so
the sound isn't the best. You'd better move closer. Now listen to this."

He threaded the tape into the spool, plugged in the extension cord, and
adjusted the modulation knob; the recorder pulsated a few times; a
steady hum emanated from the speaker, followed by several knocks and
some scratching noises, and at last a far-off voice, distorted as if it
was coming through a metal tube.

"May I speak now? Commissioner, Doctor, may I? I had a good flashlight.
. . my wife gave it to me just this year, for the night shift. First
time I went around he's lying there the usual way, with his hands like
this; next time around I hear a crash like a bag of potatoes is falling.
I shine my light through the second window -- he's on the floor. I
figure he must have fell out of the coffin but he's moving already. I
think I must be dreaming all this so I rub my eyes with snow, but he
keeps shuffling along, falling all over the place as he goes.
Commissioner, I don't know how long this went on, but it was long
enough, believe me. I kept shining my light but I didn't know if I
should go in or not, and there he is, flapping around and turning over
and finally he reaches the window and I couldn't see him too good
because he was crawling right under the window, making a hell of a
racket all the time. Then the shutters come open."

An indistinct voice in the background asked something; it was difficult
to make out the words.

"That I don't know," resounded a voice closer to the microphone. "And I
didn't see if any glass was falling either. Maybe it did, but I can't
say. I was standing over on the side, I can't. . . can't manage to show
you. So I was standing this way and he was sitting or whatever he was
doing this way -- all I could see was his head -- I could have touched
it, Commissioner, it was closer to me than this here table is. I shined
my light inside and lit the place up real good and there was nothing
there, only the empty coffin with some shavings in it and nothing else
and no one was there. I lean over and take a look in the window and
there he is down below me; his legs going a dozen ways at the same time
and he's rocking back and forth like a drunk, Doctor, he's crawling
along on his side and tapping away, like a blind man tapping his cane,
except he was doing it with his hands. Or maybe he had something.
'Halt,' I says to him, 'what d'you think you're doing, what's going on
here?' -- that's what I said, or something like that."

A short silence followed, except for a steady, delicate creaking, as if
someone was scratching the microphone with a needle.

"He climbs up a bit, then falls over again. Like I told you, I ordered
him to stop, but he wasn't alive; at first I thought maybe he wasn't
dead and had just now woke up in the coffin, but he wasn't alive, he
didn't have any eyes like, I mean only -- you know what I mean, so he
couldn't see anything and he didn't feel anything. I mean if he could
feel he wouldn't keep banging himself around on those boards, and he was
banging away like the devil himself was inside him. I yelled something
at him -- I don't even know what -- and he kept turning this way and
that way and finally he grabs the windowsill with his teeth -- What?"

Once again a muffled, indistinct voice asking questions; only the last
word was comprehensible: ". . . teeth?"

"So I shined my light on his face from close up, it was kind of blurred
like, well, kind of like a dead fish, and what happened next I don't
know."

Another voice, closer and lower, asked:

"When did you draw your pistol? Did you try to shoot him?"

"My pistol? I can't say if I drew it or not because I don't remember.
You say I ran away? How did that happen? I don't know. What's this on my
eye? Doc. . . doctor. . ."

A far-off voice.

". . . there's nothing there, Williams. Close your eyes, that's good;
you'll feel better in a minute."

A woman's voice from the back:

"He's done for, he's done for."

Again Williams's voice, breathing faster:

"I can't go on like this. If it. . . am I done for? Is my wife here? No?
Why not? She is? What damned good are the regulations if they don't say
nothing about. . . this. . . they don't cover. . ."

The sounds of a brief dispute could be heard; someone said out loud:

"That's enough!" Another voice interrupted:

"Did you see the car, Williams, the headlights?"

"Car. . . what car?" Williams repeated in a weak, stuttering voice. "I
can't get it out of my head, how he was rocking back and forth on his
side and couldn't do nothing, and how he was dragging those shavings
along with him. . . if there was a rope I might have understood it, but
there wasn't no rope. . ."

"What rope?"

"A doormat? No. Rope? I don't know. Where? God, no one ever saw anything
like it. He looked like he didn't like the light shining on him, but
that's impossible, Commissioner, isn't it? The shavings -- no! Straw. .
. won't. . . hold. . ."

A long silence, interrupted by scratching, blurred noises -- it sounded
as if several persons were carrying on a furious whispered conversation
at some distance from the microphone. A short choking, the sound of
hiccups, and suddenly the voice was gruffer:

"I'll give it all away, I don't want anything for myself. Where is she?
Is this her hand? Is that you?"

Again scratching, tapping as if something heavy was being moved, the
sound of cracking glass, the hiss of escaping gas, some sharp static,
then a deafening bass voice uttering the words:

"Turn it off, there won't be any more."

Sheppard stopped the reels, the tape stood still. He returned to his
place behind the desk. Gregory was hunched over, pressing his hand
against the arm of the chair and staring at his own whitened knuckles.
He seemed to have forgotten about Sheppard.

"If I could only turn everything back," he thought. "The whole thing,
all of it, to about a month ago -- no, not enough, maybe a year.
Ridiculous. I can't escape. . ."

"Chief Inspector," he said at last, "if you had picked someone else
instead of me, you'd probably have a perpetrator locked up for this by
now. Do you understand what I'm talking about?"

"Maybe. Why don't you continue."

"Continue? When I was studying physics, the section on optical illusions
in my textbook had an illustration that was either a white wine glass
against a dark background or two dark human profiles against a white
background. You only saw one or the other, and as a student I took it
for granted that only one of the two images was genuine, although to
this day I still can't say which. That's funny, isn't it, Chief
Inspector? Do you remember the conversation about order we once had in
this room? About the natural order of things. You said that the natural
order can be imitated."

"No, you said that."

"Did I? Maybe so. But what if it isn't really that way? What if there
isn't anything to imitate? What if the world isn't scattered around us
like a jigsaw puzzle -- what if it's like a soup with all kinds of
things floating around in it, and from time to time some of them get
stuck together by chance to make some kind of whole? What if everything
that exists is fragmentary, incomplete, aborted, events with ends but no
beginnings, events that only have middles, things that have fronts or
rears but not both, with us constantly making categories, seeking out,
and reconstructing, until we think we can see total love, total betrayal
and defeat, although in reality we are all no more than haphazard
fractions. Our faces and our fates are shaped by statistics -- we human
beings are the resultant of Brownian motion -- incomplete sketches,
randomly outlined projections. Perfection, fullness, excellence are all
rare exceptions -- they occur only because there is such an excess, so
unimaginably much of everything! The daily commonplace is automatically
regulated by the world's vastness, its infinite variety; because of it,
what we see as gaps and breaches complement each other; the mind, for
its own self-preservation, finds and integrates scattered fragments.
Using religion and philosophy as the cement, we perpetually collect and
assemble all the garbage comprised by statistics in order to make sense
out of things, to make everything respond in one unified voice like a
bell chiming to our glory. But it's only soup. . . The mathematical
order of the universe is our answer to the pyramids of chaos. On every
side of us we see bits of life that are completely beyond our
understanding -- we label them unusual, but we really don't want to
acknowledge them. The only thing that really exists is statistics. The
intelligent person is the statistical person. Will a child be beautiful
or ugly? Will he enjoy music? Will he get cancer? It's all decided by a
throw of the dice. At the very moment of our conception -- statistics!
Statistics determine which clusters of genes our bodies will be created
from, statistics determine when we're going to die. A normal statistical
distribution decides everything: whether I'm going to meet a woman and
fall in love, how long I'm going to live, maybe even whether I'm going
to be immortal. From time to time, it may be, statistics participate in
some things blindly, by accident -- beauty and lameness, for example.
But explicit processes will cease to exist before long: soon even
despair, beauty, happiness, and ugliness will result from statistics.
Our knowledge is underlined by statistics -- nothing exists except blind
chance, the eternal arrangement of fortuitous patterns. An infinite
number of Things taunt our fondness for Order. Seek, and ye shall find;
in the end ye shall always find, if you only look with enough fervor;
statistics doesn't exclude anything, and therefore it renders everything
possible, or more or less probable. History, on the other hand, comes
true by Brownian motion, a statistical dance of particles that never
stop dreaming about another temporal world. . ."

"Maybe even God only exists from time to time," the Chief Inspector
added quietly. He had leaned forward, and with his face averted was
listening attentively to what Gregory was spewing forth with such
difficulty from deep inside himself.

"Maybe," Gregory replied indifferently. "But the gaps in his existence
are very wide, you know."

He stood up, walked over to the wall, and stared at a photograph without
seeing it.

"Maybe even we. . ." he began hesitantly, "even we only exist from time
to time; I mean: sometimes less, sometimes almost disappearing,
dissolving, and then, with a sudden spasm, a sudden spurt that
disintegrates the memory center, we merge for a moment. . . for a day. .
. and we become --"

He stopped abruptly. After a moment he spoke again in a different tone
of voice.

"Forgive me for going on like that. It's all nonsense. Maybe. . . I've
had it for today. I think it's time for me to go."

"Can't you stay a little longer?"

Gregory paused. He gave Sheppard a surprised look.

"I suppose so, but it's been a long day; I think --"

"Do you know Mailer trucking?"

"Mailer?"

"Big trucks with red and gold stripes. You must have seen them."

"Oh sure, 'Mailer Goes Anywhere.' " Gregory recalled the slogan in their
ads. "What about it?" He didn't finish.

Not moving from his chair, Sheppard handed him a newspaper and pointed
to a short paragraph at the bottom of the page. "Yesterday afternoon a
Mailer Company truck crashed into a freight train near Amber. The
driver, who drove onto the railroad tracks even though he had seen the
warning signal, was killed instantly. None of the train crew was hurt."

Gregory looked up at the Chief Inspector with a puzzled expression.

"He was probably on his way back to Tunbridge Wells with an empty truck.
Mailer has a garage there," said Sheppard. "About a hundred vehicles.
They transport food in refrigerator trucks, mostly meat and fish. The
deliveries are made at night so the shipment will be available in the
morning. Each truck has a driver and a helper -- they usually start out
sometime in the late evening."

"The paper only mentions a driver," Gregory said slowly. He still didn't
understand any of this.

"That's right. After the truck is unloaded, the driver takes it back to
the garage, and the helper stays behind to help move the cargo into the
warehouse."

"The helper was lucky," Gregory said indifferently.

"That's for sure. These people work very hard. They have to keep their
trucks rolling in all kinds of weather. Mailer services four routes --
they form a cross on the map: Bromley and Levering to the north, Dover
to the east, Horsham and Lewes in the west, and Brighton in the south."

"What's the point of all this?" Gregory asked.

"Each driver has a regular schedule. He's on every third and fifth
night, and he gets compensatory time off if road conditions are bad. The
drivers weren't too lucky this winter. Maybe you remember, there wasn't
any snow at all at the beginning of January. We had a little snow around
the third week of January, and we got quite a bit of it in February. The
more trouble the highway department has clearing the snow off the roads,
the longer it takes the trucks to cover their routes. Their average
speed was about fifty miles per hour at the beginning of January, it
fell to thirty-five in February; and in March, when the thaw set in and
the roads were covered with ice, it dropped another ten miles per hour."

"What are you getting at?" Gregory asked uncomfortably. He was leaning
against the desk with his hands spread wide apart, staring at the Chief
Inspector. Sheppard gave him a bland look and asked:

"Did you ever drive a car in a thick fog?"

"Of course. What --"

"In that case you know what hard work it is. For hours on end there's
nothing but pea soup in front of your windshield. No matter how hard you
try, you can't see a thing. Some people open their doors and drive while
leaning out, but it doesn't do any good. You have to depend on intuition
to tell you where the sides of the road are; the fog diffuses the light
of your headlights and in the end you can hardly tell whether you're
going forward, sideways, or uphill; the fog is constantly rolling and
swirling around you and your eyes start tearing from the strain of
trying to see through it. After a while you start seeing things --
strange things. . . moving shadows, weird shapes deep in the fog; all
alone in a dark car you lose your perception, you can hardly feel your
own body -- you can't even tell if your hands are still on the steering
wheel and you begin to feel numb -- fear is the only thing that keeps
you going. So you keep driving that way, with the sweat dripping down
your back and face, the motor droning monotonously in your ears,
alternately dozing off and waking up with a spasmodic twitch. It's like
a nightmare. Try to imagine what it's like to go through that year after
year. Furthermore, imagine that a long time ago you began seeing things,
having visions, peculiar thoughts that you wouldn't dare tell anyone
about, confide in anyone. . . thoughts about the world maybe, or about
things no one should believe in, or about how you should have acted
toward other people while they were still alive or even now that they're
dead. During the day, at work, when you're fully conscious, you realize
that these are nothing but hallucinations, fantasies, and like any
normal person you suppress them. But the thoughts go on living inside
you, they appear in your dreams, they become more and more persistent.
You learn how to hide them, you're afraid that your reputation will be
ruined if anyone finds out about them. You don't want to be different
from anyone else. Then you get a chance to earn a good salary by working
nights, but of course you have to remain awake and alert all night; when
you're driving through the moors, you have plenty of time to think,
especially when you're alone in an empty eight-ton truck and can't
distract yourself by making small talk with the helper when you really.
. . So there you are driving your truck month after month; autumn
passes, whiter comes, and you're caught in a thick fog for the first
time. You try to shake yourself free of the hallucinations, you stop the
truck, get out, rub your face and forehead with snow, and drive on.
Hours go by. The fog is like milk all around you; it's as if you're
surrounded by an overflowing, infinite whiteness -- as if such things as
ordinary roads, muddy, lit-up streets, small towns, houses never
existed. You're all alone, completely and eternally alone in the dark
little cab of your truck and you stare frontward, blinking your eyes,
trying to rub something out of them that becomes clearer and clearer,
more and more insistent no matter how much you try. You're driving and
driving, and the vision goes on for an hour, maybe two, maybe three;
finally there comes a moment in which it is so compelling, so
uncontrollable, that it seizes you, it becomes you, and soon you feel
better, you finally know what has to be done, so you stop the truck and
get out. . ."

"What the hell are you talking about?" Gregory shouted. He was
trembling.

"There are 218 drivers working out of the Mailer garage in Tunbridge
Wells. In a group that big there'll always be at least one who. . .
who's a little different. Who -- let's say -- is not completely healthy.
What do you think about it?"

Sheppard was calm; he was speaking in an even, almost monotonous tone,
but there was something relentless in his voice.

"The incidents all took place between midnight and dawn in small
provincial mortuaries. Aside from a few differences in detail, the
individual cases are tied together by one connecting link -- a certain
consistency that no human being could have planned. No one, no human
mind would have been capable of doing any of this. We've already agreed
about that, haven't we?

"Now, let's look at the case in the light of certain unusual
circumstances surrounding it. First, a driver's work schedule. Second,
each consecutive incident took place farther and farther away from the
'center,' Tunbridge Wells, and almost at the center of the 'center' we
find the Mailer garage, with empty trucks pulling in regularly from
midnight on. Why did each subsequent incident take place farther and
farther away from the 'center'? Because the average speed of the trucks
was decreasing, and even though they always left Tunbridge Wells at
about the same time, the drivers were getting to their destinations
later and later and as a result were beginning their return trips later
and later; consequently, it was taking them longer to cover the same
distance."

"How do you know?" Gregory interrupted.

"From the fact that the fog is at its worst for a period of about two
hours every night. This is the period in which it is most effective in
inducing fantasies and delusions in drivers making their return trips
alone. Even so, if road conditions are good on the return trip, the
two-hour period doesn't affect them as much as it does when the roads
are covered with snow. So we find another regular item: the more
resistance the snow offers to the tires of the truck, the less
resistance the driver offers to the two-hour fantasy-producing period.
Furthermore, the more snow on the road, the lower the temperature, and
the lower the temperature, the worse the truck's motor performs;
therefore, we find, we get a constant if we multiply the difference in
temperature by the product of the time between two incidents and the
distance from the center to the site of an incident. As road conditions
deteriorate, the dispatcher at the Mailer garage gives the drivers
longer breaks between trips. Even so, on each subsequent trip the driver
has less and less endurance during the two-hour period, and as a result
he covers less and less distance. The second coefficient -- the time
between two trips counted in days -- increases proportionately, and
that's why the product remains the same, speaking roughly."

"In other words. . . one of the drivers. . . is a paranoiac, is that it?
He works on the night shift, stops his truck somewhere along the way and
steals a body. . . but what did he do with them?"

"At dawn, when he drove out of the foggy area, he regained his senses --
he was coming back into the ordinary world -- so he did his best to dump
the evidence of his night of insanity. There were plenty of
opportunities -- after all, he was covering quite a bit of territory,
with plenty of hills, shallow ravines, thickets, rivers, bushes.. . .
Terrified, unable to believe what had happened, he would resolve to get
help for himself, but he was afraid he'd lose his job, so when the
dispatcher gave him the date of his next trip he wouldn't say a word and
right on schedule he'd be back behind the wheel again. He must have
known the topography of the whole region by memory -- every road, every
estate, every grade crossing, every building -- he knew exactly where
all the cemeteries were located. . ."

Gregory's gaze moved from the Chief Inspector's face to the open
newspaper.

"That's him," he said.

"The madness must have increased steadily," Sheppard answered slowly.
"The memory of deeds committed, anxiety that he would be exposed,
growing distrust of his friends and co-workers, sick interpretations of
innocent things other people said to him -- everything must have
combined to make his condition worse, to increase the tension in which
he was living. You can see that it must have been getting harder and
harder for him to come back to his senses; his condition was
deteriorating steadily, his attention span was decreasing, he was less
able to concentrate and more likely to become a victim of circumstances.
For example -- this guy --"

Gregory suddenly walked away from the desk and sat down on a chair near
the bookshelf, drawing his hand over his face.

"So that's how it happened," he said. "An imitation of a miracle. . .
ha, ha. . . is all this true?"

"No," Sheppard replied serenely, "but it might be. Or, strictly
speaking, it can become the truth."

"What are you trying to say? Come on, Chief Inspector, I've had enough
fooling around."

"This isn't my theory, Gregory. Calm down. Out of six incidents -- are
you paying attention? -- out of six incidents, this truck driver," -- he
tapped the newspaper -- "was definitely on the road near the place in
question three times. In other words, three of the times, during the
hours just before dawn, he drove past the places where the corpses
disappeared."

"What about the other times?" Gregory asked. Something strange was
happening inside him. An unexpected feeling of relief, of hope, was
expanding his chest; it seemed to him that he was breathing more easily.

"The other times? Well. . . about one incident. . . Lewes. . . we don't
know anything. For the second, the dead truck driver had. . . an alibi."

"An alibi?"

"Yes. Not only did he have the night off but he was in Scotland for
three days. We checked -- there's no doubt about it."

"Then it wasn't him!" Gregory stood up, he had to get on his feet; the
jolt resulting from this movement knocked the newspaper off the edge of
the desk.

"No, it wasn't him. To be sure it wasn't him, unless we classify that
incident separately."

The Chief Inspector took a quick look at Gregory, whose face was
contorted in anger. "But if we don't do that, if it wasn't Mailer -- the
Mailer driver -- there are still plenty of other vehicles circulating in
the region at night: post office trucks, ambulances, emergency vehicles,
buses. . . we have an endless quantity of phenomena that can be fitted
into the theory."

"Are you making fun of me?" Gregory asked.

"Of course not, I'm trying to help you," answered the Chief Inspector.

"Thank you."

Gregory bent down and picked up the paper.

"So this truck driver was, that is, allegedly was," he corrected
himself, "a paranoiac; in other words, sick according to all normal
standards: fog times frost times insanity. . ." He glanced at Sheppard
with a strange smile.

"And what if, by chance, purely by chance, he took a different route the
other times -- I mean a route that didn't go anywhere near the
mortuaries -- would he still be a suspect. . . still a sacrificial lamb.
. ."

Gregory sneered; he was walking around the room.

"I must know," he said. "I have to know. . . right now!"

He grabbed the newspaper again and flattened it out.

"The first page is missing," Sheppard noted, "but I can give you the
details. It's yesterday's paper."

"Oh!"

"No, I didn't invent any of this. Everything I told you was verified
yesterday. We worked on it all day, both the local police, and Farquart,
who flew up to Scotland to check out the driver's alibi, if you're
interested."

"No, no, but. . . I want to know why you did all this."

"Well, in the final analysis. . . well, because I work at Scotland Yard
also," said Sheppard.

Gregory appeared not to have heard the answer; in a state of obvious
agitation he walked around the room, stopping to stare at the
photograph.

"You don't understand what I mean. . . This is really convenient, very,
very convenient. . . exactly what we needed. There is a perpetrator
after all, but he's dead so we can't question him or continue the
investigation. . . a very humane solution -- no miscarriage of justice
possible, no one suffers. . . Did you really suspect him? Did you also.
. . or did you only want something to match the facts that we were stuck
with, the facts that forced us to take action in the first place, so you
could give a semblance of order to this disorder and mark an open case
closed with a nice sense of orderliness. Is that what it's all about?"

"I don't see any alternative," said Sheppard indifferently. He seemed to
have had enough of the conversation and was no longer looking at
Gregory, who had stopped walking, occupied with a new thought.

"Of course it's possible to interpret it your way too," he said. "Of
course! You know, I believe it when you say you want to help me. At
first we couldn't do anything with this case -- not a thing -- and now
we can. Maybe we can shake that alibi. Or if we eliminate that one
exceptional incident from the series, and maybe the other exceptions
with it, the investigation moves out of the dead end. The odds are it's
an illness! You can use illness to explain the most peculiar things,
even visions and stigmata, even. . . even miracles! You know the works
of Guggenheimer, Hopley, and Wintershield, don't you? They're not in our
library, but you must have read them."

"The psychiatrists? Which of their books did you have in mind -- they
wrote quite a few."

"The ones in which they analyze the Gospels to prove that Jesus was
crazy. They created quite a stir in their time. A psychiatric analysis
of Scripture leading to a diagnosis of paranoia. . ."

"Let me give you some advice," said Sheppard. "These biblical analogies
won't get you anywhere. Maybe you could afford that kind of thing at the
beginning of the case when you wanted to make the problem more
interesting, but the investigation is over now, except for a few
technicalities. . ."

"Do you really mean that?" Gregory asked quietly.

"Yes. Because I hope, I feel sure, that you don't want to be left crying
in the wilderness. . ."

"Then what am I supposed to do?" Gregory asked in a slightly deferential
tone of voice, straightening up and watching the old man, who was rising
from his armchair.

"We have to set up clearly defined guidelines for the future. For the
foreseeable future. I'll be waiting for you tomorrow morning at the
Yard."

"Like the last time, around ten o'clock?" There was a note of hidden
amusement in Gregory's voice.

"Yes. Will you be there?" he added casually. They looked at each other,
both standing up. Gregory's lips quivered, but he didn't say anything.
He backed up toward the door, then turned his back to Sheppard and
placed his hand on the knob, constantly aware of Sheppard's calm and
steadfast gaze.

Finally opening the door, he turned and tossed the words over his
shoulder.

"I'll be there."


