
STANISLAW LEM

 



THE
INVINCIBLE


 

(Translated from the German by Wendayne Ackerman)



 


 

Ace books
A Division of Charter Communications Inc.
1120 Avenue of the Americas
New York, N.Y. 10036

English translation copyright ©1973 by Charter Communications Inc.

All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced without
written permission of the publisher, except for brief quotes to be used
specifically for reviews.

Translated from the German by Wendayne Ackerman

German edition: _Dei- Unbesiegbare,_ Verlag Volk und Welt, Berlin
(East); 1957

Original Polish edition: _Niezwyciezony,_ Wydawnietwo Literakie, Cracow



 


 

Printed in U.S.A



 


 

CONTENTS

The Black Rain

In The Ruins

The Condor

The First

The Cloud

Lauda's Hypothesis

Rohan's Group

The Defeat

The Long Night

The Conversation

The Invincible

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Black Rain

 

The _Invincible_ moved across the outermost quadrant of the Lyre
Constellation. The heavy cruiser was propelled through space by photon
drive. It was the largest ship at the disposal of the space fleet based
in this section of the universe.

The ship's complement numbered eighty-three men, all of them presently
asleep inside the hibernation tunnel. The flight distance was
sufficiently short that it had not been necessary to resort to full
hibernation; the men were simply kept in deep sleep, body temperature
regulated so as never to fall below 50° F. Within the cruiser's control
center only the automats carried on their work.

Dead center in the direction finder hung the disk of a sun not much
hotter than an ordinary red dwarf star. The moment the sun filled half
the screen the space-drive automatically cut off. For a while dead
silence reigned throughout the ship. The air conditioning system and the
computers functioned noiselessly. The slight vibration ceased when the
photon stream no longer emerged from the spacecraft's stern. This stream
had been like an infinitely long sword, sheathed in darkness, thrusting
the cruiser ahead through the vastness of space. The _Invincible_ still
coasted along just under the speed of light; rigid, deaf and seemingly
without any life aboard.

Tiny lights on the instrument panel reflected the reddish glow of the
distant sun that loomed on the central videoscreen. Now the magnetic
tapes began to move. Programed coded strips crept slowly into the intake
slots of a series of instruments. Sparks flew from the transformers; and
the current flooded into the supply network, accompanied by a faint hum
that was not heard by any living tiling. Electromotors overcame the
resistance of long dried-out lubricating oil and started humming. Their
low roar soon changed into a highpitched moaning sound. Cadmium rods
were pushed outwards by the auxiliary reactors; magnetic pumps squeezed
liquid natrium into the cooling coils; a mild tremor ran through the
ship's stern. Faint rattling noises came from inside the hull as if
swarms of tiny animals were busily scurrying about, scratching the metal
walls with their sharp little claws. This was the sign that the repair
robots had started out on their rounds, checking the solidity of the
braces of the ship's framework; making sure that the hull had not been
damaged anywhere and that all seams were still welded tight. The entire
ship came to life, filled with myriad noises and activities. Only the
crew had not yet awakened.

Finally the last automat was fed the proper coded strip and began to
send signals to the hibernation center, Antihibernation gas was injected
into the cold air. Warm air streamed through the gratings in the floor,
up towards the long rows of the sleeping cots. The sleeping men,
however, appeared reluctant to wake up. Slowly they began to move their
arms with feeble jerks, trying to ward off the nightmares and feverish
fantasies that invaded the void of their icy slumber. Finally the first
man opened his eyes. The ship had been fully prepared for this moment.
For the past few minutes bright daylight had chased the dark shadows
that filled the long corridors, the elevator shafts, the cabins, the
control center, the workrooms, and the airlocks. And while the
hibernation chamber resounded with the sighing and moaning of the drowsy
men, the spaceship began its first braking maneuver, as if it were too
impatient to await the complete awakening of the crew. Sheaves of fire
emanated from the jets at the craft's nose. A violent shock disrupted
the velocity of the cruiser that had constantly traveled at the speed of
light. The tremendous counter-forces produced by the forward jets tried
to crush the _Invincible_ whose stationary mass of eighteen thousand
tons had been multiplied by its gigantic initial velocity. Everything
that had not been nailed down tight began to move; lifeless objects
seemed to come alive. Hermetically sealed maps bounced about on their
rollers in the map room. In the galleys dishes rattled, the backs of the
empty foam-rubber chairs began to shake, safety belts and wall ropes
swung like pendulums in the long corridors of the decks. All the sounds
of clinking glass, tin and synthetic products combined; the noise spread
like a wave throughout the heavy cruiser. The hibernation center was
filled with a din of voices. Following a brief transitory slumber the
men now returned to the world of reality after having spent the past
seven months in a state of limbo.

The spaceship kept losing speed. Red clouds shrouded the planet,
obliterating the stars in the sky. An ocean became visible, reflecting
the sun's rays as though it were a convex mirror. Now the craft glided
over a brownish continent dotted with craters. The crew, however, saw
none of this; they were at their posts. A cloud passed through the path
of the braking ray. A sudden white glimmer appeared as if quicksilver
had exploded. The cloud disintegrated and vanished. For a moment the
howling of the propulsion drive grew intense. The reddish disk down
below became flat: the planet had turned into an expanse of land.
Sickle-shaped dunes stood out, whipped by a strong wind. Strands of lava
radiated from a nearby crater like the spokes of a wheel, reflecting the
fiery glow of the rocket jets, and almost blotting out the sunlight.

"Central axisfull power! Static drive!"

The needle advanced slowly toward the next sector of the gauge; the
landing maneuver proceeded according to plan. The spaceship hovered like
a fire-spewing volcano balanced on its head. Half a mile below lay the
scarred surface of the planet, covered by sandy ridges of rock.

"Central axisfull power! Brake static drive!"

Now the spot was already clearly to be seen where the braking ray hit
the ground. A cloud of red sand rose from the flat surface. Violet bolts
of lightning flashed, apparently without any sound, for the thunder was
drowned out by the roaring gases. Gradually the potential difference
evened out and the lightning disappeared. The spaceship descended
steadily without any vibrations; like a mountain of steel held taut by
invisible ropes.

"Central axishalf power! Small static drive!"

Steaming clouds of sand swelled up like ocean waves and sped outward in
concentric circles. At the epicenter where the bunched braking ray had
struck full force from a short distance away, neither steam nor sand had
been left. The red, blistery mirror had changed into a lake of molten
silicates which finally had evaporated in a column of shattering
explosions. The primitive rock of the planet, bare as fleshless bones,
turned soft.

"Cut down nuclear drive!"

The glowing blue of the atomic fire died down. A stream of diborane
sprayed at a slant from the jet openings. Suddenly a ghostly green
flooded the desert, crater walls and clouds. The basalt rocks would no
longer remain in a molten state, just where the broad stern of the
_Invincible_ was supposed to touch down.

"Reactors zero power. Land with cold drive!"

The men's hearts began to beat faster. They looked at the instruments.
Their sweaty hands grasped levers. This last command meant there would
be no turning back now. Soon they would be able to step down on terra
firma; even if it was only the sand of a barren planet. Nevertheless
they would see the sun rise and set again, see a horizon and clouds, and
feel the wind.

"Landing dead center at nadir!"

A continuous moan filled the ship: the turbines extruded the fuel in a
downward direction. A cone-shaped green column of fire connected the
_invincible_ to the rocky steaming ground. Sand clouds obscured the
periscopes located on the middle decks. Only the radar screens in the
control center showed the constantly changing outlines of the
surrounding landscape which rapidly disappeared under the full fury of
the raging typhoon.

"Stop at touchdown!"

The colossal descending rocket compressed the fiery column inch by inch.
Rebellious flames swirled directly beneath the ship's stern. Long
tongues licked out from this green fiery hell into the quivering clouds
of sand. The space between the burned rock and the _Invincible_ narrowed
down to a tiny gap, a glowing green line.

"Zero, zero! Cut all power!"

The rocket had come to rest on the ground. The chief engineer kept a
firm grasp on both levers of the emergency starter in case the rock
might suddenly cave in. They waited; the seconds crept by slowly,
painfully. For a while the commander observed the plumb line, but the
tiny silvery lamp did not show the slightest deviation to either side.

They were silent. The nozzles of the jets that only a short time ago had
glowed white with incandescent heat began to contract while cooling off.
This was accompanied by a characteristic sound not unlike a hoarse
groan. Little by little the reddish dust clouds that had been hurled
into the air several hundred yards high began to drift towards the
ground. The spaceship's blunt nose emerged first, then the rump,
blackened by atmospheric friction matching the color of the old basalt
rocks. But the red sand still whirled around the ship's stern, which now
stood firmly on the ground as if welded to the planet's surface. The
_Invincible_ seemed to have become a part of this planet, seemed to have
rotated along with it sluggishly for many centuries under the violet sky
where bright stars now could be seen, growing dim only in the vicinity
of the red sun.

"Normal procedure?"

The astrogator looked up from the log where he had just jotted down the
exact time of their touchdown next to the name of the planet: Regis III.

"No, Rohan. We'll start with the third step routine."

Rohan tried to hide his surprise.

"Fine," he replied with the note of familiarity that Horpach
occasionally tolerated in their conversations. "However, I'd rather not
tell the crew myself."

Seemingly ignoring Rohan's remark, the astrogator took his officer by
the arm and steered him over to the videoscreen.

Gazing through the stereoptic, multicolored screen of the electron
transformer as if it were a window eighteen storeys high opening onto
the outside, they saw a true image of the landscape surrounding their
landing site.

The force of the landing jet stream had hurled the sand outward and
piled it up in a ring of dunes surmounting a shallow hollow. They
noticed the jagged rocky rim of a crater some three miles away, its
western edge blending into the horizon. Impenetrable dark shadows hung
below its steep slopes toward the east. The ridges of wide lava streams
pushed through the sand like rivers of reddish-black congealed blood. A
bright star in the sky was visible at the upper rim of the videoscreen.

The cataclysm, brought about by the arrival of the _Invincible,_ had
gradually died down. Now the desert winda violent air mass constantly
moving from the planet's equatorial zones toward its poleswas already
driving sandy tongues underneath the ship's stern, as if patiently
trying to heal the wound that the fiery jets had torn open.

The astrogator switched on the network of the outside microphones. The
distant sound of malicious howling merged with the nearby rustling of
sand gusts as they scoured the steely hull of the ship. For a moment the
eerie, grating noise filled the high-ceilinged room of the control
center. Horpach switched off the mikes and silence returned.

"Well, that's what it looks like," he said slowly "But the _Condor_
never returned home from here, Rohan."

Rohan clenched his teeth. Better not enter into an argument with his
commander. Though they had flown together many parsecs, they had never
become friends. Maybe the generation gap was too wide, or the dangers
they had overcome together had not been sufficiently severe. This man,
whose hair was almost as white as the suit he wore, showed no
consideration now for his crew.

Nearly one hundred men waited silently at their posts. Behind them lay
the tremendous strain of the approaching maneuver, those three hundred
hours needed to brake the kinetic energy that was stored in every atom
of the _Invincible,_ to swing the ship into the proper orbit and to
bring it in for the landing. Almost one hundred men who had not heard
the rustling of the wind for many months, who had learned to hate the
emptiness of space in the manner of those who have become too familiar
with it. But the commander certainly did not take this into
consideration now. Slowly he walked across the control center, grasped
the back of his chair and growled: "We don't know what that is out there
Rohan." And suddenly he snapped, "Well, what are you waiting for!"

Rohan hurried over to the panel and switched on the intercom. His voice
betrayed his inner resentment as he shouted, "Attention, all hands!
Attention! Landing maneuver completed. Terrestrial procedure, third step
routine. Deck number eightget the energy-robots ready! Deck number
ninestart the protective screen reactors! All protection personnel to
proceed to their stations! The rest of the crew to remain at their usual
posts! These are commander's orders, men!"

As he bellowed these commands into the intercom speaker he kept his eye
on the green eye of the amplifier, which oscillated according to the
intensity of his voice. Suddenly he seemed to see inside the flickering
light the perspiring faces of the men who were turned toward the
loudspeakers. He knew the expression on those faces was changing from
amazement to cold fury. Now that they had understood, they would start
cursing.

"Terrestrial procedure, third step routine started, Astrogator," he said
without looking at the old man. The old man glanced at Rohan and a
slight smile showed unexpectedly around the corners of his mouth.

"That's just for the beginning, Rohan. You should know that. We'll
probably go for long walks when the sun is setting over the horizon. Who
knows . . ."

He took a thin, long book from a small built-in cupboard at the far end
of the wall. He opened it and placed it on the instrument panel that was
studded with buttons and levers. He asked: "Have you read this, Rohan?"

"Yes."

"The last signal registered by the seventh hyper-relay station reached
the base just a year ago."

"I know the message by heart. 'COMPLETED LANDING ON REGIS III. DESERT
PLANET OF TYPE SUBDELTA 92. LANDING PARTY FOLLOWING TERRESTRIAL
PROCEDURE, SECOND STEP ROUTINE. LEAVING FROM THE EQUATORIAL ZONE OF THE
EVANA CONTINENT.' "

"That's right. But this was not the last signal."

"Yes, I know, Astrogator. Forty hours later another message was received
by the same hyper-relay station. This time apparently in Morse code. The
message did not make any sense at all, jumbled up words. And then
several times odd noises. Haertel said it sounded like someone was
pulling a cat's tail."

"Right," mumbled the astrogator, but he was obviously no longer
listening. He stood in front of the videoscreen. Near the lower rim the
scissor-like supports of the ramp could be seen. Energo-robots glided
down the ramp at equidistant intervals. Each weighed thirty tons of
heavy machinery protected by a fire-proof armor made of silicon. As they
slid towards the ground, each opened and raised its helmet. They left
the ramp; soon they were sinking deep into the sand. Still they made
good progress, working their way through the dune that the wind had
already blown around the _Invincible._ One after the other they turned
to the right or the left. Ten minutes later the entire ship was
surrounded by a chain of metal turtles. The moment each robot had
reached its place it started burrowing down into the sand. Soon they
disappeared in the sand except for the glittering domes of their Dirac
emitters that peered out from the red slopes of the dunes, forming the
evenly spaced links of one huge circular chain.

Suddenly the steel floor of the control center began to vibrate. The men
could feel it distinctly through the thick padding of foam rubber that
covered the floor. An almost imperceptible tremor flashed through their
bodies, and for a moment they noticed a quivering in the muscles of
their jaws. Everything around them grew hazy. The phenomenon lasted no
more than half a second. Once again all grew silent around them,
interrupted only by the distant hum of starting motors that rose up from
the lower decks. Then everything came back into focus again. The desert,
the dark red rocky hillsides, the slowly creeping sandy waves showed up
in sharp outlines on the videoscreen. All seemed as it had been
beforebut now an invisible field of energy formed a protective dome
around the _Invincible,_ cutting off access to the spaceship.

Now metal crabs made their appearance on the ramp. They descended
slowly, their antennae twirling like the arms of a windmill. These flat
info-robots were considerably larger than the field emitters, and walked
on curved metallic stilts that projected on either side. The metal
arthropods soon bogged down in the deep sand; with reluctance, they
extricated their extremities in order to take their place inside the
spaces next to each link formed by the chain of the energo-robots.

While all protective measures began to function, tiny control lamps lit
up against the dull background of the central panel. The dials of the
instruments that counted incoming impulses were suffused by a greenish
glow, becoming dozens of luminous green cat's eyes that stared at the
two men. The needles on all the dials pointed to zero. Nothing attempted
to break through the invisible wall of their energy field. One needle
only kept steadily moving upwards: an illuminated arrow rose up on the
energy distributor gauge, advancing beyond the Giga-watt lines.

"I'm going down to get something to eat. Get started with the
stereotype, Rohan." Horpach's voice sounded very tired as he turned away
from the videoscreen.

"Remote control?"

"Not necessarily. You can send somebody out. Or even go yourself, if you
want to," said Horpach as he was opening the door and leaving the room.
For one more moment Rohan could see the old man's profile inside the
dimly lit elevator as it started to go down. He looked at the field
gauge. Zero. We should really begin with the photogrammetry, he thought
to himself. Circle the planet and photograph it systematically. Perhaps
something might be found that way. Much better than relying only on
visual observations. After all, a continent isn't the same thing as an
ocean, where one sailor in the crow's nest will do the trick. But
photogrammetry would take about one month. Too long.

The elevator had returned. Rohan got in and descended to the sixth deck.
A crowd had gathered on the big platform in front of the airlock. The
men no longer had any business being there; the dinner gong had been
sounded for almost fifteen minutes steadily.

The men stepped aside to let Rohan pass.

"Jordan and Blank, come along for a stereotype investigation."

"Full protective gear, Navigator?"

"No. Just the oxygen tanks. And a robot. Let's take an Arctane. He won't
get stuck in that damned sand." Rohan turned to the men standing around.
"Well, what are you still doing here? Lost your appetite?"

"We'd like to see what it's like outside, Navigator."

"Why can't we go ashore?"

"Just for a few minutes"

They all spoke at once.

"Steady, steady, men. Don't lose your cool now. We'll all soon be going
sightseeing. For the time being it's terrestrial procedure, third step
routine."

The men left reluctantly.

In the meantime a robot had arrived from the ship's hold. It stepped off
the freight lift. It was at least a head taller than the men. Jordan and
Blank returned on an electrocart bringing some oxygen tanks with them.
Rohan stood leaning against the railing of the corridor. Now that the
spacecraft rested on its stern the corridor had turned into a vertical
shaft reaching down all the way to the first engine room. Above and
below him were the many storeys of the rocket; somewhere in the depths
the conveyor belts ran quietly. He could hear faint smacking sounds
coming from the hydraulic system. Cool air blew up the shaft from forty
yards below where the air conditioning plant inside the engine room had
cleansed the fouled atmosphere.

The personnel at the airlock opened the door for them. Rohan made a
routine check: the straps were tight; the mask fitted properly. Jordan
and Blank entered behind him, followed by the robot. The steel floor
resounded under the metal monster's weighty steps. A piercing, constant
hissing sound came from the air that was sucked inside the interior of
the ship. The outside hatch sprung open, and they could see the engine
ramp four storeys below. A small elevator was already waiting for them.
(It had been released from inside the hull the moment they had entered
the airlock.) The elevator shaft consisted of a wire network which
stretched all the way down, touching the rim of the sand dunes. The
elevator cage had no walls, and the men could feel the air, but it was
hardly cooler than inside the _Invincible._ As they stepped onto the
waiting platform, the magnetic brakes were released. From a height of
eleven storeys up, the four glided down gently, passing the various
sections of the ship's hull on the way. Rohan inspected the walls
mechanically. You rarely get a chance to look at a spaceship so closely
from the outside, he thought to himself. That rocket had a pretty rough
time, all these years. Must have been hit by some meteors . . . looks as
if the armored plate has corroded in spots here; no longer looks shiny .
. .

The elevator reached its destination and came to a complete standstill
on top of the soft sand dune. The men jumped out, sinking knee-deep into
the shifting sand. The robot waddled ahead with firm strides, like a
giant duck. It had been outfitted with absurd-looking monstrous flat
feet, reminiscent of snowshoes, for just this purpose. Rohan ordered the
robot to stop. Then he and his men examined the outer rim of the jet
openings around the stern, approaching as closely as possible.

"They could stand a good cleaning. Need to be ground and polished
again," he remarked to his companions.

As they crept out from under the ship's stern, he noticed the gigantic
shadow cast by the _Invincible_ ahead of them, a dark road stretched
straight out across the sand dunes, bathed in the light of the setting
sun. A strange calm emanated from the monotonously even sandy waves.
Blue shadows gathered in the ridges while rosy twilight played on the
crests. This warm, delicate pink reminded him of the pastel hues he had
seen in picture books as a child. Such incredibly soft colors. His eyes
wandered across the dunes, detecting ever new variations of this
yellowish-pink glow. Farther away the colors deepened to a rich red
interspersed with sickle shaped black shadows. Far off in the distance
where the dunes nestled at the foot of bare, threatening volcanic rocks,
the warm colors faded into a uniform yellowish gray.

While Rohan stood gazing at the landscape, his men carried out their
routine measurements. They worked at a deliberate pace, mechanically
employing the skills they had acquired over so many years. They filled
small containers with samples of the atmosphere, the soil, the rocks.
They tested the radioactivity of the ground with the help of a probe
manipulated by the Arctane robot.

Rohan paid no heed to what his men were doing. The oxygen mask covered
only his nose and mouth, while his eyes and the rest of his head were
exposed to the air. He had removed his protective helmet, and could feel
the wind ruffling his hair. Tiny grains of sand were blown against his
face and clung to the skin, tickling where they penetrated the gap
between the mask and his cheeks. Heavy gusts of wind pulled at the loose
trousers of his protective suit. The huge, bloated sun disk was dipping
down close to the horizon; it was possible to look straight into the
dark red ball for a moment or two. The wind whistled with long drawn-out
sighs. Since the energy field around the ship permitted free passage of
gases, Rohan could not make out where its invisible wall rose up from
the sand.

The gigantic area that stretched endlessly out before him seemed totally
devoid of life, as if no living being had ever set foot on it. Could
this be the same planet that had devoured a spaceship as immense as
their own? A heavy cruiser with a crew of one hundred men, a mighty
experienced sailor of the void, capable of developing energies of
several million kilowatts within the fraction of a second which could be
transformed into protective screens impenetrable by any matter; energies
which might be bunched into destructive rays with the soaring
temperatures of a burning star, that would change mountain ranges to
dust and ashes, or dry out entire oceans. Yet the _Condor_ had
disappeared from this very same planet without a trace. How was it
possible to explain the fact that a huge steel structure, built on
earth, the fruit of a highly developed technology that had already
flourished for centuries, could simply vanish in this red and gray
desert without so much as even sending an S O S?

This is what the whole continent looks like, he thought. He remembered
the view from above: crater after crater with their serrated rims. The
only noticeable movement came from floating cloud banks that dragged
their shadows across the endless desert dunes.

"Any radioactivity?" he asked without turning around.

"Zero, zero, two," replied Jordan while slowly getting off his knees.
His face looked flushed, his eyes shiny. The mask distorted his voice.

That's negligible, Rohan thought. That couldn't have done anything to
the _Condor's_ crew. Besides, they'd know better than to commit any
gross negligence. Even if they hadn't carried out the routine stereotype
examination, the automatic controls would have sounded the alarm.

"Atmosphere?"

"Nitrogen seventy-eight per cent, argon two per cent, carbon dioxide
zero, methane four per cent, the rest is oxygen."

"Oxygen sixteen per cent? Are you sure?"

"Absolutely sure."

"Any radioactivity in the air?"

"Practically none."

That much oxygen. Strange. Rohan was surprised. He stepped over to the
robot who held out a cassette containing all the figures for Rohan's
inspection.

Maybe they tried to go without oxygen tanks. He dismissed the thought as
absurd. Occasionally a crew member would take off his mask against
orders and die of poisoning. Maybe one or two men, but no more than
that.

"Are you through with everything?" he wanted to know.

"Yes."

"Then get back to the ship."

"How about you, Navigator?"

"I'll stay a while longer. Just go back now, all of you!" He grew
impatient in his desire to be alone. Blank swung the strap over his
shoulder. The strap held all the containers together that now dangled
down his back. Jordan handed the probe to the robot. The men waded
clumsily through the deep sand, the Arctane waddling behind them like a
man in disguise.

Rohan walked some distance until he could see the broad openings of the
energy-field emitters sticking out of the sand. In a sudden surge of
childish mischief he grabbed a handful of sand and threw it against the
spot where the invisible wall was supposed to be. Not that he needed any
confirmation; he just obeyed a playful impulse. The sand arched through
the air, then trickled down in a straight line as if it had hit an
invisible glass vault. Rohan's fingers were itching to tear off his
mask.. How well he knew that sensation: spit out the plasti-mouthpiece,
jerk loose the safety straps, then pump his chest full of air, sucking
it deeply into his lungs . . .

I'm getting emotional, he thought, as he slowly made his way back to the
ship. The elevator was waiting for him, empty, the platform nestled
softly in the sand. Within a few minutes the wind had already deposited
a fine layer of dust upon the entire structure.

In the main corridor of the fifth deck he glanced at the information
panel. The commander was in the forward cabin. He made his way up there.

"To sum it up, it's quite idyllic out there," was Horpach's comment
after listening to the navigator's report. "No radioactivity, no spores,
fungi, viruses . . . nothing except this oxygen. Be sure you have some
cultures made of those samples."

"That's already being taken care of in the lab. Perhaps life has
developed on some other continent of this planet." Rohan's voice lacked
conviction.

"I'd rather doubt that. Not too much solar irradiation beyond the
equatorial zone. Didn't you notice how thick the polar icecaps seemed to
be? They must be some five to six miles deep. More likely we'd find life
in the ocean. Maybe some algae or seaweeds. I wonder why no living forms
ever left the water and adapted to dry land?"

"We'll have to take a closer look at that ocean," said Rohan.

"It's too soon to ask our people for definite data; but the planet seems
to be quite old. It must have been around for a good billion years. Even
the sun must once have seen better days. Lost all its lustre. It's
almost a red dwarf star. Puzzling that there is no life on land. Perhaps
some special evolutionary characteristic that cannot exist outside of
water . . . that would explain the presence of oxygen, but not the
mysterious disappearance of the _Condor."_

"Maybe there are aquatic life forms down on the ocean bed, some kind of
hidden civilization at the bottom of the sea," ventured Rohan.

The two men examined a huge map of the planet. It had been drawn in
Mercator projection about a century earlier, according to the data
obtained by automatic probes. The map was inexact, showing only the
outlines of the most important continents and oceans, the approximate
extent of the polar caps and the largest craters. A red dot marked their
landing site, below the eighth parallel of the northern latitude.
Horpach swept aside the map impatiently.

"How can you believe such nonsense!" he snapped at the navigator.
"Tressor was just as smart as we are. He would never have capitulated to
a bunch of fish from the ocean. Besides, let's assume any intelligent
life had evolved in the sea, it would surely have established a foothold
on dry land. They could always have used protective suits filled with
ocean water. Rubbish. Total nonsense," he grumbled, not because Rohan's
suggestion was entirely without any merit. His thoughts had raced ahead
to something else.

"We'll stay here for a while" he concluded. He touched the lower rim of
the map, which rolled up with a softly rustling noise, then disappeared
on one of the horizontal shelves of the big map case. "We'll just wait
and see."

"And if nothing happens?" Rohan inquired cautiously. "Won't we start
looking for them?"

"Be reasonable, Rohan! Such a" The astrogator tried to find a suitable
phrase. But the right word would not come. He replaced it by a
disdainful wave of his right hand.

"This planet is as big as Mars. How could we possibly send out search
parties for them? How can we hope to find the _Condor?"_

"The soil does contain a lot of iron," Rohan admitted reluctantly. An
analysis of the soil had indeed shown a considerable admixture of iron
oxides, so that ferro-induction values would be useless under these
circumstances. Rohan did not know what else to say. He was quite
convinced that the Commander would find a solution somehow. After all,
they could not return home empty-handed. He gazed at Horpach's heavy
eyebrows with their white bristling hairs, and he waited.

"To be frank with you, I'm not so sure that these forty-eight hours we
are supposed to wait will help us in any way; but these are the
regulations we have to obey," suddenly confessed the astrogator. "Sit
down, Rohan! You bother my conscience. This Regis III is the most
idiotic place in the universe. Sheer idiocy to have sent the _Condor_
here in the first place. I can't imagine why they did it. But that's
neither here nor there. We just have to face the facts of the
situation."

Horpach fell silent. He was in a bad mood, which usually made him quite
talkative and liable to become almost confidential. This was fraught
with danger, though, for he might cut short such brief periods of
intimacy with some nasty remark.

"Let's come to the point. We must act; we can't wait. All right then.
Place several photographic probes into orbit around the equator. Make
sure the orbit will be circular and not too far out. Let's say about
forty miles."

"But that would still be inside the ionosphere," objected Rohan. "They'd
burn up after a few times around the globe."

"So what? Let them burn up! As long as they get in a lot of photos. I'd
even suggest not going beyond thirty-five miles. They'll probably burn
up after the tenth orbit. But we can't send them any higher than that
and still get usuable shots. Do you have any idea what a rocket looks
like seen from sixty miles altitude, even with the best tele-lens? The
head of a pin would be as big as a huge mountain next to it. Start right
away . . . Rohan!"

The navigator was halfway out of the door when he turned to see Horpach
throw a paper on the table. It was the report with the results of the
routine stereotype analysis.

"What is that supposed to mean? What kind of lunacy is that? Who made
out that report?"

"The automatic analyzer. What's the matter?" asked Rohan making an
effort to suppress the anger that was slowly rising in him. Now he's got
to get on my back, he thought walking forward with deliberate slowness.
"Read that! Here, you see!"

"Methane: four per cent," Rohan read out loud. "Four per cent!" he
exclaimed in a startled voice.

"Four per cent methane, that's what it says here. And sixteen per cent
oxygen. Do you realize what that means? An explosive mixture. Can you
explain why the whole atmosphere didn't explode when we landed with
diborane as a propellant?"

"IncredibleI can't understand it," stammered Rohan. He hurried over to
the control panel, pushed the button of the suction tube which would
deliver a sample of the outside atmosphere. While Horpach paced the
floor impatiently in ominous silence, Rohan intently observed the
analyzers.

"Well, any change?"

"No, the same analysis as before: methane four per cent, oxygen sixteen
per cent," replied Rohan. Although he failed to understand this result,
he experienced a certain satisfaction in the knowledge that the
astrogator could not put the blame on him.

"Let me see that, will you," urged Horpach. "Methane: four per cent.
Damn it, you're right. All right, then. Put the probes into orbit and
then come over to the small lab. What do we have our experts for? Let
them rack their brains a bit."

Rohan took the elevator down, called two rocket experts to join him in
the small briefing area, where he gave them the astrogator's orders.
Then he returned to the second storey. Here were the laboratories and
cabins of the experts. He passed several narrow doors, each marked by a
name plate bearing nothing but initials: Ch. I, Ch. Ph., Ch. T., Ch. B.
The door of the small lab stood wide open. He could hear the monotonous
voices of the experts. Now and then they were interrupted by the
astrogator's deep bass. Rohan stopped at the threshold. All the "chiefs"
were assembled in this room: the engineers, biologists, physicists,
physicians, and the technologists from the engine room. The astrogator
sat at the farthest end next to the portable computer. Moderon, holding
his swarthy hands folded in front of him, was speaking. "I'm no gas
expert. In any event, we are not dealing here with ordinary methane. The
energy of the chemical bonds is different, even if it is only a
difference of one-hundredth. It will react with oxygen only in the
presence of some catalytic agent, and then only with great difficulty."

"Where does this methane come from?" inquired Horpach, twiddling his
thumbs.

"Its carbon is of organic origin, of course. There is not much of it,
but beyond any doubt"

"Are there any isotopes? How old are they? How old is this methane?"

"Anywhere from 2 to 15 million years."

"You certainly left yourself a nice amount of leeway!"

"We only had half an hour. I can't tell you any more than that."

"Quastler! What's the origin of this methane, what do you think?"

"I don't know."

Horpach's glance made the round of his experts. He looked close to
losing his temper; but suddenly he smiled.

"Gentlemen! After all, you are the experts. We have been working
together for quite some time now. Let me have your opinion now, please.
What do you suggest we should do, where shall we begin?"

No one was willing to answer, except for the biologist Joppe, one of the
few who were not afraid of the astrogator. He gazed calmly at the
commander: "This is not an ordinary planet of the class Subdelta 92.
Otherwise the _Condor_ would never have vanished. Since they also had
experts on board, neither any better nor any worse than we have here, we
can safely assume that their knowledge was insufficient to prevent the
catastrophe. This leaves us with the only possible solution: We must
continue to proceed with the third step routine and examine the mainland
and the oceans of Regis III. To begin with, I'd suggest collecting some
core samples for geological analysis. At the same time we should obtain
various water specimens from the ocean. Anything else would be
speculation, a luxury we cannot permit ourselves in our present
situation."

"Very well." Horpach pressed his lips together into a thin line. "No
problem getting core samples of the ground within the energy field. Dr.
Norwik can take care of that task." The chief geologist nodded his
consent. "As far as the ocean is concernedwhat's the distance from here
to the shore, Rohan?"

"About 120 miles," answered the navigator. He was not in the least
surprised that the commander was aware of his presence, although he
could not possibly see him.

"That's a bit too far. But anyhow, take as many people along as you
think you'll need. Fitzpatrick, one of the oceanographers, a few marine
biologists, and six energo-robots from the reserve stock. Drive to the
shore. Work only inside the protective energy screen. No joy rides on
the ocean, no diving attempts. Be careful with the energo-robots, we
don't have any to spare. Got it? Well, you can go ahead then. Wait, one
more thing: is the atmosphere suitable for breathing?"

The physicians consulted each other in a barely audible whisper.

"Essentially, yes," Stormont answered finally. His voice did not sound
very convincing.

"What do you mean, 'essentially'? Is the air breathable or not?"

"The high percentage of methane will eventually have some effect on the
men. As soon as their blood reaches saturation point, we can expect
certain disturbances in the brain. They'll become unconscious within one
hour of exposure, or perhaps it'll take several hours."

"How about using a methane absorber?"

"Not practical. We would need too manyyou'd have to change them
constantly. Besides, the oxygen content of the air is too low. I'm in
favor of taking along oxygen tanks."

"How about you others? Do you agree?"

Witte and Eldjarn nodded their consent.

Horpach rose from his chair. "That's it, then. Let's get started. Rohan!
What's the matter with the probes?"

"They are ready for takeoff. May I put them into orbit before we leave
on our expedition?"

"Yes."

Rohan turned away and soon left the noise of the laboratory behind him.
The sun was setting as he reached the control center. The serrated
contours of a crater stood out starkly against the horizon, its peaks
unnaturally clear against the red-rimmed violet and purple of the sun.
The sky was more densely star-studded and seemed to loom more vastly in
this part of the galaxy than elsewhere. The major constellations began
to sink lower and lower toward the planet's surface, soon merging with
the dark shadows of the desert

Rohan called the satellite launching pad via intercom. They were
announcing the start of the first pair of photo satellites, to be
followed by additional launchings within the hour. In another
twenty-four hours the _Invincible's_ crew could expect to receive a
detailed photographic survey of the entire equatorial zone.

Rohan sat down in front of the control panel. No one would ever have
gotten him to admit that he felt the same thrill at the light effects
whenever a satellite was put into orbit. First the control lamps of the
booster rocket would flare up with red, white and blue lights. Then the
starter automat would begin countdown. As soon as its ticking ceased, a
slight tremor would shake the entire ship's body. At the same time a
bright phosphorescence would illuminate the desert that until that
moment had lain like a dark shadow on the videoscreen.

A low rumble spread throughout the whole cruiser, down to the lowest
decks, as the tiny projectile shot out of the ramp at the ship's nose.
The _Invincible_ was bathed in a sea of flaming light. The booster
rocket fled skyward, its glow a feeble flicker on the slopes of the
dunes, which Christmas tree: they indicated that the burnt-out rocket
could no longer be heardthe instrument panel was racked by a sudden
feverish trembling. The oval-shaped ballistic control lights flashed out
of the dark, and were welcomed with friendly encouraging nodding by the
shimmering lights of the remote control steering, like bits of
mother-of-pearl. Then colorful signals lit up like a Christmas tree:
they indicated that the burntout rocket stages had been jettisoned.
Finally the rainbow effect created by the constant flickering and
shimmering was blotted out by a stark white rectangle. This was the sign
that the satellite had reached its orbit. In the center of this
glittering white area a small gray island emerged, gradually condensing
its vague outlines to form the number 67, the altitude at which the
satellite was circling the planet.

Rohan quickly checked out the orbital parameters, but perigee and apogee
were close to the values calculated beforehand. There was nothing else
for him to do here. He compared the time aboard the _Invincible,_ 18:00,
with current local time: it was 23:00. For a brief moment he closed his
eyes; he looked forward to this excursion to the seashore, for he
preferred working on his own. He felt hungry and tired. Rohan
deliberated whether he should take a pep pill, but then decided to have
a real meal. As he rose from his seat he realized how exhausted he
actually felt. The momentary shock caused by this discovery gave him a
new burst of strength. Rohan took the elevator down to the mess hall.
His crew was already there waiting for him: the two drivers of the
air-cushioned hover trucks. He was fond of the one name Jarg, because of
his pleasant disposition. There were also the oceanographer Fitzpatrick
and his two colleagues Broza and Koechlin. They were just finishing
supper as Rohan ordered some hot soup and helped himself to bread and a
few bottles of nonalcoholic beer which he took from an automatic
dispenser built in the wall. He placed everything on a tray and walked
over to the dining table. At this moment a slight tremor shook the
floor. The _Invincible_ had launched another satellite.

The commander had not been in favor of any nocturnal expeditions.
Shortly before sunrise, at 5:00 Am. local time, they started out on the
journey. They employed the usual precautionary measures, advancing in
the painfully slow marching order that was generally known as the
"funeral procession." A group of energo-robots led the way while others
brought up the rear. They had erected an ellipsoid force field for the
protection of the entire group, for the all-purpose vehicles, the
cross-country jeeps containing radar and radio installations, the mobile
kitchen, the trailer with airtight living quarters, and the small
carriage on caterpillar tracks on which their laser beam sender had been
mounted.

Rohan and his three experts climbed into the energo-robot at the front
of the train. It was a rather tight squeeze, but this way they had at
least the illusion of a relatively normal ride. The entire train moved
at the speed of the slowest vehiclesthe energo-robotswhich did not
contribute to the men's comfort. The caterpillar tracks groaned and
crunched through the sand. The turbo engines maintained a steady hum,
reminding Rohan of a huge swarm of persistent flies. Cool air blew from
the air conditioning duct that opened directly behind their seats. The
energo-robot rocked back and forth like a big sloop making its way
through heavy seas. After a while the black needle of the _Invincible_
sank below the horizon. For some time they drove across the monotonous
desert while the sun rose, blood red and cold.

The landscape changed. There was no longer so much sand. Instead rocky
shelves rose at a slant from the ground. Many detours were necessary.
Conversation was impossible because of the noisy engines and the oxygen
masks covering their faces. Conscientiously the men scanned the horizon,
again and again finding the same picture: huge rock piles and big chunks
of well-weathered stones. Finally the ground began to slope downwards.
At the bottom of a basin-shaped valley they discovered a small brook
with a narrow trickle of water that glittered in the red light of the
dawn. Both banks were lined with wide deposits of round, polished
stones, indicating that the brook occasionally must carry considerable
amounts of water.

They halted briefly and examined the water. It was limpid but rather
hard, and contained ferric oxide and tiny traces of sulphide.

They continued their march at a faster pace than before, since the
caterpillar tracks could make better headway on the rocky ground. To the
west rose low rocky cliffs. The last vehicle maintained communication
with the _Invincible._ The radar antennae kept turning; the observers
sat in front of their radar screens, constantly adjusting their headsets
and chewing grains of energy concentrate. Once in a while a stone was
flung out from beneath the turbo-drive vehicles as if by a tiny tornado,
propelling it high up the stony slopes. Then their way was blocked by
softly arching hills. Without slowing down they picked up a few rock
samples. Fitzpatrick called out to Rohan that the gravel-like soil might
be of organic origin.

Finally, as they sighted the blue-black surface of the ocean, they also
found some limestone formations. They drove toward the shore. The ground
was now covered with small, flat stones over which the vehicles
proceeded noisily. The hot vapors from the motors, the screeching of the
caterpillar chains, the hum of the engines were all instantly stifled as
they halted suddenly about one hundred yards offshore. The green-gray
ocean stretched out ahead of them, looking no different than the
Atlantic Ocean on Earth.

Now a rather complicated maneuver had to be executed: the energo-robot
in front of the column had to advance deep into the water in order to
maintain the protective energy screen above the whole group. The machine
was made watertight, then it rolled into the waves, steered by remote
control from another robot. The first robot sank slowly deeper and
deeper, disappearing underneath the surface, and could be seen only
dimly as a dark spot. Then, obeying a radio signal, the immersed
colossus pushed its Dirac emitter above the surface of the water. As
soon as the energy field had become stabilized, arching an invisible
hemisphere over a part of both the shore and the ocean in front of it,
the men could start their examinations.

The salinity of this ocean was slightly less than that of terrestrial
sea water, but the results of the analysis were anything but
sensational. Two hours later they knew little more than before, so they
steered two television probes far out over the ocean, observing their
paths on television sets. Not until the probes had disappeared on the
horizon did the crew receive signals that were of any interest to them.
Some living organisms inhabited the ocean; they resembled fish. As the
probes approached, the creatures scatterd with enormous speed, seeking
shelter in the depths of the ocean. Sonic depth finders located the
first sign of organic life on Regis 150 yards below the surface of the
ocean.

Broza insisted on catching one of the fish. The probes pursued the
shadows as they flitted about in the darkness of the ocean, shooting
electrical charges at them. But the fish were incredibly agile; it took
many misses before finally one of the creatures was stunned and could be
grabbed by hooks lowered from the probes. The crew recalled the probe
immediately to shore.

In the meantime, Koechlin and Fitzpatrick had guided another probe over
the ocean, collecting samples of fibers that were drifting in the deeper
layers of the sea. The men believed them to be a type of local algae.
Finally they sent the probe all the way down to the ocean floor, which
at this point reached a depth of 250 yards. Down below were strong
currents that made remote-control steering rather difficult. The probe
was constantly pushed off course and collided all the time with the rock
heaps on the ground. With great effort some of the stones could finally
be rolled over. Just as Koechlin had suspected, a whole colony of tiny
cilia-covered creatures had been hiding underneath the shelter of the
big stones.

After the two probes had safely returned to their base, the biologists
began their task. In the meantime a hut had been erected where they
could take off the bothersome respirator masks. Rohan, Jarg and the five
other men ate their first hot meal that day.

For the rest of the day they were busy collecting mineral specimens,
examining the radioactivity of the ocean floor, measuring the amount of
insultation and carrying out the manifold tasks that were irksome yet
had to be performed with accuracy if they wanted to obtain reliable
results.

By dusk everything that they had set out to do had been achieved. Rohan
felt a sense of accomplishment as he stepped to the microphone to answer
Horpach's call from the _Invincible._ He reported that the ocean was
full of living organisms, all of which avoided coming anywhere close to
the shore regions. Nothing unusual had been detected when they had
dissected the one fish they had caught. The evolution of life on Regis
III must have been going on for approximately several hundred million
years. They had also discovered considerable amounts of green algae;
this should account for the presence of the oxygen in the atmosphere.
There was the same division of observed organic forms as on Earth and
other planets, namely into flora and fauna. Also the skeletal structure
of the vertebrates seemed to be typical. However, one organ had been
found in the fish specimen for which no corresponding terrestrial
structure was known to the examining biologists. This seemed to be a
special organ of sense that reacted strongly to minute variations in a
magnetic field.

Horpach ordered the crew to return immediately to the spacecraft. He
closed the conversation by reporting an important item of news: they had
apparently succeeded in discovering the place where the lost _Condor_
had landed.

Despite the violent protests on the part of the biologists (who insisted
they would need at least several weeks to complete their
investigations), Rohan had the huts dismantled. The engines started and
the column began its way back in a northwesterly direction. Rohan was
unable to give any further details to his crew, who were eager to learn
more about the _Condor._ He was certain, however, that it was advisable
to hurry back, for he assumed that the commander would give out new
assignments that most likely would supply them with more rewarding
answers. Of course, the first step would consist of a thorough
examination of the area where the _Condor_ was supposed to have landed.
Rohan drove as fast as the engines would permit. Their return trip was
accompanied by a hellish noise as the caterpillar tracks rattled rapidly
over the gravel ground, crunching and cracking and spewing out the
stones in their path.

At the onset of darkness they switched on their big headlights; before
their eyes the flickering light cones drew from the darkness huge,
shapeless, apparently mobile silhouetteswhich turned out to be nothing
but big boulders, the last remaining remnants of an eroded mountain
chain.

Several times they were forced to stop before some deep rifts in the
basalt that had to be cautiously circumnavigated.

It was long past midnight when they finally sighted the body of the
_Invincible,_ shimmering in the distance like a festively illuminated
metal tower. A great deal of activity was going on within the area of
the energy field. Rows of vehicles were moving about, provisions and
fuel were unloaded; groups of men were crowded below the ramp, which was
lit up as bright as daylight by the huge Jupiter lamps. From a distance
the returning men could hear the noise generated by the workers, busily
scurrying about like so many ants in a bustling ant-heap. Now blue
signal lights began to blink to indicate the spot where they could
re-enter the energy screen. One after another, the vehicles of the
returning expedition rolled into the protective hemisphere.

Hardly had Rohan jumped off his truck when he hailed one of the passing
men, who he recognized as Blank. Rohan asked him what else had been
found out about the _Condor._ But Blank had not even heard anything
about the presumed discovery of the lost spaceship. There were only a
few additional bits of information he could supply to Rohan. Before the
satellites had burned up in the lower layers of the atmosphere they had
managed to make some eleven thousand photographs. These had been
transmitted and received by radio signals, which in their turn had been
transferred onto specially prepared plates that were now in the
cartographical cabin.

Rohan did not wish to waste any time. He ordered the cartographer Erett
to come to his own cabin. While standing under a hot shower, Rohan
quizzed Erett. He wanted to hear what had occurred on board the
_Invincible_ while he had been out on his expedition to the ocean shore.
Erett was one of those who had carefully examined the incoming satellite
photos for any trace of the vanished _Condor._ He had been one of the
thirty men who had searched for this tiny grain of steel in the vast
ocean of sand. Their group of experts had consisted of several
planetologists, cartographers, radar observers and all pilots aboard the
_Invincible._ For more than twenty-four hours they had alternately
sifted through the incoming material and then noted down the coordinates
of any suspicious spot on the planet. Unfortunately the commander's
report to Rohan had turned out to be incorrect: what they had believed
to be the spaceship was nothing but an unusually tall rocky spire whose
shadow had looked remarkably like that of a rocket. Thus the _Condor's_
fate remained in the dark as before.

Rohan wanted to report directly to the commander but he had already
retired for the night, so Rohan went to his own cabin. Despite his
exhaustion he could not fall asleep for a long time. Shortly after he
awoke the next morning, he received a request from the astrogator via
Ballmin, chief of the planetologists, to dispatch his entire material to
the main laboratory. By ten o'clock Rohan felt so hungryhe had not yet
had breakfastthat he took the elevator down to the mess hall for the
radar observers. He was just drinking his coffee when Erett stormed in,
rushing straight to Rohan's table.

"Did you find the _Condor?"_ Rohan asked when he saw the cartographer's
excited face.

"No, but we've detected something much bigger. Come along right away,
please. The astrogator is waiting for you."

It seemed as if the glassed-in cylinder literally inched its way up the
elevator shaft. Nobody spoke to them when they arrived at the quiet
darkened cabin. The humming of the relays could be heard and the
automatic developer spat out shiny moist photos; but no one paid any
attention. Two technicians were just pulling a projector out from behind
a hinged door in the wall. Just before the technician switched off the
light, Rohan managed to locate the white-haired cranium of the
astrogator amid all the other heads. The next moment a silvery
shimmering screen descended from the ceiling. Tense breathing was the
only audible sound. Rohan got as close to the screen as possible. The
rather fuzzy image (unfortunately only a black-and-white photo) showed a
bare high plateau, surrounded by an irregular ring of small craters,
jutting out from the landscape. On one side this tableland fell away
steeply, as if sliced off by a giant knife. That was the shoreline, for
the rest of the picture was filled by the even black expanse of the
ocean. At some distance from this precipice Rohan noticed a mosaic of
indistinct shapes that lay partially obscured under some low clouds and
their shadows. No doubt about it, this peculiar structure with its
blurry outlines could not be mistaken for any geological formation.

It's a city, thought Rohan with excitement. The room was silent as the
technician tried in vain to get the picture into a sharper focus.

"Were there any disturbances during transmission?" the astrogator's calm
voice broke through.

"No," replied Ballmin out of the dark. "We had good transmission, but
this shot was one of the last of the third group of satellites. Eight
minutes after it had been launched, it no longer reacted to our signals.
This photo was probably taken after the objectives had already been
damanged by the rapidly rising temperature."

"The camera was at a distance of roughly forty miles from the center of
this structure," interjected another voice, that Rohan recognized. It
was Malte, one of the most talented planetologists.

"I'd be inclined to put the distance rather at some thirty to
thirty-five miles. Will you look at this, please?" The astrogator's body
obscured part of the screen. He took a transparent stencil with many
circles and placed it over the various craters in the visible part of
the screen.

"These are definitely larger than those of the earlier shots. But it
doesn't matter, either way you look at it . . ." he added without
completing his sentence.

They all knew what he had meant to say: soon they would be able to judge
for themselves whether the satellite cameras had been properly focused.
For a few moments they regarded the image on the screen. Rohan was no
longer certain whether this was a city or the ruins of one. That these
geometrically regular structures must have been abandoned for quite some
time could be concluded from the pencil-thin wavy shadows of the dunes
which encircled them. Some of these constructions had been almost
totally covered by the sand. The geometrical order of the ruins was
divided into two uneven parts by a zigzag line which grew wider as it
stretched further inland. This tectonic fissure cut several of the large
"buildings" in half. One of these had toppled over and formed a bridge
across the chasm.

"Lights, please," sounded the astrogator's voice. As bright lamps
illuminated the cabin he glanced over to the clock on the wall. "We'll
leave in two hours."

Dissatisfied comments greeted this announcement. The loudest protests
came from the assistants to the chief geologist; they had already
drilled 200 yards down into the ground to obtain soil and rock
specimens. With a slight wave of his hand Horpach indicated that he
wished no further discussion. "All machines are to return on board ship.
Make safe any material obtained so far. Continue examining the photos
and carry on with all necessary analyses. Where is Rohan? Oh, there you
are. Did you hear what I said? Everyone to be ready for takeoff in two
hours!"

The men loaded the machines into the _Invincible's_ hold. They worked
fast but with systematic precision. Rohan turned a deaf ear to Ballmin's
pleas for just fifteen minutes more to finish drilling for his last core
sample.

"You have all heard the commander's orders; now get a move on," he
shouted, urging the men to greater speed as they drove their big cranes
toward the ditches and drilling holes. Drilling equipment, provisional
turnstiles and fuel drums disappeared quickly in the open hatches
leading to the ship's storerooms. Soon the upturned ground was the only
sign left of all their activities. Then Rohan and Westergarde, the
substitute chief engineer, made one final inspection of the now deserted
working places outside the spacecraft. After having taken care of this
last precautionary measure, the two men quickly embarked.

A great commotion then sprang up in the sandy dunes around the ship,
caused by the energo-robots obeying the radio signal to return to their
craft. Quickly waddling along in single file they soon reached their
home base.

Now the ramp and the vertical elevator shaft were pulled inside. For
another instant nothing moved: the lull before a storm.

Then the metallic whistling of the air sounded its noisy protest as it
was squeezed through the jets. A storm broke loose. Around the nose of
the _Invincible_ greenish dust clouds performed a mad dance. Their pale
glow seemed to ooze out until it blended with the red light of the sun.

Deafening thunder shook the desert around the ship. Admidst the echoes
reverberating from the nearby rock walls the spaceship ascended slowly
but with growing speed and soon disappeared in the violet skies above.
All that remained of the landing area was a circle burnt into the rocky
ground, glazed-over dunes and vapor trails high up in the sky.

When the last trace of the rocket's presence, a whitish haze, had been
absorbed by the atmosphere, when the wandering sandy waves gradually
began to cover up the naked rock of the ground, at the same time filling
in the deserted digging spacesonly then, much later, did a dark cloud
gather in the west. Hovering low above the earth it pushed close, grew,
encircled the landing area with a threatening arm. There it remained,
motionless.

As the sun was about to set, a black rain fell on the desert.

In The Ruins

 

The _Invincible_ landed at a carefully selected spot almost four miles
from the northern periphery of the "city," which could be clearly seen
from inside the control center. The impression of dealing here with some
artificial constructions became even stronger now than before, when the
men had carefully scanned the photos made by the satellites. The
structures were angular, usually broader at the bottom than at the upper
end. They came in various sizes and stretched over many miles, sometimes
with a metallic sheen, sometimes simply black. But even the strongest
field glasses would not reveal any details. Most of the buildings seemed
to be perforated like a sieve.

This time the tinny clanking of the cooling jets had scarcely died down
when the _Invincible_ put out the ramp and the elevator shaft, and
surrounded itself with the protective chain of energo-robots. But there
were some additional precautionary measures. Exactly opposite the
"city," which could not be seen from the ground as it lay hidden by some
low hills, a convoy was formed. An energy dome arched over the convoy
that consisted of five cross-country jeeps and a mobile antimatter
mortar. It was about twice the size of the vehicles and resembled an
apocalyptic bug with bluish glittering wing cases.

Rohan was the commander of this operational troop. He stood upright in
the turret hatch of the first vehicle awaiting the signal that would
allow them free passage through the force field. Two info-robots had
been positioned on nearby hillocks; there they began shooting off a
series of long-burning green flares. This clearly marked the path; the
small column started to roll. Rohan's car was at the head of the troop.

The engines hummed with their deep bass voices; the heavy balloon tires
spewed up fountains of sand. Two hundred yards ahead flew a scouter
robot, skimming close to the ground. The robot looked like a flat saucer
with rapidly vibrating antennae. These vibrations created an air current
which shot hissing into the ridges of the dunes. One could almost
believe the flying robot had set the dunes aflame with an invisible
fire. The swirling dust cloud lingered in the still air, marking with a
puffy reddish line the direction taken by the expedition.

The shadows of the machines grew longer; it was shortly before sunset.
The column was forced to make a detour around a small crater that was
almost filled with sand. Twenty minutes later the troop reached the edge
of the ruins.

They broke formation. Three unmanned vehicles left the train and placed
blue lights as a sign that a localized force field had been erected. The
two manned cars rolled forward under the protection of the mobile energy
dome. Fifty yards behind them the giant antimatter mortar followed,
stalking along on its curved telescopic legs.

On one occasion they had to stop. Just as they crossed a thicket
resembling torn metal ropes and wires, one of the robots's legs got
stuck in the sand and it was in danger of sinking down into an invisible
crevice. But two Arctanes simultaneously jumped off Rohan's vehicle and
helped the colossus out of the tight spot. Then the column continued on
its way.

What they had called the "city" in reality bore no resemblance to any
terrestrial settlement. Dark massifs, anchored in unknown depths, jutted
out from the sand of the wandering dunes. With their spiny, brush-like
surfaces, these structures looked unlike anything ever before seen by
man. The undefinable formations reached a height of several storeys.
They had neither windows nor doors, nor even any walls. Some looked like
closely woven nets, folded into many layers, penetrating each other in
countless places. Wherever they joined there occurred a thickening of
the matter. Others reminded the men of complicated spatial arabesques
such as might be formed by multilayered honeycombs or sieves with three-
or five-cornered openings. Each larger structural unit and every visible
facet revealed a certain regularity, not as uniform as that in a
crystal, but nevertheless arranged in a certain rhythm. Yet the rhythm
was frequently broken by traces of destructive forces. Still others
consisted of tightly intergrown branches with curiously angular shapes.
These twigs, however, did not branch out as they did on trees and bushes
back home on Earth, but rather formed part of an arch; elsewhere two
spiraling twigs wound in opposite directions.

In other places the men saw constructions that leaned at an angle as if
they were the supporting girders of a drawbridge. The prevailing winds
from the north had deposited sand on all horizontal structural surfaces
and wherever the ground fell away with a gentle slope. From a distance,
several ruins produced the effect of stocky pyramids whose tops had been
lopped off. But up close it became evident that the apparently smooth
surface really consisted of a system of many-forked bars and poles,
ending in sharp points, forming such an impenetrable tangle in certain
places that even the sand got caught in it.

Rohan thought that he could make out cube-like and pyramid-shaped
remnants of rocks supporting a dried-out, dead vegetation. Even this
impression dwindled the closer he came: despite the chaotic destruction
a certain regular pattern was still evident that was alien to any
organic lifeforms. These were no genuine massive ruins. It was possible
to peer inside through the many chinks in the metal thicket. And yet
they were not hollow, for they were entirely filled by this impenetrable
growth. Above everything hung the breath of deadly loneliness and
isolation.

Rohan thought of the antimatter mortar, but even the use of force would
produce no real results, for here was nothing to be invaded. The storm
swept stinging clouds of dust through the tall bastions. The even mosaic
of the black apertures was filled with sand that trickled down in a
steady stream to build up steep cones at the foot of the honeycombs.
This dry sound of the trickling sand never left them during the foray
into the ruins. But there was nothing but utter silence from the
whirling antennae, the Geiger counters, the supersonic microphones and
the radiation dosimeters. The crunching of sand under wheels and the
howling of the starting motors were the only noise to be heard as the
colonnade changed direction. The troop now swerved off to one side and
soon disappeared in the deep cool shade of the gigantic constructions.
After a while they came out again into the bright light that lay scarlet
red on the sand.

Finally they arrived at the tectonic fissure. It was a crevice one
hundred yards wide, its depth unfathomable: it had not yet been filled
in by the sand that was constantly swept down from the edges by violent
gusts of wind.

They stopped, and Rohan sent the flying scouter robot across the chasm.
He followed the robot's progress on his television screen, observing
whatever the tele-lenses were registering. But there was always the same
familiar sight. Rohan recalled the scouter one hour later. As soon as it
had returned to the troop, he had a brief consultation with Ballmin and
the physicist Gralew who were traveling with him in his vehicle. They
decided to take a closer look at some of the ruins.

At first they tried to measure the depth of the sand layer which covered
the "streets" of the dead "city." They used supersonic probes: a rather
wearisome procedure, as it turned out, for the various test results
conflicted with each other. Probably this was due to some
de-crystallization process that had occurred inside,the rocky ground as
it was torn apart by an earthquake. This was a possible explanation for
the origin of the chasm. The depth of the sandy stratum covering the
gigantic basin within this sector seemed to vary from seven to twelve
yards.

They changed direction again, now turning to the east, toward the
seashore. After following a zigzag course for about seven miles through
the black ruins that became gradually lower and then finally completely
disappeared in the sand, the expedition reached bare rocky ground. They
came to a halt on top of a cliff that was so high above the sea that
they could hear the breakers only as a weak murmur far below. The coast
line was a barren chain of rocks that looked unnaturally smooth, almost
polished. Toward the north the shore rose to form a line of mountain
peaks that plunged abruptly into the ocean like a petrified waterfall.

They had left the "city" behind them. Now its silhouette stood out black
against the reddish horizon. Rohan called the _Invincible_ to report
what new findings they had managed to get. Then the group turned around,
driving back to the interior of the field of ruins. The men were careful
to observe all precautionary measures, driving under the shelter of
their energy screen.

On the way back one of the energo-robots enlarged the area of its forced
fieldprobably because of some tiny directional errorand its edge brushed
against the overhang of a pointed "building." However, the antimatter
mortar was connected to the output meter of the force field and had been
instructed for automatic annihilation of any hostile attackers. The
mortar apparently interpreted the sudden surge of energy as evidence
that something was trying to penetrate the protective dome, and
bombarded the ruin. The entire top part of the arched structureit was as
tall as the Empire State Buildinglost its dirty gray color and began to
glow, turning into a dazzling bright shape. A few seconds later it
exploded into a fiery metallic rain. Fortunately not a drop could reach
the men in their vehicles, for the incandescent shower slid off the
invisible vault of the energy wall. The metallic spray turned into vapor
before it could even touch the ground.

The radiation level shot up while the mortar carried out the
annihilation of the structure. The Geiger counters automatically gave an
alarm signal. Rohan was cursing loudly and threatened to tear apart the
man who had programed the instruments. It took quite a while to cancel
the alarm instructions and explain the whole affair to the _Invincible,_
who had inquired with concern what had caused these fireworks.

"All we know so far is that we are dealing here with some kind of metal.
Probably some alloy of steel, tungsten and nickel," said Bellamin, who
had taken advantage of the general confusion to make a spectrum analysis
of the flames.

"Any idea how old it might be?" asked Rohan as he brushed the fine sand
off his face and hands.

"No. But this stuff is damn old. Damn old," he repeated.

"We should examine it more thoroughly. And I'm not going to ask the Old
Man for permission, either," added Rohan with sudden determination.

They had left behind the molten metal lump that had been part of the
spiry ruins. It had turned into a solid body that hung like a broken
wing over the path they had taken. Now they stopped in front of a
complicated object consisting of several arms that came together at the
center. A gap opened up in the forcefield marked by two light signals.
They approached the strange object. Seen at close range, it presented a
scene of confusion. The facade of the building was formed by sheets
overgrown with metallic tufts. These slabs were supported from the
inside by pillars as thick as tree trunks. There was still some kind of
order at the outside surface. The men peered inside, illuminating the
tangle with the help of powerful searchlights. Utter chaos was created
as the forest of poles branched out in all directions, gathering in
thick knots from which metallic twigs sprouted in every direction. It
reminded the men of a huge wire tangle made up of cables twisting in
millions of different fashions. They tested the structure for electric
currents, traces of polarization, magnetism and finally for
radioactivity; but they failed to detect anything.

The green light flares that marked the entrance into the tangled area
were flickering in the wind. Air masses blew through the steely thicket,
got caught inside and whistled eerie chants.

"I wish I could figure out what this damned jungle is supposed to be!"
complained Rohan as he rubbed the sand off his sweaty skin. He was
standing next to Ballmin on top of the flying scouter robot. A low
railing before them rose several yards above the "street," a sandy
triangular dune between two converging ruins. Way down below they could
see their vehicles and the men, like a set of miniature toys. They were
craning their necks to gaze up at Rohan and Ballmin.

The scouter robot floated along. Now they passed over an uneven, torn
area full of sharp, jagged metal peaks that were occasionally covered by
triangular plates. These plates were arranged in an irregular fashion,
jutting out at various angles, sometimes bent aside, sometimes turned
upwards. This permitted occasional glances into the dark interior. Yet
the tangle of rods, intersections and honeycombed walls was so dense
that the sun's rays could not penetrate to the bottom. Even the bright
cones of their searchlights were swallowed up by the gloomy abyss.

"Tell me, Ballmin, what is that damned jungle supposed to be?" asked
Rohan once more. He was furious. He had kept rubbing the sand off his
face and now his forehead was reddened, his skin smarted, his eyes were
burning. On top of it all he would shortly have to make his next report
to the crew back at the spacecraft. He had no idea how he could describe
what they had encountered here.

"I'm not a clairvoyant," replied the scientist. "I'm not even an
archeologist. Not that an archeologist could tell you a great deal here
either. It seems to me" Suddenly he fell silent.

"Go on. Finish what you were going to say."

"This doesn't look like any dwelling or the destroyed houses of any
humanoid creatures. Do you see what I mean? The only thing I could
compare it to would be a machine of some kind."

"A machine? What type of machine? A computer, maybe?"

"What gives you that idea?" countered the planetologist laconically. The
robot made a left turn. It was flying close to the metal poles which
were jutting out from the bent slabs. Several times the robot almost
touched the crazy black network.

"No, no electric circuits to be seen. Or did you notice any switches?
Insulators? Anything that might be part of an electronic brain?"

"Maybe they weren't fireproof. There could have been a fire here. After
all, this is nothing but ruins," replied Rohan. But his voice lacked
conviction.

"Who knows? Maybe you're right," admitted Ballmin unexpectedly.

"But what should I tell the astrogator?"

"Why don't you let him see for himself and transmit the whole deal here
by television?"

"That can't have been a city," said Rohan, suddenly summarizing his
thoughts about what he had seen here.

"Most likely not," agreed Ballmin. "At least not the kind of city we
know. Nothing that corresponds to our notion of what a city should be
like. No human beings, nothing resembling us could have dwelled here.
And since the life forms we found in the ocean here were similar to
those back home on Earth, it would be logical to assume the same thing
for any living organisms on the mainland."

"Yes. I keep racking my brains. None of the biologists will commit
himself to make a statement. What do you think about that?"

"They don't want to talk about it, because it simply seems too
improbable, as if something had prevented life from becoming established
on land; as if the aquatic creatures had never been permitted to leave
the water."

"There might have been some reason for thata nearby super-nova
explosion, for example. The Zeta of the Lyre constellation is known to
have been a nova several million years ago. Organic life on the
continents may have been annihilated by radiation, while life survived
in the deeper regions of the ocean."

"If there had ever been radiation, we would still be able to find traces
of it, but there is practically no radioactivity in the soil of this
part of the galaxy. Aside from the fact that evolution would have moved
ahead during the several million years since. You wouldn't expect any
vertebrates on land, of course, but the more primitive forms should be
present. Didn't you notice the total absence of any life forms in the
littoral zone?"

"Yes, I did. But what does that mean?"

"A great deal. Life usually originates in the shore regions of the
oceans, and migrates to deeper waters only afterwards. It can't have
been any different here. Only something must have chased it away from
the edge of the sea. Something must be preventing it from going on
land."

"What basis do you have for your conclusions?"

"The fact that the fish were frightened by our probes. On all the other
planets I have known, animals were never afraid of machines. They are
not afraid of things they have never seen before."

"Do you mean to say the fish have seen some probes before ours?"

"I couldn't tell you what they have encountered. But why else would they
need a magnetic detector sense?"

"I really wouldn't know, damn it!" grumbled Rohan. He regarded the torn
metal garlands and leaned over the railing. The bent ends of the black
metal rods trembled slightly in the robot's slipstream. Ballmin used
long pliers to pinch off some wires sticking out from a tunnel-shaped
opening.

"Let me tell you," he continued, "there could never have been very high
temperatures around here; otherwise you would find traces of oxidation
on these metal surfaces. So much for your hypothesis about a fire having
caused this destruction."

"Any hypotheses would fail the test here," muttered Rohan. "You know, I
just can't see the connection between this maze and the fact that the
_Condor_ has vanished somewhere on this planet. Everything is dead
here."

"That can't always have been the case."

"Maybe it was alive a thousand years ago, but not just a few years back.
There is nothing else for us to do here. Let's return to the convoy down
there."

They did not exchange another word until the robot landed in front of
the green signal lights. Rohan ordered the technician to let the
television cameras roll and transmit a report to the _Invincible,_

He and the scientists withdrew to the cabin of the lead vehicle. They
released additional oxygen into the air supply of the tiny room, then
they ate and drank coffee from their thermos bottles. The white light of
the overhead fluorescent lamp felt pleasant to Rohan's eyes after the
red daylight of this planet. Ballmin spat into a paper napkin; it was
some sand that had insinuated its way into the mouthpiece of his
breathing mask and gritted between his teeth.

"That reminds me of something," said Gralew unexpectedly, as he screwed
down the top of his thermos bottle. His thick black hair glistened in
the light of the fluorescent lamp. "I'll tell you about it, but don't
take it too seriously."

"If it reminds you of anything at all, that means something," replied
Rohan with his mouth full. "Shoot!"

"It's nothing special, really. I heard a story a long time ago, almost a
fairy tale, about the inhabitants of the Lyre constellation."

"Why a fairy tale? They did exist. Achramian even published a treatise
about it," remarked Rohan. A small bulb began to flicker behind them on
the dashboard, a sign that contact had been established with the
_Invincible._

"Yes. Payne suspected some of the inhabitants may have succeeded in
saving themselves in time. I'm not so sure that he is right there. They
must have all perished when the nova exploded."

"That took place sixteen light years from this planet," said Gralew. "I
don't know the book. But I did hear somewhere that these people tried to
escape. They presumably sent spaceships to all the planets of the other
stars in their vicinity. They were well acquainted with the principle of
space flight close to the speed of light."

"And then?"

"That's all I heard. Sixteen light years is not such an enormous
distance. Why shouldn't one of their spaceships have landed here?"

"Then you think they might still be somewhere around?"

"I couldn't say. I was just reminded of them when I saw these ruins.
They might have been their buildings, who knows?"

"What did they look like?" asked Rohan. "Did they resemble us?"

"According to Achramian, they did," replied Ballmin. "But that is just
another hypothesis. Practically no trace of them has survived, not even
as much as from our own Pithecanthropus."

"Strange."

"Not at all. Their planet submerged for thousands of years in the
chromosphere of the nova. Sometimes its surface temperature exceeded ten
thousand degrees. Even the rocky foundation of the planetary crust
underwent a complete metamorphosis. No trace remained of the oceans. The
entire planet was thoroughly cooked. Just think of it, ten thousand
years in the middle of the fires of a nova!"

"Then you really think it's conceivable that some of these people might
have survived here on Regis III? But why should they hide? And where
could they be?"

"Perhaps they've died since then. I don't know the answers. I simply
voiced what crossed my mind when I saw these ruins."

The men fell silent. Suddenly an alarm signal flared up on the
dashboard.

Rohan jumped up and grabbed the headphones.

"Rohan here. What did you say? Oh, it's you! Yes! Yes! I'm listening!
All right, we'll return at once!"

His face had turned pale. He turned to the rest and said: "Group II has
found the _Condor._ About 180 miles from here."

The Condor

 

From a distance the rocket looked like a leaning tower. This impression
was strengthened by the sand massed around it. Since the wind came from
the west the sand wall had pulled up much higher than the east. Several
tractors near the rocket had been almost totally buried by the sand.
Even the antimatter mortar had been put out of action. It stood there
with its hood raised, half filled with sand. But one could still see the
jet openings at the ship's nose which rested in an unobstructed
depression in the ground. One had only to remove a thin layer of sand in
order to reach the objects that lay strewn around the ramp.

The group stopped at the edge of the western dune wall. The vehicles
they had brought along from the _Invincible_ already ringed the area in
a wide circle and the bunched rays of the emitters formed a protective
energy screen. The men had left their transport vehicles and the
info-robots about one hundred yards from the spot where the sand wall
encircled _Condor's_ base. Now the men looked down onto the ridge of the
dune.

The ramp was suspended about five yards above the ground, as if it had
been suddenly stopped in midair while it was lowered downwards. The
elevator, however, was untouched and its open door beckoned the men to
enter. Nearby oxygen bottles stuck out from the sand. Their aluminum
sheaths glistened brightly as if somebody had left them lying there just
a few minutes earlier. Several steps further on, a blue object rested
gleaming on the sandy ground. It was a plastic container, as they
noticed on closer inspection. Everywhere inside the hollow around the
foot of the spaceship was scattered a vast quantity of all kinds of
things: cans of food, some full, some empty; theodolites, cameras,
tripods, canisters, some still intact, others badly damaged.

As if someone had thrown the whole mess helter skelter out of the
rocket, thought Rohan, and looked up at the darkened hole through which
the crew would usually leave or enter the spaceship. The hatch was
halfway open.

The small flying scouter robot that accompanied deVries' expedition had
found the dead spaceship quite by accident. DeVries had not tried to
enter the _Condor,_ but had immediately informed Horpach of his
discovery. It had been decided that Rohan's group would be the one to
uncover the mystery that shrouded the _Invincible's_ sister ship. Now
the technicians came running from their engines, lugging their toolboxes
with them.

Rohan noticed something round on the ground, thinly covered by sand.
With his foot he scraped away the fine sand, assuming he would dig up a
small globe. Not suspecting anything, he kept on raking until he brought
to daylight a pale yellow vault-like form. He recoiled rapidly, stifling
a startled outcry. Alarmed, his companions turned around, looking at
him. He held a human skull in his hand.

They found more bones and even a complete skeleton in a spacesuit.
Between the dropping jaw and the upper teeth stuck the mouthpiece of the
oxygen apparatus. The manometer had stopped at 46 atmospheres. Jarg
knelt down and slowly turned the valve. The gas escaped with a hissing
noise. Because of the dry desert air no trace of rust had formed on the
metal parts of the reduction valve; it worked easily.

They entered the elevator but pushed the buttons in vain: there was no
electrical current. It would be quite difficult to climb up the
scaffolding of the elevator shaft and Rohan began deliberating whether
to send up some of the men in a flying saucer robot. But in the meantime
two men of the crew had already started their upward climb; they had
secured themselves to each other by ropes as if they were mountain
climbers. The rest of the group silently watched their ascent.

The _Condor,_ a spacecruiser of the same class as the _Invincible,_ had
been built a few years earlier; externally, the two crafts could not be
distinguished. The men were silent. Although none of them expressed the
thought out loud, they all would have preferred to find the wreckage of
a crash or even the aftermath of a nuclear explosion. They were all
shaken by the sight of this ship in the sand, listing lifelessly to one
side as if the ground had given way under the weight of the support
pillars of the stern. There the apparently undamaged craft leaned in the
midst of a confusion of objects and human bones; the men shuddered.

In the meantime the climbers had reached the entrance hatch, opened it
fully and quickly disappeared from view. They remained there for a long
while. Rohan was growing restless, when suddenly the elevator jerked
upward for about one yard and then descended smoothly to the ground. At
the same time the figure of one of the technicians became visible in the
open door, beckoning to them to get in.

There were four of them going up in the elevator: Rohan, Ballmin, the
biologist Hagerup and Kralik, one of the technicians. Out of habit,
Rohan examined the mighty, rounded body of the ship that was gliding by
behind the moving elevator. He was numbed with fear for the first time
this day. The armored plates had been scratched and pitted by some
incredibly hard tool. The marks were not especially deep, but so close
together all over that the entire hull seemed to be dotted with small
pox scars.

Rohan seized Ballmin's arm but he had already become aware of this
strange phenomenon. Both men tried to get a good look at the nicks and
indentations. They were quite small, as if they had been chiseled out
with a fine instrument. But Rohan knew for a fact that there was no
chisel capable of piercing the cruiser's hull for even the fraction of a
millimeter. The titanium molybdenum skin was of such hardness that it
could be affected only by chemical corrosives. Before he could come to
any conclusion about this problem, the elevator had reached its
destination. They entered the airlock.

The interior of the ship was lit up. The technicians had already
switched on the auxiliary generators powered by compressed air. The
dustlike sand had accumulated in a heavy layer only at the threshold
where the wind had driven it through the open hatch door. But there was
none in the corridors. They proceeded to the third floor and found clean
and neat, brightly lit rooms. Here and there they saw an oxygen mask, a
plastic plate, a book or part of some protective suit. But farther down,
the cartographers' cabins, the mess halls, the dormitories, the radar
rooms, all the main corridors and side passages, were in a state of
indescribable disarray.

The worst was the command center. Not one single dial of the many
instruments, clocks and screens had remained in one piece. Those disks
had been made of a tough shatterproof glass that now covered tables,
chairs, wires, plugs and sockets in the form of a fine silvery powder.
Next door, in the library, were heaps of microfilms, partially unrolled
and twisted into wild tangles and coils. Torn books, broken sliderules,
compasses, shattered spectroscopes had been wildly thrown all over the
floor. There were stacks of Cameron's big star catalogs shredded to
pieces. Somebody must have vented special fury on these thick volumes;
they had ripped out the heavy, stiff folio-size pages in big bundles.
The impression was one of frenzied rage combined with unbelievable
patience.

Inside the club room and in the neighboring auditorium, the passages had
been blocked by heaps of clothing and leather pieces cut from the
upholstered seats of the chairs. According to one of the technicians, it
looked as if the place had been invaded by a herd of rampaging apes,

The men were speechless at this senseless destruction. They went from
deck to deck: in a small cabin, lying arched over in a heap near the
wall, they found the corpse of a man clad in a dirty shirt and linen
trousers. Now he was covered by a ground sheet that the technician who
had been the first to enter the room had thrown over him. The dead man
was mummified.

Rohan was one of the last to leave the _Condor._ He felt dizzy. Nausea
overcame him in spurts and it took all his will power to fight off the
recurring attacks. He felt as if he had just awakened from some
incredibly horrible dream. But one look at the men's faces told him that
the whole thing had been real.

They sent brief radio messages to the _Invincible._ Part of their
expedition remained on board the _Condor_ to restore some measure of
order. But before they began this gigantic task, Rohan arranged to have
each room photographed and carefully described.

Together with Ballmin and Gaarb, one of the biophysicists, Rohan started
on the way back. Jarg was driving. His broad and usually smiling face
seemed now to have shrunk, bearing a grim expression. He was driving
rather recklessly, quite unlike his customary highly disciplined self.
The heavy vehicle, weighing several tons, was raked by sudden jolts and
hobbled across the dunes, throwing out sandy fountains on either side.
One of the energo-robots moved ahead of them at an even pace, shielding
the men in the truck with its energy field. All were silent, each man
busy with his own thoughts.

Rohan was almost afraid to face the astrogator; he did not know what to
tell him. He had kept to himself one of the discoveries he had made, one
which seemed particularly incomprehensible and insane, and thus
chilling. In one of the bathrooms on the eighth floor he had found
_several soap bars pierced with tooth marks._ Famine?

There had certainly been no dearth of food on board the _Condor._ The
storerooms were filled with all kinds of provisions. Even the milk in
the freezer rooms had not spoiled.

About midway they received radio signals from a small vehicle with a
robot drive. It came toward them, raising a heavy dust cloud that
followed them like a dirty umbrella. Rohan's car braked; the other
vehicle also came to a halt. Two men were in it: Magdow, a middle-aged
technician, and Sax, the neurophysiologist. Rohan switched off the
energy screen. This way it was possible to communicate with each other
by shouting back and forth.

After Rohan's departure they had discovered the frozen body of a man
lying in the hibernator of the _Condor._ They thought they might be able
to bring the man back to life, and Sax had brought the necessary
instruments from the _Invincible._ Rohan decided to go along, justifying
this sudden change of plans by saying that Sax was traveling without an
energy field. The truth was, however, that he dreaded the confrontation
with Horpach; he was glad to have an excuse for postponing this
unpleasant task. Rohan's group turned around and chased back, raising
big dust clouds.

There was a great deal of activity around the _Condor._ Various objects
were still dug up from the dunes. Off to one side was a row of corpses,
now neatly hidden under white sheets. More than twenty dead bodies had
been found. The ramp was in working order, the power supply had been
completely restored.

The approaching convoy had been detected by the men at the _Condor,_ for
the dust cloud was visible from quite a distance. A passage into the
inside of the energy dome had been readied for them. There they were
greeted by a physician, Dr. Nygren, who had refused to examine the man
from the hibernator without some professional assistance.

Rohan availed himself of the privilege of acting here as the commander's
deputy; he accompanied the two physicians aboard. The wreckage that
blocked the entrance into the hibernator had since been cleared away.
The thermometers registered zero degrees Fahrenheit. The two doctors
exchanged meaningful glances. Rohan understood enough about hibernation
to realize that this temperature was too high for a reversible death,
and on the other hand, too low for hypothermal sleep. There was no
indication that this man had been intended to survive his stay in the
hibernator. He had most likely stumbled inside by accidentanother
riddle, just as nonsensical as everything else that had happened on
board the _Condor._ And indeed, as soon as they had changed into
thermo-protective suits, turned the handwheel to "open" and lifted up
the heavy trapdoor, they saw, stretched out on the floor, face
downwards, the body of a man in his underwear. Rohan helped the
physicians carry the frozen man to a small upholstered table with three
overhead lamps that supplied light without casting shadows. It was not a
proper operating table but merely a kind of stretcher for small
manipulations that were sometimes carried out inside the hibernator.

Rohan hesitated before looking at the man's face; he had been acquainted
with many members of the _Condor's_ crew.

But this man was a stranger to him. If his limbs had not been so icy
cold and stiff, one could have believed that he was simply asleep. His
lids were closed. Thanks to the dry, hermetically sealed room, his skin
had not lost its natural color, although he looked quite pale. His
subcutaneous tissues, however, abounded with tiny ice crystals. Once
again the two physicians communicated with each other by meaningful
glances. They laid out their instruments.

Rohan sat down on one of the empty, freshly made up cots that were
arranged in two long rows. Everything here was in perfect order. Several
times he heard the clicking of some instruments, the whispered
consultation between the two medical men. Finally Sax stepped back from
the stretcher and said: "There's nothing else we can do here."

"You mean he's dead," said Rohan. It was not so much a question he posed
as a conclusion he drew, the only possible interpretation of the
doctor's words.

Nygren had switched on the air conditioning system in the meantime. It
was not long before warm air began to stream into the room. Rohan rose
from the cot in order to leave the hibernator when he noticed the
physician returning to the stretcher. He picked up a small black satchel
off the floor, opened it and pulled out that apparatus about which Rohan
had heard so much but which he had never seen until now. With slow,
almost pedantic movements, Sax began to untangle the cords whose ends
had flat electrodes attached to them. He placed six electrodes against
the dead man's skull and fastened them with an elastic band. Then he
crouched down and pulled three pairs of headphones out of the satchel.
He put on one of these and kept testing the buttons of the machine
inside a plastic case. His eyes were closed, his face bore an expression
of deepest concentration. Suddenly he frowned, bent over further and
stopped fiddling with the button. He quickly removed the earphones from
his head.

"Dr. Nygren" he said in a strange voice. His colleague seized the
earphones in turn.

"What is it?" whispered Rohan with trembling lips.

This apparatus was referred to by the space crews as the "corpse-spy."
With it one could "auscultate the brain" of recently deceased persons,
or those dead in whom decay had not yet set in, or a body like this one
that had been preserved by very low temperatures. Long after death had
occurred one could ascertain what the last conscious thoughts and
emotions had been.

The apparatus sent electrical impulses into the brain; there they
followed the path of least resistance, moving along those nerve tendrils
that had formed one functional entity during the preagonal phase. The
results were never too reliable, but it was said to have obtained
extraordinarily significant data on many occasions. In cases like the
present one use of the "corpse-spy" was clearly indicated,

Rohan somehow suspected that the neurologist had never really counted on
reviving the dead man, but had only come to listen and find out the
secrets buried in his frozen brain. Rohan stood without moving, aware of
the dull beating of his heart and the dryness in his mouth, as Sax
handed him the second set of earphones. Had this gesture not been so
simple, so matter of fact, he would not have dared put on the
headphones. But he felt encouraged by the steady gaze of Dr. Sax who
squatted before the seats he slowly turned the amplifier button.

At first he heard nothing but the humming of the current. He felt
relieved, for he did not really want to hear more. Without realizing it
on a conscious level, he wanted nothing more than that the dead man's
brain remain silent.

Sax straightened up and adjusted Rohan's headphones. Rohan saw something
emerge from the white light that fell on the wall of the cabin: a gray
light, dimmed as if by ashes, floating vaguely somewhere at an
undeterminable distance. Without knowing why, he tightly squeezed his
eyelids together.

Suddenly he could perceive clearly what it was he had just seen. It
looked like one of the corridors inside the _Condor;_ there were pipes
running along the ceiling. The passage was totally blocked by human
bodies that seemed to move. But it was only the image that was waving to
and fro. The people were half-naked; shreds of clothing barely covered
them. Their skin was unnaturally white and was sprinkled with dark spots
like some kind of a rash. Perhaps these spots were not on the skin but
were rather a peculiar visual phenomenon, for they were scattered
everywhere: tiny black dots on the floor and the walls. The entire image
seemed to fluctuate like a blurred photograph taken through a deep layer
of flowing water. The picture seemed to stretch, then contracted again,
billowing and swaying.

Terrified, Rohan forced his eyes open. The image faded away and
vanished; only a shadow remained in the brightly lit room.

Sax began to make some adjustments on the apparatus and Rohan heard,
coming from inside him a faint whisper: ". . . ala . . . ama . . . lala
. . . ala . . . ma . . . mama . . ." Nothing else. Suddenly wierd noises
came from the earphones: caterwauling, tweeting and crowing;
high-pitched sounds that repeated over and over again like some crazy
hiccup or some wild horrible laughter, or tortured electronic circuits.

Sax rolled up the cords and put them back in his bag. Nygren took a
sheet and threw it over the dead man, covering up his body and face. The
man's mouth had been tightly shut but now his lips parted slightly,
giving his face an enormously surprised expression. It must be the heat,
thought Rohan; it had become quite warm inside the hibernator, or at
least it felt warm to him. He perspired heavily, the water trickled down
his back. He was glad to see the face disappear under the white sheet.

"What is it? Why don't you say anything?" Rohan called out.

Sax tightened the straps around the plastic case, then stepped closer to
Rohan. "Pull yourself together, Navigator!"

Rohan narrowed his eyelids and clenched his fists. But it did not help.
In such moments he would fly into a violent rage, which he could
suppress only with great difficulty.

"Sorry," he stammered. "But what did that _mean?"_

Sax unzipped his protective suit. The bulky garment slid to the ground;
nothing remained now of his portly figure. Once again he was the same
gaunt, stoop-shouldered man with the narrow chest and delicate hands.

"I don't know any more than you do," he answered. "Maybe even less."

Rohan felt lost; he did not understand any longer, but he seized upon
the neurologist's last words.

"What do you mean, less?"

"Because I just arrived. I haven't seen anything besides this corpse.
But you've been here all day. Doesn't this image suggest anything to
you?"

"No. Thosethey were moving. Were they still alive then? What were those
little black spots all over them?"

"They weren't moving. That was an optical illusion. These engrams are
registered on the brain like a photographic still. And sometimes it
happens that several images are present, like in a multiple exposure.
But this was not the case here."

"But those spots? Are they also an optical illusion?"

"I don't know. Anything is possible. But I don't think so. What would
you say, Nygren?"

Nygren had already peeled off his protective suit.

"I don't know either. I'm not sure whether they were artifacts or not.
There weren't any on the ceiling, were there?"

"The black spots? No. They only covered the dead bodies and the floor.
And some of them were on the walls"

"If that had been a second projection, they would have been all over the
image;" said Nygren. "But you can never be sure with engrams. So much is
purely due to chance."

"And that voice? Thatbabbling?" Rohan searched desperately for an
answer.

"One word was perfectly clear: _'Mama.'_ Did you hear it?"

"Yes, I did. But there was something else. 'Ala . . . lala.' That was
repeated over and over again."

"Yes, but only because I made a systematic examination of the entire
occipital lobe," said Sax. "In other words, the area that controls
acoustic memory," he explained for Rohan's benefit. "That's what's so
unusual here."

"Those words?"

"No. Not those words. A dying man might think of anything. If he had
been thinking of his mother, those words would have been quite normal.
But his auditory memory bank was absolutely empty. Do you understand?"

"No, I'm afraid I don't. What do you mean by empty?"

"As a rule we cannot obtain any useful results when we search the
occipital lobe," explained Nygren. "Too many engrams there, too many
stored words. It's as if you would attempt to read one hundred books
simultaneously. Sheer chaos. But this one," he glanced over in the
direction of the elongated shape under the white sheet, "he had nothing
in it. No words, only those couple of syllables."

"Yes, you are right. I have examined everything thoroughly from the
sensory speech center to the _sulcus Rolandi,"_ said Sax. "And the same
syllables kept recurring. These were the only phonemes that have been
left in there."

"And what happened to the rest?"

"There aren't any others." Sax seemed to lose patience. He jerked the
heavy aparatus violently upwards and off the floor, making the leather
handle squeak. "They aren't there and that's all there is to it. Don't
ask me what happened to all the other words. This man must have totally
lost his acoustical memory bank."

"But how about the image?"

"That's something entirely different. This he saw. He did not even have
to understand what he perceived. Just like a camera that does not
comprehend but still registers whatever object you aim it at. I have no
idea whether he understood it or not."

"Could you help me with this, please, Nygren?" The two physicians
carried their gear out of the hibernator, and the door fell shut behind
them.

Rohan was alone in the room. He felt so desperate that he stepped over
to the table, flung back the white sheet, unbuttoned the dead man's
shirt and carefully examined his chest. He trembled when he touched the
body, for the skin had become supple again. As the tissues were thawing
out, a general relaxation of all the muscles had taken place. The head,
which until now had been propped up in an unnatural position, had sunk
down limply. Now it seemed indeed as if he were sleeping. Rohan searched
the body for evidence of some mysterious epidemic, some kind of
poisoning or insect bites, but he could find nothing. Two fingers of the
left hand spread apart and a small, gaping wound became visible. A few
drops of blood began to ooze out of the torn flesh, and began to drip on
the white foam rubber cover of the table. That was more than Rohan could
stand. He did not even bother to pull the sheet back over the corpse; he
ran out of the cabin, pushed aside the men who stood in his way and
rushed toward the main exit as if he were being pursued. He was stopped
by Jarg in the airlock, who helped him strap on the oxygen gear and
pushed the mouthpiece between Rohan's lips.

"You didn't find anything, Navigator?"

"No, Jarge. Nothing, nothing at all."

He was unaware of the others beside him as he descended in the elevator.
Outside the motors howled. The storm had grown stronger; sand clouds
whizzed past and pelted the rough surface of the _Condor's_ hull.

Suddenly Rohan remembered something. He walked over to the stern, raised
himself on his toes and palpated the thick metal. The armored plate felt
like rock, old weathered rock, dotted with hard nodules. Over near the
tranporters he noticed the tall figure of engineer Ganong, but he did
not even try to ask him what he might think of that strange phenomenon.
The engineer would know no more than he did himself: namely, nothing.
Absolutely nothing.

He rode back in the largest vehicle, together with a dozen other men.
From his seat in the far corner of the cabin, he heard their voices as
if from a great distance. Terner brought up the question of poisoning,
but he was shouted down.

"Poisoned? With what? All the filters are in top shape, the water supply
untouched, oxygen tanks all full, an abundance of food . . ."

"Did you see what the man looked like that we found in the navigation
room?" asked Blank. "I used to know him. But I would never have
recognized him if I hadn't seen his signet ring."

Nobody answered. Back at the _Invincible_ Rohan went directly to
Horpach, who had been kept up to date on everything via television, and
the oral reports of the group that had returned earlier. They had also
brought along with them several hundred photos. Unconsciously, Rohan was
relieved that he did not have to describe to the commander what he had
seen.

The astrogator gave him a piercing glance and rose from the table where
a large map of the area was spread out and partially covered by stacks
of photographs. They were alone in the large command center.

"Pull yourself together, Rohan," he said. "I can sympathize with the way
you feel right now, but we need cold reason, a clear head, no emotions.
Well get to the bottom of this damned story."

"But they had every imaginable safety device: energo-robots, laser beam
protectors and particle throwers. The big antimatter mortar is right
there in front of the ship. They had all the same things to protect
themselves that we do," said Rohan in a toneless voice. He slumped down
into a chair. "Forgive me."

The astrogator took a bottle of cognac from a small cupboard.

"An old home remedy. Sometimes it does a lot of good. Drink that, Rohan.
A long time ago people used this on battle fields."

Rohan took the drink and swallowed it in one gulp.

"I checked the counters of all the energy aggregates," he said in a
reproachful tone. "The crew was never attacked. They never fired a
single shot. They simply, simply"

"Went stark raving mad," completed the unruffled commander.

"If only we could be sure of that! But how could that happen?"

"Did you see the log book?"

"No. Gaarb took it along with him. Do you have it here now?"

"Yes, I do. There's the date of landing and only four entries,
concerning the ruins, the same ones you men examined, andthe flies."

"What flies?"

"I don't know. This is the exact text here . . ."

He picked up the open book from the table.

" 'No sign of any life on land. Composition of the air . . .' Then the
result of the air analysis follows. But thenhere it is: 'At 18:40, the
second armored patrol unit returned from the ruins. They encountered a
local sandstorm with strong activity of atmospheric electrical
discharges. Could restore communication by radio despite these
disturbances. The patrol reports large swarms of tiny flies . . .' "

The astrogator put down the book.

"And what else? Why don't you go on?"

"That's all there is. This is the end of the last entry."

"And there's nothing after that?"

"You had better look at the rest of this yourself."

He pushed the log book over to Rohan. The page was covered with
illegible scrawls. Rohan inspected the crazy doodling with amazement.

"This one here looks like a _B,"_ he said softly.

"Yes. And this one like a _G,_ a capital _G._ As if a small child had
tried to write this. Don't you agree?"

Rohan was silent. He still clutched the empty glass in his hand; he had
forgotten to put it down on the table.

He was thinking of the ambitions he had harbored until recently, of his
dream to himself to become commander of the _Invincible_ some day. Now
he was grateful that he did not have to decide what the future fate of
this expedition should be.

"Please summon the leaders of the specialist groups. Rohan, wake up,
will you!"

"I'm sorry. A conference, Astrogator?"

"Yes. Have them all come to the library."

Fifteen minutes later they were all assembled in the large square room
with the brightly decorated walls and endless rows of books and
microfilms. The fact that this room was decorated exactly like the
library of the _Condor_ was unsettling. No matter which wall or corner
he looked at, he could not banish the images of insanity that had been
etched in his brain.

They had all taken their usual seats. The biologist, the physician, the
planetologist, the electronic engineer, the communication officer, the
cyberneticist and the physicists were all seated, their armchairs
arranged in a semicircle. These nineteen men formed the strategic brain
of the spaceship.

The astrogator stood by himself at the half-lowered screen.

"Is every man here familiar with the situation on board the _Condor?"_

A murmur of affirmative voices could be heard.

"So far twenty-nine dead bodies have been located by the search troops
in the vicinity of the _Condor._ Another thirty-four on board ship
itself, including one person who was excellently preserved inside the
hibernator. Dr. Nygren has just returned from there and will give us his
report now."

"I'm afraid there isn't too much to report," said Dr. Nygren as he rose
to his feet. Slowly he walked over to the astrogator. Nygren was almost
one foot shorter than Horpach.

"Among the corpses we found nine that were mummified, that is in
addition to the one the Commander has just told you about; that one is
undergoing special examinations. Outside in the sand, mostly skeletons
or remains of skeletons were dug up. The mummified bodies were found
inside the ship where especially favorable dry conditions are present
such as low humidity, almost no putrefying bacteria and fairly low
temperatures. Those bodies that remained on the outside have all
decayed. This process has accelerated here in the rainy season due to
the high iron oxide and iron sulfide content in the soil. These
chemicals react with weak acidsbut I believe these details are
insignificant. In case a more thorough explanation of these reactions
should be desirable, our colleagues from the chemical department would
certainly oblige. In any event, mummification was impossible outside the
spaceship, considering that rain water and dissolved substances from
soil and sand have been working on everything in the area for several
years. This accounts for the polished surface of the bones."

"Pardon me, Nygren," interrupted the astrogator. "The most important
aspect for us is the cause of death, not what happened afterwards."

"There are no indications of violent death, at least none we could
detect in the well-preserved bodies we saw," replied Nygren quickly. He
did not look at anybody in the room, but stared at something invisible
in his raised hand. "Apparently they must all have died from natural
causes."

"What do you mean by that?"

"No external causes could be detected. Several fractures of legs and
arms might have come about at a later date, but it will take additional
experiments to determine that. Those bodies that had been dressed show
no damage either to the epidermis or the skeleton. No injuriesapart from
some scratches, and they assuredly did not bring about death."

"How then did they perish?"

"I don't know. It almost looks as though they starved or died of
dehydration."

"There was plenty of food and water left aboard the _Condor,"_
interjected Gaarb.

"I am aware of that."

For a moment no one spoke a word.

"Mummification means first of all complete dehydration of the body,"
explained Nygren. He was still not looking at anyone present. "The
adipose tissues undergo changes, but they do not disappear. But these
people had practically no fats left. As if they had starved to death."

"But this was definitely not the case of the man from the hibernator,"
remarked Rohan, who was standing behind the last row of seats."

"Correct. He probably froze to death. It is a mystery to me how he could
have ventured inside the hibernator. Maybe he simply fell asleep there
while the temperature kept falling."

"Is there any likelihood of mass poisoning?" inquired Horpach.

"No."

"But Doctor, how can you so categorically . . ."

"I can very well dismiss this so easily," replied the physician. "Under
planetary conditions, poisoning is conceivable only by way of the lungs,
when breathing in poisonous gases via the esophagus or the skin.
However, one of the well-preserved bodies was wearing an oxygen mask.
The oxygen tank was still half full and would have lasted for several
more hours."

That's right, thought Rohan. He remembered the man, the tight skin
around his skull, the brownish spots on his cheekbones, the eye sockets
filled with sand.

"These people could not have eaten anything poisonous, simply because
there is nothing edible to be found. At least not on land. And they
never got as far as the ocean. The catastrophe occurred shortly after
landing. They had sent out only one scouting troop into the interior of
the ruins. That was all. But here comes McQuinn. Are you through,
McQuinn?"

"Yes, I am through," answered the biochemist from the door.

All heads turned around. He made his way through the rows of chairs and
remained standing next to Nygren. He was still wearing his lab coat and
a rubber apron.

"Do you have the results of the analysis?"

"Yes."

"Dr. McQuinn has examined the corpse we found in the hibernator,"
explained Nygren. "Will you tell us what you have found out?"

"Nothing," replied McQuinn. His hair was so light that it was difficult
to know whether it was blond or gray. His eyes were just as pale. Even
his eyelids were covered with freckles. But right now his big horsey
face did not strike anyone as funny.

"No organic or inorganic poisons. All enzyme values normal. Nothing
abnormal detected in the blood. The stomach contents were some
half-digested zwieback and food concentrate."

"But how did he die?"

"He just froze to death," answered McQuinn. He noticed that he still had
on his rubber apron. He untied the strings and threw the apron over the
back of a chair before him. The slippery material slid off the chair
onto the floor.

"What is your opinion, gentlemen?" the astrogator asked. He would not
let go so easily.

"No opinion," countered McQuinn. "All I can say for sure is that these
people were not the victims of some poisoning."

"How about radioactivity, some substance with a very brief half-life? Or
hot radiation?"

"Hot radiation in fatal doses leaves traces such as damaged capillary
walls, petecchiae, changes in the blood. There are no such changes. No
radioactive substance in a fatal dose would completely vanish within
eight years. There is less radioactivity here than we have on Earth.
These men were not exposed to any type of radiation. I could swear to
that."

"But something must have killed them," insisted Ballmin, the
planetologist, raising his voice.

McQuinn did not speak. Nygren whispered into his ear. The biochemist
nodded his head in affirmation, walked out of the room. Nygren stepped
from the podium and sat down in his usual seat among his colleagues.

"That's not too encouraging," remarked the astrogator. "Apparently we
can't expect much help from the biologists. Would someone else express
an opinion?"

"Allow me." Sarner, the nuclear physicist, rose from his chair. "We
might find a clue to what brought about this catastrophe in the very
condition of the ship itself," he began, letting his eyes run slowly
along the row of his seated colleagues. He had big far-sighted bird's
eyes whose iris looked almost pale next to his pitch-black hair. "That
means there is an explanation somewhere that we can't perceive at this
moment. The chaos in the cabins, the untouched provisions, the condition
and location of the dead bodies, the damaged installationsall this must
mean something."

"Is that all you have to say about it?" interjected Gaarb angrily.

"Take it easy. We're still completely in the dark, and the first thing
we have to do is find the right approach to this problem. I believe we
lack the courage to call some of the things we observed on board the
_Condor_ by their right name. This is why we cling so desperately to the
hypothesis of some mysterious poisoning which resulted in mass insanity.
Just remember, it is necessary, for our own sake as well as for that of
the dead crew of the _Condor,_ to face the facts with an open mind. I'd
like to urge youin fact, I insistthat we all speak out freely: what was
it that shocked you most when you were at the _Condor?_ Something that
you have not been able to confide to anybody yet, something so horrible
you'd rather forget than even mention it"

Sarner sat down. Rohan overcame his inner resistance and told about the
soap bars he had noticed in the bathroom.

Then Gralew got up. Underneath the stacks of torn maps and books the
whole deck had been strewn with dried human excrement.

Another spoke of a can of food that showed impressions of teeth, as if
someone had tried to bite through the metal. Gaarb had been deeply
shaken by the scrawls in the log book and the entry about the flies. But
he did not stop there.

"Let's assume a cloud of poisonous gas escaped from the tectonic vault
inside the city. Couldn't the wind have carried this poisonous air to
the rocket? If they'd been careless, hadn't closed the air hatch
properly"

"Only the outer hatch was not properly closed, Gaarb. We know that from
the sand accumulated inside the airlock. The inner hatch was tightly
shut, remember?"

"They might have closed it later on, when they were already feeling the
effects of the poison gas."

"That is impossible, Gaarb. If the outside hatch isn't locked, you can't
open the inside hatch. The two never open at the same time. The
possibility of carelessness or accident is totally ruled out."

"In any event, one thing is clear: it must have happened suddenly. Mass
insanitylook, I won't pretend we never see cases of psychosis during
space flights, but never on a planet, especially not a few hours after
touchdown. Mass insanity that gripped the entire crew could only be the
result of some kind of poisoning."

"Or infantilism," remarked Sarner.

"What? What did you say?" Gaarb was dumbfounded. "Is that supposed to be
a joke?"

"I'd hardly be joking in a situation like this. I said infantilism. No
one else seems to have thought of it, despite the childish scribbles in
the log book, despite the star almanacs that were ripped to pieces,
despite the painstakingly drawn letters. You've all seen them, haven't
you?"

"But so what?" said Nygren. "Are you trying to say that's a disease?"

"No. Not a disease. You are right there, doctor." Once again they all
fell silent. The astrogator hesitated.

"We might be on the wrong track. The result of necroscopy are always
uncertain. But for the moment I can't see what harm it would do. Doctor
Sax"

The neurophysiologist described the image they had found in the brain of
the frozen man in the hibernator; he also mentioned the syllables in the
acoustics memory bank of the dead man. A veritable flood of questions
followed. Even Rohan was cross-examined by his colleagues, since he had
been present during the experiment. Still, no conclusion could be drawn.

"When you speak of tiny black spots, doesn't that remind you somehow of
the word 'flies'?" said Gaarb. "Wait a minute. Maybe the cause of death
was something else. Maybe the whole crew was attacked by poisonous
insects. You can't recognize insect bites on mummified skin. And the
fellow in the hibernator was simply trying to escape from the insects
that got his friendsand then froze to death."

"But how would you account for his total loss of memory before death?"

"Total amnesia? Are you sure that diagnosis is correct?"

"Yes, as far as we can generally rely on the results of the necroscopic
examination."

"What do you think about this poisonous insect theory?"

"Let's hear what Lauda has to say about that."

Lauda was the chief paleobiologist on board. He stood up and waited
until they had calmed down.

"It isn't simply by accident that we haven't brought up the matter of
these 'flies.' Anyone who understands anything about biology knows that
outside a certain biotopein other words, a higher unit composed of
environment and all species occurring in itno organism can exist. This
holds true for every corner of the universe we have explored thus far.
Life either creates a large variety of forms or none at all. Thus no
insects could develop without simultaneous development of plants on the
dry land, or other symmetrical nonvertebrates. I don't intend to give
you a lecture on evolution; I trust it will suffice if I assure you that
there cannot possibly be any flies here. Or any other arthropods, for
that matterno hymenoptera or spiders. There aren't any related forms,
either."

"How can you be so sure about that?" demanded Ballmin.

"If you were one of my students, you would't be here with us now," said
the paleobiologist drily. "You would never have passed the exam." The
others smiled involuntarily. "Naturally I can't judge your knowledge in
the field of planetology, but I'd give you an F in the biology of
evolution."

"Typical shop talk. What a waste of time," someone whispered behind
Rohan. Rohan turned around and looked into Jarg's tanned, broad face
winking at him.

"Maybe the insects didn't evolve here," insisted Ballmin. "Maybe they
were brought in from the outside."

"From where?"

"From the planets of the Nova."

Now the whole group began to talk at once; it took a long time before
order was restored."

"Colleagues," said Sarner. "I know where Ballmin got his idea. From Dr.
Gralew."

"Well, I won't deny it," admitted the physicist.

"Excellent. Let us assume we can no longer afford the luxury of
plausible hypotheses and need some really wild ones. That's all right
with me. My dear colleagues and fellow biologists, suppose a spaceship
had imported insects from a planet of the Nova into Regis III. Could
these insects have adapted to local conditions?"

"Of course, if we want to get into wild hypotheses," admitted Lauda.
"But even wild hypotheses have to be able to supply explanations for
everything."

"Such as what?"

"Such as an explanation as to what corroded the outer armor plate hull
of the _Condor_ to such an extent that the ship can no longer take off
unless it's completely overhauled. Do you really believe some insects
could adapt to a diet of molybdenum alloy? That's one of the hardest
substances in the whole universe. Engineer Petersen, tell us, what could
destroy this type of armored plate?"

"If it's been properly tempered, nothing I know of," answered the deputy
chief engineer. "You could drill into it with diamonds, but you would
need a ton of diamonds and a thousand hours at your disposal. Another
possibility would be acids. Anorganic acids, of course, and only at
temperatures of at least two thousand degress and with the proper
catalysts."

"Then how do you explain what corroded the armored plate of the
_Condor?"_

"I haven't the faintest idea. If the ship had been immersed in an acid
solution, and at the proper temperature, it would look like that, all
right. But how anyone could get the same results without arc-light
plasma burners and catalysts is beyond me."

"Well, so much for your flies, my dear Ballmin," said Lauda and sat
down.

"There is no sense in continuing this discussion any longer," remarked
the astrogator, who had remained silent until now. "Perhaps it was too
soon for such a debate. All we can do now is carry on with our
examinations. We'll split up in three groups. One will explore the
ruins, another the _Condor,_ and the third will make forays into the
interior of the western desert. That's stretching our forces as far as
they will go; I simply can't remove more than fourteen energo-robots
from our perimeter here, even counting some machines we might take from
the _Condor._ Third step routine procedure is still in force, of
course!"

The First

 

Smouldering, slippery blackness enveloped him. He was choking. He
desperately tried to free himself from the invisible ropes that bound
him. He wanted to shake them off but kept ensnaring himself in an
inextricable net. His scream was caught in his swollen throat. In vain
he searched for a weapon. He was naked. One more time he strained every
fiber of his being to choke out a cry for help.

Some ear-shattering noise tore him out of his sleep, Rohan jumped off
his cot, aware only of the darkness around him and the endless ringing
of the alarm signal. This was no longer a dream. He switched on the
light, slipped into his protective suit and rushed out into the
corridor.

Men were crowded in front of the elevators on all floors. Only the
constant ringing of the signals could be heard. On the walls the word
_alarm_ glowed in big red letters.

He ran to the command center. The astrogator, dressed in his usual day
uniform, stood in front of the big videoscreen. "I've already given the
all-clear signal," he said calmly. "It's only raining. Look here, Rohan,
what a beautiful sight!"

Indeed, a spray of innumerable sparks covered the videoscreen, which
showed the upper part of the nocturnal sky. Raindrops were falling from
a great height, spattering against the invisible protective shield of
the energy field that surrounded the _Invincible_ like an overturned
bowl. Upon impact the drops of water instantaneously changed into
microscopic fiery explosions, bathing the whole landscape with
glittering light that resembled a hundredfold intensified display of the
Northern Lights.

"The automats should have been better programed," said Rohan softly. He
felt wide awake now. "I have to tell Terner to eliminate the
instructions for annihilation. Otherwise every handful of sand that
comes drifting against the energy dome will jerk us out of our sleep."

"Let's assume this was nothing but a fire drill," replied the
astrogator, who seemed to be in an unexpectedly good mood. "It's four
o'clock in the morning now. You can go back to sleep, Rohan."

"To be frank with you, I don't feel in the least bit like it. How about
you?"

"I'm not sleepy at all. All I ever need is four hours of rest. After
sixteen years of space travel not much has remained from the sleeping
pattern I used to have back on Earth. Rohan, I've been trying to figure
out the maximum security for our search troops. It's too cumbersome for
them to drag energo-robots along everywhere they go in order to set up
protective screens. What do you think about that?"

"Why not send along a personal emitter for each member of the group? No,
that wouldn't do the trick either. You can't touch anything if you're
surrounded by the protective bubbleyou know what that's like. And if you
shorten the field radius too much, you risk nasty burns. I've been
through that before."

"I've even considered not sending any men out at all, but using
remote-controlled robots instead," confessed Horpach. "Of course that
would only work for a few hours, or one day at best. But I believe we
are going to stay here for a while."

"What are your plans?"

"Each research team will have a base of operations, protected by an
energy field. But there must be a certain freedom of mobility, otherwise
we won't obtain any useful results because of all the protective
measures. But only under one condition: any man who works outside the
protective screen must have a shielded companion immediately behind who
will observe him. You must never lose sight of anyone under any
circumstance; that is absolute law for our stay on Regis III."

"Which group will I be assigned to?"

"Would you like to work at the _Condor?_ Or would you rather explore the
desert or the 'city'? It's up to you."

"I'll take the 'city,' astrogator. I still think that's where we will
find the solution to this mystery."

"Possibly. Tomorrowno, today, the sun's coming up alreadyyou will take
the same group of men who accompanied you yesterday. I'll send along a
few Arctanes. Several hand laser weapons wouldn't be a bad idea either.
I have the impression that it is effective from a short range."

"What do you mean by 'it'?"

"If only I knew. Well, don't forget to take along a field kitchen.
You'll want to be completely independent so you can carry on without
having to count on supplies from the spaceship."

The red disk of the sun hardly supplied any heat as it rolled across the
firmament, the shadows of the grotesque structures grew longer and
fused. The wind whirled the wander dunes between the metal pyramids from
place to place. Standing on the roof of a heavy caterpillar truck, Rohan
peered through his field glasses and observed Gralew and Chen, who were
busy outside the protective screen investigating something at the foot
of one of the black honey-combs. His portable searchlight hung from a
strap around his neck. The strap cut uncomfortably into his skin.
Without ever letting the two men out of his sight, he tried to adjust
the strap, pulling it away from his neck. The plasma burner in Chen's
hand was sparkling like a tiny diamond. From inside the truck came a
radio signal, calling at regular intervals. Rohan did not turn his head.
He heard the driver answer the call.

"Navigator! Orders from the astrogator! We're to return at once!" yelled
Jarg excitedly and stuck his head out of the turret hatch.

"Did you say return? Why?"

"I don't know. They've been sending the return signal constantlyEV four
times already."

"EV? Damn it, my neck feels stiff! All right, let's get a move on. Give
me that microphone and get out the blinker signals."

Ten minutes later all the men who had been working in the outer zone
were back inside the vehicles. Rohan urged his small column to hurry as
fast as it could over the hilly terrain. Blank, functioning now as
wireless operator, suddenly held out the earphones to him. Rohan climbed
down into the steel belly of the vehicle, where it smelled of hot
plastic. Over the humming of the ventilators, whose air blasts ruffled
up his hair, he listened in to the exchange of radio messages between
Gallagher's group in the western desert and the _Invincible._

A thunderstorm seemed to be brewing. Ever since that morning the
barometers had indicated low air pressure, but not until this moment did
flat, dark blue clouds creep up on the horizon. High above was the clear
sky. The atmospheric disturbance kept increasing, until the static noise
grew so strong in the earphones that communication could take place only
by Morse Code signals.

Rohan intercepted a group of coded messages. He had come in on the
middle of the transmission, however, and did not grasp what it was all
about. He only understood that Gallagher's group was also returning at
top speed and that a red alert had been called on the _Invincible._ Even
the physicians had been ordered to man their stations.

"Alert for the physicians," Rohan said to Ballmin and Gralew, who looked
at him expectantly. "An accident, but surely nothing serious. Maybe
there was a landslide somewhere and someone was buried under it for a
while."

He mentioned this because he had been told that Gallagher's men were
supposed to scout a certain area and make geological excavations there.
But in his heart he did not really believe that it was a matter of an
ordinary accident.

They were less than four miles from the spaceship, but the other group
evidently had been called back much earlier, for when they sighted the
steep dark silhouette of the _Invincible_ they came across fresh tracks
made by the caterpillar drive vehicles. The impressions in the sand
could have been no more than thirty minutes old, otherwise they would
have been wiped out by the strong wind.

They approached the perimeter of the energy dome and called the command
center to open a pathway for them. They had to wait surprisingly long
for an answer. Finally the blue light signals appeared and they were let
into the protected area. The group from the _Condor_ had already
arrived. Then they and not Gallagher's people had been admitted inside
before them. Several trucks were parked next to the ramp and near the
drive entrance; men ran about aimlessly, sinking into the sand up to
their knees. Automats blinked with their searchlights.

Dusk was falling. Rohan did not know what to make of this chaotic scene.
Suddenly a bright ray of light flared up high, transforming the rocket
into a giant lighthouse. Far back in the desert, the searchlights had
pinpointed a column of lights that danced crazily back and forth as if
an entire military convoy were approaching. Once again the blue lights
flared up, marking the entrance to the energy field to let in
Gallagher's party. Hardly had the vehicles come to a stop when the
patrol jumped to the ground. A second searchlight rolled down the ramp,
and a small procession passed through the narrow lane between the parked
tracks, bearing a man on a stretcher.

As they went by Rohan, he pushed past the men in front of him, then
stopped in his tracks. For a moment he really believed an accident had
taken place, for the man on the litter had been tightly strapped down.
He kept struggling against his bonds, and they creaked under the strain.
At the same time, a terrible whine rose from his open mouth.

The group continued to follow the path marked by the cone of the kleig
light. The procession drew farther and farther away, but he could still
hear clearly the nonhuman howling, unlike anything he had ever heard
before, as he stood there alone in the dark. The white spot with the
figures grew smaller, slid up the ramp and disappeared in the darkly
gaping hole of the loading hatch. Rohan called out to some of the men,
asking them what had happened, but they did not know any more than he
did, since they belonged to the _Condor_ troop.

Quite some time passed before he regained his composure and could find
his bearings again. The column of vehicles began to move and drove
noisily up the ramp. Lights came on at the elevator; gradually the small
crowd waiting down below dwindled. Rohan was one of the last to take the
elevator up. With him were the heavily laden Arctanes, whose
imperturbable calm irritated him to an irrational degree. Inside the
spacecraft, the telephones and informators rang constantly; the walls
were still lit up by alarm signals for the physicians.

Soon the warning lamps went out, the corridors were empty. Part of the
crew went down to the mess hall. Rohan heard snatches of conversation in
passageways and the sounds of steps disappearing in the distance. A
tardy Arctane stomped toward the robot section.

Finally they all had dispersed. Rut Rohan remained as if paralyzed,
utterly despairing of ever comprehending the scene he had just
witnessed, for it came to him in a flash of insight that there simply
was no explanation and could never be one."

"Rohan!"

Gaarb stood before him, wrenching him back to reality.

"Oh, it's you, doctor! Did you see it too? Who in the world was that?"

"Kertelen."

"What? I can't believe it!"

"I saw him almost until the end."

"The end?"

"Yes. I was with him," said Gaarb, his voice unnaturally quiet. Rohan
saw the reflections of the hall lamps in Gaarb's glasses.

"Was that with the expedition that went to the desert?" Rohan wanted to
know.

"Yes."

"And what happened to him?"

"Gallagher had picked that spot according to his seismographic probes.
We penetrated a labyrinth of narrow, winding canyons." Gaarb spoke
haltingly, as if he were talking to himself and wanted to visualize once
more the exact course of events. "Soft, washed-out rock of organic
origin, full of grottoes and caves. We had to leave our trucks behind .
. . We walked in single file, keeping close together. Eleven men. The
ferrometers indicated the presence of large masses of iron. That was
what we were looking for. Kertelen thought some kind of machines might
be hidden there."

"Yes. He told me something about that. And then?"

"In one of the caves he found a machine, under a surface layer of mud.
In the same cave we even found some stalactites and stalagmites."

"So you discovered a machine."

"Not the kind you would imagine. It was a wreck. Not in the least
rustyit must have been constructed of some rustproof alloybut the thing
was corroded, half burned, nothing but a wreck."

"Perhaps there are others as well?"

"But this machine was at least three hundred thousand years old!"

"How do you know?"

"We found deposits of limestone from the water that had dripped down
from the stalactites on the ceiling. Gallagher himself calculated the
approximate age of three hundred thousand years by figuring the rate of
evaporation, the time it would take for a stalagmite of a certain size
to form. By the way, can you imagine what the machine looked like?
Almost like the ruins!"

"Then it's not a computer?"

"No. It must have been mobile, but it didn't have two legs. And it
wasn't like a crab, either. Besides, we didn't have time to make a
thorough examination, because just then . . ."

"What happened?"

"I made a count of my crew at regular intervals. In fact, I stayed back
in the energy field in order to watch themyou know about the commander's
orders. But they were all wearing masks, and consequently they all
looked alike, especially since their colored protective suits were
completely caked with mud. Suddenly I was one man short. I called them
together and we began our search. Kertelen had been so pleased about his
find; apparently he had continued his search alone. I simply assumed he
had lost his way in one of the side gullies. The canyon is full of
detours, all short, level and well lit. Suddenly he came around the
corner. He was already in that state. Nygren was with us. At first he
thought it was a heat stroke."

"And what is it?"

"He's unconscious. That is, not exactly. He can walk, move every part of
his body; but it's impossible to communicate with him. He's also lost
the power of speech. Did you hear his voice?"

"Yes, I did."

"He seems to have calmed down somewhatit was much worse before. He
didn't recognize any of us. This struck us as the most horrible thing at
first. I tried calling out to him, 'Kertelen, where are you?' But he
walked by me, as if he were completely deaf, went straight through our
group and then up the canyon in such a manner that we all got
gooseflesh. He was totally changed. He didn't react to our calls, so we
had to catch himyou can't imagine what a job that was. Finally we were
forced to tie him up; otherwise we would never have been able to
transport him back to the base."

"And what do the doctors say?"

"They spout Latin phrases, as usual, but they don't know anything
either. Nygren and Sax are in with the commander. You can find out more
from them."

Gaarb walked away heavily, his head bent to one side as usual. Rohan
stepped into the elevator to get to the command center. The room was
empty, but as he passed by the cartographical cabins, he could hear
Sax's voice coming through the door that was slightly ajar. He entered
the room.

"Total amnesia. At least that's what it looks like," the
neuro-physiologist was saying. He had his back turned to Rohan and
examined an X-ray picture he held in his hand. The astrogator sat at his
desk, the open log book in front of him. His hand rested on one of the
bookshelves packed tightly with rolled-up star maps. He remained silent
as Sax slowly put the X-ray film back into a brown manila envelope.

"Amnesia, but this is a special case. Not only does he not remember who
he is, but he has also lost the ability to read, write and speak. What
we're faced with here is complete disintegration, total destruction of
personality. Nothing has been retained except for primitive reflexes. He
is capable of walking, and he can eat, but only if someone puts the food
into his mouth. He won't reject it, but"

"Can he see and hear?"

"Yes, he can. But he doesn't understand what it is he sees. He cannot
distinguish between people and objects."

"And his reflexes?"

"Normal. Only his brain has been affected. Apparentently all traces of
his memory have been wiped out with one stroke."

"Then the man from the _Condor_ was also"

"Yes. Now I am sure of it. It was the same thing."

"I've seen one other case like this," whispered the astrogator. He
looked in the direction of Rohan but did not seem to notice him. "That
was out in space."

"Oh, yes, of course! Why didn't I think of it before?" exclaimed the
neurophysiologist in a high voice. "Amnesia due to a magnetic shock,
wasn't that it?"

"Yes."

"I never saw a case of it. I'm only familiar with it through the
literature. Didn't that happen a long time ago when strong magnetic
fields were used to fly at high speeds?"

"Yes. That is to say, only under specific conditions. The intensity of
the field is far less important than the gradient and the intensity of
the change. Nowadays, if large gradients occur in spaceand occasionally
we encounter some pretty stiff onesthen our gauges will register them at
great distances. This could not be done in the old days."

"True," concurred the physician. "That's quite right. Ammerhatten made
similar experiments with dogs and cats. He exposed them to enormous
magnetic fields until they lost their memory."

"Yes, it had to do with the brain's response to electrical stimuli."

"But in this case we not only have Gaarb's report. We've got
confirmation from his men as well." Sax was thinking out loud. "Powerful
magnetic fields. Must have been hundreds of thousands of Gauss?"

"That wouldn't be enough. You'd need millions for that," the astrogator
answered in a gruff voice. Only now did he become aware of Rohan's
presence.

"Come in and close the door behind you!"

"Millions? Wouldn't our instruments here on board detect such a field?"

"Only under certain conditions," replied Horpach. "If it were
concentrated in a small area, if it were the size of this glove here,
and if in addition it were screened off from the outside . . ."

"In short, if Kertelen had stuck his head between the poles of a
gigantic electromagnet"

"Even that wouldn't be sufficient. The field would have to oscillate in
a certain frequency."

"But there was nothing but rubble up there. There were no machines and
no magnets, nothing but eroded ravines, gravel and sand."

"And caves," Horpach added meaningfully.

"And caves. Do you believe somebody pulled him into one of those caves
and that there was a magnet in it? No, that's"

"How else can you account for it?" asked the commander, as if he had
grown tired of this discussion.

The physician remained silent.

At 3:40 A.M. the shrill ringing of the alarm signals sounded throughout
the _Invincible._ The men awoke with a start, dressed and hurried to
their stations, swearing as they went. Five minutes after the alarm
signal began, Rohan entered the command center. The astrogator had not
yet arrived. Rohan quickly walked up to the video-screen. The dark night
was lit up brightly in the east by countless white flashes of lightning.
It seemed as though a meteorite shower emanated from a radiant point and
was attacking the rocket.

Rohan checked the dials of the field control instruments. He had
programed the computers himself and knew they would not react to rain or
sandstorms.

Somethingit was too dark to make out what it wascame rushing from the
direction of the desert and scattered in a rain of fire. The discharges
occurred at the surface of the energy dome. The mysterious missiles
bounced off the shield and flew back, rapidly fading flames along a
parabolic curve. Still other flames slid down the curvature of the
vaulted field. The ridges of the dunes became momentarily visible, then
sank back again into the darkness.

The hands on the dials flicked sluggishly. The system of the Diracs
needed only a relatively small effort to ward off this mysterious
bombardment. Rohan heard the approaching steps of the commander as he
looked across to the spectrometer installation.

"Nickel, iron, manganese, beryllium, titanium," the astrogator read the
results off the brightly illuminated scale. He stood next to Rohan.
"What I wouldn't give to be able to see with my own eyes what's going on
there."

"It's raining metallic particles," said Rohan slowly. "They must be
quite small to judge by their discharges."

"I'd like to get a close look at them," said the astrogator. "How about
it? Shall we risk it?"

"You mean switch off the energy field?"

"Yes. For a fraction of a second. We'll catch a few particles inside the
protected zone, the rest will be repelled when we switch our energy
field back on."

Rohan did not answer for a long time.

"Well, it's conceivable . . ." he finally said.

But before the commander had time to step over to the instrument panel,
the flickering flames died down just as rapidly as they had flared up.
Stark darkness reigned again, the kind that is known only on moonless
planets that circle far from the star clusters of the galaxy.

"No luck this time," muttered Horpach. His hand rested on the main
switch. He remained standing for another minute, then nodded briefly in
Rohan's direction and left the room. The all-clear signal sounded
throughout all levels of the spaceship.

Rohan sighed, glanced once again at the videoscreens: there was nothing
on the image but pitch black darkness. Then he went back to bed.

The Cloud

 

They were getting used to the planet, its never-changing desert face,
the slight shadows cast by its unnaturally light clouds as they drifted
apart. Even by daylight one could see them through the light of the
bright stars. They came to accept the ever-present sand that crunched
under wheel and foot. They even grew accustomed to the dull red sun,
whose rays were incomparably softer than those of its terrestrial
counterpart. Instead of warmth, one felt its silent presence whenever
the back was turned.

Every morning the work troops set out, each one in a different
direction. The energo-robots disappeared among the dunes, rocking like
giant boats. Once the dust cloud settled those who remained at the
_Invincible_ would try to guess what the day would offer. The men
discussed what one of the radar observers had said to one of the
communications technicians, or tried to recall the name of the pilot who
had lost a leg on the navigational satellite Terra 5 six years ago. They
passed the time chatting about little things, perched on empty canisters
below the rocket, whose shadow circled like the hand on a gigantic
sundial until it grew long enough to touch the ring formed by the
energo-robots. Then the men rose and began to look out for their
friends, who would return exhausted and hungry.

Without the novelty which had originally inspired them when they were
working in the metallic debris of the "city," their energy soon
dissipated. Hardly a week had gone by when even the _Condor_ work detail
failed to bring any more exciting news (like the fact that another
corpse had been identified). And the findings that at first had been
symbols of sheer horrorthe remains of their dead comradeswere now
carefully packed inside hermetically sealed containers and stowed down
below in the storage rooms of the _Invincible._ The men whose job it was
to continue to search the sand around the _Condor,_ or to rummage
through the ship's interior, experienced boredom rather than a sense of
relief. They seemed to have grown oblivious to the fate of the former
crew. Their efforts now concentrated on collecting bits of memorabilia,
meaningless knick-knacks that had survived their anonymous ownersan old,
workworn harmonica or a Chinese puzzle. These objects quickly lost all
traces of their origin, and were soon circulated and used as communal
property among the _Invincible's_ crew.

Rohan would never have believed it possible, but in less than a week he
was behaving no differently than the rest of the crew. Only on rare
occasions, when he was completely alone would he begin to wonder what he
was doing there. All this work, their antlike activity, the complicated
details of their research: the transilluminations, the search for
specimens, the rock drillings (which were made even more difficult by
the third step routine), the opening and closing of the energy fields,
the laser weapons with their exactly prescribed firing range, the
unending visual control, the constant calculationsall this, he realized,
was nothing but self-deceit. Basically, they were doing nothing more
than wait for some new event, another catastrophe. They were simply
pretending that they did not know the real reason for all this
busy-work.

At first the men would crowd around the ship's infirmary every morning
to wait for news about Kertelen. He seemed to them not so much the
victim of a mysterious attack as some creature who no longer resembled a
human being, a monster who had nothing in common with them. It was as if
they believed they were in some fantastic fairytale, in which an unknown
force from a hostile planet had changed one of them into a monster. In
reality, of course, the man was nothing but a cripple. Moreover, it soon
became apparent that his brain was simply empty, like that of a newborn
baby. His mind was able to absorb all the knowledge the doctors would
teach it. Gradually, like an infant, he began to talk. Those who passed
the hospital no longer heard the strange whining sounds, unlike any
produced by human voices, or that senseless baby's crying that had been
so terrible because it came from the mouth of a grown man. One week
later, Kertelen formed his first syllables and began to recognize the
physicians, although he could not yet pronounce their names.

By the second week, the men had lost interest in him, especially after
the doctors announced that he would never be able to say anything about
the circumstances surrounding his accident, not even after he had
completed his unusual re-education process and had "returned to his
normal self."

In the meantime the work continued. The crews continued to map the city
and to collect details about the construction of the shrub-like
pyramids, although no one could figure out their function. Finally, the
astrogator decided that further investigations of the _Condor_ would be
useless, and therefore were to be discontinued. The spaceship itself
would have to be abandoned. Repairing the outer hull was more than they
could manage here, especially since the engineers had much more urgent
work to do. Only a large number of energo-robots, transporters, jeeps
and all kinds of instruments were transferred to the _Invincible._ The
spaceship itself was reduced to a wreck after this salvaging operation.
The _Condor_ was made tight. The crew comforted itself with the thought
that either they or the next expedition would eventually bring the
cruiser back to its home base. At the conclusion of these operations,
Horpach directed the _Condor_ troop to continue its work in the north of
the desert. They joined Gallagher's group now under the command of
Regnar. Rohan advanced to main coordinator of all research activities.
He would leave the immediate vicinity of the _Invincible_ for no more
than brief periods, and not even every day.

In an area criss-crossed by many ravines with subterranean springs, the
two groups made some peculiar finds. They encountered clay deposits with
layers of a reddish-black substance which seemed to be of neither
geological nor planetary origin. The specialists were at a loss. It
looked as if millions of years earlier vast quanitites of metal
particles had settled on the surface of the old basalt mantle of the
planet's solid shell. These splinters consisted either of metal or some
metalloid matterperhaps a huge iron-nickel meteor had exploded in the
planet's atmosphere and then melted into the ancient rock during fiery
cataclysms. These metallic fragments might have oxidized gradually,
followed by chemical reactions with their matrix and other elements
present. Finally they would have changed into these black-brown layers
with occasional spots of crimson.

So far excavation had struck no deeper than a shallow level of rock
formation, whose complicated geological structure confused even the most
experienced of the planetologists. Once they had driven shafts down to
the basalt baseitself indubitably more than a billion years oldthey
discovered that the deposits immediately above contained carbon of
organic origin which showed highly advanced stages of recrystallization.
At first the scientists believed this layer to have been the original
ocean bed. But then they came upon true coal beds with fossils of a
large variety of plant species that could only have existed on the dry
land. Little by little they gained a clearer picture of the life forms
that had existed at that time on the continent of Regis III. Thus they
learned that primitive reptiles had once roamed in the primeval jungle,
some three hundred million years earlier. Indeed, they returned in
triumph one day with the remains of a reptile's spinal column and the
jawbone, though the crew showed little enthusiasm about these finds.
Apparently, evolution had taken place twice in the dry land areas. The
first extinction of all life occurred in an epoch about one hundred
million years back. At that time all plant and animal life seemed to
have died out suddenly; the most probable cause would have been the
nearby Nova explosion. However, life had developed again after this
catastrophe; new forms, new species had arisen. Unfortunately, no exact
system of classification could be established by the scientists; the
available data were not sufficiently comprehensive. Yet they were
positive that no mammals had ever evolved on this planet. Some ninety
million years later, a second star explosion had occurred, but this time
at a far greater distance from Regis III. This event could be traced by
isotopes. According to the approximate values calculated, the intensity
of surface radiation was not strong enough to have caused such enormous
losses of life. And yeteven more puzzlingfrom this point on, plant and
animal fossils were less and less frequently seen in the rock
formations. Instead, the scientists found pressed "clay," antimony
sulfides, molybdenum and iron oxides, salts of nickel, cobalt and
titanium in increasingly larger quantities.

There were strong centers within the six- to eight-million-year-old
metalliferous strata which were found relatively close to the surface;
but this radioactivity was comparatively shortlived considering the age
of the planet. During that period something seemed to have unchained a
series of violent, localized nuclear reactions, whose products were
deposited in these "metalline clay-layers," Besides the hypothesis of
the "radioactive iron meteor," other, most fantastic assumptions were
advanced, attempting to establish some connection between the strange
centers of radioactive "hot spots" and the annihilation of the planetary
system of the Lyre and the extinction of its civilization.

It was suggested that atomic battles might have taken place on Regis III
among the spaceships escaping their threatened planetary home system.
Yet this did not explain the extent of the metalliferous strata, which
were discovered in other more remote excavation sites as well. From all
these various data a mysterious yet plausible picture emerged: life on
the planet's continents had become extinct during the same span of
millions of years during which the metalline deposits had been formed.
Radioactivity could not have been the cause of the destruction of all
living things. They had made calculations and converted the general
amount of radiation into equivalents of nuclear explosions. This
amounted to twenty to thirty megatons. Distributed over a period of
hundreds of thousands of years, such explosionsif these had in fact been
atomic explosions and not some other kind of nuclear reactionscould not,
of course, have seriously endangered the evolution of biological forms.

Since the scientists suspected some connection between these deposits
and the rains of the "city," they insisted on continuing with their
research, but this required that considerable amounts of debris be
cleared away before they could begin prospecting. The only solution was
to dig underground shafts; but those who worked below the surface would
no longer be able to enjoy the protection of the force fields. The scale
was tipped whenat a depth of about twenty yardsa layer rich in iron
oxides was found to contain rusty metal parts of a most curious shape
that looked like the corroded remnant of tiny mechanisms. At this point
the scientists decided to carry on even without the protective energy
field.

On the nineteenth day after they had landed on Regis III, dark, dense
cloud formations, unlike any they had observed before, gathered over the
area where the excavation unit was working. Toward noon a violent
thunderstorm broke out that surpassed any electrical storm ever seen on
Earth. Sky and mountain merged in the unceasing blinding flashes of
lightning. The brooks turned into torrents that rushed down the winding
ravines and flooded the excavation site. The men ran for shelter under
the dome of the big energy field. Mile-long lightning bolts repeatedly
struck the hull of the protective dome. Finally, the thunderstorm moved
slowly off to the west, and the entire horizon above the ocean was soon
a single black wall ripped by constant lightning.

On the way back to the _Invincible_ the prospecting detail discovered
vast numbers of tiny black metal drops in the sand. Were these the
ill-famed "flies"? The men gathered them up very cautiously and took
them along to the spaceship, where they aroused great interest among the
scientists. However, there was no possibility whatsoever that the drops
were the remains of insects. Again there were consultations among the
experts, frequently resulting in violent controversies. In the end it
was decided to send an expedition toward the northeast, beyond the
labyrinth of ravines and the areas of iron oxide deposits, because some
new discoveries had been made on the caterpillar chains of the _Condor_
vehicles: they had found traces of minerals that had not been seen in
any of the terrains that had been examined so far.

The next day, twenty-two men climbed into their vehicles. As soon as
sufficient stores of oxygen, food and nuclear fuel had been packed away
the column began to move. The group was well equipped with
energo-robots, the self-mobile mortar from the _Condor,_ transporters
and robots (among them twelve Arctanes), automated dredging machines and
rock drills. Regnar was in charge of the expedition. Radio and telvision
contact was maintained with the column until the planet's curved surface
made the further use of ultra-short waves impossible. Then the
_Invincible_ launched an automatic teleprobe into a stationary orbit,
over which communication could be maintained.

All that day the column continued to advance. At nightfall the vehicles
and machines formed a defense circle and surrounded themselves with a
force field.

The following morning they continued on their way. Toward noon, Regnar
informed Rohan that he wanted to stop at the foot of some sand-covered
ruins inside a shallow crater in order to inspect them at closer range.
One hour later, the reception became very bad because of strong static
disturbances. The communication crew switched to another wave length for
better reception. Soon afterwards the reception suddenly broke off
altogether, just as the thunder died away and the storm moved off into
the direction the expedition had taken. The breakdown in communication
had been preceded by several episodes of fading that increased in length
and strength. Most peculiar, however, was the fact that at the same time
TV reception had become worse, even though it was independant of
conditions in the ionosphere, as it emanated from a satellite circling
beyond the atmosphere. It was about one o'clock when all communication
ceased. No technician, none of the physicists called in for
consultation, could explain this phenomenon. It was as if a metal wall
had descended somewhere in the desert to cut off the expedition from the
_Invincible._

All this time Rohan had kept close to the astrogator, who seemed quite
apprehensive. At first Rohan believed there was no justification for the
commander's attitude. The weather front that had moved off in exactly
the same direction as the expedition might have certain definite
screening properties. The physicists, however, doubted that such a thick
layer of ionized air could possibly come about. When the thunderstorm
had completely died down and it was still impossible to re-establish
communication, even after sending nonstop call signals, Horpach
dispatched two scouting planes of the flying saucer type. It was close
to six o'clock in the evening.

One of the flying saucers flew a few hundred yards above the desert. The
other rose to an altitude of two and one-half miles, serving as a
television transmitter station to its lower flying companion. Rohan, the
astrogator, Gralew and a dozen other men, including Ballmin and Sax,
stood in front of the big telescreen in the command center, viewing
directly whatever happened inside the visual field of the first
machine's pilot. Beyond the dark labyrinth of ravines stretched the
desert with its endless chains of dunes, now covered by black stripes,
for it was close to sunset. The oblique rays of the setting sun cast the
landscape in a mournful light. Small craters, filled to the rim with
sand, slipped by underneath the low flying machine from time to time.
Some craters had remained visible only because of the central cone of a
volcano extinguished for many centuries. The terrain rose gradually and
became increasingly diversified. Amid the sandy hills high rocky ridges
jutted out, forming an entire system of oddly jagged mountain chains.
Lone stone needles resembled the bodies of smashed rockets or of some
gigantic figures. Crevices, filled by cone-shaped formations of boulders
and rubble, cut the slopes with their sharp outlines. Finally the sand
disappeared altogether and gave way to a wilderness of steep rocks and
rubble heaps. Here and there tectonic fissures wound through the
planet's crust. From a distance they resembled meandering rivers. The
landscape now resembled that on the Earth's moon. Suddenly the
television reception grew worse once again. The image became blurred and
synchronization was disrupted. All efforts at correction were in vain.

Now the whitish coloration of the rocks turned into ever darkening
shades. The high-rising rocky ridges that moved away from the immediate
view were brownish and covered by a poisonous and metallic glitter.
Velvety black spots occurred here and there, as if a dense dead scrub
proliferated over the bare stones.

A call came from the first machine, which had remained silent thus far.
The pilot reported that he could hear the automatic position
transmitters with which the lead vehicle of the expedition had been
equipped. Yet the men assembled in the command center could hear only
the pilot's weak and fading voice, calling Regnar's group.

The sun was lowering in the sky, which glowed in rich crimson hues. A
black wall reared up against this red backdrop in front of the machine.
The wall seemed to consist of many cloud-like yet solid strata that
reached from the rocky ground to a height of one thousand yards.
Everything behind it was now hidden from view. If this dark
conglomeration of partially inky-blue and partially metallic purplish
shimmering clusters had not moved up and down, slowly and rhythmically,
one could have taken it for an unusual formation of mountains.

Now the sun rays struck the wall in near horizontal lines. Below them
caves opened up revealing sudden flashes of light coming from inside.
The gaps in the wall appeared to be filled with furiously dancing swarms
of sparkling black iron crystals. At first the men in front of the
picture tube had the impression that the cloud was advancing toward the
approaching machine; but this was an optical illusion. Only the flying
saucer was moving with constant speed, flying straight toward the
strange obstacle in its path.

"KU-4 to ground station. Shall I fly above the cloud? Over," sounded the
muffled voice of the pilot.

"Commander in chief to KU-4. Stop in front of cloud!" came the
astrogators reply after a fraction of a second.

"KU-4 to ground station. Stopping before cloud," confirmed the pilot at
once and Rohan thought that his voice sounded rather relieved. Just a
few hundred yards separated the machine from the strange formation that
had begun to fork out, each prong diminishing in breadth toward the end;
they seemed to stretch as far as the horizon. Now the entire screen in
the command center was filled by the gigantic, pitch black mass of the
vertical surface of this improbable ocean. The flying saucer no longer
moved in the direction of the black wall. Suddenly, before anyone could
even utter a sound, bolts of lightning shot out in all directions from
the slowly heaving mass. The image on the screen grew dark, vanished to
a small point, then again lit up, flickering once more, rent apart by
the lines of weak electrical discharges, and finally disappearing
completely.

"KU-4, KU-4," called the operator.

"Here KU-8," suddenly reported the pilot of the second craft, that had
functioned all this time as the relay station for the first flying
saucer.

"KU-8 to ground station. Shall I start televising directly? Over."

"Ground station to KU-8. Start televising directly!"

The big videoscreen in the command center was now covered by wildly
whirling black currents. It was the same picture but this time seen from
a height of two and one-half miles. Now it could be observed that the
black mass formed one immensely long cloud bank that rested against the
towering ring of mountains, as if it intended to block the way to this
region. The surface of the black Wall moved along sluggishly like some
congealed, viscous mass. No trace could be detected of the first machine
that had been swallowed by the dark substance.

"Ground station to KU-8. Are you receiving KU-4? Over."

"KU-8 to ground station. Nothing from KU-4. Using interference waves.
Calling KU-4! Calling KU-4, here KU-8! Come in, please! KU-4, KU-4!" the
men heard the second pilot's voice. "KU-4 does not reply. Proceeding to
infrared waves. Calling KU-4! Here KU-8, come in, please! KU-4 does not
reply. Using radar now to probe the black cloud wall."

It grew absolutely still inside the darkened control center; not even
the men's breathing could be heard. The entire room was tense with
expectation. There was no change on the screen; the men no longer looked
at it. The rocky ridge jutted out above the black cloud, an island in an
ocean of ink. High up in the sky gold-drenched cirrus clouds were fading
away. The sun's disk was already touching the horizon. In another few
minutes, dusk would fall.

"KU-8 to ground station," sounded the pilot's voice, which seemed to
have completely changed during the few seconds since the last
communication. "Radar findings indicate a purely metallic obstacle.
Over, please."

"Ground station to KU-8. Switch radar screen image over onto television
screen! Over!"

The screen grew dim, then totally dark, glowed briefly in a pale blue
light, then turned green. Finally it became scattered all over by
innumerable, brightly sparkling discharges.

"The cloud consists of iron," said someone behind Rohan. It was like a
sigh.

"Jazon!" shouted the astrogator. "Is Jazon here?"

"Yes, here I am." The nuclear physicist stepped forward.

"Can we heat that up?" asked the astrogator, calmly pointing to the
videoscreen. Everyone knew what he meant. Jazon hesitated. "KU-4 ought
to be warned first to expand their protective energy field to its
maximum."

"Jazon! They are incommunicado."

"Up to 7000° Fahrenheit . . . without great risk."

"Thanks! Blaar, the microphone! Commander in chief to KU-8! Get the
laser ready! Aim at the cloud bank! Up to one billierg into the
epicenter! Nonstop bombardment along the azimuth!"

"KU-8. Nonstop bombardment up to one billierg," answered at once the
voice of the pilot. Nothing happened for one second. Then a flash, and
the central cloud which filled the lower part of the screen changed
color. At first, the cloud seemed to liquefy, then it turned red and
finally began to boil. A funnel with glowing walls was formed; all the
neighboring shreds of cloud were sucked into it as if into a maelstrom.
Suddenly all movement ceased. The cloud was now in the shape of a huge
ring; through this lumen could be seen many chaotically arranged groups
of boulders and rocks. A fine black ash-like dust drifted in the air.

"Commander in chief to KU-8. Maximal fire power!"

The pilot repeated the order. A wildly flickering wall surrounded the
hole as the cloud attempted to patch it, withdrawing its groping black
arms whenever they were seized by the flaming inferno. All this lasted
but a few minutes. The situation grew more and more critical. The
astrogator did not dare shoot at the cloud with the full force of the
laser-beam mortar, for the flying saucer with its pilot was still inside
the cloud. Rohan instinctively knew Horpach was hoping that machine
would fly out through this gap. But now as before, there was no trace of
it. The KU-8 hovered almost motionless and pierced the bubbling rim of
the black ring with its blinding laser beams. The sky was still quite
light, but the shadows grew increasingly darker along the rocks. The sun
was setting.

Suddenly, the gathering darkness in the valley began to glow eerily. The
cloak of darkness that enveloped everything loomed a dull red, like the
mouth of a volcano beneath a fiery cloud of ashes.

Now only dark shadows were visible. They kept merging, forming one
continuous mass in whose center fiery flames hissed and boiled. The
cloudy substance, whatever it was, had moved in to attack the missing
aircraft, and fierce flames shot up wherever the black mass collided
with the ship's energy screen.

Rohan looked at the astrogator, on whose rigid, expressionless face was
mirrored the wavering reflection of the blazing fire. The middle of the
screen showed the black seething mass with the fiery nucleus that
intermittently broke into sheaves of fire. In the distance a huge
mountain was silhouetted against the cold purple of the last sun rays
that at this very moment so much resembled their terrestrial
counterpart. All the more incredible was the spectacle that took place
inside the cloud.

All of a sudden something horrendous happened. Either the pilot of the
machine imprisoned by the cloud lost his head, or some catastrophe
occurred aboard the aircraftin any event, a bolt of lightning coursed
through the black simmering mass, a blinding light marked the spot where
the lightning had hit, and long swaths of the cloud that had been ripped
apart by the explosion scattered rapidly in all directions. The shock
wave was so violent that the whole picture began to oscillate, echoing
the same crazy dance that the KU-8 performed as it was tossed about by
the turbulence of the atmosphere. Then the screen was filled again by
the black mass which grew denser and denser. Only black could be seen,
nothing else.

"Ready the antiprotons! Full force ahead! Aim at the cloud! Nonstop
bombardment!"

The pilot repeated the order. The technicians observed the side screen
on which everything was visible that happened behind the machine. All of
a sudden one of the technicians yelled: "Watch out, KU-8! Climb! Higher!
Climb, keep climbing!"

A huge black whirling cloud came racing like a hurricane from the vacant
air space in the west. A moment earlier the black tornado had still been
part of the immense cloud bank. Now it became separated and rose
vertically, whirling rapidly, dragging offshoots behind that soon split
off due to the violent motion. The pilot noticed this phenomenon a
fraction of a second before the warning call rang out. He pulled the
machine upward in steep ascent. But the cloud pursued him, spewing black
columns up into the sky. He attacked them systematically, shooting at
one after the other. He made a frontal hit and one of the black clusters
nearby started to divide and became darker. Suddenly the whole image
began to shake.

As soon as part of the cloud bank reached the region of the radio waves,
making radio communication from plane to ground increasingly difficult,
the pilot apparently used the antimatter mortar for the first time.
Abruptly the planet's atmosphere changed into one immense sea of fire.
The purple afterglow of the sunset vanished instantly. For several
seconds the television observers in the command center could still
perceive the cloud through the jagged horizontal pattern on the screen.
Out of the cloud rose smoke columns that quickly oozed away, their color
fading to a grayish white. Now a second explosion, far more terrible
than the first, poured cascades of fire over the rocky chaos that had
been almost enveloped by gases, haze and smoke. This was the last
picture that was transmitted, for one second later the screen was filled
with sparks and arcs of electrical discharges, and then vanished
altogether. Only the empty, brightly lit screen glimmered in the
darkened command center, illuminating the deathly pale faces of the
assembled men.

Horpach ordered the radio crew to keep calling both machines. Then he
went to the adjoining navigation cabin together with Rohan, Jazon and
several others.

"What is the nature of this cloud? What is your opinion?" he asked
without any introductory remarks.

"It is made up of tiny metal particles. A remote-controlled emulsion, as
it were, with uniform center," answered Jazon.

"Gaarb?"

"I am of the same opinion."

"Any suggestions? None? All the better. Which supercopter is in better
shape, ours or the one from the _Condor?"_ Horpach demanded of the chief
engineer.

"Both are in perfect condition, astrogator. But I would prefer ours."

"Excellent. Rohan, if I'm not mistaken you once expressed the desire to
work outside the protective dome. Well, here's your chance. You'll get
eighteen men, take along double the usual complement of automatic arms,
vibration arc lasers and antiprotons. Anything else you could use?"

Nobody replied.

"All right, then. So far we haven't invented anything more powerful than
the antimatter. You'll start at 4:31 A.M. Sunrise. Proceed in a
northeasterly direction and try to find the crater that Regnar mentioned
in his last report. Shoot at everything on your way out there, but keep
at a safe distance. Don't waste any time waiting around or
experimenting. And don't spare the ammunition. If you lose contact with
our base here, just carry on. As soon as you've located the crater,
proceed to land, but be careful not to lower on to our men there. I
suppose they're somewhere around there" He pointed at the map of Regis
III that covered an entire wall. "Over in this area, cross-hatched in
red. It's just a rough guess, but that's all we have so far."

"What do we do after touchdown, astrogator? Shall I search for the men?"

"I leave that up to you. Use your own judgment. Rut please remember not
to shoot at anything within a radius of thirty miles, because our men
might be somewhere in there."

"How about ground targets?"

"None whatsoever. Up to this point here"the astrogator outlined the area
with a sweeping motion of his hand"you may deploy your annihilation
weapons aggressively. Rut beyond this line you're to defend your selves
only with your force field. Jazon, what is the limit for the field of
such a supercopter?"

"Several million atmospheres per square inch."

" 'Several million.' What's that supposed to mean? I asked you how many?
Five million? Twenty million?"

Horpach's voice sounded very quiet; but the effect of this studied calm
was to strike chill in the hearts of the _Invincible_ crew.

Jazon cleared his throat. "The field has been tested with twelve and a
half."

"That sounds much better. Did you get that, Rohan? Whenever this cloud
bank reaches this limit of your force field, you get the hell out of
there. Climb up, that would be the best escape route. Well, of course
it's impossible to predict everything that might happen . . ." He looked
at his watch. "Eight hours after you leave here I'll have you called
over every wave length. If that doesn't work, we'll try to establish
communication via satellites or direct optical contact. We'll send laser
signals using Morse code. That's always worked up to now; at least I've
never heard anything to the contrary. But just in case the laser beam
signals should fail to get the message to you, wait another three hours
and then start back to the base. If I'm not there"

"Do you plan to take off?"

"Don't interrupt me, Rohan! No, I don't plan to, but things don't
entirely depend on us. If we're gone, you're to go into orbit around the
planet. Have you ever done that with a supercopter?"

"Yes, twice, in the delta of the Lyre constellation."

"Fine. Then you're aware that it's somewhat complicated, but not
impossible. Your orbit must be stationary. Stroem will give you the
exact data before you start. Once in orbit, you will wait for me for
thirty-six hours. If I haven't reached you by then, you'll simply return
to the surface of Regis III and land near the _Condor._ Try to get it in
shape to take off from here. I know what this advice sounds like, but
you'll have no alternative. Once you've engineered this miracle, report
back to Earth with the _Condor._ Any questions?"

"Yes. May I establish contact with these . . . with this center that
directs the cloud, if I should succeed in locating it?"

"I'll leave that up to you also. But make sure that the risk remains
within the limits of reason. Of course, I am totally ignorant, but I
don't think you'll find any master brain on the surface of Regis III. If
a center even exists."

"What do you mean by that?"

"We've been scanning the entire electro-magnetic spectrum. If anyone
were steering this cloud with the help of rays, our instruments would
have registered the corresponding signals."

"The center might be hidden in the middle of the cloud."

"Maybe. I don't know. Jazon, can you conceive of a means of
telecommunication independent of electromagnetic waves?"

"Completely out of the question, if you want my opinion."

"What do you think I asked for?"

"The extent of my knowledge is not the same as what exists or might
exist. We don't know any other type of communication. That's all."

"How about telepathy?" came a voice from the background.

"No comment," replied Jazon curtly. "Nothing of the kind has ever been
detected, as far as I know. Not in any part of the universe explored by
man, at least."

"Let's not waste our time with useless discussions. Get your men
together, Rohan, and make the supercopter ready for takeoff. Details
about the ecliptical orbit will be in your hands within the hour. Stroem
will work it out for you. Stroem, please calculate a constant orbit with
an apogee of 150 miles."

"Will do, Astrogator."

The astrogator opened the door leading to the command center.

"How are things going, Terner? Nothing yet?"

"Nothing. Just a lot of static, that's all."

"No trace of emission spectrum?"

"Not a trace."

That means that neither of the two machines is using any of their
weapons. They've stopped fighting, thought Rohan. If they'd gone on to
use laser fire or induction emitters, the instruments aboard the
_Invincible_ would register such activity at a distance of several
hundred miles.

Rohan was far too gripped by excitement to worry about the mission he
had been ordered to carry outand far too busy to indulge in the luxury
of anxiety. There was no time for sleep that night. The supercopter had
to be checked out, additional fuel had to be taken aboard, provisions
and weapons had to be loaded. The men worked hard to finish all the
necessary preparations in time. The instant the red disk of the sun
peered above the horizon, the two-storey-high craft, weighing seventy
tons, lifted off into the air. Heavy dust clouds whirled around the
launching pad. The copter flew in a straight line toward the northeast,
Rohan quickly gained an altitude of almost ten miles. He could travel at
maximum speed within the stratosphere. There was also less danger of an
encounter with the black cloud, or so he reasoned.

Whether he was right in his assumption, or whether it was just luck,
preparations were met for landing hardly one hour later. The sun's
slanting rays fell on the supercopter as it descended, while the sandy
crater below still lay in the gray light of dawn. Even before huge
fountains of sand gushed up to meet the downward blast of hot gas jets,
the video technicians alarmed the men in the command center that they
had sighted something suspicious in the northern part of the crater. The
heavy craft interrupted its descent and hovered, trembling slightly as
if poised on an invisible tensioned spring. From a height of 500 yards
they made a thorough inspection of the spot.

The screen of the magnifier showed a gray-brownish background against
which tiny rectangles stood out, grouped geometrically around a larger,
steel-gray rectangle. Together with Ballmin and Gaarb, who were sitting
next to him at the controls, Rohan realized that these were the vehicles
of Regnar's expedition.

Swiftly, with all precautionary measures, they landed not far from the
area. The telescopic landing legs of the supercopter were still working
and clicking into place simultaneously, when the crew began to lower the
gangway and send off two scouting machines, well-protected by a movable
force field. The interior of the crater resembled a shallow dish with a
jagged rim. A black-brownish crust of lava covered the central cone of
the ancient volcano.

The scouting vehicles needed a few minutes in order to cover the
distance of one mile that separated them from Regnar's group. There was
excellent radio communication, no sign of interference. Rohan spoke with
Gaarb, who was riding in the front vehicle.

"We're still climbing a slight incline, we should see them any moment
now," Gaarb repeated several times. Suddenly he shouted: "Here they are!
I can see them!" Then he added with a calmer voice: "Evidently
everything seems to be okay there." He counted: "One, two, three fourall
the vehicles are there. But why are they parked in the sun?"

"How about the men? Do you see any of our men?" inquired Rohan, who sat
tensed in front of the mike.

"Yes. Something's moving over theretwo men. Hereanother onesomebody is
lying down in the shadeI can see them, Rohan!"

His voice grew distant. Rohan could vaguely hear him say something to
his driver. Then came the dull echo as they shot off a smoke signal.
Gaarb's voice came on strong again.

"That was just a little salute to let them know we are here. The smoke
is drifting over their way now. It will soon clear up. Jarg, hey there,
Jarg! What's the matter? Hey there, guys!"

His excited shouts were loud in Rohan's ears. Then there was abrupt
silence. A motor sprang to life. Rohan could hear the humming engines
move farther and farther away until they came to a halt. Then a few
hurried steps, muffled sounds of shouting, indistinct screams and then
silence again.

"Hello, Gaarb, hello!" Rohan kept repeating in his mike. His lips were
trembling. Footsteps approached, someone running across the sand came
nearer; the loudspeaker began to crackle.

"Rohan!" Gaarb's voice sounded strange; he was breathing hard.

"Rohan! Damn it! It's the same as with Kertelen! They're all crazythey
don't recognize us, they don't talkRohan, can you hear me?"

"Yes, I'm listening. Are they all the same way?"

"Looks like it to me. But I can't say yet for sure. Jarg and Terner are
just going through the group to see"

"How about their force field?"

"It's switched off. I can't detect it. I don't know. They must have
switched it off."

"Any signs of a struggle?"

"No. Nothing. All the vehicles are parked here. There's no damage. And
the men are simply lying around or sitting there. You can shake them and
they don't react at all. What? What's the matter over there?"

Rohan heard a distorted sound, interrupted by a long whining whimpering
howl. Rohan gritted his teeth, trying to suppress the feeling of nausea
that welled up from the pit of his stomach.

"For God's sake, that's Gralew!" came Gaarb's horrified voice. "Gralew!
Gralew! Don't you recognize me?" Gaarb's panting, amplified by the
loudspeaker, seemed to fill the entire command center.

"Gralew too," he uttered breathlessly. Then he fell silent, as if
gathering new strength.

"Rohan, I don't know if we can handle this situation by ourselves. We
have to get them away from here. Send us some more men, will you?"

"Right away."

One hour later the convoy of horror stopped below the metal body of the
supercopter. Only eighteen men out of the original twenty-two that had
left with the expedition had been found. The fate of the other four was
unknown. Most of the group had offered no resistance and had come along
peacefully. Five of the men refused to budge and had to be taken by
force. They were carried aboard on stretchers, then brought to an
improvised infirmary on the lower deck of the supercopter. The other
thirteen men, whose rigid masklike faces were especially terrifying,
were brought to an isolated room where thy allowed themselves to be put
to bed without any resistance. They had to be undressed. They were as
helpless as newborn babies. Rohan witnessed the scene silently. He stood
in the corridor between the rows of cots. He noticed that most of the
men remained passive, although those that had been carried off by force
continued to whine eerily.

Rohan left the incapacitated men in the care of the attending physician.
He sent all the vehicles at his disposal on a search mission, trying to
locate the missing four men. He had many vehicles now, as he had brought
back the machines abandoned by the sick men. Now Rohan used his own men
to drive these machines. He had just finished dispatching the last group
when he was called back to the command center: the radio men had finally
established contact with the _Invincible._

He was not at all surprised that they had succeeded in getting in touch
with their "home base." He was beyond the stage where anything could
still surprise him. He gave a brief report to Horpach.

"Who is missing?" the astrogator wanted to know.

"Regnar, Benningsen, Korotko and Mead. What's the story on the two
airplanes?" Rohan now inquired in turn.

"I have no news from them."

"And how about the cloud?"

"I sent out a patrol this morning. They just returned one hour ago. They
couldn't detect any trace of the cloud."

"Nothing? Nothing at all?"

"Nothing."

"Not even the aircraft?"

"Nothing."

Lauda's Hypothesis

 

Lauda knocked at the door of the astrogator's cabin and walked in. The
astrogator was making some entries on a photogrammetrical map.

"What's the matter?" asked Horpach without lifting his head.

"I wanted to talk to you ahout something."

"Is it that urgent? We're starting in fifteen minutes."

"I don't know. It seems we're about to figure this place out," said
Lauda.

The astrogator laid aside his compasses. Their eyes met. The biologist
was no younger than the commander; strange, that he was still permitted
to go on space flights. Apparently he was particularly interested in it.
He looked more like an old mechanic than a scientist.

"What have you figured out, then? Let's hear it."

"We've turned up living organisms in the ocean," answered Lauda. "Life
in the ocean, but none at all on land."

"How is that? There _was_ life on land. Ballmin himself found traces of
it."

"That's right. Traces more than five million years old. But later all
life on land was exterminated. What I'm about to say sounds fantastic,
Astrogator, and I have next to no proof for it, but here's the way it
might have come about: imagine, once upon a time, some millions of years
ago, a rocket landed here. A rocket that originated from some other
system, perhaps from the region of a nova."

Lauda spoke faster now, his voice calm and firm.

"We know for a fact, that intelligent life existed on the sixth planet
of the system before the explosion of the Zeta of the Lyre
constellation. These creatures had a highly developed technology.
Suppose a scouting craft of the Lyre people landed here on this planet.
Maybe there was a crash landing or some other catastrophe that totally
wiped out the ship's crewa nuclear explosion, say, or a chain
reactionanyhow, there wasn't a single living being aboard that wreck
that touched down on Regis. Only robots, automated and computerized
machines remained. Not the kind we have, with a trunk, a head and limbs,
resembling the human body. The inhabitants of the Lyre were probably not
humanoid at all in appearance, and they constructed their robots to
resemble them. The robots were unharmed and left the ship. They were
highly specialized homeostatic mechanisms, capable of withstanding the
most difficult environmental conditions. Now they no longer had anyone
to direct their activities. Perhaps those robots whose mental processes
were closest to those of their creators even tried to repair the wrecked
craft, although this would serve no useful pupose under the
circumstances. But you know the way robots operate. A repair robot will
always repair, everything he's been programed for, whether it makes
sense in a given situation or not. Then a separate group of robots
became independent of the others. Perhaps they were attacked by the
local fauna. Lizardlike reptiles, predators lived on the planet at that
time, and certain predators will attack anything that moves. The robots
fought them off and won the battle. They had to be armed for a fight
like thatin other words, they adapted to local conditions as best they
could. We'd have to assume, of course, that these robots were capable of
producing other machines according to their specific needs of the
moment. Let's say they needed flying machines to fight off these
saurians. Needless to say, I don't know any details. I am only imagining
the way the situation might have evolved under natural conditions. Maybe
there were no flying reptiles here at all, only burrowing reptiles,
living underground. I simply have no way of knowing. But in any event
the robots would have adapted perfectly to life on the continents of
this planet. They succeeded so well that they were victorious in their
battle against all life forms. Including plants."

"Plants? How do you account for that?"

"I'm not quite sure. I could advance several hypotheses, but I'd rather
not. Incidentally I haven't even mentioned the most important part yet.
Hundreds of generations later the 'offspring' of the first mechanisms
were no longer anything like the original products created by the Lyre
civilization. Do you follow me? It was the beginning of an evolution of
nonliving things, an evolution of machines. After all, what's the first
principle of a homeostat? To outlast, to survive under changing
conditions, however difficult and hostile these conditions may be. The
forms that eventually resulted from this evolution faced a peril far
greater than attack by the local fauna and flora. They were forced to
search out sources of energy and raw materials in order to produce spare
parts and new organisms. This search led to the development of a kind of
mining industry. Their ancestorsthe ones who arrived with our
hypothetical spaceshipmust have been originally powered by some
radioactive source. But there are no radioactive elements present on
this planet. In other words, they no longer had access to this
particular supply of power, and so were forced to find another one. This
would have led to a critical shortage of power and eventually to a
battle over the source of energy supply. The machines waged war on each
other in a literal struggle for survival. And of course this is the
basis for all evolution: survival of the fittest, due to natural
selection. In this battle, the 'intellectually' superior mechanisms,
which needed considerable amounts of, energy (not least, perhaps,
because of their size) were no match for the less developed but more
economical and more productive machines"

"Hold it. Aside from the fact that this all sounds like pure fantasy,
isn't it true that it is precisely the organism with the highest
developed nervous system who usually wins the evolutionary battle? Even
if the nervous system had been replaced in this case by an electronic
system, the principle would still remain the same."

"Correct. But only in the case of homogenous organisms that naturally
evolved on the same planetnot those that arrived from other planets."

"I don't understand."

"It's this simple: on Earth, the biochemical prerequisites for the
proper functioning of organisms have always been and still are almost
always the same. Algae, amoebae, plants, animalsthey're all made up of
nearly identical cells; they all have a very similar protein-based
metabolism. And in view of this common basic building block, this common
point of origin, what you have just outlined about the development of
the machines becomes a distinguishing characteristic rather than a
common one. It is not the only one, but one of the most important.
However, the situation was quite different in this case. There were two
types of mechanisms that landed here on Regis. The more complicated
obtained their energy from their own radioactive stores of supply, while
the simpler mechanisms, small repair systems, derived their power from
solar cells that were recharged by sunlight. This was a tremendous
advantage and made them superior to the other radioactive-powered type."

"But the higher developed mechanisms might have robbed them of these
solar batteries. And anyway, what good is all this debate? Why should we
even talk about it? It may not even be worth discussing. What do you
say, Lauda?"

"Quite the contrary! This is an important point! As I see it, an
inanimate evolution of a most peculiar character has taken place here,
due to extraordinary conditions which came about by chance. This is the
way it looks to me. Two types of systems were successful in this
evolutionary pattern: first, those that had made the greatest advances
in miniaturization, and then those that became settled in a definite
place. The first type were the beginning of these Talack clouds. I
believe them to be very tiny pseudo insects that, if necessary, and for
their common good, can unite to form a superordinate system. This is the
course taken by the evolution of the mobile mechanisms. The stationary
mechanisms, on the other hand, were the starting point for this strange
metallic vegetation, the 'ruins' of the areas we thought were cities"

"In other words, you don't think they are cities?"

"No, of course not. They're merely collections of mechanisms that became
stationary. Inanimate structures that self-reproduced and were outfitted
with special organs to store solar energy. That seems to be the function
of the small triangular plates."

"Do you mean to tell me that the city is still vegetating?

"No. I have the impression that thislet's say this metallic foresthas
become the victim in the struggle for existence. There's nothing left of
it but rustly scrap metal. Only one type of mechanism has survived the
mobile systems that dominates all the continents of this planet."

"Why?"

"I can't answer that. I've made innumerable calculations. There is the
possibility that the sun of Regis III has cooled off at a much faster
rate over the past three million years than was previously the case.
This may have deprived the stationary organisms of the amount of energy
they need. But that's just an assumption."

"Let's just suppose you are right: do you believe, then, that the clouds
have some command center at either the surface or the interior of this
planet?"

"No, I don't think it's anything like that. It could be that these
microorganisms themselves form such a center when they combine in a
certain mannera kind of inanimate brain. In general it's probably better
for them to live separately. They exist in loose swarms which permits
them to be constantly exposed to the sunlight, or even to chase after
thunder clouds, for they probably obtain energy from these atmospheric
discharges. However, they will unite in moments of danger, or to be more
precise, in the event of any sudden change that constitutes a threat to
their survival."

"Such a reaction would have to be triggered by something. And what
happens to that incredibly complex memory bank that remembers the whole
system during these periods of 'swarming'? After all, an electronic
brain is known to be cleverer than its individual parts, Lauda. Are you
suggesting that these elements have been clever enough to jump back to
their proper places again by themselves? That would imply some initial
blueprint of the entire brain"

"Not necessarily. It suffices for each element to recall those elements
with which it was in immediate contact. Let's say element number one is
to attach each of its surfaces to six other particles which in turn
remember the same thing about themselves. Thus the amount of information
stored in each individual particle can be veiy limited indeed, and only
a certain trigger mechanism, some kind of signal_Warning! Danger!_is
needed to restore the original configuration, the creation of the
'brain.' But this is no more than a grossly simplified description. The
process must be far more complicated than thatjust consider how
frequently these individual elements are destroyedand yet the overall
functioning of the superstructure remains unaffected."

"Fine. We can't afford the time now to go into further details. Are
there any practical conclusions we can draw from your hypothesis,
Lauda?"

"To some extent, yes, but rather negative conclusions. Millions of years
of 'machine evolution' and a phenomenon never before encountered by man
anywhere in the galaxy. Let's just focus on the main problem. Machines
as we know them do not exist for their own sake, but rather to serve
someone or something. From the point of view of mankind, the existence
of a self-generating metal bush or an iron cloud is meaningless. Of
course you could also say that cactus plants in our terrestrial deserts
are equally meaningless. The key lies in the fact how excellently they
have adapated in their fight against other living beings. I am inclined
to believe they resorted to killing only during the first phases of this
battle, while the continents were still teeming with life. Soon the
amount of energy used for killing must have proven to be uneconomical,
and they turned to other methods. The result? The catastrophe of the
_Condor,_ the business with Kertelen, and, finally, the destruction of
Regnar's men."

"What kind of methods do you mean?"

"I don't know exactly how they function. I can only express my own
opinion: in the case of Kertelen, we have witnessed the annihilation of
almost the entire information bank stored in the human brain. It's
probably the same thing with animals. An organism maimed in this fashion
obviously cannot survive. Simpler, faster, and more economical than
outright killing . . . I'm sorry to say that my conclusions are very
pessimistic, as far as we are concerned. That may even be the
understatement of the year. Our position is far worse than theirs, for
several reasons. To begin with, it's much easier to destroy a living
organism than a mechanism or some technical installation. Besides, they
have evolved under conditions that forced them to fight against living
things and against their metallic brothers, as we might call these
robots. In other words, they have conducted a war on two fronts,
battling against any kind of adaptive mechanism evolved by living
systems, and also against any manifestation of intelligence in machines.
Millions of years of such warfare must have resulted in a perfect and
uniquely universal system of destruction. I am afraid if we want to beat
them we'll have to resort to total annihilation, and that's as good as
impossible."

"Are you serious?"

"Yes. Of course, it is conceivable that the entire planet could be
destroyed, if the proper concentration of means were available. But this
is not our task here, quite apart from the fact that we lack the
necessary equipment to do so. The situation as I see it is absolutely
unique. We are superior intellectually. These mechanisms do not
represent a truly intelligent power. But they have managed to adapt
perfectly to this planetby annihilating anything rational as well as
anything alive. They themselves are not alive, therefore what is
harmless for them might mean death for us."

"How can you be so sure that these mechanisms lack rationality?"

"I could try to duck that question. I could plead ignorance; but I
assure you, if I've ever been convinced of anything, this is it. Why
don't they represent an intellectual power? My God! If they had any
mental faculties they would have finished us off long ago. Just run
through everything that's happened since we landed hereyou'll have to
conclude that they can't possibly have a strategical plan. They make
only one attack at a time."

"Hmm. What about the way they interrupted contact between us and Regnar,
and then the attack on our scouting planes"

"But they haven't done anything they didn't already do thousands of
years ago. The more complicated automatons they destroyed must certainly
have had radio communication. One of their earliest tasks must have been
to prevent the exchange of information. The solution to their problem
was self-apparent: what would be better suited as a screening device
than a metallic cloud? And now? What do we do? We have to protect
ourselves and the machines and robots without whose aid we would be
helpless, while our adversaries are free to operate in any way they
need. They command a literally inexhaustible means of reproduction; they
can continue to exist even if we annihilate a part of their forces; they
are unaffected by our conventional weapons of destruction. There's
nothing left for us to do but turn to our strongest weapon, the
antimatter artillery. Yet even so we'll never destroy them all. Have you
noticed how they react when they're hit? They simply disintegrate.
Besides, the fact that we have to stay behind our protective force
fields, reduces our maneuverability. They, on the other hand, can reduce
their size at will, move freely from place to placeand even if we should
succeed in beating them on this continent, they'll simply withdraw to
another one. And after all, their complete annihilation is not what we
came here to accomplish. I think we should get out."

"So that's it."

"Yes, that's it. Since we're obviously dealing with an adversary that is
merely the outgrowth of an inorganic evolution, we cannot solve this
problem by the usual formula of retaliation for what happened to the
_Condor_ and its crew. That would be the same as trying to punish the
ocean for having swallowed a ship."

"There'd be a great deal of logic in what you are sayingif the story
really went like that," said Horpach and rose from his seat. He leaned
back against the table, both hands planted on the chart that had been
covered with writing. "But it's only a hypothesis, and we can't return
to Earth with a hypothesis. We need certainty. Not vengeance but
certainty. An accurate diagnosis. Facts. Once we have that, once I have
specimens of thesethese flying mechanical fauna (if they exist at
all)safely stowed away on board, then I'll agree that we have nothing
left to do here any more. Then it will be up to our homebase on Earth to
give us further instructions. Incidentally, there's no guarantee that
these metal flies will remain on this planet. They might undergo further
evolution, leave the confines of Regis III and become a threat to
interstellar spaceflight in this part of the galaxy."

"Even if that were so, nothing of the sort would happen for several
hundred thousandif not several millionyears. I'm afraid you are still
guided by the notion that our opponent is a rational being, Astrogator.
What was once the mere instrument of reasoning creatures became
autonomous once its masters vanished. Over a period of millions of
years, these structures have actually become part of the natural forces
of this planet. Life survived in the ocean, partly because the
mechanical evolution did not extend to that sphere, partly because the
aquatic organisms were prevented from getting access to the dry land.
This would explain that atmosphere's moderate oxygen content, which is a
by-product of the photosynthesis taking place in the algae and plankton
living in the ocean. It also would account for the conditions on the
continent's surface. Naturally it's nothing but one vast desertthese
systems do not build up anything, have no civilization and do not create
anything of value, having nothing but themselves. That's why we should
regard them as forces of nature. Nature herself never creates values.
These structures are their own _raison d'être;_ they simply exist for
themselves, and they behave the way they do simply in order to continue
to exist . . ."

"How would you explain the destruction of our scouter planes? They were
inside their protective energy field the whole time, as we know."

"One energy field can be extinguished by another. And if you want to
erase the entire memory bank of a man's brain instantaneously, you have
to surround his head with a magnetic field so powerful it would be
difficult to produce even with all the means we have here on board. For
that you would need gigantic transformers and electromagnets."

"Do you mean to say that these structures have all that at their
disposal?"

"Of course not. They don't 'have' anything. They are nothing more than
building blocks that combine to form whatever the circumstances of any
given moment require. A danger signal simply means that 'something has
come up.' They register changes in their environmentchanges in the
electrostatic field, for example. The flying swarm is immediately sent
into the 'cloud-brain' formation and its collective memory reawakens:
_yes, we've encountered this organism before, dealt with them in such
and such a manner, annihilated them_then they just repeat the
procedure."

"All right," said Horpach, who had not been listening to the biologist's
explanations for some time. "I'm going to postpone departure. Now we'll
have a meeting, though I'd rather not, since it means another one of
those endless disputes. The scientists will get upset again, but I don't
know what else to do. I'll see you in the main library in thirty
minutes, Dr. Lauda."

"If they can convince me that my hypothesis is wrong, you'll have a
truly happy man on board." Dr. Lauda spoke these words softly and left
the cabin as quietly as he had come. Horpach walked over to the intercom
at the other wall, pushed the receiver button and called the scientists
in to a meeting.

 

It soon became evident that Dr. Lauda's assumptions were shared by most
of his colleagues: he was merely the first to express them in such a
determined manner. The only differences of opinion concerned the
question whether the cloud could be considered to have consciousness or
not. The cyberneticists were inclined to view the cloud as a thinking
system, capable of strategic planning. Lauda was subjected to vigorous
attacks. Horpach realized that the basis for their violent arguments was
not so much their objections to Lauda's explanations as the fact that he
had discussed them first with the commander rather than with his
colleagues. Despite their good relations with the rest of the crew, the
scientists formed a "state within a state" on board ship and followed a
definite unwritten code of behavior.

Kronotos, the senior cyberneticist, asked Lauda how the cloud could have
learned to attack men if it were devoid of intellect.

"Quite simple," answered the biologist. "It's done nothing else for
millions of years. I'm referring to their fight against the original
denizens of Regis III, animals with a central nervous system. The cloud
learned to attack them the same way a terrestrial insect will attack its
victim, and with the same precision with which a wasp injects its poison
into the nerve fibers of a cricket or a grasshopper. No intelligence is
needed for that, just instinct."

"But where did they learn to attack planes? Surely they've never met up
with aircraft before."

"How can you be sure of that? The cloud fought on two fronts, as I've
already pointed out, my dear colleague. Against the organic inhabitants
of Regis III, and against the inorganic kindthe automatons, the robots.
These robots must necessarily have resorted to all kinds of defensive
and offensive means."

"But if there were no flying robots among them"

"I see the point Dr. Lauda wants to make here," remarked Saurahan, the
assistant cyberneticist. These giant robots, macro-automatons, must have
established some means of communication with each other in order to work
together. They could be most efficiently destroyed through isolation,
and that could be best accomplished by blocking their communication
system"

"Whether the cloud's behavior is triggered by conscious mental activity
or not is completely immaterial at this point," Kronotos countered. "Our
present task is not to find a single hypothesis that will answer all our
problems, but rather one that will guarantee us maximum possible
security in the course of our stay on this planet. So it would be wiser
for us to assume that the cloud does have a certain degree of
intelligence. We'll probably exercise greater caution that way. If, on
the other hand, we go along with Dr. Lauda's belief that the cloud does
not possess any reasoning power, and if he turns out to be in error, we
may have to pay a terribly high price for that error. I am speaking now
not as a theorist but as a tactician."

"Which of us are you setting up camp againstmyself or the cloud?"
replied Lauda calmly. "I'm not opposed to caution, but this cloud has as
much intelligence as an insect, and not even an individual insect, but,
say, an anthill. Otherwise we would all be dead by now."

"Where's your proof?"

"We were not the cloud's first human opponents. May I remind you that
the _Condor_ landed on this planet before us. The microscopic "flies"
should have learned then, if they had any reasoning power, that they
could penetrate the energy field by simply burrowing through the sand.
After all, the energy field reached only as far as the surface of the
ground. The flies knew the extent of the _Condor's_ energy field; they
could have figured out the appropriate action. Yet they failed to do so.
Therefore we must assume the cloud does not have a mind; it acts by
sheer instinct."

Kronotos was not ready to give up but Horpach intervened and suggested
that they continue the discussion some other time. He asked for concrete
suggestions based on the conditions they had discussed.

Nygren asked whether the men could be equipped with metal helmets in
order to counteract the effect of a magnetic field, but the physicists
thought this would be useless, since a strong field would produce
currents in the metal that in turn would heat the helmets to
temperatures so uncomfortable that the men would tear them off. One
could easily imagine what the result would be.

It was already evening. Horpach was talking with Lauda and the
physicians in one corner of the room, while the cyberneticists formed
another group.

"You know, it is strange that the more intelligent ones, the
macro-automatons didn't come out on top of this conflict," said one of
the cyberneticists. "That would be the exception to the rule whereby
evolution proceeds toward greater complexity, higher specialization,
thus perfecting homeostasis and making better use of available
information."

"These machines didn't have a chance; they were too complicated and too
highly developed from the start," argued Saurahan. "Don't forget that
they were highly specialized, and had been designed to serve their
creators, the inhabitants of the Lyre. Once their masters ceased to
exist, the robots were crippled. Like a body without a head. The
precursors of the present "flies"not that they existed at that time; on
the conrary, they must have developed at a much later stagethese
precursors were relatively primitive. That is precisely why they had
such a tremendous potential to develop in many different directions."

"Still another, even more important factor may have played a role
there," interjected Dr. Sax, who had just joined the group. "We are
dealing here with mechanisms, which are incapable of regenerating
themselves in the manner of organic beings, or living tissue that can
renew and heal itself. Even if a macro-automaton could have repaired a
damaged robot, he would have needed the proper tools; probably a lot of
complicated machinery. Consequently, it would have sufficed to separate
these macromachines from their tools in order to put them out of action.
Thus they became the defenseless victims of these tiny flying creatures,
who in turn were hardly affected if they were damaged."

"Very interesting," spoke up Saurahan. "From what you say it follows
that robots should be constructed quite differently from the way we've
been doing it in order to be really universal: you'd have to start with
tiny elementary building blocks, primary units, pseudo-cells that can
replace each other, if necessary."

"That's not such a new idea," replied Sax with a smile. "It's the same
way organic forms developand it's no accident, either. Neither is it
merely by chance that this cloud is composed of such interchangeable
units. It is a question of the proper materials: a damaged robot needs
parts that can only be produced by a highly advanced technology. But a
system that consists of a few crystals, thermistors, or other simple
elements, can be destroyed without serious effects, because it will be
replaced immediately by one of a billion similar systems."

Horpach realized that he could not expect much help. The others were too
engrossed in the debate to notice as he left the room. He went to the
command center in order to tell Rohan's group about the hypothesis of
"inorganic evolution." It was already dark when the _Invincible_ managed
to establish communication with the supercopter far off in the crater.
Gaarb answered the call.

"I have only seven people here," he said, "including two physicians who
are tending to our casualties. The others are asleep, except for the
radio operator, who's sitting here next to me. By the way, Rohan's not
back yet."

"Not yet returned? When did he leave?"

"At about 18:00 hours. He took six engines along and the rest of the
crew. We agreed that he would return shortly after sunset. The sun went
down ten minutes ago."

"Are you in radio communication with him?"

"Not since about an hour ago."

"Gaarb! Why didn't you inform me at once?"

"Rohan told us he would be out of touch for a while. They wanted to
advance into one of the deep ravines, you know. The canyon walls are
completely covered by that damned metal stuff. It reflects so strongly
that we can't get any signal at all."

"Please inform me the moment Rohan gets back. He will have to justify
such negligence. That's a sure way to lose the entire crew in one fell
swoop."

The astrogator had hardly finished when Gaarb began to yell excitedly:
"Here they are, Astrogator! I can see their lights, they're coming up
the hillthere's Rohan. One, two, no, only one vehiclein a minute we'll
know more."

"I'll wait."

As soon as Gaarb saw the headlights that swept the path ahead, now
flinging bundles of light rays on the encampment, now disappearing
behind some small elevation of the ground, he seized a flare pistol and
fired twice, with the effect that his men awoke abruptly and jumped up.
In the meantime the vehicle made a turn, the radio operator in the
center opened a passage in the wall of the force field. A dust-covered
tank rolled along a runway marked by blue blinking lights. The vehicle
slowed down in front of the dune where the supercopter was poised. Gaarb
was horror-stricken when he recognized the small vehicle: it was the
three-man amphibian scouter, the radio car of the group. Now the cone of
their searchlight formed a straight path from the copter to the vehicle.
Gaarb and several men ran toward the machine. The vehicle had not yet
come to a complete standstill when a man jumped out. His protective suit
hung in shreds from his body; his face was so encrusted with blood and
dirt that Gaarb recognized him only after the man began to speak.

"Gaarb," moaned the man, and tried to grab the scientist's shoulders as
his own legs gave way under him. The others jumped forward, held him up
and asked anxiously: "What happened? Where are the rest of the men?"

"They're allall," whispered Rohan and fainted as they caught him in
their arms.

Toward midnight the physicians succeeded in reviving him. From the
oxygen tent inside the aluminum barrack, he told the story that Gaarb
transmitted half an hour later to the _Invincible._

ROHAN'S GROUP

 

The column Rohan led consisted of two big energo-robots, four
caterpillar-track vehicles and one small amphibious car. The latter was
occupied by Rohan, the driver Jarg, and Terner, the mate. They followed
the order prescribed by alarm procedure three: an unmanned robot rolled
at the head of the column, followed by Rohan's amphibian scouter; then
came the four crosscountry vehicles, with a crew of two men each. The
second energo-robot brought up the rear. Both energo-robots extended a
protective force field over the entire column.

Rohan had decided to take this side trip when he discovered traces of
Regnar's group. "Electro-hounds"as the olfactometers were commonly
calledhad picked up the track of the four lost men. Unless they were
found soon, they would doubtlessly wander through the rocky labyrinth
like helpless children and die of hunger and thirst.

The group drove the first few miles along the track sniffed out by the
electro-hounds. At the entrance of one of the many wide canyons that
they passed in their search, the men discovered footprints in the mud of
a small, almost dried-up riverbed. Three footprints could be clearly
made out; they had been excellently preserved in the soft ground that
had lost very little moisture that day. There was another imprint, but
its outlines had grown quite indistinct: it had been nearly erased by
the water that trickled gently around and over the stones. These tracks
were unmistakable. They were made by the heavy shoes of Regnar's crew.
The trail led into the ravine. They followed it for a short distance,
but it disappeared as soon as the ground became rocky again. Rohan did
not feel discouraged, for he noticed that the canyon walls sloped
steeper and steeper as they advanced. It was most unlikely that Regnar's
men, who were paralyzed by amnesia, would have tried to climb up this
sharp incline. Rohan was confident he would find the lost men very
shortly. He comforted himself with the thought that only the winding
road had prevented him from spotting them so far. After a short
consultation, the group continued on its way until they came upon an
area characterized by strange dense metal bushes that grew on both sides
of the steep canyon walls. The odd-looking "plants" resembled compact
brushes, reaching a height of nearly five feet. They sprouted out of
narrow rocky crevices filled with black oozing clay. At first they were
scattered singly here and there, then became a dense brush that covered
both slopes of the ravine almost down to the bottom of the valley with a
rusty, bristling matting. Far below an invisible water vein trickled
between huge boulders.

Occasionally, the black mouths of dark caverns gaped from between the
"bushes." Narrow rivulets were dribbling from some, while others seemed
dry. Rohan's men tried to glance inside several of the caves that were
located fairly close to the ground. They used searchlights to illuminate
the black holes. In one of the grottoes they found a considerable amount
of tiny triangular crystals, partially submerged in the water that had
dripped down off the rocky vault. Rohan gathered up a handful and put
them in his pocket. They drove about half a mile into the gorge; the
terrain ascended at an ever-sharpening angle. So far the caterpillar
chains of the vehicles had done an excellent job in climbing, and when
the search party once more found footprints in two places in the dried
mud of the brook, they were convinced they were on the right track. As
they rounded another bend in the road, radio contact with the
supercopter began to fade, but Rohan ascribed this to the screening
effect of the metal bushes. On either side of the gorge, which measured
twelve yards wide at the base and about twenty at the upper rim, sheer
rocky precipices jutted out, covered by the black wiry tangle of bushes.
The plants were so numerous that they now formed one uninterrupted
thicket that stretched all the way up to the top of the mountain ridge.

The vehicles passed through two wide rocky gateways. This took quite
some time, for the technicians had to be very precise when they
diminished the radius of the force field. They wanted to avoid touching
those rocks that appeared weatherworn and crumbly. Any contact between
the force field and one of the pillars of rock might result in a
landslide. The men were less concerned about their own safety than that
of the missing colleagues, who could be injured or killed by falling
stones and boulders.

About an hour had passed since radio contact had broken off, when
suddenly bolts of lightning flashed on the videoscreen of the
magnetometers. The direction finder apparently was out of order, for
when they tried to locate the origin of these impulses they got
simultaneous readings from all points of the compass. Only with the help
of ampere meters and polarizers did they discover that the growth on the
slopes was causing the fluctuation of the magnetic field. Now the men
became aware that the thicket looked different in this part of the
ravine: no longer did it glisten in a rusty red; and the bushes were
taller, bigger and somehow more intensely black, because of strange
nodules that adhered to their wiry branches. Rohan did not allow them to
be examined more closely; he did not wish to risk opening the protective
field.

They drove on faster now, and the magnetometers and peak volt meters
indicated constantly changing activity. Whenever the men glanced up,
they noticed the air trembling above the black thicket as if it had been
heated up tremendously. Beyond the second rocky gate, thin clouds rose
from the black metallic tangle like drifting smoke. However, all this
was too far away and even binoculars did not reveal the consistency of
the cloud. Jarg, who had the eyes of an eagle, maintained that the cloud
of smoke looked like a swarm of tiny insects.

Rohan was growing restless. The trip had already lasted longer than he
had intended, and the end of the canyon labyrinth was not yet in sight.
They were making better time now; the stone rubble in their path
gradually disappeared. The stream itself was hidden deep under the
rocks; its soft gurgling could be heard only when the vehicles stopped
for a moment.

Behind the next turn loomed up a gorge much narrower than the previous
ones. On the basis of their measurements, the technicians declared it
would be impossible to pass through with the force field switched on.
They explained that the variety of shapes a force field could assume was
limited to variants of a revolving body such as a sphere, an
ellipsoid'or an hyperboloid. Up to this point they had managed to
squeeze through the narrow straits of the ravine by deforming their
force field to a flattened-out stratostat, which was, of course,
invisible.

Such maneuvering would be impossible now. Rohan consulted with Tomman,
the physicist, and two field engineers. They decided to risk a short
partial suspension of the force field. The first to pass the straits
would be the unmanned robot with its energy field temporarily out of
action. Once on the other side of the rocky gate, it would switch on
immediately its emitter and so create once more a reliable shield in
front. The men in the four big vehicles and Rohan's small scouter would
only lack overhead protection during their passage through the gorge.
The energo-robot at the rear was to connect its shield with its
counterpart in front the instant it emerged from the gate, thus
reestablishing the uninterrupted force field.

Everything went according to plan, and the last big truck was just
passing between the two rock pillars when a strange shock rent the
airnot a sound but a vibration, as if somewhere nearby a huge boulder
had fallen to the ground. The stubbly walls of the gully began to steam;
a black cloud emerged from them, slowly creeping at first, but then
rushing with unbelievable speed toward the column.

Rohan had let the trucks pass first and he was waiting his turn in his
amphibian scouter; suddenly he saw black swaths break from the slopes of
the gully, and a gigantic fiery glow appeared at the head of the column,
where the front robot (which had already emerged from the rocky gate)
had activated the force field. Wherever the attacking cloud masses
touched the field they burned brightly. But many of them managed to rise
above the flames and fell upon the vehicles.

Rohan screamed at Jarg to switch on the rear energo-robot's field and
connect it with the front, for the potential danger of a landslide was
immaterial now. Jarg tried, but he could not switch on the force field.
As the chief engineer stated later, the electronic tubes of the
apparatus were probably overheated. Had Jarg continued sending current
impulses for a few more seconds, the field would undoubtedly have
'turned on.' Instead, Jarg lost his head and jumped out of the vehicle.
Rohan had barely managed to grab his sleeve when Jarg tore himself away
and, mad with fear, fled down the ravine. Rohan rushed over to the
vehicle, but it was too late.

The men who had been taken by surprise inside their vehicles jumped out
and ran off in all directions, their figures barely recognizable behind
the seething clouds. This sight was so incredible that Rohan froze on
the spot. At this point it was senseless to reestablish the force field,
for he would have killed the whole crew: the men were even climbing up
the slopes, as if trying to find refuge in the metal thicket. Rohan
remained standing, motionless in the deserted vehicle, waiting for the
same fate to befall him.

Behind Rohan, Terner fired away, leaning out of the turret hatch of his
tank. He shot off compression lasersa useless gesture, since the largest
part of the clouds was already quite near. Not more than sixty yards
separated Rohan from the others. The victims threw themselves on the
ground and rolled around, engulfed by the black flames. They must have
been screaming, but the constant roar of the cloud drowned out their
voices along with all other soundsincluding the noise of the front
energo-robot. Myriads of tiny attacking particles sparked off endlessly
wherever they hit the robot's energy field.

Rohan remained motionless, leaning halfway over the side of his scouter
vehicle. He made no attempt to seek cover. This was no courage born of
desperation, as he told them later on; it simply did not occur to him.
He had no thoughts at all.

The unforgettable scenehis men under the black avalanchechanged
abruptly. The victims stopped rolling on the ground, trying to escape or
to crawl into the wiry growth. They stood still or sat down. The cloud
had divided into funnels to form a kind of localized whirlpool above
each of the men, swirling around the entire body or just the head. Then,
brushing against each man briefly, the cloud, now churning and raging,
fled upward, surging higher and higher along the canyon walls until the
light of the evening sky was blotted out. Finally the black seething
mass crept into crevices among the rocks, while the roaring turmilt
gradually subsided. Soon everything submerged into the black jungle.
Nothing remained of the cloud except for some tiny black dots sprinkled
here and there around the motionless bodies, bearing witness to the
catastrophe that had unfolded but a few instants earlier.

Rohan still could not believe that he had escaped unscathed. He did not
understand to what circumstances he owed his good fortune. He glanced
over in Terner's direction, but the turret hatch was empty. The mate
must have jumped outthere was no telling why and when. Then he saw him
lying on the ground nearby, still clutching at the butt-ends of the
laser guns. His dead eyes stared up at the sky.

Rohan got out of his car and ran from one man to the next. They did not
recognize him. No one said a word. Most appeared to be calm; they were
either lying down or sitting on the boulders. Several men got up, walked
over to the vehicles, and ran their fingers over the surfaces slowly and
clumsily, Like blind men.

Rohan saw Jarg's friend Genlis, an excellent radio man, standing and
gaping at the trucks as if he were seeing them for the first time in his
life. His mouth was half open as he tried to move one of the door
handles.

Suddenly Rohan realized the significance of the round scorched hole in
one of the partition walls of the _Condor's_ command center. He knelt
next to Dr. Ballmin, grabbing his shoulders, trying desperately to shake
him back to consciousness, knowing full well that this would be in vain.
Suddenly he heard a sharp report and a violet flame flared up directly
by his head. One of the men who were sitting over to one side had
removed his Weyr mortar from his holster, and accidentally pushed the
trigger. Rohan called out to him but the man paid not the slightest
attention. The bright flash of light seemed to delight him, like a child
watching fireworks, for now he began shooting wildly in all directions.
He used up the entire nuclear-powered magazine of the mortar. The air
hissed in the intense heat. Rohan instinctively dropped to the ground,
trying to seek protection behind some large boulders. He heard heavy
steps coming nearer and saw Jarg appearing from behind a bend, his face
bathed in perspiration, and running breathlessly. He stormed straight
toward the madman, who amused himself by firing his Weyr weapon. "Stop!
Take cover! Take cover, Jarg!" shouted Rohan at the top of his voice.
But before the confused Jarg could come to a complete standstill, a
horrible explosion hit his left arm. Rohan caught a glimpse of his face
as the torn-off shoulder was hurled up into the air, the blood gushing
wildly from the frightful wound. The insane marksman did not seem to
notice anything, while Jarg gazed in astonished disbelief first at the
bloody stamp, then at his mangled arm. Jarg staggered; his knees began
to sag; finally he crumpled down on the ground.

The man with the Weyr mortar got up. Rohan could see the incessant
stream of fire from the heated weapon striking sparks wherever it hit
stones and rocks. The air began to smell of silicious earth. The man
stumbled forwards, his arms describing random movements like a baby
playing with a rattle. The flame whizzed through the narrow air space
between two men sitting next to each other. They made no attempt to
shield their eyes from the blinding light; another moment and they would
get the full load right in their faces. In a purely reflex action, Rohan
drew his own Weyr gun and fired once. The man hit his chest violently
with both arms; his weapon clattered onto the rocks, and he fell face
downward to the ground.

Rohan came to his senses. Dusk was falling. The men had to be
transported out of this place as quickly as possible. All he could use
was his small amphibian car. He tried to get one of the cross-country
vehicles ready to start, but it turned out that two of them had collided
at the narrowest part of the gulch. A crane would be needed to pull them
apart. That left only the rear robot, which could carry five men at
best. But he had nine on his hands, and all nine had lost their senses.
He decided to gather them together and tie them up, so that they would
be unable to escape and harm themselves. For the time being and for
their own protection, he would place them inside the energy dome between
the two energo-robots.

It was already pitch dark when he finished his ghastly task. The men
offered no resistance when he bound them with ropes. He backed out the
rear robot to make a gangway for his small vehicle, then placed both
emitters in position, switched on the protective field by remote
control, left all the helpless men safely herded inside the energy dome,
and started back.

On the twenty-seventh day after landing on Regis III, almost half of the
_Invincible's_ crew had been put out of action.

The Defeat

 

Rohan's report sounded irrational, as true stories often do. Why hadn't
the cloud attacked him or Jarg? Why hadn't it touched Terner until he
got out of the amphibian vehicle? Why had Jarg first tried to escape,
only to return later? The last question was fairly easy to answer. He
probably decided to turn back the moment he stopped panicking and
realized he was more than thirty miles away from the spaceship, which
obviously couldn't be reached on foot with his limited supply of oxygen.

The other questions, however, remained puzzles whose solution might mean
life or death for them. But the need for action left no time for
reflections and hypotheses.

It was past midnight when Horpach learned of the catastrophe that had
befallen Rohan's group. Half an hour later the astrogator was ready for
takeoff. It is a thankless task to fly a spacecruiser to a spot only one
hundred and twenty miles away. The ship must proceed at a relatively
slow speed and at a right angle to the planet's surface, standing
vertically above its exhaust flames, and consuming a vast amount of
fuel. Since the craft's power drive had not been geared to this, they
had to switch on the electro-automation. Nevertheless, the steel
colossus floated softly through the night, as if carried by gently
rolling waves. To any observer standing on Regis III, this would have
presented a most unusual sight: the ship's dim outline, hardly visible
against the glow of the flames emanating from its rear jets, traveling
through the night sky like a dark silhouette poised on a column of fire.

It was no small task to steer a proper course. They had to climb beyond
the stratosphere, then descend again, all the while with stern pointing
downwards, perpendicular to the ground.

All this maneuvering demanded the astrogator's undivided attention,
especially since their destination, the crater, lay hidden underneath a
thin veil of clouds. Shortly before dawn, the _Invincible_ set down in
the crater, just over a mile away from Regnar's former station.
Supercopters and machines were quickly unloaded, huts erected within the
protected area of the force field surrounding the spacecruiser. By noon,
all survivors of Rohan's group had been brought back safely by a
specially equipped rescue team. None of the men was injured, except for
a total loss of all mental functions. Two additional rooms had to be
prepared as a sick bay, since every bed was occupied in the
_Invincible's_ regular infirmary. Only now did the scientists try to
probe the mystery that had spared Rohan's life, and whichhad it not been
for the tragic incident with the Weyr mortar held by an insane manwould
have saved Jarg as well.

It was a mystery. The clothing and equipment of the two men had been
identical to that of the afflicted group. The fact that the three of
them, Terner included, had been together in the small vehicle was
probably of no significance either.

At the same time, Horpach had the unpleasant job of deciding how to
proceed from here. One thing was clear: he could return to home base and
present facts that would justify his terminating this mission, as well
as facts that would clear up the tragic fate of the _Condor._ The
questions that so intrigued the scientiststhe metal pseudo-insects,
their symbiosis with the metallic plants that grew on the rocks, and
finally the questions regarding the "mind" of the cloud (they didn't
even know whether there was only one or several of these clouds, and
whether all the small clouds formed a single closed system)all that
would not have induced the astrogator to remain one hour longer on Regis
III if four men of Regnar's group, Regnar himself among them, had not
still been missing.

The trail of the lost men had led Rohan's group into the ravine. The
defenseless men would undoubtedly perish there, even if the inorganic
occupants of Regis III left them alone. Thus the whole area would have
to be searched, as the victims were bereft of any ability to act
rationally, and were entirely dependent on the help of the _Invincible._

They were comparatively certain only of the extent of the area where the
search would have to be carried out, since the men could not have gotten
more than twenty to thirty miles from the crater in their aimless
wandering through the grottoes and gullies. Not much oxygen would be
left in their packs, but the physicians reassured them that breathing
the planet's atmosphere would not constitute any serious danger.
Considering the mental state of the men, it would, of course, not matter
too much if the methane content in their blood resulted in a stuporous
state.

The area they would cover in their search for the lost men was not too
extensive, but extremely difficult to explore. It would take weeks, even
under the best circumstances, to comb all the nooks and crannies,
grottoes and caves. Beneath the layer of winding ravines and valleys
existed another system of subterranean corridors and caverns, hollowed
from the rock by underground rivers. The two upper and lower labyrinths
were connected only at certain spots. The lost men might easily have
wandered into one of these hiding places, and probably had separated
from each other by now. Their total amnesia made them more helpless than
small childrenwho would at least have stayed together. And worst of all,
this terrain was the nesting place of the black cloud. Not much use
could be made here of the _Invincible's_ gigantic technical facilities
and scientific equipment. The most effective protection, the force
field, could not be applied at all in the subterranean vaults of this
planet. Horpach faced a most difficult choice: leaving the planet at
oncewhich would have amounted to a death sentence for the lost menor
taking up the risky search. Their chances for success here were limited
to the next few days, perhaps a week at most. Horpach realized that
after that time there would be no hope of finding the men alive.

Early the next morning, Rohan called the scientists to a meeting,
explained the situation and told them he was counting on their help.
Rohan had brought back a handful of the "metal insects" in his pocket.
Nearly twenty-four hours had been spent examining the little "flies."
Horpach wanted to know whether it would be possible to render them
harmless. And the question arose again: why had Rohan and Jarg been
spared by the attacking cloud?

The captives had a place of honor during these discussions: a closed
glass container on the conference table. Only twenty specimens were
left; the others had been destroyed during the scientific experiments.
The strictly symmetrical tripartite structures resembled the letter Y.
Three wings were anchored in a central thickening, each wing tapering to
a point at its extremity. They looked coal black under direct
illumination; but reflected light made them glisten bluish and olive
green, not unlike the abdomens of certrain terrestrial insects which are
composed of tiny surfaces like the multifaceted rose-cut of a diamond.
Their interior structure was always the same when examined under a
microscope. These miniscule elements, one-hundredth the size of a small
grain of sand, formed a kind of autonomous nervous system with a number
of independent fibers.

The smaller section, forming the arms of the letter Y, constituted a
steering system controlling the "insect's" locomotion. The
micro-crystalline structure of the arms provided a type of universal
accumulator and at the same time an energy transformer. Depending on the
manner in which the micro-crystals were compressed, they either produced
an electrical or magnetic field, or else produced changeable force
fields that could raise the midsection's temperature to a relatively
high degree, thus causing the stored heat to flow in an outward
direction. The resultant thrust of the air enabled the "insects" to
ascend. The individual mini-crystals seemed to flutter rather than fly,
and were incapable of steering an exact courseat least during the
experiments conducted by the scientists in the laboratory. However, if
they joined each other by chain-linking their wing tips, the ensuing
aggregates possessed improved aerodynamic properties which increased
proportionately with the number of links.

Each crystal combined with three other crystals. In addition, its arm
could link up with another crystal's middle section. This permitted a
multilayered structure of ever-larger systems. The individual crystals
did not even need to touch directly. It sufficed for the wingtips to
come into close proximity to bring about a magnetic field which kept the
entire system in balance. When a given quantity of "insects" clumped
together, the aggregate then displayed definite, observable behavior
patterns. If the aggregate was subjected to external stimuli, it could
change its direction, form, shape and the frequency of its internal
impulses. Following such a change, the field would reverse its polarity,
and as a result, the crystals no longer attracted but repelled each
other and then broke down into their individual components.

Besides this steering system, each black crystal contained another
communicative system, or rather the fragment of what seemed to be a
larger entity. This superordinate entity, which probably incorporated an
enormous number of separate elements, was the real driving power
regulating the actions of the cloud. At this point scientists were
stumped. They knew nothing about the growth potential or the "mind" of
these guiding systems. Kronotos assumed that the number of individual
elements making up a larger entity was determined by the difficulty of
the task they had to solve. This hypothesis sounded quite plausible, but
neither the cyberneticists nor the information-theory experts knew of
any comparable structure, that is any "brain" capable of proliferating
at will, able to adjust its size to meet the extent of its goals.

Some of the structures Rohan had brought along were damaged. Others,
however, displayed typical reactions. The individual crystal could
flutter about, ascend, and hover, nearly motionless, in the air;
descend, approach a source of a stimulus or avoid it. Moreover, it was
completely harmless; even when its existence was threatenedthe research
scientists tried to destroy individual crystals by chemical means, force
fields, heat and radiationit sent out no energy whatsoever to defend
itself. It let itself be squashed like the most miserable bug on Earth,
with one difference: the crystalline insect's carapace was far more
difficult to crack. However, the moment the "insects" combined into a
relatively small aggregate and were then exposed to the action of a
magnetic field, they produced a nullifying counterfield of their own.
When subjected to heat they tried to combat it by giving off infrared
radiation. Further experiments were not possible, since only a handful
of crystals were at the scientists' disposal.

Speaking on behalf of the rest of his colleagues, Kronotos answered the
astrogator's question. The scientists requested time for additional
examinations and requested larger quantities of crystals. To this end
they suggested sending an expedition into the interior of the ravine in
order to search for the lost men, and at the same time bring back, say,
ten thousand pseudo-insects.

Horpach agreed to this plan. But he was of the opinion that no more
human lives should be endangered. He ordered a vehicle sent to the
ravine, that had not participated in any maneuvers thus far: a special
automated vehicle weighing eighty tons, normally deployed only under
conditions of heavy radioactive contamination, high pressures and
excessive temperatures. The vehicle, generally known as the Cyclops, was
fastened down at the girders of the loading hatch, at the very bottom of
the space cruiser. As a rule such machines were never put in action on
planets, and until now the _Invincible_ had never had to make use of its
own Cyclops. In the history of the entire space fleet, the situations
which had called for such extreme measures could be counted on the
fingers of one hand. As far as the astronauts were concerned,
dispatching the Cyclops for a mission meant charging the devil himself
with a task; no one had ever heard of a Cyclops' defeat.

The vehicle was lifted out of the ship's hold with the help of cranes.
Then it was set down on the ramp where the technicians and programmers
took charge of it. In addition to the usual system of Diracs for the
production of the force field, the Cyclops was equipped with an
antimatter projectile cannon, which enabled it to shoot off antiprotons
simultaneously in any and all directions. An ejector directly built into
the turret even made it possible for the Cyclops to rise several yards
above the ground on the interference of the force fields. This rendered
the machine independent of wheels and caterpillar tracks as well as the
profile of the ground's surface. The front section was equipped with an
armored nozzle; a retractable inhaustor emerged from the opening. This
telescopic hand could drill into soil, obtain core samples of minerals
in its vicinity and perform necessary exploratory tasks. Although the
Cyclops was outfitted with powerful radio and television transmitters,
it was also capable of independent action thanks to the electronic brain
that guided it. The technicians of engineer Petersen's operational staff
had fed the brain a prepared program, for the astrogator figured on
losing contact with the Cyclops as soon as it entered the ravine.

This program scheduled as its first task the roundup of the lost men.
The Cyclops was to surround the men and itself with a secondary force
field, concentric to its primary energy dome. Then under the protection
of the outer perimeter it was to open an access route to its own inner
shielding wall of energy. Once men and machine were safely protected,
the Cyclops was instructed to bring back as large a number of the
attacking crystals as it could gather up. Only in case of extreme
emergency, if the force field were in danger of being crushed, was the
machine permitted to resort to its antimatter cannon. The resultant
annihilation would inevitably lead to nuclear contamination of the
surrounding area. This would endanger the lives of the missing men who
might be lingering near the battle zone.

The Cyclops was about twenty-five feet in diameter. Should some cleft in
the rocks prove to be too narrow to let it pass through freely, it could
enlarge the opening by either using its steely telescopic hand or by
crushing the obstacle with its force field and then sweeping aside the
rubble. But even if the field were switched off, nothing could befall
the Cyclops, for its ceramic vanadium-armored hull was as hard as a
diamond.

A robot had been installed in the interior in order to take care of the
men once they were rescued. Even beds had been set up. After all
installations had been checked, the armored colossus slid down the ramp
effortlessly and passed through the openings in the energy dome which
had been marked by blue lights. The gigantic machine seemed to be
carried along by some invisible power. Even when driving at great speed,
not the slightest cloud of dust was stirred. Soon the men, assembled at
the _Invincible's_ tail end, could no longer see the Cyclops.

Radio and television contact between the Cyclops and the command center
functioned perfectly for nearly an hour. On the observation screens a
tall obelisk, resembling a toppled-over church steeple, came into sight.
It partially blocked Rohan's view of the rock walls. Rohan recognized
this as the entrance to the ravine where the attack had taken place. The
Cyclops' speed diminished somewhat while it rolled across the first
talus which was covered with many large boulders. The men, watching the
vehicle's progress on the videoscreens in the command center, even heard
the babbling brook which flowed hidden under the rocky debrissince the
machine's nuclear drive worked so quietly.

The communication experts managed to maintain audio-visual contact until
2:40 P.M. By that time the Cyclops had driven across the flat, easily
navigable part of the ravine and had arrived at the labyrinth of the
rusty jungle. Thanks to the efforts of the radio operators, they
succeeded in sending and receiving four further messages. But the fifth
message was already so garbled that they had to guess at its meaning:
the machine's electronic brain informed them that the vehicle was
proceeding satisfactorily.

At that point Horpach acted according to plan and dispatched a flying
probe equipped with a television relay system. The probe rose skyward at
a steep angle and disappeared from view within a few seconds.
Communication with the _Invincible_ was maintained; the command center
received the probe's steady signals. The videoscreens projected the
image of a picturesque landscape as seen from the altitude of 1700 feet;
fissured rocks covered with rows of rusty red and black bushes. Several
minutes later the observers spotted the Cyclops far below as it advanced
steadily along the bottom of the gorge. The machine glistened like a
fist of steel. Horpach, Rohan and the leaders of the specialists' groups
stood before the videoscreens in the command center. The reception was
good, but they fully expected it to grow worse or even be disrupted. For
this reason they had readied further probes to serve as relay stations.
The chief engineer was firmly convinced that contact with the Cyclops
would be interrupted in case of an attack; with the aid of probes, they
would at least be able to observe the Cyclops' operations.

The men before the videoscreen, watched the wide-screen image carried by
the high-flying eye of the teleprobe; the colossus was now only a few
hundred yards away from the transporters that blocked the way inside the
rock-gate; the electronic eye of the Cyclops could not see this. On its
way back, upon completion of its tasks, the Cyclops was supposed to tow
away two collided tanks locked tightly together.

Seen from above, the two abandoned transporters looked like small
greenish boxes. Near one of the vehicles the men could recognize a
partially charred figurethe body of the man whom Rohan had hit with the
Weyr gun.

Directly in front of a bend in the road where the pillars rose, forming
the rock-gate, the colossus came to a halt. There it approached a slope,
overgrown by a wild tangle of metal bushes that reached almost to the
bottom of the valley. The men watched the machine's movements intently.
It opened the force field out the front in order to send the inhaustor
through the gap. The inhaustor protruded from its casing, like an
elongated cannon barrel with a grappling hand at its end. It grabbed a
few bunches of the metallic growths and pulled them, apparently
effortlessly, out of the rocky ground. Then the vehicle retreated a
short stretch, turned and crept backwards into the ravine.

The entire operation had functioned smoothly. Radio contact with the
Cyclops' brain was reestablished with the help of the teleprobe hovering
above the ravine. The colossus reported having stashed away inside a
special container a generous specimen of teeming black "insects."

Now the Cyclops had approached the scene of the disaster within one
hundred yards. There stood Rohan's second energo-robot, its armored back
leaning against the rock; the two interlocked transporters were stuck in
the middle of the rocky passage; a short stretch ahead was the first
energo-robot that had formed the column's front. The softly trembling
air indicated that the robot was still producing a force field, just as
it had earlier when Rohan had left it behind after the catastrophe had
befallen his group of men. First the Cyclops switched off the Diracs of
the energo-robot via remote control. Then the giant revved up its motor,
rose into the air and skillfully floated over the backs of the
transporters, which jutted at a 45° angle. Hovering over the narrow
defile, the Cyclops descended to the huge boulders. Thenmore than
thirty-five miles away from the ravineone of the observers in the
control room of the _Invincible_ shouted a warning, just as the black
pelt covering the slopes began to smoke and fall over the terrestrial
vehicle in big waves, burying it instantly and completely, as if a
mantel of pitch-like smoke had been thrown over it. An instant later a
widely branched bolt of lightning flashed across the whole width of the
attacking cloud. The Cyclops had not deployed its devilish weaponthe
lightning was simply caused by the energy fields produced by the cloud
itself, which clashed with the machine's own force barrier. Suddenly,
this dome-shaped barrier, to which a heavy layer of heaving blackness
seemed to be glued, appeared to come alive. Now it swelled up like a
gigantic lava bubble; now it contracted. This strange game went on for
quite a while. The observers were under the impression that the hidden
vehicle was trying to divide the myriads of attackers, which became more
and more numerous, as ever new cloudy avalanches rolled down into the
gorge. The luminous glow of the protective sphere could no longer be
seen by the observers. Only the weird battle between two powerful
inorganic forces continued in the dull silence. Finally one of the men
in front of the videoscreen sighed: the twitching black bubble had
disappeared into a dark funnel. The cloud had changed into a giant
whirlpool which extended beyond the highest rocky peaks. The cloud's
lower end clawed into its invisible opponent while its top rotated like
a mile-long maelstrom in wild bluish whirls. No one said a word, but the
men knew that the cloud was trying to squash the vehicle trapped inside
the bubble like a kernel in a shell.

Rohan heard dimly as the astrogator questioned the chief engineer as to
whether the Cyclops' force field would hold out. But he said nothing; he
could barely manage to open his mouth.

The black whirlpool, the walls of the ravine, the black, bushy
growthsall vanished in the fraction of a second. It looked as if a
fire-spewing volcano had opened up at the bottom of the glen; a fountain
of smoke, boiling lava, chunks of rock and, finally, a huge cloud, which
dragged behind it a trail of vapor veils. The cloud raced higher and
higher, until the steamfrom the boiling waters of the little brook,
perhapsreached an altitude of one mile where the teleprobe was flying.
The Cyclops had deployed its antimatter cannon.

No one in the control center moved or uttered a sound. A sense of
gloating satisfaction ran through the group. It did not really matter,
nor did it lessen the intensity of their emotion, that this feeling had
no rational foundation. Perhaps their pleasure stemmed from the
subconscious impression that the cloud had finally met up with a worthy
opponent. Ever since the start of the attack direct communication with
the Cyclops had been cut off and the men could only see whatever was
sent via the probe's ultrashort wave rays across forty miles of
vibrating atmosphere. Also the men working outside the control center
had learned of the battle raging inside the ravine. That part of the
crew which had been busy dismantling the aluminum barrack stopped
working. The horizon over to the northeast grew bright as day, as if
another sun were rising, far mightier than the first sun which now stood
high in the sky. Then the brilliant glow was blotted out by a pillar of
smoke, which soon spread out into a giant dark mushroom cloud.

The technicians in charge of watching over the probe had to remove it
from the thick of the battle by making it ascend to a height of two and
one-half miles. Thus it escaped the zone of violent airstreams caused by
the constant explosions. Neither the rock walls, lining the sides of the
ravine, nor the matted slopes, and not even the black cloud that had
crept out of the brushy tangle were visible. Bubbling tongues of flame
and wisps of smoke, criss-crossed by the parabolic trajectories of
glowing debris, filled the videoscreens. The probe's phonometer
transmitted continuous rumbling thunder, sometimes weaker and sometimes
stronger again, as if a considerable part of the continent were shaken
by an earthquake.

It was astonishing that this ghastly battle just kept going. A few
seconds more and the bottom of the ravine and the entire area around the
Cyclops would reach the melting point. The rocks would sag, collapse and
change into lava. Indeed, the observers were now able to see the fiery
glistening stream make its way toward the exit of the gorge a few miles
away.

Horpach wondered whether the electronic switches of the Cyclops'
antimatter cannon were stuck, for it seemed unlikely that the cloud
would persist in attacking an adversary who dealt it such destructive
blows. However, after the probe had been given instructions to climb
still higher, and had reached the border of the troposphere, the image
on the picture screen proved to Horpach that he was mistaken.

By now the visual field comprised some fifteen square miles. The entire
jagged terrain was in motion. The men watched as black conglobulations
oozed forth from the darkly spotted rocky slopes, emerging from fissures
and caves haltingly, as if photographed in slow motion (of course this
optical illusion was only caused by the distance). The black billowing
masses rose upwards, fused and grew denser during their journey as they
pushed ahead in the direction of the battle scene. For several minutes
it looked as if the dark avalanches that were continually thrown into
the battle zone from the rear might suppress the atomic fires,
suffocating them by their sheer mass and extinguish the flames. Yet
Horpach knew better; he was well aware of the energy reserves contained
in the manmade monster.

An earsplitting, endless roll of thunder roared from the loudspeakers
and filled the control center. At the same time flames two miles high
bored into the shapeless mass of the attacking cloud. The burning
pillars rotated slowly, forming a fiery mill. The air vibrated in
layers, which bent in the heat as its core shifted.

Inexplicably, the Cyclops now drove backwards and retreated gradually
toward the glen's exit, without halting its attack for a single second.
Perhaps the machine's electronic brain had considered that the atomic
explosions would cause the rock walls to burst and fall on it. Although
the Cyclops could survive such a calamity, its maneuverability might be
affected considerably. For whatever reason, the Cyclops tried to reach
open terrain, and in this broiling turmoil the observers could no longer
distinguish between the fire from its cannons, smoke, wisps of cloud or
debris of the rocky pillars.

The gigantic cataclysm of nature seemed to have reached a climax. The
next moment, however, something incredible happened. The image on the
videoscreen flared up, brightened to a terribly glaring, blinding white.
The screen was covered by a swarm of innumerable explosions. In a
renewed influx of anti-matter every thing lying beneath the Cyclops was
annihilated. The air, debris, steam, smoke and gasses were transformed
into hardest radiation to split the ravine in two. Within a radius of
three hundred yards the cloud was hurled skywards.

More than forty miles from the epicenter of the earth-shaking explosion,
the _Invincible_ reeled under the impact. Seismic waves traveled through
the desert. The transporters and energo-robots standing under the ramp
slid to the side. A few minutes later a violent howling storm swept down
from the mountains. Its fiery breath seared the faces of the men who
sought shelter behind the machines, whipped whirling sheets of sand high
into the air and raced on across the wide desert.

Evidently, a fragment must have hit the teleprobe, which by that time
was over eight miles from the scene of the catastrophe. Communication
was not disrupted but the picture blurred considerably. Another minute
passed by. As the wisps of smoke dissipated a little, Rohan, who had
kept his eyes glued to the screen all this time, was able to witness the
next stage of the fight.

The battle was not over yet, as he had thought a short while before. If
the attackers had been living beings, the massacre would have induced
the reinforcements coming up from the rear to turn around, or at least
have forced them to stop in the face of this flaming hell. But this was
a battle between inanimate things. The atomic holocaust continued; only
form and direction of the main attack were altered. For the first time
Rohan understood what the battles must have been like that had once
raged on the desolate and deserted surface of Regis III, when the robots
had destroyed each other. He sensed dimly what forms of selection had
been used by this defunct evolutionary process, and what lay behind
Lauda's hypothesis that the pseudo-insects had been victorious because
of their optimum adaptation. At the same time, it occurred to him that
something similar must have occurred here before solar energy fixed the
inorganic, indestructible memory banks in the mammoth cloud's myriads of
tiny crystals. These inanimate particlesmere nothings compared to the
all-consuming flames, the rock-devouring explosionshad had to overcome
similar stragglers thousands of years agoheavily armored giants and
atomic monsters, descending from the species of robots. Whatever had
enabled the crystals to survive, whatever had allowed the metal hulls of
those giant behemoths to be torn into rusty shreds and dragged through
the immense desert together with the skeletons of once indestructible
electro-mechanisms (which now lay buried in the sand)whatever had
wrought this utter havoc represented an unbelievable, indescribable
bravado, if such a term could be applied to the tiny crystals of the
gigantic cloud. But what other name could you give it? Rohan could not
help an involuntary feeling of admiration as he continued to watch the
cloud.

Even in the face of the massacre the cloud kept on attacking. Now only
the highest mountain tops peeked out from the cloud bank which covered
the entire area picked up by the telelenses of the probe. Everything
elsethe entire valleydisappeared beneath a flood of concentric black
waves which raced up from the horizon and were sucked into the funnel of
fire at whose center the Cyclops stood, though it could no longer be
seen inside the conflagration. This advance had been gained at the cost
of apparently senseless sacrifice; but at least it offered some chance
of success.

Rohan and the men realized this as they helplessly watched the spectacle
unrolling before their eyes on the videoscreens in the control center.
The Cyclops' energy reserves were practically inexhaustible. But the
longer the annihilation bombardment lasted, the hotter it would get
inside the machine. For at least a fraction of the star temperatures was
imparted to the cannons and thus returned to its point of origin,
despite the powerful protective installations, despite the antiray
reflectors mounted on the Cyclops' armored hull. That was why the attack
was continued on all fronts simultaneously. The denser the concentration
of antimatter particles clashing with the doomed hailstorm crystals on
the armored plates, the higher the temperature rose in the Cyclops'
engines. A human being would have long succumbed to the conditions
inside the Cyclops. The ceramic hull had probably turned a glowing red,
but beneath the canopy of smoke, the observers could see nothing but the
pulsating light blue bubble of fire as it crept slowly toward the exit
of the ravine. Thus the spot where the cloud's first onslaught had taken
place appeared two miles to the north; they recognized the horribly
burnt-over ground, covered with a crust of slag and lava. From the
shattered rocks hung the ashes of the brush-like growth. Small clumps of
metal clung to themthe remains of molten crystals struck by nuclear
explosions.

Horpach gave orders to switch off the loudspeakers, whose ear-splitting
noise filled the control center. He asked Jazon what might happen once
the temperature inside the Cyclops exceeded the heat resistance of the
electronic brain.

The scientiest answered without hesitating: "The cannons are shut off
automatically."

"And the force field as well?"

"No."

Meanwhile the battle area had shifted to the plain outside the exit of
the ravine. The inky ocean of flames boiled, welled up, began to whirl
about, then rushed into the fiery gullet with devilish leaps.

"That should happen any minute now." Kronotos spoke into the silence
that emanated from the violently heaving picture. Another minute went
by. Suddenly the glow of the fiery funnel grew considerably weaker. The
cloud had covered it.

"Thirty-five miles from here," said the communications technician in
answer to a question from Horpach.

The Astrogator sounded the alarm. The crew manned their stations. The
_Invincible_ pulled up the ramp and the personnel elevator; all the
hatches were closed. Once again a fiery glow could be seen on the
videoscreens. The funnel of fire had returned. This time the cloud no
longer attacked; only a few wisps were ignited and flared up brightly.
The main body of the cloud receded in the direction of the ravines,
penetrated into the labyrinth which was overlaid by dense shadows. The
Cyclops, apparently undamaged, came back into view. It was still very
slowly pushing backwards, keeping up its steady bombardment all the
while, annihilating the entire surrounding terrainrocks, sand, dunes.

"Why doesn't the Cyclops shut off its cannons?" somebody called out.

As if in reply to these words, the machine stopped firing, turned and
rolled toward the desert with increasing speed. Far overhead, the
teleprobe pursued the machine's course. Suddenly the men saw something
like a thin band race toward the probe with incredible speed. Before
they realized that the Cyclops had fired at the probe, and that the
fiery streak was due to the annihilated air particles along the
missile's trajectory, the men recoiled instinctively, perhaps out of
fear that the discharge might jump off the screen and detonate right in
the command center. Then the image vanished and only the empty white
screen stared at them.

"The Cyclops has smashed the probe, Astrogator!" shouted the technician
at the steering console. Horpach gave orders to send up another
teleprobe. Meanwhile the Cyclops had come so close to the _Invincible_
that they could recognize the colossus as soon as the second probe had
gained a little altitude. Another thread of light, and the second probe
was destroyed. Just before the picture vanished from the screen, they
barely managed to recognize their own spaceship. The Cyclops was no more
than six miles away now.

"That damn thing has gone off its rocker!" swore the second technician
at the steering console, and his voice trembled with agitation. On
hearing these words, Rohan suddenly knew. He glanced at the commander
and was aware that Horpach had been seized by the same thought. He felt
a senseless, leaden heaviness creep through his limbs, his head,
throughout his entire body. But the command had been issued: the
astrogator had ordered a fourth and a fifth teleprobe sent up. They were
all destroyed by the Cyclops, who picked them off like a sharpshooter at
target practice.

"I need maximum thrust," said Horpach without taking his eyes off the
videoscreen.

The chief engineer's fingers struck full chords on the distributor
keyboard as if he were playing an organ.

"Full power for takeoff in six minutes," he replied.

"I need maximum thrust," Horpach repeated in the same tone of voice.
Silence fell over the control center. One could even hear the hum of the
relays behind the enamel walls. It sounded as though a swarm of bees had
awakened there.

"The reactor shell is too cold," the chief engineer argued.

But now Horpach turned around and, facing him directly, repeated for the
third time in the same unchanged voice: "I need maximum thrust."

Without a word the chief engineer grasped the main lever. Alarm signals
bleated in staccato bursts throughout the spaceship, and followed the
men's steps like a distant roll of drums as they hurried to their battle
stations. Once more Horpach glanced at the videoscreen. Nobody said a
word, but everyone knew by now that the impossible was about to happen:
the astrogator was preparing to go into battle with his own Cyclops.

The quivering needles of the instruments lined up like soldiers. On the
lit-up face of the output meter the numbers jumped up to five and six
figures. Sparks burst from somewhere in the supply network, and it began
to smell of ozone. In the rear of the control center the technicians
communicated to each other by hand signals which control system was to
be switched on.

Shortly before it was destroyed, the next teleprobe showed the elongated
head of the Cyclops, and the men watched as it tried to squeeze through
the narrow gap between the rock walls. Then once again the screen was
blank, blinding the eyes of the observers with its silvery white. Any
moment now, the machine would become visible via direct transmission.
The radar operator was ready to drive an outside TV camera beyond the
nose of the spaceship in order to enlarge the view field. The
communications technician shot off another probe. The Cyclops did not
seem to be heading straight toward the waiting _Invincible,_ positioned
under the protective energy dome and ready for battle. Teleprobes sped
from the spaceship's nose at even intervals.

Rohan knew that the _Invincible_ was capable of stopping a discharge of
antimatter, but to intercept the energy of the thrust would cost them
their energy reserves. Under the circumstances Rohan thought it wisest
to turn backin other words, to go into stationary orbit. Any minute now
he expected to hear the command, but Horpach remained inexplicably
silent, as if he believed it possible that the electronic brain might
regain its senses. Indeed, while following the silent movements of the
dark shape amongst the dunes with a worried expression, Horpach asked:
"You keep calling the Cyclops, don't you?"

"Yes. No contact."

"Send: Stop immediately!"

The technicians at the console got busy. Two, three, four times, streaks
of light flashed under their hands.

"No reply, Astrogator."

Why doesn't he start? Rohan was puzzled by the astrogator's reluctance.
Maybe he won't admit defeat? What nonsense! Horpach! He made a move . .
. and . . . now . . . he's going to issue the order to take off . . .

But the astrogator simply took a step backward.

"Kronotos?"

The cyberneticist came closer. "Here."

"Whatever have they done to that Cyclops?" Rohan felt consternation.
Horpach had said "they"as if he were actually dealing with thinking
opponents.

"The autonomous circuits are running on cryotrons," began Kronotos with
a voice which revealed that he was merely voicing theories. "The
temperature has gone up. The circuits have lost their supraconductivity
. . ."

"Do you know this for sure or are you just guessing?" asked the
astrogator.

What a strange conversation! Everybody stared at the videoscreen on
which the Cyclops could now be seen in direct transmission. It was
creeping forward, its movements fluid yet somewhat unsteady. Now and
then it deviated from its course as if it were still in doubt about its
real destination. It fired several times at the teleprobe before hitting
its target. Then the men saw the probe plummet to the ground like a ball
of fire.

"The only thing I can imagine that would explain its strange behavior
would be resonance," said the cyberneticist after a moment's hesitation.
"If their field has overlapped with the brain's own"

"How about the force field?"

"A force field can't screen out a magnetic field."

"Too bad," the astrogator remarked dryly.

Gradually the tension eased inside the _Invincible's_ control center.
The Cyclops was obviously no longer steering for its homeport. The
distance between them, that had been very slight, increased again. No
longer subject to human control, the vehicle ambled off to the wide
expanses of the northern desert.

"Chief engineer, take over for me for a while," requested Horpach. "The
rest of you will accompany me downstairs."

The Long Night

 

The intense cold woke Rohan up. Drugged with sleep, he curled up under
his blanket and pressed his face into the pillow. Then he placed his
hands over his face, trying to shield it from the biting cold, but it
was no use. He realized that he had to wake up completely. But he kept
putting the moment off without knowing why. Suddenly he sat up. The
cabin was pitch black. An icy blast of air hit him directly in the face.
He jumped off his bunk, cursing softly as he groped his way in the dark
toward the air conditioning. As he had gone to bed, he had felt so warm
that he had turned the knob to "cold."

Little by little the air in the small cabin heated up, but Rohan,
huddling under his blanket, could not go back to sleep again. He glanced
at the luminous dial of his wristwatch3:00 A.M. Only three hours of
sleep again, he thought furiously and still freezing. The conference had
lasted a long time. It was almost midnight when they had finally broken
up. All that useless talk, he thought. Now, enveloped by this darkness,
he would give anything to be back at the space station, not to have to
see or hear any more of this damned Regis III and its dead nightmare of
a world. Most of the strategists had been in favor of going into orbit,
except for the chief engineer and the head physicist. From the beginning
the latter had strongly supported Horpach's opinion: remain here as long
as possible. The probability of finding the men of Regnar's group was
one in a million, or not even that much. If they weren't already dead,
only the great distance between them and the battle scene could have
saved them from this atomic inferno. Rohan wished he knew whether the
astrogator had stayed solely because of the four lost men, or if other
considerations had played a role in his decision. The way it appeared
from Regis III was just one side of the story; it would look very
different indeed in the dry words of some report and in the bright calm
of the space station. The report would simply state that the
_Invincible_ had lost half its overland vehicles and its main weapon,
the Cyclops (which would represent a future threat for any spacecraft
landing on the planet). In addition, they had suffered six casualties,
and more than half the crew had to be hospitalized and would most likely
remain unfit for duty for many years to come. And because of these
losses in human lives, machines and their most valuable instruments,
they had run away from microscopic crystals, the creatures of a small
desert planet, the dead remainder of the Lyre civilization that had long
since been surpassed by Earth. What else but flight would it be, if they
turned back now? But was Horpach the kind of man who would take such
motives into consideration? Maybe he himself did not know why he had not
ordered them to take off? Was he waiting for something? Surely, the
biologists had discussed the possibility of defeating the inorganic
insects with their own weapons. If that species had already undergone
evolution, they concluded, it should be possible to introduce further
changes. To begin with, the scientists would need to experiment with a
considerable quantity of captured specimens and bring about certain
genetic changes that would reappear in future insect generations,
changes that would render harmless this whole crystalline race. Such
genetic changes would have to be of an extremely specific nature; they
would need to offer an immediate, exploitable effect, and ensure that
succeeding generations would develop an Achilles heel, a vulnerable
feature that could be attacked. But this was just the usual,
speculative, idle talk of the theoreticists: they hadn't the faintest
idea what type of a mutation this would require, how to produce it, how
many of these cursed crystals could be captured without risking another
battle whose outcome might mean an even more serious defeat than on the
previous day. Even if everything should go smoothly, how long would they
have to wait for the results of this new evolution? Not just days or
weeks, surely. Were they supposed to circle around Regis III like
children on a merry-go-round, for one or two or even ten years? The
whole thing was totally absurd.

Rohan noticed that he had turned the heat up too high: it had become
uncomfortably hot in his cabin. He threw back his blanket, got up, took
a shower, dressed quickly and left the cabin.

The elevator was not there. While he waited in the semi-darkness, broken
only by the moving lights of the indicator, he listened to the nocturnal
quiet enveloping the spaceship. His temples were throbbing, his head
felt heavy with the torment of sleepless nights and days filled with
tension. Occasionally a blubbering sound could be heard in the pipe
lines. From the levels below came the muffled murmurings of the idling
engines, which were ready for takeoff at any moment. Dry metallic air
wafted from the ventilation shafts next to the platform on which he was
standing. When the door slid open, he entered the elevator. He got off
on the eighth level. Here the corridor made a turn and followed the
curve of the main hull. Rohan walked ahead without really knowing where
he was going. Mechanically he lifted his feet in the right spots in
order to step over the high thresholds of the separating walls that
could be hermetically sealed off, until finally he caught sight of the
shadows of the crew working at the main reactor. The room was dark; only
a few dozen luminescent hands flickered over the control panels.

"They can't possibly be alive any more," said one of the men sitting at
the instrument panel. Rohan could not recognize who he was. "A thousand
Roentgen went out to a radius of five miles. They're dead by now, you
can bet on that."

"What are we sitting around here for, then?" grumbled another man. Not
the voice, but the seat the man occupiedhe was sitting at the
gravimetrical control paneltold Rohan that Blank had spoken.

"Why? The old man doesn't want to turn back, that's why."

"How about you? Would you do it?"

"What else can we do?"

It was warm in the room. The air was filled with the peculiar artificial
pine scent used in the air conditioning units to alleviate the odor
given off by the plastic parts and the tin casing when the reactor was
on. The result was a blend which could be found only here on the eighth
level.

The men could not see Rohan as he leaned with his back against the
foam-rubber padding of the partition wall. Not that he was hiding there
on purpose; he simply did not wish to participate in this conversation.

"It'll be right on our heels," another man said after a brief silence,
and bent forward. For a fleeting instant his face became visible, half
pink, half yellow from the glow of the little control lamps on the
reactor wall, whose lights seemed to glare at the men huddled in front
of the instrument panel. Rohan, like the rest of the men, knew at once
what he was talking about.

"We have the field, and there's our radar," muttered Blank, annoyed.

"A fat lot of good that'll do us if it shoots at one billierg."

"The radar won't let it get close enough."

"Who are you trying to kid? I know it like the inside of my own pocket."

"So what?"

"It's equipped with an antiradar system. Interference systems"

"But it's gone off its rockeran electronic looney."

"Looney, you say? Were you in the command center?"

"No. I was here the whole time."

"Well, I was there. Too bad you didn't see how that monster smashed our
teleprobes."

"Do you mean they reprogramed it? The Cyclops is already under their
control?"

They're talking about "them," thought Rohan, as if it were really
something rational.

"Who knows? Supposedly the only thing that's off is the communication
system."

"Then why is it shooting at us?"

Again there was a moment of silence.

"Don't we even know where it is?" asked the man who had not been in the
command center.

"No. The last report arrived at eleven. Kralik told me so. The Cyclops
was sighted toddling along through the desert."

"Was it far from here?"

"Are you crazy? Ninety miles. That's just under an hour's drive for it.
Maybe less."

"Why don't you two shut up? Just speculating won't help any of us,"
Blank snapped at them. His sharp profile was silhouetted against the
colorful flickering of the little lights.

The men fell silent. Slowly, Rohan turned around and left as quietly as
he had come. His way led past the two laboratories. The light was out in
the big lab but in the small one all was lit up brightly. Rohan glanced
inside. Only cyberneticists and physicists sat around the tableJazon,
Kronotos, Sarner, Liwin, Saurahan and someone else who had his back
turned to the rest and, half hidden in the shadow of the slanting
partition wall, was busy programing a big electronic brain.

"There are two potential solutions to this problem: annihilation or
self-destruction. Anything else would amount merely to changing the
cloud's conditions for existence," Saurahan said. Rohan did not budge.
Once again he was just standing there and listening.

"The first solution is based on triggering a snowballing process. For
that you need an antimatter projector that will drive into the ravine
and stay there."

"We already tried that once," somebody remarked. "If it doesn't have an
electronic brain, it will still be able to function at temperatures of
more than one million degrees. We'd need a plasma missile too. Plasma is
insensitive to star temperatures. The cloud will react the same way as
beforeit will try to strangle it, to find resonance in its steering
circuits. Nothing will happen except for a low-yield nuclear reaction.
The more matter is drawn into this reaction, the more violent it will
become. That way we can gather up the entire necrosphere of this planet
in one place and then annihilate it . . ."

Necrosphere, thought Rohan. Oh, sureinorganic crystals. Just leave it to
the scientists to come up with a fancy new name.

"I'd prefer the self-destruction alternative," Jazon said. "How would
that work?"

"First you'd need to bring about two separate consolidations of two
giant cloud brains. Then cause the two to collide with each other. Get
each cloud to consider the other a threat to its own survival in the
struggle for existence."

"Sounds good. How do you plan to accomplish this?"

"It won't be easy, but it is feasibleprovided that the cloud is only a
pseudo-brain, incapable of drawing logical conclusions."

"The safest method is nevertheless changing the cloud's conditions for
existence by lowering the average intensity of radiation," said Sarner.
"Four hydrogen bombs, fifty to one hundred megatons each, over each
hemisphere, that means altogether about 800 megatons, would be
sufficient. The water in the oceans would evaporate. As a result the
planet's cloud cover would become denser, the albedo would increase and
the symbiotic partners on the ground could no longer give off the
required minimum of energy needed for their multiplication."

"The equation won't balance out," objected Jazon. Seeing that the
discussion threatened to turn into a technical dispute, Rohan stepped
away from the door and went on.

Instead of taking the elevator again, he returned by a metal spiral
staircase which was rarely used. As he passed one level after the other
he saw the repair shops, where De Vries' mechanics were working on the
dark, motionless Arctanes as sparks showered from their welding torches.
Far away he noticed the tiny windows of the sick bay, spreading a soft
lilac-colored glow. A physician in a white coat noiselessly hurried
along one of the corridors, followed by a small automaton carrying a
tray with glittering instruments. Rohan walked past the dark and
deserted mess halls, the club rooms, the library, and finally reached
his own level. He slowed down near the astrogator's cabin, as if he
wanted to stop and listen here too. But no sound came through the smooth
door, not even a light ray, and the portholes were bolted down with
copper nuts. Not until he was back in his cabin did he feel how tired he
was. His arms hung numbly at his sides. Heavily he plunked himself down
on his bunk, kicked off his shoes and folded his hands behind his neck,
staring up at the low, poorly lit ceiling, whose blue paint showed a
long crack right in the middle.

Neither a sense of duty nor curiosity about other people's private
affairs and conversations had driven him to roam through the spaceship.
He was simply afraid of the lonely night, for that was the time when he
was troubled by images he would have liked to forget. Worst was the
memory of the man he had shot at close range to prevent him from killing
the others. He had been forced to shoot him, but that didn't make things
any easier. He knew the moment he turned off the light he would have to
relive the scene, see the man in front of him again who with a dull
smile obeyed the Weyr gun in his hand, while he stepped across the dead
man lying on the rocks, his arm torn off.

The dead man was Jarg, who had returned, and whoafter having been saved
by some miraclenow had to die such a senseless death. Seconds later the
other man, his protective suit smoldering and shred to pieces across his
chest, would collapse over Jarg's body. In vain Rohan tried to chase
away these images that, against his will, kept appearing before his
eyeshe could smell again the sharp odor of ozone, the hot recoil of the
butt tightly grasped by his sweating fingershe could hear again the
men's whimpers as he chased them, panting and wheezing, and then dragged
them one by one, tying them up in bundles like sheaves of corn. And each
time he shuddered to the core of his innermost being when he peered into
the desperate helplessness of the familiar faces, into their blind,
unseeing eyes.

A dull thudthe book he had once started to read back in the space
station had fallen to the floor. He had put a white slip of paper inside
to use as a bookmark, but he had not read a single line. Who had time
for reading? He stretched out on his bunk, thinking of the scientists
who were now sitting together concocting plans to destroy the cloud, and
his lips drew up in a scornful smile. What absurdity, he thought. They
want to destroy, and so do we. Everyone wants to destroy that certain
something, but it won't save anyone. The planet Regis is uninhabited;
man has no business being there. Why be so grimly stubborn? It's no
different than if the men had perished in an earthquake or a
thunderstorm. We haven't been confronted by someone's conscious,
purposeful effort, or some hostile will. Nothing but an inorganic
process of self-organization . . . Is it worth wasting our energy and
strength to destroy it, simply because from the start we've considered
it an enemy lying in wait for us, who ambushed the _Condor_ first and
then ourselves? How many weird phenomena alien to human concepts are
harbored by the universe? Should we land everywhere with weapons of
annihilation aboard, in order to smash to smithereens all that surpasses
man's power of comprehension? What did they call it just now? A
necrosphere. Which means necro-evolution as well. Development of
inorganic matter. Perhaps the inhabitants of the Lyre system might have
put in a word or two about that; Regis III belonged to their realm.
Maybe they intended to settle here on this planet; once their
astrophysicists announced that their sun would turn into a nova, it
might have been their last hope. If we ever found ourselves in such a
situation, of course we would fight and try to stamp out the black
crystal brood. But under the present circumstances? One parsec away from
the space station, and the station removed from Earth by so many light
years . . . For whose sake are we sitting here in this damned spot
losing our men? Why must the scientists search all night for the best
method of annihilation? How can anyone speak of vengeance here?

If only Horpach stood in front of him now, he would tell him all that.
How foolhardy, how ludicrous this "victory at any price," this "heroic
persistence of man," this obsession with retaliation for the death of
their companions, who had perished only because they themselves had sent
them to their death . . . We were simply not cautious enough, we relied
too much on our powerful weapons. We made mistakes, and now we must take
the consequences. We and no one else are responsible.

These were his thoughts in the dimly lit room as he lay on his cot, his
eyes burning as if sand had accumulated under his closed eyelids. Manhe
saw in a flash of insighthad not yet reached the true pinnacle; he had
not yet appropriated that galactocentric idea, praised since antiquity,
whose real meaning could not consist in searching only for similar
beings and learning to understand them, but rather in refraining from
interfering with alien, non-human affairs. Conquer the void, of course;
why not? But don't attack what already is, that which in the course of
millions of years has achieved a balanced existence of its own,
independent, not subject to anyone or anything, except the forces of
radiation and matteran active existence, neither better nor worse than
the existence of the amino-acid compounds we call animals or human
beings.

Rohan reveled in this noble thought, was filled with understanding for
any form of existence, when he was suddenly hit by a sound, sharp as an
arrow: the unnerving high-pitched howling of the alarm sirens.

All his thoughts vanished instantly, as if blown away by the blatant
noise which spread throughout all the level. He jumped up and rushed out
into the corridor, running with the other men with warm, human breath in
a heavy, tired trot. But even before he reached the elevator, he felt a
blow. Not with any particular organ of sense: indeed, not with his own
body at all, but rather as if it were with the spaceship's body of which
he was an infinite particle. Though very distant and weak, the blow
shook the _Invincible's_ hull from one end to the other. It was a jolt
of immense severity, whichand he felt this toowas received and skilfully
warded off by something far bigger than the _Invincible._

"It's the Cyclops! The Cyclops did it!" yelled the men as they raced
ahead. One after the other disappeared in the elevator, whose doors shut
with a hissing sound. Other members of the crew stormed noisily down the
circular stairway, too impatient to wait their turn at the elevator. At
this moment, the silent but even more violent detonation of the second
blow bored through the babble of voices, the shouts, the whistles of the
crewmen, the nonstop howling of the alarm sirens, through the hasty
shuffle of feet coming from the upper levels. The little blue lamps on
the corridor ceilings began to flicker, then burned brightly again.

Rohan would never have believed that an elevator could be so slow. He
did not even notice that he was still pushing the button with all his
might. Only one man still stood beside him, Liwin, the cyberneticist.
The elevator stopped, and as Rohan got off he heard a whistling sound,
so fine that it was almost unbelievable. He knew that the highest
frequencies of this sound could not be perceived by the human ear. It
was as if all the titanium joints of the spacecruiser were moaning at
the same time. Rohan reached the door to the command center and realized
that the _Invincible_ had answered fire with fire. That effectively
ended the battle.

Before the flaming background of the videoscreen loomed up the tall dark
figure of the astrogator. The ceiling lights had been switched off.
perhaps on purpose, and through the lines that rippled over the screen
from top to bottom, causing the entire visual field to grow hazy, there
glistened a gigantic, bulging mushroom, its stem attached to the ground,
its huge billowing blisters extending into all four corners of the sky.
It seemed motionless. The explosion had annihilated the Cyclops, reduced
it to its very atoms, and left a terrible trembling in the air, through
which the monotonous voice of the technician could be heard: "Twenty
dash six hundred at zero point. Nine dash eight hundred at the
circumference. One dash four twenty two in the field."

1420 Roentgen in the field, pondered Rohanthat means that the radiation
has broken through the barrier of the force field. He had not known it
was possible. But when he glanced at the dial of the main output meter
he saw how powerful a charge the astrogator had applied, enough energy
to bring a good-sized inland sea to the boiling point. Well, Horpach
hadn't wanted to risk any further shooting matches. Perhaps he had gone
a bit too far here; however, they now had to face only one adversary
again.

Meanwhile an extraordinary spectacle unfolded on the picture screens:
the ruffled, cauliflower-like mushroom cap was ablaze with all the
colors of the rainbow, from the most delicate silvery green to rich
orange and carmine red shades. Suddenly Rohan became aware that the
desert was no longer visible. It was covered by a dense fog-like bank of
sand that had been whirled up to a height of several dozen yards,
surging and heaving, as if the desert had become an ocean.

The technician was still calling out the readings on the dial: "Nineteen
thousand at zero point. Eight dash six hundred at the circumference. One
dash one zero two in the field."

The victory over the Cyclops was received with a dull silence: to have
defeated their own strongest weapon was a hollow triumph. Gradually the
men dispersed while the mushroom cloud rose higher and higher into the
atmosphere. Suddenly its top flared up in a new color display, as it was
hit by the rays of the sun that had not yet risen over the horizon. The
peak of the mushroom cap had pierced the upper strata of the icy cirrus
clouds and now displayed, high up in the sky, golden lilac, amber yellow
and platinum white nuances, whose light was reflected from the
videoscreens into the darkness of the command center. The entire room
was faintly illuminated by an irridescent glow, as if someone had
pulverized colorful terrestrial flowers on the enameled white of the
instrument panels.

Once more Rohan felt amazement, this time at Horpach's appearance. The
astrogator had thrown over his shoulders the snow-white dress overcoat
which he had last worn during the farewell festivities in the space
station. Evidently he had grabbed the nearest article of clothing at
hand as he had hurriedly rushed out of his cabin. There he stood, hands
in pockets, with gray disheveled hair, letting his gaze wander around
the circle of men assembled in the command center.

"Rohan," he said in an unexpectedly soft voice. "Will you come with me,
please."

Rohan stepped closer, automatically pulling himself up as he did so. The
astrogator turned around and walked over to the door. They strode down
the corridor, one after the other, and through the ventilation shaft
they could hear above the soft hiss of compressed air a dull murmur, the
irritated voices of the men on the lower levels.

The Conversation

 

Rohan had not felt any surprise at the astrogator's invitation. He
entered the commander's cabin. Rohan was not a frequent visitor to the
cabin, but Horpach had summoned him aboard the _Invincible_ and received
him here after his lonely return to the crater. Such an invitation
usually meant something unpleasant. At that time, though, Rohan was
still suffering too much from the after-effects of the catastrophe to
fear his commander's anger. Moreover, Horpach had not blamed him at all,
but had interrogated him quite thoroughly as to the circumstances
surrounding the cloud's attack. Dr. Sax had taken part in the
conversation. He had surmised that Rohan had been spared only because he
had fallen into a state of stupor which limited the brain's activity, so
that the cloud had assumed him to be wounded and thus rendered harmless.
And the driver Jarg, in the neuro-physiologist's opinion, had been
spared merely by accident, since his flight had taken him beyond the
area where the attack had occurred. Terner, however, who had tried
almost to the very end to defend himself as well as the others by
shooting with the laser guns, had acted dutifully according to the
rules. This very behavior had been his undoing, paradoxically enough,
for his brain had continued to function normally and so drew the cloud's
attention to him. To judge by human standards, the black cloud was
blind, of course, and man represented nothing to it but a mobile object
like any other, which indicated its presence by the electrical potential
of its cerebral cortex. Horpach and the physician had even considered
protecting the men by placing them in artificial paralysis with the help
of chemical preparations. But Sax thought that the effect would occur
too late in case an "electrical camouflage" should be needed, and to
send the men out on a mission already in a state of stupor would not be
advisable at all. In the end, the entire interrogation showed no
positive results. Rohan had the impression that Horpach intended to
return to the problem at some future date.

Rohan stopped in the middle of the cabin, which was twice as large as
his own. On the wall he saw the microphones for the intercom and the
direct hook-up to the command center. Besides that there was no other
indication that the spaceship's commander had been living here for
years. Horpach took off his coat. Underneath he was wearing trousers and
a net undershirt. The thick, gray hairs of his broad chest poked through
the netting. Horpach sat down near the spot where Rohan was still
standing. The commander leaned heavily on the table, which was empty
except for a small, well-thumbed, leather-bound book. Rohan's glance
wandered from the little unknown book over to the commander, and it
seemed to him that he saw Horpach for the first time. Here was an
utterly exhausted man who did not even attempt to hide the trembling of
his hand as he touched it to his forehead. And suddenly Rohan realized
that he did not know this man at all, under whom he had been serving for
the past four years. It had never occurred to him to wonder why there
were no personal effects in the commander's cabin, the kind of silly
trinkets that men would drag along with them on their trips through the
universe, souvenirs of their childhood or their homes. At this moment,
Rohan seemed to understand why Horpach owned nothing of the kind, why
there were no old photos hanging on the walls, showing the faces of
those close to him who had remained behind on Earth. Horpach did not
need this sort of thing, for Earth was not what he called home. Perhaps
he regretted this fact now for the first time in his life? The powerful
shoulders, his strong arms, his solid neck did not reveal his age. Only
the skin of his hands was old; it was thick and lay in chapped wrinkles
around the joints. The skin there turned white as he spread out his
fingers, observing the slight trembling with apparently tranquil, tired
interest, as if he were noticing something that previously had been
unknown to him. Rohan could not continue to watch. But Horpach bent his
head, looked in his eyes and murmured with an embarrassed smile: "Seems
I overdid things a bit."

It was not so much the words that startled Rohan as the tone the
astrogator used and his general behavior. Rohan did not reply. He stood
there as Horpach rubbed his hairy chest with his big hand and added:
"It's probably better this way." And a few seconds later he spoke with
surprising frankness. "I didn't know what to do."

This was shocking. Rohan thought he had known for days that Horpach was
just as helpless as the rest. However, now he came to realize that he
had known nothing, and had in fact believed that the astrogator was
always several steps ahead of the others, because that was the way
things were supposed to be. And now the commander's true nature was
demonstrated to him doubly: on the one hand he saw Horpach's half-naked
body, this tired body with the trembling hands that he had never seen
before, and at the same time he heard the words that confirmed his
discovery.

"Have a seat, son," said the commander. Rohan sat down. Horpach got up,
stepped over to the wash basin, splashed water over his head and neck,
dried himself quickly and with vigor. Then he put on a jacket, buttoned
it and pulled up a chair at the table across from Rohan. He regarded
Rohan with his colorless eyes that perpetually watered as if in a strong
wind, and asked casually: "How about your . . . immunity? Have you been
examined?"

So that's what he's after, Rohan realized in a flash. He cleared his
throat. "Naturally I've been examined, but the physicians couldn't find
anything. Sax was probably right. He thought it was probably due to
stupor."

"Well, well. Didn't they have anything else to say?"

"Not to me directly. But I heard them talking among themselves about why
the cloud would attack a man only once and then leave him to his fate."

"Interesting. And?"

"Lauda suspects that the cloud can distinguish the normal from the
injured on the basis of the electrical activity of the brain. The brain
of an injured person, according to Lauda, shows the same activity as
that of a newborn baby. Approximately, at least. Apparently I presented
a very similar picture while I was in a state of shock. Sax thinks you
could make a fine metal net that could be hidden under the hair, and
have it emit weak impulses, like those in a brain injury case. That way
it would be possible to elude the cloud. But that's just a theory. No
one knows whether it could really be done. They would like to conduct
some experiments but they don't have enough crystals for it. The Cyclops
let us down too . . ."

"All right, then." The astrogator sighed. "I really wanted to discuss
something else with you. But this is strictly between the two of us. Is
that clear?"

"Yes," Rohan answered slowly, and the tension returned.

The astrogator averted his eyes. It seemed difficult to make a start.

"I am still undecided," he began suddenly. "Some people in my place
would simply flip a coin: leave or remain. But I don't want to resort to
that. I know you don't always agree with me."

Rohan was just about to answer but Horpach cut him off with a wave of
his hand.

"No, no . . . This is your chance. I'll leave the decision up to you.
I'll do whatever you decide."

Horpach looked him straight in the face, then quickly hid his eyes again
under his heavy eyelids.

"What . . . me?" Rohan stammered. He had expected anything but this.

"Quite right, son. You. This is confidential, of course. It's a deal,
then. You make the decision and I will execute your orders. I'll justify
everything before the executive board at the space station. It's a good
deal, isn't it?"

"Are you serious?" asked Rohan, trying to stall for time, for he knew
what the answer would be.

"Of course I am. If I didn't know you, I would give you more time to
make up your mind. But I know that you have your own thoughts about
things and that you've already come to a decision. Since I can't wheedle
it out of you, I insist that you tell me what it is, now, on the spot.
That's an order. At this moment, _you_ are the commander of the
_Invincible_ . . . Is this too sudden for you? All right, I'll give you
one more minute to think it over."

Horpach got up, walked over to the wash basin, rubbed his palm across
his cheeks so that his stubbly beard rustled under his fingers, and
without further ado started shaving with his electric razor. He looked
into the mirror.

Rohan's first reaction was to feel furious at Horpach for being so
ruthlessly inconsiderate, for giving him the rightno, rather forcing the
obligation on himto make a decision, but at the same time tying his
tongue and relieving him of all responsibility right from the start. He
knew Horpach well enough to realize that everything had been thoroughly
planned in advance and that nothing could be changed now. The seconds
passed, and he had to speak up, now, at once, but nothing came to mind.
All the arguments he would liked to have flung in the commander's face,
all the objections he had prepared like so many brick-bats during his
nocturnal ruminations, had suddenly vanished into thin air. The four men
were no longer alivethat was almost a certainty. If only that "almost"
did not exist, then they need not consider anything, need not deliberate
back and forth. They simply could fly away at dawn. But now this
"almost" assumed ever larger proportions in his mind. As long as he had
been on a par with Horpach, he had felt they should leave immediately.
Now he felt incapable of forcing from his lips the order to take off. He
knew that would not mean the end of the affair with Regis III, but
really just the beginning. It had nothing to do with justification
before the executive board at the space station. These four men would
haunt the spaceship and things could never be the same again. The crew
wanted to go back. But then he remembered his nocturnal roamings through
the _Invincible_ and realized that after a certain time the men would
start thinking of it again and discuss it among themselves. They would
say: "You see? He took off and left four men behind." Nothing else would
count. Each man needed the certainty that the others would not abandon
him under any circumstances. Everything else was expendable, except for
the crew. It did not really matter what else one might have lost, but
the entire crew had to be back on boardthe dead as well as the living.
This was not one of the rules to be found in the official service
manual. Yet spaceflight would not be possible without such an unwritten
code.

"I'm listening," said Horpach as he put away his electric razor and sat
down across the table from Rohan.

Rohan moistened his lips. "We ought to try . . ."

"What?"

"To find them."

Finally it was out. He knew the astrogator would not contradict him.
Rohan was now actually firmly convinced that Horpach must have counted
on this, that he had even arranged it this way. In order not to have to
bear the risk all by himself.

"The four men. I understand. Good."

"But we need some plan. Something sensible."

"We've been sensible all along," countered Horpach. "And you are well
aware with what result."

"May I say something?"

"Go ahead."

"A little earlier tonight I listened in to the deliberations of the
strategists. I heardno, never mind, it doesn't matter. They're figuring
out various ways to annihilate the cloud, but it isn't our task to
destroy the cloud. We should rather concentrate on searching for the
men. If we go ahead with an antiproton massacre, not one can possibly
live through such a hell, if any of them are still alive. Not one. It
isn't possible."

"That's what I think, too," the astrogator said with emphasis.

"You too? That's good . . . Well, then?"

Horpach was silent. Then he asked, "Have they found some other
solution?"

"The strategists? No."

Rohan wanted to ask another question, but he could not muster up
sufficient courage. The words would not pass his lips. Horpach looked at
him, as if he were waiting for something. But Rohan did not know what to
say. Could the commander possibly assume that he, Rohan, would come up
with something better, more perfect than the scientists, than the
cyberneticists and the strategists with their electronic computers to
help them? That was sheer nonsense. Yet the commander kept patiently
staring at him. Neither of them spoke. At regular intervals came the
drip-drip-drip of the faucets, uncommonly loud in this complete
stillness. And out of this silence that hovered between the two men
something rose, brushing against Rohan's cheeks with its icy breath. And
now his whole face, from his neck to his jaws, cramped together, shrank,
became too narrow, as he gazed into Horpach's watery, ancient eyes. He
saw nothing but these eyes and he knew what he had to do.

Slowly he nodded his head, as if he had said yes. Do you understand? the
astrogator asked with his eyes. I understand, replied Rohan with a
silent glance. But the clearer things became to Rohan, the more he felt
that no one had the right to request something like this from him, no
one, not even he himself. He maintained his silence, he did not speak,
but now he pretended not to know anything, not to have even the faintest
idea. He clung to the naive hope that he would be able to deny what had
passed back and forth in their glances, for it had never been spoken out
loud. He might feign lack of comprehension, for he knew, he could feel
it, Horpach would never be the first to speak. But the old man saw
through him, he was aware of everything. Thus they sat across from each
other without moving. Horpach's glance softened. It held now neither
expectation nor coercive urgency, only compassion, as if he wanted to
say: All right, I understand. It's just as well.

The commander lowered his head. One more second, and the unspoken words,
the agreement between them that only silent glances had implied, would
vanish. Both could pretend that nothing had ever happened. But the
lowered head tipped the balance. Rohan heard himself say: "I'll go."

Horpach sighed deeply, but Rohan did not notice. He was aghast at his
own words.

"No," said Horpach, "I won't let you go this way." Rohan was silent. "I
couldn't tell you," the astrogator began. "I could not even look for any
volunteers. I have no right to do such a thing. But now you know for
yourself that we can't simply take off from this planet. Only a single
person, all alone, can walk into that area and hope to come out again.
Without protective helmet, machines or weapons."

Rohan heard the commander's voice as from a great distance.

"I'm going to explain my plan now. You can think about it. You may
reject itthe whole thing is still simply between the two of us. This is
the way I envision it: an oxygen container made of silicone. No metal.
I'll send two unmanned cross-country vehicles. They will act as a decoy
for the black insects and will be destroyed by the cloud. At the same
time a third vehicle will start out with one man. This is the most
dangerous part, because he must keep as close as possible so as not to
waste any time for the march through the desert. The oxygen supply will
hold out eighteen hours. Here are some photograms of the entire ravine
and its surroundings. I think it would be advisable to follow a
different route than on the previous expeditions. Drive as close as
possible to the northern rim of the high plateau and then descend on
foot over the rocks into the upper part of the ravine. If they're any
place, that's where they would be. They could have made it there. The
terrain is difficult, full of caves and crevices. In case you should
find all of them or even just one . . ."

"That's it. How shall I transport them?" asked Rohan and he experienced
a fleeting smugness. This is where the plan would fall apart. How ready
Horpach was to sacrifice him . . .

"You'll carry along some suitable narcotic. Something to stun them. Of
course, you'll use it only if they refuse to walk. Fortunately, they all
can walk in that condition.

Fortunately, thought Rohan. He clenched his fists underneath the table
so that Horpach would not notice it. He was not afraid, not yet.
Everything seemed too unreal.

"Should the cloud become interested in you, then you must lie on the
ground and remain rigid. I have thought of some medication for such an
eventuality, but it would take too long to take effect. That leaves only
the protective head gear, the current simulator that Sax mentioned."

"Have they built one already?" asked Rohan. Horpach understood what his
question implied, but he remained calm. "No, not yet. But we can make
one within an hour. Just a network you can hide in your hair. A small
instrument that will produce minute electric currents. It can be sewn
inside the collar of your spacesuit. I'll give you one more hour now. I
would give you more, but with each additional hour their chances of
rescue grow less. They're small enough to begin with. When will you
reach a decision?"

"I have already made up my mind."

"Don't be foolish, son. Didn't you hear what I just said? What I told
you earlier was only to make you understand that we must not yet take
off from this planet."

"You know I'm going to go."

"You won't go if I don't permit it. Don't forget that I am still
commander of this ship. We are facing a problem here and any personal
ambitions must take second place to it."

"I see," said Rohan. "You don't want me to feel that I have been
pressured into this. All right. Is our first agreement still valid for
what we are discussing now?"

"Yes."

"Then I would like to know what you would do in my place. Let's change
roles now . . ."

Horpach remained silent for a while.

"And if I said that I wouldn't go?"

"Then I won't go either. But I know that you will speak the truth."

"Then you wouldn't go either? Word of honor? No, no . . . I know that
won't be necessary."

The astrogator rose from his chair.

Rohan, too, stood up. "You haven't answered my question."

The astrogator looked at him. He was taller, more powerfully built,
broader across the shoulders. His eyes had the same tired expression
they had held at the beginning of the conversation.

"You can go," he said.

Rohan automatically pulled himself up and turned toward the door. At
this moment the astrogator made a movement, as if he wanted to hold him
back, seize his arm, but Rohan did not notice it. He left the room, and
Horpach remained motionless at the door. He stood this way for a long
time.

The Invincible

 

Before daybreak the first two cross-country vehicles rolled down the
ramp. The slopes of the dunes toward the sunny side were still black,
lying in the shadow of nocturnal darkness. The force field opened up,
letting the machines pass through, and closed once more with blue lights
twinkling in the night. On the posterior running board of the third
vehicle, directly beneath the tail end of the space cruiser, sat Rohan,
wearing a spacesuit, but without his helmet and goggles, only with the
small oxygen mask before his mouth. He clasped his knees with his hands,
for this way it was easier to observe the jumping second hand of his
watch.

In the left breast pocket of his protective suit he had stashed away
four vials, in the right pocket thin wafers of concentrated food, and
the pockets of his knee protectors held small instruments: a radiation
counter, a small magnetic watch, a compass, and a microphotogram map of
the terrain, smaller than a postcard, which could be read only with a
strong magnifying lens. Wound around his waist was a six-ply roll of the
finest nylon rope. All metal parts had been removed from his clothing.
He could not feel the wire netting hidden in his hair, unless he moved
his scalp on purpose. Neither could he feel the current flowing through
the net, but he was able to control the micro-sender, sewn inside his
collar, by placing his finger on that spot. The small, hard cylinder
kept ticking evenly, and he could feel it throb clearly when he touched
it.

There was a red streak in the eastern sky. A strong breeze had sprung
up. The wind whipped the sandy crests of the dunes. The low-lying,
jagged crater rims on the horizon seemed gradually to dissolve in a
flood of red. Rohan lifted his head. There was to be no two-way
communication between him and the spaceship, since a sender would have
given away his presence at once. However, inside, in his ear, was a tiny
receiver, no larger than a cherry stone. The _Invincible_ could send him
signals, at least for a while. Now words came from the receiver; it was
almost as if he were hearing a voice inside his head.

"Rohan, this is Horpach speaking. Our instruments on the ship's nose
have noted increasing magnetic activity. The two vehicles are probably
already under attack by the cloud . . . I am dispatching a probe."

Rohan looked up into the brightening sky. He failed to see the start of
the rocket which suddenly rose vertically like a flare, leaving in its
wake a thin, white streak of smoke, which fogged in the spaceship's
nose. The teleprobe raced off with tremendous speed in a northeasterly
direction. Minutes went by. By now half the disk of the bloated old sun
sat astride the crater wall.

"A small cloud is attacking the first car," said the voice inside
Rohan's head. "So far, the second vehicle is advancing undisturbed. The
first car is approaching the rock gate . . . attention! We have lost
control over the first car. No visual contactit is covered by the cloud.
The second vehicle is approaching the turn near the sixth narrowing of
the road. No attack yet. Now it's got it too! We have lost control over
the second car. They have surrounded it already . . . Rohan! Your car
will leave in fifteen seconds. From now on you're on your own. I'm
activating the automatic starter. Good luck!"

Horpach's voice was suddenly gone. In its stead came a mechanical
clicking, ticking off the seconds. Rohan settled in a more comfortable
position, planted his feet firmly on the running board and slipped his
arm through the elastic loop that had been fastened to the railing of
the car. The light machine began to vibrate and drove off.

Horpach had given orders for all men to stay inside the _Invincible . .
._ Rohan was almost grateful; a farewell scene would have been
unbearable. Clinging to the bouncing running board of the vehicle, he
saw only the giant pillar of the spaceship which gradually grew smaller.
At first, the blue glow that flickered over the slopes of the dunes told
him the car was just crossing the border of the protective energy field.
Soon after, the speed increased, and the reddish dust cloud whirled up
by the huge tires obstructed his view. Only dimly could he see the gray
skies above. How unfortunate, he thought. He might be attacked without
even realizing it. Instead of remaining seated, as planned, he turned
around and stood up on the running board, holding tight onto the
railing. Now he could direct his glance over the flat back of the
unmanned vehicle toward the desert, which kept rushing toward him. The
car drove at top speed, jolting, bouncing and lurching, forcing Rohan
frequently to press himself with all his might against the body of the
car. He could hardly hear the engine; the wind whistled past his ears,
fine grains of sand bit into his eyes. On either side of the car
fountains of sand sprayed into the air, forming a high and impenetrable
wall. He did not even notice when he left the circle of the crater.
Apparently the vehicle had wiggled out of it over a flat indentation on
the sandy north rim.

Suddenly Rohan heard a singing signal coming nearer. The sender of the
teleprobe must have been activated. He could not locate it in the sky,
although he strained his eyes to look for it. Probably it had climbed up
very high to avoid attracting attention and discovery by the cloud. At
the same time, the probe was indispensible, for without it the crew back
at the _Invincible_ could not have guided the vehicle. A special
odometer had been attached to the rear wall of the car to facilitate
orientation. So far he had traveled more than eleven miles, and any
moment now the rocks should come in view. But the disk of the sun, which
had remained on his right and low over the horizon all along, barely
visible through the whirling sand, now moved a bit behind him. That
would mean that the car was turning to the left. In vain, he tried to
find out if the angle of the turn coincided with the predetermined
course, or whether it was wider. That would have indicated that the men
back at the navigational controls in the spaceship had noticed an
unforeseen maneuver of the cloud, and therefore wanted to remove him
from its range. Soon the sun disappeared behind the first long rocky
outcrop; then its dim light returned. Bathed in the sun's slanting rays,
the landscape presented a wild appearance and looked quite different
than he remembered it from his last expedition. Still, at that time he
had regarded it from a greater height, from the tower of the
transporter. All of a sudden the vehicle was violently rocked about,
throwing Rohan's chest several times quite painfully against the body of
the car. Now he had to muster all his strength to keep the furious jolts
from shaking him from his perch on the narrow running board. The wheels
danced across the rocks and boulders, hurling the gravel high up into
the air. Sometimes they stuck and spun crazily in the same spot. Rohan
was sure this hellish ride was making enough noise to be heard for miles
around, and he considered seriously whether he shouldn't stop the car
and jump offclose below his shoulder he could feel the handle of the
brake that had been purposely placed on the outside. But then he would
have to face a march of several miles, and the prospect of swiftly
reaching his goal, slim as it was to begin with, would have diminished
even further. With clenched teeth, his hands frantically clutching the
handles which now no longer seemed to offer a secure hold, with blinking
eyes he looked over the flat top of the vehicle, up along the slope.
Occasionally the singing of the radio-probe grew weaker, but it was
still above him, no doubt, for the cross-country vehicle maneuvered
skilfully and dodged the piled-up debris and boulders on the huge rocky
talus. Once in a while the car leaned to the side and slowed down, but
soon afterwards it raced up the hill with full speed.

The odometer showed the number of miles he had traveled so far: sixteen.
On his map his path had been marked as thirty-six miles, but in reality
it was surely much longer, considering the differences in altitude and
because of the meandering road. Not a trace of sand could be found here.
The sun hung threateningly in the sky, heavy, gigantic and almost cold,
and still touching the jagged teeth of the rocky crest. As if racked by
a violent fever, the machine doggedly shook its way through the rubble.
Sometimes it would slip when the rocks underneath it would work loose
with a gnashing sound. The tires would rub helplessly against the stones
and make a screeching noise. The incline grew steeper. Almost eighteen
mileshe heard nothing aside from the singing signal of the probe.
Nothing from the _Invincible._ Why? Rohan could vaguely recognize a
steep wall, outlined in distinct black lines below the sundisk. This
might be the upper rim of the ravine into which he was supposed to
descendnot here, though, but much farther north. Eighteen miles now. In
any event, nothing was to be seen of the black cloud. It had probably
already disabled the other machines by now. Or had the cloud given up
after cutting them off from the spaceship by blockading radio
communication? The whole vehicle threw itself from side to side like a
desperate animal. Once in a while the roaring of the motor, which was
running at full speed, hit Rohan right in the gut. The vehicle kept
losing speed, but against all expectations it made headway. Maybe he
should have taken along a car with air-cushioned drive? But it would
have been too large and heavy; there was no use now wasting a thought in
that direction, since nothing could be changed anyhow.

He wanted to look at his watch but could not manage to hold his hand up
to his eyes for even a second. He bent his knees, trying to soften the
impact of the tremendous blows which shook all his insides. All of a
sudden the vehicle reared up like a horse and then slipped sideways,
down the hill. The brakes were squealing, but the pebbles and boulders
gave way and slid down from all directions, rattling and clattering on
the metal body of the car. The vehicle turned frantically, began to spin
and skidded for a while on its side through the rocky debris. Then this
movement came to a halt . . .

Slowly the car righted itself and crawled stubbornly up the slope again.
Now Rohan could see the ravine. He recognized it by the black patches of
underbrush, resembling crook-timber, which covered the steep rocks.
About half a mile separated him from the edge of the ravine. Twenty
miles . . .

The slope that lay before him looked like an ocean made up of
chaotically tossed-about rocks and boulders. It seemed impossible that
the vehicle would ever pave a way through this. He had already given up
searching for passable spots, since it was not his job to steer the car.
Instead he concentrated on not losing sight, even for a single moment,
of the two rock walls on either side, that rose steeply from the bottom
of the valley. Any second now, the black cloud might well up from these
walls.

"Rohan . . . Rohan . . ." he heard suddenly. His heart began to beat
faster. He recognized Horpach's voice.

"The car probably won't get you to your destination. From where we are,
we cannot make out the exact angle of the slope, but you only have a few
more miles to go. In case the car gets stuck, you will have to proceed
on foot. Repeat . . ."

No more than twenty-six miles . . . that means I have another ten miles
to go. That could take at least four hours in this type of terrain,
maybe even more, Rohan calculated quickly. Let's hope they're mistaken
and the car makes it after all.

The message ended and once again he could hear nothing but the
rhythmical singing of the probe. Rohan bit down harder on the mouthpiece
of his oxygen mask. The mouthpiece had chafed his lips during the
violently bouncing ride. The sun no longer touched the nearby mountain
crest but it had not climbed any higher either. Before him lay boulders
and rocky ledges of all sizes; sometimes their old shadow seemed to
reach out for him.

The car had slowed down. Rohan lifted his eyes and saw tiny feathery
clouds sailing across the sky. Suddenly a strange thing happened to the
vehicle: it reared up like a shying horse. Another second and the car
would have plunged down the slope, trapping him underneath, if Rohan had
not jumped off. He fell on his hands and knees, hitting the ground hard
and feeling it right through his thick protective gloves and
shin-guards. He skidded about six feet across the rocky rubble before he
recovered his footing.

"Rohan, this is Horpach calling! The car can't go on. You must continue
on foot . . . Use the map for orientation. The car will remain where it
is, in case you aren't able to make your way back otherwise. You are now
at the intersection of coordinates 46 and 192 . . ."

Rohan got to his feet slowly. Every muscle in his body was aching. But
only the first few steps were difficult. He quickly found his stride. He
wanted to get away as fast as possible from the vehicle, which was stuck
between two rock ridges. He sat down at the foot of a tall rocky
obelisk, pulled the map out of his pocket and tried to adjust it. That
was not so easy. Finally he determined his location. He was more than
half a mile, as the crow flies, away from the upper rim of the ravine,
but descending was out of the question at this point. A solid layer of
low metal growths covered the slopes. So he climbed uphill, wondering
whether he should risk the descent into the ravine at a spot nearer than
the one they had chosen previously. For it would take at least four
hours to reach that place. Even if he could use the car to drive back,
he would have to reckon another five hours for the return trip, and how
much longer would he need to climb down into the gorge, let alone the
time needed for the search? Suddenly the entire plan seemed to contain
not even a single grain of common sense. The whole enterprise was
nothing but a vain and heroic gesture devised by Horpach, who was
willing to sacrifice him in order to soothe his own conscience.

For a while he was so furioushe felt he had been tricked like a silly
schoolboy by the astrogator, who had planned everything in advancethat
he barely noticed his surroundings. Gradually he got hold of himself.
There is no way back, he kept repeating to himself, I have to try it. If
I have no luck climbing down, if I haven't found anyone by three
o'clock, then I'll turn back.

It was a quarter past seven. He tried to walk with long, even, but not
too rapid strides, because his oxygen consumption would rise steeply
with any exertion. He fastened his compass to his right wrist to avoid
deviating from the direction he had to follow. Several times, though, he
had to walk around deep crevices with steep walls. Fortunately, gravity
on Regis III was considerably less than on Earth. This fact allowed him
relative ease of movement, despite the difficult terrain. The sun stood
higher in the sky. His sense of hearingused to the constant
accompaniment of all the sounds which encircled him like a sheltering
barrier laid down by the machines on his previous expeditionsthis sense
now felt exposed and supersensitive. Only occasionally would he
perceive, now much weaker than before, the rhythmical singing of the
probe. On the other hand, each gust of wind hissing around the jagged
edges of the boulders, attracted his attention, for he believed he
recognized in it the familiar, delicate hum which he remembered so well.
Gradually he became accustomed to the vigorous stride. While
mechanically clambering from one rock to the next, he could give free
rein to his thoughts. He carried a pedometer in his packet. He did not
want to check the distance he had already traversed yet, and was
determined to wait until an hour had gone by. But he could not stand it
so long, and he pulled out the small instrument before the hour was up.
He was sorely disappointed. He had not even covered two miles. True, he
had to overcome considerable differences in altitude. This had slowed
him down. This means not three, not even four hours, but at least
another six, he thought to himself. He took out the map again, knelt
down and adjusted it once more. To the east he could see the crest of
the ravine. All this time he had been marching in a direction nearly
parallel to it. In one place the dark bushes covering the slopes were
divided by a long, thread-like gap, probably the dried-up bed of a
little brook. He tried to get a better look at it. Kneeling down, with
the wind whistling around his ears, he experienced a moment of
indecision. As if he did not know too well what he was doing, he got to
his feet and mechanically tucked away his map, made a ninety-degree turn
from his previous direction and marched toward the steep wall of the
gorge.

Cautiously he approached the silent, cleft boulders, as if he feared the
ground might suddenly open up beneath him. He was gripped by a terrible
fear. Yet he kept walking, his arms swinging at his sides, his hands
seeming so dreadfully empty. He stopped suddenly and looked down into
the valley, onto the desert where the _Invincible_ was waiting. He could
not see the spaceship; it was below the horizon. He was well aware of
that, and yet peered over in its direction, at the reddish sky that
slowly filled with puffy clouds. The singing of the probe's signals
became so faint that he was no longer certain whether it was reality or
just imagination. Why was there no word from the _Invincible?_

Because they have nothing more to say to you, he answered himself. The
upper bouldersthey reminded him of grotesquely weathered statueswere
within reach now. The ravine opened up before his eyes like a gigantic
ditch of darkness. The rays of the sun did not yet penetrate halfway
down the black-covered walls. Here and there, needles of chalky rock
jutted out from the bristling thicket. With one glance he encompassed
the entire giant space as far down as the stony bottom which lay less
than a mile below.

Suddenly he felt so like a defenseless prey that he squatted down,
snuggling against the rocks as if he were trying to turn into one of the
boulders himself. This was absurd, of course, as he was in no danger of
being discovered. What he had to fear had no eyes to see. He stretched
out on a rock slab and looked down. The information he could glean from
the photogrammetric map was totally useless, since it showed the terrain
as seen from a bird's-eye view and was consequently extremely
foreshortened vertically. Impossible to risk a descent along the narrow,
bare channel lying between the two slanting surfaces all overgrown with
black bushes. For that he would have needed not seventy-five feet of
rope but at least one hundred feet, as well as a few hooks and a hammer;
but he had nothing of the sort. He was not equipped for a climbing
expedition.

The narrow furrow swept down quite gently at first, then broke off
suddenly, disappeared behind a promontory jutting out from the rocky
wall and became visible again way down through a bluish haze. A wild
thought passed through his mind: If only I had brought along a parachute
. . .

He carefully examined the slopes on either side of the spot where he was
lying, stretched out below a big, mushroom-shaped boulder. Only now did
he become aware of a mild warm breeze wafting upwards from the great
emptiness yawning wide below him. And indeed, the outlines of the slopes
opposite trembled softly. The tangled black growth absorbed, gathered
and stored the sun rays. He let his gaze roam farther to the southwest,
where he recognized the points of the rocky needles whose base formed
the stone gate where the catastrophe had taken place. He would not have
noticed them had they not been pitch black and coated with a thick,
shiny glazethe outer layers of the rock needles had reached boiling
temperatures during the battle between the Cyclops and the cloud. This
difference made them stand out from the rest of the rock formations.
From his vantage point he could not discover a single trace of the
transporters or the atomic explosion anywhere in the valley. As he lay
there, stretched out, he was suddenly overwhelmed by despair: he had to
get down there, and there was no way. Yet instead of feeling relief at
the prospect of returning and telling Horpach he had done his utmost, he
came to a decision.

He rose. A movement down in the gorge, seen out of the corner of one
eye, caused him to huddle once more against the boulder. But he
straightened up again almost immediately. If I lie down every few
minutes, I won't accomplish very much, he thought. He began walking
along the ridge searching for a traversable point. Every few hundred
feet he leaned out over the void, but the picture was always the same:
wherever the slope was gentle, black underwood clung to it; where there
was no brush, the terrain would fall away steeply.

Once his foot started a small rock rolling down. It tumbled into the
abyss, followed by other stones. A small avalanche followed, rumbling
and roaring some 300 feet below into the matted wall. Wisps of sparking
smoke crept out from the spot, unfolded in the air, and hovered for a
moment as if taking stockhe grew rigid all over. After a long minute,
the smoke thinned out and dispersed among the glittering brush.

Shortly before nine o'clock, as he was peering out from behind a
boulder, he saw down at the bottom of the valleythe basin was
considerably wider herea small, bright point that moved about. With
trembling hands he pulled the collapsible field glass from his pocket
and pointed it in that direction . . .

A human being! The magnification was not powerful enough, and he was
unable to recognize the face but he could clearly see the rhythmical
movements of the man's legs. The man walked slowly, limping slightly, as
if he were dragging a wounded leg. Should he call to him? He did not
dare. Or rather, he tried to, but fear paralyzed his throat. He hated
himself for it. He knew only one thing: now more than ever he dared not
abandon the search. He took note of the route the other man had
pursuedup the valley, which steadily widened here, toward the whitish
cones of the talusand he ran in the same direction, along the ridge,
jumping across boulders and gaping clefts in the rocks, until his
whistling breath in the mouthpiece became too labored, almost choking,
and his heart pounded violently. This is sheer insanity, I can't exert
myself like this, he thought helplessly. He slowed down somewhat, and
suddenly a wide gully opened up invitingly ahead. Further below it was
lined on either side by black tangled growths. The angel of descent grew
steeperperhaps some rocks were jutting out there to form an overhanging
roof?

A glance at his watch helped him decide; it was almost 9:30. He started
to climb down. At first his face was turned toward the abyss, then he
swung around carefully. The wall became too steep. On all fours, he
climbed down backwards step by step. It was not long until he came close
to the black thicket which seemed to sear him with its rigid silent
heat. His temples were throbbing. He stopped for a breather on a
slanting, narrow rocky ledge, jammed his left shoe in a crevice and
looked down. Some 120 feet below he saw a broad shelf from which,
clearly visible, a barren hummock led downwards, rising above the stiff
dead tufts of the black bushes. Unfortunately, there was nothing but air
between him and the promising shelf. He looked up. He had traversed some
600 feet, perhaps even more than that. The violent thumping of his heart
seemed to shake the air. Several times he blinked his eyes. Slowly,
cautiously, he unrolled the rope. You wouldn't do anything as crazy as
that, an inner voice told him. He angled sideways and downwards and
reached a shrub nearby. The sharp branches were covered by a fine layer
of rust that scattered dust to the touch. Expecting the worst, Rohan
grasped the shrub.

Nothing happened. He heard only a dry crackling sound. He pulled the
shrub with a firm grip but it did not budge. He slung the rope around
its base, tugged hard one more time . . . then in a sudden burst of
courage, he wound the rope around a second and a third shrub, planted
his feet firmly against a boulder and tugged at the rope with all his
might. The bushes did not give way, but clung to the rocky ground.

Slowly he lowered himself; at first he could shift part of his body
weight onto the rocks through the friction of his shoe soles, but soon
he slipped and hung suspended in the air. Faster and faster, he let the
rope slide through below his bent knee, braked his speed with his right
shoulder, looked down attentively and finally landed on the rocky shelf.
Then he tried to detach the rope from the shrubs above by pulling at the
end nearest to him. But the shrubs would not let go, although he tugged
at the rope repeatedly. It was stuck. He sat down on the narrow shelf,
straddling it between his legs, and pulled as hard as he could. Suddenly
it jerked through the air, hissing like a snake, and hit him on the back
of his neck. He jerked back as though struck by lightning. For the next
few minutes he stayed where he was, sitting astride the shelf. His knees
were shaking too much for him to risk any further descent for a while.
But now he could see the figure down below again ambling along. It
looked larger already. He wondered why the figure was so bright; and
there was something very peculiar about the shape of the man's head, or
rather his head covering.

He was aware that the worst was yet to come. But it surpassed his
expectations. The path itself was much smoother now, but the crackling
dead rust bushes gave way to a greasy shiny mass. Their wiry tangle was
studded with small berry-like characteristic thickenings which he
recognized immediately.

Now and then, little smoke clouds swarmed from these growths, softly
humming, and circled in the air. Each time, he froze, but not for long;
otherwise he would never be able to reach the bottom of the gorge. For a
while he pushed forward, straddling the narrow rocky shelf. Then the
hump broadened and was not quite so steep, and he was able to climb
again, but only on hands and knees, and not without difficulty. He was
unaware how much progress he had already made. He had to divide his
attention all the while to either side of the narrow path. Occasionally
he had to pass so close to the dusty bushes that their tuft-like wires
would graze the folds of his protective suit. Yet not once did the
little clouds that sailed above him, glittering in the sunlight, advance
toward him. Finally he stood at the broad end of the rocky talus, only a
few feet removed from the pebble-strewn bottom of the ravine. The stones
there were chalky white and as hard as bone. It was shortly before noon.
Now he was already below the brushy zone. The upper half of slope he had
just climbed down was lit up by the sun high in the sky. Now it was
possible to look back and survey the distance he had covered so far, but
he did not bother to turn around. He ran downhill, trying to shift his
weight alternately from one leg to the other, jumping from rock to rock
as fast as he could, but the crumbling rubble of the rock-piles followed
him, tumbling and knocking down, and suddenly, just by the dry bed of
the little brook, the rock-strewn ground slipped away from under his
feet. He was hurled to the ground so violently that his oxygen mask was
knocked off his face as he rolled downhill several dozen yards. He
jumped to his feet again to continue his pursuit of the man, despite his
bruises and cuts, for he was afraid to lose sight of him entirely here
where both slopesespecially the opposite wallwere dotted with the dark
entrances to a large number of caves. But before he could start up
again, something warned him. Even before he fully comprehended what it
was, he dropped to the ground and, arms stretched out wide, flattened
himself against the sharp-edged stones. A light shadow descended on him
from above, and a formless black cloud mass drew near and enveloped him,
accompanied by a rising, monotonous roar, encompassing all registers
from a high-pitched whistle to a bass booming. Perhaps he should have
shut his eyes, but he did not do so. One thought crossed his mind: if
only the instrument sewn into his protective suit had not been damaged
by his fall . . . Then, swiftly, he lapsed into self-imposed immobility.
Not even his eyeballs moved; and yet he could see the wriggling cloud
stop immediately overhead and lazily flick out an arm. From quite close,
the very tip of this arm looked like the mouth of an inky-black
maelstrom.

On his scalp, on his cheeks, all over his face, he felt a manifold warm
breeze, like a breath composed of millions of tiny particles. Something
brushed against his suit near his chest. Almost total darkness
sourrounded him. In a flash the arm, spiraling like a miniature tornado,
receded into the cloud. The constant humming grew to a shrill, piercing
sound which hurt his teeth and drilled into his head. Then the sound
lessened in intensity. The cloud climbed up almost vertically, turned
into a black fog that spread from slope to slope, broke down into
separate, globular coils that in turn began to whirl in concentric
circles, crept into the stiff pelt of the bushes and finally
disappeared. For a long time afterwards he lay there motionless. The
thought flashed through his brain that this must be the end, that he no
longer knew who he was, or how he had gotten there, or why. At this
thought he was overwhelmed by such fear that he suddenly sat bolt
upright. Then began to laugh. If he was capable of thinking such things,
then obviously he had been spared, the cloud had been unable to harm
him, he had outwitted the black insects. He tried to suppress the
tickling, idiotic laughter that stuck in his throat and shook his whole
body. It's hysteria, he reprimanded himself, and got to his feet again.
He had almost regained his composureat least so it seemed to himas he
adjusted his oxygen mask and looked around. The man was not there any
more. But he had heard the footsteps. Most likely he had already passed
by and disappeared behind the boulder jutting out nearly to the middle
of the ravine. Rohan started to run after him. The echo of the man's
steps seemed to come closer and closer; it seemed strangely loud, almost
as if the man were stomping along in iron boots. As Rohan ran, he felt a
sharp pain shooting up from his ankle to his knee. I must have sprained
my ankle, he thought, his arms flailing desperately through the air.
Once again he could not breathe properly and was nearly choking when he
suddenly caught sight of the figure. He walked mechanically, making
giant strides, stomping along over the stones. The heavy tread and
stomping reverberated from the nearby rock walls with a clapping sound.
And then it hit Rohan like a bolt out of a clear blue sky: it was no
human being, but a robot! One of the Arctanes . . . Not for a single
moment had he considered what fate might have befallen them after the
catastrophe. They had been in the second transporter when the cloud
started to attack. Now he noticed the robot's left arm hanging limply
and shattered by its side, its once shining, curved armor was buckled
and slashed. Rohan felt bitterly disappointed, and yet he found comfort
in the thought that at least he would have some kind of companion in his
further search. He was just about to call to the robot when something
made him hesitate. Instead he raced ahead of the robot, then stopped and
waited for it, blocking its way. But the eight-foot tall giant obviously
did not notice him. The dishlike ear of its radar antenna was partially
destroyedRohan saw this clearly now that he was close to the robotand
where the lens of the left eye had been, a hole with a jagged edge
yawned open. Still, the robot held itself steadily on its mighty feet,
though it dragged its left leg behind it. When there were only a few
feet left between them, Rohan called the robot, but the Arctane pushed
blindly ahead, straight toward him, so that Rohan had to jump aside at
the last second. He approached the robot a second time and tried to
seize its metal paw but the automation jerked its arm away with an
indifferent sweeping movement, and continued on its way. Rohan knew that
the Arctane, too, had fallen victim to the attacking cloud and that he
could no longer count on it. But he found it difficult to simply leave
the helpless machine to its fate. Besides, he was curious about the
robot's destination, for it picked its way over the smoothest possible
path, as though it were advancing toward a definite goal. Rohan
deliberated brieflythe Arctane had meanwhile wandered on for almost
fifty feetand then followed the machine. Soon the robot arrived at a
steep boulder formation and started to climb it, without paying the
least attention to the steady streams of debris that rolled out from
under its broad feet. It had scaled about half of the rubble hillock
when it suddenly fell and slid backwards, kicking its legs desperately.
Under other circumstances, an observer might have laughed at this funny
spectacle. Then the robot got to its feet again and once more started
its upward climb.

Resolutely, Rohan made an about-face and walked away. For quite some
time, however, he could hear the tumult on the boulder hill and the
repeated metallic dragging of feet, a sound that was tossed back and
forth many times between the facing rocky slopes, a multiple echo. He
made good headway now, since the path he had takenover the flat stones
in the dry brookwas fairly smooth and descended gently. Nothing was to
be seen of the cloud; only an occasional trembling of the air above the
slopes gave away the simmering in the black thicket. By now he had
arrived at the widest part of the gorge, which opened into a basin,
framed by rocky heights. He was roughly a mile and a half from the rock
gate, where the catastrophe had occurred. Only now did he realize how
hard it would be without an olfactometer, which could have helped him
find human traces; but the instrument was much too heavy to be carried
on foot. He would just have to get along without it. He stopped and
examined the rocky walls. No one could possibly have taken refuge in the
metal thicket. That left only the grottoes, caves and hollows in the
rockshe counted several from where he was standing. High rock shelves
with vertical faces, that presented extraordinary difficulties for the
climber, hid the caves' interiors from sight, and he decided to begin by
examining the grottoes, one after the other. Back aboard the
spacecruiser, he had tried, together with the psychologists and the
physicians, to figure out where he should search for the four lost menin
other words, where they were most likely to be hiding. But in reality
the conference had been of little use, since the behavior of an amnesiac
was unpredictable. The fact that the lost men had been together when
they left the rest of Regnar's group indicated that some kind of
activity set them off from the others. And to a certain extent, the fact
that the trails of the four men had not separated once at any point
along the terrain explored so far, justified the hope of finding all
four together in the same areaonly if they were still alive, naturally,
and had not spread out in various directions above the rock gate. Rohan
made a thorough search in two smaller and four larger grottoes, one
after the other, which he could enter fairly easily since he needed only
to climb over a few large, slanting rock shelves. This was not dangerous
and took only a few minutes. In the last grotto he stumbled on metal
debris, partly covered with water. At first he believed it to be the
skeleton of the second Arctane; but they were extremely old and unlike
any design he had ever encountered before. In a shallow puddle of water,
which was visible because the smooth, almost polished vaulted ceiling of
the grotto reflected some sparse daylight, he saw an elongated form,
something like a fifteen-foot-long cross. The outer metal hull had long
since fallen apart, disintegrated, mixed with the muddy ground and now
formed a rust-red mass. Rohan could not indulge in a closer examination
of this unusual find, perhaps the wreck of one of the macro-automats
that had been exterminated by the fittest of the inorganic evolution,
the black cloud. All he could permit himself was to fix the image on his
mind: hazy outlines of braces and poles which probably were used for
flying rather than for walking. A glance at his watch urged him to hurry
on, and without further delay he continued to search through the next
caves. But they were so numerousfrom the bottom of the ravine they
peered out occasionally like dark yawning windows in the steep rock
wallsand the often flooded subterranean corridors that sometimes led
into straight-walled, vertical tunnels and ditches with icy, gurgling
rivulets, were so tortuous that he did not dare penetrate too deeply
into them. Besides, he carried only a small flashlight which provided
relatively weak illumination and was especially powerless inside the
more spacious grottoes with their tall, vaulted ceilings and innumerable
galleries. Finally, totally exhausted and near collapse, he sat down on
a huge flat sun-warmed boulder near the exit of a cave he had just
finished examining, and chewed a few bars of the food concentrate,
washing the dry mouthfuls down with some water from the little brook.
Several times he thought he heard the rustling of the approaching cloud
but it was probably just the echo from the Sisyphus-like labors of the
Arctane reverberating from the upper regions of the ravine. After he had
finished eating his meager provisions, he felt much better. What
surprised him most was the realization that he was less and less worried
about his dangerous surroundings, the black thicket that extended over
all the slopes, wherever he looked.

He climbed down the rocky promontory in front of the cave after resting
there for a while, and perceived a thin, rusty streak that extended
across the dry stones to the opposite side of the gorge floor. As he
reached the spot, he saw that they were traces of blood. They had dried
completely and faded, and had it not been for the unusually bright white
color of the limestone-like rocks, he would most likely have missed the
tracks. He tried to determine which direction the wounded man must have
taken, but it was hopeless. So he marched up the valley arbitrarily,
driven by the thought that the blood must have come from someone who was
wounded during the battle between the Cyclops and the cloud, someone who
had tried to leave the battle scene. The tracks intersected and broke
off in places, but eventually they led him toward a cave which was one
of the first he had searched before. He was all the more astonished
whendirectly by the entrance to the cavea vertical, shaft-like narrow
cleft opened, which he had failed to notice earlier. The blood ended
there. Rohan kneeled down and bent over the shadowy hole in the ground.
Although he had been prepared for the worst, he could not suppress a
stifled cry when he saw Benningsen's head staring at him with empty eye
sockets and bared teeth. He recognized the man by his gold-rimmed
glasses, whose lenses had remained undamaged by some fluke of fate and
now sparkeled brightly in the light reflected from the limestone slab
that tilted over the stone coffin. The geologist was wedged between
boulders, his shoulders jammed into the natural lining of the rocky
shaft, so that his body had remained upright. Rohan did not want to
leave the man's remains behind, but when he gathered up his courage and
tried to lift the body, through the thick material of the protective
suit he could feel the corpse disintegrating under his touch. Decay had
already done its work, accelerated by the effect of the sunrays that
penetrated this spot every day. Rohan finally zipped open the breast
pocket in Benningsen's suit and removed the scientist's dog tag. Before
moving on, he gathered up his last ounce of strength and rolled one of
the nearest rock slabs toward the shaft to seal the rocky tomb.

The first man had been found. Not until Rohan was a good distance away
did it occur to him that he ought to have tested the corpse for
radioactivity, for the degree of contamination might shed some light on
the fate that had befallen the geologist and his friends. A high
radioactive count would have proved that the dead man had been near the
scene of the atomic battle. But he had forgotten to make the test, and
nothing could have induced him to roll the coffin's stone lid aside
again. At the same time, Rohan became aware how important a role chance
was playing during his endeavors, for he had undoubtedly made a thorough
search all around this spot when he had first been there.

Inspired by a new thought, he now hastily pursued the blood trail in
order to find its beginning. The trail led almost in a straight line
down into the valley, in the direction of the atomic battlefield. But
after just a few hundred paces, the trail made a sudden turn. The
geologist had lost a great deal of blood; thus it was all the more
surprising that he should have come so far. The stones, which had not
been touched by a single drop of rain since the catastrophe, were
covered with blood. Rohan climbed some large wobbly boulders and found
himself in a spacious, basin-like trough below a barren cliff. The first
thing he saw was the huge metal sole of a robot. It lay on its side,
evidently split down the middle by a Weyr gun. Off to the side, farther
down, a man was leaning against a stone in a half-seated position, his
body almost folded over in two halves; his helmet was blackened by soot.
The man was dead. The Weyr gun still dangled from his limp hand, its
glittering barrel touching the ground. Rohan did not immediately dare to
touch the man; instead, he knelt next to him and tried to look into his
face, but it was just as disfigured by decay as Benningsen's had been.
Just then he discovered the broad, flat satchel of the geologist hanging
over the shrunken shoulder of the corpse. It was Regnar himself, the
leader of the expedition that had been attacked in the crater. According
to the radioactivity readings, the Arctane had been wrecked by the
charge of a Weyr gun: the indicator registered the characteristic
isotopes of rare earth. Rohan wanted to remove Regnar's dog tag but he
could not bring himself to do it. He simply unbuckled the satchel, so
that he did not have to touch the corpse.

But the satchel was crammed full with samples of various minerals. He
hesitated briefly, then with his knife cut off the geologist's initials
which were fastened to the leather. He put the metal initials in his
pocket. Then, standing on a tall rock, he surveyed the entire scene once
more, trying to comprehend what actually had happened here. It looked as
if Regnar had shot at the robot. Had the Arctane perhaps attacked the
geologist or Benningsen? Was it even possible for an amnesiac to have
fended off an attack? He realized that he would never find the solution
to this mystery; he had to continue his search. Once more he glanced at
his watch: it was almost five o'clock. If he had to rely on his own
oxygen supply, then he would have to start back now. But it suddenly
occurred to him that he could remove the oxygen container from Regnar's
backpack. He lifted the entire apparatus from the dead man's shoulders
and found that one of the flasks was still full. He exchanged it for his
empty container and started to pile up stones around the corpse. This
took nearly one hour, but he felt that the dead man had more than paid
for it by handing over his oxygen supply. When the stone mound was
complete, Rohan considered that it would have been a good idea to equip
himself with a weapon, and the Weyr gun was probably still loaded. But
again he had thought of it too late and had to leave the scene
empty-handed.

It was close to six o'clock. He was so tired that he could hardly drag
his feet. He still had four stimulant tablets in his possession. He took
one of them and after a minute felt sufficiently revived to get up from
the ground. Since he had not the faintest idea where to press on with
his search, he simply walked forward in the direction of the rock gate.
He was still more than half a mile away when his geiger counter warned
him of increasing radioactive contamination. For the time being the
contamination was fairly mild, and he walked ahead, keeping the
surrounding terrain under observation. Since the ravine had many turns,
only some of the rocks showed traces of the melting process on their
surfaces. The farther he advanced, the more frequently he encountered
the characteristic cracked glaze, until eventually he saw entire
boulders congealed into one single, huge blister, where their rocky
surface must have boiled when the thermal explosions hit. Actually there
was no reason for him to stay here any longer; yet he kept walking on.
The counter on his wrist gave off a light ticking sound that gradually
picked up speed, until the instrument hand danced madly across the scale
of the dial. At long last he recognized, far off in the distance, the
remains of the rock gate, which had collapsed into a trough-like crater.
The crater resembled a small lake whose waters, as a result of the
tremendous impact, had splashed out over the shoreline, where they had
become solidified in weird shapes. The base of the rock gate had changed
into a thick lava crust and the formerly black pelt of the metal shrubs
had turned into a uniformly ragged rug of ashes. Between the rock walls
in the interior of the ravine glistened gigantic clefts of lighter
coloration. Rohan swiftly turned back again.

Once again chance came to his aid. As he reached a second, considerably
broader rock gate behind the scene of the battle, nearby, on a spot he
had previously passed by, he noticed a sparkling metal object. It was
the aluminum reductor of an oxygen container. In a shallow crevice
between the rock and the dry bed of the brook he saw a man's dark back
clad in a spacesuit blackened by smoke. The corpse had no head. The
terrible air pressure had hurled the man across a stone heap and dashed
him against the rocks. To the side lay an undamaged weapon holster with
a Weyr gun firmly wedged inside, gleaming brightly as if it had only
recently been polished. Rohan picked up the gun. He wanted to identify
the dead man, but it was impossible.

He continued to march up along the ravine. Over on the eastern slope,
the light was already red and glided up like a flaming curtain as the
sun sank behind the mountain crest. It was a quarter to seven. Rohan was
faced with a real dilemma. So far he had been luckyin one sense, at
least: he had carried out his task, had escaped safe and sound, and
could now return to the space cruiser. He was convinced that the fourth
man was no longer alive, but they had assumed as much back aboard the
_Invincible._ His duty now was to make sure that this was really the
case. Did he have the right to turn back now? The oxygen supply from
Regnar's tank would last another six hours. However, a whole night lay
before him, and he would be unable to undertake anything, not just
because of the cloud, but simply because he was almost totally
exhausted. He swallowed another pill, and while he waited for its effect
to take place, he tried to design a halfway reasonable plan for the rest
of his mission.

The blood-red glow of the setting sun now bathed the black jungle on the
mountain ridge high above him with ever-deepening shades: the sharp
points of the bushes sparkled and shimmered in deep violet hues.

Rohan still could not make up his mind. As he sat there under a huge
boulder, he heard in the distance the full-toned hum of the approaching
cloud. And strangely enoughhe was not frightened. Throughout the course
of this one day his relationship with the cloud had undergone strange
changes. He knewor at least he believed he knewhow far he could go, like
a mountain climber who has no fear of the death lurking on the icy walls
of a glacier. In point of fact, he was not fully aware of this inner
change, for his mind had not consciously registered the moment when his
senses first opened to the somber beauty of the black brushy growths
that shimmered in opalescent tinges of violet on the slopes. But now,
even as he caught sight of two blackclouds swarming out off the opposite
slopes and coming closer, he did not move at all, nor did he try to
protect himself by pressing his face against the rocks. After all, it
made no difference whatever he did as long as the hidden instrument was
working properly. He fingered the thick cloth of his protective suit,
trying to locate the coin-like disc sewn into his collar, and with his
fingertips he felt a delicate vibration. In order not to challenge fate,
he settled in a more comfortable position, to avoid shifting his body
unnecessarily. The clouds now occupied both sides of the ravine. Some
kind of an order-creating stream seemed to flow through the black
globular densities, for now the clouds thickened at the edges, while
their interior surfaces arched out steadily, reaching out toward each
other. As if a giant sculptor were shaping them with swift, invisible
strokes. Brief discharges flashed through the air between the closest
points of the two clouds. They seemed to race toward each other, yet
each remained on its own side, and only the spherical condensations in
the middle fluttered in an increasingly violent rhythm. The glare of
these bolts of lightning was strangely dark. Both clouds flared up in
this light for a few seconds, like myriads of silvery-black crystals
arrested in their flight. Muffled thunderclaps bounced back and forth a
few times from the rock walls, which suddenly seemed covered by some
sound-absorbing material, and then both sides of the black ocean met,
quivering and tensed to the utmost, and flowed into each other. The air
underneath grew dark, as if the sun had set, and at the same time blurry
fleeting lines made their appearance inside. It was some time before
Rohan understood what it was that confronted him there: the grotesquely
contorted mirror image of the bottom of the valley. In the meantime, the
mirage below the cloud bank surged and expanded, until all at once he
perceived a gigantic human figure whose head projected into the
darkness. The figure stared straight at him without moving, although the
image itself quivered and danced ceaselessly, flaring up and dying down
in a constant, mysterious rhythm. And once more several seconds passed
before he recognized in it his own mirror image, a fata morgana floating
in the empty space between the lateral lobes of both clouds. He was so
amazed, so paralyzed by the inexplicable activity of the cloud, that he
forgot everything. He thought that perhaps the cloud was aware of him,
of the microscopic presence of the last living human being in the midst
of the rocks: however, even that thought did not frighten him. Not that
it seemed too unlikelynothing was impossible at this pointhe simply felt
an urge to participate in this murky mystery, whose significance, he was
quite sure, would forever remain beyond his understanding. His gigantic
mirror image, through which he caught faint glimpses of the distant rock
walls, became diffused in the upper parts of the gorge, where the shadow
of the cloud did not extend. At the same time, innumerable arms extruded
from the cloud. As soon as it had reabsorbed some of these projections,
new ones appeared in their place. A black rain began to fall, constantly
growing heavier. Tiny crystals dashed over him, brushed against his head
and slid down along his protective suit, accumulating in the folds of
the garment. The black rain kept falling and the voice of the cloud
swelled to a crescendo, to a raging sound which apparently filled not
only the valley, but the entire atmosphere of the planet. Individual
whirlpools formed inside the cloud, like windows through which the sky
could be seen. The black cloak tore right down the middle and two
mountainous clouds sailed sluggishly toward the brushwork, submerged and
finally vanished in the motionless, rigid thicket.

Rohan still dared not make a move. He could not make up his mind whether
it was advisable to shake off the crystals that were strewn all over
him. They lay everywhere on the stones, and the entire bed of the brook,
that heretofore had glistened as white as snow, seemed sprayed with ink.
Carefully, he seized a triangular crystal between thumb and forefinger.
Suddenly it appeared to come alive, brushed against his hand with a
delicate breath of warmth and rose into the air as Rohan instinctively
opened his fist. All of a sudden, as if on cue, the whole surrounding
area began to crawl like an anthill. The movement was chaotic for a bare
second, then black points formed a kind of misty layer hovering close to
the ground, concentrated, grew dense, clustered and climbed skyward like
pillars. It looked as if the boulders themselves had turned into
gigantic, sacrificial nameless torches. At this instant an
incomprehensible maneuver took place: while the ascending swarm hung
exactly above the center section of the gorge, hovering there like a
cumulus cloud, there emerged, pitted against the gradually darkening sky
the gigantic black balloons of those clouds that but a short while ago
had vanished in the brushy growths and now raced with incredible speed
toward the first cloud suspended quietly in mid-air. Rohan thought he
heard the peculiar grinding noise of colliding air masses, but it was
probably just a delusion. He was all ready to believe that he was
witnessing a battle, that the clouds had managed to expel the dead
insects they had wanted to get rid of and dash them to the bottom of the
valleyand then it all turned out to be nothing but a false conclusion on
his part. The clouds parted and nothing remained of the puffed-up
sphere. They simply had swallowed it. Soon after, only the mountain tops
bled as before in the last rays of the setting sun, and the wide basin
lay quiet and deserted.

Rohan got to his feet and stood there on shaky legs. Suddenly he felt
ridiculous standing there with the Weyr gun he had taken so hastily from
the dead man; he felt so superfluous in this realm of perfected death,
where only dead forms could emerge victoriously in order to enact
mysterious rites never to be witnessed by any living creature. Not with
horror, but rather with numbed awe and great admiration had he
participated in the fantastic spectacle that just had taken place. He
knew that no scientist would be capable of sharing his sentiments, but
now his desire was no longer merely to return and report what he had
found out about their companions' deaths, but to request that this
planet be left alone in the future. Not everywhere has everything been
intended for us, he thought as he slowly descended. There was still some
light in the sky, and he soon arrived at the scene of the battle. There
he had to speed up his pace, because of the increasing radiation from
the glassy boulders, which whizzed by like eerie silhouettes in the
descending dusk. The rock walls picked up the reverberation of his steps
and passed it on, and accompanied by the sound of this endless echo,
summoning him to a tremendous haste, he jumped from rock to rock,
straining to the utmost, ran past fragments of machines, molten beyond
recognition, and reached a winding slopebut here too the dial glowed
ruby red as he checked his radiation counter.

He dared not stand still, although he had become short of breath.
Without slowing down his pace he turned the reductor of his oxygen tank
almost all the way over to stop. Even if he used up all his oxygen by
the time he arrived at the end of the ravine, and then had to breathe
the air of this planet, it would certainly still be preferable to
remaining here longer than absolutely necessary, where each square inch
of rock emitted deadly radiation. The oxygen pounded against the inside
of his mouth like a cool wave. He raced easily over the surface of the
congealed lava stream, which the retreating Cyclops had left behind
along the trail of its defeat. The path was smooth, in some places even
glassy. Fortunately he wore well-fitting shoes with rubber-tread soles
and did not skid. In the meantime it had grown so dark that he could
make out the downward road only by occasional brightly gleaming pebbles
which peered out from under the layer of glass. The path led downhill
all the time. He knew that there was at least another mile and a half of
such road ahead. It was impossible during this wild chase to make any
calculations but now and then he nevertheless managed to glance quickly
at the pulsating red dial of his radiation counter. About one hour would
be the upper safety limit for staying here among these rocks, bent and
cleft due to the annihilation; then his exposure to the rays would not
exceed 200 Roentgen. An hour and a quarter would still be acceptable,
but if he should not reach the desert's edge by that time, there would
be no longer any reason to hurry.

About twenty minutes later Rohan reached the crisis point. His heart
felt like a cruel insuperable entity that alternately tried to push his
chest apart from the inside and then squeezed it together again. The
oxygen burned his mouth and throat like raw, liquid fire; sparks danced
before his eyes. The worst part, however, was that he began to stumble
more and more frequently. Although the radiation had diminished somewhat
by now and the indicator barely glimmered in the dark, like a dying
ember, he knew that he must hurry on despite all, had to keep running,
while his legs threatened to give out. Every muscle fiber had had enough
by now; every cell of his body was screaming for him to stop and throw
himself down onto the seemingly cool, harmless, cracked glass sheets on
the grounds. He tried to glance up to the stars but he tripped and fell
headlong onto his outstretched hands. Sobbing, he gasped for air. He
scrambled to his feet again, staggered on for a few steps, until the
rhythm returned and carried him along. By now he had lost all sense of
time. How could he find his way around at all in this gloomy blackness?
He had forgotten the dead, the bony, sardonic grin of Benningsen;
Regnar, resting under the heaped-up stones next to the demolished
Arctane; the man without a head whom he had been unable to identify; he
had even forgotten, yes, the cloud. He was totally crushed by this
darkness; it had forced the blood into his eyes that, in vain, looked
for the big starry sky above the desertthe sandy wasteland seemed like a
port of refuge to him now. He hurried on blindly, his eyelids smarting
with sweat, driven by some inner force whose undiminished presence kept
amazing him from time to time. Would this ceaseless running, would this
night ever take an end?

His eyes no longer saw. His feet made headway only with the greatest
effort and kept sinking into the soil. In a last fit of despair, he
raised his head and realized in a flash that he had reached the desert.
He saw the stars on the horizon, and as his legs began to give way under
him, his eyes sought the dial of the radiation counter, but in vain: it
was dark and silent, he had left the invisible death behind him in the
congealed lava bed. That was his last thought, for as he felt the rough,
cool sand on his face, he did not fall asleep, but into a kind of
stupor, while his body kept laboring desperately, his ribs twitched, his
heart beat wildly. Then, from the twilight zone of total exhaustion, he
slipped into another, even deeper state of semi-trance, until, finally,
he lost consciousness.

With a start he regained his senses again, though he had no idea where
he was. He moved his hands, felt the cool sand, which trickled through
his fingers, sat up and moaned involuntarily. He felt hot. Slowly he
returned to a state of complete consciousness. The phosphorescent hand
of the manometer pointed to zero. There were still eighteen atmospheres
left in the second container. He opened the valve and got to his feet.
It was one o'clock. The stars stood out sharply against the black
backdrop of the nocturnal sky. With the help of his compass he found the
direction he had to follow and started out. At three o'clock he took the
last stimulant tablet. Shortly before four the last of the oxygen was
depleted. Resolutely he threw away the container and walked on, at first
breathing almost reluctantly. But soon the fresh air of the approaching
dawn filled his lungs; he quickened his steps, straining to think of
nothing but this march through the sand dunes, where at times his legs
would sink in up to the knees. He felt slightly intoxicated, but he
could not tell whether this was due to the gases in the atmosphere or
simply lack of sleep. He had figured out that he would need to do
between two and three miles per hour in order to arrive at the space
cruiser by eleven o'clock.

He tried to regulate his speed with the pedometer then, but it was no
use. The firmament was divided into two uneven parts by the immense
whitish streak of the Milky Way. By now he had adjusted so well to the
sparse light of the stars that he was able to steer around the biggest
dunes. He trudged along, wading through the sand until he suddenly
noticed on the horizon a strangely even patch without stars, an angular
silhouette. Without knowing what it might be, he ran toward it, paying
no attention to the fact that he was sinking deeper and deeper into the
sand. Then, as he plunged forward like a blind man, his outstretched
hands hit against some hard metal. It was an overland vehicle vacant and
deserted. Maybe it was one of those that Horpach had sent out the
previous morning, or perhaps a different one, one from Regnar's group.
Rohan did not stop to think about the car's origin. There he stood,
panting, and embraced the machine with both arms. His fatigue drew him
towards the ground. Just to sink down next to the vehicle, to fall
asleep and march on after sunrise . . .

He climbed slowly onto the armored hull, hand over hand, his fingers
searching for the handle, and opened the hatch. The lights went on. He
slid down onto the seat. Yes, now he knew that he was in a state of
intoxicationpoisoned by the gas in the atmosphere, no doubtfor he was
unable to find the switches. He could not remember where they were
located, he no longer knew anything . . . Finally his groping hand
accidentally bumped into the worn-out knob and pushed it to one side.
The engine emitted a slight noise and started. He unclasped the lid of
the gyro-compass. The one number he still remembered clearly was the
direction for the return trip. For some time, the vehicle rolled along
in the dark; Rohan had forgotten that there were headlights.

It was still dark at five o'clock, when suddenly in the distance,
between the white and bluish stars, he perceived a ruby-red star, quite
low above the horizon. Rohan blinked his eyes in confusion. A red star?
Unthinkable . . . He imagined that someone was sitting next to himJarg,
of courseand he wanted to ask him what kind of star it was. Suddenly he
came to with a start. He was thunderstruck. It was the headlight of the
_Invincible._ He traveled straight toward the ruby droplet in the
darkness. The light gradually climbed higher and finally turned into a
bright sphere, in whose reflection the spaceship's hull gleamed softly
in the dark. The red eye between the clock dials flared up; the buzzer
rang, indicating the vicinity of an energy field. The vehicle rolled
down a sandy slope and came to a halt. He was not certain that he would
have enough strength to climb back into the car once he had left it, so
he reached into the tool compartment, pulled out a Very pistol andsince
his hand was tremblingleaned his elbow on the steering wheel while he
steadied his right hand with his left and pulled the trigger. An
orange-red streak raced through the dark. The short trajectory of the
flare ended suddenly in a burst of starsit struck the barrier of the
energy field like an invisible glass wall. He shot again and again,
until the magazine rattled drily. The ammunition had been all used up.
But he had been spotted. The first to sound the alarm were most likely
the personnel on duty in the control center, for almost simultaneously
two giant kleig lights flared up under the nose of the space-cruiser;
the white tongues of the kleig lights licked at the sand and their beams
crossed above the vehicle. At the same time, the ramp was lit up by a
powerful floodlight and the entire shaft of the outside elevator glowed
like a cold flame in the splendor of the neon tubes. Within seconds, the
gangways were swarming with men, the sand dunes around the _Invincible_
flared up in the glaring cones of the rotating searchlights; soon the
lane of blue beacons indicated that passage through the protective
barrier was clear.

The Very pistol had dropped from Rohan's hand, and he did not register
the moment when he had slid down to the ground over the vehicle's side.
With unsteady, exaggerated strides, stiffly drawn up to his full height,
his fists clenched in order to suppress the unbearable trembling of his
fingers, he strode straight towards the twenty-storey-high spaceship
that, bathed in a blaze of light, stood outlined before the paling sky.
There it towered, majestic as ever in its motionless grandeuras if it
were indeed invincible.
