Microworlds 

By Stanislaw Lem

Edited by Franz Rottensteiner

 

"Reflections on My Life," The New Yorker, January 30, 1984, copyright ©
1984 by Stanislaw Lem; reprinted by permission. "On the Structural
Analysis of Science Fiction," Science-Fiction Studies, Spring 1973,
copyright © 1973 by R. D. Mullen and Darko Suvin. "Science Fiction: A
Hopeless Case — with Exceptions," Science Fiction Commentary,
July-September 1973, copyright © 1972 by Stanislaw Lem and Franz
Rottensteiner. "Philip K. Dick: A Visionary Among the Charlatans,"
Science-Fiction Studies, March 1975, copyright © 1975 by R. D. Mullen
and Darko Suvin. "The Time-Travel Story and Related Matters of
Science-Fiction Structuring," Science-Fiction Studies, Spring 1974,
copyright © 1974 by R. D. Mullen and Darko Suvin. "Metafantasia: The
Possibilities of Science Fiction," Science-Fiction Studies, March 1981,
copyright © 1981 by SFS Publications. "Cosmology and Science Fiction,"
Science-Fiction Studies, July 1977, copyright © 1977 by R. D. Mullen and
Darko Suvin. "Todorov's Fantastic Theory of Literature," Science-Fiction
Studies, Fall 1974, copyright © 1974 by R. D. Mullen and Darko Suvin.
"Unitas Oppositorum: The Prose of Jorge Luis Borges," Science Fiction
Commentary, April 1971, copyright © 1971 by Stanislaw Lem and Franz
Rottensteiner. "About the Strugatskys' Roadside Picnic," Science-Fiction
Studies, 1983, copyright © 1983 by SFS Publications.

Requests for permission to make copies of any part of the work should be
mailed to: Permissions, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,

Publishers, Orlando, Florida 32887.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Lem, Stanislaw.
Microworlds: writings on science fiction and fantasy.
"A Helen and Kurt Wolff book."
Bibliography: p. 279
1. Science fiction — History and criticism — Addresses, essays,
lectures.
2. Fantastic fiction — History and criticism — Addresses, essays,
lectures.
I. Rottensteiner, Franz. II. Title.
PN3433.8.L4 1984 809.3'876 84-12837
ISBN 0-15-159480-5
ISBN 0-15-659443-9 (Harvest/HBJ : pbk.)

Designed by Mark Likgalter
Printed in the United States of America
First Harvest/HBJ edition 1986

A B C D E F G H I J

 

 

Contents 

Introduction by Franz Rottensteiner

Reflections on My Life

On the Structural Analysis of Science Fiction

Science Fiction: A Hopeless Case — with Exceptions

Philip K. Dick: A Visionary Among the Charlatans

The Time-Travel Story and Related Matters of Science-Fiction Structuring

Metafantasia: The Possibilities of Science Fiction

Cosmology and Science Fiction

Todorov's Fantastic Theory of Literature

Unitas Oppositorum: The Prose of Jorge Luis Borges

About the Strugatskys' Roadside Picnic

Bibliography

Notes

 
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Introduction 

It was toward the end of the 1960s that I began corresponding with
Stanislaw Lem. I had been a voracious reader of science fiction for many
years, although I disliked most of what I read and saw it as a waste of
the form's potential. Perhaps it was this similarity in our views that
Lem found attractive.

Science fiction differs from other popular genres in that its readers
are frequently articulate, eager to meet and talk with other
science-fiction fans. There is a whole science-fiction subculture, with
hundreds of amateur magazines, or "fanzines," devoted to science
fiction, its authors, and its audience. These magazines, most with a
circulation of only a few hundred copies, are found not only in the
United States, where they started, but all over the world, even in
Communist countries. Since the early 1960s I myself have edited such a
fanzine, called Quarber Merkur; it is devoted to the analysis of science
fiction and fantasy writing and is rather critical of them. At that time
I knew of Lem, but I considered him only one science-fiction writer
among many, though perhaps the most important in Eastern Europe; I had
read very little of his work. In Germany he was little more than a name;
few of his books had appeared in German, mainly in East Germany. His
first science-fiction novel, Astronauci (1951; The Astronauts), had been
widely translated, and a few other works had appeared in France and
Italy, mostly in atrocious translations. That was all.

In 1968 I published a review of an East German translation of Lem's
novel The Invincible in my magazine and sent the author a copy, without
comment. In response, Lem wrote me a long and extremely interesting
letter in German. That was the beginning of a long correspondence; by
now Lem's letters to me fill three large files. They constitute the most
detailed documentation in the West of Lem's thoughts, activities, and
international career since 1968. From his letters I recognized a truly
remarkable mind, and when I became a science-fiction editor in West
Germany in 1970 I was able to publish him. Then it occurred to me that I
might do more for Lem if I became his literary agent.

Early in our correspondence, Lem indicated that he was planning to write
a study of science fiction but was having difficulty obtaining source
materials. I sent him what I considered interesting and drew his
attention to a number of writers, among them Cordwainer Smith, Philip K.
Dick, J. G. Ballard, C. M. Kornbluth, and Philip José Farmer. Aside from
supplying some works of science fiction and also some of the few then
existing books about science fiction (especially the criticism of Damon
Knight and James Blish), I made no attempt to influence the shape of
Lem's book, nor would any such endeavor have been successful with a
writer like Lem. (Curiously, some science-fiction writers later implied
I had unduly influenced Lem or even made him up.)

The result of Lem's efforts was finally published in 1971 as Fantastyka
i futurologia (Science Fiction and Futurology). It is both a rigorous
investigation of the theoretical basis of science fiction and a detailed
analysis of many of its major topics and literary themes. The first
volume in particular contains some highly theoretical reasoning that is
without precedent in other books on science fiction, most of which are
historical, biographical, or bibliographical in character. So far Lem's
book has appeared outside Poland only in German and (in abridged form)
in Hungarian. Two chapters have been published in English in the journal
Science-Fiction Studies, "The Time-Travel Story and Related Matters of
Science-Fiction Structuring" and "Metafantasia: The Possibilities of
Science Fiction." Both give an indication of the freshness and
originality of Lem's approach and also shed light on his own science
fiction.

While Lem was writing Fantastyka i futurologia, we corresponded a great
deal, and in his letters Lem provided extensive explanations of what he
was doing. Later I published some of these letters as separate articles.
"On the Structural Analysis of Science Fiction" had its genesis in a
lengthy letter; it is the most succinct statement of the aims of Lem's
book. Lem also wrote many reviews and essays for my magazine, and I
translated many of Lem's writings for Australian publications like John
Foyster's Journal of Omphalistic Epistemology and especially Bruce
Gillespie's Science Fiction Commentary. These writings proved quite
controversial for science-fiction buffs, especially the long essay
"Science Fiction: A Hopeless Case — with Exceptions," a more polemical
version of a chapter from Fantastyka i futurologia.

Lem has an insatiable thirst for knowledge and more of a philosophical
than a poetic bent; scientific and philosophical inquiry has always
played an important part in his work. Even in his fiction there is a
strong essayistic element. Learned disquisitions are frequently woven
into the plot, and if anything this practice has grown stronger with the
passage of time. The stories in the various cycles (such as the Ijon
Tichy tales, the Pirx stories, and the philosophical tales of the
Cyberiad) become more complex with time; sometimes they carry so heavy
an intellectual load that the story is in danger of being smothered.
Moreover, Lem leans increasingly toward forms that are hybrids of
fiction and nonfiction. His Master's Voice, a novel of science, is
actually a brilliant essay on the limits of human knowledge, the process
of cognition, and the moral responsibility of the scientist. It was
followed by fictions that do away altogether with conventional
characters and narrative. A Perfect Vacuum is a collection of reviews of
nonexistent books; Imaginary Magnitude brings together introductions to
equally nonexistent works.

So it is hardly surprising that Lem should have made a critical study of
the problem that interests him most, that of the scientific and literary
foundations of his own and others' writings. Given the vagaries of
translation, however, very little of Lem's criticism is available in
English, and most of what is available deals with science fiction, the
genre which Lem himself favors most of the time. Of course, the practice
of science fiction is an important subject of Lem's nonfiction writing,
but it is only one of many. Lem's interests range from cybernetics and
artificial intelligence to cosmology and cosmogony, genetic engineering,
the creation of simulated environments, literary theory and the
reception of literary works, and indeed everything pertaining to the
future of man and his civilization.

In Dialogi (1957; Dialogues) Lem discussed, in the form of Socratic
dialogues between a Berkeleyan Hylas and Filonous, the amazing prospects
of the young science of cybernetics. His Summa Technologiae (1964),
perhaps his most important discursive work, is a futurological treatise
unlike anything else on the subject. Instead of presenting the usual
catalogue of wonderful or horrible things that the future has in store,
Lem selects certain ideas to pursue to their outermost limits — the
problem of cosmic civilizations, the evolution of artificial
intelligence, the genetic remodeling of man, the creation of worlds,
stellar engineering; or he formulates daring hypotheses about the
breeding of information or the total reconstruction of reality.

In Filozofia przypadku (1968; The Philosophy of Chance), Lem turned to
quite another question: why are works of literature received differently
in different ages and different cultures, being highly esteemed at
certain times and held in low regard at others? Here Lem tried to arrive
at an empirical theory of literature that would take into account such
temporal and cultural factors. The book also contains a spirited polemic
against structuralism, a polemic that is continued in Fantastyka i
futurologia, in which Lem applies to science fiction the theories
elaborated in the earlier, more general volume.

Lem's relationship with science fiction is a love-hate relationship.
Although much of his writing can only be called science fiction, for a
long time Lem was not familiar with what other science-fiction writers
were doing (he has often declared that he lived in Poland like Robinson
Crusoe on his island). Verne and Wells he read in his youth, but modern
Western science fiction was unknown to him until the late 1950s, when he
read some of it, mostly in French translation, following his publication
in France by Denoël. Only much later was he able to read more widely,
and the more science fiction he read, the more he was disappointed. This
disappointment is reflected in many of his autobiographical pieces and,
of course, in his criticism. In the late sixties, Lem decided to put his
ideas about science fiction into systematic form. The result was
Fantastyka i futurologia, a major study of Western science fiction.

For a time Lem played the part of a missionary in the science-fiction
world, but today he feels he was wasting his time trying to reform
science fiction by criticism, and he has virtually stopped writing about
it (and reading it), although he still contributes occasionally to
publications like Science-Fiction Studies. To judge from the reaction to
Lem's essays, few understood him. But some people at least seem to have
understood him: in 1976 the Science Fiction Writers of America revoked
Lem's honorary membership, following publication by an American press
service of excerpts from an article of his in a German newspaper,
sharply critical of science fiction. Officially, Lem's membership was
withdrawn on technical grounds. Had Lem been less critical of science
fiction, of course, the SFWA officers would have had no reason to read
the bylaws of their own organization, and Lem would not have been
treated so shabbily. (The whole affair is documented in Science-Fiction
Studies, July 1977 ff.)

A Polish reviewer has remarked that Lem is not interested in literature
per se at all; his main interest is in the structure of the world, not
the structure of the literary work. Lem is more interested in
intellectual problems than in their literary expression. He has no
patience with the notion of fiction as entertainment or art for art's
sake, and fiction without intellectual problems bores him. He is filled
with curiosity about what is not yet known. For him, science fiction is
a laboratory for trying out experiments in new ways of thinking; it
should be a spearhead of cognition. It should attempt what hasn't been
thought or done before.

These goals are of course impossible to achieve, let alone in a
literature of mass entertainment. Lem sees science fiction as literature
with great potential — a potential that naïve apologists often claim has
already been achieved — and he is all the more disappointed that it
falls so far short of his expectations. He complains that it is only a
rehash of old myths and fairy tales, that it avoids all kinds of real
problems, and that it resorts to narrative patterns of primitive
adventure literature, which are wholly inadequate to express what is
claimed for science fiction. For him, science fiction plays "empty
games" — the tired old vaudeville of time travel, robots, supermen,
mutants, extrasensory perception, and the rest.

From this disappointment comes the polemical acerbity of Lem's writings
on science fiction. He believes in old-fashioned cultural and
intellectual virtues, which he sees threatened by the onslaught of mass
culture. Science fiction is a traitor to those values; even worse, it
often claims to possess those values when it does not, quite unlike more
modest forms of popular fiction. One of Lem's recurrent nightmares is
the flood of information whose sheer volume makes it extremely
difficult, if not impossible, to find the few good works in the mass of
the bad. Such a leveling effect he also attributes to structuralism, one
of his main targets.

It is Lem's concern for the real world and its cultural heritage that
explains the sharpness of his tone, for he writes in a tradition where
cultural values matter. Lem does not have to denigrate "Western science
fiction" in order to ingratiate himself with the Polish authorities, as
one of the sillier opinions once current among American science-fiction
writers had it. Nor does it follow, from the fact that Lem's criticisms
in Fantastyka i futurologia deal mostly with American and English
science fiction, that he likes the Soviet variety any better. It is only
that it would be more difficult for a citizen of Poland to write serious
criticism about Soviet science fiction, not because it couldn't be
published, but rather because objective discussion of the better works
would be fraught with dangers for the writers discussed. Nevertheless,
the present collection includes an analysis of one of the most brilliant
examples of modern Soviet science fiction, Roadside Picnic, by the
Strugatsky brothers, originally published as an afterword to a Polish
edition in a series entitled "Lem Recommends." (The series included
Philip K. Dick's Ubik — Lem's afterword is also printed here — and short
story collections by M. R. James and by the Polish weird fiction writer
Stefan Grabiliski, as well as Ursula K. Le Guin's Wizard of Earthsea.)

All the essays in this volume have been published before, and the
selection presented here was made entirely from existing translations.
The magazines in which they first appeared range from science-fiction
fanzines to Science-Fiction Studies and The New Yorker. Some were
written originally in German; two came into English via Hungarian and
German, respectively. Of some essays, such as the one on Borges, there
is no Polish version; one, "Todorov's Fantastic Theory of Literature,"
was originally written in German, later rewritten in Polish by the
author himself, and then translated from Polish to English. The
autobiographical essay was commissioned by a Chicago publisher for a
series on contemporary authors. It was written by Lem in German and
published in my translation. A somewhat different version appeared in
The New Yorker, as "Chance and Order."

Despite the mixed origins of the essays and the many hands involved in
giving them their final shape, I think that this collection has a
remarkable unity and can serve as a useful introduction to Lem's
nonfiction and to his ideas on science fiction and fantasy. It should
contribute to a better understanding of Lem's unique fiction, so much
different in scope from other science fiction even when it uses the same
forms.

Special thanks are due to all the people who first published these
essays, especially to Bruce Gillespie, whose Science Fiction Commentary
was in its day one of the liveliest and most open of the many fan
magazines in the science-fiction field.

—Franz Rottensteiner

 

Reflections on My Life 

As I write this autobiographical essay, I am aware of two opposed
principles that guide my pen. One of those two extremes is chance; the
other is the order that gives shape to life. Can all the factors that
were responsible for my coming into the world and enabled me, although
threatened by death many times, to survive unscathed in order finally to
become a writer — moreover, one who ceaselessly strives to reconcile
contradictory elements of realism and fantasy — be regarded only as the
result of long chains of chance? Or was there some specific
predetermination involved, not in the form of some supernatural moira,
not quite crystallized into fate when I was in my cradle but in a
budding form laid down in me — that is to say, in my genetic inheritance
was there a kind of predestiny befitting an agnostic and empiricist?

That chance played a role in my life is undeniable. In the First World
War, when the fortress of Przemysl fell, in 1915, my father, Samuel Lem,
a physician in the Austro-Hungarian Army, was taken prisoner by the
Russians, and was able to return to Lemberg (now Lvov), his native city,
only after nearly five years, in the wake of the chaos of the Russian
Revolution. I know from the stories he told us that on at least one
occasion he was to be shot by the Reds on the spot for being an officer
(and therefore a class enemy). He owed his life to the fact that when he
was being led to his execution in a small Ukrainian city he was noticed
and recognized from the sidewalk by a Jewish barber from Lemberg who
used to shave the military commander in that city and for this reason
had free access to him. The barber interceded for my father (who was
then not yet my father), and he was allowed to go free, and was able to
return to Lemberg and to his fiancée. (This story, made more complex for
aesthetic reasons, is to be found in one of the fictitious reviews — of
"De Impossibilitate Vitae," by Cezar Kouska — in my book A Perfect
Vacuum. ) In this instance, chance was fate incarnate, for if the barber
had happened to pass through that street a minute later my father would
have been irrevocably doomed. I heard the tale from him when I was a
little boy, at a time when I was unable to think in abstract terms (I
may have been ten), and was thus unable to consider the respective
merits of the categories of chance and fate.

My father went on to become a respected and rather wealthy physician (a
laryngologist) in Lvov. I was born there in 1921. In the rather poor
country that Poland was before the Second World War, I lacked nothing. I
had a French governess and no end of toys, and for me the world I grew
into was something final and stable. But, if that was the case, why did
I as a child delight in solitude, and make up the rather curious game
that I have described in another book — the novel The High Castle, a
book about my early childhood. My game was to transport myself into
fictitious worlds, but I did not invent or imagine them in a direct way.
Rather, I fabricated masses of important documents when I was in high
school in Lvov: certificates; passports; diplomas that conferred upon me
riches, high social standing, and secret power, or "full power of
authority," without any limit whatsoever; and permits and coded proofs
and cryptograms testifying to the highest rank — all in some other
place, in a country not to be found on any map. Did I feel insecure in
some way? Threatened? Did this game perhaps spring from some unconscious
feeling of danger? I know nothing of any such cause.

I was a good student. Some years after the war, I learned from an older
man who had held some position or other in the prewar Polish educational
system that when the IQs of all high-school students were tested — it
must have been around 1936 or 1937 -mine was over 180, and I was said to
have been, in the words of that man, the most intelligent child in
southern Poland. (I myself suspected nothing of this sort at the time of
the test, for the results were not made known to us.) But this high IQ
certainly was of no help in surviving the occupation of the
General-gouvernement (to which administrative unit Poland had been
reduced by the Germans). During that period, I learned in a very
personal, practical way that I was no "Aryan." I knew that my ancestors
were Jews, but I knew nothing of the Mosaic faith and, regrettably,
nothing at all of Jewish culture. So it was, strictly speaking, only the
Nazi legislation that brought home to me the realization that I had
Jewish blood in my veins. We succeeded in evading imprisonment in the
ghetto, however. With false papers, my parents and I survived that
ordeal.

But, to return to my childhood in prewar Poland, my first reading matter
was of a rather curious nature. It was my father's anatomy books and
medical texts, in which I browsed when I was still hardly able to read,
and I understood them all the less since my father's professional books
were in German or in French. Only the fiction in his library was in
Polish. Pictures of skeletons, of neatly dissected human skulls, of
human brains precisely sketched in many colors, of intestines in
preserved condition and embellished with magic-sounding Latin names
provided my earliest contacts with the world of books. Hunting through
my father's library was, of course, strictly forbidden to me, and it
attracted me precisely because it was forbidden and mysterious. I must
not forget to mention the actual human bone that was kept behind the
glass doors of my father's bookcase. It was a skull bone — os temporale
— that had been removed during a trepanation; perhaps it was a relic
from the time when my father was studying medicine. I held this bone,
without any particular feelings, several times in my hands. (I had to
steal my father's key to be able to do this.) I knew what it was, but I
wasn't frightened by it. I only wondered about it in a certain way. Its
surroundings — the rows of big tomes of medical textbooks — appeared
quite natural to me, for a child, lacking any real yardstick, is unable
to differentiate between the banal or commonplace and the unusual. That
bone — or, rather, its fictional counterpart — is to be found in another
novel of mine, Memoirs Found in a Bathtub. In this book, the bone became
a whole skull, cleanly dissected from a corpse, that was kept by a
doctor in a ward — one of the many stations in the hero's odyssey
through a labyrinthine building. A complete skull like this was owned by
my uncle, my mother's brother, who was also a physician. He was murdered
two days after the Wehrmacht marched into Lvov. At that time, several
non-Jewish Poles were also killed — mostly university professors — and
Tadeusz Boy-Zelenski, one of the best-known Polish writers. They were
taken from their apartments during the night and shot.

Now, then, what objective, extrinsic connection — i.e., not one imagined
by me and consisting solely of associations — could there be between a
little boy's fascination with the parts of a human skeleton and the era
of the Holocaust? Was this apparently significant and fitting omen a
matter of chains of chance, purely of coincidence? In my opinion, it
was. I do not believe in manifest destiny or predetermination. In lieu
of a preestablished harmony, I can well imagine (upon the basis of the
experiences of my life) a preestablished disharmony, ending in chaos and
madness. In any case, my childhood was certainly peaceful and Arcadian —
especially when compared with what happened in the following years.

I grew into a bookworm, and read everything that fell into my hands: the
great national poems, novels, popular-science books. (I still remember
that a book of the kind that my father gave me as a gift sold for
seventy zlotys — the price was written inside -and that was a fortune in
those days; for seventy zlotys you could buy a whole suit. My father
spoiled me.) I also — I can still remember it — looked with keen
interest at the male and female genitalia reproduced in my father's
anatomy books. The female pubis struck me especially — as something
spiderlike, not quite nauseating but certainly something that could
hardly have a connection with erotic feelings. I believe that I was
later, during my adolescence, sexually quite normal. But since my
subsequent studies in medicine included gynecology, and since I was, for
a month, an obstetrician in a hospital, I associate the pornography of
today not with sexual longing and with copulative lust but with the
anatomical pictures in the tomes of my father, and with my own
gynecological examinations. The thought that a male may be highly
excited by the mere sight of female genitalia strikes me as very
peculiar. I happen to know perfectly well that this is a case of libido
— of the instincts built into our senses and programmed by evolution —
but the desire for sex without love strikes me as something comparable
to an irresistible urge to eat salt and pepper by the spoonful because
dishes without salt and pepper lack full flavor. I feel no repulsion but
no attraction, either, as long as there is no specific erotic bond of
the kind that is called "love."

As an eight-year-old boy, I fell in love with a girl. I never uttered as
much as a word to the girl, but I observed her often in a public garden
near our house. The girl had no inkling of my feelings, and most
probably never even noticed me. It was a burning, long-lasting love
affair dissected, as it were, from all actual circumstances — even from
the sphere of any kind of wishful thinking. I was not interested in
becoming her friend. My emotions were restricted to worshiping her from
afar; aside from that, there was absolutely nothing. May the
psychoanalysts make what they will of these feelings of a small boy. I
do not comment further on them, because I am of the opinion that such an
episode can be interpreted in any way one chooses.

At the beginning, I mentioned the opposites of chance and order, of
coincidence and predestination. Only as I wrote the book The High Castle
did the thought cross my mind that my fate — my profession as a writer —
was already budding in me when I looked at skeletons, galaxies in
astrophysical tomes, pictures of reconstructions of the monstrous
extinct saurians of the Mesozoic, and many-colored human brains in
anatomical handbooks. Perhaps these external circumstances — these
impulses and sensuous impressions — helped to shape my sensibility. But
that is only speculation.

I not only imagined fantastic kingdoms and domains but also made
inventions and mentally created prehistoric animals unheard of in
paleontology. For instance, I dreamed up an aircraft shaped like a giant
concave mirror, with a boiler situated in the focus. The circumference
of the mirror was studded with turbines and rotors to provide lift, as
in a helicopter, and the energy for all that was to be derived from
solar radiation. This unwieldy monstrosity was supposed to fly very
high, far above the clouds, and, of course, only during daytime. And I
invented what had already existed for a long time without my knowing it:
the differential gear. I also drew many funny things in my thick
copybooks, including a bicycle on which one rode moving up and down, as
on a horse. Recently, I saw something like this imaginary bicycle
somewhere — it may have been in the English periodical New Scientist,
but I am not quite sure.

I think it is significant that I never bothered to show my designs to
other people; indeed, I kept them all secret, both from my parents and
from my fellow pupils, but I have no idea why I acted in this way.
Perhaps it was because of a childish affection for the mysterious. The
same was the case with my "passports" — certificates and permits that,
for instance, allowed one to enter subterranean treasure troves. I
suppose also that I was afraid to be laughed at, for, although I knew
that these things were only a game, I played it with great seriousness.
I divulged something of this childhood world in the book that I have
already mentioned, The High Castle, but it contains only a small part of
my memories. Why only a small part? I can answer such a question at
least partly. First, in The High Castle I wanted to transport myself
back into the child that I had been, and to comment on childhood as
little as possible from the position of the adult. Second, during its
gestation period the book generated a specific normative aesthetic
similar to a selforganizing process, and there were certain memories
that would appear as dissonances in this canon. It was not the case that
I intended to hide certain things because of, say, a feeling of guilt or
of shame but, rather, that there were memories that would not fit into
the pattern that I presented as my childhood. I wanted — something
impossible to attain — to extract the essence of my childhood, in its
pure form, from my whole life: to peel away, as it were, the overlying
strata of war, of mass murder and extermination, of the nights in the
shelters during air raids, of an existence under a false identity, of
hide-andseek, of all the dangers, as if they had never existed. For,
indeed, nothing of this had existed when I was a child, or even a
sixteen-year-old high-school boy. I gave an indication of these
exclusions in the novel itself. I do not remember exactly where, but I
signaled that I had to or wanted to keep certain matters out by dropping
a parenthetical remark that every human being is able to write several
strikingly different autobiographies, according to the viewpoint chosen
and the principle of selection.

The meaning of the categories of order and chance for human life was
impressed upon me during the war years in a purely practical,
instinctual manner; I resembled more a hunted animal than a thinking
human being. I was able to learn from hard experience that the
difference between life and death depended upon minuscule, seemingly
unimportant things and the smallest of decisions: whether one chose this
or that street for going to work; whether one visited a friend at one
o'clock or twenty minutes later; whether one found a door open or
closed. I cannot claim that in following my instinct for
self-preservation I always employed a minimax strategy of extreme
cautiousness. To the contrary, I exposed myself to danger several times
— occasionally when I thought it necessary but in some cases through
mere thoughtlessness, or even stupidity. So that today, when I think of
such idiotically reckless patterns of behavior, I still feel wonder,
mingled with bewilderment, about why I acted as I did. To steal
ammunition from the so-called Beutepark der Luftwaffe (the depot where
the German Air Force stored its loot) in Lvov and to turn it over to
somebody totally unknown to me — somebody of whom I knew only that he
was a member of the Resistance — I considered to be my duty. (I was in a
position to do so since, as an employee of a German company, I had
access to this depot.) But when I was instructed to transport something
— a gun, in this case — from one place to another just before curfew,
and was told, strictly, not to use the tram (I was supposed to walk), it
happened that I nevertheless disobeyed the order and climbed onto the
footboard of a tram, and that a "Black One" — a Ukrainian policeman who
was a member of the auxiliary police of the German occupational forces —
jumped onto the footboard behind me and put his arm around me to reach
for the door handle. It could have meant an ill end for me if the
policeman had felt the gun. My act was insubordination, thoughtlessness,
and folly all in one, but I did it anyway. Was it a challenge to fate,
or only foolhardiness? Up to this day, I am not sure. (I am better able
to understand why I visited the ghetto several times — risky though this
was — when it was open to visitors. I had friends there. As far as I
know, all, or nearly all, of them were transported to the gas chambers
of Belzec in the fall of 1942.)

At this point, the question arises whether what I have reported so far
is relevant at all, in the sense of having any direct, causal
relationship to my profession as a writer, or to the kind of writing I
have done — excluding, of course, autobiographical works like The High
Castle. I believe that such a causal relationship exists — that it isn't
mere chance that I attribute in my work such a prominent role to chance
as the shaper of human destiny. I have lived in radically different
social systems. Not only have I experienced the huge differences in poor
but independent, capitalist (if one must call it that) prewar Poland,
the Pax Sovietica in the years 1939-41, the German occupation, the
return of the Red Army, and the postwar years in a quite different
Poland, but at the same time I have also come to understand the
fragility that all systems have in common, and I have learned how human
beings behave under extreme conditions — how their behavior when they
are under enormous pressure is almost impossible to predict.

I remember well my feelings when I read Mr. Sammler's Planet, by Saul
Bellow. Now, I thought that book very good — so good that I have read it
several times. Indeed. But most of the things that Mr. Bellow attributed
to his hero, Mr. Sammler, in recounting his experiences in a Poland
occupied by the Germans, didn't sound quite right to me. The skilled
novelist must have done careful research before starting on the novel,
and he made only one small mistake — giving a Polish maid a name that
isn't Polish. This error could have been corrected by a stroke of the
pen. What didn't seem right was the "aura" -the indescribable
"something" that can be expressed in language perhaps only if one has
experienced in person the specific situation that is to be described.
The problem in the novel is not the unlikeliness of specific events. The
most unlikely and incredible things did happen then. It is, rather, the
total impression that evokes in me the feeling that Bellow learned of
such events from hearsay, and was in the situation of a researcher who
receives the individual parts of a specimen packaged in separate crates
and then tries to put them together. It is as if oxygen, nitrogen, and
water vapor and the fragrance of flowers were to be mixed in such a way
as to evoke and bring to life the specific mood of a certain part of a
forest at a certain morning hour. I do not know whether something like
this would be totally impossible, but it would surely be difficult as
hell. There is something wrong in Mr. Sammler's Planet; some tiny
inaccuracy got mixed into the compound. Those days have pulverized and
exploded all narrative conventions that had previously been used in
literature. The unfathomable futility of human life under the sway of
mass murder cannot be conveyed by literary techniques in which
individuals or small groups of persons form the core of the narrative.
It is, perhaps, as if somebody tried by providing the most exact
description of the molecules of which the body of Marilyn Monroe was
composed to convey a full impression of her. That would be impossible. I
do not know, of course, whether this sort of narrative inadequacy was
the reason that I started writing science fiction, but I suppose — and
this is a somewhat daring statement -that I began writing science
fiction because it deals with human beings as a species (or, rather,
with all possible species of intelligent beings, one of which happens to
be the human species). At least, it should deal with the whole species,
and not just with specific individuals, be they saints or monsters.

It is likely that, after my beginner's attempts — that is to say, after
my first science-fiction novels — I revolted for the same reason of
narrative limitations against the paradigms of the genre as they
developed and became fossilized in the United States. As long as I
didn't know current science fiction — and I didn't know it for a long
time, because up to 1956 or 1957 it was almost impossible to get foreign
books in Poland — I believed that it had to be a further development of
the starting position taken by H. G. Wells in The War of the Worlds. It
was he who climbed into a general's position, from which it was possible
to survey the whole human species in an extreme situation. He
anticipated a future filled with disasters, and I must admit that he was
correct. During the war, when I read his novel several times, I was able
to confirm his understanding of human psychology.

Today, I am of the opinion that my earliest science-fiction novels are
devoid of any value (regardless of the fact that they had large editions
everywhere and made me world-famous). I wrote these novels — for
instance, The Astronauts, which was published in 1951, and was about an
expedition to the planet Venus from a simplistically Utopian Earth — for
reasons that I can still understand today, although in their plots and
in the kind of world they depicted they were contrary to all my
experience of life at the time. In these books, the evil world of
reality was supposed to have suffered a sea change into a good one. In
the postwar years, there seemed to be only this choice — between hope
and despair, between a historically untenable optimism and a
well-justified skepticism that was easily apt to turn into nihilism. Of
course, I wanted to embrace optimism and hope!

However, my very first novel was a realistic one, which I wrote perhaps
in order to rid myself of the weight of my war memories — to expel them
like pus. But perhaps I wrote this book also in order not to forget; the
one motive could well go together with the other. The novel is called
The Hospital of Transfiguration, and it is about the fight of the staff
of a hospital for the insane to save the inmates from being killed by
the German occupiers. One German reviewer ventured the opinion that it
was a kind of sequel to Thomas Mann's The Magic Mountain. What was in
Mann only a portent — only the distant hint of a then nearly invisible
lightning, since the horrors to come were still hidden behind the
horizon of the times — proves to be in my novel the final circle of
Hell, the logical outcome of the predicted "decline of the West" in the
mass exterminations. The village, the hospital for the mentally ill, the
professional staff: none of the places and characters ever existed; they
are all my invention. But mentally ill persons — and many others — were
indeed murdered by the thousands in occupied Poland. I wrote The
Hospital of Transfiguration in 1948, my last year as a student. It could
not appear until 1955, however, since it didn't conform to the then
already reigning standards of Socialist Realism. In the meantime, I was,
as I can say without exaggeration, very busy.

In 1946, we — my father, my mother, and I — moved from Lvov to Kraków,
having lost all our possessions in the course of the war. My father, who
was seventy-one years old, was forced, because of these reverses, to
work in a hospital; there was no possibility that he could set up his
own practice. We all lived in a single room in Kraków, and my father
didn't have the means to buy his own equipment. Purely by chance, I
learned how I could financially help our family: I wrote several long
stories for a weekly dime-novel series that featured a complete story in
each issue. Considered as thrillers, they weren't so bad. Aside from
that, I wrote poems; they appeared in Tygodnik Powszechny, the Krakovian
Catholic weekly. And two novellas — not science fiction proper but on
the margin of fantasy — plus some odds and ends in various publications.
But I did not take my writing very seriously.

In 1947, at the age of twenty-six, I became a junior research assistant
for an organization called Konwersatorium Naukoznawcze (the Circle for
the Science of Science), founded by Dr. Mieczyslaw Choynowski. To him I
presented my most dearly held works: a theory of brain functions
invented by me, and a philosophical treatise. He called both nonsense
but took me under his tutelage. Thus, I was forced to read logic
textbooks, scientific methodology, psychology, psychometrics (the theory
of psychological testing), the history of natural science, and many
other things. Although it was apparent that I couldn't read English, I
had to do the best I could with English-language books. These books
proved so interesting that I had to crack them, dictionary in hand, as
Champollion cracked his hieroglyphs. Since I had learned French at home
and Latin and German in school, and had picked up some Russian, I
somehow managed to get along. But to this day I can understand only
written English. I can neither speak the language nor understand it when
it is spoken. For the monthly Zycie Nauki (The Life of Science), I
compiled surveys of scientific periodicals from the standpoint of the
science of science. By doing so, I became involved in the wretched
Lysenko affair, for in my survey I synopsized the controversy between
him and the Soviet geneticists in what an official report from the
ministry in charge of Polish universities called "a tendentious manner."
I held Lysenko's doctrine of the inheritance of acquired characteristics
to be ridiculous, and I was proved right after several years, but my
taking this position had rather painful consequences for our monthly.
Something similar happened a little later, when I perceived in Norbert
Wiener's and Claude E. Shannon's cybernetics a new era not just for
technological progress but also for the whole of civilization. At that
time, cybernetics was considered in our country to be a fallacious
pseudoscience.

In those years, I was particularly well informed about the latest
developments in the various sciences, for the Krakovian circle
functioned as a kind of clearinghouse for scientific literature from the
United States (and, to some extent, from Canada) coming in to all the
Polish universities. From the book parcels received I could borrow all
the works that stirred my interest, including Wiener's The Human Use of
Human Beings. At night, I read everything voraciously, so that I could
pass on the books as soon as possible to the people who were supposed to
get them. On the basis of this reading, I wrote those of my novels that
I can still acknowledge without shame — Eden (1959), Solaris (1961), The
Invincible (1964), etc. They incorporate cognitive problems in fictions
that do not oversimplify the world, as did my earliest, naïve
science-fiction novels.

My father died in 1954, and toward the end of the fifties I was able to
acquire for us — myself and my wife — a small house on the southern
outskirts of Kraków, which we still have. (Close to this house, a larger
house, in a larger garden, is in the process of being built for us as I
write these words.) In the late sixties, I first made contact with my
future literary agent and kindred spirit, Franz Rottensteiner, from
Vienna. Both of us were then writing many critical, often polemical
essays for Anglo-American science-fiction "fanzines" (i.e., the amateur
magazines published by the aficionados of science fiction), mostly for
Bruce Gillespie's Australian Science Fiction Commentary; that resulted
in a certain popularity for both of us, even if it was of a negative
sort, in the science-fiction ghetto. Today, I am of the opinion that we
wasted our efforts. In the beginning, it was totally incomprehensible to
me why so many authors were erecting, viribus unitis, a common prison
for science fiction. I believed that, according to the law of large
numbers alone, there had to be among so many a considerable group at the
top, as far as both writing abilities and scientific qualifications were
concerned. (For me, the scientific ignorance of most American
science-fiction writers was as inexplicable as the abominable literary
quality of their output.) I was in error, but it took me a very long
time to recognize it.

As a reader of science fiction, I expected something like what is
called, in the evolutionary processes of nature, "speciation" — a new
animal species generating a diverging, fanlike radiation of other new
species. In my ignorance, I thought that the time of Verne, Wells, and
Stapledon was the beginning, but not the beginning of the decline, of
the sovereign individuality of the author. Each of these men created
something not only radically new for their time but also quite different
from what the others created. They all had enormous room for maneuvering
in the field of speculation, because the field had only recently been
opened up and was still empty of both writers and books. Each of them
entered the no man's land from a different direction and made some
particular province of this terra incognita his own. Their successors,
on the other hand, had to compromise more and more with the crowd. They
were forced to become like ants in an ant hill, or industrious bees,
each of which is indeed building a different cell in the honeycomb but
whose cells are all similar. Such is the law of mass production. Thus,
the distance between individual works of science fiction has not grown
greater, as I erroneously expected, but has shrunk. The very thought
that a Wells or a Stapledon could have written, alternately, visionary
fantasies and typical mysteries strikes me as absurd. For the next
generation of writers, however, this was something quite normal. Wells
and Stapledon are comparable to the people who invented chess and
draughts. They discovered new rules for games, and their successors have
applied these rules with only smaller or larger variations. The sources
of innovation have gradually become depleted; the thematic clusters have
become fossilized. Hybrids have arisen (science fantasy), and the
patterns and schemata of the literary form have been applied in a
mechanical and ready-made way.

To create something radically new, it was necessary to advance into
another field of possibilities. I believe that in the first period of my
career I wrote purely secondary things. In the second period (Solaris,
The Invincible), I reached the borders of a field that was already
nearly completely mapped. In the third period — when I wrote, for
example, reviews of nonexistent books and forewords to works that, as I
put it, ironically, in an interview, would be published "sometime in the
future but that do not exist yet" — I left the fields already exploited
and broke new ground. This idea is best explained by a specific example.
A few years ago, I wrote a small book entitled Provocation. It is a
review of a fictitious two-volume tome ascribed to a nonexistent German
historian and anthropologist, whom I call Aspernicus. The first volume
is titled Die Endlösung als Erlösung (The Final Solution Considered as
Redemption), the second Fremdkörper Tod (Foreign Body Death). The whole
thing is a unique historico-philosophical hypothesis about the as yet
unrecognized roots of the Holocaust, and the role that death, especially
mass death, has played in the cultures of all times up to the present
day. The literary quality of my fictitious criticism (which is rather
long, or it wouldn't have filled even a small book) is beside the point
here. What counts is the fact that there were professional historians
who took my fancy for the review of a real book, as is attested to by
attempts on the part of some of them to get hold of the book. To my
mind, Provocation, too, is a kind of science fiction; I am trying not to
limit the meaning of the name of this category of writing but, rather,
to expand it.

Nothing I've ever written was planned in an abstract form right from the
start, to be embodied later in literary form. Nor can I claim that it
was my intention to find other fields for development — that I set out
with the intention of seeking them out for my imagination. But I can say
something about the conception of an idea, the gravid state, the pains
of giving birth, though I do not know the genetic make-up of the embryo
or know how it is transformed into a phenotype — the finished work.
Here, in the realm of the "embryogenesis" of my writing, considerable
differences have developed in the course of some thirty-six years.

My earliest novels (which I acknowledge as my own only with some
discomfort) I planned and constructed according to a complete design. I
wrote the novels in the Solaris group in a similar manner, which I
myself cannot explain. The terminology of birth that I have used above
may sound inappropriate, but it is somewhat apt. I am still able to
point to passages in Solaris and Return from the Stars where I found
myself, during the writing process, in the position of a reader. When
Kelvin, the narrator of Solaris, arrives at the station hovering over
the planet Solaris and finds it empty of human beings, and when he
starts his search for the crew, and encounters the scientist Snow, who
goes into a state of panic when he sees Kelvin, I had no idea why nobody
had expected his arrival or why Snow behaved in this peculiar manner;
indeed, I had no idea at all that some "living ocean" would cover the
whole planet. All this was divulged to me in the same manner that it
becomes dear to the reader in the course of reading the book -with the
sole difference that it was I who created the novel. And in Return from
the Stars I faced a wall when the returning astronaut frightens one of
the first women he meets, and then the word "betrization" is used:
that's the treatment that human beings have undergone in the future
world to rid them of their aggressive impulses. I didn't know at first
exactly what the word should mean, but I knew that there must be some
unbridgeable difference between the civilization that the man left when
he flew to the stars and the one that he found upon his return. The
metaphor that takes its terms from the lexicon of embryology is thus not
nonsense, for a woman who is with child knows that she carries an
embryo, but she has no idea how the embryo is transformed from an ovum
into a child. Considering myself to be a rationalist, I dislike such
confessions, and I should prefer to be able to say that I knew
everything I was doing — or, at least, a good deal of it — beforehand,
and that I planned and designed it, but amicus Plato, sed magis amica
veritas.

Nevertheless, something can be said about my creative method. First,
there is no positive correlation between the spontaneity of my writing
and the quality of the resulting work. I gave birth to Solaris and
Return from the Stars in a similar manner, but I think that Solaris is a
good book and Return from the Stars a poor one, because in the latter
the underlying problems of social evil and its elimination are treated
in a manner that is too primitive, too unlikely, and perhaps even false.
(Even if the evil done to others with full intent could be suppressed
pharmacologically — the book's main premise — no chemical or other
influence upon the brain could cause the unintended evil effects of all
social dependencies, conflicts, and contradictions to disappear from the
world, in the same manner that an insecticide can eliminate vermin.)
Second, creative spontaneity is not a guarantee that there will be sure
development of a whole narrative — i.e., a plot that can be finished
without applying force. I have had to put more stories aside unfinished
or drop them into the wastebasket than I have been able to submit to
publishers. Third, this process of writing, which is characterized by
the signs of a creation by trial and error, has always been arrested by
blocks and blind alleys that forced me to retreat; sometimes there has
even been a "burning out" of the raw materials — the manifold resources
necessary for further growth — stored somewhere in my skull. I was not
able to finish Solaris for a full year, and could do it then only
because I learned suddenly — from myself — how the last chapter had to
be. (And then I could only wonder why I hadn't recognized it from the
beginning.) And, fourth, even what I wrote spontaneously never received
its final shape in the first thrust of work. I have never written a
larger work (it is different with short stories) in a "linear" way right
to the end in one sweep; rather, in the pauses between writing sessions
— it is for purely physiological reasons impossible to sit at the
typewriter all the time — I had new ideas that enriched what was already
finished or was to be written soon; changed it; and complicated it with
some new turn or complexity of plot.

Practical experience — the result of wrestling with my writing over the
years -has taught me never to force what I am working on if it has not
ripened at least partly but, rather, to let it rest for some time (which
may amount to periods of months, or even years) and let the thing mill
around in my head. (A gravid woman knows that an early birth bodes
nothing good.) This situation has put me on the horns of a dilemma,
however, for, like nearly all writers, I often try to invent excuses for
not writing. As is well known, laziness is one of the main barriers
hindering everyone in his work. If I waited until I carried something in
its definite form around in my head, I would never create anything.

My method of creating (which I should like to call, rather, my behavior
as a writer) has changed during the years, if only very slowly. I have
learned to avoid the pure spontaneity of beginnings which motivated me
to write something even when I had not the slightest idea what would
come of the thing — its plot, its problems, its characters, etc. —
because the instances in which I was unable to finish what I had begun
were on the increase. Perhaps the imaginative space that was given me
became gradually emptied, like a territory rich in oil, from which the
black gold at first fountains in the air everywhere in geysers, no
matter where one begins to drill; after some time, one has to use ever
more complicated tricks and apply pressure to drive the remaining
reserves up to the surface. The center of gravity of my work, then,
gradually shifted in the direction of the gaining of a basic idea, a
conception, an imaginative notion. I ceased to sit down at my typewriter
whenever I had a quite small but ready beginning; instead, I started to
produce an increasing number of notes, fictitious encyclopedias, and
small additional ideas, and this has finally led to the things I am
doing now. I try to get to know the "world" to be created by me by
writing the literature specific to it, but not whole shelves of
reference works of the sociology and the cosmology of some thirtieth
century, not the fictitious minutes of scientific expeditions or other
types of literature that express a Zeitgeist, the spirit of a time and a
world, alien to us. After all, this would be an endeavor impossible to
accomplish during the short life span of a human being. Nor do I now do
what began in the first place rather as a joke — write criticism in the
form of the reviews of nonexistent books or forewords to them (A Perfect
Vacuum, Imaginary Magnitude). I do not publish these things any longer
but use them to create my own knowledge of another world, a knowledge
entirely subservient to my literary program — in other words, to sketch
a rough outline that will be filled in later. I surround myself, so to
speak, with the literature of a future, another world, a civilization
with a library that is its product, its picture, its mirror image. I
write only brief synopses or, again, critical reviews of sociological
treatises, scientific papers, and technical reference works, and I
describe technologies that have taken the place of literature after its
final death, just as television has made obsolete the cinématographe of
Lumière, and three-dimensional television will make obsolete the TV sets
of today. There are also historicophilosophical papers, "encyclopedias
of alien civilizations" and their military strategies — all of them, of
course, in a kind of shorthand, or I would need the longevity of a
Methuselah to create them. It may well be that I will publish something
out of this "library for a given purpose" independently of the work for
which it served as a frame and a source of information.*

And where do I get all these facts, which I adorn with such enchanting
titles as "The Trend of Dehumanization in Weapon Systems of the 21st
Century" or "Comparative Culturology of Humanoid Civilizations"? In a
certain sense, from my head; in another, not. I have invented several
picturesque similes to illustrate for myself and others what my working
method is like:

(1)
    A cow produces milk — that is certain — and the milk doesn't come
    from nothing. Just as a cow must eat grass in order to be able to
    produce milk, I have to read large amounts of genuine scientific
    literature of all kinds — i.e., literature not invented by me — and
    the final product, my writing, is as unlike the intellectual food as
    milk is unlike grass.

(2)
    Just as the ape in Wolfgang Köhler's psychological experiments
    wasn't able to reach a banana hanging very high, and made a scaffold
    from junk — boxes lying around, etc. — in order to be able to climb
    up to the banana, I have to build up in subsequent moves and
    attempts an informational "scaffold" that I must climb up to reach
    my goal.

(3)
    The last simile is somewhat drastic and may appear to be very
    primitive, but it nevertheless contains some grain of the truth. A
    water closet has a reservoir that must be filled, and when the lever
    or button is pushed all the water flushes down in one stream.
    Thereafter, the reservoir is empty for a time, and until it has been
    filled again no impatient pushing of the button or the lever will
    cause the small Niagara to flush forth again. As far as my work is
    concerned, this image is appropriate, in that if I did not keep
    enriching my fictitious library there would come a state of
    depletion, and after that I would not be able to get anything more
    out of my mind — my information storehouse. I wrote A Perfect Vacuum
    — it contains fifteen fictitious book reviews — nearly without a
    pause, and after that my reservoir was empty. Indeed, the comparison
    can be dragged in a little further. Just as, if you push the button
    of a toilet too soon, there will flush down only inadequate
    Niagaras, I can squeeze a little more from my head after the writing
    of a book like A Perfect Vacuum. But I will not be satisfied with
    the stuff gained this way, and I cast these remnants aside.

My working methods are additionally complicated and enriched by my
having from time to time written quasi-scientific works that were not
intended as scaffoldlike supports for fiction but meant seriously as
independent books on the theory of literature (but they are along
empirical lines that are alien to specialists in the humanities). And I
have produced Science Fiction and Futurology (1970), which is an acerbic
criticism and theory of science fiction; and skeptical futurology, like
Summa Technologiae (1964), which doesn't amass many speculations about
the wonderful or terrible things of the near future but, rather,
attempts to pursue a few radical ideas to their utmost limits; and the
Dialogues (1957), about the horizons and chances of cybernetics implicit
in the system; and essays on various topics, such as Biology and Values
(1968) and Applied Cybernetics: An Example from the Field of Sociology*
(1971) — a discussion of the pathology of socialism.

Later, it turned out that several of the ideas that occurred to me
during the writing of these works and that I used as hypotheses and
examples — i.e., much of what I encountered on my chosen intellectual
way during the process of writing — could also be put to good use in
fiction. At first, this happened in a totally unconscious manner. I
noticed it only when it was pointed out to me; that is, my critics
discovered the similarities and were of the opinion that I oscillated
with full consciousness between serious discussion and fantastic
literature, when I myself was not aware of such a seesawing. Once my
attention was drawn to this phenomenon, I sometimes browsed in my own
books with an eye toward this possibility of exploitation or
cross-fertilization.

In looking back, I see clearly that in my middle period as a writer I
wrote fiction without any regard for the existence of some continuity
between the imagined worlds and our world. In the worlds of Solaris,
Eden, and Return from the Stars, there are no immediately obvious
transitional stages that could connect these states of civilization with
the obnoxious state of things on earth today. My later work, on the
other hand, shows marked signs of a turning toward our world; that is,
my later fictions are attempts to establish such connections. I
sometimes call this my inclination toward realism in science fiction.
Most likely, such attempts, which to some extent have the unmistakable
character of a retreat (as a renunciation of both Utopia and dystopia,
extremes that are either repugnant to me or leave me cold, just as is
the case for a physician when he faces someone incurably ill), spring
from the awareness that I must soon die, and from the resulting desire
to satisfy, at least with hypotheses, my insatiable inquisitiveness
about the far future of mankind and the cosmos. But that is only a
guess; I wouldn't be able to prove it.

In response to a request to write his autobiography, Einstein emphasized
not the historical circumstances of his life but, rather, his most
beloved offspring — his theories -because they were the children of his
mind. I am no Einstein, but in this respect I nevertheless resemble him,
for I am of the opinion that the most important parts of my biography
are my intellectual struggles. The rest, not mentioned so far, is of a
purely anecdotal character.

In 1953, I married a young student of medicine. We have a son of
fifteen, who likes my novels well enough but modern music — pop, rock
and roll, the Beatles — his motorcycle, and the engines of automobiles
perhaps even more. For many years now, I have not owned my books and my
work; rather, I have become owned by them. I usually get up a short time
before five in the morning and sit down to write: I am writing these
words at six o'clock. I am unable now to work more than five or six
hours a day without a pause. When I was younger, I could write as long
as my stamina held out; the power of my intellect gave way only after my
physical prowess had been exhausted. I write increasingly slowly — my
self-criticism, the demands I put upon myself, have continued to grow —
but I am still rather prolific. (I know this from the speed with which I
have to throw away used-up typewriter ribbons.) Less and less of what
comes into my mind I consider to be good enough to test as suitable
subject matter by my method of trial and error. I still know as little
about how and where my ideas are born as most writers do. I am also not
of the opinion that I am one of the best exegetes of my own books —
i.e., of the problems characteristic of them. I have written many books
of which I haven't said a word here, among them The Cyberiad, the Fables
for Robots (in Mortal Engines), and The Star Diaries, which on the
generic map of literature are to be found in the provinces of the
humorous — of satire, irony, and wit — with a touch of Swift and of dry,
mischievous Voltairean misanthropy. As is well known, the great
humorists were people who had been driven to despair and anger by the
conduct of mankind. In this respect, I am one of those people.

I am probably both dissatisfied with everything that I have written and
proud of it: I must be touched by arrogance, but I do not feel anything
of it. I can notice it only in my behavior — in the way that I used to
destroy all my manuscripts, in spite of many attempts and requests to
get me to deposit these voluminous papers in a university or some other
repository to preserve them for posterity. I have made up a striking
explanation for this behavior. The pyramids were one of the wonders of
the world only while there was no explanation of how they were erected.
Very long, inclined planes, on which bands of workers hauled up the
stone blocks, possibly on wooden cylinders, were leveled once the work
was finished, and thus today the pyramids rise up in a lonely way among
the shallow sand dunes of the desert. I try to level my inclined plane,
my scaffolds and other means of construction, and to let stand only that
of which I need not be ashamed.

I am not sure whether what I have confessed here is the pure truth, but
I have tried to adhere to truth as well as I could.

Translated from the German by Franz Rottensteiner

 

 On the Structural Analysis of
Science Fiction

In the early stages of literary development the different branches of
literature, the genological types, are distinguished clearly and
unmistakably. Only in the more advanced stages do we find hybridization.
But since some cross-breedings are always forbidden, there exists a main
law of literature that could be called "incest prohibition"; that is,
the taboo of genological incest.

A literary work considered as a game has to be played out to the finish
under the same rules with which it was begun. A game can be empty or
meaningful. An empty game has only inner semantics, for it derives
entirely from the relationships that obtain between the objects with
which it is played. On a chessboard, for example, the king has its
specific meanings within the rules of the play, but it has no reference
outside the rules (i.e., it is nothing at all in relation to the world
outside the confines of the chessboard). Literary games can never have
so great a degree of semantic vacuum, for they are played with "natural
language," which always has meanings oriented toward the world of real
objects. Only with a language especially constructed to have no outward
semantics, such as mathematics, is it possible to play empty games.

In any literary game there are rules of two kinds: those that realize
outer semantic functions as the game unfolds and those that make the
unfolding possible. "Fantastic" rules of the second kind — those that
make the unfolding possible — are not necessarily felt as such even when
they imply events that could not possibly occur in the real world. For
example, the thoughts of a dying man are often detailed in quite
realistic fiction even though it is impossible, therefore fantastic, to
read the thoughts of a dying man out of his head and reproduce them in
language. In such cases we simply have a convention, a tacit agreement
between writer and reader — in a word, the specific rule of literary
games that allows the use of nonrealistic means (e.g., thought reading)
for the presentation of realistic happenings.

Literary games are complicated by the fact that the rules that realize
outer semantic functions can be oriented in several directions. The main
types of literary creation imply different ontologies. But you would be
quite mistaken if you believed, for example, that the classical fairy
tale has only its autonomous inner meanings and no relationship with the
real world. If the real world did not exist, fairy tales would have no
meaning. The events that occur in a myth or fairy tale are always
semantically connected with what fate has decreed for the inhabitants of
the depicted world, which means that the world of a myth or fairy tale
is ontologically either inimical or friendly toward its inhabitants,
never neutral; it is thus ontologically different from the real world,
which may be here defined as consisting of a variety of objects and
processes that lack intention, that have no meaning, no message, that
wish us neither well nor ill, that are just there. The worlds of myth or
fairy tale have been built either as traps or as happiness-giving
universes. If a world without intention did not exist — that is, if the
real world did not exist — it would be impossible for us to perceive the
differentia specifica, the uniqueness, of the myth and fairy-tale
worlds.

Literary works can have several semantic relationships at the same time.
For fairy tales the inner meaning is derived from the contrast with the
ontological properties of the real world, but for anti-fairy tales, such
as those by Mark Twain in which the worst children live happily and only
the good and well bred end fatally, the meaning is arrived at by turning
the paradigm of the classical fairy tale upside down. In other words,
the first referent of a semantic relationship need not be the real world
but may instead be the typology of a well-known class of literary games.
The rules of the basic game can be inverted, as they are in Mark Twain,
and thus is created a new generation, a new set of rules — and a new
kind of literary work.

In the twentieth century the evolution of mainstream literary rules has
both allowed the author new liberties and simultaneously subjected him
to new restrictions.

This evolution is antinomical, as it were. In earlier times the author
was permitted to claim all the attributes of God: nothing that concerned
his hero could be hidden from him. But such rules had already lost their
validity with Dostoevsky, and God-like omniscience with respect to the
world he has created is now forbidden the author. The new restrictions
are realistic in that as human beings we act only on the basis of
incomplete information. The author is now one of us; he is not allowed
to play God. At the same time, he is allowed to create inner worlds that
need not necessarily be similar to the real world, but can instead show
different kinds of deviation from it.

These new deviations are very important to the contemporary author. The
worlds of myth and fairy tale also deviate from the real world, but
individual authors do not invent the ways in which they do so: in
writing a fairy tale you must accept certain axioms you haven't
invented, or you won't write a fairy tale. In mainstream literature,
however, you are now allowed to attribute pseudo-ontological qualities
of your personal, private invention to the world you describe. Since all
deviations of the described world from the real world necessarily have a
meaning, the sum of all such deviations is (or should be) a coherent
strategy or semantic intention.

Therefore we have two kinds of literary fantasy: "final" fantasy, as in
fairy tales and science fiction, and "passing" fantasy, as in Kafka. In
a science-fiction story, the presence of intelligent dinosaurs does not
usually signal the presence of hidden meaning. The dinosaurs are,
instead, meant to be admired as we would admire a giraffe in a
zoological garden; that is, they are intended not as parts of an
expressive semantic system, but only as parts of the empirical world. In
The Metamorphosis, on the other hand, it is not intended that we should
accept the transformation of human being into bug simply as a fantastic
marvel, but, rather, that we should pass on to the recognition that
Kafka has with objects and their deformations depicted a
sociopsychological situation. Only the outer shell of this world is
formed by the strange phenomena; the inner core has a solid nonfantastic
meaning. Thus a story can depict the world as it is, or interpret the
world (attribute values to it, judge it, call it names, laugh at it,
etc.), or, in most cases, do both things at the same time.

If the depicted world is oriented positively toward man, it is the world
of the classical fairy tale, in which physics is controlled by morality,
for in a fairy tale there can be no physical accidents that result in
anyone's death, no irreparable damage to the positive hero. If it is
oriented negatively, it is the world of myth ("Do what you will, you'll
still become guilty of killing your father and committing incest"). If
it is neutral, it is the real world — the world that realism describes
in its contemporary shape and that science fiction tries to describe at
other points on the space-time continuum.

It is the premise of science fiction that anything shown shall in
principle be interpretable empirically and rationally. In science
fiction there can be no inexplicable marvels, no transcendences, no
devils or demons — and the pattern of occurrences must be verisimilar.

And now we come near the rub, for what is meant by a verisimilar pattern
of occurrences? Science-fiction authors try to blackmail us by calling
upon the omnipotence of science and the infinity of the cosmos as a
continuum. "Anything can happen" and therefore "anything that happens to
occur to us" can be presented in science fiction.

But it is not true, even in a purely mathematical sense, that anything
can happen, because there are infinities of quite different powers. Let
us leave mathematics alone, however. Science fiction can be either "real
science fiction" or "pseudo-science fiction." When it produces fantasy,
like Kafka's, it is only pseudo-science fiction, because it then
concentrates on the content to be signaled. What meaningful and total
relationships obtain between the telegram "Mother died, funeral Monday"
and the structure and function of the telegraphic apparatus? None. The
apparatus merely enables us to transmit the message, which is also the
case with semantically dense objects of a fantastic nature, such as the
metamorphosis of man into bug, that nevertheless transmit a realistic
communication.

If we were to change railway signals so that they ordered the stopping
of trains in moments of danger not by blinking red lights but by
pointing with stuffed dragons, we would be using fantastic objects as
signals, but those objects would still have a real, nonfantastic
function. The fact that there are no dragons has no relationship to the
real purpose or method of signaling.

As in life we can solve real problems with the help of images of
nonexistent beings, so in literature can we signal the existence of real
problems with the help of prima facie impossible occurrences or objects.
Even when the happenings it describes are totally impossible, a
science-fiction work may still point out meaningful, indeed rational,
problems. For example, the social, psychological, political, and
economic problems of space travel may be depicted quite realistically in
science fiction even though the technological parameters of the
spaceships described are quite fantastic in the sense that it will for
all eternity be impossible to build a spaceship with such parameters.

But what if everything in a science-fiction work is fantastic? What if
not only the objects but also the problems have no chance of ever being
realized, as when impossible time-travel machines are used to point out
impossible time-travel paradoxes? In such cases science fiction is
playing an empty game.

Since empty games have no hidden meaning, since they represent nothing
and predict nothing, they have no relationship at all to the real world
and can therefore please us only as logical puzzles, as paradoxes, as
intellectual acrobatics. Their value is autonomous, because they lack
all semantic reference; therefore they are worthwhile or worthless only
as games. But how do we evaluate empty games? Simply by their formal
qualities. They must contain a multitude of rules; they must be elegant,
strict, witty, precise, and original. They must therefore show at least
a minimum of complexity and an inner coherence; that is, it must be
forbidden during the play to make any change in the rules that would
make the play easier.

Nevertheless, ninety to ninety-eight percent of the empty games in
science fiction are very primitive, very naïve one-parameter processes.
They are almost always based on only one or two rules, and in most cases
it is the rule of inversion that becomes their method of creation. To
write such a story you invert the members of a pair of linked concepts.
For example, we think the human body quite beautiful, but in the eyes of
an extraterrestrial we are all monsters: in Sheckley's "All the Things
You Are" the odor of human beings is poisonous for extraterrestrials,
and when they touch the skin of humans they get blisters, etc. What
appears normal to us is abnormal to others — about half of Sheckley's
stories are built on this principle. The simplest kind of inversion is a
chance mistake. Such mistakes are great favorites in science fiction:
something that doesn't belong in our time arrives here accidentally (a
wrong time-mailing), etc.

Inversions are interesting only when the change is in a basic property
of the world. Time-travel stories originated in that way: time, which is
irreversible, acquired a reversible character. On the other hand, any
inversion of a local kind is primitive (on earth humans are the highest
biological species, on another planet humans are the cattle of
intelligent dinosaurs; we consist of albumen, the aliens of silicon;
etc.). Only a nonlocal inversion can have interesting consequences; we
use language as an instrument of communication; any instrument can in
principle be used for the good or bad of its inventor. Therefore the
idea that language can be used as an instrument of enslavement, as in
Delany's Babel-17, is interesting as an extension of the hypothesis that
world view and conceptual apparatus are interdependent; i.e., because of
the ontological character of the inversion.

The pregnancy of a Virgo Immaculata; the running of 100 meters in 0.1
seconds; the equation 2 x 2 = 7; the pan-psychism of all cosmic
phenomena postulated by Stapledon: these are four kinds of fantastic
condition.

1.  It is in principle possible, even empirically possible, to start
    embryogenesis in a virgin's egg; although empirically improbable
    today, this condition may acquire an empirical character in the
    future.
2.  It will always be impossible for a man to run 100 meters in 0.1
    seconds. For such a feat a man's body would have to be so totally
    reconstructed that he would no longer be a man of flesh and blood.
    Therefore a story based on the premise that a human being as a human
    being could run so fast would be a work of fantasy, not science
    fiction.
3.  The product of 2 x 2 can never become 7. To generalize, it is
    impossible to realize any kind of logical impossibility. For
    example, it is logically impossible to give a logical proof for the
    existence or nonexistence of a god. It follows that any imaginative
    literature based on such a postulate is fantasy, not science
    fiction.
4.  The pan-psychism of Stapledon is an ontological hypothesis. It can
    never be proved in the scientific sense: any transcendence that can
    be proved experimentally ceases to be a transcendence, for
    transcendence is by definition empirically unprovable. God reduced
    to empiricism is no longer God; the frontier between faith and
    knowledge can therefore never be annulled.

But when any of these conditions, or any condition of the same order, is
described not to postulate its real existence, but only to interpret
some content of a semantic character by means of such a condition used
as a signal-object, then all such classificatory arguments lose their
power.

What, therefore, is basically wrong in science fiction is the abolition
of differences that have a categorical character; the passing off of
myths and fairy tales for quasi-scientific hypotheses or their
consequences, and of the wishful dream or horror story as prediction;
the postulation of the incommensurable as commensurable; the depiction
of the accomplishment of possible tasks with means that have no
empirical character; the pretense that insoluble problems (such as those
of a logical typus) are soluble.

But why should we deem such procedures wrong when once upon a time
myths, fairy tales, sagas, fables were highly valued as keys to all
cosmic locks? It is the spirit of the times. When there is no cure for
cancer, magic has the same value as chemistry: the two are wholly equal
in that both are wholly worthless. But if there arises a realistic
expectation of achieving a victory over cancer, at that moment the
equality will dissolve, and the possible and workable will be separated
from the impossible and unworkable. It is only when the existence of a
rational science permits us to rule the phenomena in question that we
can differentiate between wishful thinking and reality. When there is no
source for such knowledge, all hypotheses, myths, and dreams are equal;
but when such knowledge begins to accumulate, it is not interchangeable
with anything else, because it involves not just isolated phenomena but
the whole structure of reality. When you can only dream of space travel,
it makes no difference what you use as technique: sailing ships,
balloons, flying carpets or flying saucers. But when space travel
becomes fact, you can no longer choose what pleases you rather than real
methods.

The emergence of such necessities and restrictions often goes unnoticed
in science fiction. If scientific facts are not simplified to the point
where they lose all validity, they are put into worlds categorically,
ontologically different from the real world. Since science fiction
portrays the future or the extraterrestrial, the worlds of science
fiction necessarily deviate from the real world, and the ways in which
they deviate are the core and meaning of the science-fiction creation.
But what we usually find is not what may happen tomorrow but the forever
impossible, not the real but the fairy-tale-like. The difference between
the real world and the fantastic world arises stochastically, gradually,
step by step. It is the same kind of process as that which turns a head
full of hair into a bald head: if you lose a hundred, even a thousand
hairs, you will not be bald; but when does balding begin — with the loss
of 10,000 hairs or 10,950?

Since there are no humans that typify the total ideal average, the
paradox of the balding head exists also in realistic fiction, but there
at least we have a guide, an apparatus in our head that enables us to
separate the likely from the unlikely. We lose this guide when reading
portrayals of the future or of galactic empires. Science fiction profits
from this paralysis of the reader's critical apparatus, because when it
simplifies physical, psychological, social, economic, or anthropological
occurrences, the falsifications thus produced are not immediately and
unmistakably recognized as such. During the reading one feels instead a
general disturbance; one is dissatisfied; but because one doesn't know
how it should have been done, one is often unable to formulate a clear
and pointed criticism.

If science fiction is something more than just fairy-tale fiction, it
has the right to neglect the fairy-tale world and its rules. It is also
not realism, and therefore has the right to neglect the methods of
realistic description. Its genological indefiniteness facilitates its
existence, since it is supposedly not subject to the whole range of the
criteria by which literary works are normally judged. It is not
allegorical; but then it says that allegory is not its task: science
fiction and Kafka are two quite different fields of creation. It is not
realistic; but then, it is not a part of realistic literature. The
future? How often have science-fiction authors disclaimed any intention
of making predictions! Finally, it is called the Myth of the
Twenty-first Century. But the ontological character of myth is
antiempirical, and though a technological civilization may have its
myths, it cannot itself embody a myth. For myth is an interpretation, a
comparatio, an explication, and first you must have the object that is
to be explicated. Science fiction lives in but strives to emerge from
this antinomical state of being.

A quite general symptom of the sickness in science fiction can be found
by comparing the spirit in ordinary literary circles to that in
science-fiction circles. In the literature of the contemporary scene
there is today uncertainty, distrust of all traditional narrative
techniques, dissatisfaction with newly created work, general unrest that
finds expression in ever new attempts and experiments; in science
fiction, on the other hand, there is general satisfaction,
contentedness, pride; and the results of such comparisons must give us
some food for thought.

I believe that the existence and continuation of the great and radical
changes effected in all fields of life by technological progress will
lead science fiction into a crisis, which is perhaps already beginning.
It becomes more and more apparent that the narrative structures of
science fiction deviate more and more from all real processes, having
been used again and again since they were first introduced and having
thus become frozen, fossilized paradigms. Science fiction involves the
art of putting hypothetical premises into the very complicated stream of
sociopsychological occurrences. Although this art once had its master in
H. G. Wells, it has been forgotten and is now lost. But it can be
learned again.

The quarrel between the orthodox and heterodox parts of the
science-fiction fraternity is regrettably sterile, and it is to be
feared that it will remain so, since the readers that could in principle
be gained for a new, better, more complex science fiction could be won
only from the ranks of the readers of mainstream literature, not from
the ranks of the fans. I do not believe that it would be possible to
read this hypothetical, nonexistent, and phenomenally good science
fiction if you had not first read all the best and most complex works of
world literature with joy (that is, without having been forced to read
them). The revolutionary improvement of science fiction is therefore
always endangered by the desertion of large masses of readers. And if
neither authors nor readers wish such an event, the likelihood of a
positive change in the field during the coming years must be considered
as very small, as, indeed, almost zero. It would then be a phenomenon of
the kind called in futurology "the changing of a complex trend," and
such changes do not occur unless there are powerful factors arising out
of the environment rather than out of the will and determination of a
few individuals.

Postscript. Even the best science-fiction novels tend to show, in the
development of the plot, variations in credibility greater than those to
be found even in mediocre novels of other kinds. Although events
impossible from an objective-empirical standpoint (such as a man
springing over a wall seven meters high or a woman giving birth in two
instead of nine months) do not appear in non-science-fiction novels,
events equally impossible from a speculative standpoint (such as the
totally unnecessary end-game in Disch's Camp Concentration) appear
frequently in science fiction. To be sure, separating the unlikely from
the likely (finding in the street a diamond the size of your fist as
opposed to finding a lost hat) is much simpler when your standard of
comparison is everyday things than it is when you are concerned with the
consequences of fictive hypotheses. But though separating the likely
from the unlikely in science fiction is difficult, it can be mastered.
The art can be learned and taught. But since the lack of selective
filters is accompanied by a corresponding lack in reader-evaluations,
there are no pressures on authors for such an optimization of science
fiction.

Translated from the German

by Franz Rottensteiner

and Bruce R. Gillespie,

with R. D. Mullen and Darko Suvin

 

 SCIENCE FICTION: A HOPELESS 
CASE — WITH EXCEPTIONS

1

On reading In Search of Wonder by Damon Knight and The Issue at Hand by
James Blish, a couple of questions, the answers to which can be found
nowhere, came to my mind.*

For example: in science fiction fandom rumor has it that science fiction
is improving every year. If so, why does the average production, the
lion's share of new productions, remain so bad?

Or: we do not lack definitions of this genre. However, we would look in
vain for an explanation for the absence of a theoretical, generalizing
critique of the genre, and a reason why the weak beginnings of such
criticism can be found only in "fanzines," amateur magazines of very low
circulation and small influence (if any at all) on the authors and
publishers.

Furthermore: Blish and Knight agree that science-fiction readers cannot
distinguish between a high-quality novel and a mediocre one. If they are
right, how are readers selected to belong to the public who reads this
literary genre, which intends to portray the (fantastically magnified)
outstanding achievements of mankind?

The important question is: even if science fiction was born in the
gutter, and lived on trash for years on end, why can't it get rid of the
trash for good?

My essay tries to answer these questions. Therefore, it is a
"Prolegomenon to Science-Fiction Ecology" — or an "Introduction to a
Socioculturally Isolated Realm of Creative Work" — or a "Practical Guide
for Survival in the Lower Realm of Literature." These pompous titles
will be justified below. The books by Blish and Knight were of great
assistance to me in writing, but I did not regard them as only
collections of critiques, but more as ethnological protocols of several
explorations into the exotic land of science fiction — i.e., as raw
material to be subjected to a sociological analysis. For me, the facts
collected by these authors were often more valuable than their opinions;
that is to say, I arranged this material in a way not completely
corresponding to the spirit of the sources.

2

I call science fiction a "collective phenomenon" of a sociocultural
nature. It has the following parts: (a) the readers — on the one hand,
the mute and passive majority of science-fiction consumers; on the
other, the active amateur groups that constitute fandom proper; (b) the
science-fiction producers — authors (some of them also critics) and
publishers of magazines and books.

Science fiction is a "very special case" because it belongs to two
distinct spheres of culture: the "Lower Realm," or Realm of Trivial
Literature, and the "Upper Realm," or Realm of Mainstream Literature. To
the Lower Realm belong the crime novel, the Western, the
pseudo-historical novel, the sports novel, and the erotico-sentimental
stories about certain locations, such as doctor-nurse romances,
millionaire-and-the-playgirl stories, and so on. I'd like to spare the
reader a detailed description of what I mean by mainstream. Perhaps it
will suffice to quote the names of some of the authors who inhabit this
Olympus: Moravia, Koestler, Joyce, Butor, Sartre, Grass, Mailer, Borges,
Calvino, Malamud, Sarrault, Pinget, Greene.

It cannot be maintained with universal validity that these authors do
not descend to the lower floors occasionally, for we know of crime
novels by Graham Greene, "fantastic" novels by Orwell and Werfel, and
Moravia's "fantasies." Some texts by Calvino are even considered science
fiction. Therefore it should not be conceived that the difference
between authors of the Upper and Lower Realms is that one of the first
does not write fantasy or other literature related to science fiction,
while one of the second does just this: the difference can be examined
according to neither intrinsic type nor the artistic quality of a single
work. To be a subject of the Lower or Upper Realm does not only and
exclusively depend upon the product made by the author. There are much
more complicated interrelationships of a sociocultural nature. I will
talk about them a little later.

At this point I want only to propose a practical rule of procedure,
which will predict with ninety-eight percent accuracy whether an author
will be considered as an inhabitant of the Upper or the Lower floor. The
rule is simple and can be stated as follows: if someone starts to write
in the mainstream, and the public and critics get to know him by name,
or even as a world celebrity (so that, on hearing the name, they know
that they are talking about a writer, not an athlete or actor, so his
attempts at science fiction and/or fantasy are regarded as "excursions"
or "side leaps," even if repeated) then that man lives on the Upper
floor. For instance, the "entertainments" of Graham Greene express a
private mood or tactic of his.

During H. G. Wells's working life, there was no such clear-cut border
between these two realms of literature. They shaded into each other
gradually and continually. At that time Wells was known simply as an
English writer, and the readers who appreciated his prose often knew of
both his ambitions — the realistic and the fantastic. Only much later
did an Iron Curtain descend between these two kinds of literature so
that the typical science-fiction fan often knows the works of science
fiction written by Wells, but ignores the fact that Wells also wrote
"normal" realistic prose (and highbrow connoisseurs value it highly
today, and more so than his science fiction). This curtain, this
concrete ceiling (to maintain the image of a two-story building), has
grown little by little, and this ceiling, hermetically sealed, became an
impenetrable barrier only during the twenties. We can recognize this by
the fact that Capek's works are still classed with the literature of the
Upper Realm, while Stapledon, who was writing about ten years later, is
not accredited with being there. Therefore some authors do not earn
their classifications exclusively on their merits. On the contrary,
their works are subject to higher rules of taxonomy, rules that have
developed in the course of history and know no exceptions.

If, in spite of all this, a classificatory exception is made, the
judgment is given that the (literary) case under consideration is not
essentially science fiction, but wholly "normal" literature, which the
author intentionally camouflaged as science fiction. However, if we
proceed by disregarding all these "extenuating circumstances," some
novels by Dostoevsky become "crime novels," though in fact they are not
regarded as such. The experts say that the plot of a crime novel served
the author only as a means to an end, and he definitely did not want to
write a crime novel. This is the same situation as is the case of a
brothel searched by the police. For simplicity's sake the nameless,
ordinary guests are regarded as customers of the prostitutes, but a
prince or a politician defends his presence on the pretext that he
descended to these lowest floors of social life because he longed for
something exotic, because his fancy took him on such an excursion. In
short, such people stay in the land of pestilence as extravagant
intruders or even as curious scientists.

3

The status of trivial literature can be recognized by several typical
attributes.

First: its works are read only once, just like the cheapest mass
products which are also intended for but a single use. Most of them
become obsolete in the same way as mass products do. If crime novels
were selected according to their literary merits, it would be
superfluous to keep throwing new ones onto the market, because we could
find so many good ones among the multitude there already that nobody
could read the choicest of them during his lifetime. Still, publishers
keep on putting "brand-new" crime novels onto the market even though
there are quantities of crime novels of undisputedly better quality that
have sunk into oblivion. The same goes for refrigerators and cars: it is
a well-known fact that today's models are not necessarily better,
technologically, than those of yesteryear. But in order to keep going,
the machinery of production must put new models on the market, and
advertising exerts pressure on the consumers to make them believe that
only the current year's models have the best quality. The dogma of
continual change of models becomes a law of the market, although every
specialist can distinguish clearly between fictitious obsolescence of
the product and authentic technological obsolescence. Off and on there
are real improvements in technological products. More often, change is
dictated only by fashion, a dictatorship in the interest of profit by
supplying new goods.

The entanglement of real progress and economic laws constitutes a
picture of a situation quite similar to that which reigns in the market
of trivial literature. On principle, publishing houses like Ace Books
could put on the market science fiction from the first half of the
century exclusively, in ever-renewed reprints, because the number of
this kind of book has already increased to such an extent that nobody
could read even the better ones among them, even if he devoted all his
time to this genre. Printing new books, ninety-eight percent of which
are miserable products, published for purely economic reasons, makes
many older works fall into oblivion. They die in silence, because there
is no place for them on a clogged market. The publishing houses provide
no filter to bring about a positive selection, because to them the
newest book is also the best, or at least they want the customer to
believe this, the justification for the well-known total inflation of
publishers' advertising. Each new title is praised as the best in the
science-fiction genre. Each science-fiction writer is called the
greatest master of science fiction after one or two of his books have
been published. In the science-fiction book market, as well as in the
whole market of trivial literature, we can perceive the omnipotence of
economic laws. The literary market, moreover, has in common with the
whole market the typical phenomenon of inflation. When all books and
writers are presented as "the best," then a devaluation, an inflation of
all expressions of value is inevitable.

Compared with these carryings-on, with this escalation of advertising,
the behavior of mainstream editors is quite shy and silent. Please
compare the blurbs on the jackets of science-fiction books with those
that serious publishers put on the jackets of a Saul Bellow or a William
Faulkner. This remark seems to be banal, but it isn't. Although instant
coffee or cigarettes of every brand are always praised as the best in
the world (we never hear of anything advertised as "second best"),
Michelangelo's frescoes and Tolstoy's War and Peace are not offered,
with the same advertising expenditure, as the best works of art
possible. The activities of the publishers of trivial literature make us
recognize that this literature is subject to economic laws exclusively
and to the exclusion of any other laws of behavior.

Second: I must remark that a reader of trivial literature behaves just
like the consumer of mass products. Surely it does not occur to the
producer of brooms, cars, or toilet paper to complain of the absence of
correspondence, fraught with outpourings of the soul, that strikes a
connection between him and the consumer of his products. Sometimes,
however, these consumers happen to write angry letters to the producer
to reproach him with the bad quality of the merchandise they bought.
This bears a striking similarity to what James Blish describes in The
Issue at Hand, and, indeed, this author, more than five million of whose
books have been printed, said that he received only some dozens of
letters from readers during his whole life as an author. These letters
were exclusively fits of temper from people who were hurt in the soft
spot of their opinions. It was the quality of the goods that offended
them.

Third: the market of trivial literature knows only one index of quality:
the measure of the sales figures of the books. When an "angry young
critic" snubbed Asimov's Nightfall and Other Stories as old hat, Asimov
put up the defense that his books, this year and for years previously,
had sold excellently and that none of his books had been remaindered.
Therefore he took literary merit for the relation of supply and demand,
as if he were unaware that there have been world-famous books that have
never been printed in large quantities. If we use this yardstick,
Dostoevsky is no match for Agatha Christie. There are many fans of
science fiction who have never read a novel by Stapledon or Wells in
their lives, and with an easy mind I can assert that the silent majority
of readers does not even know Stapledon by name. Blish and Knight agree
that the public cannot distinguish a good novel from an abominable
novel; and this is correct, with the proviso that they are talking about
only the readers of the Lower Realm. If this generalization were valid
for all readers at all times, we should have to consider the phenomenon
of cultural selection in the history of literature as a miracle. For if
all or almost all readers are passive and stupid beings, then who was
able to collect Cervantes and Homer into the treasure troves of our
culture?

Fourth: there are crass and embarrassing differences between the
relations that link the authors of Upper and Lower Realms with
publishers. In the Upper Realm it is the author who alone determines the
title, length, form, and style of his work, and his right to do so is
guaranteed unequivocally by the letter of his contract. In the Lower
Realm, the publishers appropriate these rights. We can recognize from
paragraphs of the printed contracts of large science-fiction publishing
houses like Ace Books that it is the publishers who can, at their own
discretion, change titles, length, and even the text of a book without
express permission of its author, just as fancy dictates. Naturally, the
editors of the Upper Realm also make encroachments. In practice these
actions are quite different; they occur before the author signs the
contract — i.e., first the editors propose to the author what they want
changed, and only after he has agreed is the contract made, and not one
syllable says that the original manuscript must be revised. The
difference is because in the Upper Realm literary texts are considered
in their integrity untouchable and taboo because they are almost sacred
art objects. This is an old custom, in the spirit of the historical
tradition of Western culture, though the practice of publishing, even in
the Upper Realm, is not always so pious and fair as we are told.
However, this difference between the two realms is of great importance.

In the Upper Realm one always strives at least to keep alive the
appearance of intact virtue, in the same way as in high society women do
not permit themselves to be called "prostitutes" although they indulge
in open promiscuity. The "ladies" of the underworld do not have such
pretensions, and it is no closely guarded secret that one can buy their
favors at the appropriate price. Sad to relate, the authors of science
fiction are quite similar in behavior to those "ladies," and they do not
feel the disgrace of making transactions, either, as part of which they
willingly hand over their works to the publishers, who are allowed to
revise the texts at will. Thus James Blish* tells us that his A Case of
Conscience is only the length it is because his publisher at the time,
owing to certain technical circumstances, could not produce a work of
greater length! Just imagine if we read in the memoirs of Hermann Hesse
that his Steppenwolf was only so long because his publishers. . . Such a
disclosure would cause a shout of wrath from literary circles, but
Blish's words do not affect either him or any other author or critic
because in the Lower Realm the station of a slave is taken for granted.
Publishers are within their rights when changing the title, length, and
style of science-fiction books as these encroachments are determined by
economic considerations: they act like people who must find a purchaser
for their goods, and they have a firm conviction that they work hand in
glove with the author, like project leaders and advertising managers for
Ford. Naturally, nobody thinks it strange that the project leader for a
new model does not have the right to think up a name for it.

However, these particular differences should not make us wonder.
American science fiction descends from the pulps; English science
fiction had as its father, not Hugo Gernsback, about whom nobody outside
of U.S. science fiction knows a thing, but H. G. Wells. What else?
American science fiction worked itself up from the gutter of literature
(though it could not fly into the sky); English science fiction has
Americanized itself partly for commercial reasons, and partly has
stepped into Wells's shoes, something that should not be taken as
praiseworthy. The "classical" successor to Wells, John Wyndham, worked
like a huckster, seeking to supplement the work of the master and
teacher by filling what was, in his eyes, a gap. But even as anyone who
paints like Van Gogh today cannot become a Van Gogh, so Wyndham did not
add anything major to Wells's work. Wells worked according to the known
principle of escalation, so that in The War of the Worlds, earth is
attacked only by the Martians; but in Wyndham's The Day of the Triffids,
the author does not think it sufficient to let all mankind go blind — he
foists poisonous plants upon it; but because those plants do not seem
dangerous enough, he adds the gift of active motion as spice.

After all, there are two distinct traditions in science fiction: the
English, with the better manners and customs of the Upper Realm, and the
American, which has lived from its beginnings in the slums of the Lower
Realm, this slave market, which has no overabundance of courtly manners.
Also, the language of English science fiction has always been more
cultivated.

4

Seen in isolation, a number of the traits of trivial literature, as
described above, are quite unimportant. However, when added up, they
form an ordered structure of the environment in which science fiction is
born and gains a scanty living. These traits are clues, pointing out how
in different ways the status of a work of literature is determined; it
depends upon whether it is born in the Upper or Lower Realm.

Thus science-fiction works belong to the Lower Realm — to trivial
literature. Thus sociocultural analysis finally solves the problem. Thus
words said about it are wasted; the trial can be closed with a sigh of
relief.

But this is not so. Without a doubt there is a difference between
science fiction and all the neighboring, often closely related, types of
trivial literature. It is a whore, but a quite bashful one at that;
moreover, a whore with an angel face. It prostitutes itself, but, like
Dostoevsky's Sonya Marmeladova, with discomfort, disgust, and contrary
to its dreams and hopes.

True, science fiction is often a liar. It wants to be taken for
something else, something different from what is really is. It lives in
perpetual self-deception. It repeats its attempts to disguise itself.
Has it got the shadow of a right to do so?

Many famous science-fiction authors are trying to pass for something
better than their fellow writers — the authors of such trivial
literature as crime novels or Westerns. These pretensions are often
spoken out loud. Moreover, in the prefaces to their books, embarrassing
praise is given to the authors by the authors themselves. For instance,
Heinlein often emphasized that science fiction (that is, his own science
fiction) was not only equal to, but also far better than mainstream
literature, because writing science fiction is more difficult. Such
pretensions cannot be found in the rest of the field of trivial
literature.

This does not mean that there is no standard of quality for crime
novels. Here, too, we distinguish bad, boring novels and original,
fascinating ones. We can speak of a first-rate crime novel — but it does
not occur to anybody to consider such a hit as equal to the masterpieces
of literature. In its own class, in the Lower Realm, it may be a real
diamond. When in fact a book does cross the borders of the genre, it is
no longer called a crime novel, just as with a novel by Dostoevsky.

The best science-fiction novels want to smuggle themselves into the
Upper Realm — but in 99.9 percent of cases, they do not succeed. The
best authors behave like schizophrenics; they want to — and at the same
time they do not want to — belong to the Realm of Science Fiction. They
care a lot about the prizes given by the science-fiction ghetto. At the
same time, they want their books to be published by those publishing
houses that do not publish science fiction (so that one cannot see from
the book jackets that their books are science-fiction books). On the
other hand, they feel tied to fandom, write for fanzines, answer the
questions of their interviewers, and take part in science-fiction
conventions. On the other hand, publicly, they try to stress that they
"do not really" write science fiction; they would write "better and more
intellectual books" if only they did not have to bear so much pressure
from the publishers and science-fiction magazines; they are thinking of
moving into mainstream literature (Aldiss, Ballard, and several others).

Do they have any objective reasons for surrendering to frustration and
feelings of oppression in the science-fiction ghetto? Crime novels are
another, an open-and-shut, case. Naturally, a crime novel reports on
murders, detectives, corpses, and trials; Westerns, on stalwart cowboys
and insidious Indians. However, if we may believe its claims, a
science-fiction book belongs at the top of world literature! For it
reports on mankind's destiny, on the meaning of life in the cosmos, on
the rise and fall of thousand-year-old civilizations: it brings forth a
deluge of answers for the key questions of every reasoning being.

There is only one snag: in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred it
fulfills its task with stupidity. It always promises too much, and it
almost never keeps its word.

For this reason, science fiction is such a remarkable phenomenon. It
comes from a whorehouse but it wants to break into the palace where the
most sublime thoughts of human history are stored. From the time it was
born, science fiction has been raised by narrow-minded slaveholders.
Thomas Mann was allowed to work on one novel for fourteen years; John
Brunner complains that there was a time when he had to write eight
novels a year in order to stay alive comfortably. From shame, science
fiction tries to keep some sides of this situation a well-guarded
secret. (Often we hear from science-fiction authors how much freedom
they enjoy in their work.)

Science fiction is subject to the rigid economic laws of supply and
demand. It has not completely adapted itself to the "editor's milieu,"
meaning that there are recipes on how to write a science-fiction work
that appeals to a certain editor and gains his appreciation (for
instance, the late John W. Campbell, Jr., was an authoritative man who
published only a certain easily definable kind of science fiction, and
some authors knew how to foresee his demands). In Geis's Science Fiction
Review, Perry A. Chapdelaine gives us a detailed account of how he was
carefully briefed by well-known science-fiction authors when he wrote
his first novel. Special care was taken to include those qualities that
maximize sales; no mention was made of the immanent quality of the work
itself. Often the same is the case in the Upper Realm — but only for
beginners. However, science-fiction authors remain minors in the eyes of
their publishers — all their lives. Such circumstances breed frustration
and compensatory behavior. Indeed, the same sort of thing abounds in the
science-fiction ghetto. All these compensatory phenomena, taken
together, clearly have the character of mimicry.

(a) 
    In the science-fiction ghetto there is no lack of makeshift and
    ersatz institutions which exist side by side with those of the Upper
    Realm. The Upper Realm has the Nobel Prize and other world-famous
    literary awards. The science-fiction ghetto has the Hugo and Nebula
    awards; and American science fiction poses (still) as "world"
    science fiction, as can be seen from anthology titles such as The
    World's Best S/F.

(b)
    The Upper Realm has academic and other highbrow literary journals,
    containing theoretical and hermeneutical articles. Science fiction
    also has its highbrow fanzines (Riverside Quarterly from Canada,
    Science Fiction Commentary from Australia, and Quarber Merkur from
    Austria). These are parallel, although not analogous phenomena. The
    highbrow periodicals of the Upper Realm command real authority in
    cultural life. The most famous critics and theoreticians of the
    mainstream are all known to the cognoscenti and to almost all
    intelligent readers, at least by name (e.g., Sartre; Leslie
    Fiedler). Yet the names of the best science-fiction critics are not
    known to one soul outside the inner circle of fandom, and the silent
    majority of science-fiction readers does not know of the existence
    of the highbrow magazines. Even if they did know of them, they would
    not care for the evaluations of the cognoscenti — i.e., they are not
    influenced by these fanzines when choosing the new science-fiction
    books they are going to buy.

(c)
Science-fiction conventions are intended to form a kind of match for the
meetings of the PEN Club and other similar gatherings. This also
involves mimicry, because PEN meetings do not have in the slightest the
character of a party that is so characteristic of science-fiction
conventions. At conventions, theoretical reflections are nothing but
seasoning; at PEN meetings, however, as well as at similar conferences
of professional writers, they are the main course.
I must stress that no esoteric highbrow magazine of the Upper Realm has
any direct influence on the policies of publishers. These magazines
possess only a purely moral authority, founded on tradition. They do not
try to wage open warfare upon the typical phenomena of mass culture
today (e.g., normally they hide all data about one-day best sellers) and
their activity becomes visible only in the long run, as all of the
institutions in the structure feed the slow process of the Upper Realm.
They should be the (often quite powerless) conscience and memory of
world culture, its highest tribunal, which is at the same time an
unbiased witness and judge. Often this tribunal loses a single skirmish
but wins the great, epic wars — just the way Great Britain did. It
cannot give a guarantee of today's fame to a great, misjudged poet, but
it provides a memory, helping the next generation sometimes to dig up
treasures that are almost lost. In short: these tribunals are not
subject to the economic rules of the market, and because of this they
are able to defend the cultural heritage against the chaotic onslaught
of mass culture.

Nothing like that can be seen in the Lower Realm. Science fiction has no
independent periodicals that supervise critically the whole production
and form a similar fraction of the bulk of publications in the field, as
in the case in the Upper Realm (measured by the yardstick of the
circulation of books and especially of literary periodicals). The
evidence of the best and best-known science-fiction authors is
suppressed when it is contrary to the interests of the publishers — a
fact that Knight reports on. The highbrow fanzines are known exclusively
to a very small circle of initiated readers, and their influence on
publishers' policies is nil. These amateur magazines often publish
analyses and reflections that are equal in quality to the best of what
is published in the Upper Realm. But this does not change the fact that
no one listens to the voices of the critics. This important fact shows
clearly that it is not the immanent quality of a statement that
determines its scope of action, but this radius is contingent on the
broader structure of the whole network of information with which the
medium that published this statement is connected.* It is a typical
science-fiction custom that critiques are not produced independently,
but are written by either the authors or the editors of anthologies, who
evaluate each other's works. This state of affairs only helps to cloud
the line of demarcation between apologetics (a public-relations affair)
and objective criticism.

Taken as a whole, science-fiction institutions (cons, fanzines, and
awards) appear similar to those of the Upper Realm, but dissimilar as
regards the function of furthering social values and selections. In the
Upper Realm, as time goes by, the worst and the best literary works
drift apart from each other; in science fiction however, the forces that
are the result of economic laws of the marketplace, an absence of
independent criticism, and a lack of cultural assistance are all
directed toward the opposite tendency. They put trash next to valuable
books; they impede any experiments in literary creation, choke
independent, demanding, probing criticism, and they assist publishers in
camouflaging as true criticism the advertising that boosts the sales of
their products.

Furthermore, the chain of publishers who specialize in science fiction —
and the silent majority of mute, passive readers — forms an environment
to which even the most gifted science-fiction authors must adapt
themselves eventually. The authors are initiated early into the rules of
the game, and they must either obey or take immense risks. Suppose an
ingenious, even inspired author enters the realm of science fiction.
This man must adapt rapidly and without scruples to the simple truth
that it is impossible for him to be valued and esteemed according to his
extraordinary achievements. The silent majority of the readership will
devour his valuable books in just the same way, at best, as they are
used to absorbing the worst nonsense of mass production. Taking into
account just the economic barometer of the market, the publishers will
treat him in the same way as they treat his colleagues — i.e., as
authors who willingly allow the titles, lengths, and structures of their
books to be changed in advance according to the wishes of their masters.
This author will watch helplessly the embarrassing sight of his books
submerging in an ocean of trash, for the stigma of science fiction links
them irrevocably to this sea. Surely Sturgeon is right in maintaining
that ninety-nine percent of all books in every genre are trash, but the
fact remains that in the Upper Realm of culture there are forces that
never cease furthering positive selection. In the Lower Realm, the best
books are placed beside the worst and most stupid, and submerged by them
under the pressure of the objective situation.

Thus, science-fiction institutions only seem to be the equal of the
institutions of the Upper Realm. In fact, we see before us a superficial
mimicry. Science fiction merely apes and simulates the Olympian quality
of literature, without reproducing the same performance capability. No
famous author from the Upper Realm concerns himself with disqualifying
trashy literature or defending himself against the attacks of
graphomaniacs. For a while, the Knights and Blishes tried to do this,
but in the end their aggressiveness had to give way to a moderated, more
passive attitude. To some extent these intelligent men are conscious of
their own defeat. They feel that this behavior, typical of science
fiction, merely apes grown-up literature. They can see how grotesque
such goings-on must look to an outside observer. The unauthenticated
(because not earnest) quality of fandom, with its letters, parties, and
friendly exchange of opinions, is for the authors only a weak
substitute, an asylum where they can play the part of the great writer
by confessing in fanzines with circulations of two hundred or less the
secret of their creative writing and their deep psychological secrets.

We could consider these phenomena as insignificant and pay no attention
to them, because in the end the ways in which the literati compensate
their inferiority complexes, their feelings of frustration, and their
Wille zur Macht are not necessarily those aspects of literature that
flourish in the Upper Realm. However, in the Lower Realm these are
symptoms of the chronic illness that impedes so embarrassingly the
growth of the science-fiction genre. Thus the only way to better the
prevailing situation is to make an outspoken diagnosis. We could support
this conclusion with hundreds of examples. In an article by a
contemporary science-fiction critic, the names of authors, including
Farmer, Joyce, Sturgeon, and Kafka, are listed indiscriminately. But
mainstream critics never reciprocate this striving for equal status. In
today's science-fiction anthologies we find, apart from science-fiction
authors, such writers as Grass, Calvino, Ionesco, and Michaux, but the
Upper Realm does not offer any just return. The inhabitants of the Upper
Realm are invited to the Lower; they accept these invitations, but there
is no return service. The inhabitants of the Upper Realm treat those of
the Lower Realm properly, just as the gentry treat the rabble properly.
A lady may enter a honky-tonk, but the "ladies" who reside there
permanently are not allowed into a respectable house.

5

We shall now show how the work of a gifted science-fiction writer grows
in the science-fiction environment and how it is accepted there. (The
fate of the untalented does not concern us — but we will report on it,
too, if only marginally, as it turns out in quite a characteristic way
in the Lower Realm.)

The substance that fills the entire milieu of science fiction, and upon
which the work of its authors feeds, is kitsch. It is the last,
degenerate form of myths. From them it inherited a rigid structure. In
myth the story of Ulysses is the prestabilized structure of fate: in
kitsch it becomes a cliché. Superman is a spoiled Hercules, the robot a
golem, even as kitsch itself is the simplified, threadbare, prostituted,
but original constellation of values central to a given culture. In our
culture, kitsch is what was once holy and/or coveted, awe-inspiring, or
horrible, but now prepared for instant use. Kitsch is the former temple
that has been so thoroughly defiled by infidels for so long that even
the memory of its ancient untouchability has been lost. When hitherto
untouchable idols get the status of mass products, through mechanical
reproduction, and become obtainable as everybody's objects of enjoyment,
we observe how the originally sublime is degradingly transubstantiated
into kitsch. The venerable paradigm is reworked in order to make it
easily consumed and as simple as possible. And — quite important —
kitsch does not present itself as such to its consumers; it believes in
its own perfection and wants to be taken seriously. Even the psychic
process that originally kept the mass of the uninitiated at a distance
from the object of worship, because it was an obstacle that had to be
overcome, comes wrapped up with the goods as an appetizer. Kitsch, free
from all difficulties of consumption, is a product that has been
prechewed for the consumer. In literature, kitsch results when all the
complexity, multi-sidedness, and ambiguity of the authentic product is
eliminated from the final product.

However, the people concerned (both authors and customers) have a
splendid feeling of well-being if this final product retains the air of
being an objet d'art, in full bloom, without restrictions. Kitsch is
composed exclusively of ersatz products: of heroism, of need,
misfortune, love, etc. In science fiction, kitsch is made from ersatz
science and literature. From reading "inner circle" critiques and
considering what science-fiction prospectuses have to offer, you would
hardly believe that the authors who are reviewed display an abundant
ignorance of the grammar, syntax, and style of their mother tongue; it
is as if one suddenly hears that a team of athletes preparing for the
Olympic Games cannot yet get up and stand.

In a stabilized culture, the sphere that kitsch might inhabit is quite
small. In mass culture, it tends to overflow into neighboring genres; it
has an aggressive and explosive pressure; it is a tumor that grows
exuberantly, devouring that part of the body which is still intact. It
is quite hard to justify morally a defense against its attacks, because
the dilemma always arises as to which is the lesser evil: the trashy
deformation of an art object, or its total absence from the circuit of a
mass culture that cannot assimilate the real thing. Science fiction is a
clinical case of a region occupied exclusively by trash, because in
kitsch, the culturally and historically highest, most difficult, and
most important objects are produced on the assembly line, in the most
primitive forms, to be sold to the public at bargain prices.

Knowing no discretion and no reverence for things inconceivable by the
human mind, piling universes upon universes without batting an eyelash,
mixing up physics, metaphysics, and trite trash from misinterpreted
philosophical systems without end, science fiction is the true
embodiment of kitsch, because of the cheekiness of its total ignorance,
which even denies the existence of a higher knowledge, toward which it
finds no path, and denies it triumphantly and obstinately.

Even if there are subjects about which philosophers dare not even think,
topics about which world-famous scholars can say scarcely anything at
all, they can be bought for 75¢ to $1.25 at every newsstand for
immediate inspection. Science fiction provides a pleasant substitute for
the study of the handbooks of the greatest thinkers, cosmologists,
astrophysicists, and philosophers who have ever lived — yes, it can even
report on what scientists born a thousand years from now will know. I am
not ridiculing this maximum offer; I can only repeat what you read in
the science-fiction advertisements. If somebody ridicules somebody else,
you could not tell from the earnestness of these statements; it is just
another case when you can't take a single word seriously, for this is
advertising, which is used to talk only about the best possible and
previously nonexistent products. If all this is not meant to be taken
seriously, then what is the real content of all their cipher language?

One of the most incredible secrets of science fiction (although one not
too closely guarded) is the fact that ninety-nine percent of its authors
do not know even the titles and authors of today's learned works, but
still they want to top these scholars with their knowledge of the year
6000. If an author understands schoolteacher's physics, he is praised by
Knight, quite in earnest, and presented as a model to authors who seem
to have been forced to drop out of school after three years because of
general mental weakness. The public does not seem to wait to find out
about these interesting facts, probably because such news would annoy
them. It is quite embarrassing to find out that for the least amount of
money and mental effort, one has been convinced that one was initiated
into the vastest secrets of the universe and existence.

6

The exception mentioned in the title of this essay is the work of Philip
K. Dick. Because of the lack of a selection process to struggle against
trash and promote real value, the works of Dick are sometimes compared
with those of A. E. van Vogt.

The novels of both authors share the common characteristics that (1)
they are composed of trashy parts and (2) they are full of contradictory
elements. The contradictions include those of an external nature (as
when the world depicted in a book runs counter to empirical scientific
knowledge) and of an internal nature (as when during the course of a
novel the action becomes self-denying — i.e., contradicts itself).

Such a diagnosis does not automatically invoke a subsequent
condemnation. It is true that literary judgment is undemocratic, but
nevertheless in the course of each critical trial it is also just. Yet
it must be ascertained why the case under scrutiny allows a sacrifice of
values. These works contain local nonsense and a local destruction of
values (sense is always to be preferred to nonsense), but this local
inroad might aid the construction of a higher sense of the totality.
This point is connected with the general relativity of all values: even
a murder may be justified in a civilization where it is considered a
link in a chain of connections in which, according to prevailing belief,
the lesser value, a man's life, is sacrificed to the greater, the
godhead.

Judged prima facie, there are no relevant differences between the two
cases under review. Both authors disregard empirical knowledge, logic,
and causality, categories upon which our knowledge is founded. They seem
to sacrifice these basic values to the momentary stage effect;
therefore, they destroy the greater values in order to create a lesser
one — something always culturally taboo.

However, our authors are writers of quite different ranks, when read
thoughtfully. As Knight and Blish have proved, the phantasmagoric
acrobatics of van Vogt do not add up to a meaningful whole. He does not
solve the riddles posed, he does not draw conclusions from the things
depicted early in his books, and he sketches only ephemeral ideas,
piling them chaotically on one another. With all that, he does not
hypnotize the wary reader, but only lulls him to sleep; this sleep comes
from increasing boredom, not fascinating magnetism. The only problem
posed by van Vogt's prose is its financial success, at the same time
irritating and annoying an intelligent reader like Knight. Why is it
possible that work the stupidity of which was amply and unequivocally
demonstrated by Knight still enjoys such great popularity?

But no deep secret awaits discovery. The van Vogt fans do not care a jot
about the Knight line of deduction. Most probably they do not know of it
and do not want to, either. From van Vogt they get the whole cosmos,
with its inhabitants, wars, and empires, excellently served up, because
the plot can be seen without thinking at all, and they close their eyes
to the knowledge that they are being fed with stupid lies. We will say
no more on this topic.

Philip K. Dick seems to write in a vein similar to van Vogt's, although
he does not, like van Vogt, violate grammar and syntax as well as
physics. Dick, too, works with trash. Yet his novels are structured with
more logic. He is accustomed to let action issue from a clearly and
precisely built situation, and only later in the course of a novel does
decay, perplexing the reader, begin to undermine initial order so that
the end of the novel becomes a single knot of fantasies. Dreaming and
waking are mixed, reality becomes indistinguishable from hallucination,
and the intangible center of Dick's world dissolves into a series of
quivering, mocking monstrosities so that in the end each novel of Dick's
mainstream (for Dick has also written second-rate, insignificant works)
destroys the order of things that he erected at the beginning. Even if
Dick's worlds owe their explosion to a technology or a disease (or
madness) of the space-time manifold, in ever-increasing speed they
multiply their "pseudo-realities" so that (as in The Three Stigmata of
Palmer Eldritch) the levels of hallucination and reality, which
initially were separate from one another, become a space-time labyrinth.
But Dick always moves among the typical trash of science fiction in the
realm of androids, of the usual prophets ("precogs"), "psi,"
"esp"fields, brain transplants, and hundreds of other similarly
scurrilous products and phenomena.

Trash is present everywhere in Dick's books; from time to time, though,
in some of his novels, he succeeds in executing a master stroke. I am
convinced that he made this discovery unconsciously and unintentionally.
He has invented an extremely refined tactic: he uses elements of trash
(that is, those degenerate molecules that once had a sacramental,
metaphysical value) so that he leads to a gradual resurrection of the
long-extinct, metaphysical-exotic values. In a way, he makes trash
battle against trash. He does not deny it, he does not throw it away,
but he builds from it a ladder that leads straight into that horrible
heaven, which, during this operation, ceases to be an "orthodox" heaven,
but does not become an "orthodox" hell. The accumulating, mutually
negating spheres of existence enforce the resurrection of a power that
has been buried for eons. In short, Dick succeeds in changing a circus
tent into a temple, and during this process the reader may experience
catharsis. It is extremely difficult to grasp analytically the means
that make it possible for him to do so.

On the contrary, it is easy to say that this catharsis justifies the
sacrifice of values that shocks the reader at the beginning. I cannot
devote this essay to the Dick Transubstantiation Method; therefore, I
will make only a few remarks on his tour d'adresse.

The promise of "almightiness" is implicit in science fiction. This
omnipotence has a bipolar nature — the omnipotence of the bad (as in the
dystopia) and of the good (the Utopia). In the course of its evolution
science fiction has renounced the positive omnipotence, and for a long
time it has occupied the opposite pole — that of maximum despair.
Gradually it has made this pole its playground. Because the end of the
world, the atomic Last Judgment, the epidemic provoked by technology,
the freezing, drying up, crystallization, burning, sinking, the
automation of the world, and so on no longer have any meaning in science
fiction today. They lost their meaning because they underwent the
typical inflation that changes eschatological horror into the pleasant
creeps. Every self-respecting fan owns a science-fiction library of the
agonies of mankind that equals the book collection of a chess amateur,
since the end of the world should be as formally elegant as a
well-thought-out gambit. I believe it is a very sad phenomenon to
witness the indifferent workmanship with which such novels are produced.
There are specialists who have slaughtered mankind in thirty different
ways, but still search diligently and calmly for further methods of
murder. Structurally this (end-of-the-world) science fiction has put
itself on the same level as the crime novel, and culturally it acts out
a nihilism that liquidates horror, according to the law of diminishing
returns. A space occupied by trash is a vacuum in which lead and
feathers fall at the same speed. It is indeed a great venture to coerce
the resurrection of dead metaphysical values from such a novel.

* This point of view may prompt some fans to ask the question why
science-fiction writers should not be allowed to make an intellectual
game out of the topic of mankind's doom, and why the science-fiction
field should be forbidden that which is done with complete justification
in the field of the crime novel? My answer is: Surely nothing in heaven
or on earth prohibits us from doing so; in the same way as there are no
"absolute" prohibitions to hinder us from playing with corpses or the
genitalia of our fathers or from concentrating our whole love life on
the goal of sleeping as fast as possible with as many women as possible
in order to establish a record. We could do all these things as a matter
of course, but surely nobody praises such programs as something to
further social values: neither can we deny that these actions promise
certain new liberties only annulling forever taboos that have stayed
intact until today. As the English put it: you cannot have it both ways;
you cannot respect a life, a topic, a feeling, and prostitute it at the
same time. At the utmost you can falsify the real appearance and real
meaning of a situation brought about by your own actions deliberately or
unconsciously; but hiding one's head in the sand is fraught with
well-known dangers. According to the whole historical tradition of our
culture, truth has inherent value, whether pleasant or depressing. If
crime novels follow their own schemata to falsify reality, it does not
matter, since nobody looks into these novels for the highest revelations
and initiations into the abysses of human nature. If science fiction
adapts itself to the crime novel, it must stop claiming to be considered
as something better than the crime novel. Its peculiar state of
continual oscillation between the Upper and the Lower Realms of
literature is a symptom of its repetitive attempts to have it both ways.
But this is impossible without self-deception.

It cannot be maintained that Dick has evaded all the traps set for him:
he has more defeats than victories in his work, but the latter determine
his rank as an author. His successes are due to his intuition. Average
science-fiction authors form their hells of existence, their flaming
grounds to head for, in social institutions, especially
police-tyrannies-plus-brainwashing, as from Orwell's school, but Dick
makes his out of ontological categories. The primary ontological
elements — space and time — are Dick's instruments of torture, which he
uses with great versatility. In his novels he constructs hypotheses that
are prima facie wholly nonsensical (because of the contradictions they
contain) — worlds that are at the same time determinist and
indeterminist, worlds where past, present, and future "devour" each
other, a world in which one can be dead and alive at the same time, and
so on.

But in the first world even the "precogs" prove to be powerless to evade
their own cruel end, which they foresaw themselves. Their wonderful gift
only makes their torture harder to bear. In the second world time
becomes a Laocoon's snake that strangles its inhabitants. The third
world embodies the saving of Chiang Tsi, who, upon waking, posed the
famous question of whether he is Chiang Tsi who has just dreamed he was
a butterfly or a butterfly who now dreams that he is Chiang Tsi. Dick
writes about a technological realization of an ontological problem that
has always occupied philosophers (i.e., the controversy between
subjectivists and objectivists) so that it may be considered as an
earnest problem of the (far) future, and not just a speculative
question.

The common opinion that philosophical problems can never change directly
into technological feats is an illusion caused by the relatively brief
period of the technological era. In the year 1963 I discussed this
problem in my Summa Technologiae, in the chapter entitled
"Phantomatics." One possible way to build a synthetic reality is to
"encapsulate" the consciousness by connecting the brain of the person in
question to a computerlike apparatus in the same way as it is connected
normally to real environments through the senses and nerves — i.e., with
feedback. The most interesting puzzle is whether a "phantomatically
imprisoned" man can divine the real state of things, whether he can
distinguish the machine-simulated environment from the real one, by
means of any one experiment. From either a logical or an empirical
standpoint, it seems that the person could not make a correct diagnosis
if the program of the machine was insufficiently developed. In a
civilization which has such phantomatic techniques, there may be much
mind-napping. But also there may be many legal uses of such methods, so
that a person could witness while awake as many happenings as could be
programmed, and since in principle there are no obstacles, the
phantomated person would realize the counter-empirical (he could,
subjectively, live through many metamorphoses of his body).

In Dick's book Ubik, we find a literary variant of a similar project. He
deals with a biotechnological method that is complicated by the fact
that it allows dying people to remain in a specific state between life
and death — i.e., "half-life." Dick develops a quite horrible game, so
that it is not clear at the end which of the main characters lie in
half-life and which live in normal reality. The action zigzags. With
different ideas of what the reader is led to believe to be true. Also
there are such macabre effects as the dissolution of earth and jumping
back in time. You can find similar things in science fiction, but this
masterly, gripping guidance of the play, in particular the behavior of
all the characters, is psychologically depicted without fault. The
border that separates the adventure novel from mainstream literature is
transgressed in Ubik, something I want to prove later in this essay.

Now I want to review the "message" that several of Dick's novels
communicate to us in an unequivocal way, embedded in the action. He
seems to want to prove an equation, in the form of "We exist, therefore
we are damned," and this equation is supposed to be valid for all
worlds, even for impossible ones. His novels are the results of
pessimistic ontological speculations about how the face of men would
change if total revolutions in the basic categories of existence
occurred (e.g., revolutions in the space-time system, in the
relationship between dreaming and waking, etc). The result is the same,
since insofar as these changes are induced by biotechnologies or drugs
(as in Palmer Eldritch) they can only worsen the fatality of earthly
existence. The greater a technological innovation is, says Dick, the
more horrible its consequences.

In his first "major" novel, Solar Lottery, Dick has not yet tried to
destroy the fundamentals of existence completely. He "shyly" introduces
a new sociotechnology in which all men are supposed to have an equal
chance to gain political power, because the allocation of power depends
upon a comprehensive lottery. As can be expected, the result is a new
kind of misery and inequality. Thus Dick has good reasons to sacrifice
logic and causality; he shows that even the variants of existence that
violate causality and logic are inherent in the invariance of texture
and doom. One could call Dick an inverted apologist for "progress,"
because he connects unlimited progress in the field of the
instrumentally realizable with bottomless pessimism in the field of
human consequences of such progress in civilization. His novels are
pieces of fantastic belles-lettres, but his underlying philosophy of
life is not fantasy. Dick seems to foresee a future in which abstract
and highbrow dilemmas of academic philosophy will descend into the
street so that every pedestrian will be forced to solve for himself such
contradictory problems as "objectivity" or "subjectivity," because his
life will depend upon the result. With all his "precogs," "cold-packs,"
and "Pen-fields," he tells us, "And if you could achieve the impossible,
it would not alleviate your misery one bit."

Dick's main characters are engaged in a battle not only for their lives,
but also to save the basic categories of existence. They are doomed to
failure in advance. Some exhibit the patience of Job, who gazed quietly
into the face of what was coming, since everything that can happen to a
man had already happened to him. Others are valiant wrestlers, striving
after power, while still others are small and petty people, officials,
and employees. Dick mans all his misleading worlds with contemporary
Americans. Probably this is the reason why they seem so living and
authentic — because there is a feedback between them and the world
surrounding them. The authenticity of these people corroborates the
fantastic background, and, vice versa, the background makes the normal
people seem especially noteworthy and true to life. Dick's main
characters do not become greater during the apocalyptically terrifying
action of his novels; they only seem greater — or more human — because
the world around them gets ever more inhuman (that is, more
incomprehensible to the mind of man).

There are moments when they have a tragic effect. In the Greek sense
tragedy is inescapable defeat, with several ways of being defeated. Some
of these ways, if a man chooses one of them, give the opportunity
symbolically to save an inestimable value. For one of Dick's heroes, the
love of a woman or a similar human feeling is the kind of value that is
worth saving, a value to be guarded even if the world goes to pieces.
They are the last islands of spiritual sanity in a world gone mad, a
world that heaps on them objects used in ways other than originally
intended and that thus become instruments of torture and objects that
spring from the sphere of the most trivial consumer goods and behave
like things obsessed (e.g., a tape recorder or a spray can). Dick's main
characters engage in conferences with monsters, which, however, are not
little BEMs ("bug-eyed monsters," the embodiment of trash), because an
aura of grotesque and dramatic worth clings to them, and they have the
dignity of misshapen, tortured creatures. With the example of such
monsters — one of which is Palmer Eldritch — we can see how Dick
vanquishes truth; in the shape of a mutilation, he makes simple the
macabre and the primitive by giving them a trace of fragile humanity.

In Ubik, the twitching world reminds us of the "will" of Schopenhauer,
will gone mad; spurned into everlasting time explosion and implosion,
devouring itself. As an aside, measured by the yardstick of Dick's black
pessimism, Schopenhauer's philosophy of life seems to be real joie de
vivre. Dick sees our world as the best of the worst, and there are no
other worlds. According to him, we are everywhere damned, even where we
cannot go. Dick once said that he does not consider himself a limitless
pessimist. Possibly, though conscious of reason in the cosmos, he does
not draw the nihilistic conclusion because he does not ascribe an
exclusively negative value to the agony of man. But this is my private
speculation.*

Dick's planets, galaxies, men, children, monsters, elevators, and
refrigerators are all symbols of a language that, mix it as you please,
always crystallizes into the same form of a mene tekel.

With that I don't want to say that Dick's novels — even his best, like
Ubik — are faultless masterpieces. The surfaces of his books seem quite
coarse and raw to me, connected with an omnipresence of trash. I like
what he has to say in one chapter more than what a page shows, and that
is why his work forces me into fast reading. Upon looking his details in
the face, one beholds several inconsistencies, as in looking at an
Impressionist's painting from too close. Dick cannot tame trash; rather,
he lets loose a pandemonium and lets it calm down on its way. His
metaphysics often slips in the direction of cheap circus tricks. His
prose is threatened by uncontrolled outgrowths, especially when it boils
over into long series of fantastic freaks, and therefore loses all its
function of message. Also, he is prone to penetrate so deeply into the
monstrosities he has invented that an inversion of effect results: that
which was intended to strike us with horror appears merely ridiculous,
or even stupid.

With that I'll stop this immanent review of Dick's work and pass over to
its sociological aspect. The science-fiction environment is unable to
separate and make distinct the types of works that are being born into
it. This environment is incapable of distinguishing clearly between the
work of Dick, which is artistically bunched together into sense, from
that of van Vogt, which collapses into nonsense. On a higher plane a
title like The World of Null-A belongs to Dick, not to van Vogt,
although it was the latter who actually wrote it; but only with Dick can
we talk about a "non-Aristotelian" logic, whereas this title is merely
tacked onto van Vogt's book without any justification. In its actions
the science-fiction environment is by no means chaotic; obeying its own
laws and regulations, it extols the stupid and denigrates the valuable
until both meet "halfway" -on the level of insignificant trifles. In
science fiction, Dick has not been honored according to his merits. Some
people acknowledged the entertainment values of his novels, and one of
the best living science-fiction critics, Damon Knight, also spoke about
Dick's distorted pictures of contemporary reality (in In Search of
Wonder) when he reviewed Solar Lottery and some other early books by
Dick.

But that was all the praise this author came to hear. Nobody saw that
his "unchecked growth" is quite strikingly similar in content and form
to what goes on in the Upper Realm. Judged according to the problems he
deals with, Dick's novels belong to that stream of literature that
explores the no man's land between being and nothing — in the double
sense.

(a) 
    We can count Dick's novels as part of the prose that is today called
    "Literature of Ideas" or "Literature of Possibilities." This type of
    experimental prose tries to probe the neglected, latent, untouched,
    as-yet-unrealized potentialities of human existence, mainly in the
    psychological sphere. Probably one can find fountains of such prose
    in, among others, the works of Musil (Der Mann Ohne Eigenschaften —
    The Man Without Qualities) in which the outer world, randomly
    manifesting itself, affixes to the individual, so that he remains a
    soul "without qualities." In such books as his Le Voyeur,
    Robbe-Grillet tries other tactics; this prose seems to fit the motto
    Quod autem potest esse totaliter aliter — "that which, however, can
    be something wholly different" (which in Poland is represented by J.
    Andrzejewski in his Miazga, a work that is written partly in the
    future subjunctive mood and therefore describes what could possibly
    happen, and not what has unconditionally happened), which has its
    parallels with Dick's work. Robbe-Grillet proceeds from the typical
    science-fiction blueprint of "parallel worlds," but whereas most
    science-fiction writers flatten this motif into unbearable trash,
    running over it like a steamroller, Dick knows how to raise the
    problems that grow from this inspiration to a fitting level of
    complexity. Therefore he is an original representative of the
    Literature of Ideas in science fiction — a wide field, but one with
    which I cannot deal here exhaustively.

(b)
    In connection with Dick, we can think of authors like Beckett,
    because of the "unhealthy curiosity" that both have for death, or,
    more exactly, for the flow of life as it approaches its end. Beckett
    "is content" with natural processes that will devour man from the
    inside, slowly and continually (as when growing old, or becoming a
    cripple). Dick devotes himself to grander speculations, in the true
    spirit of the genre he is working in.

We could say many interesting things about his "theory" of half-life
(not as a sensible empirical hypothesis, but as a variety of
fantastic-ontological speculation) but, once again, I cannot dig too
deep into an exegesis of a desacralized eschatology.

We draw these two parallels to show how an area of creation, closed into
a ghetto, suffers from the situation of its own isolation. For such
parallel courses of evolution are not accidental coincidences. It is the
spirit of time that mirrors itself in them, but science fiction knows
only short-lived fashions.

The peculiarity of Dick's work throws a glaring light upon relationships
within the science-fiction milieu. All science-fiction works have to
give the reader the impression of being easy to read, as has all
fiction. Science-fiction works before which two hundred Nobel Prize
winners in the department of physics kneel down are worthless for the
science-fiction market if, in fact, the precondition of being able to
evaluate a work of science fiction is a minimum of knowledge. Therefore
it is best for science-fiction books not to contain any deep meaning —
either physical or metaphysical. But if the author smuggles any sense
into his work, it must not stir the phlegmatic and indolent reader, or
else this invaluable man will stop reading because of a headache.* The
deeper meaning is admitted only if it is "harmless," if we can neglect
it entirely while reading. The following anecdote may explain this
problem: If many colored flags are put upon the masts of a ship in the
harbor, a child on the shore will think that this is a merry game and
perhaps will have a lot of fun watching, although at the same time an
adult will recognize the flags as a language of signals, and know that
it stands for a report on a plague that has broken out on board the
ship. The science-fiction readership equals the child, not the adult, in
the story.

Their trashy surface helps Dick's novels to survive in the milieu of
science fiction. I do not maintain that Dick is a Machiavelli of science
fiction who, under the cover of science-fiction trash, intentionally
carries out a perfidiously thought-out camouflage in order to deceive
his readers (i.e., in giving them gold disguised as iron trinkets).

Rather, I believe that Dick works intuitively, without knowing himself
that he plays hide-and-seek with his readers. Please note the difference
between an artist and an artisan: the artist grows in his environment,
deriving from it the elements that serve him as a medium of expression —
of those differences of tensions to which his personality is subject.
The artisan is a producer of things for which there is a demand and
which he has learned to produce — after the models that enjoy the
highest popularity. Ninety-eight percent of science fiction is a craft,
and its authors are day laborers who must obey to demand payment. Almost
any artist can become an artisan when he strangles his inner voice — or
he has no such voice at all.

For a long time Philip K. Dick has been only an artisan, and a skillful
one, too, since he knew how to produce the things that were bought
immediately. Gradually he began — and I must continue to speak in
metaphors — to listen to his inner voice, and, though he still made use
of those elements that science fiction put at his disposal, he began to
put together patterns of his own.

But this is not an infallible explanation. As is always the case, it
arises from a land of cross-breeding between what is in the books I read
and what I can do with this material as a reader. Therefore I can
imagine other explanations for Dick's novels, explanations that differ
from mine, though naturally the role of such an explanation cannot be
played by just any idea. There is no doubt about the fact that with
trashy elements Dick tries to express a metaphysics of an extremely
"black" nature, mirroring authentically the state of his mind. A
logical, one-hundred-percent unequivocal reconstruction of the deep
semantic structures of a complex work is impossible because there are no
discursive series of phrases to which a work of art may be reduced
without leaving something remaining.

Thus it must be; for if it were otherwise, this essay would be entirely
superfluous. Why should I talk in so complicated and obscure a manner
about a theme, if this theme may be put into clear and simple words?
That which you can say briefly and intelligibly you need not describe
with long and unintelligible words. For this reason, every authentic
work of art has its depths, and the possibility that such a work of art
carries a message about existence for subsequent generations of readers,
although in society, in civilization, and in life there is endless
change, bears witness that the transitory things that do not disappear
in a masterpiece are buried in its semantic variability. Out of the
glaring clichés of trash, behind which yawns a horrible vacuum for every
science-fiction artisan, Dick makes for himself a set of messages —
i.e., a language — just like somebody who puts together from separate
colored flags a language of signals according to his own judgment.
Science-fiction criticism could help Dick to collect the colored flags,
but not to put together sensible entireties from this crude material,
because in practice it denies the existence of semantic depth.

Those science-fiction readers who are keenest of hearing feel that Dick
is "different"; however, they are unable to articulate this impression
clearly.

Dick has adapted to the science-fiction milieu — with positive as well
as negative effects. He invented a method to express, with the aid of
trash, that which transcends all trash. But he was unable to withstand
to the end the contaminating influence of this quite poisonous material.

The most striking lack is the lack of penetrating, detailed, and
objective criticism. The critical books by Blish and Knight are an
exception to this rule; the book by Lundwall (Science Fiction: What It's
All About, 1970) is not a piece of criticism or a monograph, but is
merely a traveler's guide to the provinces of science fiction. The
innocent sin of Blish and Knight is that they only and simply reviewed
current science-fiction production, paying attention to all the authors.
In their length and detail, the negative, destructive critiques written
by Knight are totally superfluous, because it is impossible to help
authors who are nitwits, and, as I said before, the public does not give
a damn about such disqualifications.

Literature has no equality of rights: the day laborers must be dealt
with in one sentence, if not with scornful silence, and a maximum of
patience and attention is due to the promising author. But science
fiction has different customs. I am no enthusiast; I do not believe that
shrewd critiques would make author Dick into a Thomas Mann of science
fiction. And yet it is a pity that there has been no critical selection
among his works (although this state of affairs is consonant with the
lack of selection in the whole science-fiction field). Unfortunately,
the work of Dick praised above also has its reverse side. One is used to
calling such work uneven. The contradictions in The Three Stigmata of
Palmer Eldritch and Ubik (and also partly in Solar Lottery) are of a
fleeting nature. These seeming contradictions constitute the claim of
completeness — the semantic value of the work (as I tried to show very
briefly). Therefore the local contradictions are meaningful messages
that direct the reader's attention to the problems that underlie the
works. The novel Galactic Pot-Healer is only negligible. Every author is
free to produce works of different value; there is no law against a
great epic master allowing himself a novel of pure entertainment.

Our Friends from Prolix 8 and Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? are
not unimportant literature, but they cheat the reader. Especially in the
latter do we see the sad picture of an author who squanders his talent
by using brilliant ideas and inspirations to keep up a game of cops and
robbers. This is far worse than putting together a valueless whole from
valueless parts. The idea of the "Pen-field apparatus," with which one
can arbitrarily change one's own mental disposition, is a brilliant one,
but it does not play a role in the novel. In order to unravel the
logical mystery that makes up Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? a
whole study would be necessary, but it would have to be written with the
embarrassed feeling that it is wholly superfluous.

But I must say this without furnishing proof. The first premise of the
plot is that a policeman may kill on the spot everyone who is discovered
to be an android, because on earth only androids kill their masters.
(This premise does not hold good in the face of what is written later in
the book.) We get to know that some androids do not know their true
nature, because they have been filled with the incorrect information
that they are normal humans. The police system has been undermined by
androids who, disguised as humans, kill policemen in order to bear false
witness that the dead human has been unmasked as an android. At the same
time, we discover that some policemen have the same type of android
nature — i.e., with an artificially implanted consciousness that they
are humans. But if somebody does not know himself whether he is an
"android replica" or a normal policeman, in what sense is this
"infiltration"? If an android has a synthetically "humanized"
consciousness with a falsified memory, for what is he called to account?
How can one be responsible for that which one has no knowledge of? With
these actions did Dick intend to present a model of discrimination, such
as the kind of persecution of the Jews administered under the label
"final solution"? But then (1) the androids are innocent victims and
should not be depicted as insidious creatures, something that the novel
does in places, and (2) people who are persecuted — e.g., persecuted
because of their race — are certainly conscious of their innocence but
at the same time conscious of their identity, which is not the case with
the androids. In other ways the parallel is not valid. It remains
obscure whether every android is killed on the spot because of what he
once did (he is supposed to have killed his master) or because of what
he is. As I have shown, the claim that every android is a murderer
because it is unthinkable there is an android without an owner is not
valid. Why are there no humans, masters of androids, who die natural
deaths in their beds? As for the difference between human and android,
we hear that it is almost impossible to distinguish between humans and
androids with one hundred percent accuracy. To do this one needs a
psychological test that measures the suspect's reactions with a
psychogalvanic apparatus. The test is nonsense; besides, on another
occasion we hear that androids have a life span of only a few years,
since the cells of their tissue cannot multiply. Therefore it is not
child's play to discover the difference by means of an organic
examination of a microscope slide preparation of cell tissue, a
procedure that takes about three minutes.

There is no unequivocal answer to all these questions. Situations to
shock the readers must be multiplied at all costs. A trial to identify a
suspect is far less shocking than the situation in which two policemen,
working hand in glove, may kill one another if either of them should
suddenly be unmasked as an android. This is all the more thrilling if
neither of them, subjectively, knows who he really is, android or human.
Then, both are subjectively innocent, both could be androids, or only
one, or none — all of which heightens the tension, but at the same time
increases the nonsense. In order to shock us when applied, the
differentiating test must be applied fast and surely, but then suspense
is lost if it is not coupled with the uncertainty of whether the suspect
is an android or not, but with uncertainty of whether the test itself
might fail, which causes somebody's death instantly, in error. Because
the author did not want to do without these logically exclusive
alternatives, the test must be at the same time reliable and unreliable,
the androids must act at the same time with malice aforethought and in
complete innocence; as an android one is at the same time conscious and
unconscious of one's nature; a girl who has slept with a policeman is
sentenced to death because it is forbidden for androids to sleep with
humans; however, at the same time the girl does not know she is an
android, etc., ad lib. The problem that is spelled out originally and
begins to unfold, of human conflict with humanlike creations endowed
with spirit by humans themselves, is torn to shreds, while the game of
cops and robbers continues merrily. This nonsense, offered by the author
of Ubik, can be construed as an offense to the reader, an offense which,
however, evaporates without trace in the highly concentrated
thoughtlessness of the science-fiction milieu.

We cannot deny this: the author of Ubik knew quite well what he was
doing. But did criticism catch him red-handed and hold him responsible?
I do not jest: for he who could write Ubik must understand the
fraudulent character of his work. Criticism only took offense at his
novel for being, in a way, insipid — i.e., not as full of suspense as
the best of Dick. Such a brew of trite remarks is held out as criticism
in science fiction.*

Dick set me right, and for that reason — as a guidepost — his work is so
important. With the tactics I was using I could write only humorous (or
grotesque) works: this is worse than if one remains in earnest all the
time. It is worse because humor shows up the rich ambiguity of an
earnest way of narration in but a lesser degree. The reader must
recognize that an example has been ridiculed, or else the reader and
writer are as much at cross-purposes as when somebody does not grasp the
point of a joke; one cannot misunderstand a joke and savor it at the
same time. Therefore humorous prose is assured of a more ready reception
than complex prose that wants to be taken seriously. Because of Dick's
method of "transformation of trash," I have found a third (just this)
tactic of creation. A novel by Dick is not bound to be — and often is
not — understood, because of its peculiar maximum span of meanings;
because trash is not ridiculed; because the reader can enjoy its
elements and see them isolated from reciprocal relationships within the
same work. This is better for the work, since it can survive in
different ways in the reader's environment, either correctly or
incorrectly understood. Similarly, one can recognize a humorist at first
glance, but not a man who makes use of Dick's tactics. It is far more
difficult to grasp the complexity of the work in its entirety, and in no
other way can we deal with the "transformation of trash."

Only a complete lack of a theory of science fiction makes it
comprehensible why the New Wave of science fiction did not pick Dick as
their guiding star. The New Wavers knew that they should look for
something new, but they did not have the slightest idea what it could
be. Surely there is no more diffuse definition of anything than that of
the New Wave, which is supposed to be represented on the one hand by
Spinrad, on the other by Delany, and on a third by Moorcock. Until now
the New Wave has succeeded well in making science fiction quite boring,
but this is the only characteristic in which it is approaching the state
of modern prose in the Upper Realm. Repressed but powerful inferiority
complexes are constantly at work, and we can detect this because all the
experimenters seem to believe from the bottoms of their hearts that the
medicine and models for redeeming science fiction can be found only in
the Upper Realm. Out of this belief came Farmer's Riders of the Purple
Wage (no mean piece of prose, but of a markedly secondary, or even
tertiary, character to Farmer's model, Joyce's Ulysses, which is itself
modeled on The Odyssey) and Stand on Zanzibar, which, as we all know,
was written by Brunner on the model of Manhattan Transfer by Dos Passes.
The New Wavers seized expressionism, surrealism, etc., and so they
completed a collection of old hats; it becomes a race backward which
still arrives in the nineteenth century before they know it. But a blind
search can give only blind results; just "blind shells" (duds).

As I said, I believe that a writer can either make a caricature of
trash, and ridicule it, or throw it away. Dick found out how to blaze a
third trail, a discovery that was important not just for himself, but
that remained unnoticed. The newness of Ursula K. Le Guin's The Left
Hand of Darkness was observed instantly because it is localized in the
action, but the more volatile discovery by Dick was misjudged because it
cannot be localized and can be described only with the utmost difficulty
for the reasons I have set out. It is not sufficient, milords critics,
to enjoy a book, and criticism is not a cry of joy; one must not only
know how to prove that one was delighted but also know how to explain by
what one was delighted and charmed.

There is no justification for this primitive dalliance; there is only an
explanation, of a general character, which transcends the work itself.
Ross Ashby proves that intelligence is a quality that does not foster
survival under all possible variants of environments. In some
environments stupidity serves better the drive for self-preservation. He
spoke of rats; I would like to apply this claim to that part of
literature called "science fiction." For in science fiction what does it
matter if Ubik is a piece of gold and Do Androids Dream of Electric
Sheep? a counterfeit coin? I don't know what an average reader thinks
while reading these two novels. If we could reproduce his thoughts as
they correspond to his behavior as a library borrower, we must conclude
that he has an extremely short memory; at the utmost he can remember
what is printed on one page. Or he does not think at all; an alternative
that scares me so much, however, that I'd prefer to drop it.

The problem remains that all science-fiction books are similar to one
another -not according to their content, but according to the way they
are received. Innumerable imitations of each original work appear, so
that the originals are buried beneath mountains of trash, like cathedral
towers around which garbage has been dumped for so long that only the
spires project out of the rubbish that reaches toward heaven. In this
context the question arises as to how many gifted beginners have
insufficient power to preserve their individuality as writers — unless
by way of compromise, like Dick — in spite of the equalizing trends of
science fiction.

Probably the pressure of trivial literature has crushed many highly
talented writers with the result that today they deliver the products
that keep highbrow readers away from science fiction. This process
brings about a negative selection of authors and readers: for even those
writers who can write good things produce banalities wholesale: the
banality repels intelligent readers away from science fiction; as they
form a small majority in fandom the "silent majority" dominates the
market, and the evolution into higher spheres cannot occur. Therefore,
in science fiction, a vicious circle of cause and effect coupled
together keeps the existing state of science fiction intact and going.
The most intelligent and most demanding readers, who form a small
minority, still long for "better" science fiction and feel ill at ease
when reading its current production, showing their uneasiness in their
letters of comment and essays in fanzines. The "normal" reader — i.e.,
the silent majority and their representatives in fanzines — gains the
impression somehow that the others are tense, scurrilous, and even
malicious creatures just like — I wrote something like this once in a
private letter — missionaries in a whorehouse — i.e., people who feel
that they are doing their duty but at the same time are conscious that
their efforts at conversion are powerless and that they seem out of
place. The missionaries, ready to make the greatest sacrifices, can just
as little change a whorehouse into a temple as "genial" readers can
change science fiction into a fully qualified citizen of the Upper Realm
of Literature.

I'll close this essay with one last remark: the disfigurement of Dick's
work is the price that he had to pay for his "science-fiction
citizenship." Dick owes his exuberant growth, as well as his own
peculiar downfalls, to this circle of life, which, like a dull teacher,
cannot distinguish its brightest pupils from the plodding grinds. This
circle of life, like such a teacher, strives to treat all its
subordinates in the same way, a way improper in schools, and disastrous
in literature.

APPENDIX
Ubik as Science Fiction

In Science Fiction Commentary 17, George Turner wrote: "In Ubik we are
given the living and the half-living; the half-living are actually dead
but exist in another version of reality until their vestigial remainders
of consciousness finally drain away. Their "reality" is subject to
manipulation by a strong personality among the half-living, which piles
complexity on complexity, until inconsistencies begin to stand out like
protest posters. The plotting is neat, but cannot override the
paradoxes. The metaphor fails because it cannot stand against the weight
of reality as we know it."

Now I am ready to prove that there is a rational viewpoint from which
Ubik can be seen as a novel based on scientifically sensible notions.
Here is the line of proof.

In Ubik dying people are put into a state of "half-life" if medicine
does not know how to heal them. The critically ill are placed in "cold
packs" in which their bodies are intensively cooled down. At a very low
temperature, their life functions decelerate so that death cannot occur.
This is not fantasy. We know today that at temperatures close to 0°
Kelvin for all practical purposes the growth of cancer cells stops, and
even deadly poisons no longer destroy cells. Therefore an analogue of
the process mentioned in Ubik can be realized today, except that it
would be regarded as senseless to carry it out. Although cooling (better
known as hibernation) will delay death and stop agony, one cannot speak
of saving the patient: he is unconscious, he cannot be allowed to be
warmed up to consciousness again, because then the death that has been
delayed will occur. People speak of freezing a man and preserving him in
this state of cryogenics until medicine discovers a method of healing
this special case after years or centuries. We do not know yet whether
reversible cold death, the idea of which lies at the base of this
opinion, can be realized, because until the present day, experiments
performed on mammals have shown no positive results; freezing and later
defreezing wreaks irreversible damage on all tissues. Ubik presupposes
that reversible cold death cannot be realized — something considered by
specialists to be plausible or even highly probable. Thus hibernation
can be regarded as useless, and freezing at low temperatures as
unobtainable. But there is one escape route, viz., one could keep the
body of the patient in a state of continuous hibernation and supply his
brain with warm blood with a suitable apparatus (artificial heart and
lungs), so that the patient will regain consciousness.

The patient would find himself in the same position as a paralytic, or
maybe we should call it a situation much worse than that. His sense
organs do not function, for only his brain can be supplied with blood;
however, even if someone were ready to face such a cruel risk as
near-death, even then he could not be helped. For we know that the idea
of keeping intact the paraphysiological functions of an isolated brain
is Utopian. When the normal flux of sense data to the brain ceases, and
a state of sensory deprivation sets in, an ever-increasing decay of all,
especially the higher, brain functions sets in. An isolated brain cannot
function normally; therefore we meet a barrier even in this escape
route.

But all is not yet lost: if we succeed in creating a synthetic
environment for the patient's brain, he will continue to live, although
not in our normal reality — he will live in a substitute reality. This
pseudoreality is the common good (or bad, as you like) of all people in
cold storage. The key question to answer is whether we can create a
substitute world for those lying in cold storage, and if so, how? Now we
cannot put into effect such an achievement at the moment, but the
chances of doing so are quite good. Often during surgical operations on
the brain the cerebral cortex has been irritated electrically and,
circumstances permitting (with which I do not wish to deal here), this
irritation may produce a series of hallucinations that the patient lives
through as reality. The subject hears the voice of a dead acquaintance,
sees him, witnesses whole scenes from his past, and so on. Please bear
in mind that these are primitive experiments to which very little time
was devoted, because the main purpose of the operation was to heal the
patient, and one is not allowed to attempt tests that carry with them
the slightest shadow of danger. Perhaps we will gain more knowledge,
which will allow us to perfect this method. There must be machines,
which we can call simulators or environment-producers, to which people
lying in cold storage could be connected. The simulator becomes a source
of information used necessarily to create a fictitious environment in
the patient's brain; it works according to a program attuned to the
needs of each case and becomes a fountain of new facts and impressions
previously unknown to the patient. (Even today we can bring about by
irritation of the cerebral cortex not only sensory hallucinations, but
also feelings, including, for example, erotic experiences.)

In principle, the technical problem in the real world is soluble, and so
we come to the next, untechnological, question: how much knowledge can
the patient have about his true situation? Ubik makes the assumption
that sane people in cold storage, such as Runciter's wife, have been
conscious of their situation for years, but also some people, such as
Joe Chip, who was put on ice after an accident, and those placed there
because of incurable disease, do not know about their situation.
Somebody — and this happens to Joe Chip — meets with catastrophe, loses
consciousness, regains it after a period of time and finds himself
returned to his well-known environment without knowing that it is part
of a pseudoreality to which he is condemned "for life" because this is
the only way to save him.

Morally it is quite questionable whether the false belief of these
people that they are still living normal lives should be maintained —
but this problem is irrelevant because a much more important one
displaces it: i.e., his next-of-kin prefers the situation in which the
patient lives to his death; though at the same time nobody could call it
an agreeable situation. People are not content to keep the patient
alive, because, from the point of view of people in the normal world, he
is leading only a half-life isolated from the real world. They want to
reach him, to talk to him, listen to him, etc. This is technically
possible, but only under the most extraordinary conditions.
Pseudoreality makes up an integral whole for the patient; therefore if
someone who exists outside intrudes, the patient experiences this
intrusion as an anomaly in his environment. The "quest" cannot reach
into pseudo-reality in a fully plausible and harmless way. This is
important if a patient such as Runciter's wife is conscious of the
situation. But it is extremely important if he or she does not know it —
as in the case of Joe Chip.

Two curious phenomena must still be explained: (1) the "mad" behavior of
pseudoreality, and (2) the manipulation by one man in cold storage of
the consciousness of his fellow sufferers. (In Ubik the problem is the
curious relationship formed among Emily, Runciter's wife, Joe Chip, and
the strange man named Jorg.)

The first phenomenon is a realistic presentation of a fictitious
technology. We may, in advance, claim that whichever way the technology
of reality-fission will be realized, it must be subject to certain
malfunctions because no technology is invulnerable to malfunctions. The
fact that at some time a breakdown in the production of pseudoreality
will occur can be regarded as a realistic prediction, since none of
today's predictions can tell us what kind of mishaps will happen. Ubik's
author was justified in describing the "breakdowns" and "defects" of
pseudoreality at his own discretion. Different types of disasters may
occur.

In pseudoreality certain anomalies of the flow of time and space might
happen, and both have a dreamlike character, i.e., they resemble what we
experience in dreams. This type of creation of "reality breakdowns"
seems to be correct insofar as (according to what we said before) the
main source of the information that makes up pseudoreality is the brain
of the man lying in cold storage; in this way we can account for the
fact that each relaxation of the direction of psychic processes by the
simulator correlates with changed appearances in the mind of the
patient. He will experience this as a change of environment, as if in a
dream. (At this point I should like to remark that as a rule a dream is
not recognized as such by the dreamer; for this reason Joe Chip also
does not think of such an interpretation of the events around him.)

We may assume that the "overgrowth" of one consciousness by another
occurs because a lot of people are lying in cold storage and, for
economic reasons, not everyone is allotted a separate simulator. Rather,
a handful of people is always connected with a multichannel machine.
Even if one circuit is insulated from the others, it may happen that
electrical impulses flash across, or cause the induction of another
current; subjectively, this may be experienced as the "devouring" of one
consciousness by another, neighboring, one.

The last question to be answered is: who is really lying in cold
storage: Runciter or Joe Chip? Because of all the facts found in Ubik,
one may conclude that both men lie in cold storage — that all the men on
the moon were killed by the explosion and subjected to cold-storage
treatment.

Quod erat demonstrandum— and in several places we have "filled" the gaps
left in the novel. But it would not be correct to speak in earnest about
such "gaps."

First, an author need not necessarily describe the technological details
in a novel. As is well known, writers of contemporary novels do not
describe the principles that underlie the functions of refrigerators,
radios, and cars, and in these novels we would look in vain for the
information that all the main characters are "vertebrates" and
"mammals." The basic assumption of Ubik is a technology of split
reality, and it is not particularly important what kind of technology
caused this split, so it need not be described in detail. It can occur
in many ways; the technological details have secondary importance. The
most important detail is that in a world where split reality has already
been realized, its inhabitants face new, previously unknown dilemmas and
must solve problems having the greatest impact. The existence of such a
technology changes the ontological perspective of life and, as Ubik
shows convincingly, the problem is not just that of people put in cold
storage because they are severely injured. In principle, anyone can be
incarcerated in a pseudoworld for his whole life. Whether this is legal
or illegal is a problem of jurisprudence, not philosophy. In a world
with split reality, general knowledge shows that, as well as the normal
level of reality, other levels may exist, levels that may exist for some
other people — or for everybody. As always, this is a question of the
price to be paid for so-called progress (in Ubik, progress in the battle
against death).

At any rate, the point set out above is a perspective from which the
novel may be seen as a science-fiction work that depicts the human
consequences of a biotechnological revolution. Perhaps it is not
superfluous to remark in the second place that observers who watch the
spectacle of a highway catastrophe do not usually indulge in reflections
that call into question the facts of civilization and the history of
technology; when people are looking at destroyed cars and maimed bodies
they do not think about the price that has been exacted in human lives
because Otto once invented the four-stroke engine and other inventors
put this motor into the body of an old coach. So we may doubt whether
the above technological exegesis is really necessary and whether we may
think that Dick should of his own accord fill the gaps in technological
detail that I have tried to fill.

Rather, I believe that Dick left no gaps in the novel, and in fact that
the technological explanation is superfluous. It pursued only one
object: I wanted to demonstrate that the novel is coherent as science
fiction as well and that contradictions and loose ends in its structure
are not in question. If technological details abounded in Ubik they
would interfere with our reading; they do not add anything relevant to
the text, and they can only rationalize it in a way that the author does
not like. From the point of view of an artist, he is correct, for this
novel is not "futurological" science fiction, though it may be read as
such. However, Dick has taken a different point of view: he renounces
all "empirical justifications" and "scientific" foundations. Primarily
Ubik is a poetic achievement; we may draw this conclusion from the fact
that the biotechnological premise, as outlined above, could also be the
basis of a novel whose factual details were impeccable but, despite all
this, a blind shell as a work of art. The contradictions in Ubik need
not be defended at all costs by appealing to technological authority.
The novel has neither gaps nor signs of the author's negligence. The
"contradictions" form a mode of expression that serves to expose to full
daylight the messages that are stressed by affection and a special
philosophy of life. In a word, they are metaphors that should not be
examined for empirical content, even if that seems possible. As I could
show, even if they withstand logical and scientific tests, this is not
their main value as an experience that can be exchanged with the
currency of practical knowledge. This experience is called catharsis.

 POSTSCRIPT  

The laws of science fiction form a dynamic structure at a balance of
flow. Translated into the language of a futurologist, there are
long-term, complex trends. There is no hope that they will be reversed.
However, there are real possibilities that these trends will creep
gradually into the Upper Realm of Literature, because of the ongoing
explosion of information. The premise of selection that filters values
implies a filter of sufficient capacity. But even today the capacity of
this filter — the critics — as a value-selecting system is overtaxed by
the quantity of books on the market. Generally, one is unaware of this
situation. Consequently, the career of each literary work reminds us
less of a directed trajectory than of something that takes on the motion
of a Brownian particle — i.e., order becomes chaos. From the viewpoint
of a critical filter, this chaos is not perceived easily, because a
selection process is still taking place. But the fact that it takes
place at all is no longer due to the filtration of the whole quantity of
all the works that come onto the market, but to the random collision
between prominent books and prominent critics. Since the number of books
flowing onto the market increases continually, in the course of time the
books form a kind of umbrella — i.e., they form a shield against the
critics — and they frustrate an encompassing selection, something the
critics do not realize for a long time because they are still fishing
the "best" titles out of the stream of the market. However, they do not
see those books that, although they are just as good as the ones picked
out, or even better, remain unknown to them.

Selection no longer encompasses the whole quantity of published
material, and this cultural area converts itself into a blind lottery.
But this lottery takes only a marginal part in the selection of values.
In due course, we can see that true values in abundance can have the
same effect as a devastating flood. If they abound, these values begin
to destroy themselves because they block all the filters intended to
select them. Thus the fate of literature as a whole can become quite the
same as that of trivial literature. Perhaps culture itself will be
drowned in the Great Flood of information.

Translated from the German by Werner Koopmann

 

Philip K. Dick: A Visionary
Among the Charlatans

No one in his right mind seeks the psychological truth about crime in
detective stories. Whoever seeks such truth will turn rather to Crime
and Punishment. In relation to Agatha Christie, Dostoevsky constitutes a
higher court of appeal, yet no one in his right mind will condemn the
English author's stories on this account. They have a right to be
treated as the entertaining thrillers they are, and the tasks Dostoevsky
set himself are foreign to them.

If anyone is dissatisfied with science fiction in its role as an
examiner of the future and of civilization, there is no way to make an
analogous move from literary oversimplifications to full-fledged art,
because there is no court of appeal for this genre. There would be no
harm in this except that American science fiction, exploiting its
exceptional status, lays claim to occupy the pinnacles of art and
thought. One is annoyed by the pretentiousness of a genre that fends off
accusations of primitivism by pleading its entertainment character and
then, once such accusations have been silenced, renews its overweening
claims. By being one thing and purporting to be another, science fiction
promotes a mystification that, moreover, goes on with the tacit consent
of readers and public. The development of interest in science fiction at
American universities has, contrary to what might have been expected,
altered nothing in this state of affairs. In all candor it must be said,
though one risk perpetrating a crime laesae Almae Matris, that the
critical methods of theoreticians of literature are inadequate in the
face of the deceptive tactics of science fiction. It is not hard to
grasp the reason for this paradox: if the only fictional works treating
of problems of crime were like those of Agatha Christie, then to just
what kind of books could even the most scholarly critic appeal in order
to demonstrate the intellectual poverty and artistic mediocrity of the
detective thriller? Qualitative norms and upper limits are established
in literature by concrete works and not by critics' postulates. No
mountain of theoretical lucubrations can compensate for the absence of
an outstanding fictional work as a lofty model. The criticism of experts
in historiography did not undermine the status of Sienkiewicz's Trilogy,
since there was no Polish Leo Tolstoy to devote a War and Peace to the
period of the Cossack and Swedish wars. In short, inter caecos luscus
rex — where there is nothing first-rate, its role will be taken over by
mediocrity, which sets itself facile goals and achieves them by facile
means.

What the absence of such model works leads to is shown, more plainly
than by any abstract discussions, by the change of heart that Damon
Knight, both author and respected critic, expressed in Science-Fiction
Studies #3. Knight declared himself to have been mistaken earlier in
attacking books by van Vogt for their incoherence and irrationalism, on
the ground that, if van Vogt enjoys an enormous readership, he must by
that very fact be on the right track as an author, and that it is wrong
for criticism to discredit such writing in the name of arbitrary values
if the reading public does not want to recognize such values. The job of
criticism is, rather, to discover those traits to which the work owes
its popularity. Such words, from a man who struggled for years to stamp
out tawdriness in science fiction, are more than the admission of a
personal defeat — they are the diagnosis of a general condition. If even
the perennial defender of artistic values has laid down his arms, what
can lesser spirits hope to accomplish in this situation?

Indeed, the possibility cannot be ruled out that Joseph Conrad's
elevated description of literature as rendering "the highest kind of
truth to the visible universe" may become an anachronism — that the
independence of literature from fashion and demand may vanish outside
science fiction as well, and then whatever reaps immediate applause as a
best seller will be identified with what is most worthwhile. That would
be a gloomy prospect. The culture of any period is a mixture of that
which docilely caters to passing whims and fancies and that which
transcends these things — and may also pass judgment on them. Whatever
defers to current tastes becomes an entertainment, which achieves
success immediately or not at all, for there is no such thing as a magic
show or a football game which, unrecognized today, will become famous a
hundred years from now. Literature is another matter: it is created by a
process of natural selection of values, which takes place in society and
which does not necessarily relegate works to obscurity if they are also
entertainment, but which consigns them to oblivion if they are only
entertainment. Why is this so? Much could be said about this. If the
concept of the human being as an individual who desires of society and
of the world something more than immediate satisfactions were abolished,
then the difference between literature and entertainment would likewise
disappear. But since we do not as yet identify the dexterity of a
conjurer with the personal expression of a relationship to the world, we
cannot measure literary values by numbers of books sold.

But how does it ever happen that something which is less popular can, in
the historical long run, hold its own against that which scores prompt
successes and even contrives to silence its opponents? This results from
the aforementioned natural selection in culture, strikingly similar to
such selection in biological evolution. The changes by virtue of which
some species yield place to others on the evolutionary scene are seldom
consequences of great cataclysms. Let the progeny of one species
outsurvive that of another by a margin of only one in a million, and by
and by only the former species will remain alive — though the difference
between the chances of the two is imperceptible at short range. So it is
also in culture: books that in the eyes of their contemporaries are so
alike as to be peers part company as the years go by; facile charm,
being ephemeral, gives way at last to that which is more difficult to
perceive. Thus regularities in the rise and decline of literary works
come into being and give direction to the development of the spiritual
culture of an age.

Nevertheless, there can be circumstances that frustrate this process of
natural selection. In biological evolution the result will be
retrogression, degeneration, or at the very least developmental
stagnation, typical of populations isolated from the outside world and
vitiated by inbreeding, since these are most lacking in the fruitful
diversity that is guaranteed only by openness to all the world's
influences. In culture an analogous situation leads to the emergence of
enclaves shut up in ghettos, where intellectual production likewise
stagnates because of inbreeding in the form of incessant repetition of
the selfsame creative patterns and techniques. The internal dynamics of
the ghetto may appear to be intense, but with the passage of years it
becomes evident that this is only a semblance of motion, since it leads
nowhere, since it neither feeds into nor is fed by the open domain of
culture, since it does not generate new patterns or trends, and since,
finally, it nurses the falsest of notions about itself, for lack of any
honest evaluation of its activities from outside. The books of the
ghetto assimilate themselves to one another, becoming an anonymous mass,
while such surroundings thrust whatever is better downward toward the
worse, so that works of differing quality meet one another halfway, as
it were, in the leveling process forced upon them. In such a situation
publishing success not only may, but must, become the sole standard of
evaluation, since a vacuum of standards is impossible. Hence, where
there are no ratings on the merits, these are replaced by ratings on a
commercial basis.

Just such a situation reigns in American science fiction, which is a
domain of herd creativity. Its herd character manifests itself in the
fact that books by different authors become as it were different
sessions of playing at one and the same game or various figures of the
selfsame dance. It should be emphasized that, in literary culture as in
natural evolution, effects become causes by virtue of feedback loops:
the artistic-intellectual passivity and mediocrity of works touted as
brilliant repel the more exigent authors and readers, so that the loss
of individuality in science fiction is at once a cause and an effect of
ghetto seclusion. In science fiction there is little room left for
creative work that would aspire to deal with problems of our time
without mystification, oversimplification, or facile entertainment:
e.g., for work that would reflect on the place that reason can occupy in
the universe, on the outer limits of concepts formed on earth as
instruments of cognition, or on such consequences of contacts with
extraterrestrial life as find no place in the desperately primitive
repertoire of science-fiction devices (bounded by the alternative "we
win"/"they win"). These devices bear much the same relation to serious
treatment of problems of the kind mentioned as does the detective story
to the problems of evil inherent in mankind. Whoever brings up the heavy
artillery of comparative ethnology, cultural anthropology, and sociology
against such devices is told that he is using cannon to shoot sparrows,
since it is merely a matter of entertainment; once he falls silent, the
voices of the apologists for the culture-shaping, anticipative,
predictive, and mythopoeic role of science fiction are raised anew.
Science fiction behaves rather like a conjurer pulling rabbits from a
hat, who, threatened with a search of his belongings, pretends to think
we are crazy to suggest this and indulgently explains that he is just
performing tricks — after which we promptly hear that he is passing
himself off in public for an authentic thaumaturge.

Is creative work without mystification possible in such an environment?
An answer to this question is given by the stories of Philip K. Dick.
While these stand out from the background against which they have
originated, it is not easy to capture the ways in which they do, since
Dick employs the same materials and theatrical props as other American
writers. From the warehouse that has long since become their common
property, he takes the whole threadbare lot of telepaths, cosmic wars,
parallel worlds, and time travel. In his stories terrible catastrophes
happen, but this, too, is no exception to the rule; lengthening the list
of sophisticated ways in which the world can end is among the standard
preoccupations of science fiction. But where other science-fiction
writers explicitly name and delimit the source of the disaster, whether
social (terrestrial or cosmic war) or natural (elemental forces of
nature), the world of Dick's stories suffers dire changes for reasons
that remain unascertainable to the end. People perish not because a nova
or a war has erupted, not because of flood, famine, plague, draught, or
sterility, not because the Martians have landed on our doorstep; rather,
there is some inscrutable factor at work that is visible in its
manifestations but not at its source, and the world behaves as if it has
fallen prey to a malignant cancer, which through metastases attacks one
area of life after another. This is, be it said forthwith, apposite as a
castigation of historiographic diagnostics, since in fact humanity does
not as a rule succeed in exhaustively or conclusively diagnosing the
causes of the afflictions that befall it. It is sufficient to recall how
many diverse and in part mutually exclusive factors are nowadays adduced
by experts as sources of the crisis of civilization. And this, be it
added, is also appropriate as an artistic presupposition, since
literature that furnishes the reader with godlike omniscience about all
narrated events is today an anachronism that neither the theory of art
nor the theory of knowledge will undertake to defend.

The forces that bring about world debacle in Dick's books are fantastic,
but they are not merely invented ad hoc to shock the readers. We will
show this with the example of Ubik, a work which, by the way, can also
be regarded as a fantastic grotesque, a "macabresque" with obscure
allegorical subtexts, decked out in the guise of ordinary science
fiction.

If, however, it is viewed as a work of science fiction proper, the
contents of Ubik can be most simply summarized as follows:

Telepathic phenomena, having been mastered in the context of
capitalistic society, have undergone commercialization like every other
technological innovation. So businessmen hire telepathists to steal
trade secrets from their competitors, and the latter, for their part,
defend themselves against this "extrasensory industrial espionage" with
the aid of "inertials," people whose psyches nullify the "psi field"
that makes it possible to receive others' thoughts. By way of
specialization, firms have sprung up that rent out telepathists and
inertials by the hour, and the "strong man" Glen Runciter is the
proprietor of such a firm. The medical profession has learned how to
arrest the agony of victims of mortal ailments, but still has no means
of curing them. Such people are therefore kept in a state of "half-life"
in special institutions, "moratoriums" ("places of postponement" — of
death, obviously). If they merely rested there unconscious in their icy
caskets, that would be small comfort for their surviving kin. So a
technique has been developed for maintaining the mental life of such
people in "cold-pac." The world which they experience is not part of
reality, but a fiction created by appropriate methods. Nonetheless,
normal people can make contact with the frozen ones, for the cold-sleep
apparatus has means to this end built into it, something on the order of
a telephone.

This idea is not altogether absurd in terms of scientific facts: the
concept of freezing the incurably ill to await the time when remedies
for their diseases will be found has already come in for serious
discussion. It would also be possible in principle to maintain vital
processes in a person's brain when the body dies (to be sure, that brain
would rapidly suffer psychological disintegration as a consequence of
sensory deprivation). We know that stimulation of the brain by
electrodes produces in the subject of such an operation experiences
indistinguishable from ordinary perceptions. In Dick we find a perfected
extension of such techniques, though he does not discuss this explicitly
in the story. Numerous dilemmas arise here: should the "half-lifer" be
informed of his condition? is it right to keep him under the illusion
that he is leading a normal life?

According to Ubik, people who, like Runciter's wife, have spent years in
cold sleep are well aware of the fact. It is another matter with those
who, like Joe Chip, have come close to meeting with a violent end and
have regained consciousness imagining that they have escaped death,
whereas in fact they are resting in a moratorium. In the book, it must
be admitted, this is an unclear point, which is however masked by
another dilemma: if the world of the frozen person's experiences is a
purely subjective one, then any intervention in that world from outside
must be for him a phenomenon that upsets the normal course of things. So
if someone communicates with the frozen one, as Runciter does with Chip,
this contact is accompanied in Chip's experiences by uncanny and
startling phenomena — it is as if waking reality were breaking into the
midst of a dream "only from one side," without thereby causing
extinction of the dream and wakening of the sleeper (who, after all,
cannot wake up like a normal man because he is not a normal man). But,
to go a step further, is not contact also possible between two frozen
individuals? Might not one of these people dream that he is alive and
well and that from his accustomed world he is communicating with the
other one — that only the other person succumbed to the unfortunate
mishap? This, too, is possible. And, finally, is it possible to imagine
a wholly infallible technology? There can be no such thing. Hence
certain perturbations may affect the subjective world of the frozen
sleeper, to whom it will then seem that his environment is going mad —
perhaps that in it even time is falling to pieces! Interpreting the
events presented in this fashion, we come to the conclusion that all the
principal characters of the story were killed by the bomb on the moon,
and consequently all of them had to be placed in the moratorium, and
from this point on the book recounts only their visions and illusions.
In a realistic novel (but this is a contradictio in adiecto) this
version would correspond to a narrative that, after coming to the demise
of the hero, would go on to describe his life after death. The realistic
novel cannot describe this life, since the principle of realism rules
out such descriptions. If, however, we assume a technology that makes
possible the half-life of the dead, nothing prevents the author from
remaining faithful to his characters and following them with his
narrative — into the depths of their icy dream, which is henceforward
the only form of life open to them.

Thus it is possible to rationalize the story in the above manner — on
which, however, I would not insist too seriously, and that for two
reasons at once. The first reason is that to make the plot fully
consistent along the lines sketched above is impossible. If all
Runciter's people perished on the moon, then who transported them to the
moratorium? Another thing that does not yield to any rationalization is
the talent of the girl who by mental effort alone was able to alter the
present by transposing causal nodes in a past already over and done
with. (This takes place before the occurrence on the moon, when there
are no grounds for regarding the represented world as the purely
subjective one of any half-life character.) Similar misgivings are
inspired by Ubik itself, "the Absolute in a spray can," to which we will
devote attention a little later on. If we approach the fictional world
pedantically, no case can be made for it, since it is full of
contradictions. But if we shelve such objections and inquire instead
after the overall meaning of the work, we will discover that it is close
to the meanings of other books by Dick, for all that they seem to differ
from one another. Essentially it is always one and the same world that
figures in them — a world of elementally unleashed entropy, of decay
that not only, as in our reality, attacks the harmonious arrangement of
matter, but also even consumes the order of elapsing time. Dick has thus
amplified, rendered monumental and at the same time monstrous, certain
fundamental properties of the actual world, giving them dramatic
acceleration and impetus. All the technological innovations, the
magnificent inventions, and the newly mastered human capabilities (such
as telepathy, which our author has provided with an uncommonly rich
articulation into "specialties") ultimately come to nothing in the
struggle against the inexorably rising floodwaters of Chaos. Dick's
province is thus a "world of preestablished disharmony," which is hidden
at first and does not manifest itself in the opening scenes of the
novel; these are presented unhurriedly and with calm matter-of-factness,
just so that the intrusion of the destructive factor should be all the
more effective. Dick is a prolific author, but I speak only of those of
his novels that constitute the "main sequence" of his works; each of
these books (I would count among them: The Three Stigmata of Palmer
Eldritch, Ubik, Now Wait for Last Year, and perhaps also Galactic
Pot-Healer) is a somewhat different embodiment of the same dramatic
principle — the conversion of the order of the universe to rack and ruin
before our eyes. In a world smitten with insanity, in which even the
chronology of events is subject to convulsions, it is only the people
who preserve their normality. So Dick subjects them to the pressure of a
terrible testing, and in his fantastic experiment only the psychology of
the characters remains nonfantastic. They struggle bitterly and
stoically to the end, like Joe Chip in the current instance, against the
chaos pressing on them from all sides, the sources of which remain,
actually, unfathomable, so that in this regard the reader is thrown back
on his own conjectures.

The peculiarities of Dick's worlds arise especially from the fact that
in them it is waking reality that undergoes profound dissociation and
duplication. Sometimes the dissociating agency consists of chemical
substances (of the hallucinogenic type — thus in The Three Stigmata of
Palmer Eldritch); sometimes in "cold-sleep technique" (as precisely in
Ubik); sometimes (as in Now Wait for Last Year) in a combination of
narcotics and "parallel worlds." The end effect is always the same:
distinguishing between waking reality and visions proves to be
impossible. The technical aspect of this phenomenon is fairly
inessential — it does not matter whether the splitting of reality is
brought about by a new technology of chemical manipulation of the mind
or, as in Ubik, by one of surgical operations. The essential point is
that a world equipped with the means of splitting perceived reality into
indistinguishable likenesses of itself creates practical dilemmas that
are known only to the theoretical speculations of philosophy. This is a
world in which, so to speak, this philosophy goes out into the street
and becomes for every ordinary mortal no less of a burning question than
is for us the threatened destruction of the biosphere.

There is no question of using a meticulous factual bookkeeping to strike
a rational balance for the novel, by virtue of which it would satisfy
the demands of common sense. We are not only forced to but we ought to
at a certain point stop defending its "sciencefictional nature" and for
a second reason, so far unmentioned. The first reason was dictated to us
simply by necessity: given that the elements of the work lack a focal
point, it cannot be rendered consistent. The second reason is more
essential: the impossibility of imposing consistency on the text compels
us to seek its global meanings not in the realm of events themselves,
but in that of their constructive principle, the very thing that is
responsible for lack of focus. If no such meaningful principle were
discoverable, Dick's novels would have to be called mystifications,
since any work must justify itself either on the level of what it
presents literally or on the level of deeper semantic content, not so
much overtly present in, as summoned up by, the text. Indeed, Dick's
works teem with non sequiturs, and any sufficiently sensitive reader can
without difficulty make up lists of incidents that flout logic and
experience alike. But — to repeat what was already said in other ways —
what is inconsistency in literature? It is a symptom either of
incompetence or else of repudiation of some values (such as credibility
of incidents or their logical coherence) for the sake of other values.

Here we come to a ticklish point in our discussion, since the values
alluded to cannot be objectively compared. There is no universally valid
answer to the question whether it is permissible to sacrifice order for
the sake of vision in a creative work -everything depends on what kind
of order and what kind of vision are involved. Dick's novels have been
variously interpreted. There are critics — Sam Lundwall is one — who say
that Dick is cultivating an "offshoot of mysticism" in science fiction.
It is not, though, a question of mysticism in the religious sense, but,
rather, of occult phenomena. Ubik furnishes some grounds for such a
conclusion. Does not the person who ousts Ella Runciter's soul from her
body behave like a "possessing spirit"? Does not he metamorphose into
various incarnations when fighting with Joe Chip? So such an approach is
admissible.

Another critic (George Turner) has denied all value in Ubik, declaring
that the novel is a pack of conflicting absurdities — which can be
demonstrated with pencil and paper. I think, however, that the critic
should not be the prosecutor of a book, but its defender, though one not
allowed to lie: he may only present the work in the most favorable
light. And because a book full of meaningless contradictions is as
worthless as one that holds forth about vampires and other monstrous
revenants, and since neither of them touches on problems worthy of
serious consideration, I prefer my account of Ubik to all the rest. The
theme of catastrophe had been so much worked over in science fiction
that it seemed to be played out until Dick's books became a proof that
this had been a matter of frivolous mystification. For science-fictional
endings of the world were brought about either by man himself — e.g., by
unrestrained warfare — or by some cataclysm as extrinsic as it was
accidental, which thus might equally well not have happened at all.

Dick, on the other hand, by introducing into the annihilation ploy — the
tempo of which becomes more violent as the action progresses —
instruments of civilization such as hallucinogens, effects such a
commingling of the convulsions of technology with those of human
experience that it is no longer apparent just what works the terrible
wonders -a deus ex machina or a machina ex deo, historical accident or
historical necessity. It is difficult to elucidate Dick's position in
this regard, because in particular novels he has given mutually
incongruent answers to this question. Appeal to transcendence appears
now as a mere possibility for the reader's conjectures, now as a
diagnostic near-certainty. In Ubik, as we have said, a conjectural
solution which refuses to explain events in terms of some version of
occultism or spiritualism finds support in the bizarre technology of
half-life as the last chance offered by medicine to people on the point
of death. But earlier, in The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch,
transcendental evil emanates from the titular hero — that is, by the
way, rather low-grade metaphysics, being akin to hack treatments of
"supernatural visitations" and "ghosts," and all that saves the thing
from turning into a fiasco is the author's virtuosity as a storyteller.
And in Galactic Pot-Healer we have to do with a fabulous parable about a
sunken cathedral on some planet and about the struggle that takes place
between Light and Darkness over raising it, so that the last semblance
of literalness of events vanishes here. Dick is, so I instinctively
judge, perfidious in that he does not give unambiguous answers to the
questions provoked by reading him, in that he strikes no balances and
explains nothing "scientifically," but instead just confounds things,
not only in the plot itself but also with respect to a superordinated
category: the literary convention within which the story unfolds. For
all that Galactic Pot-Healer leans toward allegory, it does not adopt
this position either unambiguously or definitively, and a like
indeterminacy as to genre is also characteristic of other novels by
Dick, perhaps to an even higher degree. We thus encounter here the same
difficulty about genre placement of a work that we met with in the
writing of Kafka.

It should be emphasized that the genre affiliation of a creative work is
not an abstract problem of interest only to theorists of literature. It
is an indispensable prerequisite to the reading of a work. The
difference between the theorist and the ordinary reader reduces itself
to the fact that the latter places the book he has read in a specific
genre automatically, under the influence of his internalized experiences
— in the same way that we employ our native language automatically, even
when we do not know its morphology or syntax from specialized studies.
The convention proper to a concrete genre becomes fixed with the passage
of time and is familiar to every qualified reader; consequently,
"everybody knows" that in a realistic novel the author cannot cause his
hero to walk through closed doors, but can on the other hand reveal to
the reader the content of a dream the hero has and forgets before he
wakes up (although the one thing is as impossible as the other from a
common-sense point of view). The convention of the detective story
requires that the perpetrator of a crime be found out, while the
convention of science fiction requires rational accounting for events
that are quite improbable and even seemingly at odds with logic and
experience. On the other hand, the evolution of literary genres is based
precisely on violation of storytelling conventions which have already
become static. So Dick's novels in some measure violate the convention
of science fiction, which can be accounted to him as merit, because they
thereby acquire broadened meanings having allegorical import. This
import cannot be exactly determined; the indefiniteness that originates
from this favors the emergence of an aura of enigmatic mystery about the
work. What is involved is a modern authorial strategy, which some people
may find intolerable, but which cannot be assailed with factual
arguments, since the demand for absolute purity of genres is becoming
nowadays an anachronism in literature. The critics and readers who hold
Dick's "impurity" with respect to genre against him are fossilized
traditionalists, and a counterpart to their attitude would be an
insistence that prosaists should keep on writing in the manner of Zola
and Balzac, and only thus. In the light of the foregoing observations
one can understand better the peculiarity and uniqueness of the place
occupied by Dick in science fiction. His novels throw many readers
accustomed to standard science fiction into abiding confusion, and give
rise to complaints, as naïve as they are wrathful, that Dick, instead of
providing "precise explanations" by way of conclusion, instead of
solving puzzles, sweeps things under the rug. In relation to Kafka,
analogous objections would consist in demanding that The Metamorphosis
should conclude with an explicit "entomological justification," making
plain when and under what circumstances a normal man can turn into a
bug, and that The Trial should explain just what Mr. K. is accused of.

Philip Dick does not lead his critics an easy life, since he does not so
much play the part of a guide through his fantasmagoric worlds as he
gives the impression of one lost in their labyrinth. He has stood all
the more in need of critical assistance, but has not received it, and
has gone on writing while labeled a "mystic" and thrown back entirely on
his own resources. There is no telling whether or how his work would
have changed if it had come under the scrutinies of genuine critics.
Perhaps such change would not have been all that much to the good. A
second characteristic trait of Dick's work, after its ambiguity as to
genre, is its tawdriness, which is not without a certain charm, being
reminiscent of the goods offered at county fairs by primitive craftsmen
who are at once clever and naïve, possessed of more talent than
self-knowledge. Dick has as a rule taken over a rubble of building
materials from the run-of-the-mill American professionals of science
fiction, frequently adding a true gleam of originality to already
worn-out concepts and, what is surely more important, erecting with such
material constructions truly his own. The world gone mad, with a
spasmodic flow of time and a network of causes and effects that wriggles
as if nauseated, the world of frenzied physics, is unquestionably his
invention, being an inversion of our familiar standard according to
which only we, but never our environment, may fall victim to psychosis.
Ordinarily, the heroes of science fiction are overtaken by only two
kinds of calamities: the social, such as the "infernos of police-state
tyranny," and the physical, such as catastrophes caused by nature. Evil
is thus inflicted on people either by other people (invaders from the
stars are merely people in monstrous disguises) or by the blind forces
of matter.

With Dick the very basis of such a clear-cut articulation of the
proposed diagnosis comes to grief. We can convince ourselves of this by
putting to Ubik questions of the order just noted. Who was responsible
for the strange and terrible things that happened to Runciter's people?
The bomb attack on the moon was the doing of a competitor, but of course
it was not in his power to bring about the collapse of time. An
explanation appealing to the medical cold-pac technology is, as we have
pointed out, likewise incapable of rationalizing everything. The gaps
that separate the fragments of the plot cannot be eliminated, and they
lead one to suspect the existence of some higher-order necessity, which
constitutes the destiny of Dick's world. Whether this destiny resides in
the temporal sphere or beyond it is impossible to say. When one
considers to what an extent our faith in the infallible beneficence of
technical progress has already waned, the fusion Dick envisages between
culture and nature, between the instrument and its basis, by virtue of
which it acquires the aggressive character of a malignant neoplasm, no
longer seems merely sheer fantasy. This is not to say that Dick is
predicting any concrete future. The disintegrating worlds of his stories
— inversions, as it were, of Genesis, order returning to chaos — are not
so much the future foreseen, as future shock, not straightforwardly
expressed but embodied in fictional reality; an objectivized projection
of the fears and fascinations proper to the human individual in our
times.

It has been customary to identify the downfall of civilization falsely
and narrowly with regression to some past stage of history — even to the
caveman or downright animal stage. Such an evasion is often employed in
science fiction, since inadequacy of imagination takes refuge in
oversimplified pessimism. Then we are shown the remotest future as a
lingering state of feudal, tribal, or slaveholding society, inasmuch as
atomic war or invasion from the stars is supposed to have hurled
humanity backward, even into the depths of a prehistoric way of life. To
say of such works that they advocate the concepts of some cyclic (e.g.,
Spenglerian) philosophy of history would amount to maintaining that a
motif endlessly repeated by a phonograph record represents the concept
of some sort of "cyclic music," whereas it is merely a matter of a
mechanical defect resulting from a blunt needle and worn grooves. So
works of this sort do not pay homage to cyclic historiosophy, but merely
reveal an insufficiency of sociological imagination, for which the
atomic war or the interstellar invasion is only a convenient pretext for
spinning out interminable sagas of primordial tribal life under the
pretense of portraying the farthest future. Nor is it possible to hold
that such books promulgate the "atomic credo" of belief in the
inevitability of a catastrophe that will soon shatter our civilization,
since the cataclysm in question amounts to nothing but an excuse for
shirking more important creative obligations.

Such expedients are foreign to Dick. For him, the development of
civilization continues, but is, as it were, crushed by itself, becoming
monstrous at the heights of its achievement — which, as a prognostic
viewpoint, is more original than the assuredly unilluminating thesis
that, if technical civilization breaks down, people will be forced to
get along by returning to primitive tools, even to bludgeons and flints.

Alarm at the impetus of civilization finds expression nowadays in the
slogans of a "return to nature" after smashing and discarding everything
"artificial," i.e., science and technology. These pipe dreams turn up
also in science fiction. Happily for us, they are absent in Dick. The
action of his novels takes place in a time when there can no longer be
any talk of returning to nature or of turning away from the
"artificial," since the fusion of the natural with the artificial has
long since become an accomplished fact.

At this point it may be worthwhile to point out the dilemma encountered
by futuristically oriented science fiction. According to an opinion
quite generally held by readers, science fiction ought to depict the
world of the fictional future no less explicitly and intelligibly than a
writer such as Balzac depicted the world of his own time in The Human
Comedy. Whoever asserts this fails to take into account the fact that
there exists no world beyond or above history and common to all eras or
all cultural formations of mankind. That which, like the world of The
Human Comedy, strikes us as completely clear and intelligible is not an
altogether objective reality, but is only a particular interpretation
(of nineteenth-century vintage and hence close to us) of a world
classified, understood, and experienced in a concrete fashion. The
familiarity of Balzac's world thus signifies nothing more than the
simple fact that we have grown perfectly accustomed to this account of
reality and that consequently the language of Balzac's characters, their
culture, their habits and ways of satisfying spiritual and bodily needs,
and also their attitude toward nature and transcendence seem to us
transparent. However, the movement of historical changes may infuse new
content into concepts thought of as fundamental and fixed, as for
example the notion of "progress," which according to nineteenth-century
attitudes was equivalent to a confident optimism, convinced of the
existence of an inviolable boundary separating what is harmful to man
from what benefits him. Currently we begin to suspect that the concept
thus established is losing its relevance, because the harmful ricochets
of progress are not incidental, easily eliminated, adventitious
components of it, but are, rather, gains achieved at such cost as, at
some point along the way, to liquidate all the gain. In short,
absolutizing the drive toward "progress" could prove to be a drive
toward ruin.

So the image of the future world cannot be limited to adding a certain
number of technical innovations, and meaningful prediction does not lie
in serving up the present larded with startling improvements or
revelations in lieu of the future.

The difficulties encountered by the reader of a work placed in a remote
historical period are not the result of any arbitrariness on the
writer's part, any predilection for "estrangements," any wish to shock
the reader or to lead him up the garden path, but are an ineradicable
part of such an artistic undertaking. Situations and concepts can be
understood only through relating them to ones already known, but when
too great a time interval separates people living in different eras
there is a loss of the basis for understanding in common life
experiences, which we unreflectingly and automatically imagine to be
invariant. It follows that an author who truly succeeded in delineating
an image of the far future would not achieve literary success, since he
would assuredly not be understood. Consequently, in Dick's stories a
truth value can be ascribed only to their generalized basis, which can
be summed up more or less as follows: when people become ants in the
labyrinths of the technosphere they themselves have built, the idea of a
return to nature not only becomes Utopian but cannot even be
meaningfully articulated, because no such thing as a nature that has not
been artificially transformed has existed for ages. We today can still
talk of a return to nature, because we are relics of it, only slightly
modified in biological respect within civilization, but try imagining
the slogan "return to nature" uttered by a robot. Why, it would mean
turning into deposits of iron ore!

The impossibility of civilization's returning to nature, which is simply
equivalent to the irreversibility of history, leads Dick to the
pessimistic conclusion that looking far into the future becomes such a
fulfillment of dreams of power over matter as converts the ideal of
progress into a monstrous caricature. This conclusion does not
inevitably follow from the author's assumptions, but it constitutes an
eventuality that ought also to be taken into account. By the way, in
putting things thus, we are no longer summarizing Dick's work, but are
giving rein to reflections about it, for the author himself seems so
caught up in his vision that he is unconcerned about either its literal
plausibility or its nonliteral message. It is the more unfortunate that
criticism has not brought out the intellectual consequences of Dick's
work and has not indicated the prospects inherent in its possible
continuation, prospects and consequences advantageous not only for the
author but also for the entire genre, since Dick has presented us not so
much with finished accomplishments as with fascinating promises. It has,
indeed, been just the other way around — criticism inside the field has
instinctively striven somehow to domesticate Dick's creations, to
restrain their meanings, emphasizing what in them is similar to the rest
of the genre, and saying nothing about what is different — insofar as it
did not simply denounce them as worthless for that difference. In this
behavior a pathological aberration of the natural selection of literary
works is emphatically apparent, since this selection ought to separate
workmanlike mediocrity from promising originality, not lump these
together, for such a "democratic" proceeding in practice equates the
dross to the good metal.

Let us admit, however, that the charms of Dick's books are not
unalloyed, so that it is with them somewhat as it is with the beauty of
certain actresses, whom one had better not inspect too carefully at
close range, on pain of being sadly disillusioned. There is no point in
estimating the futurological likelihood of such details in this novel as
those apartment and refrigerator doors that the tenant is forced to
argue with. These are fictional ingredients created for the purpose of
doing two jobs at once: to introduce the reader into a world decidedly
different from the present-day one, and to convey a certain message to
him by means of this world.

Every literary work has two components in the above sense, since every
one exhibits a given factual world and says something by means of that
world. Yet in different genres and different works the ratio between the
two components varies. A realistic work of fiction contains a great deal
of the first component and very little of the second, as it portrays the
real world, which in its own right — that is, outside the book -does not
constitute any sort of message, but merely exists and flourishes.
Nevertheless, because the author makes, of course, particular choices
when writing a literary work, these choices give it the character of a
statement addressed to the reader. In an allegorical work there is a
minimum of the first component and a maximum of the second, seeing that
its world is in effect an apparatus signaling the actual content — the
message — to the receiver. The tendentiousness of allegorical fiction is
usually obvious, that of the realistic kind more or less well concealed.
There are no works whatsoever without tendentiousness; if anyone speaks
of such, what he actually has in mind is works devoid of expressly
emphasized tendentiousness, which cannot be "translated" into the
concrete credo of a world view. The aim of the epic, for example, is
precisely to construct a world that can be interpreted in a number of
ways — as the reality outside of literature can be interpreted in a
number of ways. If, however, the sharp tools of criticism (of the
structural kind, for instance) are applied to the epic, it is possible
to detect the tendentiousness hidden even in such works, because the
author is a human being and by that token a litigant in the existential
process; hence complete impartiality is unattainable for him.

Unfortunately, it is only from realistic prose that one can appeal
directly to the real world. Therefore, the bane of science fiction is
the desire — doomed from the start to failure — to depict worlds
intended at one and the same time to be products of the imagination and
to signify nothing — i.e., not to have the character of a message but to
be, as it were, on a par with the things in our environment, from
furniture to stars, as regards their objective self-sufficiency. This is
a fatal error lodged at the roots of science fiction, because where
deliberate tendentiousness is not allowed, involuntary tendentiousness
seeps in. By tendency we mean a partisan bias, or point of view, which
cannot be divinely objective. An epic may strike us as just that
objective, because the how of its presentation (the viewpoint) is for us
imperceptibly concealed under the what; the epic, too, is a partisan
account of events, but we do not notice its tendentiousness because we
share its bias and cannot get outside it. We discover the bias of the
epic centuries later, when the passage of time has transformed the
standards of "absolute objectivity" and we can perceive, in what passed
for a truthful report, the manner in which "truthful reporting" was at
one time understood. There are no such things as truth or objectivity in
the singular; both of these contain an irreducible coefficient of
historical relativity. Now, science fiction can never be on a par with
the epic, since what the science-fiction work presents belongs to one
time (most often the future), whereas how it tells its story belongs to
another time, the present. Even if imagination succeeds in rendering
plausible how it might be, it cannot break completely with the way of
apprehending events that is peculiar to the here and now. This way is
not only an artistic convention; it is considerably more -a type of
classification, interpretation, and rationalization of the visible world
that is peculiar to an era. Consequently the problem content of an epic
can be deeply hidden, but that of science fiction must be legible,
otherwise the story, declining to deal with nonfictional problems and
not achieving epic objectivity, slides fatally down and comes to rest on
some such support as the stereotype of the fairy tale, the adventure
thriller, the myth, the framework of the detective story, or some hybrid
as eclectic as it is trashy. A way out of the dilemma may consist in
works for which componential analysis, designed to separate what is
"factual" from what forms the "message" ("seen" from a "viewpoint"),
proves altogether impracticable. The reader of such a work does not know
whether what he is shown is supposed to exist like a stone or a chair,
or whether it is supposed also to signify something beyond itself. The
indeterminacy of such a creation is not diminished by its author's
commentaries, since the author can be mistaken in these, like a man who
tries to explain the real meaning of his own dreams. Hence I consider
Dick's own comments to be inessential to the analysis of his works.

At this point we might embark on an excursus about the origin of Dick's
science-fictional concepts, but let just one example from Ubik suffice:
to wit, the name that figures as the title of the book. It comes from
the Latin ubique, "everywhere." This is a blend (contamination) of two
heterogeneous concepts: the concept of the Absolute as eternal and
unchanging order which goes back to systematizing philosophy, and the
concept of the "gadget" — the handy little device for use on appropriate
everyday occasions, a product of the conveyer-belt technology of the
consumer society, whose watchword is making things easy for people at
whatever they do, from washing clothes to getting a permanent wave. This
"canned Absolute," then, is the result of the collision and
interpenetration of two styles of thought of different ages, and at the
same time of the incarnation of abstraction in the guise of a concrete
object. Such a procedure is an exception to the rule in science fiction
and is Dick's own invention.

It is hardly possible to create, in the way just noted, objects that are
empirically plausible or that have a likelihood of ever coming into
existence. Accordingly, in the case of Ubik it is a matter of a poetic —
i.e., metaphorical — device and not of any "futurological" one. Ubik
plays an important part in the story, emphasized still more by the
"advertisements" for it that figure as epigraphs to each chapter. Is it
a symbol, and, if so, of just what? This is not easy to answer. An
Absolute conjured out of sight by technology, supposed to save man from
the ruinous consequences of Chaos or Entropy much as a deodorant shields
our sense of smell from the stench of industrial effluents, is not only
a demonstration of a tactic typical nowadays (combating, for example,
the side effects of one technology by means of another technology); it
is an expression of nostalgia for a lost ideal kingdom of untroubled
order, but also an expression of irony, since this "invention" of course
cannot be taken seriously. Ubik moreover plays in the novel the part of
its "internal micromodel," since it contains in nuce the whole range of
problems specific to the book, those of the struggle of man against
Chaos, at the end of which, after temporary successes, defeat inexorably
awaits him. The Absolute canned as an aerosol, which saves Joe Chip at
the point of death — though only for the time being: will this, then, be
a parable and the handwriting on the wall for a civilization that has
degraded the Sacred by stuffing it into the Profane? Pursuing such a
train of associations, Ubik could finally be seen as a take-off on Greek
tragedy, with the role of the ancient heroes, who strive vainly against
Moira, assigned to the staff telepathists under the command of a
big-business executive. If Ubik was not actually undertaken with this in
mind, it in any case points in such a direction.

The writings of Philip Dick have deserved at least a better fate than
that to which they were destined by their birthplace. If they are
neither of uniform quality nor fully realized, still it is only by brute
force that they can be jammed into that pulp of materials, destitute of
intellectual value and original structure, that makes up science
fiction. Its fans are attracted by the worst in Dick — the typical dash
of American science fiction, reaching to the stars, and the headlong
pace of action moving from one surprise to the next — but they hold it
against him that, instead of unraveling puzzles, he leaves the reader at
the end on the battlefield, enveloped in the aura of a mystery as
grotesque as it is strange. Yet his bizarre blendings of hallucinogenic
and palingenetic techniques have not won him many admirers outside the
ghetto walls, since there readers are repelled by the shoddiness of the
props he has adopted from the inventory of science fiction. Indeed,
these writings sometimes fumble their attempts; but I remain after all
under their spell, as often happens at the sight of a lone imagination's
efforts to cope with a shattering superabundance of opportunities —
efforts in which even a partial defeat can resemble a victory.

Translated from the Polish by Robert Abernathy

 

The Time-Travel Story and Related
Matters of Science-Fiction Structuring

Let's look at a couple of simple sentences that logic, by virtue of a
"disconnected middle" or by virtue of a tautology, asserts are always
true, and let's investigate whether there can be worlds in which their
veracity ceases. The first will be the ever real disjuncture: "John is
the father of Peter or John is not the father of Peter." Any logician
would acknowledge that this disjuncture satisfies at all times the
requirement for truth, since tertium non datur, it is impossible to be
forty percent father and sixty percent nonfather.

Next, let's work with a complex sentence: "If Peter has sexual relations
with his mother, then Peter commits incest." The implication is a
tautological one, since, according to the semantic rules of language, to
have sexual relations with one's mother is tantamount to committing
incest. (Our conjunction is not a complete tautology, since incest
constitutes a concept broader than sexual relations with a mother,
referring, rather, to relations with any person of such close kinship.
We could bring the sentence to a perfect tautology, but this would
necessitate complexities that would in no way alter the essence of the
matter and merely make the argumentation more difficult.)

To simplify matters we shall investigate first the impact of changes on
the veracity or falsity of the statement "John is the father of Peter."
We should point out that what is involved here is a truly causative
biological relation to the birth of a child, and not the ambiguous use
of the designation "father" (since it is indeed possible to be a
biological father and not be a baptismal father, or, conversely, to be a
godfather, but not a parent).

Suppose John is a person who died three hundred years ago, but whose
reproductive cells were preserved by refrigeration. A woman fertilized
by them will become Peter's mother. Will John then be Peter's father?
Undoubtedly.

But then suppose the following: John died and did not leave reproductive
cells, but a woman asked a genetic technician to make up in the
laboratory a spermatozoon of John from a single preserved cell of John's
epithelium (all the cells of the body having the same genetic
composition). Will John, once fertilization is complete, now also be
Peter's father?

Now suppose the following case: John not only died, but also did not
leave a single bodily cell. Instead, John left a will in which he
expressed the desire that a genetic technician perform the steps
necessary to enable a woman to become the mother of a child of John —
i.e., that such a woman give birth to a child and that the child be
markedly similar to John. In addition, the genetic technician is not
permitted to use any spermatozoa. Rather, he is supposed to cause a
parthenogenetic development of the female ovum. Along with this he is
supposed to control the genic substance and direct it by embryogenetic
transformations in such a way that the Peter born is "the spit and image
of John" (there are photographs of John available, a recording of his
voice, etc.). The geneticist "sculptures" in the chromosomal substance
of the woman all the features John craved for in a child. And thus, to
the question "Is John the father or not the father of Peter?" it is now
impossible to give an unequivocal answer of "yes" or "no." In some
senses John is indeed the father, but in others he is not. An appeal to
empiricism alone will not in itself furnish a clear answer. The
definition will be essentially determined by the cultural standards of
the society in which John, Peter's mother, Peter, as well as the genetic
technician, all live.

Let's assume that these standards are fixed, and that the child realized
in strict accordance with John's testamental instructions is generally
acknowledged to be his child. If, however, the genetic technician,
either on his own or at the instigation of others, made up forty-five
percent of the genotypical features of the child not in accordance with
the stipulations of the will, but in accordance with an entirely
different prescription, it would then be impossible to maintain that
John, in agreement with the standards of a given culture, either is or
is not the child's father. The situation is the same as when some
experts say about a picture reputed to be a work of Rembrandt: "This is
a canvas by Rembrandt," whereas others say: "This is not a canvas by
Rembrandt." Since it is quite possible that Rembrandt began the picture,
but that some anonymous person finished the work, then forty-seven
percent of the work could be said to originate from Rembrandt, and
fifty-three percent from someone else. In such a situation of "partial
authorship," tertium datur. In other words, there are situations in
which it is possible to be a father only in part. (It is also possible
to achieve such situations in other ways, e.g., by removing a certain
number of genes from a spermatozoon of John and substituting another
person's genes for them.)

The possibilities of the transformations mentioned above, which entail a
change in the logical value of the disjunction — "John is the father of
Peter or John is not the father of Peter" — lie, one may judge, in the
bosom of a not too distant future. Thus a work describing such a matter
would be fantastic today, but thirty or fifty years hence it might
indeed be realistic. However, the work by no means needs to relate the
story of a definite, concrete John, Peter, and mother of Peter. It could
describe fictitious persons in a manner typical of any form of literary
composition. The relational invariables between father, mother, and
child would not have at that time the fictitious nature they have in the
present. The invariables that concern paternity are today different from
those of a time when genetic engineering would be realized. In this
sense a composition written today and depicting a given situation
without a "disconnected middle" in the predication of paternity may be
considered a futurological prognosis or a hypothesis that may prove to
be true.

For a real tautology to become a falsehood, the device of travel in time
is necessary. Suppose Peter, having grown up, learns that his father was
a very vile person — that he seduced Peter's mother and abandoned her
only to disappear without a trace. Burning with the desire to bring his
father to account for so despicable an act and unable to locate him in
the present, Peter boards a time vehicle, sets out for the past and
seeks out the father in the vicinity of the place where his mother was
supposed to have resided at that time. The search, although very
thorough, turns out to be in vain. However, in the course of
establishing various contacts related to his expedition, Peter meets a
young girl who attracts him. The two fall in love and a baby is
conceived. Peter cannot remain permanently in the past, though; he is
obliged to return to his old mother, for whom he is the sole support.
Having been convinced by the girl that she has not become pregnant,
Peter returns to the present. He has not succeeded in finding traces of
his father. One. day he finds in one of his mother's drawers a
thirty-year-old photograph and to his horror recognizes in it the girl
whom he loved. Not wishing to impede him, she committed a white lie, and
hid her pregnancy. Peter thus comes to understand that he did not find
his father for the simple reason that he himself is the father. So,
Peter journeyed into the past to search for a missing father, assuming
the name John to facilitate his search by remaining incognito. The
upshot of this journey is his own birth. Thus, we have before us a
circular causal structure. Peter is his own father, but, as against a
superficial judgment, he did not commit incest at all, since, when he
had sexual intercourse with her, his mother was not (and could not be)
his mother. (From a purely genetic point of view, if we forget that — as
is today believed — the causal circle is impossible, Peter is
genotypically identical with his mother. In other words, Peter's mother
for all practical purposes gave birth to him parthenogenetically, since,
of course, no man inseminated her who was alien to her.)

This structure constitutes the so-called time loop, a causal structure
characteristic of an enormous number of science-fiction compositions.
The composition I described is a "minimal" loop, yet there is one still
"smaller," created by Robert Heinlein in the story "All You Zombies"
(1959).* Its plot is as follows: a certain young girl becomes pregnant
by a man who then promptly disappears. She bears a child, or, more
correctly, gives birth to it by Caesarean section. During the operation,
the doctors ascertain that she is a hermaphrodite and it is essential
(for reasons not explained by the author) to change her sex. She leaves
the clinic as a young man who, because he was until quite recently a
woman, has given birth to a child. She seeks her seducer for a long
time, until it comes to light that she herself is he. We have the
following circular situation: one and the same individual was in time T1
both a girl and her partner, since the girl, transformed into a man by
surgical intervention, was transferred by the narrator to time T1 from a
future time, T2. The narrator, a time traveler, "removed" the young man
from time T2 and transferred him to time T1 so that the latter seduced
"himself."

Nine months after time T1 the child was born. The narrator stole this
child and took it back in time twenty years, to moment T0, so he could
leave it under the trees of a foundling home. So the circle is
completely closed: the same individual comprises "father," "mother," and
"child." In other words, a person impregnated himself and gave birth to
himself. The baby born as a result of this is left behind in time,
bringing about in twenty years the growth of a girl who has in time T1
sex with a young man from time T2. The young man is she herself,
transformed into a man by a surgical operation. The fact that a sexual
hermaphrodite should not be able to bear a child is a relatively small
hindrance, since the puzzling situation of a person's giving birth to
himself is considerably "more impossible." What we are dealing with here
is an act of creatio ex nihilo. All structures of the time-loop variety
are internally contradictory in a causal sense. The contradictoriness is
not, however, always as apparent as in Heinlein's story.

Frederic Brown writes about a man who travels into the past in order to
punish his grandfather for tormenting his grandmother. In the course of
an altercation he kills his grandfather before his father has been
engendered. Thus the time traveler cannot then come into the world. Who,
therefore, in fact killed the grandfather, if the murderer has not come
into the world at all? Herein lies the contradiction. Sometimes an
absentminded scientist, having left something in the past, which he has
visited, returns for the lost object and encounters his own self, since
he has not returned exactly to the moment after his departure for the
present, but to the time point at which he was before. When such returns
are repeated, the individual is subject to multiple reproduction in the
form of doubles. Since such possibilities appear to be pointless, in one
of my stories about Ion Tichy (the "7th Journey"), I maximized
"duplication" of the central character. Ion Tichy's spaceship finds
itself in gravitational whirlpools that bend time into a circle, so that
the spaceship is filled with a great number of different Ions.

The loop motif can be used, for instance, in the following ways. Someone
proceeds into the past, deposits ducats in a Venetian bank at compound
interest, and centuries later in New York demands from a consortium of
banks payment of the entire capital, a gigantic sum. Why does he need so
much money all of a sudden? So that he can hire the best physicists to
construct for him a thus far nonexistent time vehicle, and by means of
this vehicle go back in time to Venice, where he will deposit ducats at
compound interest. . . (Mack Reynolds, "Compounded Interest" [1956]).
Another example: in the future someone comes to an artist (in one story
to a painter, in another to a writer) and gives him either a book
dealing with painting in the future or a novel written in the future.
The artist then begins to imitate this material as much as possible, and
becomes famous, the paradox being that he is borrowing from his own self
(since he himself was the author of that book or those pictures, "twenty
years later").

We learn, further, from various works of this sort how the Mesozoic
reptiles became extinct thanks to hunters who organized a "safari into
the past" (Frederic Brown), or how, in order to move in time in one
direction, an equal mass must be displaced in the opposite direction, or
how expeditions in time can reshape historical events. The latter theme
has been used time and again, as in one American tale in which the
Confederate States are victorious over the North (Ward Moore's Bring the
Jubilee [1952, 1953]). The hero, a military historian, sets out for the
past in order to investigate how the Southerners gained victory near
Gettysburg. His arrival in a time machine throws General Lee's troop
formations into disarray, which results in victory for the North. The
hero is no longer able to return to the future, because his arrival also
disturbed the causal chain upon which the subsequent construction of his
time machine depended. Thus, the person who was supposed to have
financed the construction of the machine will not do this, the machine
will not exist, and the historian will be stuck in the year 1863 without
the means to travel back into the original time. Of course here also
there is an inherent paradox — just how did he reach the past? As a
rule, the fun consists in the way the paradox is shifted from one
segment of the action to another. The time loop as the backbone of a
work's causal structure is thus different from the far looser motif of
journeys in time per se; but, of course, it is merely a logical,
although extreme, consequence of the general acceptance of the
possibility of "chronomotion." There are actually two possible authorial
attitudes, which are mutually exclusive: either one deliberately
demonstrates causal paradoxes resulting from "chronomotion" with the
greatest possible consistency, or else one cleverly avoids them. In the
first instance, the careful development of logical consequences leads to
situations as absurd as the one cited (an individual that is his very
own father, that procreates himself), and usually has a comic effect
(though this does not follow automatically).

Even though a circular causal structure may signalize a frivolous type
of content, this does not mean that it is necessarily reduced to the
construction of comic antinomies for the sake of pure entertainment. The
causal circle may be employed not as the goal of the story, but as a
means of visualizing certain theses, e.g., from the philosophy of
history. Antoni Slonimski's story "Time Torpedo"* belongs here. It is a
belletristic assertion of the "ergo ness" or ergodicity of history:
monkeying with events that have had sad consequences does not bring
about any improvement of history; instead of one group of disasters and
wars, there simply comes about another, in no way better.

A diametrically opposed hypothesis is incorporated into Ray Bradbury's
"A Sound of Thunder" (1952). In an excellently written short episode, a
participant in a "safari for tyrannosaurs" tramples a butterfly and a
couple of flowers, and by that microscopic act causes such perturbances
of causal chains involving millions of years, that upon his return the
English language has a different orthography, and a different candidate
— not liberal, but, rather, a kind of dictator — has won in the
presidential election. It is only a pity that Bradbury feels obliged to
set in motion complicated and unconvincing explanations to account for
the fact that hunting for reptiles, which indeed fall from shots,
disturbs nothing in the causal chains, whereas the trampling of a tiny
flower does. (When a tyrannosaur drops to the ground, the quantity of
ruined flowers must be greater than when the safari participant descends
from a safety zone to the ground.) "A Sound of Thunder" exemplifies an
"antiergodic" hypothesis of history, as opposed to Slonimski's story. In
a way, however, the two are reconcilable: history can as a whole be
"ergodic" if not very responsive to local disturbances, and at the same
time such exceptional hypersensitive points in the causal chains can
exist, the vehement disturbance of which produces more intensive
results. In personal affairs such a "hyperallergic point" would be, for
example, a situation in which a car attempts to pass a truck at the same
time that a second car is approaching from the opposite direction.

As is usually the case in science fiction, a theme defined by a certain
devised structure of occurrences (in this instance pertaining to a
journey in time) undergoes a characteristic cognitive-artistic
involution. We could have demonstrated this for any given theme, but
let's take advantage of the opportunity at hand.

At first, authors and readers are satisfied by the joy of discerning the
effects of innovations still virginal as far as their inherent
contradictions are concerned. Then, an intense search is begun for
initial situations that allow for the most effective exploitation of
consequences that are potentially present in a given structure. Thus,
the devices of chronomotion begin supporting, e.g., theses of history
and philosophy (concerned with the "ergodicity" or nonergodicity of
history). Then, grotesque and humorous stories like Frederic Brown's
"The Yehudi Principle" (1944) appear: this short story is itself a
causal circle (it ends with the words that it began with: it describes a
test of a device for fulfilling wishes; one of the wishes expressed is
that a story "write itself," which is what just happened). Finally, the
premise of time travel serves frequently as a simple pretext for weaving
tales of sensational, criminal, or melodramatic intrigue; this usually
involves the revival and slight refurbishment of petrified plots.

Time travel has been used so extensively in science fiction that it has
been divided into separate subcategories. There is, for example, the
category of missent parcels that find their way into the present from
the future: someone receives a "Build-a-Man Set" box with "freeze-dried
nerve preparations," bones, etc.; he builds his own double, and an
"inspector from the future," who comes to reclaim the parcel,
disassembles, instead of the artificial twin, the very hero of the
story; this is William Tenn's "Child's Play" (1947). In Damon Knight's
"Thing of Beauty" (1958) there is a different parcel — an automaton that
draws pictures by itself. In general, strange things are produced in the
future, science fiction teaches us (e.g., polka-dotted paint as well as
thousands of objects with secret names and purposes not known).

Another category is tiers in time. In its simplest form it is presented
in Anthony Boucher's "The Barrier" (1942), a slightly satiric work. The
hero, traveling to the future, comes to a state of "eternal stasis,"
which, to protect its perfect stagnation from all disturbances, has
constructed "time barriers" that foil any penetration. Now and then,
however, a barrier becomes permeable. Rather disagreeable conditions
prevail in this state, which is ruled by a police similar to the Gestapo
(Stapper). One must be a slightly more advanced science-fiction reader
to follow the story. The hero finds his way immediately into a circle of
people who know him very well, but whom he does not know at all. This is
explained by the fact that in order to elude the police he goes somewhat
further back in time. He at that time gets to know these very people,
then considerably younger. He is for them a stranger, but he, while he
was in the future, has already succeeded in getting to know them. An old
lady, who got into the time vehicle with the hero when they were fleeing
from the police, meets as a result her own self as a young person and
suffers a severe shock. It is clear, however, that Boucher does not know
what to do with the "encountering oneself motif in this context, and
therefore makes the lady's shock long and drawn out. Further jumps in
time, one after another, complicate the intrigue in a purely formal way.
Attempts are begun to overthrow the dictatorial government, but
everything goes to pieces, providing in the process sensationalism.
Antiproblematic escapism into adventure is a very common phenomenon in
science fiction; authors indicate its formal effectiveness, understood
as the ingenious setting of a game in motion, as the skill of achieving
uncommon movements, without mastering and utilizing the problematic and
semantic aspects of such kinematics.

Such authors neither discuss nor solve the problems raised by their
writing, but, instead, "take care" of them by dodges, employing patterns
like the happy ending or the setting in motion of sheer pandemonium, a
chaos that quickly engulfs loose meanings.

Such a state of affairs is a result of the distinctly "ludic" or playful
position of writers; they go for an effect as a tank goes for an
obstacle: without regard for anything incidental. It is as if their
field of vision were greatly intensified and, simultaneously, also
greatly confined. As in Tenn's story, the consequences of a "temporal
lapse" in a postal matter are everything. Let us call such a vision
monoparametric. At issue is a situation that is bizarre, amusing,
uncanny, logically developed from a structural premise (e.g., from the
presupposition of "journeys in time," which implies a qualitative
difference in the world's causal structure). At the same time such a
vision does not deal with anything more than that.

This can be seen readily from an example of "maximal intensification" of
the subject of governments in time or "chronocracy," described by Isaac
Asimov in his novel The End of Eternity (1955). "The Barrier" showed a
single state isolating itself in the historical flow of events, as once
the Chinese attempted to isolate themselves from disturbing influences
by building the Great Wall (a spatially exact equivalent of a "time
barrier"). The End of Eternity shows a government in power throughout
humanity's entire temporal existence. Inspector-generals, traveling in
time, examine the goings-on in individual epochs, centuries, and
millennia, and by calculating the probability of occurrences and then
counteracting the undesirable ones, keep in hand the entire system —
"history extended in a four-dimensional continuum" — in a state of
desirable equilibrium. Obviously, presuppositions of this sort are more
thickly larded with antinomies than the plumpest pig is with bacon.
While Asimov's great proficiency is manifested by the size of the slalom
over which the narrative runs, it is, in the end, an ineffably naïve
conception because no issues from philosophy or history are involved.
The problem of "closed millennia," which the "tempocrats" do not have
access to, is explained when a certain beautiful girl, whom an inspector
falls in love with, turns out to be not a lowly inhabitant of one of the
centuries under the dominion of the tempocracy, but a secret emissary
from the "inaccessible millennia." The time dictatorship as a control
over the continuum of history will be destroyed, and a liberated
humanity will be able to take up astronautics and other select suitable
occupations. The enigma of the inaccessible millennia is remarkably
similar to the "enigma of the closed room" found in fairy tales and
detective stories. The various epochs about which the emissaries of the
chronocracy hover also recall separate rooms. The End of Eternity is an
exhibition of formal entertainment to which sentiments about the fight
for freedom and against dictatorship have been tacked on rather
casually.

We have already spoken about the "minimal time loop." Let us talk now,
simply for the sake of symmetry, about the "maximal" loops.

A. E. van Vogt has approached this concept in The Weapon Shops of Isher
(1949,1951), but let's expound it in our own way. As is known, there is
a hypothesis (it can be found in Feynman's physics) that states that
positrons are electrons moving "against the tide" in the flow of time.
It is also known that in principle, even galaxies can arise from atomic
collisions, as long as the colliding atoms are sufficiently rich in
energy. In accordance with these presuppositions we can construct the
following story: in a rather distant future a celebrated cosmologist
reaches, on the basis of his own research as well as that of all his
predecessors, the irrefutable conclusion that, on the one hand, the
cosmos came into being from a single particle and, on the other, that
such a single particle could not have existed. Where could it have
sprung from? Thus he is confronted with a dilemma: the cosmos has come
into being, but it could not come into being! He is horrified by this
revelation, but, after profound reflection, suddenly sees the light: the
cosmos exists exactly as mesons sometimes exist; mesons, admittedly,
break the law of conservation, but do this so quickly that they do not
break it. The cosmos exists on credit! It is like a debenture, a draft
for material and energy which must be repaid immediately, because its
existence is the purest one-hundred-percent liability both in terms of
energy and in terms of material. Then, just what does the cosmologist
do? With the help of physicist friends he builds a great "chronogun,"
which fires one single electron backward "against the tide" in the flow
of time. That electron, transformed into a positron as a result of its
motion "against the grain" of time, goes speeding through time, and in
the course of this journey acquires more and more energy. Finally, at
the point where it "leaps out" of the cosmos — i.e., in a place in which
there had as yet been no cosmos — all the terrible energies it has
acquired are released in that tremendously powerful explosion which
brings about the universe! In this manner the debt is paid off. At the
same time, thanks to the largest possible "causal circle," the existence
of the cosmos is authenticated, and a person turns out to be the actual
creator of that very universe! It is possible to complicate this story
slightly; for example, by telling how certain colleagues of the
cosmologist, unpleasant and envious people, meddled in his work,
shooting on their own some lesser particles backward against the tide of
time. These particles exploded inaccurately when the cosmologist's
positron was producing the cosmos, and because of this that unpleasant
rash came into being that bothers science so much today, namely, the
enigmatic quasars and pulsars, which are not readily incorporated into
the corpus of contemporary knowledge. These, then, are the "artifacts"
produced by the cosmologist's malicious competitors. It would also be
possible to tell how humanity both created and depraved itself, because
some physicist shot the chronogun hurriedly and carelessly and a
particle went astray, exploding as a nova in the vicinity of the solar
system two million years ago, and damaging by its hard radiance the
hereditary plasma of the original anthropoids, who therefore did not
evolve into "man good and rational" as "should have happened" without
the new particle. In other words, the new particle caused the
degeneration of Homo sapiens — witness his history.

In this version, then, we created the cosmos only in a mediocre fashion,
and our own selves quite poorly. Obviously a work of this sort, in
whichever variant, becomes ironical, independently of its basic notion
(i.e., the "self-creative" application of the "maximal time loop").

As one can see, what is involved here is an intellectual game, actually
fantasy-making, which alters in a logical or pseudo-logical manner
current scientific hypotheses. This is "pure" science fiction, or
science fantasy, as it is sometimes called. It shows us nothing serious,
but merely demonstrates the consequences of a reasoning that, operating
within the guidelines of the scientific method, is used sometimes in
unaltered form (in predicting the "composition percentage of paternity"
we have in no way altered the scientific data), and sometimes secretly
modified. And thus science fiction can be responsibly or irresponsibly
plugged into the hypothesis-creating system of scientific thought.

The example of "self-creation" reveals first of all the "maximal
proportions" of a self-perpetrating paradox: Peter gave birth only to
himself, whereas in the universal variant, mankind concocted itself,
and, what is more, perhaps not in the best manner, so that it would even
be possible to use "Manichaean" terminology. Furthermore, this example
at the same time demonstrates that the conceptual premise of essential
innovations in the structure of the objective world presented is central
to a science-fictional work (in the case of journeys in time, a change
in causality is involved, by admitting the reversibility of that which
we consider today as universally and commonly irreversible). The
qualities of fictional material that serve a dominant concept are thus
subject to an assessment based on their usefulness to this concept.
Fictional material should in that case be an embodiment of a
pseudo-scholarly or simply scholarly hypothesis — and that's all. Thus
"pure" science fiction arises, appealing exclusively to "pure reason."
It is possible to complicate a work with problems lying beyond the scope
of such an intellectual game: when, for example, the "Manichaeism of
existence" is interpreted as due to an error made by an envious
physicist. Then an opportunity for sarcasm or irony arises as a harmonic
"overtone" above the narrative's main axis. But by doing this, we have
forced science fiction to perform "impure" services, because it is then
not delivering scientific pseudo-revelations, but functioning in the
same semantic substratum in which literature has normally operated. It
is because of this that we call science fiction contaminated by semantic
problems "relational science fiction."

However, just as "normal" literature can also perform high and low
services -produce sentimental love stories and epics — relational
science fiction shows an analogous amplitude. As was noted, it is
possible to interpret it allegorically (e.g., Manichaeism in relation to
the creation of the cosmos), and this will be the direction of grotesque
or humorous departures from a state of "intellectual purity" that is
somewhat analogous to "mathematical vacuity." It is also possible to
overlay the history of creating the cosmos with melodrama, e.g., to make
it part of a sensational, psychopathological intrigue (the cosmologist
who created the universe has a wicked wife whom he nonetheless loves
madly; or, the cosmologist becomes possessed; or also, faced with his
deeds, the cosmologist goes insane and, as a megalomaniac, will be
treated slightingly in an insane asylum, etc.).

Thus, in the end, the realistic writer is not responsible for the
overall — e.g., the causal — structure of the real world. In evaluating
his works, we are not centrally concerned with assessing the structure
of the world to which they nonetheless have some relation.

On the contrary, the science-fiction writer is responsible both for the
world in which he has placed his action and for the action as well,
inasmuch as he, within certain limits, invents both one and the other.

Yet the invention of new worlds in science fiction is as rare as a pearl
the size of a bread loaf. And so 99.9 percent of all science-fiction
works follow, compositionally, a scheme, one of the thematic structures
that constitute the whole science-fiction repertoire. For a world truly
new in structural qualities is one in which the causal irreversibility
of occurrences is denied, or one in which a person's individuality
conflicts with an individual scientifically produced by means of an
"intellectronic evolution," or one in which earthly culture is in
communication with a non-earthly culture distinct from human culture not
only nominally but qualitatively, and so forth. However, just as it is
impossible to invent a steam engine, or an internal combustion engine,
or any other already existing thing, it is also impossible to invent
once more worlds with the sensational quality of "chronomotion" or of "a
reasoning machine." Just as the detective story unweariedly churns out
the same plot stereotypes, so does science fiction when it tells us of
countless peripeties merely to show that by interposing a time loop they
have been successfully invalidated (e.g., Thomas Wilson's "The
Entrepreneur" [1952], which talks about the dreadful Communists having
conquered the United States, and time travelers who start backward at
the necessary point, invalidating such an invasion and dictatorship). In
lieu of Communists, there may be Aliens or even the Same People Arriving
from the Future (thanks to the time loop, anyone can battle with himself
just as long as he pleases), etc.

If new concepts, those atomic kernels that initiate a whole flood of
works, correspond to that gigantic device by which bioevolution was
"invented" — i.e., to the constitutional principle of types of animals
such as vertebrates and nonvertebrates, or fish, amphibians, mammals,
and birds — then, in the "evolution of science fiction," the equivalent
of type-creating revolutions were the ideas of time travel, of
constructing a robot, of cosmic contact, of cosmic invasion, and of
ultimate catastrophe for the human species. And, as within the
organization of biological types a natural evolution imperceptibly
produces distinctive changes according to genera, families, races, and
so forth, so, similarly, science fiction persistently operates within a
framework of modest, simply variational craftsmanship.

This very craftsmanship, however, betrays a systematic, unidirectional
bias; as we stated and demonstrated, great concepts that alter the
structure of the fictional world are a manifestation of a pure play of
the intellect. The results are assessed according to the type of play.
The play can also be "relational," involved with situations only loosely
or not at all connected with the dominant principle. What connection is
there, after all, between the existence of the cosmologist who created
the world and the fact that he has a beautiful secretary whom he beds?
Or, by what if not by a retardation device will the cosmologist be
snatched away before he fires the "chronogun"? In this manner an idea
lending itself to articulation in a couple of sentences (as we have done
here) becomes a pretext for writing a long novel (where a
"cosmos-creating" shot comes only in the epilogue, after some deliverers
sent by the author have finally saved the cosmologist from his sorry
plight). The purely intellectual concept is stretched thoroughly out of
proportion to its inherent possibilities. But this is just how science
fiction proceeds — usually.

On the other hand, rarely is a departure made from "emptiness" or "pure
play" in the direction of dealing with a set of important and involved
problems. In the world of science fiction it is structurally as possible
to set up an adventure plot as a psychological drama; it is as possible
to deal in sensational happenings as it is to stimulate thought by an
ontological implication created by the narrative as a whole. It is
precisely this slide toward easy, sensational intrigue that is a symptom
of the degeneration of this branch of literature. An idea is permitted
in science fiction if it is packaged so that one can barely see it
through the glitter of the wrapping. As against conventions only
superficially associated to innovations in the world's structure and
which have worn completely threadbare from countless repetitions,
science fiction should be stimulated and induced to deviate from this
trend of development, namely, by involution away from the "sensational
pole." Science fiction should not operate by increasing the number of
blasters or Martians who impede the cosmologist in his efforts to fire
the "chronogun"; such inflation is not appropriate. Rather, one should
change direction radically and head for the opposite pole. After all, in
principle the same bipolar opposition also prevails in ordinary
literature, which also shuttles between cheap melodrama and stories with
the highest aesthetic and cognitive aspirations.

It is difficult, however, to detect in science fiction any improvement
or outright redemption of this sort. An odd fate seems to loom heavily
over its domain, which prompts writers with the highest ambitions and
considerable talent, such as Ray Bradbury or J. G. Ballard, to employ
the conceptual and rational tools of science fiction at times in an
admittedly superb way, yet not in order to ennoble the genre, but,
instead, to bring it toward an "optimal" pole of literature. Aiming in
that direction, they are simultaneously, in each successive step, giving
up the programmatic rationalism of science fiction in favor of the
irrational; their intellect fails to match their know-how and their
artistic talent. In practice, what this amounts to is that they do not
use the "signaling equipment" of science fiction, its available
accessories, to express any truly, intellectually new problems or
content. They try to bring about the conversion of science fiction to
the "creed of normal literature" through articulating, by fantastic
means, such nonfantastic content, already old-fashioned, in an ethical,
axiological, philosophical sense. The revolt against the machine and
against civilization, the praise of the "aesthetic" nature of
catastrophe, the dead-end course of human civilization — these are their
foremost problems, the intellectual content of their works. Such science
fiction is, as it were, a priori vitiated by pessimism, in the sense
that anything that may happen will be for the worse.

Such writers proceed as if they thought that, should mankind acknowledge
the existence of even a one-in-a-million or one-in-a-billion chance —
transcending the already known cyclical pulsation of history, which has
oscillated between a state of relative stabilization and of complete
material devastation — such an approach would not be proper. Only in
mankind's severe, resolute rejection of all chances of development, in
complete negation, in a gesture of escapism or nihilism, do they find
the proper mission of all science fiction that would not be cheap.
Consequently they build on dead-end tragedy. This may be called into
question not merely from the standpoint of optimism, of whatever hue and
intensity. Rather, one should criticize their ideology by attempting to
prove that they tear to shreds that which they themselves do not
understand. With regard to the formidable movements that shake our
world, they nourish the same fear of misunderstanding the mechanisms of
change that every ordinary form of literature has. Isn't it clear what
proportions their defection assumes because of this? Cognitive optimism
is, first of all, a thoroughly nonludic premise in the creation of
science fiction. The result is often extremely cheap, artistically as
well as intellectually, but its principle is good. According to this
principle, there is only one remedy for imperfect knowledge: better
knowledge, because more varied knowledge. Science fiction, to be sure,
normally supplies numerous surrogates for such knowledge. But, according
to its premises, that knowledge exists and is accessible: the
irrationalism of Bradbury's or Ballard's fantasy negates both these
premises. One is not allowed to entertain any cognitive hopes — that
becomes the unwritten axiom of their work. Instead of introducing into
traditional qualities of writing new conceptual equipment as well as new
notional configurations relying on intellectual imagination, these
authors, while ridding themselves of the stigma of cheap and defective
science fiction, in one fell swoop give up all that constitutes its
cognitive value. Obviously, they are unaware of the consequences of such
desertion, but this only clears them morally: so much the worse for
literature and for culture, seriously damaged by their mistake.

Translated from the Polish by Thomas H. Hoisington and Darko Suvin

 

Metafantasia:
The Possibilities of Science Fiction

Let us demonstrate three possible types of science fiction by way of
three fictional examples. Our first example is a work about a system for
preventing earthquakes. It has recently been discovered that spraying
water under high pressure into geological strata that lie under immense
tectonic stress induces a series of harmless, microseismic movements in
the earth. As the water penetrates the fissures of the deep-lying
strata, it acts like lubricating oil, and helps the soil layers to slide
away from one another. This preventive spraying facilitates the gradual
reduction of tectonic stress, so that the pent-up seismic energies need
not be released in the tremendous, destructive earthquakes that
accompany the fierce shifts of geological formations. On the basis of
this hypothesis, already verified in reality, one might write a
science-fiction novel about the successful elimination of the
catastrophes that threaten people living in earthquake-prone regions.
This is a variation on the theme of "humanity's game with nature"; our
stance concerning it would be unequivocal, since we would not have to
re-evaluate or reorient our cultural norms to conclude that the
prevention of earthquakes is a good thing and a worthwhile goal for
which to strive.

Our second work might describe what happens when the use of a certain
chemical that separates the sensations of pleasure from sex spreads
throughout the earth. One possible rational motive for the use of the
drug might be the desire to check the population explosion. Or there
might also be a hostile motive: the drug might be a secret weapon in a
covert military operation. It is not difficult to imagine the
consequences. Since no one wants to indulge in sex of his own free will
any more — after all, it is simply hard physical labor, totally devoid
of pleasure — humanity is threatened with extinction. To prevent this
disastrous eventuality, governments are forced to experiment with
strategies for saving the human race, First, they try propaganda. But
quickly they are forced to realize that the very same drawings,
photographs, and movies whose distribution they had been obliged to
prohibit not so long before no longer interest anyone at all now; on the
contrary, they produce general disgust, since they are no more arousing
for either sex than a picture of a washtub is for a washerwoman, or a
photo of an ax for an exhausted woodcutter. These seductive devices fail
for a very simple reason: once the act itself has lost its attraction,
no amount of hinting, alluding, and suggesting can create a desire for
it. Since the promotion of sex proves ineffective, governments resort to
more pragmatic methods. They mobilize material incentives: rewards,
premiums, decorations, extraordinary honors, social benefits,
privileges, and magnificent titles with honorary diplomas. In the
meantime, several industries go under: the cosmetics industry, part of
the publishing industry (after all, who will read erotic literature when
all it calls to mind is drudgery?), the film industry, as well as
advertising — since they have been based on sex. The clothing and
underwear industries are faced with a crisis greater than they have ever
faced. Women's breasts now only remind people that humans are mammals;
legs, that people can walk; and a painted mouth seems as bizarre as if
someone had decided to glue an artificial ear on his bald head.

Naturally, researchers work feverishly to find an antidote that will
neutralize the catastrophic effect of the drug; but in vain. As the new
state of affairs stabilizes, new models of beauty emerge, models that
provide security against every kind of erotic danger (for it can happen
that one resigns himself to procreating to gain a medal or a title, only
to find the potential partner repelled by the invitation; others may try
to shirk their social responsibilities by making the illusion appear to
be the reality, and thus supervisory committees are established to
verify that everything is taking place as the social good demands; men
declare that they deserve greater rewards because they have to put more
work into it, while women protest that this is out of the question, and
so forth). Under these conditions, perfect security lies in the
companionship of someone visibly incapable of the sexual act (and so,
not likely ever to suddenly demand it). Gray hair, potbellies,
wheelchairs, and similar "antisexual" characteristics are accorded
universal interest and respect as symbols of erotically disarmed
paralysis.

A work of this sort would posit a certain anthropological hypothesis
about the role of sexuality in the totality of human behavior.

The third example is of an entirely different order. It is a popular
scientific book published in the mid-twenty-first century detailing the
history of cosmological views, including the most recent theories. The
author begins, naturally, at the beginning: long, long ago, humans,
basing their thought on their relationships to their own products,
conceived of the universe as an intentional object, like a pot or a
table; there was a Someone who had created it, intentionally, and by
design. The battle of ideas went on for centuries, until science
appeared to establish that natural phenomena are not intentional
objects. Thus, the trees, stones, atoms, clouds, oceans, rivers, and
beyond them the planets, the sun, the stars, and the nebulae that
constituted the objects of scientific inquiry were products of the
natural processes of a heterogeneous evolution not conceived or designed
by a personal being. Science discovered a series of objective
regularities in these phenomena, and named them the fundamental laws of
nature. Physics and astrophysics led the field, and the other branches
of science queued up behind them.

But by the mid-twentieth century, theoretical views in the scientific
world had come into grave conflict with one another. On the one hand,
physics, planetology, astronomy, and evolutionary biology preached that
the birth and development of life, which is crowned by the appearance of
intelligent beings, is, in cosmic terms, normal, typical, average, and
therefore a phenomenon belonging to the order of things. On the other
hand, despite years of serious effort not a single trace had been
discovered of any great, stellar-scale constructs that might have
signaled the existence of a highly developed civilization, either in our
own galaxy, or elsewhere. The persistence of this intolerable situation
— produced by the contradiction between scientific expectations and the
empirical data that had actually been gathered — swept the natural
sciences, primarily biology and astronomy, into an ever-deepening
crisis, until at last the inevitable ensued, and science resigned itself
to the painful labor of restructuring its theoretical foundations.

Since we are here gathering in a nutshell something that itself amounts
to a summary of an entire epoch's work (i.e., in our proposed popular
scientific book) we cannot delve into the biographies of the learned
people who set human thinking, including cosmogony and cosmology, on a
completely new track. The first tentative hypotheses proposed by certain
pioneering scientists were given the worst possible reception by the
community of inquirers. But when the evidence of the "negative facts"
became incontestable (i.e., the total absence of signs of
"astrotechnical" constructs or traces), an extraordinary reversal
occurred. Through their common efforts, scientists shaped new approaches
and new models of the cosmos one after another, and the broad outlines
of a new image of the universe began to unfold as follows.

Astrophysicists already know today that our sun and its planetary system
belong to the so-called second stellar generation; the solar system is
approximately five billion years old, while our whole galaxy is close to
ten billion years old. Clearly then, the first generation of stars came
into being before the formation of our solar system, in the remote mists
of the cosmic past. With them came the planets, and on these planets
life emerged. This was the first stage in the history of cosmic
civilizations. When they attained a sufficiently high degree of
scientific development they applied astrotechnics in an ever wider
sphere of activity. For creatures at lower levels of development, the
laws of nature are immutable attributes of being, but for those who have
reached the higher planes of cognition, the laws of nature are no longer
absolutely binding. Certain changes can be effected on them; the
constant of gravitation, for example, can be reshaped, as well as the
constants of electrical charges, the constant of maximum velocity, and
so on. Since enormous distances separate the most developed
civilizations from one another -distances of several hundred million
light-years' magnitude, at the very least — they do not communicate with
each other directly. They only infer the existence of their neighbors
from certain observed facts: from certain gradual, noticeable changes in
the laws of nature. Some of these transformations may benefit a given
civilization, others may not. Therefore, each civilization approves and
augments the former, and obstructs the latter, through its own
astrotechnical activities. Thus begins the cosmogonic game played by the
most developed civilizations of the universe.

This cosmogonic game is not military in nature, since the partners do
not use weapons and do not aim to annihilate one another. Rather, it is
a co-operation justified by considerations beyond ethics: the
annihilation or conquest of the partners would benefit no one, while by
co-operating the partners help to sustain the trend of cosmogonic
transformation most beneficial to everyone. Nor is the game a form of
interstellar dialogue. Civilizations so advanced have nothing to say to
one another — the less so when we consider that a dialogue in which the
reply is separated from the question by a billion years is utterly
irrelevant. Intelligent discussions might be held about which natural
laws should be transformed and in what manner, but the time spent
waiting for an answer would be too long for any effective action. The
situation might be described like this: a certain ship, battling a
storm, is so large that the machinist and navigator cannot coordinate
their actions through a dialogue, since they must act too quickly for
orders or replies. Every message is thus hopelessly late in relation to
the actions that have already been initiated; as they arrive, the
messages always refer to something no longer relevant. Similarly,
communication in the universe occurs on the level of action, not in
articulated messages. The civilizations do not fight, since it would do
them no good; nor do they converse, since that would be meaningless.
Gradually, over millions of years, their cooperation has become
harmonized and synchronized. In the beginning, surely, confusions did
arise when they misunderstood one another's creative work; traces of
this can still be observed by astronomers. But that time is long past.
Now, the exalted partners do their work wrapped in energetic silence,
and realize their plans of cosmic stabilization or transformation so
well that hardly any part of the primal universe that existed seven to
eight billion years ago remains untouched. In the course of time, they
transformed the entire universe in accordance with the strategy of the
exalted civilizations, and everything within it — stars, dust clouds,
galaxies, nebulae, as well as the laws directing them -originated in the
game of this coalition. The evolution of matter is governed by
collective reason, which is embodied in the multitude of the highest
civilizations.

At first, this new cosmogony was roundly attacked, but it also gained
adherents when it became clear that its hypotheses allow for deductions
that agree with observed phenomena. For instance, the theory explains
the expansion of the universe, since an expanding universe would be the
most comfortable home for all the leading civilizations participating in
the game at the same time. As soon as life appears on the planets of
second-generation suns, followed by the flowering of intelligent
societies, the psychozoic density (the frequency of the presence of
intelligent beings) of the cosmos is altered as more and more
civilizations occupy each unit of space. Should neighboring
civilizations reach agreements, they might form coalitions whose
activities could disturb the progress of cosmic processes. Therefore, in
order to keep the psychozoic density of the cosmos constant, the ancient
civilizations effected the continuous expansion of the universe. This at
once explains why terrestrial astronomers have not been able to discover
a single civilization near the sun: the distances between civilizations
must remain great. Pulsars, those great, pulsing founts of radiation,
are instruments used to synchronize and keep in phase the activity of
still more gigantic, but imperceptible, systems determining the
measurable aspects of space. And quasars, each of which is a cosmic
furnace so mighty that its capacity exceeds the total radiation capacity
of the Milky Way, are devices for radiating energy into space: or,
rather, this is how they functioned several billions of years ago,
since, due to their great distance from the earth, we see them in their
distant past, when the exalted partners had just begun their
cooperation.

The new cosmology also explains the fact, known since the 1960s, that
mathematics takes many forms, and the form in which it developed
historically on earth is only one of many possible varieties. The
foundations of the universe were changed and reconstructed precisely
through these different mathematics. The multitude of mathematical
systems is an image of the multitude of possibilities of cosmogonic
creation available at the dawn of cosmic history.

We will not dwell further on this new cosmogony of the twenty-first
century, which considered the universe to be the result of intentional
actions; nor will we describe at length the new philosophical syntheses
based on its models. In brief, these posited a dialectical triad
composed of a thesis: the universe created by God; its antithesis: the
universe as a nonintentional object; and their synthesis: the empirical
interrelation of the two previous models, which, developed further, does
away with transcendence and replaces it with metagalactically plural
reason. Let us instead point out the relations between the three
variations of science fiction we have cited above and the canons of
literature.

The first work — on preventing earthquakes — might be best treated as an
adventure novel or a technological "project" novel. What could be easier
than to populate its setting with conventional literary characters. The
second text — a hypothesis about human nature — might be written in a
number of modes, from pseudorealistic to extravagantly grotesque. But
whatever mode the author chooses, the central protagonists, whose
personal histories are the individual embodiments of general phenomena,
will conform to the canons of literature.

The third theme, however, does not seem conducive to the same kind of
literary treatment — at least if the traditional narrative structures
are upheld, complete with the characterization of heroes bound to
specific situations. The intellectual adventures of the new cosmogony's
creators will not be contained by traditional naturalistic or realistic
narrative structures. We need not know about these scientists' wives,
children, and acquaintances, any more than about Newton's or Planck's
social and marital lives. Here we cannot simply present a
social-cultural background against which purely personal events take
place; the concept requires the chronicle of an idea, not of the
vicissitudes of a few individuals. Of course, with sufficient obstinacy,
we could apply the traditional solutions to this situation as well; but
then all higher abstractions would be systematically detached from the
minute human gestures, reactions, recognitions, personal conflicts,
separations, etc., that make up the ordinary substance of the novel.
Narrative structures of literature are incapable of synthesizing the
"microscopic" elements of the cosmogonic scientists' everyday lives with
the general hypotheses of their new cosmogony. To attempt such a
synthesis would lead to a fractured work, with literary fragments, on
the one hand, and discursive passages summarizing the new cosmogonic
views, on the other. What is needed is an entirely new narrative
structure, one that might be modeled on historiography, the biographies
of scientists, or perhaps a collage of excerpts from scientific texts,
press clippings, the addresses of Nobel laureates, or other facsimiles.

We are in no way suggesting that science fiction should renounce
altogether its traditional structures of writing, in order to substitute
as yet entirely unproven ones. Our example has a different purpose: it
seeks to demonstrate that not all dramas and adventures of the human
spirit in search of knowledge can be adequately represented through the
traditional canons of the novel or epic narrative. In other words, the
potential treasury of the narrative structures of science fiction has
not yet been satisfactorily exploited.

In the course of writing this book, we suppressed the temptation to
elaborate a metatheory of literary activity that would have dealt with
the central structures of literature. Had we attempted it, we would have
shattered the already too confining framework of this monograph. Our
task here is not to elaborate a metatheory of science fiction, or even
of literature in general, but to determine the extent of the field of
paradigms, to define the boundaries that can contain the fruits of every
possible creative production. Any metatheory of creative work must
embrace every kind of cultural and intellectual effort that produces
articulated and systematic products, such as music, novels, poems,
buildings, sculptures, and philosophical systems. Such an inclusive
theory cannot as yet be elaborated, but the time is approaching when it
may be fully articulated. Its portents are visible in many fields. The
philosophy of science, for example, strives for a metaperspective on the
structure of scientific theories. There are analogous attempts in
mathematics to define all those structures that are invariant elements
of every branch of pure mathematics. Similar researches are being
pursued in other fields, such as linguistics and anthropology. It would
be most desirable, therefore, to extrapolate the system of universal
constants shared by all researches operating with the technical term
"structure." But this term does not mean the same thing to the linguist,
the mathematician, the anthropologist, and the literary scholar —
indeed, the latter two cannot even define it unambiguously. Now that
structuralism has become a fashionable movement, its practice is full of
abuses. But these should not be permitted to blind us to the
generalizations -even though distant and difficult — to which this
method can lead us. We suspect -although this has not yet been expressed
as a definite hypothesis — that every kind of creative activity whose
goal is constructive and whose starting point is an ensemble of elements
and the rules for their treatment has the characteristics of a process
unfolding in a theoretically closed configurational space, and that the
topological qualities of this space are determined equally by the
multitude of potential objects to be constructed and the unsurpassable
limits of the space.

Structuralism, as a word and a method, had hardly been born when, in
1945, G. Evelyn Hutchinson — reviewing the anthropologist A. L.
Kroeber's book Configurations of Culture Growth, in the third issue of
American Scientist— proposed a hypothesis worth recalling. In his book,
Kroeber compares the various periods of world history that were made
memorable by extraordinary developments in philosophy, science,
philology, sculpture, painting, drama, music, etc. In each of these
cultural activities we can distinguish the embryonic and initial stages,
when the parameters of all potentially realizable constructs that can be
derived from the culturally accepted paradigms of artistic creation are
already set — as yet, without anyone's being aware of it. (Where such
newly accepted models originate is a different question altogether. But
it is no more necessary for us to answer this question than for a
biologist concerned with the evolution of organisms to answer the
question, How did life originate on earth?)

In this early stage of the model, the whole stock of structures that can
be derived from it is markedly indeterminate; in the course of their
creative work, succeeding generations gradually determine the field of
possible configurations, until it is completely delimited and exploited.
The creative work of every historical period has developed within such
limits or boundaries. Indirect evidence of this is provided by the
following phenomena. Since the individuals more talented than the norm,
whom we call geniuses, are the results of the rare intermingling of
genotypes (the "winning numbers" in the "chromosome lottery"), and since
these exceptional coincidences of genotypes are determined by the
statistical regularities guiding population genetics, we might expect
geniuses to be distributed uniformly along the axis of historical time.
But in reality, this is not the case; the distribution of highly
talented individuals is definitely not uniform and fortuitous.
Hutchinson therefore constructs the following hypothesis based on
Kroeber's insight: the chances of becoming an outstanding creator under
different historical circumstances are not uniform, since an individual
can create only within the field of paradigmatic structures that he
finds prepared for him when he comes into the world. Those who are born
in an early phase of the exploitation of a given "family of structures"
face an enormously broad and difficult task, since the mass of virtual
possibilities has not yet been defined. Those born in this state, writes
Hutchinson, may perhaps gain the recognition of a small circle of
enlightened cognoscenti, but they will not become as well known, or be
able to found schools or movements quite as easily, as those who begin
their work in the stage of maximal development of a given creative
tradition. Thus, the sooner a genius is born within an artistic
tradition, the more he can create; but if he arrives too early, he may
go unnoticed, and, lacking "social reinforcement," may remain merely an
unknown precursor. The person who arrives at the peak stage of a
particular tradition can create a great deal, backed by strong social
reinforcement. The artist who appears when most of the possibilities
have already been exploited can, at best, become an original
representative of a decaying tradition. Thus, the ascents and declines
in cultural production — which are evident only in retrospect — are
actually movements first toward, then away from the maximum of a certain
curve. As a whole, this curve — which expresses the rate at which
original productions derived from the embryonic stage proliferate — is
additive, and is therefore only minimally dependent on individual
successes. Thus, we do not consider 1616 the final date of Elizabethan
drama as a whole, but as the year of Shakespeare's death.

Hutchinson attempts to formalize this process of slow growth,
quickening, peaking, and decay in a logistical curve used in the study
of demographic dynamics. The curve resembles a letter 5, the center of
which is characterized by exponential inclines, its beginning and ending
by slight inclines (the Verhulst-Pearl curve). I will not cite the math
with which Hutchinson supports his hypothesis, since it is, in any case,
far too simple to grasp the phenomenon — as Hutchinson is well aware.
The introduction of only two parameters — the quantity of still
exploitable "degrees of freedom" and the quantity of already exploited
degrees at time T, when a certain creator X appears in the world -cannot
be adequate. The mass statistical (stochastic) nature of the process
would certainly require a greater number of variables. But the greatest
problem with any attempt to quantify creative phenomena is that, in
order to verify the effectiveness of the formal apparatus, the works of
certain artistic periods must be enumerated as elemental facts, a
process that would unequivocally classify them in terms of their
originality, and, coincidentally, in terms of their relative value — a
hopeless task.

But we do have at our disposal a unique creative territory where the
researcher is spared the problems caused by the subjective nature of any
evaluation of cultural products, since, in this case, the evaluation has
already been done for him, in an entirely unambiguous and incontestable
way: this is the realm of natural development. Every emergent organism —
such as the prototypes of "insect," "fish," "reptile," or "mammal" -is
generated in a manner equivalent to those structural paradigms within
which further evolutionary development "exploited every possible
advantage for construction." In other words, the "insect" or "reptile"
represents a certain stabilized "tradition" of creation within the field
of variables determined by the given system's typology. The evolutionary
process inexorably strives to exploit every possible organic combination
inherent within the given prototype. (We need not puzzle over the
quality of the various consecutive solutions that emerged in this way;
evolution performs the evaluation of the product "in our stead," since
only the "good" product survives.)

It is worth noting that not all of the prototypes mentioned above have
developed an equal, or even a similar, number of variations in the
course of their evolution. The structural paradigm of insects, for
example, has proved to be an incredibly "fertile creative principle": at
least as many species have developed from it as from all the other
prototypes combined. Evolution also has its "creative stages," and its
own "different schools and traditions." Its first triumphs were the
creation of fishes, then it moved on to reptiles, while in our time it
is primarily engaged in variations on the "theme" of mammals. Each type
has, in its turn, gone through a slow initial stage of specialized
differentiation, to arrive at a stage of the maximum richness of
possible forms (consider but the variety of evolutionary reptile
modifications), and finally to end up in an "age of epigonism" or
repetitive fulfillment. Such a correspondence of natural and cultural
creativity can hardly be an accident. The hypothesis immediately offers
itself that there are, still unknown to us, higher regularities that
determine the field of potential structures, regularities moreover that
operate universally in the case of every type of material-information
creation.

Recently, two English scientists, M. A. Ede and J. T. Law, used a
computer to construct models of the embryonic formation process of
certain organs, specifically the extremities. They fed the machine five
series of data: four had to do with the behavior of embryonic cells, the
fifth provided a model of the gene mechanism guiding their growth. In
the course of its work, the computer produced only such models of
extremity structures as had actually come about in the evolution of the
different species of vertebrates, from fish to human. A slightly
retrograde modification of the gene program resulted in the
transformation of the structure of a leg into the structure of a fin.
Neither machines nor programs exist for making models of complete
organic systems; nonetheless, as the above example shows, we can already
observe in experiments how the initial paradigm "determines" the field
of possible constructions.

In order to continue the original creation, we must always introduce new
elements into the paradigm's system. In literature (which is of greater
interest to us here than evolution), there is a fairly universal
intuition that every "great," "original" narrative model has already
been discovered (and, moreover, quite long ago). But this is only a
relative truth. While it is true, with respect to historically known
conditions, that the narrative structures have been exhausted, it is
equally true that civilization, by creating new problems, also provides
new possibilities for literature. Our age, for example, is marked by the
decline of conventional structures of ethical judgment all over the
planet, since it is now within our power instrumentally to execute the
Last Judgment. This fact is lost on the writer who would bring alien
visitors to a destroyed earth and have them deliberate among the ruins
about "which side was right." One can speak of one's rightness, i.e., as
representing the correct path, only as long as someone is left behind to
evaluate what has happened. It is meaningless to discuss either side's
being right or wrong when total destruction has become possible; the
only argument worth articulating on the verge of the ultimate
catastrophe is that the catastrophe must be averted. At that point,
truth, in the sense of "good" and "bad," is irrelevant as long as it is
not bound up with the only program that has not lost its meaning,
namely, the project of preserving humanity. The type of writer referred
to above wishes to preserve the traditional standards of judgment of the
pre-Atomic Age, but since he is writing in a pseudo-realistic style, he
does not want to bring the Good Lord Himself down to the ash-covered
earth -and so sends "aliens" instead, to continue the same argument that
led to the cataclysm, on behalf of the no longer existing earthlings.
This is a classic example of the helplessness of thought when it is
shackled by inadequate narrative structures.

Every culture has codes that delineate the phenomena it considers
"normal," and others that "deviate" from these and come into different
degrees of conflict with the regulating norms. When phenomena that are
predominantly associated with the stock of normal descriptive structures
are depicted through discrepant structures, the result is often comic.
Indeed, many humorous works owe their existence to this rule of
displacement -they are intentionally "erroneous messages," cast in
descriptive structures that are normally inappropriate to the phenomena
described (for example, the description of a family quarrel in terms of
natural phenomena, such as typhoons and volcanic eruptions; or,
inversely, anthropomorphizing the volcano or storm). Generally, comic
effects are generated when the use of alien descriptive structures does
not quite amount to a fundamental transgression of the given culture's
decrees and prohibitions. Still, the more the described phenomenon's
structure is subject to codification (social ritualization), the
stronger the effect; thus, a chase scene presented on speeded-up film is
not as comic as a speeded-up funeral.

The simplest procedure, as we know, is simple inversion. What could be
simpler than to achieve new effects by inverting the conventional
structures petrified by tradition: this is the principle behind Mark
Twain's "antistories." It would be easy to construct a theory of
literature if only the descriptive language did not damage the reality
depicted in the work, but simply represented it in a different mode. The
problem is that this is not the case at all. Language, the instrument of
description, is also the creator of what it describes. (Language can
describe itself, as well, thereby becoming an object, and not only in a
linguistic sense; for the language that describes language has a
different semantic function from the language it describes.)

As cultural prohibitions weaken, it becomes impossible for literature to
confront them. An approach that a century ago would have been considered
"blasphemous" or immoral now rises to the level of artistic innovation.
To cite the most readily available example: dispassionate descriptions
of things that customarily are not permitted to be presented "coldly."
This is the principle behind Kafka's "In the Penal Colony," and this is
how modern experimental prose often describes the sexual act. The result
is a kind of culture shock — characteristic of many works by Henry
Miller (Tropic of Cancer, Sexus, Nexus, Plexus), in which the author
describes his characters with great precision as though they were
machines, naming their bodily parts by their functions, and
intentionally ignoring all relevant social-erotic taboos. But in such
situations we can at least distinguish between the structure of the
description and the immanent structure of the object described. This
becomes impossible when the reader has no knowledge whatsoever of the
object and has none of the normative guidelines fixed in his memory for
how the object "should be" described. These "wobbles" of perception
cannot be enclosed within any strictly conceived semantic theory,
because they are problems of practice, in which the receiver of the
information is an inseparable part of the informational system. (For us,
living in the present, the Man on the Moon can already be a specific
person, or a specific historical event, whereas for people living only a
few years in the past he was a purely fantastic creature, whose fictive
nature deprived him of the solid objective qualities unique to
intersubjectively demonstrable facts.)

The principle of "transposing and displacing" descriptive structures in
relation to their objects can produce valuable results, both
aesthetically and epistemologically. But when this "mix-up" is the
result of a writer's ineptness and ignorance, the narrative clings to
any available structure like some fragile vine, and the effort can only
end in failure. This sort of indifference usually reduces
anthropological problems to stereotypical adventure novels, social
phenomena to psychological and personal phenomena (e.g., the conflict of
two cultures played out as if it were the conflict of two individuals),
and the alternations of cultural codes and norms to primitive
reorientations on the order of "Aha! so this is how it should be done!"
By the same token, escape from realistic dilemmas into illusory
solutions is the general rule (for example, the resolution of the
conflict between socialism and capitalism through the arrival on earth
of "highly developed cosmic beings" who compel humans to live in peace,
etc.).

The crisis of art in our age stems from the general disappearance of
normative rules of action, which in turn results from the erosion of a
view of culture as sacred and unquestionable because its commandments
form a more ancient code than do civil laws. Whether one could break
cultural rules if they became inconvenient was a question that one
simply could not pose publicly in former times. It was empiricism that
proved to be culture's Trojan Horse, since its principal criteria are
those of utility, which naturally raise questions of comfort and
convenience. For empiricism, the only inviolable barrier is the totality
of the attributes of nature it calls the body of physical laws. Thus,
observing the human world from an empirical standpoint necessarily leads
to the complete relativization of cultural norms everywhere where they
impose "unfounded" imperatives and restraints. Art can never be content
with the basic stock of prohibitions that empiricism respects — merely
because it cannot transgress them — for that would reduce art to
nothingness. If art were to confine itself to the goals of empirical
knowledge, it would begin to resemble empiricism more and more, until it
became a faint replica, a shadow of science.

Art — and specifically literature — had in its province structures
inherited from a venerable past governed by the untouchable norms of
religious doctrines and myths. Literature has all but completely
exhausted these models, and it has not been enriched by new ones, for
the sources of such structures have dried up. It is irrelevant whether
they dried up when their creative power was naturally exhausted or
whether the invasion of technogenic pragmatism had dammed them before
they could reach maximum potential. Even if such latent, historically
untested meaning-structures might still be "inventable" in theory, they
would be of no use for either humanity or art. A structure of
significations that had never shone with the light of sacred solemnity,
and had never been treated with the respect, fear, and love with which
humans react to the presumed presence of the transcendental secret,
would have no value for art.

The collapse of every kind of taboo created a freedom so vast that
literature quickly began to feel acutely uncomfortable. From there on,
its only forum of appeal is culture, in a necessarily nonsacred sense.
Literature can still operate with the model structures generated by this
secular culture. But the sense that all the actual, synchronically
functioning structures of the cultural field are unsatisfactory has led
to hybridizing techniques, with combinations of extremely divergent
structures and their superimposition over one another. For example: the
deterministic structure of myth alloyed with the indeterminate structure
of reality, as in Mann's Doktor Faustus, Joyce's Ulysses, or Frisch's
Homo Faber. The principle of such works is allusion. The writer must
arrange his ostensibly realistic material, drawn from the fund of common
experiences, in such a way that its resemblances to the structure of
some venerable myth (Faust, Odysseus, Oedipus) is evident to the reader.
The reference to myth not only serves to give a lofty sanctification to
things that would ordinarily be meaningless, however. Myth can also be
parodized, treated iconoclastically, or even forcibly demolished. In
Lolita, Nabokov discredits the myths of the innocence and angelic purity
of adolescent girls, for in the novel it is the young girl who seduces
the would-be ravisher, not he who defiles her. Elsewhere, as in
Nabokov's more recent novel (Ada, or Ardor), the author exploits the
cultural arsenal of prohibitions against incest in a "ludic" mode, by
extending them to other relations parodistically superimposed over one
another: between blood relations of a certain family, between the signs
of the code invented by the incestuous lovers, between the "aristocracy"
and the "plebeians." Even empirical truth contradicts the postulates of
the incest taboo, because, as it turns out, due to the sterility of
incestuous relationship, "nothing would have come of it anyway."

The hallmark of such creative strategies is their authors' constant
search for ever more emphatically expressed resistance. As far as
creative motivation is concerned, this situation differs radically from
previous historical situations, because the artist who believed in the
uniqueness of the norms guiding and regulating his creative activity
naturally did not consider it his primary responsibility to attack them.
These norms were "programmed" into him, having been perfectly
internalized intellectually and emotionally, and he obeyed them with
grace. As a consequence, originality — the personal irreproducibility of
the work — manifested itself above all in the form, since the lofty
canons of religious-cultural faith did not prescribe down to the last
atom what forms works of art were to take.

This "search for resistance" — the initially clandestine erosion of
existing norms -developed gradually in art. Historically, it predates
the advent of technical civilization, since Don Quixote already
introduces the (otherwise quite ambivalent) collision of the "myth of
chivalry" with a prosaic, nonmythic reality. But as more and more norms
disappear from social praxis, literature faces ever-growing
difficulties. Its predicament is beginning to resemble that of a child
who has discovered that his incredibly understanding parents will let
him break with impunity all his toys, indeed everything in the house.
The artist cannot create specific prohibitions for himself in order to
attack them later in his work; the prohibitions must be real, and hence
independent of the writer's choices. And since the relativization of
cultural norms has not so far been able to disturb the given
characteristics of human biology, that is where writers today seek the
still perceptible points of resistance — which is why literature is
preoccupied with the theme of sex. But such tactics are short-lived, an
accelerating escalation sets in, and the "law of diminishing returns"
goes into effect. A cultural taboo is too fundamental to be a pliable
barrier; once it has collapsed, it can no longer serve as a wall for
wall-shattering rams to knock down, piece by piece. Thus the removal of
the administrative, and not culturally generated, censorship barriers
has produced such a lightning-fast "pansexualization" of literature that
an amusing competition has begun in the description of the most obscene
scenes.

Writers require the resistance of matter as they require air. In
literature it is particularly meaningless to storm gates that are
standing wide open. When the solid foundations of the cultural norms
began to crack, then crumble, literature tried to establish for itself a
special autarchy and self-sufficiency, but this could never be complete.
Through its aesthetic means, its concrete works, literature attempts to
prove what is both logically and empirically unprovable. This is the
source of those polyvalent and ambiguous structures that are susceptible
to divergent interpretations. Kafka's The Castle, for example, can be
read as a caricature of transcendence, a heaven maliciously dragged down
to earth and mocked, or in precisely the opposite way, as the only image
of transcendence accessible to a fallen humanity. In the first instance,
the revelation is compromised; in the second, its earthly
interpretation. Works like this do not expose those main junctures that
could reveal their unambiguous ontological meanings: and the constant
uncertainty this produces is the structural equivalent of the
existential secret. The secret is neither explained nor given a
secondary meaning. It simply remains — not merely as an enigmatic
reference, but vividly displayed as a tangible presence, created by the
palpable, irreducible indeterminacy of the work's own structure. This
"rock solidity" of the secret produced by the cunning structuration of
the work is one possible response to the destruction of cultural norms.

The other possibility is the approach mentioned earlier: superimposition
of very different structures, some of which are harmoniously striving
toward the same goal, while others are in dissonance and headed toward
collision. The result is a peculiar feeling of depth, since it is not
always possible to determine anew which structure is fundamental and
which is relative, or, rather, which is the "absolute system of
relations," and which are the variables whose values must be interpreted
with reference to the system's standards. In neither case is the guiding
principle of the work arbitrary. Just as a breeder does not act blindly,
fortuitously, or chaotically when he sets out to develop a superior
strain from the original animal or plant prototypes, so a writer also
does not act fortuitously when he cross-breeds and combines complex
narrative structures in new ways. This does not mean that such a writer
makes only pragmatic "improvements." For, as a linguistic system, the
literary work is often simultaneously homogeneous and disparate: it can
be perfectly coherent on some levels, in certain constitutive
structures, whereas on other levels it may even be internally
contradictory. Moreover, it may keep some of its potential structures
open — leaving, as it were, a way out for the work to transcend its own
sphere, as is done in "The Monkey's Paw," for example. This short story
proposes an "appended transaction": we must either accept the existence
of the "ghosts," and thus the hypothesis of transcendence, which makes
the story a coherent whole, or we discard the hypothesis, and the work
dissolves into a series of fortuitous, coincidental events. The
acceptance of transcendence is the price one must pay for the work to be
coherent.

The approach of the French antinovel has been a most interesting example
of creative exploration. This exploration moved into extremely dangerous
territory; for the novelists, instead of "cross-breeding" various kinds
of order, reached a point where the paradigmatic forms of order and
disorder collided. This is an altogether understandable approach when
the author's guiding principle is the attempt to maximize the number of
semantic levels in his work. Every message loses its clarity when it is
damaged, either through collision and intermingling with another
message, or because it is caught up in a flood of "pure noise." If we
posit that the task of literature is not ever to give a definitive
explanation of what it presents, and is therefore to affirm the autonomy
of certain enigmas rather than to enter into explanations, then the most
enigmatic of possible secrets is a purely random series. Every code that
holds a hidden message has some key that will open it and decipher it,
except pure chance, which is not a mask that can be ripped away, and
thus will always resist every attempt at a definitive understanding.
There is an unintentional trap in this situation, however. Every chance
situation can be transformed into a nonrandom system if one employs
adequate supplementary hypotheses. For instance, one can state that the
Scandinavian peninsula resembles the outlines of a seal not because of
chance geographical occurrences, but because of intentional actions
(i.e., God Himself willed it so when He created heaven and earth). In
accordance with Occam's razor, one can designate any state to be
intentional through such extraneous hypotheses, even when there is not a
trace of intentionality in them.

The majority of the works of the French antinovelists are the semantic
equivalents of the story of the Emperor's new clothes, in that a certain
kind of "semantic nudity" — a lack of intentionality induced by turning
on the "noise generator" — is seen by its recipients as "new clothes,"
or as a new type of literary narrative that is, in its own way,
intelligible.

The antinovelists have employed this generator on many different levels
of creative work. Nothing explains the superimposition of the following
structure in The Erasers: (1) the myth of Oedipus, (2) "time loops," (3)
the detective story. If we must, we can deduce the detective story from
the myth, or the time loops from the investigation. But we cannot
explain without contradiction the meanings of the whole triadic
structure, unless we invoke an elaborate edifice of additional tortuous
and arbitrary interpretations. In The Erasers, the heterogeneous
narrative structures were aligned by chance. In another of
Robbe-Grillet's works, La Maison de rendez-vous, the principle of chance
operates in the fragmentation and gradual recombination of the plot, and
the method of fragmentation is also random. (Thus, in The Erasers, the
chance generator operates on the fundamental level, the level of total
structure, whereas in La Maison de rendez-vous, it operates on the
subordinate ones.)

From the reader's point of view, Kafka's method (endowing the total
structure of the work with a multidimensional "indeterminacy") and that
of the antinovelists (depriving the work of clarity of meaning through
quasi-accidental interventions to produce obscurity) have similar
semantic results. The reader, in the activity of reading, reconstructs
the work in a way that explains it, and invests its partially random
qualities with order. The only problem is that such works, like the ink
blots of a Rorschach test, have no "true" interpretations. This state of
affairs favors the writer, since the broader a work's field of cultural
references, the better it defends itself against devaluation. Any work
that extends deep roots through its semantic references can serve to
integrate the culture in which it originates. But the practical problem
remains of convincing the reader to make the necessary interpretative
effort, to integrate through hidden cultural references something that
appears, at first sight, impossible to integrate, because it is a
product of chance. Readers must be persuaded that there is a real need
for their efforts, and the author is aided in this by zealous and
resourceful critics who become the veritable coauthors of such
emphatically indeterminate texts (which is probably why these texts hold
such an attraction for many of them).

The difference between the works constituting multi-structured
sandwiches and the works that represent "noise-damaged" messages is the
same as that between the information of an authoritative palimpsest and
a pseudo palimpsest in which the work of monks illustrating a manuscript
is interlayered with that of houseflies making their own "corrections."
It goes without saying that the use of the noise generator as a creative
device is not a trick, since cultural consensus approves of chance in
the creative process (this fact is self-evident in the fine arts, and
can be seen in such extravagant methods as pitching fistfuls of paint at
the canvas, or tracking shoe soles dipped in paint across it, and so
forth). It is another matter that these works are essentially mechanisms
for the creation of semantic mirages, even when they give an impression
of semantic richness; to search for their inherent significance is akin
to searching for the objective correlation between the delusions and
nightmares of the hallucinating mind. If the organizing principle of the
work is chance, it cannot also be intentional at the same time. This
means that intentionality is displaced onto another, more inclusive
level of the work, since the choice to use chance as a creative
technique is itself not a product of chance at all. It is the result of
calculation or conscious intention — a calculation sanctioned by game
theory, which tells us that if one player makes a random move, his
partners must also resort to a random strategy. And this is where the
anti-novel defeats us, because as readers we cannot justify chance
strategies of reception, because that would mean the dissolution of
articulation.

As a result, we are forced to strive for integration, to pretend that
the work is a coherent whole.

Another factor in this context is that literature makes general use of
the structures of indirect description or allusion. Whenever something
is completely known — i.e., when it is fully rooted in a given culture —
it can be understood or deduced from a single sign or allusion, and
because of this, any given state of affairs can be made vividly present
for the "culturally practiced" reader even through the remotest
circumstantial reference. This indirect description is a method of
structuring a work by "remote control" guidance of the reconstructive
efforts of the reader's imagination, not only in space, but also in
time. Every description of a situation taken from the repertoire of
culturally known situations invokes the repertoire of possible issues
appropriate for it, and these issues are what the reader will
anticipate. Within the framework of this structured anticipation, he
will make his decisions by following directions given in the text, even
when they are few, or barely present. (For instance, we can speak of
blatantly erotic situations, or others which have hidden erotic content
held in constant suspension.) Indirect, "remote control" description is
dictated either directly by cultural norms (as, for example, the
prohibitions against expressly naming and presenting what the culture
considers too drastic), or by the author's individual choices and
thought. In the latter case the descriptive structures are generally
full of gaps; they are either incomplete, or they are dim mirror images
of completely different, unnamed, unarticulated, and thus merely
intuited, structures. This displacement of description into
circumscription can happen gradually, and, furthermore, either
discontinuously or continuously. To transform circumscription into
description, one can either move over into the as yet unnamed, untouched
center of the problem by offending cultural prohibitions (by speaking
plainly of things that had been previously forbidden, or by introducing
obscene words into the vocabulary); or one can go in the opposite
direction and attach to the culture's generalized structures of
reference still other references, whose proper territories are even
further from the concrete events.

Because of this systematic refusal to speak plainly, the reader begins
to feel unsure whether he or she really understands what the description
is concretely about, and this gives rise to the semantic wavering that
characterizes the reception of contemporary poetry. (Not all poetry,
certainly: there is randomly composed poetry, but we can discern a high
level of "systematic indirection" in the finest poems of Grochowiak, for
example.) All these approaches have a common origin: as the level of the
reception's indeterminacy rises, the reader's own personal
determinations begin to waver. In practice, it is often impossible to
determine whether a given narrative structure is only very indirect and
elliptical, but essentially homogeneous, or one deliberately damaged by
"chance noise," or even perforated, softened, and bent by another,
discordant structure. Furthermore, since one can also create
multilayered structures, even the concrete quality of the described
object or situation can be transformed beyond recognition and reshaped
from one level of articulation to another. Thus, it is often impossible
to determine categorically whether the basic structure of description is
an image of order or of chaos. We cannot always distinguish the
consequences of chance intrusions from the planned transformations of a
particular creative design.

How do these methods and vocabulary bear upon science fiction?

In the first place, we consider the primary unsolved problem of science
fiction the lack of a theoretical typology of its paradigmatic
structures. Since writers of science fiction do not even recognize the
existence of this problem, the structures they use most frequently are
neither aesthetically nor epistemologically adequate for their chosen
themes. An example of aesthetic inadequacy is the practice of authors
who attempt to write mimetic (pseudorealistic) works, and yet model such
phenomena as "contact with another civilization" or an invasion from
outer space after the relationship between detective and criminal. (Two
aliens in Hal Clement's The Needle — a criminal and a detective — "hide"
in the bodies of two humans; and the detective, the "symbiont" on the
boy who has become his "host," searches for the criminal "concealed" in
the body of an unknown man.) This cognitive process results in
antiempirical narrative. In the closed ecological system of Isaac
Asimov's story "Strike-Breaker," the director of the planet's sewage
system is essential for the life of all. He is unexpendable, yet
precisely because of his low social position he is the object of general
contempt. The basic structural assumption is obviously antiempirical.
Those who were of low status long ago, such as butlers, maids, or
housekeepers, are today worth their weight in gold — and the relations
between the housekeeper and her "masters" have changed radically.
Nowadays, the housekeeper is almost the ranking member of the family;
she is indulged, her caprices are respected, her whims attended to.
Therefore, if we simply extrapolate this transformation of social
conditions, we can see that, in Asimov's society, the strike-breaker
cannot be a man on whom the life of the whole community depends and
still be treated as a pariah.

The choice of narrative structures can often be antiempirical even in
works that otherwise pose interesting problems, such as Flowers for
Algernon. The structure of such works, reminiscent of the curves of
normal distribution (or the inverted letter K), originates with a
certain type of tale. In the action of Flowers for Algernon, a retarded
young man's intelligence at first expands to an extraordinary degree,
but no sooner does he experience the joy of intellectual creation than
he regresses back to idiocy with terrible speed. The work is interesting
psychologically, but it poses the problem of "intelligence expansion" as
a "rise and fall" paradigm — which is not very plausible, precisely
because its origin is in fairy tales; but, more important, it prevents
the author from examining the socio-cultural dimensions of his
hypothesis about the artificial increase of intelligence. He requires
his newly intelligent hero's sudden restupefaction for dramatic effect
(for this curve of the action presents a personal drama, the tragedy of
an individual's fall from the heights of wisdom, arduously and barely
achieved, and at the same time it creates the closed structure of events
that automatically shapes the whole progress of the action). This
extremely simple model would not be adequate to show the consequences of
intelligence augmentation for the whole culture; and yet these
consequences would be well worth treating. A university professor is a
universally respected figure with a high social status, both because it
is hard to become a professor (certainly not everyone who wishes to can
become one) and because such specialists have a very important role in
the culture (they are the ones who pursue creative research, and educate
the host of specialists that make up the foundation of civilization).
If, however, the augmentation of intelligence permitted anyone to become
a university professor, and if this happened to become the easiest and
most desirable solution for everyone, then society would have to defend
itself against the destructive consequences of the situation. All those
who would still be willing to be drivers, sewer workers, builders, or
milkmen — in spite of the fact that it is within their power to attain
the highest level of creative intelligence — would have to be generously
compensated. They would come to be surrounded by the halo of noble
renunciation of their innate potential for development for the sake of
the community. If such a novel were written as a grotesque, the sewer
worker would be the admired, respected, outstanding personage, the lofty
spirit, whereas the professor would be merely a mediocre little man, a
tiny gear in the great mechanism. (There would be, of course, many other
consequences of such a "geniusification" process that we cannot consider
here. They can be deduced with the proper reasoning. But an arbitrarily
chosen closed structure of events, such as the paradigm taken from fairy
tales, is certainly not appropriate for the task.)

Thus, science fiction takes flight from the models and methods of
reasoning we have sketched here to the rigid, simplistic structures
derived from fairy tales and detective novels. Because of this, the
system of narrative structures generally used is muddled, and is
inadequate for the futurological thematics of science fiction. In their
choice of narrative structures, most science-fiction writers fail to
consider any criteria of empirical adequacy for and the best possible
arrangement of the objects and situations they wish to describe. They
try to conceal the "dubious origin" of such structures (the detective
novel, romantic stories, fairy tales), which leads to the
unintentionally grotesque style characteristic of most science fiction.

The second problem of science fiction is the unresolved relationship of
the narrative to phenomena that are as yet not associated with
appropriate descriptive structures, since they are the first of their
kind. Meetings with such unknowns at first lead inexorably to
semantic-descriptive paralysis. At such times, the greatest dilemmas
that humanity has, over the centuries, conquered in the course of its
"natural gnoseological evolution" surface all at once. I am thinking
here of the problems of categorizing and articulating new phenomena —
and thus of their inclusion in the established schemes of identification
and recognition — all the decisions that together give a final
definition of what, precisely, a new phenomenon is, what it means, how
it can be described, what ethics it implies, and so forth. Judging from
the popular output, science fiction is completely unaware that such
problems exist, that they must be considered and consciously and
concretely resolved. If the new phenomenon is of a qualitatively
different scale — contact with "aliens" in outer space, for example — it
is all but certain that the repertoire of received, ready concepts will
not be able to accommodate it without considerable friction. In all
likelihood, a cultural, perceptual, and perhaps even a social-ethical
revolution will be necessary. Thus, instead of the assimilation of the
new, we must imagine the reordering and even the destruction of
fundamental concepts, the revaluation of truths that were previously
indisputable, and so on. To refer such phenomena to slick, closed, and
completely unambiguous structures we must simply consider a flaw. We can
learn which structures and methods are the most appropriate from the
history of science -by examining, for instance, the vicissitudes of
physics, with its whole series of conceptual-categorial revolutions. (In
this sense, the completely fantastic, one-hundredpercent invented
history of the "new cosmogony" would still be true to reality, at least
structurally, since the succeeding conceptual orders were "turned inside
out" and reordered either precisely in this way or similarly in each
science's actual course of development.)

Science fiction can thus learn from science as well as from other forms
of literature, such as experimental prose. But it cannot learn through
the kind of passive imitation characteristic of the English new wave of
science fiction. Experimental literature, as we noted, introduces into
the creative process different forms of "noise" (the chance generator),
and the criteria for selecting structures created in this way are purely
aesthetic. Science fiction should add to these another and separate set
of criteria for cognitive adequacy. (Some equivalent to "noise" — the
significant dispersion of opinions, or the contradiction arising
simultaneously from the same sources — arises whenever a particular
science confronts a new and unfamiliar phenomenon, and enters the phase
of rapid conceptual reorganization. At the same time, this "noise" is
never pure nonsense; science has not simply slipped into chaos.) Authors
of science fiction must therefore draw upon the paradigmatics of
transformations.

Clearheaded "internal" critics of science fiction have long been
displeased with the genre for its flight from the real problems of
civilization. But criticism must deal not only with the text's relations
to the external world. It must evaluate not only the structure of the
things described, but also the structure of the description itself. The
former generally determines the choice of themes, whereas the latter
determines the sum total of the rules governing the treatment of the
material — and these rules are not automatically defined by the chosen
theme.

Science fiction remains mired in a stage of theoretical self-reflection
similar to the aggressive, extreme reductionism of neo-positivism
("every science, from biology to psychology, must be reduced to the
language of physics!"). When asked whether such a reduction is
practicable or not, the enthusiastic neo-positivists answer yes, their
opponents no, and that usually puts an end to the argument. The
neo-positivists, amazingly, have not recognized the simple fact that the
reductionist program is based on a fallacy. They wish to posit a logical
dichotomy by way of exclusion of the middle, whereas the historical
nature of scientific understanding does not allow such a
conceptualization. Biology and psychology certainly cannot be deduced
from modern physics. At the same time, we cannot be sure that the
physics of the future (which cannot, in principle, be reduced to the
physics of the present, just as Einstein's model of the universe cannot
be reduced to Newton's, nor the indeterminacy of quantum physics to
Laplacian determinism) might not create transitional branches that will
intersect with corresponding branches of the biology or psychology of
the future (general systems theory). For that matter, we might attain
the synthesis in yet another way, as the cyberneticists envision it: the
synthesis would come about, not on the level of particular sciences, but
on the next higher level of abstraction, with the discovery of the
constants common to all the branch sciences.

Science fiction is reminiscent of neo-positivism's aggressive
reductionism in that it acts as if the miserable repertoire of the
detective story and the adventure novel were sufficient for structuring
any phenomenon in the whole spectrum of the infinite universe,
regardless of its time, place, and degree of complexity, and all the
situations in which human civilization may ever find itself. Thus
science fiction designates its problems (contact with aliens, the spirit
in the machine, the instrumentalization of values, etc.), but it does
not embody them in narrative structures.

In summary, it is clear that among the criticisms leveled against
existing science fiction, the most important is this matter of
opportunities systematically squandered. We must deem it a serious flaw
of the genre that it has no independent, rational, and normative
criticism that is neither destructive nor apologetic and that is
committed not only to science fiction, but also to the more encompassing
relations between culture and literature on which the fate of both
depends. For this reason, my intention has not been so much to write the
definitive monograph on science fiction, but, instead, to prepare the
outline of a rational, internal critique.

Translated from the Hungarian by Etelka de Laczay and Istvan
Csicsery-Ronay, Jr.

 

Cosmology and Science Fiction 

These remarks owe their existence to a suggestion of Dr. R. Mullen, of
Science-Fiction Studies, who received a review copy of Cosmology Now,
edited by Laurie John, but felt the book too peripheral to the journal's
concerns for an ordinary review. The title, too, is Dr. Mullen's choice.
Therefore my remarks are addressed to the readers of Science-Fiction
Studies, and they were written in German because my English is
insufficient for the task.

1. Cosmology Now was written by several British scientists for the BBC
in 1973. The American edition, the one on hand, appeared in 1976. A
reviewer both well versed in the subject and malicious could claim with
some justification that the book would be better called Cosmology
Yesterday. If the cosmos is the most durable of things, this durability
doesn't extend to the science that deals with its exploration. Even the
best cosmological reference works written some seven or eight years ago
are today totally out of date. The three life-years that Cosmology Now
has now had have seen much change in cosmology. Since I don't have to
write a "regular review," I will list only the most important
innovations. The age of the cosmos is today estimated to be some twenty
billion years. The experiments of Weber, who claimed to have registered
gravitational waves, have been discarded, since his apparatus was of
insufficient sensitivity. The health of the "steady state" theory, which
denies the evolution of the universe from a zero point, has deteriorated
noticeably. Scientists are inclined to award the palms of victory to the
theory of the Big Bang. Moreover, many of the things described in
Cosmology Now have lost their former, beautiful simplicity. For
instance, there is now a whole "family" of black holes. In addition to
the ones postulated originally, which were supposed to be the final
stage of a collapsing neutron star, there have been new ones — for
instance, partially reversible black holes. These may not be assumed to
be "gravity graves," invisible for all eternity. And there are,
especially, the black micro-holes. As the new theory of Stephen Hawking,
of Cambridge, will have it, these are objects with the diameter of a
proton and mass of a mountain range. Quite a lot of them are said to
have been created at the time of the Big Bang. I mention the theory of
Hawking, first, because it introduces the method of quantum mechanics
into the field of the general theory of relativity, and, second, because
it implies consequences that cannot be overlooked and may change our
whole outlook. Although there are so far no irrefutable (empirical)
proofs for the existence of any black holes, we cannot imagine any
possible technological utilization of the big black holes, whereas one
may consider the micro-holes as energy sources that can surpass the
annihilation of matter by several million times, the so far
energetically most potent reaction. Such a micro-hole is supposed to
contain the energy of several million hydrogen bombs. Sapienti sat.
There are other important discoveries, but I cannot enlarge this short
aside into a "regular book review." Therefore — finis.

In our times, scientific works grow old very fast. The Internal
Constitution of the Stars by A. Eddington enthralled me when I read it
forty years ago, and it is still a magnificent book, but it must be read
now as (genuine!) science fiction, because nothing in it corresponds any
more with our present knowledge. In my opinion the same may happen with
Cosmology Now: please take this remark as an hommage. This volume will
remain readable, indeed exciting, but very little of its aesthetically
appealing, lucid simplicity in its development of the model of the
universe will survive the changes to come. I say this as a dilettante
and a heretic who knows more about the history of science than about
cosmology. The first conquerors of new knowledge always find it easier
to proclaim that "God may be subtle, but He is not malicious" because
the biggest hurdles are discovered by the next generation of scientists.
But it seems to me that one of the main theses of Cosmology Now will
remain valid: that the universe is a continued explosion extended over a
time of twenty billion years that appears as a majestic solidification
only to the eyes of a transient being like man. The question whether we
are living in a rhythmically pulsating universe or in a cosmos that will
finally dissolve into vacuum still remains to be answered. The pendulum
of mutually exclusive opinions goes on swinging.

2. Now then, what is the relationship between cosmology and science
fiction? The facts are clear: both universes, that of the writers and
that of the scientists, grow ever more apart. The estimations of the
"density of cosmic civilization" show this most evidently. The
scientists, even the founders of CETI (Contact with Extraterrestrial
Intelligences), feel compelled to attribute ever smaller figures to the
psychozoic density in the cosmos, because the accumulating negative
results of the "sky listening" (for signals) force them to do so.
Science fiction takes not the slightest notice of such changes.
Therefore for science fiction one of the biggest riddles of contemporary
cosmology, the silentium universi, doesn't exist at all. But it would be
totally wrong to reduce the divergence of the two universes to only one
parameter, the one mentioned. Science fiction started its escape from
the real cosmos even before the question was formulated why the universe
remains silent so stubbornly. This flight has by now evolved into a
"steady state"; science fiction has encapsuled itself so much against
the space of cosmology that it is unwilling to receive any signals; that
is to say, any news from the field of science, with the exception of
what manages to make the front pages of the newspapers (such as the tale
of the black holes). This encapsulement took place when the authors got
hold of two fantastic, very convenient inventions: unlimited travel in
time, and unlimited travel in space. Thanks to time travel and faster
than light the cosmos has acquired such qualities as domesticate it in
an exemplary manner for storytelling purposes; but at the same time it
has lost its strange, icy sovereignty. Science fiction doesn't know of
the cosmos of colliding galaxies, the invisible stars sucked in by the
curvature of space, the pulsating magnetic fields. Nevertheless, there
is in science fiction not a single one of the civilizations of the
"third stage" postulated by CETI, the civilizations that are, thanks to
their applied science of astral engineering, able to control stellar
energies. As far as their content is concerned, most of the
civilizations in science fiction correspond to the state predicted for
earth in 2000 or 2300, although structurally they have remained arrested
instead in the nineteenth century, with their colonizatory tactics of
conquest and their strategies of war, whose magnification is due only to
the principle of "Big Bertha," the German supergun that shelled Paris
during the First World War. Science fiction has not the slightest idea
what could be done with a power of the magnitude of a sun, if it isn't
used exclusively for the destruction of inhabited planets. And in
science fiction, cosmic civilizations have no intellectual culture at
all, because a future-oriented movement that claims to probe into the
farthest future, and makes its home in a realm of naïvely contaminated,
amateurish ideas on "primitive slave societies," must be held totally
lacking in credibility. Science-fiction criticism often talks of a
"sense of wonder" that the field is supposed to generate, but upon close
examination that "wonder" divulges its close relationship to the tricks
of a stage magician. As popular fiction, science fiction must pose
artificial problems and offer their easy solution. The astonishing
results of contemporary cosmology, which border on paradox, are of no
use to science-fiction writers, because they cannot be tucked into the
narrow fixed frame of the artificial cosmos. Any comparison, including
that with the stage magician, isn't quite exact; the magician doesn't
aim at anything beyond the production of some tricks, whereas the
self-imprisonment that is characteristic of science fiction has made it
unable to describe real space any more.

To do justice to science fiction, which looks so shabby when compared to
the background of cosmology, it is necessary to explain its dilemma
further. The sins of individual authors have always been relatively
small. The development of the totally false, domesticated universe was a
gradual process of self-organization, and therefore all together are
responsible for the final deformation — and nobody. Thanks to the first
science-fiction invention, all occurrences in space have become easily
reversible, but the authors who "just" want to shine with a new version
of time travel have forgotten the larger context. It is particularly due
to these unnoticed relationships that nature was softened in the cruelty
of the irreversible flow of time that is its hallmark. In order that
space might not be used as another cruelty to man, it was
"short-circuited" by another invention, i.e., annihilated. The fact that
a domestication of the cosmos has taken place, a diminution that whisked
away those eternally silent abysses of which Pascal spoke with horror,
is masked in science fiction by the blood that is so liberally spilled
in its pages. But there we already have a humanized cruelty, for it is a
cruelty that can be understood by man, and a cruelty that could finally
even be judged from the viewpoint of ethics -granted that one could take
this blood seriously at all. By looking at it this way, we come to
understand what science fiction has done to the cosmos; for it makes no
sense at all to look at the universe from the viewpoint of ethics.
Therefore, the universe of science fiction is not only minuscule,
simplified, and lukewarm, but also has been turned toward its
inhabitants, and in this way it can be subjugated by them, losing
thereby that indifference which causes man to project continually new
enigmas to be solved and secrets to be lifted, in the vain hope to get
there the answer to the question of his own meaning. In the universe of
science fiction there is not the slightest chance that genuine myths and
theologies might arise, because the thing itself is a bastard of myths
gone to the dogs. The science fiction of today resembles a "graveyard of
gravity," in which that subgenre of literature that promised the cosmos
to mankind dreams away its defeat in onanistic delusions and chimeras —
onanistic because they are anthropocentric. The task of the
science-fiction author of today is as easy as that of the pornographer,
and in the same way. Now that all the real stops to the satisfaction of
their impulses have been pulled, they can have their fling. But with the
stops has disappeared the indescribable richness that can be conveyed
only by real life. Where anything comes easy, nothing can be of value.
The most inflamed desire must finally end in miserable dullness. Once
the credible, the real barriers have been blown up, the process of
falsification must go on; artificial barriers must be erected, and in
this manner the stuffed waxworks come about, the miserable ersatz that
is supposed to be cosmic civilizations.

3. Why is it impossible to regain the universe that has been lost to
science fiction? One could claim that the laws of the market do not
permit it — that today no authors and publishers would dare to subject
the readers to a cure of giving up that would equal the renunciation of
easy solutions to fictitious problems. True, it must be admitted that
not everything in science fiction is rotten in the same degree. After
all, there was once the cosmogonic fantasy of a Stapledon. But
Stapledon, as an isolated writer, was still able to view the universe of
cosmology, and not the humanized universe of science fiction. It should
be kept in mind here that "humanize" in this context doesn't mean to
"make more humane"; we know that among the animals there are no sexual
murderers, and a sexual murderer can hardly be called a humane being.

It must be admitted that the universe presents the "peak of
indigestibility" for fiction writing in the whole field of our
experience. For what can you do as an author with the central subjects
of cosmology — with the singularities? A singularity is a place that
exists in the continuum just as a stone exists here; but there our whole
physics goes to pieces. The desperate struggles of the theoreticians,
going on for several years now, have only the purpose of postponing this
end of physics, its collapse, by yet one more theory. In fiction,
however, things like that cannot be domesticated. What heroic
characters, what plot can there be where no body, however strong or
hard, could exist longer than a few fractions of a second? The space
surrounding a neutron star cannot be passed closely in a spaceship even
at parabolic velocity, because the gravity gradients in the human body
increase without a chance that they might be stopped or screened, and
human beings explode until only a red puddle is left, just like a
heavenly body that is torn apart from tidal forces when passing through
the Roche limit. Is there therefore no way out of this fatal dilemma:
that one must be either silent about the cosmos or forced to distort it?
Cosmology shows us a way out.

Just as one may look at the knowledge of yesterday as a fantastic
speculation — as I said about the famous work of Eddington — so one may
imagine a cosmogony of tomorrow, dissimilar to the current one, but
nevertheless understandable, since cosmic processes are accessible to us
to the degree that they can be focused by reason. But nothing is today
so much held in contempt in science fiction as reason. In this regard a
total harmony unites the authors with the readers. Obscenity is no
longer indecent — the intellectual has taken its place in the pillory.
Science-fiction fans should be discouraged from perusing Cosmology Now,
unless they are willing to free their imagination from its imprisonment
to discover in the brightness of real suns the true face of nature.

Translated from the German by Franz Rottensteiner

 

Todorov's Fantastic Theory of Literature 

Since structuralism in literary studies is largely of French origin, let
this attempt to ruin its reputation have as its motto the words of a
Frenchman, Pierre Bertaux:

At one time it was hoped that the beginnings of a formalization of the
humanities analogous [to that of the "diagonal" or "formalistic"
sciences] could be expected from structuralism. Unfortunately it appears
today that precisely the loudest advocates of structuralism have let it
degenerate into a mythology —and not even a useful one. This chatter
that is now called structuralism has apparently dealt a mortal blow to
that rudimentary scientific beginning.*

I fully agree with this verdict. However, inasmuch as it is difficult to
expose in a single article the barrenness of a whole school of thought —
one moreover that has spawned divergent tendencies, since here every
author has his own "vision" of the subject — I will limit myself to
dissecting Tzvetan Todorov's book The Fantastic.*

The history of the degeneration of a conceptual apparatus that
originated in mathematical linguistics, after it was mechanically
transplanted into the domain of metaliterature, has yet to be written.
It will show how defenseless logical concepts become when they are torn
out of contexts in which they were operationally justified, how easy it
is, by parasitizing on science properly speaking, to bemuse humanists
with pretentious claptrap, disguising one's actual powerlessness in a
foreign field beneath a putatively unassailable logical precision. This
will be a rather grim, but instructive, history of how unambiguous
concepts turn into foggy ones, formal necessity into arbitrariness,
syllogisms into paralogisms. It will, in short, deal with a retrograde
trend in French critical thought, which, aiming at nothing less than
logical infallibility in theory-building, transformed itself into an
incorrigible dogmatism.

Structuralism was to be a remedy for the immaturity of the humanities as
manifested in their lack of sovereign criteria for deciding the truth or
falsehood of theoretical generalizations. The formal structures of
linguistics are mathematical in origin, and are, indeed, numerous and
diverse, corresponding to branches of both pure and classical
mathematics ranging from probability and set theories to the theory of
algorithms. The inadequacy of all these leads linguists to employ new
models, e.g., from the theory of games, since this furnishes models of
conflicts, and language is, at its higher, semantic levels, entangled in
irreducible contradictions. These important tidings have, however, not
yet reached those literary scholars who have taken over a small fraction
of the arsenal of linguistics and endeavor to model literary works using
conflict-free deductive structures of an uncommonly primitive type — as
we shall demonstrate with the example of the Todorov book.

This author begins by disposing of some objections which arise in
connection with constructing a theory of literary genres. Deriding the
investigator who would, before proceeding to description of a genre,
engage in endless reading of actual works, he asserts — appealing to the
authority of Karl Popper — that for the maker of generalizations it
suffices to be acquainted with a representative sample from the set of
objects to be studied. Popper, wrongly invoked, is in no wise to blame,
since representativeness of a sample in the natural sciences and in the
arts are two quite different matters. Every normal tiger is
representative for that species of cats, but there is no such thing as a
"normal story." The "normalization" of tigers is effected by natural
selection, so the taxonomist need not (indeed should not) evaluate these
cats critically. But a student of literature who is in like fashion
axiologically neutral is a blind man confronting a rainbow, for, whereas
there do not exist any good organisms as distinguished from bad ones,
there do exist good and worthless books. And in the event, Todorov's
"sample," as displayed in his bibliography, is astonishing. Among its
twenty-seven titles we find no Borges, no Verne, no Wells, nothing from
modern fantasy, and all of science fiction is represented by two short
stories; we get, instead, E. T. A. Hoffmann, Potocki, Balzac, Poe,
Gogol, Kafka — and that is about all. In addition, there are two
crime-story authors.

Todorov declares, further, that he will pass over problems of aesthetics
altogether in silence, since these are beyond the present reach of his
method.

Thirdly, he debates the relationship of the Species and its Specimen. In
nature, he says, the occurrence of a mutation does not modify the
species: knowing the species tiger, we can deduce from it the properties
of each individual tiger. The feedback effect of mutations upon the
species is so slow that it can be ignored. In art it is different: here
every new work alters the species as it existed heretofore, and is a
work of art just insofar as it departs from a specific model. Works
which do not satisfy this condition belong to popular or mass
literature, such as detective stories, slushy love stories, science
fiction, etc. Agreeing thus far with Todorov, I see what is in store for
his method as a result of this state of affairs: the more inferior and
paradigmatically petrified the texts which it undertakes to anatomize,
the more readily it will reveal structures. Todorov, not surprisingly,
omits to draw this conclusion.

Further, he discusses the question of whether one should investigate
genres that have arisen historically or those that are theoretically
possible. The latter strike me as coming to the same thing as a history
of mankind a priori, but since it is easier to formulate a foolish idea
concisely than it is to refute it concisely, I will let this pass. I
will however remark here that there is a difference between taxonomy in
nature and in culture which structuralism overlooks. The naturalist's
acts of classification, say of insects or of vertebrates, evoke no
reaction on the part of that which is classified. A futurologist might
say that Linnaean taxonomy is not subject to the Oedipus effect (Oedipus
got into trouble by reacting to a diagnosis of his fate). On the other
hand, the literary scholar's acts of classification are feedback-linked
to that which is classified, i.e., the Oedipus effect manifests itself
in literature. Not straightforwardly, to be sure. It is not the case
that writers, upon reading a new theory of genres, run straight to their
studios to refute it by means of their next books. The linkage is more
roundabout. Sclerosis of paradigms, as a stiffening of intergeneric
barriers, arouses authors to a reaction that expresses itself, among
other ways, in the hybridization of genres and the attack on traditional
norms. Theoreticians' labors are a catalyst that accelerates this
process, since their generalizations make it easier for writers to grasp
the entire space of creative activity, with its inherent limitations.
Thus the student of genres who establishes their boundaries causes
writers to rebel against them — he produces a feedback loop by the very
act of classification. To describe limitations on creativity thus
amounts to drawing up a self-defeating prognosis. What could be more
tempting than to write what theory prohibits?

The constriction of the imagination that is inherent in a dogmatic
mentality, such as is represented by the structuralist, manifests itself
in the belief that what he has found to be barriers to creativity can
never be transgressed by anyone. Perhaps there exist intransgressible
structures of creativity, but structuralism has not come within reach of
any such. Rather, what it proclaims to us as bounds of creativity is
really quite an antique piece of furniture — to wit, the bed of
Procrustes, as we shall show.

Coming to matters of substance, Todorov first of all demolishes past
attempts at defining the fantastic. After crossing off the efforts of
Northrop Frye, he lights into Roger Caillois, who had the bad luck to
write that a "touchstone of the fantastic" is "the impression of
irreducible strangeness" (p. 35). According to Caillois, jeers Todorov,
a work's genre depends on the sang-froid of its reader: if he is
frightened, then we have to do with the (uncanny) fantastic, but if he
keeps his presence of mind, then the work must needs be reclassified
from the standpoint of the theory of genres. We will speak in the proper
place of how the scoffer has here left his own method exposed to attack.

Todorov distinguishes three aspects of the literary work: the verbal,
the syntactic, and the semantic, making no secret of the fact that these
were formerly known as style, composition, and theme. But their
invariants have traditionally and mistakenly been sought "on the
surface" of texts; Todorov declares that he will look for structures on
a deep level, as abstract relations. Northrop Frye, suggests Todorov,
might say that the forest and the sea form a manifestation of an
elementary structure. Not so — these two phenomena manifest an abstract
structure of the type of the relation between statics and dynamics. Here
we first come upon the fruits of spurious methodological sophistication,
that congenital trait of structuralism, for it is plain to see what our
author is seeking: oppositions which come to light on a level of high
abstraction. Now, this one is wide of the mark, because statics is not
opposed to dynamics but is a special case of it, namely, a limiting
case. This is a small matter, but a weighty problem lies behind it,
since it is in the same way that Todorov constructs his integral
structure for fantastic literature. This, by the structuralist's decree,
consists of a one-dimensional axis, along which are situated subgenres
that are mutually exclusive in a logical sense. This is portrayed by
Todorov's diagram: "uncanny : fantastic-uncanny : fantastic-marvelous :
marvelous" (p. 44).

What is the "fantastic"? It is, Todorov explains, the hesitation of a
being who knows only natural laws in the face of the supernatural. In
other words, the fantastic character of a text resides in a transient
and volatile state during the reading of it, one of indecision as to
whether the narrative belongs to a natural or a supernatural order of
things.

The "pure" uncanny amazes, shocks, terrifies, but does not give rise to
indecision (of the kind we would call ontological). This is the place of
the horror story, which presents occurrences that are frightful,
extraordinary, but nevertheless rationally possible. This genre extends
off the diagram to the left, merging into "ordinary" literature — as a
transitional link, our theoretician mentions Dostoevsky.

The fantastic-uncanny already gives occasion to the vacillations that
evoke the sense of the fantastic. This is a tale the events in which
are, as its reader at first supposes, brought about by the intervention
of the Supernatural. Its epilogue, however, furnishes a surprising
rational explanation. (Here belongs, for example, the Manuscrit trouvé a
Saragosse.)

The "fantastic-marvelous" work is just the other way around — it
supplies in the end explanations of an extramundane, irrational order,
as in Villiers de l'Isle-Adam's Véra, inasmuch as the conclusion of this
story forces one to acknowledge that the dead woman really rose from the
grave.

And finally the "pure" marvelous, which again does not give rise to any
vacillations between mutually exclusive types of ontic systems, has all
of four subdivisions: (a) the "hyperbolic marvelous," stemming from
narrative extravagance, as in the voyages of Sinbad, where he speaks of
serpents capable of swallowing elephants;

(b) the "exotic marvelous": here, too, Sinbad serves Todorov's purpose,
when he says that the Roc had legs like oak trees — this is not a
zoological absurdity, since to long-ago readers such an avian form may
have seemed "possible"; (c) the "instrumental marvelous" — the
instruments are fabulous objects such as the lamp or the ring of
Aladdin; and (d) the "scientific marvelous," i.e., science fiction. Of
this last subdivision, he says: "These narratives, starting from
irrational premises, link the 'facts' they contain in a perfectly
logical manner" (pp. 56-57). And: "The initial data are supernatural:
robots, extraterrestrial beings, the whole interplanetary context" (p.
172). And: "Here the supernatural is explained in a rational manner, but
according to laws that contemporary science does not acknowledge" (p.
56).

The scientific bibliography of the theory of "robots" forms a thick
volume; there exists a world-renowned organization of astrophysicists
(CETI) concerned with searching for signals emitted by Todorov's
"supernatural beings," i.e., by extraterrestrial creatures; for our
theoretician even the "interplanetary background" possesses supernatural
properties. Let us, however, regard all these qualifications as slips of
the pen. We may as well do so, since Todorov's theory would be fine if
it contained only such defects.

As we know, Todorov calls the fantastic a transitional boundary state on
an axis whose opposite extremes signify the rational system of nature
and the irrational order of marvels. For a work to manifest its
fantastic character, it must be read literally, from the standpoint of
naïve realism, thus neither poetically nor allegorically. These two
categories, according to Todorov, exclude one another with logical
necessity, hence fantastic poetry or fantastic allegory is always
impossible. This second categorical axis is perpendicular to the first.
Let us clarify these relationships on a "microexample" of our own, given
by a single simple sentence. The sentence "A black cloud swallowed the
sun" can be taken, first of all, as a poetic metaphor (a thoroughly
trite one, but that is beside the point). The cloud, we know, was only
figuratively compared to a being capable of devouring the sun, since in
fact it merely hid it from view.

Furthermore, it is possible, by dint of contextual suggestions, to
substitute for the cloud, say, falsehood, and for the sun, truth. The
sentence becomes an allegory: it says that falsehood may obscure truth.
Again, this is a platitude, but the relations that hold are clearly
apparent, and that is what we are after.

Now if instead we take the sentence literally, some uncertainties emerge
that make it possible for indecision and, by the same token, the
fantastic to result. The cloud, we know, "actually swallowed the sun" —
but in what order of events, the natural or the marvelous? If it gulped
it down as a fairy-tale dragon might, then we find ourselves in a fairy
tale, in the "pure marvelous." But if it engulfed the sun as did a
certain cosmic cloud in the novel The Black Cloud by the astrophysicist
Fred Hoyle, we shift to science fiction. In this novel the cloud is made
of cosmic dust, it is a "cybernetic organism" and it engulfed the sun
because it feeds on stellar radiation. The explanation acquires
rationality as a hypothetical extrapolation from such disciplines as the
theory of self-organizing systems, the theory of evolution, etc.

To be sure, the results of our classification do not coincide with
Todorov's, since for him science fiction is irrationalism embodied in
pseudoscience. There is no point to arguing about Hoyle's Black Cloud.
It is enough to note that science fiction is nourished by scientific
revelations — e.g., in the aftermath of the heart transplants there
appeared swarms of fictional works that described criminal gangs
snatching hearts from the breasts of young people on behalf of rich
oldsters. Even if this is improbable, it assuredly does not belong to
any supernatural order of things. But after all, arbitration might
reconcile the conflicting viewpoints by effecting, say, within the scope
of Todorov's axis, a translation of some titles, at least, toward the
pole of the Rational.

Things get worse when it comes to subgenres of the fantastic for which
there is no place at all on Todorov's axis. To what genre should
Borges's "Three Versions of Judas" be assigned? In this work Borges
invented the fictional heresy of a Scandinavian theologian, according to
which Judas, not Jesus, was the true Redeemer. This is not a "marvelous"
tale — no more than any genuine heresy such as the Manichaean or the
Pelagian. It is not an apocryphon, for an apocryphon pretends to be an
authentic original, while Borges's text does not try to conceal its
literary nature. It is not an allegory, nor is it poetry, but, since
nobody ever proclaimed such an apostasy, the matter cannot be placed in
the order of real events. Quite obviously we have to do here with an
imaginary heresy, that is, with fantastic theology.

Let us generalize this interesting case. Let us recognize unprovable
propositions, such as metaphysical, religious, or ontological
assertions, as forming an "actual religious credo," a confession of
faith, the affirmation of a world view, if they have entered in just
this guise into the repository of the historic civilizations. From an
immanent standpoint it cannot be discerned from any such proposition,
whether it was uttered with the conviction that things are really as it
claims, or whether it was enunciated nonseriously (in "ludic" fashion,
thus nonassertively). If no philosopher named Schopenhauer had ever
existed and if Borges had invented in a story a doctrine called "The
World as Will," we would accept this as a bit of fiction, not of the
history of philosophy. But of what kind of fiction, indeed? Of fantastic
philosophy, because it was published nonassertively. Here is a
literature of imaginary ideas, of fictional basic values, of other
civilizations — in a word, the fantasy of the "abstract."

On Todorov's axis there is likewise no place for fantastic history,
which did not happen but might have. This is a matter of so-called
political fiction, telling what might have been if Japan rather than the
United States had fabricated the atomic bomb, if the Germans had won the
Second World War, and the like. These are not uncanny tales — at any
rate, no more so than what has actually happened in the present century
— and they are not marvelous, since it would hardly have taken a miracle
to make Japanese physicists go to work building reactors, and also there
is no question of the reader's being unsure about whether the narrated
events are rational or irrational. And yet in just this way objective
worlds are constructed, the nonexistence of which in past, present, or
future is an irrefragable certainty. So what sort of books are these?
Beyond a doubt, ones that fabricate a fantastic universal history.

Thus our Procrustes has not made place on his meager axis even for
actually existing varieties of the fantastic — let alone "theoretically
possible" kinds, for which there is a fortiori no room in his bed of
torture.

Let us now take a closer look at Todorov's axis. It is of logical
ancestry. The structuralist is indebted to the linguists, and they in
turn adopted this simplest structure of exclusion from set theory, in
that here the principle of the excluded middle holds: an element either
belongs to a set or it does not, and forty-five percent membership in a
set is impossible. Todorov ascribes to this axis a fundamental, because
definitional, significance on the highest level of abstraction. However,
the essential thing is not the axis but the reader's act of decision.
Reading a literary work indeed calls for decisions -in fact, not just
one, but an ordered set of them, which result in the genre
classification of the text. The reader's decisions do not oscillate in
only one dimension. Assuming as a working hypothesis that these are
always decisions with respect to simple (binary) alternatives, thus
dichotomous, one can enumerate such additional axes as:

(a) 
    Earnestness : irony. Irony is calling a statement in question,
    either its linguistic level (this has been done stylistically by
    Gombrowicz) or its objective level. As a rule irony is in some
    measure reflexive. But lest the "deflation" of the utterance should
    become self-destruction on its part, this tactic stabilizes the
    reader's hesitancy, or renders futile the attempt at a definitive
    diagnosis with respect to the designated opposition. It achieves its
    optimum durability when the separation of an "ironic component" from
    a "serious component" in the text is not feasible. "Three Versions
    of Judas" is of just this kind.

(b)
    Autonomous (reflexive) text: relative text (referred to something
    outside itself). Todorov's "allegory" is a bag into which countless
    heterogeneous matters are stuffed. Culturally local (ethnocentric)
    allegory is something different from universal allegory. What is
    allegorical in the author's cultural sphere may be "mere
    entertainment" or "pure fantasy" for ethnically alien readers, in
    line with the saying: "Wer den Dichter will verstehen, muss in
    Dichters Lande gehen" ("Whoever wants to understand the poet must go
    to the poet's country"). The symbolism peculiar to Japanese prose
    may be unrecognizable by us, for precisely this reason. And again,
    symbolic character of a text does not necessarily make it
    allegorical. Whatever is a normative symbol (pertaining to taboo,
    say) of a given culture is by that very fact neither arbitrary, nor
    fantastic, nor "imaginary" for that culture's members. Whether a
    given text is autonomous or relative is determined by the community
    of culture between the author and his readers.

(c) 
    Text as cryptogram : text as literal message. This is a variant of
    the foregoing opposition. The difference between the two is that
    in (b) it is a matter of relations among

objects (events), but in (c) one of (linguistic) relations among
utterances. Allegory is a sort of generalization signaled by
events-objects (a man, as by Kafka, turns into an insect). The content
of a cryptogram, on the other hand, can be anything, e.g., another
cryptogram. From the fact that cryptograms exist it does not follow that
everything is a cryptogram. From the fact that in certain cultures a
part is played by themes concealed under relationships (social,
familial) it does not follow that in every culture its relational
character (its structure) must be a camouflage for meanings concealed in
this fashion. This is why one feels a cognitive disappointment in
reading Levi-Strauss, because one cannot discover any reason,
psychological, social, or logical, responsible for some meanings'
functioning in the community in overt relationships (i.e., ones publicly
called by their names), whereas others are "hidden" in the network of
occurring relations and have to be reconstructed by abstraction. Here
for ethnological structuralism there lies in wait the same bottomless
pitfall that menaces psychoanalysis, since as in psychoanalysis it is
possible to impute to the analysand's every word the status of a "mask"
concealing another, deeper content, so in structuralism it is always
possible to hold that what occurs as relations in a culture is
inconclusive and unimportant, because it represents a "camouflage" for
other concepts, those that will only be brought to light by the abstract
model. Neither of these hypotheses can be verified, so they are
nonempirical with respect both to assumptions and to methods.

One could go on enumerating such oppositions. Superimposing their axes,
so that they form a multidimensional "compass card" — i.e., a
co-ordinate system with multiple axes — we obtain a formal model of the
situation of the reader who has to make repeated decisions about a
complexly structured text. Not all texts activate the decision process
along all the possible axes, but a theory of genres must take into
account at least that class of decisions which cumulatively determines
the genre classification of what is read.

It should be emphasized that particular decisions, until they are made,
are dependent variables. Once we have concluded, for example, that a
text really is ironic, we have thereby altered the probabilities of
specific decisions on other axes.

The perfidy of modern creative writing lies just in making life — that
is, semantic decisions — difficult for the reader. Such writing was
emphatically initiated by Kafka. Todorov, unable to cope with Kafka's
texts by means of his axis, has made a virtue of methodological
paralysis, taking his own perplexity out into the deep waters of
hermeneutics. According to him, Kafka conferred "complete autonomy" on
his text; he cut it off from the world in all directions. The text seems
to be allegorical but is not, since there is no way of ascertaining to
what court it addresses its appeal. Hence it is neither allegorical nor
poetic nor realistic, and if it can be called "fantastic," then only in
the sense that "dream logic" has engulfed the narrative together with
the reader. ("Son monde tout entière obéit a une logique onirique sinon
cauchemardesque, qui n'a plus rien à voir avec le réel" [p. 181].) Ita
dixit Todorov, without noticing that he has hereby abandoned all his
structuralizing.

Todorov's conception of Kafka's works as totally lacking an address (as
reflexive) in the real world ("n'a plus rien à voir avec le réel") has
become popular also outside structuralist circles, I think, as a result
of intellectual laziness. These works, boundlessly veiled in meanings,
seem to signify so much at once that no one knows what they mean
concretely. Well, then, let it be that they simply mean nothing, whether
referentially, allusively, or evocatively.

If there existed an experimental science of literature concerned with
studying readers' reactions to deliberately prepared texts, it would
prove in short order that a text wholly severed from the world with
regard to its meanings can be of no interest to anyone. References of
expressions to extralinguistic states of affairs form a continuous
spectrum, ranging from ostensive denotation to an aura of allusions hard
to define, just as recall of things seen to our visual memory ranges
from sharp perception in broad daylight to the vagueness of a nocturnal
phantom in the dark. Consequently, a boundary between "undisguised
reference" and "hermetic autonomy" of a text can be drawn only
arbitrarily, because the distinction is extremely fuzzy.

A representative of impressionistic criticism might say that Kafka's
writing "shimmers with mirages of infinite meanings," but an advocate of
scientific criticism must uncover the tactics that bring this state of
things about, not hand the texts a charter certifying their independence
of the visible world. We have sketched above a way of effecting the
transition from texts that are decisionally unimodal, simple ones, such
as the detective story, to those that are n-modal. A work that embodies
the relational paradigmatics of the "compass card" thereby sets up an
undecidability about its own meaning in that it persistently defies that
"instrument of semantic diagnosis" which every human head contains.
There then takes place the stabilization of a shaky equilibrium at the
crossroads formed by the text itself, since we cannot even say whether
it is definitely in earnest or definitely ironic, whether it belongs to
the one world or to the other, whether it elevates our vale of tears to
the level of transcendence (as some critics said about Kafka's The
Castle) or whether, on the contrary, it degrades the beyond to the
temporal plane (as others said about The Castle), whether it is a
parable with a moral expressed by symbols from the unconscious (this is
the thesis of psychoanalytic criticism), or whether it constitutes "the
fantastic without limits" — which last is the dodge our structuralist
uses.

It is strange that no one is willing to admit the fact of the matter:
that the work brings into head-on collision a swarm of conflicting
interpretations, each of which can be defended on its own grounds. If
what we had before us were a logical calculus, the sum of these
conflicting judgments would clearly be zero, since contradictory
propositions cancel one another out. But the work is just not a logical
treatise, and therefore it becomes for us, in its semantic
undecidability, a fascinating riddle. "Single-axis" structuralism fails
utterly for it, but the mechanism of undamped oscillation of the
reader's surmises can be formalized by a topology of multiple
decision-making, which in the limit turns the compass card into a
surface representing continuous aberrations of the receiver. However,
the structuralist model even as we have thus amended it is not fully
adequate to a work such as Kafka's. It falls short because its axiomatic
assumption of disjointedness of opposed categories (allegory : poetry,
irony : earnestness, natural : supernatural) is altogether false. The
crux lies in the fact that the work can be placed on the natural and the
supernatural level at the same time, that it can be at once earnest and
ironic, and fantastic, poetic, and allegorical as well. The "at the same
time" predicated here implies contradictions — but what can you do, if
such a text is founded just on contradictions? This is made plain by the
throng of equally justified but antagonistic interpretations that battle
vainly for supremacy, i.e., for uniqueness. It is only mathematics and
logic and — following their example — mathematical linguistics that fear
contradictions as the Devil fears holy water. Only these can do nothing
constructive with contradictions, which put an end to all rational
cognition. What is involved is a trap disastrous for epistemology, in
that it is an expression that contradicts itself (much like the classic
paradox of the Liar). Yet literature manages to thrive on paradoxes, if
only on ones strategically placed — precisely these constitute its
perfidious advantage! Not, to be sure, from its own resources. It has
not invented such horrendous powers for itself. We find logical
contradictions ready-made, firstly in culture: for — to take the first
example to hand — according to the canons of Christianity, whatever
happens happens naturally, and at the same time it happens by the will
of God, since nothing can be apart from this. The nontemporal order thus
coexists with the temporal — eternity is in every moment and in every
inch. The collisions of behavior provoked by this "overlapping"
predication are buffered by successive interpretations of dogma, e.g.,
in a species of theological consent to the use of anesthesia in
childbirth. Nonetheless there is a contradiction involved that
culminates in "Credo, quia absurdum est." Secondly, overlapping
categorizations of percepts become the norm in dreams as well as in
hyponoic states, thus not only in psychiatric symptomatology (cf. Ernst
Kretschmer, Medizinische Psychologic). The coexistence in apperception
of states of affairs that exclude one another both empirically and
logically is, consequently, a double regularity — cultural and
psychological — on which structuralism finally breaks every bone in all
its "axes." Thus the whole literary-critical procrustics or catalogue of
adulterations, errors, and oversimplifications formed by this
Introduction à la littérature fantastique is of value only as an object
lesson illustrating the downfall of a precise conceptual apparatus
outside its proper domain.

We still have with us the dilemma of the hard-headed reader, who, if he
is not scared by a ghost story, relabels it with respect to genre.
Todorov would hold such a receiver to be an ignoramus who ought to keep
his hands off literature. But when we examine the situation in which
someone reads an "uncanny" or a "tragic" text and splits his sides
laughing, we will realize that this situation can be explained in either
of two ways. Perhaps the reader is in fact a primitive oaf who is too
immature to appreciate the work, and that is an end of the problem. Or
perhaps the work is kitsch and he who laughs at it is an experienced
connoisseur of literature, so that he cannot take seriously what the
work presents as serious, i.e., he has outgrown the work. In the second
case the text really does change its genre: from a story about spirits
(intentionally uncanny) or about galactic monarchs (intentionally
science-fictional) or about life in high society (intentionally edifying
romance) it turns into an unintentional humoresque.

Todorov bars saying anything at all about an author's intentions — to
mention these amounts to covering oneself with the disgrace of "fallacia
intentionalis." Structuralism is supposed to investigate texts only in
their immanence. But if one is free to recognize, as Todorov does, that
a text implies a reader (not as a concrete person but as a standard of
reception), then in accord with a rule of symmetry one should recognize
that it also implies an author. Both of these concepts are indissolubly
connected with the category of messages, since a message, in information
theory, must have a sender and a receiver.

The words of Roger Caillois about "the irreducible impression of
strangeness" as a touchstone for the fantastic represent the
psychological correlate of the linguistic state of things constituted by
the full-valued character of the artistic text, which guarantees that it
is not kitsch. The irreducibility of the impression certifies the
authentic values of the text and thereby abolishes the relativism
typical for writing with unwarranted pretensions, which produces kitsch
as an incongruity between intention and realization.

The relativism of kitsch lies in the fact that it is not kitsch for all
readers, and, what is more, it cannot be recognized as kitsch by those
who esteem it. Kitsch identified as such forms a special case of paradox
within the set of literary works; namely, contradiction between the
reactions anticipated by the text and the reactions that its reading
actually evokes. For the uncanny is incompatible with nonsense, physics
with magic, the sociology of the aristocracy with the scullery's notions
about it, and the process of cognition with the adventures of puppets
called scientists. Thus kitsch is a product counterfeited to pass for
what it is not. The contradictions in interpretation of Kafka's writings
not only can but must be grasped by the reader; only so, thanks to
"indecision of manifold scope," will he apprehend the aura of mystery
established by the text. Per contra, the contradiction specific to
kitsch must remain unrecognized by its readers, since otherwise generic
disqualification of what has been read will take place. The reading of
kitsch as kitsch is nonimmanent — the reader appeals to his own superior
knowledge about how a work of the given kind ought to look, and the
chasm separating what ought to be from what in fact is amuses him (or
offends him).

Because our superior knowledge decreases as the themes of literature
become increasingly remote from reality, kitsch takes up residence in
regions inaccessible to the reader: in the palace, in the far future,
among the stars, in history, in exotic lands. Every literary genre has
its masterwork-ceiling, and kitsch, by a tactics of crude mimicry,
pretends to have soared to such an altitude. Todorov, fettered by the
immanence of his procedures, has deprived himself of any possibility of
recognizing mimicry of values, and accordingly his implicit reader must,
by dint of solemn exertions, see to it that the silliest twaddle about
spirits sends chills up and down his spine. On pain of a structuralist
curse he is forbidden to poke fun at such rubbish; since structuralism
establishes absolute equality in literature, the right of citizenship
that the text usurps for itself is a sacred thing.

A possible rejoinder at this point would be that idiotic stories are
written for idiotic readers. And indeed, we observe this state of
affairs in the book market, dominated by the laws of supply and demand.
But this is not an extenuating circumstance for a theory of literature.
A "theory" is synonymous with a generalization that applies without
exception to all elements of the set under investigation. Since the
structuralists' generalizations balk at applying thus, or, more
precisely, because when they are made to apply thus everywhere they
yield such nonsense as no advocate of the school would like to
acknowledge (for structural equivalence democratically places the
counterfeit on an equal footing with the masterpiece), the theoreticians
carry out certain sleight-of-hand manipulations when they assemble their
materials for public dissection. They place on their operating table, to
wit, only what has already earned a respectable reputation in the
history of literature, and they conjure away under the table works that
are structurally of the same kinds but artistically trashy. They have to
proceed thus, because their method impels them toward simple texts such
as the detective story; their overweening ambitions, on the other hand,
toward celebrated works. (Kitsch, being subject to relativization in the
process of reception, is not the structurally simplest case, for it
seeks to be one thing and is in fact another; the detective story, on
the other hand, devoid of pretensions, is decisionally unimodal.)

Now we can more readily understand the make-up of Todorov's
bibliography, as to the names (Balzac, Poe, Gogol, Hoffmann, Kafka) and
the works it includes. The theoretician has taken as his "sample" that
which could not involve him in difficulties, since it had already passed
its cultural screening examination and by that token could give him no
trouble. A therapist, if he were to proceed analogously, would take as
patients only robust convalescents. A physicist would test his theory
only on facts that he knew beforehand would confirm it, carefully
avoiding all others. Let us spare the structuralist the description that
the philosophy of science would give to such a method of selecting
"representative samples." A theory of literature either embraces all
works or it is no theory. A theory of works weeded out in advance by
means beyond its compass constitutes not generalization but its
contrary, that is, particularization. One cannot when theorizing
discriminate beforehand against a certain group of works — i.e., not
bring them under the scope of analysis at all. A taxonomically oriented
theory can set up a hierarchy in its subject matter — i.e., assign
nonuniform values to the elements of the entire set under investigation
— but it should do this openly, not on the sly, and throughout its whole
domain, showing what sort of criteria it employs for making distinctions
and how they perform their tasks of evaluation.

These obligations are binding not for humanistic studies alone. They
stem from the set of directives to which all scientific cognition is
subject. A zoologist cannot ignore cockroaches because they're such
nasty little beasties, nor a cosmologist ignore the energy balance of
quasars because it makes his calculations blow up in his face. The
sleight-of-hand artist's activities are not always and everywhere
admirable. So, we conclude, if structuralism desires to avoid expulsion
from among the sciences, it must rebuild itself completely, from the
ground up, since in its present state it is, in the words of Pierre
Bertaux, a procedure that from its point of departure in logic has
strayed into useless mythology.

Translated from the Polish by Robert Abernathy

 

Unitas Oppositorum: The Prose of Jorge Luis Borges 

I admit that this essay is a very subjective review of Borges's fiction.
If someone asked me why I am stressing the subjective aspect of this
piece of criticism, I would be hard-pressed to give a conclusive answer.
Perhaps because I have been trying for years to enter the territory in
which the Argentinian's best work was created, although I went by quite
another road. Therefore his work is very close to me. At the same time
it is foreign to me, for I know from my own experience the traps into
which he has sometimes fallen in his writing, and I cannot always
approve of his literary methods.

Nothing could be simpler than to list Borges's best stories. These are:
"Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius," "Pierre Menard — Author of the Quixote,"
"The Lottery in Babylon," and "Three Versions of Judas."

I justify my preference in the following way: each of the stories
mentioned has a double-decker, perverse, but logically perfect
structure. Viewed superficially, they are fictionalized paradoxes of the
Greek type (Zeno's, for instance*).

In "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius," Borges bases the story on the idea of
reversing our concepts of "idea" and "reality." Borges suggests that a
secret society has created a new world where the mind creates its own
external objects, and the only external objects are those created by the
mind.

In "The Lottery in Babylon" Borges contrasts two mutually exclusive
explanations of the universe: (statistical) chance, and (total)
determinism. Usually we consider these notions incompatible. Borges
tells of a world system based upon a lottery, and reconciles two
cosmological explanations without destroying the logical bases of each
system.

"Pierre Menard — Author of the Quixote," on the other hand, is a satire
on the uniqueness of the act of artistic creation, logically driven to
its utmost point. (In this story Pierre Menard seeks to rewrite "Don
Quixote" precisely — without copying it. The story shows the paradoxes
behind the idea that art is created necessarily and uniquely. Borges
reduces the idea ad absurdum.)

Finally, "Three Versions of Judas" is a logically improvable heresy.*
Borges builds a fictitiously heterodox system of Christian dogmatics in
which he "proves" that Judas not Jesus was the Christ. In its
"radicalism" this fictitious heresy surpasses all historical types of
heresy.

In each story we can find the same kind of method: Borges transforms a
firmly established part of some cultural system by means of the terms of
the system itself. In the fields of religious belief, in ontology, in
literary theory, the author "continues" what mankind has "only begun to
make." Using this tour d'adresse Borges makes comical and absurd those
things which we revere because of their current cultural value.

But when we look at Borges's work only superficially we see the
"comicallogical" effect alone. However, each of these tales has in
addition another — wholly serious — hidden meaning. At base, his curious
fantasy is, I claim, quite realistic. Only after some thought do you
first note that the heterodoxy contained within "Judas," for instance,
might really be possible. Such a perfidious interpretation of the myth
of the redemption, if historically not very plausible, is at least
thinkable. I could say the same about "Lottery." Under certain
conditions even the reinterpretation of the notions of chaos and order
shown here may be historically plausible. Both stories, diiferent as
they may appear to be from one another, are hypotheses about the
structure and attributes of existence. Because they are both borderline
cases, isolated to one edge of the real paradigm corresponding to them,
it was very unlikely that they would come true historically. Yet,
considered from a logical point of view, they are totally "correct." The
author therefore has the courage to deal with the most valuable goals of
mankind just as mankind himself does. The only difference is that Borges
continues these combinatory operations to their utmost logical
conclusions.

Borges's best stories are constructed as tightly as mathematical proofs.
It is impossible to refute them logically, however lunatic the stories'
premises may sound. Borges is successful because in any single case he
never questions the implied premises of the model structure that he
transforms. For instance, he pretends to believe (as some humanists do)
that a truly brilliant work of art contains no trace of chance, but is
indeed the result of some (higher) necessity. If one thinks that such a
statement is generally true, it is possible, without contradicting
logic, to claim that a masterpiece could be created, word for word, a
second time, and quite independently from its first birth (as one can
really do with mathematical proofs). We can only see the nonsense of
such a procedure when we attack its very premises; but of course Borges
is careful never to do this. He never creates a new, freely invented
paradigm structure. He confines himself strictly to the initial axioms
supplied by the cultural history of mankind. He is a mocking heretic of
culture because he never transgresses its syntax. He only extends those
structural operations that are, from a logical point of view, "in
order," i.e., they have never been seriously "tried out" because of
historical extralogical reasons — but this is of course another matter
altogether.

Basically, Borges just does what he claims for the fictitious
philosophers of his "Tlön" (in philosophy they "do not seek truth, only
amazement"). He cultivates a fantastic philosophy, for the characters
and settings in his stories are not discursive arguments, but just as
much literary objects as the objects which appear in "normal"
literature. This group of tales forces me to ask how we may distinguish
a fictitious ontology (one that cannot be taken seriously) from a real
(historically valid) philosophy. The answer to this question is
shocking: no essential difference separates the two. Things are quite
trivial: those ontological-philosophical concepts that some thinkers
had, and that were preserved by mankind in her historical treasure trove
of ideas, and that she therefore acknowledges as serious attempts to
interpret and understand the world in one grand sweep — those ideas are
our religions and philosophical systems.* But ideas that cannot present
such a genealogical attestation and cannot show such an assimilation by
the real history of mankind (and Borges's cannot) are just "fictitious,"
"freewheeling," "privately invented" meaningful structures, and for no
other reason than that mentioned above. Because of this, they can never
be taken seriously as an interpretation of the world and existence.
These stories cannot be refuted even when the most severe criteria are
applied, but only because things happen to be so. To refute them, it
would not be sufficient merely to show their absurd consequences. To
refute them, it would be necessary to call into question the total
syntax of human thought, and thinking in its ontological dimensions.
Therefore, Borges's work just confirms that no cultural necessity exists
in our growth toward knowledge; for we often take that which has arisen
by accident for what is necessary, and mistake the ephemeral for the
eternal.

I'm not sure whether Borges would agree with my explication of his work,
but I do fear that I have attributed more to him than he deserves, and
that he has not written his best work with so serious an intent (in its
semantic depths, not its comical-paradoxical surface, of course). Which
means that I suspect that Borges "privately" has not seen the final
point of his fictional chain of proof. This guess is based on a
knowledge of all of his stories. By talking about his other stories, I
pass onto the other, more dubious aspects of his work. Seen as a whole,
his work is a universe of literature whose secondary, repetitious
aspects diminish and slight his best efforts by their very neighborhood,
because these aspects structurally debunk his best work. In Borges's
best stories one can find flashes such an intellectual power that they
do not lose impact even after many rereadings. If at all, they are
lessened only when one reads all of his stories at a sitting.

Only then do we notice the mechanism of their creative process. It is
always dangerous, even fatal for the creator, when we see the invariant
(debunking) structure, the algorithm of his creative power. God is a
total mystery to us above all because it is on principle impossible for
us — and will remain impossible for us — to understand or imitate
exactly the structure of God's act of creation.

Considered from a formal point of view, the creative method of Borges is
very simple. It might be called unitas oppositorum, the unity of
mutually exclusive opposites. What allegedly must be kept separate for
all time (that which is considered irreconcilable) is joined before our
very eyes, and without distorting logic. The structural content of
nearly all of Borges's stories is built up by this elegant and precise
unity. Borges calls the one and the same the conflicting notions of the
orthodox and the heretic, Judas and Jesus. Christ, betrayer and
betrayed, the troglodytes and the immortals, chaos and order, the
individual and the cosmos, the nobleman and the monster, good and evil,
the unique and the repeated, etc. His literary game with its borderline
meanings always begins where opposites repel one another with their
inherent force; and it ends as soon as they are joined together. But we
can see a trivial weakness in Borges's work in the fact that there is
always the same mechanism of conversion (or a closely related
inversion). God the Almighty was wise enough never to repeat Himself in
such a manner. We authors, his successors, shadows and apprentices, also
mustn't do it. Occasionally — but very rarely — the skeletal,
paradigmatic structure of the transformations used in Borges's fiction
results in truly extraordinary things, as I have tried to show. But we
always find this structure, invariably in the same form, once we have
properly recognized and assessed it. Such repetition, which inevitably
is already accompanied by an element of the unintentionally comical, is
the most familiar and most general weakness in all of Borges's fiction.
For as good old Le Bon has already said in his work on humor, we always
look disdainfully down upon the mechanic, for a mechanical process
always lets the strange and surprising get away. It is simple to predict
the future of a purely mechanical phenomenon. In its utmost depths, the
structural topology of Borges's work acknowledges its relationship with
all mechanistic-determinist kinds of literature, including the mystery
novel. The mystery novel always incorporates unequivocally the formula
of Laplacean determinism.

The cause of his work's "mechanistic" sickness is this, I think: from
the beginning of his literary career, Borges has suffered from a lack of
a free and rich imagination.* In the beginning he was a librarian, and
he has remained one, although the most brilliant manifestation of one.
He had to search in libraries for sources of inspiration, and he
restricted himself wholly to cultural-mythical sources. They were deep,
multifarious, rich sources — for they contain the total reservoir of the
mythical thought of mankind.

But in our age they are on the decline, dying off as far as their power
to interpret and explain a world undergoing further changes is
concerned. In his paradigmatic structures, and even in his greatest
achievements, Borges is located near the end of a descending curve which
had its culmination centuries ago. Therefore he is forced to play with
the sacral, the awe-inspiring, the sublime and the mysterious from our
grandfathers. Only in rare cases does he succeed in continuing this game
in a serious way. Only then does he break through the paradigmatically
and culturally caused incarceration which is its limitation, and which
is quite contrary to the freedom of artistic creation he strives for. He
is one of the great men, but at the same time he is an epigone. Perhaps
for the last time. He has lit up — given a paradoxical resurrection to —
the treasures transmitted to us from the past. But he will not succeed
in keeping them alive for any long period of time. Not because he has a
second-rate mind, but because, I believe, such a resurrection of
transitory things is in our time quite impossible. His work, admirable
though it may be, is located in its entirety at an opposite pole from
the direction of our fate. Even this great master of the logically
immaculate paradox cannot "alloy" our world's fate with his own work. He
has explicated to us paradises and hells that remain forever closed to
man. For we are building newer, richer, and more terrible paradises and
hells; but in his books Borges knows nothing about them.

Translated from the German by Franz Rottensteiner

 

About the Strugastsky's

Roadside Picnic

There are subjects that cannot be entirely exhausted. For theologians,
such a subject is God. How can one definitively report on something that
is, by definition, inexhaustible; how, when the description presumes a
limit, can one describe a Being which, in principle, consists of
infinite qualities? In this case, various strategies have been used: a
multiplication of general concepts — which, however, generates no
precise picture; comparisons — but they necessarily reduce the divine
attributes to the level of all-too-concrete categories; or a spiraling
approach to the subject whereby a definitive determination is replaced
by an approximation — which for that reason is likewise inadequate.*

The optimal strategy for theology has proved to be that of maintaining
the mysteriousness of God. Yet rigorously to preserve that mystery, one
would actually have to remain silent; and a silent theology ceases to be
theology. The strategy therefore turned (in later — e.g., Christian —
versions) into one operating on obvious contradictions. God the
omniscient knew that from man as He had made him would come the Fall.
Yet God created him free. If God was aware in advance that man would
inevitably fall, then man was not free — which nevertheless is exactly
what the theologian asserted he was. In this way dogmatically imposed
contradictions create the very mystery before which reason must become
silent.

An inexhaustible topic of fantastic literature is the reasonable, yet
not human, being. How can a human author describe a being which is
definitely gifted with reason, but which, with equally categorical
certainty, is not human? The bare assertion of its reasonableness will
not do, since the genre must work with facts. Here, too, fantasts have
resorted to various strategies. The one that proved the best in theology
— namely, preserving the mystery — cannot be applied in exactly the same
way: aliens, after all, are not deities but material beings like us. The
author who describes them with the aid of various readily apparent
contradictions is thus requiring the reader to believe in something
absurd; whereas it is not, after all, in the writer's power to establish
no-matterwhat dogmas.

According to the simplest available strategy, then, intelligent beings
differ from each other corporeally, and only from this area do their
peculiarities arise. Mentally they are identical or similar to human
beings, since there can be only one form of Reason. H.

G. Wells gave reality to this view almost a hundred years ago in The War
of the Worlds. His Martians have a horrifying appearance, which,
however, will some day be man's.

Their bodies have deteriorated to such an extent that their heads are
almost all that remains; and, according to Wells's surmise, in the man
of the future as well, the organism's viscera will atrophy and the
cranium expand. The novel says nothing about Martian culture, as if
that, too, had wasted away and consisted of nothing but technical
mastery and the equation of might with the cosmic justification of the
state. In Wells the future thus simplifies both physiology and culture.
His Martians have no interest in anything human except human blood: like
vampires, they nourish themselves on it. The Martians' technological
achievements do, to be sure, arouse our admiration, but the poverty of
their culture represents the fiction's greatest weakness. Let us not
speak of the loathing the aliens inspire — that can always be referred
back to their physical environment. Still, is the behavior of the
Martians not an unintentional caricature of an extreme rationalism?

The invasion of Wells's Martians is certainly justified by their
situation as inhabitants of a dying planet that is turning into a
desert, from which perspective the fruitful earth hovers as territory
(Lebensraum) to be conquered. What proves to be an exceptional case
within the solar system was nonetheless thoughtlessly appropriated as
the model for the whole science-fiction genre. Indeed, the successors to
Wells mechanically imitated the failings of the master. The science
fiction that followed his sickened on the chronic monstrosity of stellar
invaders, while leaving behind the rationale by which Wells accounts for
it. Furthermore, later writers, wanting at all costs to surpass the
founder of the genre in their rendering of aliens' hideousness, went
well beyond the limits of plausibility. By equipping their aliens with
ever greater power, they filled the entire universe with civilizations
whose desire to expand is wholly irrational. The greater the power
attributed to the aliens, the more irrational is their invasion of
earth. In this phase, science fiction became a fantasy of imposture and
of paranoid delusions, because it claimed that the cosmic powers were
sharpening their fangs the better to eat humanity, as if earth and its
treasures were of incalculable value not only for the inhabitants of a
small desert planet like Mars, but also for every imaginable
civilization in the galaxy. Yet the preconception that a power with
armies of starships at its disposal could be dead set on taking over our
property is as naïve as the assumption that one of the superpowers of
earth would mobilize its armies in order to expropriate a grocery store.
The price of the invasion must always be higher than the value of the
loot.

Thus invasion plots could not be motivated by interest in material gain.
Instead, the aliens attack earth because it pleases them to do so; they
destroy because they want to destroy; they enslave humanity because it
amuses them to exercise tyrannical mastery. In this way, science fiction
exchanged Wellsian interplanetary Darwinism for a sadism which became a
cosmic constant in intercivilizational contacts. Science fiction's task
of forming hypotheses was replaced by that of projection, in the sense
the word has in depth psychology: the authors projected their fears and
self-generated delusions onto the universe. They thereby established a
paranoid cosmos, in which everything having so much as a hint of life
sets about the conquest of earth — a cosmos that is a trap set to catch
humankind, a cosmos whose evolution comes down to an embodiment of the
principle of "Civilization as a wolf to Civilization" (cp. homo lupus
homini).

This "den of thieves" cosmos was later transfigured many times over. Its
general unfriendliness was mechanically transformed into friendliness.
The aliens attack, but only to rob us of our free will and to preserve
humankind by taking us into protective custody (this motif became
especially popular during the Cold War years); or they don't attack
immediately, but hesitate and thus enable humankind to unite: in view of
the stellar threat, solidarity wins.

Further permutations of the invasion scenario resulted from these; yet
none of the variations invented stands up to a thoughtful examination.
They are incapable of answering certain elementary questions that
Wells's novel — albeit in its own way — does pertinently address itself
to. There is, for one, the question of what the motive is for the
star-voyage — something that cannot be explained in terms of "they felt
like it" or of a game of cops and robbers; for another, there is the
question of the main orientation of cultures on a high level of material
development; for yet another, there is the question of what form systems
that have achieved a high level of astrotechnical accomplishment will
assume; and so forth. But the most telling of such questions is this:
why do actual human cultures show a tremendous richness approaching the
truly diverse, while virtually all cosmic cultures in science fiction
are marked by a depressing uniformity which borders on monotony?

To such questions science fiction could make no answer as long as it
exchanged reflection on the fate of reason in the cosmos for sensational
stereotypes of interplanetary adventure. In this way, science fiction's
line of development — and this concerns the subject under discussion —
became antithetical to that of science. At a time when scientists,
beginning to discuss seriously the problem of how one might communicate
with other civilizations in the universe, were formulating the
hypotheses that Reason takes various forms and that not all possible
manifestations of intellect need assume the human form, fantasy was
already at the opposite pole from such thinking, driving the last
remnants of realistic concepts out of its sphere through its undisguised
borrowing from fairy tales. In its desire to furnish the aliens with
ever greater power, it already ascribed protean abilities to them: such
a being can, just by wishing it, transform itself into a tree, into part
of a rocket, even into a human being. It can also take over a human body
and control the human mind, thus in effect giving new life to a subject
of old myths: possession by evil spirits. This fantasy destroyed
intercultural barriers in short order, by ascribing some sort of
telepathic omnipotence to the aliens; or, on the other hand, it formed
the cosmic relationships between the planets on primitive, simplistic
models of earthly origin (those, for example, suggested by colonialism,
by the exploits of the conquistadors, or by the rules governing the
creation of imperialistic coalitions). In so doing, it disregarded all
possible objections both of a sociological and of a physical nature —
objections that are contingent on the tremendous spatio-temporal
distances in the cosmos. That handicap it did away with once and for
all, by conferring on the star-voyagers the ability to move at any
desired speed. In short, while in Wells's modest effort the Martians —
in accordance with the scientific data of his time — were at home in the
real cosmos, science fiction now chose to locate its beings in a totally
(i.e., astronomically, physically, sociologically, and — finally —
psychologically) falsified cosmos. It practiced a ruthless exploitation,
ransacking, in its search for inspiration, history textbooks and the
Linnean system alike, in order to provide lizards, cuttlefish with
grasping arms, crabs, insects, and so forth with intelligence. When even
that had become threadbare and presently boring, the theme science
fiction had run into the ground was in its teratological extremism taken
over by the third-rate horror movie, which is perfectly bare of any
thoughtful content.

American writers deny the validity of such a diagnosis of the facts, and
they find allies in the book buyers, who have become used to an easily
digestible, sensationalistic literature that pretends to be science
fantasy. Yet the fairytale nature of this "fantasy" is obvious. Nobody
questions why the dragons in fairy tales are so mischievously
bloodthirsty or why the witches in them prefer to devour children rather
than chickens. These are simple axioms of the fairy tales, whose world
is fundamentally partisan: evil appears in it so that it can be defeated
by good. It is therefore clear that such evil must be powerful;
otherwise, the final victory of good would seem too easily gained. The
world of science fiction, on the contrary, must be impartial; it must
not incubate evil merely for the sake of allowing the united
interplanetary forces of virtue to overcome it. Nor should it be a
partisan world with a minus sign, an anti-fairy-tale world in which the
beautiful, amiable, and morally upright good is bred in order to give
the greatest possible pleasure to an evil incarnate which proceeds to
gobble it up with relish. (Such a world, incidentally, was imagined by
the Marquis de Sade, whom one could hardly take for an author of science
fantasy.) The science-fiction world must be (to put it quite plainly) a
real world: that is, one in which no one is privileged from the start,
in which no fate is predetermined, whether in favor of good or of evil.
Since men are not angels, there is no need to ascribe angelic traits to
the aliens; since men, though they kill flies, do not exactly travel to
the ends of the earth to do so, similarly the aliens, even if they
should regard us as flies, should not go out of their way to seek
earthlings to swat.

An author who describes a life form or type of intelligence different
from the terrestrial variety is in an easier position than the one who
depicts a cosmic invasion of earth. The former can — as, for example, I
did in Solaris — restrict himself or herself to portraying phenomena
that differ as much as desired from what humans are familiar with. The
latter, proceeding from the "interventionist" premise, assumes that the
aliens have come to earth and that, consequently, something or other
must have dictated their literally astronomical undertaking. What could
their motive have been? If it was not an impulse to fight or to steal,
it must have been the urge either to learn or to play (they came in
order to amuse themselves a bit with us. . .). There are, as we see, not
many alternate possibilities. Thus the best strategy for dealing with
this subject, too, is to preserve forever the aliens' mysteriousness.

I would like to stress emphatically that this strategy is not founded,
either entirely or primarily, on aesthetic criteria; that, in other
words, the narrative must not preserve the aliens' mysteriousness in
order continuously to puzzle readers and hold them spellbound by the
great unknown. The strategy does, of course, incline to conform to the
fundamental directives of conflict theory. Thus, by way of example,
future-strategists at military academies are required to impute to the
enemy the most threatening intentions from the point of view of the
strategists' own side. In regard to cosmic aliens, such a dictate has a
cognitive, rather than a military, purport. Yet visitors fitted with
absolutely inimical intentions do not represent the worst of all
possible eventualities. In this case, the enemy's attitude is at least
clearly defined. The situation is worse when we absolutely cannot
understand the peculiarities of their strange behavior, when we cannot
explain their alien proceedings.

The strategy of preserving the mystery, if it is to be optimal, requires
a precise concretizing. One cannot manage it in the way that theology
does its subject, by working with contradictions. One cannot ascribe
mutually exclusive purposes to the visitors — for example, they cannot
want to conquer and at the same time not conquer. Still, one can rouse
the appearance of such a contradiction — for example, the visitors may
believe they are helping us, though we may feel that their actions are
pernicious — and here one enters the realm of what is promising from a
dramaturgical perspective: misunderstandings occasioned by the drastic
disparity between civilizations. One can find attempts in this direction
in science fiction, but they are not followed through: the
intercivilizational misunderstandings always stay extraordinarily
primitive puerilities which do not merit serious consideration. The
author must invest a certain amount of intellectual effort in the
construction of the quid pro quo that perplexes the meeting of two
disparate cultures. The more factors from various areas that contribute
to such a misunderstanding, the better. One ought to keep in mind that
such an encounter is not a duel between two heroes, but a very confused
interplay in which collective social organizations take part,
organizations that differ radically from each other and to each of which
the structure, meaning, and purpose of the other's actions are foreign.

The overwhelming majority of science-fiction texts can serve as examples
of how not to tackle the theme of invasion. It is therefore all the more
gratifying to come upon a work which, by and large, knows how to deal
with the problem successfully. In Roadside Picnic, the Strugatsky
brothers have employed the tactic of preserving the mystery to excellent
effect; indeed, as they surpass the canon established by Wells, so, too,
they transcend the science-fiction tradition.

Roadside Picnic relies on two ideas. The first we have already
designated as the strategy of preserving the mystery of the visitors.
One does not know what they look like; one does not know what they want;
one does not know why they came to this world, what their intentions
were respecting humankind. Nor does one know exactly whether it's
absolutely certain that they have landed on earth at all, and if they
have, whether they have already left again. . .

The second idea — and this is what makes Roadside Picnic an anomaly in
science fiction — pertains to humanity's reaction to the landing. For
something has landed — or, to put it more circumspectly, something has
fallen from the sky. The inhabitants of Harmont have found that out
tragically enough. In some areas of the city people go blind; in others,
they fall victim to mysterious illnesses that are generally described as
plague; and the depopulated area of the city turns into the Zone, whose
properties, menacing as they are incomprehensible, abruptly separate it
from the outside world. Yet the actual landing was no great natural
catastrophe: it did not cause houses to topple down, nor did it make
windows break for miles around. The book does not tell us much about
what happened in the first phase of the creation of the Zone. Still, we
learn enough to understand that we will not be able to fit the events
and their consequences into any compartment of already-existing
classificatory schemes. Those who escaped from Harmont in one piece and
moved elsewhere become the center of incomprehensible events, of extreme
deviations from the statistical norm (ninety percent of the clients of a
hairdresser who left Harmont die in the course of a year, though of
"ordinary" causes — in a criminal attack, in traffic accidents — and
wherever emigrants from the Zone increasingly congregate, the incidence
of natural catastrophes rises proportionately, as Dr. Pilman informs
Noonan).

We thus have before us an incomprehensible infringement on causal
connections. The narrative effect is striking. It has nothing to do with
phantasmagoria in the form of a "visitation," because nothing
supernatural occurs; and yet we are confronted with a mystery that is
"much more terrifying than a stampede of ghosts" (as Dr. Pilman says,
3:109).* Should someone seek for a hypothesis that would explain these
effects, it might be possible to find one. (Let us assume that what has
happened is caused by local disturbances of certain physical constants
responsible for the normal probability curves in typical statistical
equations: that is the easiest explanation, though only, of course, as
it indicates the direction in which more research would have to be done,
and not in the sense of being a solution to the problem.) It turns out,
then, that even when one has found a physical process whereby the
mechanics of the unusual events can be explained rationally, one has not
come a hair's breadth closer to the heart of the problem — viz., to the
nature of the visitors. Thus the optimal strategy consists of presenting
the individual actions of the visitors as a puzzle whose resolution
either does not throw any light at all on the nature of the visitors or
makes that nature seem even more unfathomable. This is not, as it might
perhaps appear to be, something made up, like a fantasy novel's ad hoc
inventions; since our knowledge of the world is acquired in just this
way: perceiving some of its laws and peculiarities does not lessen the
number of problems left to be solved; on the contrary, while making
these discoveries, we begin to realize that there are further mysteries
and dilemmas of whose existence we hitherto had no presentiment.
Evidently, then, the scientific learning process can produce from its
treasury even more "fantastic" wonders than the fairy-tale repertory
does childish ones.

In Roadside Picnic things do not go as they do in The War of the Worlds.
Wells's story of the Martian invasion involves a nightmarish, monumental
breakdown of the human world, a dramatically heightened collapse of
civilized order under visibly inflicted blows. One knows who the
opponent is; one knows his methods; even his final goals are known (it
would be difficult not to guess them!). All this has nothing in common
with Roadside Picnic. To be sure, the invasion has presumably occurred;
to be sure, it has left behind ineradicable traces in the form of
"Zones"; and earth is incapable of coming to grips with the
consequences. Yet at the same time, the little world of humanity
continues as before. Ominous miracles, descending on six spots on the
planet like a cosmic rain, become the focal points of the various —
legal as well as illegal — human activities that go on around all
supposed sources of profit, no matter how risky they are. The
Strugatskys realize the strategy of preserving the mystery through an
extremely subversive tactic — through well-nigh microscopic bearings on
what is going on. We learn only through hearsay that experiments are
being made on the "magnetic traps" discovered in the Zones, and that
somewhere or other institutes for the study of extraterrestrial cultures
are busy trying to comprehend the nature of the landing. About what
governments think of the Zones, about how the Zones' instauration has
affected world politics, we find out nothing. By contrast, we witness
every last detail of some episodes in the life of a "stalker," of a new
breed of smuggler who, because a demand exists for them, spends nights
retrieving objects from the Zone. Through verbal snapshots, the story
shows how the Zone has become surrounded, as a foreign body does when it
has penetrated a living human organism, only in this case by a tissue of
opposed interest groups: those connected with the official guardianship
of the Zone (i.e., the UN), but also the police, the smugglers, the
scientists, and — let's not forget them — the members of the
entertainment industry. This encirclement of the Zone by a ring of
feverish activity is depicted with considerable sociological insight.
Certainly the portrayal is one-sided, but the authors had good reason to
focus on those figures whose activity, in a marked but also quite
natural way, counters the typical science-fiction scheme of things. The
sense of fascination and depression that the "scenes from the life of a
treasure hunter" (or "stalker"), the core of the story, inspire in the
reader are the product of a deliberately restricted field of vision. The
scientific and extrascientific literature that the landing precipitated
must undoubtedly have been a focus of bitter controversy. So, too, the
landing must inevitably have brought about the formation of new
attitudes and lines of thought; and it probably has not left either art
or religion untouched; yet our perspective on the whole upheaval is
perforce confined to the excerpts from the life of a poor joe who, in
the drama of two civilizations colliding, strictly plays the part of a
human ant.

It would nevertheless be a good idea for us to make ourselves aware of
wider aspects of the event. Everyone will agree with Dr. Pilman's words
that the invasion represents a decisive stroke in the history of
mankind. Now in that history there have been quite a number of decisive
moments, even though they were not exactly caused by a cosmic invasion;
and each was marked by an intensification of the extremes of human
behavior. Each of these decisive moments had its larger-than-life-size
figures and its pitiable victims. The greater the historic event, the
more pronounced was the distance between the great and the
insignificant, the sublimity and the wretchedness of human fates.
Glorious battles at sea that once decided the destiny of empires
possessed at a distance the beauty of a painting of a battle, and close
up a repulsive gruesomeness. One need only recall that chained to their
benches, the rowers of galleys burned to death in Greek fire silently,
because before the battle they were obliged to stuff their mouths with
special pears to prevent their making any noise. (Their hellish shrieks,
you see, would have had a negative effect on the soldiers' morale!)
Perceptions of such a battle would differ radically, depending on
whether it were seen from the elevated perspective of the commanders,
with their imperial aims, or from the viewpoint of the poor devils faced
with a death struggle — and yet their death struggle was an integral
part of the process of historical change. One could say that even such a
beneficial discovery as that of X-rays, for example, had its horrific
side, since the discoverers, unaware of the properties of these rays,
had to have limbs amputated because of their effect. So, too, one of the
by-products of the world's industrialization is the leukemia that
children are slowly dying from today. (We know this to be true, even
though the causal connection cannot be palpably demonstrated.) The
dreadful fate of the stalkers in Roadside Picnic, I should add, does not
represent an extraordinary deviation brought about by the cosmic
landing, but is precisely the rule of decisive moments in history — a
rule that distinctly points up the constant and inevitable connection
between "picturesque" greatness and horrifying misery.

The Strugatsky brothers thus demonstrate that they are realists of the
fantastic inasmuch as realism in fantasy betokens a respect for logical
consequence, an honesty in deducing all conclusions entirely from the
assumed premises. Even the uninhibited entertainment industry that
encircles the Zone has its plausibility — indeed, I would say its
necessity. The principles of human behavior operating in the narrative
are thus the same as they ever are; the authors have merely directed
their attention to the "dregs" in the cosmic encounters, so to speak —
and the events thereby take the concrete form of a miracle introduced
into a consumer society. This is not — what is sometimes meant by the
latter term — a society that produces nothing but those goods to which
consumers are immediately attracted. On the contrary, it is a society
that considers everything to be within the scope of its endeavor: not
only cars, refrigerators, and perfume but also sex, blood, and
destruction it makes items for consumption, in good time seasoning each
of them so that they become palatable. In the Middle Ages, the Zones
would doubtless have caused movements of panic-stricken flight and
migration; and they might afterward have become centers of new religious
beliefs, originating in response to their evidence for the Apocalypse,
and breeding grounds for prophecies and revelations. In our world,
however, the Zones succumb to being domesticated; for what one can
neither understand nor ignore, one can at least consume piecemeal.
Accordingly, the Zones, rather than being the subject of eschatological
thought, are the goal of bus tours. This admits of being explained with
reference to a lust for phenomena once regarded solely as abhorrent but
these days enforcing the popularity of an aesthetic that in place of
beauty has set the repulsive. That is the spirit of the times to which
in the Strugatskys' story anything evincing its complete independence
from man — as the mysteriousness of the visitors nearly does — succumbs.
All in all, Roadside Picnic implies that the landing passes over
ninety-nine percent of humankind without a trace; and precisely in this
regard, the Strugatskys set themselves against the entire
science-fiction tradition.

Theirs is no banal opposition. Dr. Pilman, given to expressing himself
in the terminology of physics, calls mankind a "stationary system"
(3:100); translated into the language of the historian, this means that
contact with the aliens, insofar as it does not equate with a global
catastrophe, cannot change the course of human history with one fell
swoop, since mankind is not capable of suddenly leaping out of its
history and — impelled by a cosmic intervention — stepping into a
completely different history. This supposition — in my view a correct
one — is something that science fiction has neglected in its avidity for
the sensational. In Roadside Picnic, by contrast, the landing is not
intended as something strange for the sake of its strangeness; instead,
it establishes the starting conditions for a thought-experiment in the
domain of the "experimental philosophy of history" — and that is exactly
what determines the value of this book.

There is only one point about which I would fain take issue with the
book — a point having to do not with human matters (these are presented
unobjectionably), but with the actual nature of the visitors. I might
premise my discussion on four propositions. The first is that in the
book we are given data, but not necessarily opinions about these data,
even when the characters harboring such opinions are holders of the
Nobel Prize. This means that we consider ourselves to have as much of a
warrant to postulate theories about the visitors as the fictional
personages have. Second, on all imaginable levels of knowledge there is
given no hundred-percent error-free course of action. Such infallibility
would of course require that one possessed complete information about
what can occur in the course of making one's plans a reality; but the
universe is a place in which the attaining of complete information about
anything whatever is never possible. According to the third of my
propositions, the principle of freedom from contradictions in thinking
obtains for us as for other beings in the cosmos. This means that of two
things, one must prove to be the case: if the "visitors" were aware of
the presence of humans on earth, then they cannot at the same time have
been unaware of it; if they harbored any design at all vis-à-vis human
beings, then they could not at the same time have harbored no design;
and so on. Finally, in explaining unknown phenomena, the simplest
hypotheses, as stipulated by the principle of Occam's razor, are always
to be preferred. If, for example, we live next door to a famous magician
and hear dead silence from his side of the dividing wall for a long
while, we can explain that in many ways: the neighbor may have dissolved
into thin air, or he may have transformed himself into a paper clip, or
he may have gone up to heaven through his window. We would tend to take
refuge, however, in the quite commonplace explanation: that he simply
left the house quietly and unperceived. Only when that hypothesis proves
wrong are we compelled to look for another, and less banal, one.

These are the standpoints from which we negotiate the encounter with the
visitors.* In regard to the landing, a distinction must be made between
what the aliens left in the Zones and the way in which they did this. In
the opinion of Dr. Pilman, who expresses the outlook of most
specialists, the gap between the civilizations turned out to be too
great for human beings alone to be able to surmount it; the other side,
however, failed to give its assistance. What the visitors have left
behind human beings can deal with only as fragments of a strange
technology whose functioning is incomprehensible. As for the manner in
which the visitors bequeath the so-called objects to men, Dr. Pilman's
thesis — which is central to the story since the title on the cover
already anticipates it — represents this to us in the form of a parable.
Mankind finds itself in the situation of animals which, having crept
from their hiding places to a roadside or clearing where
incomprehensible creatures have stayed, rummage around among the remains
of the campsite. This analogy expresses Pilman's honest conviction, even
though in his conversation with Noonan he enumerates other going
hypotheses about the landing. Dr. Pilman is not just anyone; he has
finally received the Nobel Prize for his discovery of the "Pilman
Radiant." At the same time, he is a misanthrope — as outstanding
scholars frequently are. Such men strongly sense the ambiguity of their
societal role. For civilized society, which is brought forth from the
fruits of their thinking, they are indispensable; yet it treats them
quite inconsiderately. The political powers expropriate their
discoveries, but public opinion nonetheless makes the researchers
themselves answerable for the consequences of that expropriation. An
awareness of this situation does not dispose one toward kindliness.
Instead it arouses either rebellion or cynicism; but whoever finds
rebellion useless and cynicism repugnant tries to behave like a stoic.
Such a person gets used to choosing the lesser evil; and when one tries
to corner him with questions, he answers evasively or with sarcasm. This
is precisely Dr. Pilman's attitude, a primarily defensive stance which
he has assumed in the interview with which the story begins.

In his conversation with Noonan, Pilman is certainly less spitefully
laconic than he is with journalists. Because he is talking
confidentially to someone he knows -besides which he is somewhat
inebriated — he inclines toward straightforwardness. That Pilman, as he
is psychologically delineated by his judgments on the landing, is by the
same token not unbiased is another matter. The simile of leftovers from
a picnic which he has availed himself of may accurately reflect the
situation of human beings vis-à-vis the things found in the Zone; but in
respect to the visitors it is all too lenient. The so-called leftovers,
objects that are dangerous to all living beings, were not after all
thrown away in some deserted spot. They were tossed into the middle of a
city. It is a fact that urban areas do not amount to even one percent of
earth's surface. That is why, though the cosmos has been "throwing"
meteors at the earth for millennia, so far no meteor has fallen on a
city. It would seem, then, that the landing in Harmont was not the work
of chance. One could suppose that the visitors landed in the city
because they wanted to. They held their picnic not on a roadside or in a
deserted clearing, but right on top of our heads. The event thereby
appears in another light. There is, after all, a difference between
sitting down for a picnic near an ant hill, and pouring gasoline from
the car over the ant hill and setting it on fire. The roadside picnic of
Pilman's friendly analogy presupposes total indifference to the fate of
the human ants. The picture of deliberate destruction, on the other
hand, presupposes a high level of ill will, since one would really have
to take the trouble of coming from far off in order to destroy the ant
hill. Indifference and malevolence are not the same thing; and in this
regard it is unfortunate that the story is silent as to whether even one
of the other landings took place in a human settlement.

As we see, this bears on a paramount question, one that is critical for
clarifying the visitors' relationship to man, and hence a question that
all the characters in the fiction must similarly be aware of. One
landing in a city could be the work of extraordinary chance, but two
such landings certainly could not. We are thus inevitably led to the
following reflection: if it were the case that the visitors had also
landed in another city apart from Harmont, a roadside picnic would
manifestly be a false image. But since Pilman has chosen this analogy,
we assume that we are dealing with an isolated fact. That is very
important for our further considerations.

Dr. Pilman details various hypotheses concerning the nature of the
landing. He omits only one that commands our attention. This we will
introduce after we have gathered (as follows) the conclusive evidence in
its favor. . .

(1)
    First of all, two characteristics — unrelated to one another — of
    almost all the objects found in the Zone attract our notice. One is
    that these objects have retained a measure of functionability: they
    are not passive, lifeless, deactivated waste or rubbish. The second
    is that they are commensurable in size (and weight) with the human
    body. This can be inferred from the fact that one man can lug
    objects well-nigh intact from the Zone on his back without having to
    take them apart first. None of the larger units needs to be
    dismantled or broken up — which is why the equipment of the treasure
    hunters

(2)
Next, it is notable among the Zone's numerous characteristics that its
boundaries are rigidly and sharply fixed. Neither flying objects such as
the "hairy stuff"
(1:19) nor other Zone phenomena (the "jelly" [2:56], thermal shocks,
etc.) ever cross over the demarcation line between the Zone and its
environs. One could once more claim that this "self-containment" of the
Zone, which sets its own strict limits, is the result of a further "pure
coincidence." However, it is a priori a more probable hypothesis that
this is not the case, but that the Zone "holds itself in check" because
it contains something that, according to the visitors' plan and intent,
merits such enclosure.

(3)
    Then again, entire objects lie scattered chaotically in the Zone. It
    is probably this that has put Dr. Pilman in mind of a roadside
    picnic, where garbage is left behind. It thus really does appear as
    if these things were carelessly thrown away. But one can also defend
    the view that nobody threw them away, that they scattered themselves
    chaotically when the containers they were brought in burst.

(4)
    Furthermore, the objects in the Zone frequently have the character
    of extremely dangerous pitfalls or booby-traps. Compared to dealing
    with them, defusing bombs or mines is sheer child's play. Again one
    cannot exclude the possibility that they were carelessly discarded
    by visitors indifferent to human welfare, or even the other
    possibility that the visitors treated people in the way that an
    assassin treats children when he passes out poisoned candies in a
    kindergarten. But another explanation is also permissible: that the
    objects do not function in the way they should because they were
    damaged during the landing.

(5)
    Finally, it is worth remarking that among the forces at work in the
    Zone are those that produce an effect of "resurrection from the
    grave." Under their influence, human corpses rise up and begin to
    move about. This is treated as a resurrection not of the dead, who
    are thereby returned to their normal state of living, but — to use
    the term from the story — of "moulages — . . . dummies" (3: 109),
    whose newly formed tissue is not identical with normal living
    tissue. To quote Pilman: "If you cut off some part. . . [from these
    living corpses], the part will live on. Separately. Without any
    physiological solutions to nourish it" (3:109). (Dr. Pilman claims
    that such a quasi-resurrection would violate the second law of
    thermodynamics; this is not a necessarily valid conclusion, but we
    do not want to quarrel with the learned man at this point, because
    doing so would take us too far off our track.) The
    "pseudo-resurrection" of the "zombies," or "moulages" -their
    reconstruction from a skeletal basis — is an effect that is very
    important for understanding the nature of the landing. Their
    "resurrection" seems to be more probable as a consequence of
    purposive rather than undirected activities; and by the same token,
    it

would certainly appear easier to resurrect real, concrete life forms
(i.e., terrestrial ones, consisting of albumen) than "omnipossible" (and
hypothetical) forms of life in the cosmos. We do not know if that is
correct, just as we do not know if the effect was not directed
exclusively at the visitors themselves (it might be a "remedy in their
first-aid kit"). But whatever is the case, the resurrection effect
suggests that the visitors knew a lot about the physiology of
terrestrial life forms.

All of this constitutes the evidence for our hypothesis. We maintain
that there has been no landing after all. Our hypothesis, indeed, runs
otherwise. . . A spaceship filled with containers that held samples of
the products of a highly developed civilization came into the vicinity
of the earth. It was not a manned ship, but an automatically piloted
space probe. That is the simplest explanation of why no one manages to
observe a single visitor. Every other hypothesis has to assume either
that the visitors are invisible to humans or that they deliberately hide
from them. In the approach to earth, the vessel sustained damage and
broke into six parts, which one after another plunged from their orbit
to earth.

This seems to contradict what is said about the radiants discovered by
and named after Dr. Pilman; they ostensibly confirm that Someone fired
at earth six times from Alpha Centauri in the Cygnus constellation.
Nevertheless, between our interpretation and the radiants there stands
no contradiction. In astronomy the term "radiant" refers to a likely
place in the heavens from which a meteor swarm is approaching. The
determination of a radiant in astronomy is not synonymous with taking a
fix on the place from which the meteors actually originate. They may
approach on an elliptical or parabolic curve; the radiant is a tangent
which a terrestrial observer plots on such a curve, and it extends
backward (in the opposite direction from the meteors' fall) until it
reaches the place in the heavens where a specific cluster of stars is
located. Thus when one names meteors according to their radiants, this
by no means signifies that the meteors are in fact emanating from that
star cluster after which astronomers have named them. Consequently, the
Pilman Radiant offers us no clue at all as to whether what descended in
the Zones was actually sent from the principal star of the Cygnus
constellation. As to where the six flying objects or probes came from,
the Pilman Radiant can tell us nothing, albeit the story directly
encourages the impression that it can. That is a false impression,
occasioned by Dr. Pilman's insufficiently precise manner of expressing
himself in responding to journalists' queries at the outset of the
story. That what has arrived here actually flew directly from Alpha
Centauri to earth is out of the question. Traversing such a distance on
a perfect flight path borders on an astronautical impossibility, since
on the way innumerable interferences (above all, those of gravitational
forces) must influence the trajectory. In addition, it is mathematically
demonstrable that the curve that six shots would produce on the surface
of a sphere (while the sphere is rotating, as the earth does) cannot be
distinguished from the curve resulting from the projection of a segment
in the orbital trajectory onto the surface of the sphere. Pilman's
radiant does not altogether exclude the hypothesis of a disintegrated
spaceship crashing in six separate sections, one after the other. Once
one knows a meteor's radiant and its final velocity, one can compute the
orbital path from which it actually approached, because a meteor, being
an inanimate object subject to the laws of celestial mechanics, cannot
alter its course at will. From a spaceship's radiant, on the other hand,
one can make out nothing about its place of origin, its course, its
travel speed, etc., because a spaceship is a navigable, mechanized body
and can execute maneuvers, make course corrections, change its speed,
and so forth. In short, from the so-called Pilman Radiant nothing
follows in favor of any one of the hypotheses about the landing.

Of course we cannot know for sure that the spaceship was indeed the
victim of a catastrophe. Nonetheless, our hypothesis accounts for
everything that happened, and does so in the most economical manner. Why
should one not properly assume that the landing has miscarried? To
suppose that the unusual nature of the objects found in the Zone
demonstrates the high level of the visitors' ingenuity and thus
precludes a calamity's befalling their ship is a logically false
inference. The visitors' perfection, in consequence of which no harm
could come to their ship, is neither a fact nor a rationally defensible
hypothesis, but merely an article of faith. Perfection to the point of
infallibility is, in our judgment, reserved solely for those entities
with which theology concerns itself — which is to say, there is no
infallible applied science. We are not asserting that an accident
definitely occurred, merely that a breakdown would, in one fell swoop,
account for everything that happened by reference to a common single
cause.

Besides, the facts that we mentioned in point (1) above about the
characteristics of the objects found in the Zone make plausible the
conjecture that someone sent containers of technological specimens in
earth's direction. Our point (2) (concerning the Zone's
"self-containment") further increases the likelihood of (1), that the
senders, unable to be absolutely certain that no catastrophe would
befall their spaceship during its landing, must at least have provided
for a minimizing of the consequences, and have done so precisely by
installing on board a safety device that would not allow the effects of
the catastrophe to spread, but would almost hermetically confine them to
one place. This must naturally have been a device meant to survive the
aftermath of the catastrophe. Somehow it has survived. The fact
mentioned above under my third point heightens the probability that an
accident has occurred, because nothing is more natural than that the
containers' contents should be chaotically scattered by the force of the
impact with earth. Even the fact cited as my fourth point (i.e., the
perils the objects present) becomes understandable as a consequence of
the same cause. Not only did the containers burst upon impact, but most
of their contents were damaged in various ways. The same thing would
happen if someone were to drop containers with foodstuffs, medicines,
insecticides, etc., down to the Samoan Islands in what turn out to be
defective parachutes. These crash to earth and the containers rupture —
in consequence of which, the chocolates are full of hexachlorides, the
gingerbread full of emetics, and so on. It is possible for the Samoans
to conclude that someone has made a very malicious attempt on their
lives; yet in the Samoans' place scientists ought not to jump to the
same conclusion. What we are getting at is that the intention of the
"Others" does not manifest itself in the pernicious character of the
cosmic offerings: it is not the case that they took pleasure in pelting
us with deadly debris, but, rather, that an unfortunate accident — the
defect in their spaceship — transformed their well-intended consignment
into scrap metal. (We do not want to go into further specifics of our
hypothesis here; but in general terms, they would run as follows: since
the ship left no trace behind, it must certainly not have landed but
simply accomplished the dropping off of the containers. The containers,
moreover, need not necessarily have taken the form of material vessels;
the objects may have been "packaged," held together, by a type of force
field, whose failure at a crucial moment caused the contents of the
"packages" to rain down on earth.)

The Strugatskys might tell us that the hypothesis of "samples" is
likewise taken into account in their book. After all, in his
conversation with Noonan, Dr. Pilman makes mention of the possibility
that "[a] highly rational culture threw containers with artifacts of its
civilization onto Earth. They expect us to study the artifacts, make a
giant technological leap, and send a signal in response to show we are
ready for contact" (3:103). However, this version — which, by the way,
does not admit the possibility that the consignments have arrived in a
disastrously damaged condition — the story through an ironic undertone
utterly discredits. Indeed, how could objects that are more dangerous
than explosives and that are dispatched to unknown addressees as gifts
be supposed to invite the recipients to make contact? That would be like
sending someone an invitation to a ball, but enclosing the invitation in
a letter-bomb. In the story's presentation of it, this hypothesis is
therefore the one that is most self-compromised in view of the Zone's
macabre characteristics.

The hypothesis of an accident, on the other hand, not only explains
events quite naturally, but also rehabilitates at once the "Others" as
Senders and the human beings as Recipients of a "Danaic gift" from the
stars. The senders, far from being guilty of wrongdoing, have even — as
was their duty — foreseen the worst possibility and provided the
shipment with a safety device, thanks to which all of the Zone's effects
are confined to a particular location. Accordingly, the Zone's
peculiarity is most simply explained by the foresight of the senders,
who, unable to eliminate the possibility of an accident, therefore took
care that its consequences would be kept within bounds. The hypothesis
of an accident likewise exonerates humankind, and especially the
learned, whose perplexity about the gift becomes understandable, given
the additional difficulties they have to overcome because they do not
know which of the properties of the objects in the Zone were intended by
the designers and which are the result of the damage incurred during the
catastrophe.

It does not take long to explain why the authors silently passed our
version of the landing by. It could not please them because it detracts
from the work's menacing and hence mysterious atmosphere. Still, their
error lies in just this silence about the possibility of an accident. We
understand quite well why they chose this course. In the meeting of the
civilizations, both sides were meant to be discredited. Men agree on
using the gift only in base and self-destructive ways because that is
human nature; and the Senders prove their murderous indifference to
humanity because beings of high intelligence do not give a damn about
their intellectual inferiors. So extreme a version of the invasion theme
would have deserved literary representation, all the more since it
surpasses everything that science fiction has so far accomplished in
this direction. But in that case the narrative would have had to rule
out our hypothesis about the damaged gift; it would have had to bring it
to grief from the outset — that is, it ought to have discredited it.
Silence about it, on the other hand, though intended to consign our
version to oblivion, constituted a mistaken authorial tactic.

From what has been said, conclusions of a more general nature arise with
regard to the optimal strategy for dealing with the invasion theme.* In
order to carry out the strategy of preserving the mystery, two
requirements have to be rigorously fulfilled. First of all, the author
must not arouse the suspicion that certain facts are being hidden from
the reader, facts beknown to the fictive heroes (all of Roadside
Picnic's protagonists must know, for example, whether another Zone,
aside from the one in Harmont, also lies within a city's limits). The
reader must remain convinced that the information the author imparts is,
within the limits of possibility, complete. The mystery then will be
kept hidden by the very unfolding and presentation of the depicted
events, which create, as it were, an impenetrable mask behind which no
one can see. Otherwise this effect can be achieved only through a very
precise balancing of the facts. They may neither point in one direction
too unequivocally, nor overwhelm us by being all too chaotically
diffuse. What they attest to must remain undecided, on the divide, as it
were, between diverging alternatives, without inclining definitively
toward any one side.

Now our excellent authors have defeated their own purposes by maligning
the visitors at the end of their story. That the Golden Ball is supposed
to fulfill wishes is, of course, a naïve belief, one of those popular
legends that rose up in the wake of the visit. It was clear to the
authors that they could not make an infernal machine out of this Ball,
since that would have been an exaggeration that would have changed the
meaning of their book: it would have transformed the Zone from something
ambiguous, albeit dismal, into an unequivocal trap for humankind.
Therefore they made the Golden Ball into an almost neutral object and
let death stand not in it, but right beside it, as a "transparent
emptiness that was lurking in the shadow of the excavator's bucket"
(4:143), a nothingness that throttles Arthur before Redrick's eyes.
Comparing the first expedition into the Zone that Redrick undertakes
(together with Panov) with the last (which, in the company of Arthur,
leads to the Golden Ball), one recognizes that the latter adventure has
the structure of a "black fairy tale." The fairy-tale quality is not
difficult to spot: like a valiant knight-errant seeking the elixir of
life or a magic ring, the heroes must overcome dreadful and dangerous
obstacles while striving toward a highly valued treasure. Furthermore,
Redrick knows that the approach to the Golden Ball is barred by a
mysterious "grinder" (4:130), which one must "satiate" by bringing it a
human sacrifice. That is why he lets Arthur be the first to approach the
sphere — and in fact Arthur dies before his eyes, and his death
momentarily breaks the evil spell, so that Redrick in his turn can then
reach the Golden Ball. At that point, the authors break off the table
and subscribe the word "finis." This, however, is a way out which merely
attenuates the shape of things without altering it.

The authors claim — and I have discussed this point with them — that the
convergence in the Golden Ball of fairy-tale motif and the Horrific
originates solely in the human mind and is a product of chance and human
fantasy. Yet, as we have previously stated, one must not arrange all too
many "coincidences" that all point in one and the same direction; for it
then becomes incredible that they came about by chance. Besides, the
last expedition into the Zone does not have the generic attributes of
science fiction. The realistic frame for the events transforms itself
into that of a fairy tale,* because the "coincidences" following one
upon the next amount, as we have already observed, to the stereotypic
quest for the accursed treasure, though they ought not be identical with
any stereotype. The mystery is not consistently preserved to the very
end; behind it, the truth keeps shimmering through, since we no doubt
have an idea about who the visitors are: they are, once more, monsters,
albeit invisible monsters.

The authors attempt to distract the reader from this thought, which
flatly forces itself upon us. They stress, for example, that the Golden
Ball seen from a distance gives the impression that an unknown giant has
accidentally lost it. That, however, is not the correct tactic. It is
not the authors' commentary that should divert us from the structurally
obtrusive solution, but the events themselves in their objective
unfolding. Then, too, the strong impact the epilogue makes spoils the
outstanding impression the book makes overall.

Max Frisch transposed the Oedipus myth into our contemporary reality in
his novel Homo Faber, wherein the father as unknowingly enters into an
incestuous relationship with his daughter as Oedipus did with his
mother. Frisch managed the events of the novel in such a way that each
possesses a normal, realistic verisimilitude, while together they
structurally correspond to the Oedipus myth. The difference between Homo
Faber's affinity for myth and Roadside Picnic's for the fairy tale lies
herein: that Frisch had in mind the achieved similarity while the
Strugatskys by no means desired it. That is the very reason why I say
that they "have defeated their own purposes," because only discretion in
the arrangement of events could have guarded the end of the story
against an unwanted connection with the main plot and hence with the
ethos of a fairy tale.

A theologian would have had no difficulty preserving the mystery in
Roadside Picnic, for he can employ contradictions. But since science
does not have such a recourse, it is not an exaggeration for me to say
that the difficulties of a fantasy writer who sides with science are
generally greater than those of a theologian who acknowledges the
perfection of God. . . .

Translated from the German by Elsa Schieder and Robert M. Philmus

 

Bibliography 

Essays 

"About Myself," Poland, no. 124 (December 1964): 12-13.

"About the Strugatskys' Roadside Picnic" ("Poslowie"), Afterword to
Arkady and Boris Strugatsky's Piknik na skraju drogi (Kraków:
Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1977); in English: Science-Fiction Studies 10,
no. 31 (November 1983): 317-331.

"Cosmology and Science Fiction" ("Science Fiction und Kosmologie"),
Science-Fiction Studies 4, no. 12 (July 1977): 107-110. Reprinted in
Science-Fiction Studies: Selected Articles on Science Fiction 1976-1977,
ed. by R. D. Mullen and Darko Suvin (Boston: Gregg Press, 1978), pp.
214-217.

"Culture and Futurology" (a chapter from Stanislaw Lem's Summa
Technologiae), Polish Perspectives 16, no. 1 (1973): 30-38.

"A Kind of Credo" ("Eine Art Credo"), Quarber Merkur 31 (July 1972); in
English: The Yale Literary Magazine 150, no. 5 (1984), pp. 1-2.

"Looking Down on Science Fiction: A Novelist's Choice for the World's
Worst Writing" ("Science-fiction oder die verunglückte Phantasie"),
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (February 22, 1975); in English:
Science-Fiction Studies 4, no. 12 (July 1977): 126-127.

"Metafantasia: The Possibilities of Science Fiction" ("Zakonczenie
metafantastyczne"), from Stanislaw Lena's Fantastyka i futurologia, tom
II (Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1970); in English: Science-Fiction
Studies 8, no. 23 (March 1981): 54-70.

"On the Structural Analysis of Science Fiction" ("Eine
strukturalistische SF-Betrachtung"), Quarber Merkur 23 (May 1970); in
English: as "Introduction to a Structural Analysis of SF," Science
Fiction Commentary, no. 9 (February 1970): 34-44. Reprinted in
Science-Fiction Studies I, no. I (Spring 1973): 26-33, and in
Science-Fiction Studies: Selected Articles on Science Fiction 1973-1975,
ed. by R. D. Mullen and Darko Suvin (Boston: Gregg Press, 1976), pp.
1-8.

"Philip K. Dick: A Visionary Among the Charlatans" ("Poslowie"),
Afterword to Philip

K. Dick's Ubik (Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1975); in English:
Science-Fiction Studies 2, no. 5 (March 1975): 54-67. Reprinted in
Science-Fiction Studies: Selected Articles on Science Fiction 1973-1975,
ed. by R. D. Mullen and Darko Suvin (Boston: Gregg Press, 1976), pp.
210-223.

"Planetary Chauvinism: Speculation on the 'Others' " ("Stimmen aus dem
All"), Playboy (German edition), August 1977; in English: Second Look I,
no. 10 (August 1979): 5-9.

"Poland: Science Fiction in the Linguistic Trap" ("Polen: Science
Fiction in der linguistischen Falle"), Quarber Merkur 20 (August 1969);
in English: The Journal of Omphalistic Epistemology, Supplement No. 1
(August 1969): 1-6. Reprinted in Science Fiction Commentary, no. 9
(February 1970): 27-33, and in Science Fiction Commentary, no. 19
(January-February-March 1971): 89-94.

"Reflections for 1974" ("Refleksja 1974"), Kultura, no. 26 (1974); in
English: Polish Perspectives 17, no. 10 (October 1974): 3-8.

"Reflections on My Life" ("Mein Leben"), as "Chance and Order," The New
Yorker, January 30,1984, pp. 88-98. Reprinted as "Stanislaw Lem, 1921- "
in Contemporary Authors Autobiography Series, ed. by Cedria Bryfonski
(Detroit: Gale Research Company, 1984), I, 255-266.

"Remarks Occasioned by Dr. Plank's Essay 'Quixote's Mills,' "
Science-Fiction Studies I, no. 2 (Fall 1973): 78-83.

"Robots in Science Fiction" ("Roboter in der Science Fiction"), Quarber
Merkur 21 (November 1969); in English: The Journal of Omphalistic
Epistemology, no. 3 (January 1970): 8-20. Reprinted in Science Fiction
Commentary, no. 19 (January-March 1971): 117-130, and in SF: The Other
Side of Realism, ed. by Thomas D. Clareson (Bowling Green, Ohio: The
Popular Press, 1971), pp. 307-326.

"Science Fiction: A Hopeless Case — with Exceptions" ("Science Fiction:
Ein hoffnungsloser Fall — mit Ausnahmen"), Quarber Merkur 29 (January
1972); in English: Science Fiction Commentary, nos. 35-37
(July-September 1973): 7-35. Reprinted in Philip K. Dick: Electric
Shepherd, ed. by Bruce Gillespie (Melbourne: Norstrilia Press, 1975),
pp. 69-94. "Appendix: Ubik as Science Fiction" reprinted, as "Science
and Reality in Philip K. Dick's Ubik," in A Multitude of Visions, ed. by
Cy Chauvin (Baltimore: T-K Graphics, 1975), pp. 35-39.

"Sex in Science Fiction" ("Sex in Science Fiction"), Quarber Merkur 25
(January 1971); in English: Science Fiction Commentary, no. 22 (July
1971): 2-10, 40-49.

"The Ten Commandments: Some Remarks on 'Paingod and Other Stories' by
Harlan Ellison," untitled letter in Quarber Merkur 20 (August 1969); in
English: The Journal of Omphalistic Epistemology, Supplement No. I
(August 1969): 6-7. Reprinted, as "The Ten Commandments for Reading the
Magazines," in Science Fiction Commentary, no. 6 (September 1969): 26;
in Science Fiction Commentary, no. 19 (January-March 1971): 9496; and in
Science Fiction Commentary Reprint Edition: First Year 1969, SF
Commentary Nos. 1-8, ed. by Bruce Gillespie (Melbourne: Bruce Gillespie,
1982), p.

106.

"The Time-Travel Story and Related Matters of Science Fiction
Structuring" ("Struktura swiata i struktura dziela II: Fantastyka"),
from Stanislaw Lem's Fantastyka i futurologia, tom I (Kraków:
Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1970); in English: Science-Fiction Studies I,
no. 3 (Spring 1974): 143-154. Reprinted in Science-Fiction Studies:
Selected Articles on Science Fiction 1973-1975, ed. by R. D. Mullen and
Darko Suvin (Boston: Gregg Press, 1976), pp. 16-27, and in Science
Fiction, ed. by Mark Rose (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1976),
pp. 72-88.

"To My Readers," Poland, no. 225 (May 1973): 6-9.

"Todorov's Fantastic Theory of Literature" ("Tzvetana Todorova
fantastyczna teoria literatury"), Teksty 5, no. II (1973); as "Tzvetan
Todorovs Theorie des Phantastischen," Quarber Merkur 34 (July 1973); in
English: Science-Fiction Studies I, no. 4 (Fall 1974): 227-237.

"Unitas Oppositorum: The Prose of Jorge Luis Borges" ("Unitas
Oppositorum: Das Prosawerk des J. L. Borges"), Quarber Merkur 24
(January 1971); in English: Science Fiction Commentary, no. 20 (April
1971): 33-38, Reprinted in edge, nos. 5/6 (Autumn/Winter 1973): 99-102.

Interviews 

"Amazing Interview: A Conversation with Stanislaw Lem," by L. W.
Michaelson, Amazing Science Fiction Stories 27, no. 10 (January 1981):
116-119.

"The Future Without a Future: An Interview with Stanislaw Lem," by Zoran
Zivkovic, Pacific Quarterly 4, no. 3 (July 1979): 255-259.

"An Interview with Stanislaw Lem," by Anne Brewster, Science Fiction 4,
no. I (n.d.): 6

8.

"An Interview with Stanislaw Lem," by Peter Engel (with John Sigda), The
Missouri Review 7, no. 2 (1984): 218-237.

"An Interview with Stanislaw Lem," by Raymond Federman, Science-Fiction
Studies 10, no. 29 (March 1983): 2-14.

"Knowing Is the Hero of My Books," by Andrzej Ziembicki, Polish
Perspectives, 22, no. 9 (September 1979): 64-69.

"Lem: Science Fiction's Passionate Realist," by Peter Engel, The New
York Times Book Review, March 20,1983, pp. 7, 34-35.

"Promethean Fire: An Interview with Stanislaw Lem," Soviet Literature 5,
no. 239 (1968): 166-170.

"Stanislaw Lem — an Interview," by Daniel Say, Entropy Negative, no. 6
(1973): 3-24 (unnumbered). Reprinted, as "An Interview with Stanislaw
Lem," in The Alien Critic 3, no. 10 (August 1974): 4-14.

"Stanislaw Lem: The Profession of Science Fiction XV: Answers to a
Questionnaire," Foundation, no. 15 (January 1979): 41-50.

"You Must Pay for Any Progress: An Interview with the Polish SF Writer
Stanislaw Lem," by Bozena Janicka, Science Fiction Commentary, no. 12
(June 1970): 19-24. Reprinted from Sovetskaya Kultura, November 30,
1968.

Letters 

June 24, 1970. Science Fiction Commentary, no. 14 (August 1970): 5-6,
20.
January 13, 1972. Science Fiction Commentary, no. 26 (April 1972):
28-29.
"A Letter to Mr. Farmer." Science Fiction Commentary, no. 29 (August
1972): 10-12.
May 7,1972. Science Fiction Commentary, no. 29 (August 1972): 9, 43-44.
September 9, 1974. Science Fiction Commentary, nos. 41/42 (February
1975): 90-92.
"In Response" (to criticism of his "Todorov's Fantastic Theory of
Literature"). Science-

Fiction Studies 2, no. 6 (July 1975): 16-17.

"In Response (to Professor Benford's remarks on Lem's essay "Cosmology
and Science
Fiction"). Science-Fiction Studies 5, no. 14 (March 1978): 92-93.
February 6,1980. Science Fiction Commentary, nos. 60/61 (June 1981): 4.

Reviews 

"From Big Bang to Heat Death," extract from "Von Wissenschaft und
Pseudowissenschaft," Quarber Merkur 52 (January 1980); in English:
Second Look 2, no. 2 (January-February 1980): 38-39. On Paul Davies's
The Runaway Universe.

"Lost Opportunities" ("M. K. Josephs Roman The Hole in the Zero"),
Quarber Merkur 27 (July 1971) and untitled review, Quarber Merkur 25,
(January 1971); in English: Science Fiction Commentary, no. 24 (November
1971): 17-24. On The Hole in the Zero by M. K. Joseph, and The Left Hand
of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin.

"Only a Fairy Tale," untitled review in Quarber Merkur 31 (July 1972);
in English: Science Fiction Commentary, no. 51 (March 1977): 8-9. On
Robert Silverberg's A Time

of Changes.

"On Science, Pseudo-Science, and Some SF" ("Von Wissenschaft und
Pseudowissenschaft"), Quarber Merkur 52 (January 1980); in English:
Science-Fiction Studies 7, no. 22 (November 1980): 330-338. On Other
Senses, Other Worlds by Doris and David Jonas; Computer Power and Human
Reason: From Judgement to Calculation by Joseph Weizenbaum; Worlds in
Collision by Immanuel Velikovsky; Lifetide: The Biology of the
Unconscious by Lyall Watson; The Martian Inca by Ian Watson; The Crash
of Seventy-Nine by Paul Erdman; and The Third World War: August 1985 by
Sir John Hackett.

"Robbers of the Future" (by Sakyo Komatsu), review in Quarber Merkur 27
(July 1971); in English: Science Fiction Commentary, no. 23 (September
1971): 17-18.

"The Space Flight Revolution" (by William Sims Bainbridge),
Science-Fiction Studies 6, no. 18 (July 1979): 221-222.

"Two Ends of the World" (by Antoni Slonimski), review in Quarber Merkur
57 (July 1982); in English: The Missouri Review 7, no. 2 (1984), pp.
238-242.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES

 

* Michel Butor once expressed the opinion that a team of science-fiction
writers should cooperate in the construction of a fictitious world,
because such an undertaking is beyond the powers of any single
individual. (This was supposed to explain the poor quality, the
one-dimensionality of the existing science fiction.) I did not take
those words of Butor's seriously when I read them. And yet I have,
although many years later and by myself, tried to realize the basic
essence of this idea as described above. And in Borges, too — in his
"Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius" — you can read of a secret society that
creates a fictitious world in all its particulars, with the intent of
turning our world into the imagined one.

 

* I shall add the autobiographical element in my discursive writings to
this enumeration. In brief, I am a disenchanted reformer of the world.
My first novels concerned naïve Utopias, because in them I was
expressing a desire for a world as peaceful as that described in them,
and they are bad, in the sense in which a vain and erroneous expectation
is stupid. My monograph on science fiction and futurology is an
expression of my disappointment with a fiction and a nonfiction that
pretend to be scientific, when neither of them turns the attention of
the reader in the direction in which the world is in fact moving. My
Philosophy of Chance is a failed attempt to arrive at a theory of the
literary work based on empiricism; it is successful inasmuch as I taught
myself with the help of this book what factors cause the rise and the
decline in the fortunes of literary works. My Summa Technologiae, on the
other hand, is proof of the fact that I am not yet a despairing reformer
of the world. For I do not believe that mankind is for all times a
hopeless and incurable case.

 

* This essay is a rewritten chapter ("Sociology of Science Fiction")
from my Fantastyka i futurologia (Science Fiction and Futurology). I
have polemically sharpened the original text in several instances, and
added the later review of Dick's work, which is absent from the book. I
confess that I made a blunder when I wrote this monograph, since then I
knew only Dick's short stories and his Do Androids Dream of Electric
Sheep? I believed that I could rely on reviews published in the fanzines
of other novels by Dick, with the result that I considered him merely a
"better van Vogt," which he is not. This mistake was due to the state of
science-fiction criticism. Every fifth or eighth book is praised as "the
best work of science fiction in the whole world," its author is
presented as "the greatest science-fiction author ever," great
differences between works are minimized and annulled, so much so that in
the end Ubik may be regarded as a novel that is just a little better
than Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? Naturally, what I say does not
justify my mistake, because no criticism is a substitute for reading the
books concerned. However, my words still describe the circumstances
responsible for causing my error, because it is a physical impossibility
to read every science-fiction title, so that there must be a selection;
as you can see, one cannot rely on science-fiction criticism to make
this selection.

 

* It is quite difficult to shake off either a bad or a good tradition,
once it is established. In The Issue at Hand, James Blish complains that
English criticism surpasses American, and that this difference of level
can be seen also on another plane — according to Blish, English
publishers treat science-fiction authors with a consideration scarcely
to be found in United States. His words date from the fifties. From what
I know of the state of things today, this difference has decreased
insofar as American criticism has improved, insignificantly, and English
publishers have become a bit less considerate.

 

* This does not mean that the radius of effective action of a statement
varies directly with the range of a medium — i.e., in our case, that
this radius grows in proportion to the increase of circulation of the
periodical in which this statement is printed. In regard to circulation,
many highbrow literary periodicals are no better off than the
high-circulation fanzines, and the literary and theoretical publications
of university faculties sometimes have tiny circulations, as low as
three hundred or four hundred copies. What I am saying is that the
degree of attention paid by the public to a "message" (a normative
judgment) is determined by quite different factors from those of
circulation. So, in some countries, an extreme degree of public opinion
is paid to several "underground" papers, though these pamphlets look
shabby and are circulated in very tiny editions. The authority, the
weight, of such statements belongs to the imponderabilities of
civilization; the public must be aware in advance that somebody
important has something to say; but the "inherently wise," or even the
"eggheads," do not possess such authority and attraction in their own
right. The channels that serve to disseminate information are not built
by technical and material means (such as the number of copies of a
periodical distributed). Instead, these copies find their own way and
have their maximum effect only if they flow into a broader structure
that strengthens the message. This is the case for the highbrow
periodicals because they live at the peak of the cultural pyramid. It is
an extremely important phenomenon, which has been almost neglected. In
many circles of fandom, people believe that one could wake the "silent
majority" of the public from its slumber if only one could bomb the
public incessantly with beautifully made publications with mass
circulations. Most probably the public would throw these fine pamphlets
into the nearest wastepaper basket because this bombardment of
mass-produced science fiction would still lack the necessary influence.
Authority and influence are not acquired easily.

 

* This applies only to the novels by Dick that I know: Solar Lottery,
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, Our Friends from Frolix 8, Now
Wait for Last Year, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, Ubik, and
Galactic Pot-Healer. In addition, I have read several of Dick's short
stories, mainly in science-fiction magazines.

 

* Each society is stratified according to its own pattern. In each
society there are powers of selection with local effects to attract and
repel individuals. Among others, such mass processes give rise to
different readerships for widely differing varieties of literature. If
one compared the intelligence and level of education of the average
science-fiction reader in the United States and in the Soviet Union, one
would draw the conclusion that the Russians know more about literature
and are more intelligent than the Americans. However, this would be a
fallacy; the selection processes of science-fiction readership in Russia
and in the United States have taken different courses, because of the
different traditions that prevail in the two countries in regard to the
broader questions of the duties and psychosociological status that
literature, as a whole, must play in society. Certainly the United
States has the same percentage of bright boys and girls as Russia has
but intelligent readers there approach science fiction far less often
than they do in Russia.

 

* A lack of theoretical essays on science fiction was the reason for my
career as a Robinson Crusoe; like the unhappy man on a desert island, I
had to sweat for years, under the most primitive conditions, to produce
the necessary (intellectual) tools by myself. My tactic concerning trash
was to ridicule it — i.e., to blow up its model until its nonsense,
multiplied many times, became ludicrous. But this is the simplest of
tactics. On my own I thought there was no better way than to avoid trash
and to remove all traces of it from my work.

 

* The dates given in this essay are either for first publication,
whether in serial or book form, or for serial/book publication. — R. D.
Mullen.

 

* Slonimski, born in 1895, was a Polish poet and essayist.

 

* Bertaux is a Germanist, and he published the article quoted,
"Innovation als Prinzip," in German in the volume Das 798. Jahrzehnt
(Christian Wegner Verlag, 1969). — SL. The passage given in German in
Dr. Lem's original text (from which the first sentence has been reduced
to the bracketed phrase in our translation) reads as follows: "Unter
'Diagonalwissenschaften' (um den Ausdruck von Roger Caillos aufzunehmen)
verstehe ich ungefähr das, was man auch 'formalistische' Wissenschaften
nennt, also Disziplinen, deren Gebiet sich quer durch die herkömmlichen
Fächer der Realwissenschaften zieht. . . Eine Zeitlang hat man hoffen
können, der Ansatz zu einer ähnlichen Formalisierung der
Humanwissenschaften sei vom Strukturalismus zu erwarten. Leider sieht es
heute aus, als ob gerade die lautesten Vertreter des Strukturalismus ihn
zu einer Mythologie hätten entarten lassen — und nicht einmal zu einer
brauchbaren. Das Gerede, das jetzt den Namen Strukturalismus tragt, hat
den ursprünglich in ihm enthaltenen wissenschaftlichen Ansatz
wahrscheinlich tödlich getroffen." — Charles Nicol, R. D. Mullen, Darko
Suvin.

 

* Translated by Richard Howard (Cleveland/London: The Press of Case
Western Reserve University, 1973) from Introduction à la littérature
fantastique (Editions du Seuil, 1970). All quotations from Todorov are
from the pages of this translation. — R. D. Mullen.

 

* The difference is that Zeno's paradoxes confront the trivial
interpretation of physical processes with the contradictory results of
their purely logical interpretation, whereas the paradoxes of Borges are
directed toward the universe of cultural facts.

 

* Strictly speaking, what has been said isn't true insofar as there are
no systems of belief (of either an orthodox or a heterodox nature) that
would not hide contradictions within their structures. For them, the
supreme court of decision is revelation, not logical reasoning. For
instance, consider the fact that it is possible to postulate a logically
impossible trinity, but not the existence and nonexistence of a God at
the same time — although in both cases logic is similarly suspended. The
"strictly logical" heresy in the Judas story means that his postulated
"role as savior" is proved by the same logical means that belong to the
arsenal of the traditional demonstrators of Christian theology. The
heterodoxy arises only because Borges does not halt where, according to
the Scriptures, any orthodox theological attempt at interpretation must
"desist unconditionally." Borges's conclusions lead to a point which
transcends the permissible boundaries, but this does not destroy logic,
for this boundary is of an extralogical nature.

 

* If Schopenhauer had never existed, and if Borges presented to us the
ontological doctrine of "The World as Will," we would never accept it as
a philosophical system that must be taken seriously; we would take it as
an example of a "fantastic philosophy." As soon as nobody assents to it,
a philosophy becomes automatically fantastic literature.

 

* This can be seen from the fact that several times he has rewritten
material supplied by others. I have not discussed this aspect of his
work, for I believe that nothing can be more erroneous in criticism than
to descend to the shallow passages of the work of a writer merely in
order to prove their worthlessness. Besides, it is an undisputed fact
that world literature is full of prose that is similar, and the immense
number of such exercises alone deprives of originality any piece that
can defend its individuality only by stylistic means. You can see this
in the stories comprising the last two parts of the Hanser volume [which
Lem was reviewing in this essay —TRANS.], especially in regard to the
stylistic means employed, whose baroque character is stressed by Borges
in his introduction. The more nearly a work becomes "literature," the
greater its originality (as measured by the integral of its differences
from all other literary works), the more this kind of fiction, which
only increases the number of already existing texts by further similar
elements, must be likened to the enlargement of an ocean by the pouring
of water into it — it is, rather, a work of reproduction, more related
to the crafts than to creative art. Of course, ninety-five percent of
all writers are just craftsmen; but the historical movement of
literature, and its historical changes, are caused by the inventors,
heretics, visionaries, anticonformists — the revolutionaries of writing.
And this gives us the right to measure any work claiming to belong to
the top in literature first of all by its originality. Many writers can
entertain; but only a few can amaze, educate, and move. But because such
a point of view is open to attack, I have armed this review with a
warning against its subjective character. Also I do not intend to
evaluate the whole work of Borges, and especially not his poetry, which
I would feel I would have to read in its original Spanish form. Whatever
the matter may be with his poetry (which I value highly), it does not
belong to fantastic literature for the simple reason that, in my opinion
(and here I am in agreement with T. Todorov), on principle there can be
no fantastic poetry.

 

* The foregoing essay, subscribed "July 1975" in the Polish original,
has been translated from the text that appeared as the Afterword to
Arkady and Boris Strugatsky's Picknick am Wegesrand (Frankfurt:
Suhrkamp, 1981), pp. 189-215. The essay first came out as an afterword
to the Polish translation of the Strugatskys" Piknik na obocine: Piknik
na skraju drogi (Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1977), pp. 265-88. For
this last bit of information, and for his generous assistance in
checking our rendering of Lem, we are indebted to Dr. Franz
Rottensteiner, who, however, is not to be held accountable for our
errors. We are equally grateful to Elizabeth Kwasniewski for her help
and patience in correcting the English translation against the original
Polish. — Robert M. Philmus.

 

* Parenthetical references (which the translators have supplied) are to
Roadside Picnic, trans. Antonina W. Bouis (New York: Macmillan, 1977).
This volume also includes Tale of the Troika. — Robert M. Philmus.

 

* Our entire explanation, which provides a new interpretation of the
riddle presented by the landing in Roadside Picnic, may seem to be an
aberration brought on by excessive pedantry, all the more so since,
after all, we are not analyzing a real event, but a literary fiction.
But truly scientific fantasy is distinguished by just this: that one can
subject the events described in it and their rational depiction to the
same proof of coherence as phenomena that occur in the extraliterary
world. Such a work may start with a fictive, even an extremely fictive,
premise. Yet this authorizes only an initial poetic license, which loses
its validity within the story itself. This means that the storyteller
may not, within the story, continue to help himself along by the ad hoc
invention of whatever things or phenomena strike his fancy. Fairy tales
may operate with such ad hoc inventions; for they are not at all
required to explain logically or empirically the miraculous occurrences
they depict. A science-fiction story that makes this fairy-tale license
its own leaves the realm of the real world and puts itself in the
position of the fairy tale, in which everything that is thought of or
said for that very reason instantly becomes possible and must be
unquestioningly accepted as true coin by the reader. In short, though
the facts in a science-fiction story may be fictive, the way in which
science in the fiction interprets these facts may not. Scientific
theories change; but what does not change is the method of discovery
that characterizes science, and it is precisely this methodology that
dictates a certain type of hypothesis-formation in science fiction.
Accordingly, our polemic, as an example of how criticism of science
fiction should typically proceed, can be applied mutatis mutandis to
every work that fulfills the main criteria of this genre.

 

* We are presenting the hypothesis of the calamity in its simplest,
which does not mean its most probable, version. For example, an unmanned
spaceship with containers might have been sent forth without any fixed
addressee in mind; it might have been outfitted with sensors that would
recognize the planet to be "gifted" by virtue of predetermined
parameters (such as its average temperature; its atmospheric
composition, particularly the presence of free oxygen and water; an
orbit favorable to ecological development; etc.). Such an automatically
piloted vehicle could have approached various stars on a scouting
mission. However, because it is physically impossible to manufacture
technological products to survive undamaged over a journey of
indeterminate length (which may take millions of earth-years), such a
vehicle must have been provided with a device that would automatically
destroy the contents when their "shelf life" had ended. Such a vehicle
could have entered our solar system as the "shelf life" of the articles
was nearing the expiry date. After all, it could also have been that the
self-destruction did not occur only because the ship's surveillance
system discovered earth and dispersed the containers with their
"partially spoiled" contents. The degree of damage to individual
surveillance, steering, and control systems is uncertain; only the
statistical probability of damage can be determined — i.e., the one
thing absolutely certain is that the probability of defects occurring in
the programs and their execution system increases with the passage of
time. I should emphasize this point: the more complicated a device, the
more inevitable are breakdowns over the course of time; this is a
universal law that is independent of where in the cosmos the technology
was produced or how. Therefore, the enterprise of learning about the
aliens — what the Strugatskys call "xenology" — must take the
statistical-probability aspect of intercivilizational contact into
account as something crucial for interpreting such visits.

 

* The degree to which the authors followed the fairy tale's structural
pattern in their epilogue can, for example, be seen in the passage in
which "black twisted stalactites that looked like fat candles" (4:141)
are mentioned. These are all that is left of the people the Golden Ball
has killed — that is, all that is left of Redrick's and Arthur's
predecessors in the quest for the accursed treasure. In fairy tales such
remains — the bones of daredevils who ran out of luck — usually lie at
the entrance of the dragon's cave, at the foot of the glass mountain,
etc.

 
